

SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
PAST AND PRESENT
LAND SYSTEMS.
MARCH, 1881.






THE
PAST AND THE PRESENT
LAND SYSTEMS
OF
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Compiled in the Office of the Surveyor-General, at Adelaide, by direction of the
Hon. T. Playford, Commissioner of Crown Lands and Immigration .
A




PREFACE.
This little compilation of the past and present systems of dealing
with the Crown Lands of the Province has been prepared to meet a
want frequently experienced by persons requiring information upon
the subject.
It is arranged so as to afford a ready reference to the conditions
under which the Crown Lands of the Province have been dealt with
from time to time since its establishment; and it is hoped that it
will not only be of value to the inexperienced wishing to obtain
land, but will also facilitate dealings by those already accustomed to
such transactions, and enable all persons interested to thoroughly
comprehend the laws regulating the occupation of Crown Lands in
South Australia.
T. PLAYFORD,
Commissioner of Crown Lands and Immigration^
Crown Lands Office, March, 1881.




SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
LAND OPERATIONS UNDER IMPERIAL AND COLONIAL
ACTS AND REGULATIONS (PRIOR TO MARCH, 1869).
South Australia was proclaimed a British Province in the year
1836, under provisions of an Act passed in the fourth and fifth years
of William the bourth, cap. 95, which, inter alia , authorised the
appointment of Colonization Commissioners; fixed the minimum
price of land within the province ; provided for the raising of
£35,000 by the sale of lands ; and the investment of £20,000 of the
sum so raised in Government securities, as a guarantee that no
portion of the costs would fall upon the mother country.
Under this Act the price of land was fixed, in the first place, at £1
per acre, by regulations, vide Appendix No. 1 to report of Colonization
Commissioners, dated 14th June, 1836; but the necessary area to
raise the sum required by the 26th section of the Act, viz., £35,000,
not being applied for at that amount per acre, the price was reduced
to the minimum allowed by the 6th section, viz., 12s. per acre, by
modified regulations, see Appendix No. 2 to same report.
Under the modified regulations the requisite area was applied for,
and between the dates 15th July, 1835, and 31st May, 1836, 437 lots
of land—of 134 acres each, and a town acre—were disposed of at
12s. an acre ; making a total of 58,995 acres, realising £35,397,
granted under preliminary land orders. There were also sold at the
same price twenty country lots, of eighty acres each, over and above
what was necessary to complete the £35,000 required by the Act,
making the total sales and amount realised, at 12s. per acre, equal to
60,595 acres, realising £36,357.
On completion of the above sales, the price of land was again
raised to 20s. an acre, and the regulations were modified, in terms
of Appendix No. 4 to above report, under which it was intended
to conduct the future sales of land within the province.
These regulations provided that every applicant for land in the
colony, in order to entitle himself to a grant, should pay a certain sum
into a fund to be employed in bringing out laborers ; that applica-
tions made within the colony should be by sealed tender; sections
included within the same tender to adjoin; duplicate applications


to be decided by lot, except in cases where a larger area was applied
for in one case than in the other, when the application for the larger
area had preference.
Pasturage leases to be granted for a term of three years, with right
of renewal, at an annual rental of 10 s. per square mile, to be limited
to an extent of one square mile of pasturage for every forty (40)
acres of freehold land held by the lessee, and at a rental of 40s. per
square mile to non-proprietors, or to proprietors for any quantity
exceeding the stated allowance.
Persons paying to the proper officers in England, or in the colony,
the price of 4,000 acres of land, to have the right to call for the
survey of any compact district within the colony of an extent not
exceeding 15,000 acres, and within fourteen days after publication of
such surveys at land office, to select their land from any part of such
district before any other applicant.
Under the above regulations, up to the 22nd December, 1837, and
in addition to the area previously detailed, the commissioners disposed
of 3,300 acres of country lands at £1 per acre, and 563 town acre lots,
at auction, for £3,594 4s.
In 1838, 48,040 acres were disposed of at 20s. an acre, and during
1839, 170,841 acres—making a total of sales effected and amount
realised up to Ist January, 1840, of 283,507 acres, and £262,240 9s.
The selections during 1839 included the following special surveys,
viz.:—
4,000 acres—Mount Barker
4,000 “ Lyndoch Valley
5,000 “ Sources of the Onkaparinga
4,000 “ On the Para
4,000 “ Three Brothers
4,000 “ Northward of Mount Barker
4,000 “ The Meadows
4,000 “ Junction of North and South Para
4,000 “ Gawler
4,000 “ Boston Bay
4,000 “ Port Lincoln and Boston Island * .
16,000 “ Flaxman’s
5,000 “ Sources of the Torrens
8,500 “ River Murray
4,000 “ Lake Alexandrina
12,000 “ East of Flaxman’s Valley
4,000 “ West and North-West of Light’s Pass
4,000 “ North-West Bend, River Murray
4,000 “ East of Meadows
4,000 “ Moorundie
4,000 “ North and East of Lyndoch Valley
4,000 “ West of the sources of the Torrens
4,000 “ Currency Creek
4,000 “ Lake Alexandrina
Land continued to be disposed of under the above Act and Regu-
lations until 23rd January, 1843, when the Act of 5 and 6 Victoria,
cap. 36, came into operation. Up to this time the total area of land
alienated in the province reached 323,805£ acres, and amount realised
was £302,539 4s.
The new Act provided for the survey of lands prior to sale, quarterly
sales by auction, division into town, suburban, and country lands, fixed
lowest upset price at £1 per acre, with power to increase the same for


special country lots; town and suburban lands to be sold by auction
only, a deposit being paid at time of sale, and balance of purchase-
money within a month ; country lands to be offered first by auction,
and, if passed, might then be purchased at the upset price by private
contract for cash ; power to divide the colony into districts not
exceeding four; territorial revenue collected from lands sold in each
district to be spent in the introduction of labor into such district; the
sale, for cash, by private contract, at £1 per acre, of blocks of land of
20,000 acres or more, under conditions to be made by the Governor ;
authorised payment of moneys in England the certificates of which
were received as cash in payment for land in the colony, either by
auction or private contract; provided for the issue of pasture and
timber licences ; the payment from the land fund of all costs con-
nected with survey; the whole of such fund to be devoted to the
purposes of the colony, one-half being for immigration.
The regulations under authority of above Act were published in
the Government Gazette of the 18th May, 1843, and arranged, in
addition, for the application for the survey of lands required in par-
ticular localities; limited the area of grazing lands to 640 acres, of
special country lots of land likely to be required for small farms to
blocks of not less than ten acres, the sale of land in proclaimed
counties; gave power to withdraw lands from sale, provided for
reservation on sea-coast, navigable rivers, harbors or inlets, of 100
feet above high watermark.
The above regulations were slightly modified by notice in Gazette
of June 19th, 1844, and continued in force until the passing of Act
5 of 1857, which came into operation on the 24th December of that
year, up to which date the total sales amounted to 1,756,235 acres,
and the amount realised £2,217,243 ss. These sales included special
surveys for ordinary purposes under the Act amounting to 161,896
acres, and four blocks of 20,000 acres each, known as the Mount
Remarkable, Burra, Reed Creek, and Mount Barker mineral surveys.
The average price paid per acre up to the 24th December, 1857,
including town and suburban lands, was £1 ss. 3d.
Act 5 of 1857 repeated the provisions of the former Act, but limited
the area of any one block to 640 acres, required survey and delineation
of land on public maps prior to sale, and all lands to be offered at
auction, a deposit of 20 per cent, being payable at the fall of the
hammer.


COMMENCEMENT 0F CREDIT SYSTEM.
Act 5 of 1857 continued in force from 24th December, 1857, until
the passing of Act 14 of 1868-9, which came into operation on the
2nd March, 1869. On the 24th December, 1857, the area sold
equalled about 17 acres per head of the total population (about
105,000 persons), and upon that date there were under cultivation
about 235,965 acres, or about 2£ acres per head of the papulation.
When Act 14 came into force in March, 1869, and the population
had increased to 176,700, there had been sold 3,790,185 acres,
realising a total of £4,841,806, or an average of £1 ss. 6d. per acre,
and giving an area of about acres per head of the population,
whilst the land under cultivation had increased to 850,576 acres, or
4f acres per head of the entire population.
Act 14 of 1868-9 continued in force until the passing of the
Waste Lands Alienation Act of 1872, but was amended by Acts
4of 1869-70 and 27 of 1870-71. It did not repeal Act 5 of 1857
as to the ordinary disposal of town, suburban, and country lands
for cash, but, in addition, permitted country lands to be taken on
a credit of four years on payment of 20 per cent, interest on the
purchase-money (or 5 per cent, per annum) and the purchase-money
at the end of the four years—credit purchasers being required to
reside on the land and effect improvements during the term of credit
to the value of 12s. 6d. per acre. The Government were also em-
powered to proclaim certain blocks as Agricultural Areas, in which
lands were declared open on credit only, and could not be purchased
for cash, unless they remained unselected for a period of two years—
no person being entitled to hold more than 640 acres on credit.
Act 4 of 1869-70 reduced the interest payable to 20 per cent, for
five years, or 4 per cent, per annum, and allowed selectors to extend
the term of credit for three years more, on payment of interest at 5
per cent, per annum, or to complete the purchase of the land at any
time after three years’ bond fide residence and completion of the
necessary improvements. The conditions relating to improvements
were also modified, so as to require an expenditure of ss. per acre by
the end of the second year, 7s. 6d. up to the end of the third year,
and 10s. to the end of the fourth year.
Act 27 of 1870-71 came into force on the 14th January, 1871, and
permitted the payment of 20 per cent to be made in two instalments
of 10 per cent, each—the first on application for the land, the second
at the end of three years—the other conditions remaining the same.
The Waste Lands Alienation Act, 1872, came into operation on
the 15th August, 1872, on which date they were disposed of, for
eash, 4,265,063 acres, which realised £5,392,322, or an average price
of £1 ss. 3d. per acre, and on credit 598,098 acres for £763,783, an
average price per acre of £1 ss. 6d.


The land disposed of, therefore, for cash and credit, on the Waste
Lands Alienation Act, 1872, coming into operation, amounted to
4,863,161 acres, realising £6,156,105 ; the population of the colony
also had increased, to 195,000, and the area under cultivation to
1,180,000 acres, so that on that date the land sold represented twenty-
five acres for each person, of which six acres were under cultivation.
The Waste Lands Alienation Act, 1872—which repealed or super-
seded the previous Acts—provided for the subdivision of lands into
six classes, viz., town, suburban, country, reclaimed, special country
lots, and improved lands.
Town and suburban lands could be sold by auction only ; country
lands on credit only for the first twelve months, that period being,
however, increased to two years by the policy of the Government;
after two years they could be offered at auction and taken up at £1
per acre for cash or credit, lists being laid before Parliament for thirty
days prior to the land being advertised for sale. After being open to
purchase for cash or on credit for five years, leases could be obtained
for ten years at auction, at an upset price of 6d. per acre per annum—
the lands to be offered in blocks not exceeding 3,000 acres, and the
lessees to have the right of purchase, at any time within the ten years,
at £1 per acre.
Reclaimed lands were dealt with as country lands, the cost of
reclamation being added to the upset price.
Special country lots were intended to comprise single blocks of land
that had been offered at auction and withdrawn from sale, and which
afterwards could be offered for cash by auction, at an upset price of
not less than £l per acre.
Improved lands were sections upon which improvements had been
effected, and the value of which were added to the upset price. They
could either be town, suburban, or country, according to situation.
All lands were to be surveyed and delineated on the public maps
prior to sale.
Town and suburban lands could not be sold at less than £1 per
acre, the price being fixed by the Governor in Executive Council.
A credit purchaser might take one or more sections up to 640 acres,
such to be in one block if practicable, but in the event of a less area
being taken up, and the adjoining lands disposed of, then from vacant
lands available elsewhere, but not in more than three separate and
detached blocks.
A selector could take portion of an adjoining section to make up
area on paying cost of subdivision, and should the balance left in the
section not exceed sixty acres, making a total area of 700 acres, such
sixty acres might be paid for in cash, the land grant, however, not being
issued until the purchase of the whole selection had been completed.
When two or more persons applied for the same sections of land,
competition by auction, limited to the applicants, was resorted to, the
highest bidder obtaining the land.
Selection could either be by personal or substituted residence, the
personal resident having the preference where there were more
applicants than one for the same land.
The term of credit was six years. The interest was on the
amount bid for the land, calculated at the annual rate of 3£ per cent,,
B


three years’ interest being paid on securing the land, and interest for
the remainder of the term at the end of the first three years.
The selector could either complete his purchase at the end of six
years, or, by paying one-half the purchase-money, obtain credit for the
remainder for a further term of four j'ears on payment, in advance, of
interest calculated at the rate of 4 per cent, per annum. A selector
by personal residence might, should he desire to do so, complete the
purchase of the land included within his agreement at the end of five
years—the necessary conditions as to residence, cultivation, and
improvements having been duly carried out.
The selector was required to take possession of the land within
three months from the date of his agreement, and to continue to reside
upon it, after the first six months, for not less than nine months during
each year. The improvements might comprise a dwelling-house, farm
buildings, tanks, wells or reservoirs, fencing, drains, grubbing, and
clearing the land, one-fifth of which was to be cultivated during each
year, or the selector could elect to cultivate two-fifths during the
second year should he be unable to complete the required quantity
during the first year. The agreement could be revoked by Gazette
notice, if the selector failed to comply with its conditions; and, should
he become insolvent, the land reverted to the Crown, but the value of
improvements erected thereon was paid to the assignees.
Agreements could be transferred in cases of physical incapacity or
necessary absence from the province, or on the marriage of a female
selector. In the case of the death of a selector, the land named in the
agreement went to the personal representative or devisee, who could,
should he decline to hold the land, transfer it.
Lands supposed to contain minerals could, at any time, be withdrawn
from selection.
On the passing of the Waste Lands Alienation Act, 1872, selectors
were limited, by a schedule, to lands within a district the northern
boundary of which was intended to represent a line of demarcation
between country on which the rainfall was more reliable, and nearly
akin to that of Adelaide, and outside of which it was less reliable, and
rarely equalled the average fall at Adelaide. Such line was commonly,
though erroneously, called Goyder’s line of rainfall. This schedule
was, however, repealed by Act 22 of 1874, which allowed selection,
after survey, up to the 26th parallel of south latitude. It might,
therefore, be said, that the agriculturist could obtain land, after
survey, anywhere within the limits of South Australia.
The Waste Lands Alienation Act, with but little amendment, con-
tinued in force until the passing of the Crown Lands Consolidation
Act, which was assented to on the 21st December, 1877, and came
into operation on the 15th January, 1878, in accordance with the
proclamation in Gazette of the 27th of December, 1877 (page 1591).
The area alienated from the Crown in fee simple, on the Crown
Lands Consolidation Act coming into force, was, including completed
purchases, 4,970,940 acres, realising £6,362,059 ; and the area held
on credit, after deducting revoked and abandoned selections and
completed purchases, was 2,509,606 acres, on which the sum of
£3,534,576 was agreed to be paid, making a total area sold for cash


or on credit of 7,480,546 acres, and an amount of purchase money
paid, or agreed to be paid of £9,896,636. The population of the
colony on the same date was 236,000, and the area under cultivation
1,828,000 acres, giving an average area of about 31 acres of sold or
selected land for each person in the province, of which area 7|- acres
were under cultivation.
Up to the 31st December, 1880, inclusive, there has been alienated
in fee 5,555,979 acres, which realised £7,277,931, and by selection
under deferred payments (deducting lands the purchase of which has
been completed, and lands included within revoked or abandoned
agreements) 3,386,436 acres, representing £4,751,683 of purchase-
money, making a total area disposed of by the Crown of 8,942,415
acres, representing purchase-money amounting to £12,029,614, or an
average of £1 6s. lOd. per acre.
On the above date the population of the province had increased to
about 265,000, being equal to a holding of thirty-three acres of sold
and selected land to each person in the province.
It will be seen by the above figures that, prior to the credit system
by deferred payments coming into force, 3,790,185 acres had been
sold, which realised £4,841,806, or an average price of £l ss. 6d.
per acre. Up to the 31st December, 1880, and exclusive of lands
under selection, the average price differed but slightly, being
£1 6s. 2d. per acre against an average price of £1 ss. 6d. per acre
realised up to the passing of Act 14 of 1868-9. It cannot be said,
therefore, that the average price of purchased land has been mate-
rially affected by the passing of Acts allowing selections of land by
deferred payments.
The area selected in the eleven months under Act 14 of
1868- up to its amendment by Act 4of 1869-70 was 48,300 acres,
the price agreed to be paid for which amounted £81,614 10s. 6d., or
an average of £1 13s. 9d. per acre. This represented 183 selections,
of an average area of 263 acres. From the passing of Act 4 of
1869- on 9th February, 1870, to 13th January, 1871, when the Act
was further amended by Act 27 of 1870-71, 278 selections, of an
average area of 303 acres or a total area of 84,338 acres, were made,
at a price agreed to be paid of £95,807 7s. 6d., an average of £l 2s.
Bd. per acre.
From the 13th January, 1871, to the 15th August, 1872, when the
Waste Lands Alienation Act, 1872, became law, 1,687 selections
were made, averaging 278 acres each, and representing a total area
of 470,133| acres, at a price of £593,633 os. 6d., or an average of
£l ss. 3d. per acre. Under the Waste Lands Alienation Act, 1872,
from the 15th August, 1872, up to the 14th January, 1878, inclusive,
there were taken up 7,399 selections, of an average area of 336 acres,
each representing a total area of acres, at a price of
£3,508,980 11s. 6d., or an average price of £1 Bs. Id. per acre.
Under the Crown Lands Consolidation Act, viz., from the 15th
January, 1878, to 24th October, 1879, when the Act was amended by
Act 157 of 1879, there were taken up 2,391 selections averaging
404 acres each, and including an area of 967.072* acres, at a price
of £1,441,904 4s. fid., or £1 9s. lid. per acre; and under the
amended system of offering the lands, introduced by Act 157 of 1879,


viz., from 25th October, 1879, to 31st December, 1880, there were
1,286 selections taken up, averaging 421 acres each, and including an
area of 542, acres, at the price of £662,426 ss. l£d., or £1 4s. sd.
per acre.
Summarising the above figures, we have the following return, which
includes all sales on credit since the commencement of that system :
Act under which Sections
were made.
Term of Credit.
Deposit.
Period.
Number
of
Selections
made.
Average Area
Selected.
Area
Selected.
Amount
of Purchase-
money agreed
to be paid.
Average
Price per
Acre.
Act 14 of 1868-9 \
(Simultaneous applications >
decided by lot.) )
4 years’ credit
20 per cent, j
From March 2,
1869, to Feb.
8, 1870
| 183
263
48,300
£ s. d.
81,614 10 0
£ s. d.
1 13 9
Act 14 of 1868-9 and Act 4 of \
1869-70 /
(Simultaneous applications i
decided by lot.) J
5 years’ credit, and
3 years’ extension
(if required)
]
20 per cent.
From Feb. 9,
1870, to Jan.
12, 1871
| 278
303
84,338
95,807 7 6
12 8
Act 14 of 1868-9, Act 4 of 1869- \
70, and Act 27 of 1870-71 ... 1
(Simultaneous applications t
decided by lot.) )
5 years’ credit, and
3 years’ extension
(if required)
]
10 per cent.
From Jan. 13,
1871, toAug.
14, 1872
| 1,687
278
470.133J
593,633 0 6
1 5 3
Waste Lands Alienation Act, 18 1
of 1872 y
(Limited Auction.)
6 years’ credit, and
4 years’ extension
for half purchase-
money (if re-
quired)
i
10 per cent.
From Aug. 15)
1872, to Jan.
14, 1878
j 7,399
336
2,401,639J
3,508,980 11 6
1 8 1
Crown Lands Consolidation Actl
86 of 1877 !
(Right of choice offered at (
auction.)
6 years’ credit, and
3 years’ extension
for three-quarters
purchase-money
(if required)
1
t
J
10 per cent.
From Jan. 15,
1878, to Oct.
24, 1879
j 2,391
404
967,0722
1,411,904 4 6
1 9 11
Crown Lands Consolidation Act")
amended by Act 157 of 1879 j
(Sections affered at auction in >■
order fixed by Surveyor- J
General.) J
6 years’ credit, and
3 years’ extension
for three-quarters
purchase-money
(if required)
1
1
>
J
10 per cent
From Oct. 25,
1879, to Dec.
31, 1880
j 1,286
421
542,056J
662,426 5 l£
1 4 5
Total, without deducting revocations. &c.
13,224
347
4,603,5393
6,384,365 19 7$
17 8


The number of selections do not represent the actual number of
selectors, several of whom hold land under two or more agreements.
The total number of persons holding land under agreement on the
31st December, 1880, was 6,661, averaging 508 acres each selector,
and representing a total area still held on credit of 3,386,435 acres,
after deducting 981,148 acres of which the purchase has been com-
pleted, and 235,934 acres the agreements for which have been revoked
or voluntarily abandoned.
It will be seen that, whilst the credit system has largely increased
the area of land alienated and the area under cultivation, it has also
increased the average price per acre from £1 ss. 6d., on lands sold
for cash at the commencement of Act 14 of 1868-9, to £1 7s. Bd.,
the average price by selection.
The Crown Lands Consolidation Act consolidates and amends the
law relating to the sale and occupation of Crown lands in South
Australia, and materially alters the conditions under which lands
could previously be purchased on credit.
Under this Act and amendments contained in Act 157 of 1879,
large blocks of country are thrown open to the selector at intervals
of from two to four weeks, the whole of the lands in a newly-
surveyed hundred being, whenever practicable, declared open for
selection on the same date, six weeks’ notice being given in the
Gazette , to enable intending selectors to examine the land.
As the Crown Lands Consolidation Act was originally passed the
right of choice over all the lands in a hundred was offered to the
highest bidder, who was entitled to take his full area in one block at
the price bid.
This system was, however, amended by the passing of Act 157 of
1879, on October 25th, 1879, and the lands surveyed for selection are
now disposed of as follows :
On the day fixed by the Gazette notice, the land is offered at auction
amongst persons declaring their intention to reside personally, the
sections being offered one at a time according to value, the order
being fixed by the Surveyor-General before the commencement of the
sale, and the highest bidder is entitled to the section bid for, and also
to select sufficient adjoining lands at the same price to complete the
maximum area of 1,000 acres. On this being done, the remainder
of the land in the hundred is offered, the next highest bidder select-
ing, and so on, until all the lands are selected, or until no further bid
is made by a personal resident. Persons intending to select under
conditions of substituted residence are then allowed to bid for any
lands remaining unselected. Lands which are not selected on the first
day of offer become open for choice on the following day, between
the hours of 10 and 12 (Saturdays 10 to 11 only), and, in case of
simultaneous applications, the right to the land is decided by lot.
By the Crown Lands Consolidation Act the maximum area allowed
to be selected by any person was 1,000 acres, such area including all
lands taken up on credit under previous Acts, even if the agreements
had been completed, cancelled, or transferred ; but under Act 123
of 1878 (passed on November 30th, 1878), and Act 157 of 1879, any
selector can hold 1,000 acres, irrespective of lands taken up by him
under previous Acts and of which he has completed purchase.


On approval of the Surveyor-General, and payment of fee of £lO
for re-survey, a selector can have a section subdivided to complete
his maximum of 1,000 acres, and should the remaining portion of the
subdivided section not exceed sixty acres in area, he has the option of
paying cash for the excess instead of having it cut off.
The first term of credit under Act 86 of 1877 was six years, but
this could be extended, on payment of a quarter of the purchase-
money and interest for the remaining three-quarters, for three years
longer. The personal resident had, however, the privilege of com-
pleting his purchase after five years if he had fulfilled all the conditions
of his agreement, this concession being denied to the selector under
substituted residence, who had to hold his land on credit for the full
nine years.
The interest payable by the selector was as follows, viz:—
1. A first instalment of 10 per cent, on the purchase-money at the
time of selection.
2. A second instalment of 10 per cent, at the end of three years.
3. If the full purchase-money was not paid at the end of the sixth
year a third instalment of 10 per cent, on the three-quarters purchase-
money (the above being at the rate of per cent per annum for the
entire term of credit).
The conditions of agreement as to improvements under Act 86 of
1877 are substantially the same as those described above under the
Waste Lands Alienation Act. The selector is required to cultivate
one-tenth of his land during the first year of credit, and one-fifth
during the second and each subsequent year. The planting of
orchards and vineyards, and growing of potatoes and other roots and
plants mentioned in the agreement, are encouraged by providing that
one acre of such cultivation is equivalent to six acres of cereals.
Transfers of agreements may be allowed by the Commissioner of
Crown Lands in cases of personal hardship, as well as for the reasons
given in the Waste Lands Alienation Act.
Lands are open to credit selectors only for the space of two years,
after which they are offered at public auction for cash, or are leased,
as may be decided by the Commissioner of Crown Lands as mentioned
below. Should they pass the hammer at such auction, and remain
unsold for a month, they can be offered on twenty-one years leases
(generally called scrub leases) with right of purchase during the last
eleven years of the term, subject to conditions of clearing, Btc.
The Commissioner of Crown Lands has power, under Fart hi. of
Act 123 of 1878, to lease any land for fourteen years, although it may
not have been open to selection for two years, in such sized blocks as
he may think fit, provided that plans of the lands proposed to be
offered shall be laid before Parliament for fourteen days prior to
publication of notice in Gazette .
Should the lands remain open for five years after the offer for cash,
they can be leased for ten years, Avith right of purchase at the end of
the term, and Avith no other condition than the payment of rent.
Act 192 of 1880.
By the passing of Act 192 of 1880, Avhich was assented to on
October 28th, 1880, but did not come into operation until January Ist,


1881, the Crown Lands Consolidation Act was further amended, to
allow a much longer term of credit, with, payments as follows, viz.:—
(a) First instalment of interest at 10 per cent, on the purchase-
money, which payment extends over the first three years
(equal to per cent, per annum).
(b) Four per cent, in advance for each of the next six years, on
the expiry of which fi.e., at the end of nine years’ credit)
one-quarter of the purchase-money has to he paid.
fcj Five per cent, in advance for each of the next eleven years
on the remaining three-fourths of the purchase-money.
(d) This makes in all twenty years’ credit, at the end of which
the balance of purchase-money has to be paid.
The purchaser under personal residence is, however, entitled to
pay his full purchase-money at any time after the first five years of
credit, and the selector under substituted residence conditions after
six years, provided in either case that all conditions of the agreement
have been fulfilled.
If the selectors wish they can pay portions of their purchase-
money (in sums of not less than £SO) at any time during the
currency of their agreements.
The growing of artificial grasses, under certain conditions, is allowed
to take the place of other cultivation on drained lands.
Selectors under previous Acts may bring their agreements under
Act 192 of 1880, but must pay one-fourtli of the purchase-money at
the end of six years from date of agreement, if they have not already
done so.
(See Appendix for form of agreement under Act 192 of 1880.)
Pastoral Occupation.
Leases for pastoral purposes are granted under two Acts, viz., the
Crown Lands Consolidation Act, No. 86 of 1877, and Act No. 123
of 1878.
The Crown Lands Consolidation Act applies to the southern portion
of the province, and Act 123 of 1878 refers to the northern portion of
South Australia proper, the boundaries within which its provisions
are in force being particularly set forth in its First Schedule.
1. Lands south of the limits described in the First Schedule
to Act 123 of 1878.
Under the Crown Lands Consolidation Act and Regulations, lands
not already held may be taken up on lease for twenty-one years—
the rent payable being at the rate of 2d. per head for small cattle,
and Is. per head for great cattle depastured, with the proviso, how-
ever, that the yearly rent shall in no case be less than 2s. 6d. per
square mile; this amount is called the minimum rent, and is payable
even when no stock is depastured.
The first year’s minimum rent is payable in advance at the time of
application, but rent for all subsequent years is paid half-yearly, and
not in advance.
Country entirely destitute of surface water may, instead of being at
once leased, be taken up under the “ Preferential Right” Regula-


tions, in order to give the applicant time to test the country, and to
secure a supply of water before committing himself to an application
for lease.
Preferential rights are allowed for blocks not exceeding 100 square
miles each, on payment of a fee of £5 for each block, there being no
restriction under the Crown Lands Consolidation Act as to the
number of such blocks that may be taken by an applicant.
The preferential rights remain in force for one year, and may be
renewed if the Commissioner of Crown Lands is satisfied that the
holder has made bond fide efforts to obtain water. They give the
holder the sole privilege of applying for a lease of the lands repre-
sented by them at any time during their currency. If a lease is not
applied for and a renewal not granted, they expire at the end of the
term of twelve months, and are declared forfeited by notice in the
Gazette , and the lands comprised in them become again open for
application at the expiry of seven clear days from the publication
of such notice.
Leases must be declared stocked within three years from their
commencement, in the proportion of ten head of small cattle to the
square mile, or three head of great cattle to every two square miles,
unless extension of such time is granted by the Commissioner on his
being satisfied that there is good reason for doing so.
Lessees under the Crown Lands Consolidation Act have to furnish
half-yearly returns of all stock depasturing on the lands included in the
leases, such returns being due at the Crown Lands Office on or before
the 21st June and 21st December in each year ; the June return to
state the number of all sheep and cattle, whether the property of the
lessee or not, depasturing on his run with his consent on each of the
first days of February, April, and June previous; and, similarly, the
December return is to show the stock depastured on the first days
of August, October, and December previous, and in addition, to
state the number of sheep shorn, or removed from the run for the
purpose of being shorn at the last shearing.
A second set of returns has to be furnished to the Commissioner,
one every two months, viz., within twenty days of the first day of
each of the months of February, April, June, August, October, and
December. These are to show the number of sheep and cattle
travelling over the lands held under lease on each of the above-
mentioned days, but not the property of the lessee, nor there with
his consent, and also to give all particulars as to owners, &c.
A third set of returns is to show what stock each lessee has
travelling outside of his own runs. These are to be supplied half-
yearly on 21st June and 21st December respectively ; the June return
to give particulars for Ist February, April, and June, and the Decem-
ber one for Ist August, October, and December.
All the above-mentioned returns are to be made, even if there is no
stock depastured, in which case they are called “ nil” returns ; and
heavy penalties are fixed by the Act for false returns or omission to
send them in. The rent payable on each lease is calculated from
these returns, and a statement is published half-yearly in the Gazette
informing lessees of the amounts becoming due.


Pastoral leases under the Crown Lands Consolidation Act may be
resumed for sale, or other purposes approved by the Governor, the
leases nearest the settled districts having twelve months’, and those
further inland three years’, notice of intention to resume. The
boundary line between the lands entitled to twelve months’ and those
having three years’ notice is described in the Eleventh Schedule to
the Crown Lands Consolidation Act.
Improvements consisting of wells, reservoirs, tanks and dams of a
permanent character, which secure a supply of fresh water and
increase the carrying capability of the land, are paid for in full on
termination or on resumption of the lease. Compensation for other
substantial and useful improvements, such as station buildings, fenc-
ing, &c., is made in proportion to the length of term of which the
lessee is deprived by resumption, i.e., if the resumption takes place
during the first half of the term, the full value is paid, if during the
third quarter, one-half value, and if during the last quarter, one-
quarter value.
2. Lands within the limits of the First Schedule to Act 123,
1878-
Act 123 of 1878 was assented to on 30th November, 1878, and is
intended to encourage the development of the outlying districts of
the province, by offering a longer tenure, and more liberal compen-
sation in case of resumption. Any of the lands included in its First
Schedule, and not already taken up, may be leased for twenty-eight
years, in two terms of fourteen years each; or lands already leased
within the same limits may be brought under the Act within twelve
months of its passing. The great advantage of this Act to the
pastoral lessee is, that should it be found necessary to resume the
lands during the first term of fourteen years, he is not only compen-
sated for the actual value of the wells, reservoirs, buildings, fences,
and other improvements constructed by him, but, in addition to this,
he is entitled to compensation for the loss sustained by him through
the resumption, the amount to be paid on account of such loss, and
also the value of improvements, being decided by two arbitrators, and,
if necessary, an umpire.
In case of resumption being necessary for road or railway purposes,
only the value of improvements on the resumed land is paid; and the
same rule applies if resumption for any purpose takes place during
the second term of fourteen years, as the lessee is not in that case
compensated for any loss occasioned by the resumption, but only for
the improvements of which he is deprived.
On the termination of the lease, wells, dams, and reservoirs of
a permanent character, which increase the carrying capabilities of the
land under lease, are paid for, other improvements reverting to the
Government.
The rent for the first term of fourteen years is two shillings and
sixpence per square mile, in addition to a sum of one penny per head
for sheep, and sixpence per head for great cattle depastured; and for
the second term these rates are doubled.


The number of stock to be paid for is ascertained by means of
returns, in precisely the same manner as described above for the
Crown Lands Consolidation Act.
Three years’ notice of resumption is given except for road and rail-
way purposes, for which only one month’s notice is necessary.
A lessee intending to claim the second term of fourteen years has
to give six months’ notice to the Commissioner, such notice to expire
during the currency of the first fourteen years.
Leases have to be declared stocked within three years from com-
mencement, at the rate of ten sheep or three great cattle to every two
square miles —the Commissioner having power to extend the time as
in the Crown Lands Consolidation Act.
Preferential rights to leases of land entirely destitute of permanent
surface water may be granted, and are only renewable on good cause
being shown to the Commissioner. In Act 123 of 1878 there is the
restriction that no one person or firm of persons can hold more than
1,000 square miles under such preferential rights.
Lessees under Act 123 of 1878, and also of all future leases under
the Crown Lands Consolidation Act, have to give notice to the Com-
missioner, within twelve months, of the completion of any improve-
ments made by them, otherwise they lose their right to compensation.
Provisions have been inserted in Act 123 of 1878, to prevent any
pastoral lessee whose lease has been forfeited from again becoming
interested in the lands included in such lease; and also to render it
illegal to traffic with runs until they are stocked. These provisions
apply to all pastoral leases in the province.
The Commissioner may cause search for water to be made on any
pastoral leases under the Crown Lands Consolidation Act or
Act 123 of 1878, and may resume and lease land on which water is
obtained with conditions for supplying the public with water.
All applications for lands for pastoral purposes are to be made at
the office of the Surveyor-General, between 10 and 12 o’clock, except
on Saturdays, when applications are received only from 10 to 11
o’clock; and in case of more than one person applying for the same
lands on the same day during these hours, the right to a lease is
offered at auction amongst the applicants not later than 2 o’clock on
the same day.
Annual Leases and Commonage Licences .
If any land resumed is not immediately required for sale or other
purposes, the lessee is entitled to occupy the resumed lands under
leases, renewable each year, called annual leases, but as soon as any
of the resumed lands are sold, the purchasers become entitled to
depasture cattle on the unsold lands of the hundred in which their
land is situated, on their taking out depasturing (also called com-
monage) licences, for which fees are payable at the rate of 3d. per
head per annum for small or Is. 6d. for great cattle. These
commonage licences take precedence of annual leases.
In hundreds where there is a sufficient area of unsold lands, owners
and occupiers of purchased land (cash or credit) are entitled to run
two sheep for each acre of such land. This proportion is called full
rate, and one head of great is reckoned as six small cattle. As
more land becomes sold, and the area of unsold lands consequently


decreased, the number of sheep allowed per acre is reduced to pro-
portion. A return is published in the Gazette every year during
the month of May to guide persons entitled to commonage, who
are required to lodge their applications on or before the Ist of June
of each year, the applications being then considered, and commonage
licences granted to the applicants in proportion to the area of land
held by them, and to the extent of commonage land available in the
hundred.
Licences for depasturing within the boundaries of districts pro-
claimed under the District Councils Act are issued by the Councils
under their own regulations.
Mining jor Gold and other Minerals.
1. Gold Licences and Leases—
Mining for gold is regulated by Act No. 26 of 1870-1, and Regu-
lations thereunder.
The search for gold may be prosecuted over any waste lands of the
Crown, the only authority necessary for the gold miner being a miner’s
right, which costs but ss. per annum, and authorises the holder to
search and mine for gold upon any waste lands, and also to occupy a
block of ground termed a claim in virtue of such miner’s right. If
on an alluvial goldfield, the claim allowed must not exceed ten yards
by ten yards, but if on a quartz reef the miner may claim 100 yards
along the course of the reef by 250 yards across it. Much larger
blocks are allowed to the discoverer of alluvial ground or of a quartz
reef, and these are called Prospectors’ Claims.
Gold leases of not more than forty acres each in area, are granted
at the rent of 1 Os. per acre per annum, generally for a term of twenty-
one years, and with conditions requiring the lessee to develop the land
under lease by the expenditure of capital and employment of labor.
2. Licences and Leases for Minerals and Metals (other than
Gold)—
The laws relating to mining for copper and other non-auriferous
minerals and metals were made very liberal by the passing of the
Crown Lands Consolidation Act, Part iv. of which relates to such
mining.
On the discovery of indications of copper or other minerals (not
being auriferous) on Crown lands, a mineral licence can be obtained
for the land on which the discovery is made. Ihe licence gives the
applicant the sole right of search over eighty acres of land for twelve
months, on payment of a fee of £l, with the condition, however, that
only one ton of ore can be removed for sample and analysis.
The applicant for a licence must give sufficient description to
identify the locality intended to be included.
The hours during which applications for mineral lands are received
are the same as for pastoral country.
Licences are subject to the approval of the Commissioner, and are
renewable for another twelve months, the holder of a licence having a
preferential right to apply for a lease during its currency; the licence,
in fact, corresponding to the preferential right for pastoral country, and
having the same advantage of allowing the applicant to test his discovery


before committing himself to an application for lease, which latter
involves the expense of obtaining a survey of the land, and a higher
rental and expenditure. Mineral licences are also gazetted forfeited
on the expiry of the term of twelve months, and become open to
application again on the expiry of seven clear days after publication
of forfeiture. No person can hold more than 640 acres under mineral
licences.
Mineral leases are granted for a term of ninety-nine years, at the
minimum annual rental of Is. per acre, subject, in addition, to a
royalty of 2± per cent, per annum on net profits derived from the
leases; and for the purpose of ascertaining the amount of such
additional rent or royalty, the lessee is required to forward half-yearly
returns certifying to the amounts of profit realised; and the Commis-
sioner can haA e access to all account-books and documents relating to
the leases if he wishes to verify the returns—the penalties for false
returns being from £5O to £5OO.
These returns are due within thirty days of 30th June and 31st
December of each year, and the rents, which are based on the returns
are payable half-yearly, on or before the 28th February and 31st
August respectively, except the first year’s minimum rent, which is
payable in advance on application for the lease.
The lessee has to expend £6 per acre every two years in developing
his lease, or, at his option, keep three men employed for everv 80
acres during nine months in each year.
No one lease for mineral purposes is allowed to contain more than
640 acres.
Miscellaneous Leases and Licences.
1. Leases—
Leases for various purposes, such as of wells and reservoirs, sites
of inns and stores, quarries, wharves, smelting works, &c., &c., are
granted to the bidder of the highest annual rental at auction, under
conditions which are always published beforehand in the Gazette.
Iheie is also power in the Act to grant leases without auction to
bonajide discoverers of coal, petroleum, or other valuable substance in
deposit.
2. Licences—
Licences to obtain timber, stone, sand, salt, and other materials,
are obtainable at the office of the Surveyor-General, and from other
persons appointed to issue them in the country districts, on payment
df certain fees, which are specified in the regulations.
i these licences are usually granted for unleased and unsurveyed
Giown lands only, but if an applicant requires materials which can
only be obtained from leased lands, or stone or dead timber from
unsold surveyed lands, the Surveyor-General may, if he thinks it
advisable, give special authority, in writing, allowing such to be re-
moved.
The Government regulations do not apply to District Councils,
which bodies, issue licences under their own by-laws, provided that
such are not inconsistent with the rules published by the Government.


APPENDIX.
[From of Agreement under Act 192 of 1880, where the area selected
is 756 acres , at the price of £1 2s. 6c?. per acre.~\
PERSONAL RESIDENCE.
South Australia.
No. 35,346.
iWmoranlium of &gtccment made the eleventh day of March, 1881,
between the Commissioner of Crown Lands and Immigration of the
Province of South Australia (hereinafter called the vendor), of the one
part, and A B, of Kooringa, farmer (hereinafter called the purchaser),
of the other part, whereby it is agreed between the parties hereto,
that the vendor shall sell, and the purchaser shall purchase, all that
piece of land, being sections Nos. 563 and 564, situate in the Hundred
of C, County of D, and containing seven hundred and fifty-six (756)
acres or thereabouts, in fee-simple, at the price of eight hundred and
fifty pounds and ten shillings (£B5O 10s.), viz., £1 2s. 6d. per acre, to
be paid in manner hereinafter provided.
It is also agreed by the said parties as follows, that is to say—
1. The purchaser shall and will take possession of the said land within three
months from the date hereof, and shall and will during the first year of the currency
of this agreement reside on the said land for three months at the least After the
first year the purchaser shall continue to reside on the said land during nine months
out of every twelve months thereafter, until the payment of the last instalment of
the purchase-money.
2. The purchaser shall and will make substantial improvements upon the said
land before the end of the second year, to the extent of five shillings per acre;
before the end of the third year, to the extent of seven shillings and sixpence per
acre ; and before the end of the fourth year, to the extent of ten shillings per acre;
such improvements to consist of all or any of the following, that is to say—erecting
a dwelling-house or farm buildings, sinking wells, constructing watertanks or
reservoirs, putting up fencing, draining, and clearing and grubbing the said land.
3. No fence shall be deemed to be a fence within the meaning of this agreement
unless the same shall be a wire fence, or constructed of posts and rails, or wires, or
of stone, or other substantial material, and ordinarily capable of resisting the
trespass of great cattle.
4. Any person authorised by the vendor may, at all reasonable times, enter upon
the said land, to view the same, and any improvements made thereon.


5. The purchaser shall and will, during the first year, plough and have under
cultivation at least one-tenth of such land, and during each and every subsequent
year, until the whole of the purchase-money has been paid, plough and have under
cultivation at least one-fifth of such land: Provided that on lands sold as drained
lands the Governor in Council may at any time define, by proclamation in the
Government Gazette, that the cultivation of not less than two-fifths of such lands
with grasses not indigenous shall be allowed as such cultivation on such drained
lands, such cultivation to be done in a husbandlike manner, and subject to the approval
of the Commissioner. But if the purchaser shall be desirous of engaging in the
cultivation of osiers, olives, mulberries, vines, apples, pears, oranges, figs, almonds,
potatoes, onions, beetroot, mangold-wurtzel, hops, apricots, peaches, walnuts, sweet
chestnuts, filberts, or cobnuts, or such other plants as the Governor in Council may
at any time define by proclamation in the Government Gazette, the planting and
cultivation in a husbandlike manner of one acre of land with any of the above
trees or plants shall, for all purposes of this agreement, be deemed to be equivalent
to the cultivation of six acres of such land as hereinbefore defined : Provided that
such cultivation be bona fide continued and kept up to the satisfaction of the Com-
missioner until full payment of the purchase-money, but not otherwise.
6. The purchaser shall and will send in to the vendor true returns, as provided by
the Crown Lands Consolidation Act.
7. All improvements, ploughing, and cultivation made by the pin-chaser shall be
subject to the valuation or inspection, as the case may be, of such officer as the
vendor may appoint for that purpose, whose valuation shall be conclusive and
binding on the parties hereto.
8. The vendor acknowledges to have received from the purchaser the sum of
£B5 Is., by way of interest upon the amount of the purchase-money, paid in
advance up to the eleventh day of March, 1884. The purchaser shall and will pay,
in advance, interest from that date on the purchase-money at the rate of Four
Pounds per centum per annum; and shall and will pay such interest, and the
amount of such purehase-money, to the vendor on the days, at the times, and in
manner hereinafter mentioned, that is to say—
The sum of £34 Os. 5d., by way of interest, on the eleventh day of March, 1884,
and on the eleventh day of March in every year thereafter, until the
year 1890:
The sum of £212 12s. 6d. (by way of payment on account of the purchase-
money), on the eleventh day of March, 1890, and on the same day, and on
the eleventh day of March in every year thereafter, until the whole of
the purchase-money shall be paid, the further sum of £3l 17s. lid., by
way of interest on the balance of • purchase-money remaining unpaid:
The sum of £637 17s. 6d., being the balance of the purchase-money, on the
eleventh day of March, 1901.
9. The purchaser may at any time during the first five years from the date of
this agreement pay off, in sums of not less than Fifty Pounds at any one time, any
portion of the purchase-money, not exceeding in the whole £765 9s. ; and may, at
the expiration of such five years, or at any time thereafter, pay off the whole or
any part (not being less than Fity Pounds at any one time) of the purchase-money
or balance thereof remaining unpaid; and upon every such payment on account of
purchase-money a proportionate reduction shall be made in the amount of future
interest payable under this agreement.
10. The purchaser shall and will not at any time, until he has paid the whole of
his purchase-money, assign, transfer, or make over the said lands, or his rights
under this agreement, unless and until he has obtained the consent of the vendor
for that purpose. The vendor will not consent to any transfer unless he is satisfied
that all the conditions of the agreement have been complied with, and that the land
included in this agreement was taken up bond fide for the use and benefit of the
purchaser, and not with the intention of evading the conditions of this agreement,
and that the purchaser is unable to occupy such from illness, physical incapacity,
or necessary absence from the province, or unless it be satisfactorily shown that
continued occupation would inflict a personal hardship upon or be the occasion of
great loss to, the purchaser ; and it is discretionary with the vendor in all cases to
grant or withhold his consent.


11. This agreement is made subject to the provisions of the Crown Lands Con-
solidation Act, and of any regulations made or to be made thereunder, and any such
regulations which may hereafter he made shall be equally binding and obligatory
on the parties hereto as if this agreement had been made subject thereto.
12. Upon breach of any of the foregoing conditions, or upon the publication of a
notice in the Gazette that the Governor has revoked this agreement, or if the
purchaser shall do any act declared by the Crown Lands Consolidation Act to he a
fraud thereunder, or shall make default in payment of any of the several sums
payable under this agreement for the space of thirty days after the same shall be
payable, then, in either of such cases, the purchaser shall forfeit all moneys paid
and all benefit under this agreement, and shall deliver up to the vendor, or whom-
soever he may appoint, the said lands and all improvements thereon ; and this
agreement shall become void, and the purchaser may be dealt with under the Crown
Lands Consolidation Act as a person in unauthorised occupation of such lands.
In witness whereof the said parties hereto have hereunto set their hands the day
and year firstly before mentioned.
(Signature of Commissioner)
Vendor.
Witness to the signature of the vendor —
(Signature of SelectorJ
Purchaser..
Witness to signature of the said purchaser —






