

A2Q3-2
78 turv
Ps.Zxar
SSggjpie;- . { :' : -iP-7<'
‘WwMww^M
\ -v
* S
a a


i! : m
j v.---3
\ \ \ ' x
, /, 5)®®K \ \ \ x ,
f * '•»-..
WITH PICTURES TO COLOR
XT/-! 7 AN AUSTRALIAN PRODUCTION BY
INU. 0/ GUNN & TAYLOR PTY, LTD., MELBOURNE
Distributors for N.S.W. and Queensland: HAMSON & LEONARD. 101 York sJreet. Sydnc/’
'SE


“JZ3
RANKIE HAD been so ill at lunch time that his
mother had kept him home from school. She said
that, as he knew his work so well, the teacher
would not mind.
“ May I go to the beach and read ? ” asked Frankie.
‘‘Very well,” agreed his mother. “Perhaps the fresh
air will do you good.”
So a rather listless little boy wandered off towards the
sea a short distance away. As he went he thought of the
lollies he had eaten on the way home at lunch time. He
supposed he had eaten too many. Next time he would save
some or share them with his mates. It wasn’t much fun
being on the sick list, and besides, it was lonely with all
the other boys at school.
The sick feeling was beginning to go away, so Frankie
decided to pass the time by reading some favourite ad-
venture stories.
Frankie’s beach was well away from those used by the
city crowds and just now there was not a soul in sight.
So for a while the lone boy sat on a rock, absorbed in his
stories. But when a ship on the horizon caught his eye,
he put aside his open book, and cupping his chin in his
hands, sat gazing wistfully out to sea.
Then he sighed and tried to imagine he was aboard the
ship and sailing away to some strange land. Suddenly
he stared in astonishment. Six little gnomes seemed to


Many hands made light work of the launching, and soon
the good ship was heading out to sea.


THE SUNSHINE BOOK
have emerged from his book
and leaped to the sand.
“Did---did you come out
of my book?” Frankie gasped.
The gnomes laughed and
began a merry dance, singing;
“Whence we come and
whither we go,
We can’t tell people.
Oh, no, no!”
Then one, who appeared to be their leader, smiled in
the friendliest manner. “We are the Cheer-Up Patrol,”
he explained brightly. “You have been a sick little boy, so
we just came along to help you forget all about it.”
Then away they went in a second jolly chorus:
“By the sea, by the sea, where the waves gently swish,
If you will command us, we’ll grant just one wish.”
“Do you really mean that?” asked Frankie. “Indeed we
do,” they replied. “What is your wish?” “I should like to
go on a voyage of adventure,” he confided eagerly. “But
I suppose that’s impossible?”
“ You should never think that anything you wish to
achieve will be impossible,” advised the leader. Then straight
away he gave a few brief orders and hey presto from
odds and ends produced from their pockets, and using a
sea-shell for a hull, they had constructed a tiny ship.
“But how in the world can we sail in that?” asked the
bewildered boy.


THE SUNSHINE BOOK
■‘Ho-ho!” they laughed. “You just watch.” Off they
went in a merry dance around their handiwork, and as
they frolicked in ever widening circles, the tiny craft became
larger and larger, until it was big enough to hold everyone.
Many hands made light work of the launching and
soon, with the delighted Frankie aboard, the good ship was
heading out to sea.
After they had sailed for some time, Frankie spied what
appeared to be an island. He was puzzled because he had
never noticed it from the shore. But the gnomes assured
him that it really was an island. “Then let’s sail that far,”
begged Frankie.
“Certainly,” agreed the leader, who was also captain of
the ship. So they set a course for the mysterious island
and sailed on and on over the sparkling sea. .At last they
came near and Frankie saw many gently waving palm
trees fringing the shore.
“We shall take aboard a cargo of coconuts,” announced
the captain to his crew. “I don’t mind coconuts,” thought
the young passenger, “but if
there are cannibals? Oh gee!”
But when they arrived
and the little gnomes ran
ashore so fearlessly, he thought;
“Well I mustn’t be scared
when they are so brave.”
The work of collecting
coconuts, rolling them down
to the beach and stowing
them aboard was soon com-
pleted. But no one was anxious
to leave.


’ THE SUNSHINE BOOK
Frankie shaded his eyes from the sun and surveyed the
scene. “Let’s explore,” he suggested. “We intend to,” said
the captain. “Follow me.”
All sorts of pretty birds flew away at their approach
and here and there a fox or a rabbit scuttled from their
path. But not a savage did they see.
Frankie, who was feeling really brave by now, was
almost wishing that one or two would show themselves.
Then, just as he was thinking this, out from a cave sprang
three fearsome figures, not savages, but pirates armed with
sharp knives.
“Ah!” snarled the biggest one. “The buried treasure
we came for has been stolen. You are the thieves.”
For a moment Frankie felt even worse than when he
had been ill at home. But the gnomes’ leader was quick
as lightning with a plan of escape.
He winked at his patrol members and they all began
dancing around the pirates, singing once again;
“By the sea, by the sea, where the waves gently swish,
If you will command us, we’ll grant just one wish.”
The pirate leader thrust his wicked looking, knife back
into his belt. “Very well,” he sneered. “Restore our treasure
chest. Fail and you die.”
“Yonder lies your chest,” announced the gnome chief,
pointing to a distant object.
“Well, by thunder!” boomed the pirate, fixing his eyes
on something partly buried in the sand. And away he
ran, followed by his greedy-eyed companions.


! 'I
'V/.; ‘ v>v:^
•••■:•:••:•.. ••••.•... ' .. .:^v-V.*!
THE SUNSHINE BOOK
“Now!” cried the gnome leader. “Run for your lives.”
Frankie needed no urging, and as he raced for the ship,
he kept looking back to see if the pirates had noticed their
flight. But, as he expected, they were too busy fighting one
another for possession of the chest.
Soon Frankie and his shipmates were safe aboard their
Ship and sailing safely away. “I expect those scoundrels
have a lugger somewhere,” remarked the captain coolly,
“but they’ll never catch us.”


THE SUNSHINE .BOOK
“But what a pity to let them have the treasure,” said
Frankie.
“Treasure!” laughed the captain. “There was no treasure.
I merely promised to restore the treasure chest. And
I can just imagine how they will perform when they find
it’s entirely empty.” And so could our young voyager as
he watched the island gradually fading from view.
“Land-Ho!” came the erf, after they had been making
good headway for sometime, and looking ahead,, the boy
could just make out the familiar beach where he had first
met the jolly members of the Cheer-Up Patrol.
Suddenly an extra big wave caught the good ship and
jolted her heavily. Frankie felt a terrific bump and the
next thing he knew, he was sprawled on the sand against
a rock.
It was the rock he had been sitting on. His open book
was still on the sand. There was no ship; there were no
merry gnomes. He was still rubbing his eyes when some
of his pals came romping down on to the beach.
Of course he lost no time in telling them of the Cheer-Up
Patrol and the voyage to the island. But they only laughed
and said he must have been very sick to have imagined
such things.
Well, Frankie did not argue, but Oh, dear! he was puzzled.


NE PERFECT summer day, David and his
father were enjoying themselves at the seaside.
While they were playing with bat and ball a
friendly old dog invited himself to the game.
Whenever the young batsman hit the ball beyond
his father’s reach, away raced the knowing old dog, to
return with it in his mouth. They played on until at last
David’s daddy thought it was too hot on the sand.
“Then let’s play in the sea,” suggested the little lad
eagerly. When his father agreed, they raced into the cool
water. Of course David, being very young, stayed near
the edge while his father, who was a fine swimmer, went
further out.
The playful dog, not to be outdone, swam about eager
to join in the game. For a long time the ball was tossed
to and fro, the dog often swimming quite a long way to
retrieve missed catches.
At last there came a shrill whistle from a fisherman
to whom the dog belonged. “Oh, Daddy!” cried the boy in
disappointment, for the dog promptly dropped the ball,
shook himself and raced away to his master.
“Cheer up,” laughed his father. “He is a grand old fellow
I’ll admit.” “I wish he was ours,” said the boy sadly.


THE SUNSHINE BOOK
“Let’s hope he will be
here next time we come,”
replied the other. “Now,
what do you say to a race
before we go home?”
David told his mother all
about the rare fun they had
enjoyed that day, and how
he hoped the dog would play
with them next time. But
having plenty of playmates
and lots to do, he soon re-
covered from his yearning for the dog.
Then one day, on returning from school, he found his
mother all smiles. “WeTe going to celebrate a special
occasion,” she said cheerily. “Just wait until Dad comes
home. You will be thrilled.”
It seemed a long wait to the mystified boy, but at last
he heard his father’s merry laugh. David was washing
his face and hands and he quite forgot that he was dripping
with soap as he rushed to greet his Dad.
Then he stopped short, for there from the crook of his
father’s arm peeped a puppy. David took him gently. “Oh!
Daddy. Is he really for me?” he asked.
“For you, my boy,” came the answer. “But I’m going
to name him. I’m going to call him Soapy. Can you guess
why?” They all laughed happily as David’s mother went
for a towel.
Now it was not very long before Soapy showed that
he was an intelligent little fellow. He soon learned to
sit up and beg for biscuits; to leap gaily through a hoop
held by his young master; even to catch a ball in his


THE SUNSHINE BOOK
mouth. And when they visited the beach Soapy was allowed
to take part in the games.
At first he would dash to get the ball, but would refuse
to return with it. However, a little petting, whenever
he brought it back, worked wonders. And how excited he
became when they played in the water. David was delighted
when the fisherman’s dog joined in the fun. By imitating
him Soapy soon became a clever playmate.
Then one day, Soapy proved his real worth. David,
who had been sent to the grocer’s, decided to return home
by a short cut through a park. As he and Soapy crossed
an old rustic bridge that spanned a narrow pond, David
saw some graceful white swans and could not resist
stopping to feed them with the broken biscuits the grocer
had given him.
Suddenly he heard a
cry of dismay. A blind
man, feeling his way
across, had accidently
thrust his stick through
the side of the bridge and
it had slipped from his
grasp, and fallen into the
water. Before the boy
could think what to do, he
heard a splash and in no
time, Soapy had rescued
the stick.
Of course the blind man
was delighted. And when
David finally arrived home,
he was forgiven for being late; while Soapy came in for
special praise for his good deed.


NOOZING in the fork of a gently swaying gum
tree, or venturing along a bough in search of
juicy leaves, may seem a good life, but even a
koala can tire of that. At any rate Fluffy could.
One day he descended from the top of a tree so hastily
that his pal Huffy, who was crouched lower down, jumped
out of his way in alarm. Huffy hadn’t had a fall since, as a
little fellow, he sadly misjudged the strength of a twig, and
he did not want another.
“Why come racing down like that?” he complained
angrily.
“I’ve been to the very top,” cried Fluffy, his beady little
eyes just shining with excitement, “and I could see right
over our forest and into the valley.”
“Well, what of it?” grumped the other, annoyed at
being disturbed.
“There’s a township down there. Wouldn’t it be grand
to visit it?”
Huffy yawned. “I’ve heard all about it,” he replied, “but
all I wish for is peace and quiet.”
“And nothing to do but eat and sleep,” retorted Fluffy
impatiently. “Well I had better just leave you and see
the world myself.”


. * '* .ill
\
When Fluffy swung on the rope there was a startling
ding-dong from the school bell,


THE SUNSHINE BOOK
“Hold on, hold on!” returned Huffy, not anxious to be left
alone. “I suppose I had better come and look after you.”
So together the bears set off through the forest. Of
course Huffy grumbled. He always was a contrary fellow
and considered everything a trouble. Before long he wanted
to stop for a feed; then later for a sleep. But Fluffy would
not listen; he kept on until at last the township came into
view.
“See!” he cried. “We could not have chosen a better
time; there is scarcely a soul about.” But as he spoke there
came a sudden clanging sound. The bears cocked their
heads in alarm, then looked at one another.
“A nice time did you say?” gasped Huffy. “That’s the
school bell. I suppose it’s lunch time and the children will
be everywhere.”
Fluffy nodded anxiously. Then he looked again into the
valley. “Why,” he chuckled. “Those children are off to
their homes. Let’s hurry and have a look around while the
town is quiet.”
“But there may be dogs,” panted Huffy stubbornly.
“They will have gone to lunch too,” insisted Fluffy.
“The whole place is at lunch.”
“I hope you’re right,” mumbled the other gloomily. “I
don’t want to die before my time.”
Despite his moods, Huffy at last plucked up courage
and the two boldly entered the township. They passed the
deserted school and soon became interested in the shops.
In a toyshop window they saw something that made them
stop short. It was a toy koala. “I suppose that’s what the;;


THE SUNSHINE BOOK
would do to us if we were caught,” said Huffy. “I certainly
do not want to end up as a stuffed dummy.”
\
“Nor I,” agreed Fluffy. Then, as his eyes turned to a
couple of scooters left outside the shop: “Suppose we ride
around on these.”
“It would save time,” agreed Huffy, selecting the one
marked with the highest price.
Next minute the visitors were sailing merrily along,
glancing at the shops as they went. Then they returned
down the other side of the street and so saw everything
quickly. By this time they were back near the school.
“Gee!” panted Fluffy. “Whatever are those things in
the school yard?” Huffy squinted across. “Just slides and
swings for the children,” he explained.
“Let’s try them,” urged Fluffy. And leaving his borrowed
scooter he ran into the yard. Up a post and down a rope
he went until he reached the seat of a swing. Huffy
followed and carefully climbed the steps leading to a slippery
slide.


THE SUNSHINE BOOK
What fun they had. Even Huffy allowed a few chuckles
to escape. After a while they decided to leave while the
township was still quiet.
“Before we go I must have a swing on this rope,” said
Fluffy. But when he did there was such a startling ding-
dong, ding-dong that both bears scampered for their lives.
“That was the school bell,” gasped Huffy. “Now we’ll
be caught and we will die and be sold as stuffed dummies.”
“Hadn’t hadn’t we better return those scooters?”
gurgled Fluffy as they raced out of the school yard. “We
can’t stay to do that,” muttered Huffy who had seen
children coming from many of the houses.
Then the frightened bears suddenly ran right into the
arms of two excited young girls. “Oh! I wish we had time
to nurse them,” said one. “I wonder where they live?” But
of course the koalas preferred to keep their secret.
When they were gently released, the bears knew that
they had nothing more to fear so they ambled away at an
easy pace. Fluffy was rather sorry that he had been the
cause of a false alarm, for when he glanced around all the
children were running anxiously back to school.
“I don’t believe anyone would harm us,” he remarked
to his companion. And Huffy, who had secretly enjoyed the
jaunt, could not but agree.
A/i I
P\ 593 .0.
f N cct


■
3 1508 01023966 8


