

J.W.F Blundell
The Eastern Settled Districts
in [Western] Australia
New Monthly Mag, Sept 1849
Vol IXXXXII W. 84-93
THE CANNING RIVER AND ITS SETTLERS, WESTERN
AUSTRALIA
. Oct, 1849
pp v195-205




THE CANNING RIVER AND ITS SETTLERS, WESTERN
AUSTRALIA.
( 195 )
By J. W. F. Blundell, Esq.
About eight miles from Perth, over level clay plains for half the
distance, may be seen, on the opposite bank of the river, the lowly
homestead of one of the earliest and most enduring pioneers of Western
Australia. It is an abode which no colonist can pass without a sigh of
regret for those unmeasured, and at the same time unmerited hardships,
which beset the early days of a settlement planted with seeming care
and much hope, and then abandoned to the cold bosom of untaught and
unsympathising nature. For to this part of its unfailing history may be
attributed the long-cherished notions of the unfitness of this colony for
colonisation purposes; while the ruin which attached to local circum-
stances alone was made the substance of a confirmed stigma, which
remains even to the present hour.
The seventeen years of trial and sorrow that lingered their appointed
duration around this homestead and its possessors, are varied and useful
in their annals; telling a tale of troubles which, in these days of system
and artificial appliance, are not likely to occur again—at least, to such
an extent; and teaching a practical lesson to the emigrant, of capability
for the labours of a new country, and perseverance amid educational and
physical incapacity.
First amongst the throng of retired military and naval men who sought
to occupy the lands upon either bank of this river, from the important
fact of its being within an easy distance of the capital, was the inhabi-
tant of the dwelling of which we have spoken. At the period of his
arrival he was in the prime of life—full, as the emigrants of those days
invariably were, of extravagant hopes and expectations —and both ready
and anxious to commence upon plans of their own concocting, and deter-
mined to elaborate future sources of wealth and comfort upon certain
preconceived ideas of a country, of which little was then known, and far
less understood. The situation was chosen for its vicinity to markets for
any produce that might be raised; and this having been accomplished,
supplies of food, clothing, and stock, were purchased at existing exor-
bitant rates, such as were at that time sufficient to swamp the means and
energies of men far more capable in all respects than those who had
commenced inauspiciously upon a new and dubious sort of career. The
result might be easily foreseen. Neither liking, nor indeed expecting, to
have thus early to take plough in hand—for the land was so little encum-
bered with trees as to be ready for that operation —our friend, partially
disgusted at the necessary high rate of labour, and the drudgery appa-
rent in the simple and plain course of farming life, seemed to linger on
in expectation of some spontaneous uprising of crops, or speedy abate-
ment of those unthought-of impediments which then began to stare him
in the face. Sports and diversions, too, were somewhat rife in this well-
settled locality; society there was of the best, for it might, in colonial
parlance, be termed an aristocratical quarter of the colony. In vain was
his Excellency the Governor seen applauding individuals who, spade in
p 2


hand, were assiduously turning up the virgin soil of the country, or,
emulous of their fate, wheeling wheelbarrows full of bricks, or sawing
and splitting timber for the erection of temporary dwellings. All this
was in a measure thrown away. The utility of such earnest and zealous
application was little acknowledged; our settlers were apparently waiting
for that large influx of population and labour which should render their
position similar to that of an old country, where, according to the theory
of acres, they would be required alone to superintend and share the pro-
duce of a numerous tenantry, such as many of their forefathers, they
were told in infancy, proudly acknowledged and possessed.
It is, therefore, neither a slur cast upon these desirable, and one could
have wished successful settlers, nor is it a blot upon the past or future
capability of the colony, to say that the waking from this dream was a dis-
astrous acknowledgment of an untried and unexpected state of existence :
on the contrary, it was a happy hour to themselves and the settlement
they had assisted in founding, when they did awake—when they did open
their eyes to the merits of the case, and sought zealously for the causes
of their discomfiture. It was, however, the misfortune of this settlement,
and one from which it has barely recovered—because the public mind is
prone to judge hastily, and to receive the most superficial impressions as
corroborative evidences—it was the misfortune of this condemned portion
of her Majesty’s dominions, to have the partial failure of these early
settlers exhibited in anything but a fair light; and to receive in addition
to these casualties a virtual withdrawal of the sympathy and assistance
of the British Government, at a time when more than at any other it was
needed. So that, from being the gayest and the most promising, the
Canning River began to be deserted, many seeking the penal settlements
of Van Dieman’s Land or New South Wales ; and the fair lands upon
which they had commenced the rudiments of location were restored to
their primitive bearing: and one sees even now in the district but the
landmarks of a struggle, too faint to have afforded either proof or dis-
proof of its qualities of soil, or susceptibility of rewarding those whose
natural and inevitable exertions could alone accomplish the work of form-
ing estates in the wilderness.
Yet, little as we like the task, from a conviction that, although true,
it is ever of little or no avail, it would be preeminently unfair to pass
over the share the home government undoubtedly had in those disasters,
which have all along served to maintain the disparaging position which
this colony held in the estimation of the emigrating portion of the British
public. Perhaps nothing could more clearly exemplify that of which we
intend to speak, than the unjustifiable use which has been made, even under
authority, and with the keensightedness of puffy colonisation-promoters,
of its early trials and misfortunes. At the foundation of a now rapidly
rising and neighbouring settlement —which, by-the-bye, with assistance,
surmounted difficulties as great, if not greater, than those which ham-
pered the untoward career of the one under notice—Western Australia,
or Swan River as it is depreciatingly styled, was brought forward as a
proof of the sad consequences of a system of colonising said to be false ;
and upon the mistakes of which, as was affirmed, much experience and
many practical truths might be found to hinge: while, granting the correct-
ness of their data, little did these people think or dream of the obligation
which impinged the argument itself, either to restore a healthy action to


the lost settlement, or to apply some modified principles in place of those
which, upon their own showing, had signally failed. But, could the
public of this country, upon simple proof of the resources of a colony, be
brought to believe that its physically low condition might possibly arise
from the unsuccessful application of many species of legislative quackery,
it would then understand much that at present lies at the door of indivi-
dual folly and extravagance of thought, at the same time furnishing an
outlet of escape for the really criminal party in the affair.
The early colonists were cast upon the western shore of Australia heed-
lessly, and without due preparation. A colony was to be planted ; and
the home government for the time being, desirous to save the nation
the greater portion of the expense of such an undertaking, eagerly caught
at the propositions of a few speculative individuals; and thus shifted a
burden, as they supposed, from their own shoulders to the backs of men
who aimed alone at speedy self-aggrandisement. The terms of the com-
pact were, to all intents and purposes, highly favourable to those who
chose to accept them; and it may yet be a matter of speculation whether
or not, had these men been at all acquainted with the nature of the task
they had undertaken, the wide-spread domains at this hour in few hands
might have been turned to highly profitable account.
But it appears never to be in the nature of things that individual
efforts should be acknowledged by those which succeed ; and the certain
effect was, that a large, though limited, capital exhausted itself at the
outset; and left at length in the hands of that government, which ought
never to have relinquished its primary right, the perfecting of a work
seemingly as far distant from accomplishment as it was at the beginning.
The moderate crowd of settlers which flocked into the territory deemed
no power responsible but that of the parent country; and we of the present
age of colonisation can very readily imagine their chagrin and disappoint-
ment when they received in return for their natural demands an assurance
very much to this effect—that, as private enterprise had commenced the
scheme, private means must be brought to carry it through. Waiting,
hopelessly waiting for the coming immigration, which was to remove every
strait in which they found themselves, to render that assistance and dis-
entangle those difficulties which population in all countries can so easily
and effectually surmount, much of the time and substance of the new-
comers was spent in wandering gossip from tent to tent, or, in too many
instances, in that species of dissipation which is allied to the sad and fatal
feeling that they found themselves in the toils of a dilemma from which
there was no visible escape. At this time, too, the government, with an
improvidence of action for which we cannot too deeply blame them, en-
larged the circle of despondency by declaring that the fault rested with
the settlers themselves, whose unwillingness to apply at once to the duties
of their new state opposed both the wishes and endeavours of their rulers
to ameliorate their condition
Yet, whatever may have been the inertness of these emigrant-settlers,
and how great their acknowledged incapacity, still the extremes of each
could afford no justifiable excuse to the government, either to lay down
its prerogative and duty, or to fail in re-establishing and asserting that
right and duty so soon as untoward circumstances called loudly for its
exercise and its aid. To say to the already disheartened and mistaken
settler, “The fault is your own”—“ We have granted what you asked,


and are by no means responsible for the want of forethought and pru-
dence which have placed you where you are” —is but poor sympathy
at any time; but when in after years we find the same government, being
engaged upon the work of founding another settlement in the southern
hemisphere, taking the experience of this very colony, and not disguising
the fact of their so doing,—taking the past errors of this very spot as a
guide for their conduct in the new sphere of their exertions, and going so
far as to supply the monied-resources which were withheld in the former
case, we cannot cease to point out such inconsistencies ; we cannot hesi-
tate, in the task we have undertaken to give a brief history of this
ill-judged settlement, to shift the burthen once more, and fix it firmly
upon those shoulders whose breadth and strength are ever matters of
astonishment, even to the session-dried experience of many members of
the British parliament. And this is not mere declamation—mere finding
fault, or arraying opinion against opinion—it is a thing inseparable from
the history of the settlement, and from its traduced character.
At this hour, when its claims are beginning to dawn upon that portion
of society which takes an interest in these matters, when some fair pro-
spect of redeeming the past is held out by way of compensation for the
lingering neglect of bygone days, and when at the moment we write our
eye catches numerous specimens of rich mineral wealth yet to be deve-
loped, we can turn with renewed strength from the contemplation of even
that which our antagonists have all along gracelessly bandied against us. A
few words, however, will correctly define the course of proceeding which
has made the very name of Swan River an instrument of example, a
sample of all that could be ruinous and false in the modus operandi of
colonisation. Probably up to the hour when the far-famed Californian
“ diggings” burst in all their glory upon that section of society —and large
and varied it indeed is! —which spurns at the ordinary roads to wealth, and
prefers a cross country at all risks, no spot, no emigration field ever
kindled higher hope, exhausted more speculation in the prospect of bound-
less and fertile domains to enrich their new possessors as of old, than did the
now lulling settlement on the Swan River. The most extravagant fancies,
which in later days are disallowed and scattered to the winds, spread
their meshes around a certain estimable class of emigrants, and told them
that that for which they sighed in vain in their native land, those coveted
landed possessions which in the old country brought great influence and
accumulating resources, had found their counterpart in the regions of the
South; and there, under even a far brighter clime, could they realise territo-
rial parade, and perpetuate the doctrine of acres. As a natural consequence
of the puffs of that day, and the liberal conditions upon which the govern-
ment ceded it possessions, a numerous body of a superior order of emi-
grants entered the field; and as the granting of land was dependent in
amount upon the property, be it whatever it might, which was brought
into the settlement, a somewhat partial exclusion of a moderate and highly
essential class necessarily took place.
All who can recall those days will remember the “ hot haste” with
which numerous families embarked for the promised land ; taking with
them their servants, and in some cases handsome equipages, together
with much antique and fusty mummery, which should have garnished on
their native shore, prior to departure, a blazing pile to commemorate the
extinction of old habits and prejudices—which they found, alas! too late,


were both incompatible with and alien to the dawning sphere of a new exist-
ence. Many will call to mind, also, the shock, which came as smartly as
the pang of remorse which visited that universally-sympathised-with in-
dividual of golden-egg notoriety, when the early settlers had at length
pierced the cloud of mystery, and beheld the first faint impressions of the
errors into which they had fallen. There was neither milk nor honey in
the land, nor spontaneous crops, nor willing tenantry ready at call; and
but few substitutes, who soon began naturally to feel their value and
their importance. Long did they linger on in expectation of coming
herds of men, to set all matters on a proper footing; but it was too late.
They depended upon the favour of the public at home, and in its
acknowledgment of the merits of their country; and that public had
been disappointed like themselves —it saw its own fond and giddy pro-
spects fading away, and it withdrew from the connexion altogether. At
that hour the government might have stemmed the ebbing tide of popu-
larity, but it failed to do so; it seemed, as it were, to make common cause
with the public, and to repudiate that it had cradled and launched upon
the world. And where is it now?—lt is now mature and ripe for the
masses who closely follow upon the steps of the pioneer. Swan River
and its early mishaps became a proverb; and the government of this
country, and the ranks of founders of new settlements, gained experience
at its solitary cost; and failed not to parade, whenever circumstances
needed such, the rash and inefficient principles on which it had com-
menced its career of hardship and suffering. Relapsing into forgetful-
ness, the emigrant public ceased to consider it at all; and this neglect
appears to have superinduced the belief that the territory itself was unfit
for the purposes of successful colonisation.
Let us now return to the banks of the Canning River, and mark what
remains at the present time of the numerous body of settlers who once
struggled with the destinies of a new country, and sought to establish
homes in the wilderness, and draw around them the adjuncts of civili-
sation amid the simple pursuits of husbandry. The fabled notion of pos-
sessing a numerous tenantry, which should take the burden of culture off
the shoulders of original proprietors, was soon blotted out of the records
of their gains ; and though, as we have before mentioned, there are many
existing landmarks of former extensive location thereabouts, still the spot
is not entirely deserted. The proprietor of the homestead and farm to
which we have introduced the reader, was himself amongst the earliest
arrivals in the colony. The brief narrative of his privations, sufferings,
and losses, is, fortunately for the hope we have in the success of emi-
grants to those shores, one of an unusual, and at the same time interest-
ing character. The difference is so great between the habits of an old
country and a new, that most people who cling to the routine of the
former will hardly be found to admit the possibility of happiness existing
where the unceasing requirements of civilisation are not only unrequited,
but unthought of and excluded altogether. The fact must never be lost
sight of, that in a climate so mild as that of Australia, and so stimulating
and spirit-nourishing, men care little how they live, so that they live
peaceably, and are freed from the carking cares which beset the dwellings
of members of older communities. This gentleman arrived in Western
Australia with a wife and a family of young children, and planted him-
self at the spot on which we found him. Many harassing cares marked


the progress of the first settlers; and among these there was not one
which retarded their efforts so much as the hostile front assumed by the
native tribes against the invaders of their domain. In all countries,
where aboriginal tribes exist in considerable numbers, collisions are un-
avoidable ; and as many well-meaning people in this country, who have
never seen a wild man except by deputy at some country fair, exhibit an
overstrained tenacity of belief in the premeditated wrong of the white
man, and are exceedingly thin-skinned upon this point, w'e think it right
to speak a little of the experience of our own colonists in this particular.
The savage is certainly not always the first aggressor, but yet he has
been found so in most cases: the white man wishes earnestly for peace
and a good understanding between the conflicting races; indeed, he
would purchase it at a considerable price, and is undoubtedly in most
instances required to pay that price. There is a simple and invariable
cause of aggression from the native, which is the result of his first com-
munication with the wondrous beings who appear to him to be of another
world ; and it is the same to the explorer of the hitherto unknown
interior as it is to the newly-arrived emigrant upon the coast —namely,
the cupidity which is naturally excited in his breast by the sight of
much desirable wealth ; a taste of which the settler, prompted by feelings
of humanity and conciliation, readily allows. Those invaluable com-
modities in the sight of the native, flour and tobacco, are, once tasted,
not the harbingers of future peace and mutual good understanding, but
the antecedents of hatred and of strife. Such is the product of, perhaps,
their first interview. The savage is made acquainted with a treasure
which supersedes the necessities of that precarious mode of existence
known from his birth; the toils of hunting, the long fasts, and the hours
of unsuccessful search, can be at last lessened, if not obviated : the in-
truder possesses the secret, and it must be taken from him at every risk;
for it is needless to say that life itself on either side is but a feather in
the balance, weighed down by the all-absorbing animal desires of those of
our darker brethren.
Until the period, therefore, when these savages were subdued, which
was not till a pitched battle had been fought with them, the early
colonists were harassed on all sides, and could scarcely consider either
their properties or their lives in safety. But now, brought to a state of
subjection by stringent though humane laws, they no longer trouble,
except by occasional petty thieving; for which, however, they are seldom
allowed to escape punishment. On one occasion our friend remembered
having to conceal his little ones in flour-casks, to save them from probable
destruction by the natives—as it is singular how here, as in many other
parts of. Australia, they sought to destroy the children of the settlers.
The native, in fact, acknowledges no law of control save that of fear ;
and so long as we have in all our colonies wielded the rod of correction,
and proved our power to retaliate, as well as to reward by kindness a
peaceable demeanour among the aboriginal tribes, so long has bloodshed
and extermination been withheld; while early timidity or reserve has
invariably marked colonial annals with warfare and implacable hostility.
And we believe all the talking and writing in the world will fail to show
otherwise.
. Surmounting all these numerous disasters and troubles, we find our
friend with a family grown up around him, and at least inured to the life,


which in their case was burdened with little retrospection of the past.
Afflicted with a temporary deprivation of sight a few years after his
arrival in the colony, this faithful pioneer had lingered at the spot of his
first location, and had been enabled, despite his former losses, to complete
the work of clearing land, erecting the necessary farm-buildings, and
producing in a rough way various kinds of marketable produce. It is
true that they lived much in a style which many in this favoured land
would consider akin to times of barbarism, and altogether incompatible
with the hopes and necessities of civilised existence; but still, however
much our friend might deplore—and no doubt in reason he often did—
the fading traces of those former days which he well knew could never
come again, yet his family remembered them not — they had no recol-
lections, dear and sad, to check them on the path allotted in their simple
sphere, or turn them from the ardent pursuit of the small meeds of pri-
mitive and patriarchal wealth, which, when we last saw them, they were
striving manfully and earnestly to obtain. Perhaps, too, there was no
point more estimable in the character of this worthy man, than that
which related to the education and training of these children, thus nursed
and matured in rude adversity. His wife died, through want of medical
aid, it was said, in giving birth to the youngest; and the afflicted parent,
deprived of a helpmate so essential to the preservation and nourishment
of his children, had, amid the duties of his farm, to lend some hours daily
to their instruction. It can hardly be believed how he accomplished this
double duty; yet he did accomplish it; and to the simple rudiments of
education were added a knowledge of the French language, of which he
was a great proficient, and of music. One of these sons is now married,
and promising well; one is in the employ of the government; and the
remaining two labour for their father upon the farm. There is also an
only daughter, and she is lately married to a youthful settler. “ You
can see it better than I,” said the old man, as he groped his way along
with us one day, to explain the resources of his small estate ; “ the fire
has spared the initials, I think;” and, wondering what this could mean,
we arrived at the foot of a solitary tree, not far from the spot where his
first dwelling had been erected and had been destroyed by fire—it was
the grave of his wife! The letters to which he alluded, and the year,
were rudely carved upon the trunk, a few feet above the sod beneath
which for ever reposed the companion and the victim of that privation
and danger which attend the steps of the first generation in a new
country. Yes; sacred indeed will be the spot when the pioneer himself
shall join her—though not in consecrated ground. And the Canning
shall flow noiselessly onward, and the note of industry shall once more
resound upon its banks, and the smoke of many rural dwellings shall
curl up amid the trees ; and none shall touch that grave ; the ploughshare
shall spare it, and the new race shall honour it for a testimony of the
founders of their country !
The river of which we speak is in no part dry during the summer
season, as is the case with very many of the rivers of Australia; yet, in
common with others, it is subject to occasional floods during the rainy
season, and, as a due consequence, some portion of the alluvial flats upon
its margin are liable to inundation : and before this was rightly under-
stood, a great deal of the settler’s toil was wasted during some periodical
and unlooked-for rising of the waters. There is no damming out, or other


efforts available to check these visitations: the floods give no warning of
their approach ; the waters burst their limits and boundaries within the
hills, and in a few hours a man’s vines and fig-trees, thus heedlessly
planted, may be seen transferred to his neighbour’s estate at the opposite
bend of the stream ; and a great portion of his alluvial soil at the subsiding
of the waters may, on the principle of exchange being no robbery, serve
to enrich some hitherto barren patch of marginal land in the possession
either of friend or enemy. So that experienced men avoid the immediate
banks of rivers, or take the risks and the chances of such location. The
Canning is nevertheless blessed in this particular, as the river itself, in
parts, lies low, and the banks are high; while the soil, deposited by ages,
is usually above, far above, the level of its swelling and nourishing waters.
Its scenery, as we have hinted before, is picturesque ; and the roadways,
particularly on its northern bank, are as firm and smooth as natural roads
can be found anywhere. It is sad to see the boundary marks and posts
of many spots susceptible of the highest cultivation, and to note the visible
traces of the early settler, who fled ere his trials bad begun; and at
the same time to know that his property is in most cases in trust to
Nature—that to cultivate it would be trespass, and to communicate with
its far-off possessor now impossible; —to see this grant or that, the pro-
perty of some gentleman in London or elsewhere, whose name figures
in the allotment-rolls of the Survey Office of the settlement, and who,
speaking of it as if it were in some snug county in England, asks
mysteriously, “ What he is to with it ?” or discourses glowingly to the
good folks at home of his prospective fortune at the antipodes. There is
the land, it is true, and of a good sort likewise, but he is not the pos-
sessor, although he may have paid in hard cash for it; it belongs to the
wilderness, which lets it lie fallow—ever fallow. The colonist who aban-
doned it is in a worse position still; he is gone, and perhaps has left no
trace of his whereabout: very likely, as is the case with men who in new
countries find that land is a thing of nought without personal cultivation,
he has thought no more of it, but left it to the birds of the air and the
reptiles of the woods—a legacy which he is careless ever to reclaim.
Often have we ourselves—for the Canning was a favourite district with
us —rested upon some turf-grown bank which had known neither plough
nor spade near to its verdure since its creation; and, gazing into the
crystal stream murmuring softly along, have pictured the Mr. Smith, or
Mr. Jones, who called the place his by right of purchase; and the look
with which he might probably survey his domain at the antipodes—were
he conveyed for even an hour to it —all fresh from the hand of Nature,
and but a speck amid millions of acres which population could alone
have rendered useful for any purpose whatever.
The pioneers of the country knew this well, for they had personally
experienced it; and in the absence of population, and the poor prospect
of increasing their numbers, they in many instances resigned it to its
pristine state. Yet, though this will in some measure account for the
want of fair and consistent progress exhibited by the colony, it cannot
be taken as any disparagement to its soils, or capabilities for colonising
purposes. The whole of the land upon its immediate banks is ready for
the plough ; and this extends to the hills, where excellent pasturage is
afforded for stock. At its junction with these hills the river itself becomes
narrow, and flows turbulently over a rocky bed, while the slopes and


gullies through which it receives the waters of several murmuring brooks,
although covered for the most part with giant timber, and more particu-
larly on the heights, are nevertheless adapted for cultivation, and are
even now settled to a small extent. About two miles from the spot where
it may be said to leave the hills, shafts have been sunk to trace the direc-
tion of mineral indications, which are abundant in the entire district.
Specimens of silver-lead and copper have been procured, upon which the
assays are both rich and promising ; added to this is the valuable timber
which abounds everywhere, and may be said to be inexhaustible. With
regard to farming operations in this country, it may be taken as a general
rule that the vicinity of hills affords the most desirable spots for location,
particularly when the object of the settler is that of raising dairy
produce ; otherwise the plains yield the best food for sheep. It may also
be remarked in this place, that domestic animals of all kinds reared in
Australia are in their natures unusually quiet and docile; the lords of
the several herds submit to be caressed as meekly as any member of the
group, and but rarely gore or turn upon the youths who usually attend
them to and from their pasture. This is a feature which Nature herself
appears to have extended to the lovely female sex—though we never
doubt but that it exists everywhere ; for the colonial maidens, particu-
larly they of the rural districts, are the fondest of wives, and the most
mild and enduring of helpmates. Yet, as many may reply to this, that,
where women are scarce, their value felt, and their soft enduring virtues
fostered and appreciated, we are reckoning of the happy regard paid to
them not by fact but by isolated inference—we can add no more than,
So it is. We would indeed that they were more plentiful there, and that,
many a slovenly, ill-directed homestead knew the light of their care and
of their smiles ; for in their absence no one knows better than the solitary
inhabitant of the woods or of the plains that his existence is, in homely
phrase, as “ a world without a sun.” We will not ask our fair friends if
they can put up with the roughs and the smooths of nature’s smiling dwell-
ing-place, for we know that they have the stable minds, the stout hearts,
to encounter ills, to remove the sting of early privation, and adorn the
rough and rude abode as the flowers of the forest gladden their native
wilds ; we merely repeat what hundreds have declared, and add our weak
testimony of the mission to which they are called.
The early settlers were accompanied by their wives and children, and
therefore experienced none of the desolate sorrows which beset the
dwellings where woman’s presence was unknown. They knew not the
cheerless aspect of the hut or cottage where no simple comforts awaited
the toil and exhausted labours of the day; when man is both unwilling
and incapable of that renewed exertion which would attend the cares of
the household, should he turn to them after the fatigue and harass of the
parting hours; —so that he too often becomes careless of himself, his
food, and his lodgment, until the neglect of personal cleanliness and pro-
perly prepared diet extends to the out-door pursuits which surround
him. The pioneers, after their day’s work had been done—and at that
time it was nothing to boast of, far less to make any great show, —used
to collect together and enliven the remaining hours between the song
and the dance; and a happy community they then were, and doubtless
would have continued to be, had they not found that other hands than
theirs were necessary to the task, sinews more inured to the work, to aid,


under their control, in accomplishing the foundation of their homes and
future support. The river itself wanders through just such a district as
a small yet united band of settlers would seek to fix their residence.
Each would be at a convenient and neighbourly distance from the other;
and while the nearest would be eight, the farthest could not possibly
be more than sixteen miles from the capital of the settlement, and have
water-carriage for at least seven miles, when the river becomes narrower,
and is much impeded by fallen trees. But useless would it now be to
speculate on the appearance this locality might have presented, had labour
poured into the territory, and supplied the only want which at last con-
sumed the fortunes of the settlers, and drove them, we have always been
assured, with the greatest reluctance from the domain they had chosen
in the full hope of reward. There it remains as it was of yore; and
hardy dispositions may still reclaim it from the waste to which it has re-
turned, and be nourished by it, and fed in simple plenty there.
We trust the foregoing brief record may serve to show that the
failure of an attempt at colonising may arise from many untoward cir-
cumstances, apart from the character of the territory in which such
attempt is made. The only thing that a young colony really requires at
the hands of its parent state is, that a continued stream of population,
in due proportion, should be kept up ; not any artificial distribution of
the masses, or control over their pursuits, for they will of themselves fall
fast enough into their respective callings and places ; but that the great
and essential thing to their success at all, namely, population , be sup-
plied in the best way possible;—and supplied it must be, or the work will
end in ruin and disappointment. The annals of colonial agitation for
the past few years will fully exemplify this ; and there is no stretch of
wisdom or forethought which either counteracts or obviates the necessity.
From one colony to the other the cry is the same: “ Send us your
people, and we will do the rest.” The early history of Western Australia
shows that every wise provision against casualty or disaster was neg-
lected, and at the same time that the conditions on which the lands of
the territory were to be granted, and their cultivation brought about,
were founded on no previous calculation ; in fact, that there was no ex-
perience at hand to apply to such far distant settlements, or point out the
way in which labour was to be supplied. The only existing settlements
were of a penal character, and had risen rapidly under the workings of a
system which supplied the free settlers with abundant labour, together
with providing a large reserve of human skill to the formation of roads
and harbours ; and thus early supplying the lines of communication which
even in old countries are barely produced throughout a long intervening
period of time. All that had to be done in this respect to render the
new colony habitable was left to the pure resources of the immigrants
themselves; and, as we have already shown, those resources were barely
sufficient, and in most cases far less than enough, for the requirements of
their own estates, and the operations indispensable thereto. The gradual
decrease of their already limited numbers, and the non-arrival of those
who could supply their places, together with the entire cessation of accre-
tions from without, prostrated all remaining energy, and threw the
wreck of a sad beginning upon the rocks and shoals of difficulty and
danger from which it was impossible to rescue it. The work was a de-


cided failure —and why was it so ? Not because the country responded
not to the call of civilisation and improvement, but because a powerless
handful of human beings, and most of them not of a class suitable to the
work, were cast upon the shore, with no hand to direct, no fostering aid to
assist. The speculation, if we can admit the term where the lives and
properties of our common countrymen are at stake, did not answer
according to the expectations of the rulers of the parent country; and
therefore they repudiated it, and resigned it to a fate from which, by en-
during fortitude, unbounded and uncomputed sacrifice, it has, after the
immolation of years —and only acknowledged as a place beyond hope—
gradually and proudly emerged. The use which has been taken of the
experience which fell to its own charge, has placed its rival sister settle-
ments on a prosperous footing, and has even promoted their early and
late well-being, from the extension of those several species of motherly
assistance which were pointed out at the commencement of the purblind
system on which the Swan River settlement was founded. But to show
the necessity for availing themselves of this experience, we are obliged to
repeat, the unhappy hull, shorn of its gear, and bankrupt in its coffers,
was repeatedly dragged up to the light, and pointed to as an example of
mismanagement, in such gloomy colours, that the public of this country
naturally viewed it with feelings allied to pity and disgust, and could be
little induced either to sympathise with or to interest themselves for a
settlement which remained under the ban of exclusion, arising from the
lack of each and every inducement (to risk fortune, or chance of the
benefits of emigration, within it. Notwithstanding, however, its having
been from the commencement virtually closed as an emigration field, and
the deaf ear which has for so many years been turned to its protestations
and its claims, the small band of people which clung to the wreck are
able at length to show that they have prepared the way —that they have
established a colony; and this without any foreign assistance, save that of
a small yearly parliamentary grant applied to the services of their local ad-
ministration ; and this latter exceeding by scarcely two thousand pounds
that which is yearly required to sustain those problems of colonisation, the
Falkland Isles, containing a population at this time of not more than
200 souls!
Ifj then, the offspring of those days of folly and neglect, now risen into
lusty manhood—if the early pioneers of that solitary and disheartening
achievement, are not worthy of support, and the results of their endea-
vours tempting enough to any who may be disposed to join them, it
would be hard to trace on the map of our vast colonial empire a place so
anomalous, so utterly puzzling and conflicting in evidence, as the colony
of Western Australia.


( 206 )
AN EVENING WITH KNIPP.
BY DUDLEY COSTELLO.
Chapter I.
HOW MR. PEPYS TOOK A WALK ON MAY MORNING, AND WHAT HE
ENCOUNTERED ON THE WAY.
It was early on the morning of May-day, in the year of our Lord
1667, that a gentleman of a somewhat staid appearance and a certain
demureness of aspect, which seemed not altogether natural to him, nor
suitable to the occasion which brought him forth, might have been seen
leisurely taking his way through the city of London, and walking in the
direction of the Strand.
He was attired in a new suit of black bombasin, —the fashion at that time
for summer wear, —over which he wore a fine cinnamon-coloured camlet
cloak reaching to his knees; and from under his small hat a periwig of
huge dimensions fell in voluminous wreaths upon his shoulders. The
squareness of his figure, exaggerated by this costume, and the general
sobriety of his large massive features, would have led a stranger to
imagine him considerably more than forty years old; but when some
accidental circumstance brought a smile to his lip, and lit up his small
but expressive eye, ten years at least were banished from his countenance,
and he looked, what he really was, about five-and-thirty years of age.
The most predisposing cause to this relaxation of gravity was the
appearance of a pretty female face; and as, in the progress of his walk,
this vision became more and more frequent, his smiles kept pace with the
occasion; and whoever had noticed him half-an-hour before, as he issued
from a dull-looking house in Seething-lane, and observed him now as he
turned the corner of Wych-street, would have concluded that he left
home with the intention of going to a conventicle, and on his way had
changed his destination to a theatre.
He had, indeed, reached the region of the theatres; and if they had
been open at that hour, it was not impossible but he might have walked
into one. The first person, too, whom he recognised was one who had just
begun to charm the town with the wit, the impudence, and the beauty
which soon left her without a rival on the stage ; for, as he passed up
Drury-lane, who but “ pretty Nelly” was standing at the door of her
lodging, in her smock-sleeves and bodice, and gazing with childish delight
on the milk-maids dancing with garlands on their pails, and on the caper-
ing fiddler who led the way.
“ Sweet Mistress Nelly,” said Mr. Pepys,—for such was the gentleman’s
name, —“have you washed your face in May dew this morning, that it
looks so fresh and fair?”
“ Nay,” replied Nelly, “I am but just up. To gather May dew, one
must out to the fields at three o’clock of the morning; and at that hour
Knipp and I were at my Lord Brouncker’s, singing merry songs, drink-
ing rosa solis , and still wondering what had become of Dapper Dicky.
But I see the reason ; that pretty lace band has been a bribe to keep




