

THE FAR NORTH
COUNTRY.
By S. NEWLAND.
lUelaibe:
ited from the “South Australian Advertiser. ”
BURDEN & BONYTHCN, ADVERTISER OFFICE.


EDWARD ANGAS JOHNSON


THE FAR NORTH
COUNTRY.
By S. NEWLAND.
BURDEN & BONYTHON, ADVERTISER OFFICE.


EDWARD ANGAS JOHNSON


THE FAR NORTH
COUNTRY.
By S. NEWLAND.
BURDEN & BONYTHON, ADVERTISER OFFICE,




IN compliance with the wishes of many friends the
present edition of the articles on the “Far North
Country ” is published. A few errors have been corrected ;
otherwise the subject matter is left as it originally appeared
in the pages of the Advertiser. Personally I should have
been quite content to allow them to live and die with that
journal, and therefore cannot but feel gratified that a partial
circle consider them worthy of reproduction in another
form. To myself it is a matter for great regret that no
opportunity was afforded me of making a more extended
examination of the country, and indeed of passing through
the continent to Port Darwin. Possibly circumstances may
still admit of this being done, and if so my pen may be
taken up where now laid down. With the hope of carrying
out this idea it seemed better to wait until the whole series
was complete before republishing any, but the Fates may
prove unkind. So this pamphlet is put “on the market,”
not with the expectation of anything beyond the hope that
it may be of some use in drawing attention to the vast
importance of developing the interior, not simply to the
future of South Australia, but to the civilised globe.
S. NEWLAND.
Undelcarra,
September 2bth, 1887.




THE FAR NORTH COUNTRY.
|H|N writing my impressions of the northern country —known
p|p to so few, understood by scarcely any, and vilified by
nearly all —my object is to throw some light upon a
subject nearly affecting the welfare and advancement of South
Australia, and to give a truer idea of a territory embracing so
large a portion of the colony. That the practicability of
developing this country and the uses to which it can be turned
have a most important bearing upon our future growth no one
can deny. It is, indeed, the question in which our interests are
more closely involved than perhaps any other, since if the vast
interior, of which the country I propose treating forms no
inconsiderable portion, can be made available for profitable
occupation South Australia must pass rapidly from her present
state, as the lowest in population and wealth of all
the colonies on the continent save one, to a higher
rank and possibly a premier position. That there are
many difficulties to be eo countered is evident, but most of
these are inseparable from the initial stage in forming new
settlements. To a large extent, too, these have been already
partially met. When the railway has reached the point
authorised by Parliament at Kekwick Springs, a few miles
to the west of the Peake, it will bridge over most of the bad
country. The G-overnment well-sinking parties have obtained
water at moderate depths at intervals of not more than
thirty miles where required, from the Peake to Charlotte
Waters, and in other places on the road to Alice Springs. As a
whole these attempts to procure water have been exceedingly
successful, the failures have been few, and if the supply is not
sufficient in some cases, or the appliances for watering stock not
all that can be desired, the precious fluid is obtainable at stages
that can easily be travelled. While complimenting the Con-
servator of Water, and those actually engaged in the work, upon
the general results of their exertions, I would point out that
more is required to render the road what it ought to be,
practicable in all seasons. Meanwhile much has been done to
solve the question of the existence of wholesome water
at comparatively shallow levels. In subsequent articles


the subject of what in my humble opinion ought to be
done with these wells will be dealt with. Probably in
treating the wide question before me I shall tread upon
many toes, besides finding that many opinions do not coincide
with my own. But it does some people good to have
their toes trodden upon. Differences of opinion, too, are whole-
some, and if, as is possible, in this case they direct more
attention to the enormous extent of country that might be but
is not utilised, then may the differences continue. It may be
justly urged that I have seen the country in a good season ; but
this is not altogether so, as in some parts little rain has fallen,
and many of the creeks have not run. My observations have
been carefully made, and are founded upon the old as well as
the new growth. The conclusions, at any rate, are arrived at
after a close and careful personal examination of a large extent
of country.
The journeyings and misfortunes of the Transcontinental
Railway Commission party as far as the Peake station having
already been ably narrated by “ One of Them,” with description
of the country passed through, I will not dwell upon that part
of the trip at length, simply stating that the country the road
traverses from the Strangways to the Peake is generally of a
wretched kind, poor even for pastoral purposes, and useless for
any other productions. Travelling along the road it is, however,
impossible to form a decided opinion, and those who have seen
the country on either side pronounce it of a much better
character. It unfortunately appears to be a fact that where
the springs are the country as a rule is inferior. As we cannot
bring the good country to the water we must take the water
from the springs to where there is food for the stock. The
other members of the party having returned homeward on
April 24,1 find myself the sole representative of the Commission,
and begin earnestly to consider how the long journey is to be
prosecuted. Horses it appears are available, but a buggy is
wanting. Mr. Kempe, the manager of the Peake cattle station,
kindly comes to the rescue with the offer of a serviceable
American express. With the experience of past breakdowns, I
think it the very thing for a rough road. The main difficulty
being overcome all others are trifles. Horses are shod, a supply
of “ tucker ” is laid in, and at midday of the 25th we are ready
to start. After lunch we bid good-bye to our hospitable
friends? and wend our way to Algebuckina, the gold diggings on
the Neales, where we intend camping for the night. lam
accompanied by Mr. J. Harding, of Crown Point station
(commonly and affectionately known as “ Joe ”), and a
blackboy, who when he answers at all answers to the name of
“Jim,” but the silence of that boy is as the silence of the tomb.
It is not too much to say that Mr. Harding is known to every


inhabitant o£ the north, from Hergott to Barrow’s Creek. To
him everything is fit and beautiful, and as we jog along he
expatiates upon the virtues of bush, herb, or grass. Not a soul
do we meet but he is accosted as an old friend, and not a horse
is wanted that he will not lend. The road from the Peake to
Algebuckina runs at the foot of the range over a generally
gravelly soil, crossing the Peake creek about a mile from the
station. At the diggings we cross the Neales just above a fine
waterhole, the river here forcing its way through the range
immediately above where the gold is found. The country thus
far is not a paradise upon earth, but it is heaven compared with
the next few miles. The determined spirits who dig here
certainly deserve all the success that can be theirs. The
appliances are rude, but the prospects apparently do not
warrant, up to the present moment, the expenditure of much
money. We now ascend a tableland, and for twelve miles the
country may be described as stones with some soil still left in
the crevices, the rest probably having found its way, like much
of the hills, into Lake Eyre. “ Gibbers” they are called in New
South Wales and Queensland. They are cased in some reddish
composition, giving the landscape somewhat the appearance of
broken bricks, only the bricks ought to be smooth and shiny.
The coating may be scraped off these stones, but within they are
too hard to be affected by any wheels drawn by animal power.
Then we pass Little Cadnowie, a spring of good water in some
welcome sandhills. My companion points out Big Cadnowie
spring, a few miles distant to the south. After three more miles
we cross Hann’s Creek, a dry and desolate watercourse, and at
the end of three more, North Creek, equally dry and uninviting.
“Gibbers ” are now left behind, gravel taking their place. The
low hills to right and left are gravel, so are the valley and bed
of the creek, and the road cannot be surpassed by the best drive
in Adelaide. But little rain can have fallen here. The gidea
fringing the watercourse is all but dead, the cotton bush being
but little better, the aspect damping the enthusiasm of my
friend almost as much as the “ gibbers.” I protest that there
is no land at all; it has all gone into Lake Eyre long ago,
leaving nothing but stones and gravel, and it would be a mercy
if they would follow suit, particularly the former, for the
memory of the “ gibbers ”is continually with me. We pass
from the desolation of North Creek to the brightness of Cecilia,
which is not running, though full of beautiful water. This is
a favorite camping-place, as it appears to be the margin between
bad and fair country. From it the first Government well we
have seen is distant about three miles. The water is very good,
and Mr. Ryan, of the camel wagon party, is now, under
instructions from his chief, engaged in deepening it to increase
the supply. The site is excellent, as the Cecilia is not perma-


nent. There is a great change now, it being firm mulga
country, well bushed generally and fairly grassed, though not
thickly enough to bear heavy stocking. Through open country
in which is a belt of good sandhills with plenty of bush and
grass we reach the “ Angle Pole,” an absurd name given to a
fine waterhole in the Neales, from a curve occurring in the
telegraph line. In the sandhills passed is one of the few
failures of the well-sinking party- —salt water having been
struck and the well abandoned. Here the weather-worn
gravelly hills approach near the flooded ground of the creek, in
some places the soft shale standing on edge, as it does where
the gold is found at Algebuckina. At seven miles through nice
level stock country we cross the Swallow, well-known as a
camping spot. It is a fair waterhole under a rocky bank where
swallows build their nests; hence its name. Thence the road
ascends some stony country, where we leave the telegraph line
to pursue its endless way, via the Alberga and Stevenson, while
we diverge to the right, for the Macumba. In a few miles we
drop into the valley of Storm Creek. As we descend the some-
what steep declivity of the tableland dividing the tributaries of
the Neales and the Macumba, a fine view is afforded of the
basin of the latter river, with Mount Alexander in the distance.
Storm Creek is followed by a winding track on its rocky course
to the Macumba for about five miles, to near the Government
well of fresh water. This is also well situated about sixteen
miles from the next. The country round is considered fairly
bushed and grassed, but Ido not covet its possession. I prefer
a leasehold where I can pitch my camp and rest my weary bones
and bruised flesh —weary and bruised by reason of “ gibbers ”
—without being still tortured by the compulsion of lying on
them, or hanging myself in a gidea tree, for any other place
without them there is none. I diligently sought such a spot
when returning, but found it not. Lower down the stones are
in moderation, and disappear where we strike across a nine-mile
plain of chocolate soil, but of indifferent description, so far as
feed is concerned, for the Alberga. The salt and cotton bus his
far apart, the grass only growing in the “ gilgys.”
Then comes a change to gladden the squatter —excellent
sandhill country, with well-grassed flats between, to the Alberga
Eiver. This we cross, and in a mile the Stevenson also. Both
creeks are running slowly over a portion of their wide and
shallow sandy beds, having been in heavy flood a few days
previously. A couple of miles below is their junction, forming
the Macumba, in an arm of which is the well-known Boss’s
hole, considered the finest water within many miles. It is not per-
manent, though without stocking it is said to last eighteen months.
The tableland to the east of the Macumba is reported to be
first-class, and what I have seen bears out that character.


After crossing tlie Stevenson the Macumba station, now occu-
pied by Messrs. Chambers & Polhill as a store, is but a short
distance. Here we are most hospitably welcomed by the hind
proprietors. Mr. Polbill is also the contractor for running the
mail between the Peake and Alice Springs, but on the subject
of mails I shall have something to say in due course. For
some miles, except the sandhills, where mulga and smaller bushes
are to be found, the country is timbered with box and gum,
indicating that it is subject to big floods. This is so in fact,
as the old Macumba station was abandoned in consequence of
frequent floods. Its site is still pointed out to the curious
traveller. Near it I am also shown an object of considerable
interest, since it was the involuntary abode of a deservedly
popular and prominent member of the Legislature and two other
esteemed colonists for some eighty hours in January, 1877. I can
bear testimony to the judgment of the hon. member in his
selection of that temporary residence, as it undoubtedly is
the best tree to roost upon in that locality. And as
further giving an idea of the floods this portion of the
country is subject to, it may be mentioned that the party
in question were detained at this time at the Macumba for ten
days by the flood, and subsequently only made their way
with great difficulty to Dalhousie Springs, owing to the boggy
state of the ground. On their return about a month later they
saw Lake Byre as a sea, which, on their northward journey,
appeared merely a dry salt basin. The relation recalls to
recollection an incident in my own life, with the difference that
I had cheese instead of sardines to subsist upon, and no tree to
perch in. While here an opportunity is afforded of seeing a
horse affected by the poison plant. One had died a few days
previously. This poor brute appeared paralysed in the loins.
Efforts were made to save him by my energetic friend in his
capacity of “generally useful,” but without avail. I am
supplied with specimens of the supposed cause of death, which
for the satisfaction of the residents shall be analysed. Appar-
ently only horses hungry from a journey suffer ; those running
upon the country are not affected. Excellent water is here
obtainable on the bank of the stream at shallow depths, but the
lessees of the run were not successful in their attempts when
sinking in the back country. After a night’s stay, with a fresh
stock of provisions we start on our track up the Stevenson. For
a while the road is over some heavy sand, but improves as we
progress. For about fifty miles the valley of the creek is
followed, occasionally a spur of tableland having to be crossed.
Then the telegraph-line is met once more, and we strike off to
the north for Blood’s Creek. In the stretch of country from
the Macumba station to Ike’s Well, where the telegraph-line
crosses the Stevenson, there are three Government wells, each


of good water. As all are in the valley of the creek it may be
argued that they are no index as to whether fresh water can he
obtained on the higher land, but as to their value in opening up
the road in any season there can be no two opinions. The
tabelands appear all stony, but there is much good stock food
upon them, though the timber, or indeed nearly everything
above the size of a saltbush, is confined to the lower lands
adjacent to the creeks. The actual beds of all the large streams
are pure white sand, and the Stevenson, so far as I have seen
it, is no exception.
At Adminga, the station of Messrs. Duncan & Treloar, some
miles above the telegraph crossing, there are splendid water-
holes, generally well supplied with water since the occupation
of the country in 1876, though during a very severe drought
the whoie of them, with one exception, were dry, and the one
referred to nearly so. It is in hilly country, and said to be
favored by a better rainfall than other places in this dry region.
As we leave the Stevenson this station is to our left, Dalhousie
Springs, the “ wonder of the north,” being some thirty miles on
our right. These springs are indeed a marvel. Almost sur-
rounded by hills a few miles distant they are themselves on a
considerable elevation, about ten miles long. Several of the
most extraordinary were shown, among the rest the famed hot
spring, the water flowing from which would be called a river in the
settlements. The supply is evidently inexhaustible, and while
quite appreciating their present importance it must strike the
observer as a pity they are centred in so comparatively small an
area. In the no distant future I venture to predict that a large
portion of these waters will be carried very many miles away in
pipes from the source. Spring Creek offers a fall down which
the pipes can be laid to good country, thus saving stock the
long tramp that kills to water. Immediately round the springs
a kind of acacia bush, rushes, and reeds, with several kinds of
grasses, among the rest a couch-grass, are growing freely, but
as the water descends on to the level ground vegetation disappears,
indicating that when the water rises it is comparatively free
from the properties deleterious to vegetable life. This view is
borne out by the fact that the creek from the hot spring flows in
a well-defined channel lined with bushes for from two to three
miles, and then spreads out into a swamp covered with reeds
such as grow in the swamps of the Murray. Below that it
becomes impregnated with saline matter, and the ground
presents the same white barren aspect characteristic of the
springs from the Hergott to the Peake. On the whole, how-
ever, the country round the Dalhousie Springs is much better,
and the number of cattle it has supported in many droughts is
a proof of this.
The road to Blood’s Creek crosses a plain broken by sand


rises and claypans very similar to much of the back country of
the Darling. There is another Government well at Blood’s
Creek near the junction of the Dalhousie-road. The water is
good, and I understand the supply also. A house of accommo-
dation for travellers and a store has just been opened, which
will be a great convenience, as that is a general camping place. A
few miles further we ascend the tableland dividing the water-
sheds of the Stevenson and the Finke. Here our old trouble,
the “ gibbers,” confronts us. They close upon us on each side
and seem endowed with life, as they are ever before each wheel.
Our strong trap recoils from apparently a score at once. We
try “ deviations,” a term travellers by rail between Hergott and
Strangways will understand, hut the result is not satisfactory.
Without danger to the “ unruly member ” you cannot even
mutter curses, and connected conversation is impossible. My
companion emulates the taciturnity of the silent Jem, and is
heard no more until we descend into the valley of the Adminga,
and breathe freely again. Here stones still prevail, but the
road is better. There is little timber in this tributary of the
Finke, and the country is hut sparsely bushed or grassed. It
is hard and hilly, and should be a good watershed, causing the
creek to flood with light rains. From here to Charlotte Waters
telegraph-station is sixteen miles. Bullocky Creek lies between,
where the well-sinkers tried boring, hut abandoned the effort in
consequence of some breakage in the tube. For some miles
before arrival at the telegraph-station the road traverses quite
open, gravel, and stony country, with low hills to the left and
the Charlotte Creek on the right, beyond which can be seen the
depression of the Finke. The site of the telegraph-station is
an unfortunate one. It is dry, bare, and desolate, with the hot
stony land all round. Probably it was chosen as offering no
cover to the blacks, but no such consideration can have weight
now, and before any improvements are made the desirability of
removing to a place where permanent water can be obtained,
and vegetables grown, should receive the attention of the
authorities. The present site is spoken of as the hottest of hot
localities, which can well be, for there is not a tree or bush
within half a mile. To the south and west the nearly bare
stony country extends for miles, to look upon which in hot
weather must be almost to wither you. We are now just over
the 26th parallel of latitude, and may well pause to consider the
different aspect presented by the country as it lies before us.
South Australia proper is behind ; the Northern Territory in
front. The line almost defines the difference in vegetation.
Looking over the Charlotte Creek to the north trees, hushes,
and grass are growing in profusion ; in some places the timber
appears almost dense. To the south stretches a wide expanse of
country where the eye in vain searches for tree or bush. The


interminable stones, of which we have seen so much, are left
behind. Truly, they are scattered over the higher lands of the
great Finke watershed before us, but they do not cover it to
the exclusion of vegetation as we have seen in the past. Apart,
too, from the marked dissimilarity in the country we are some
two hundred miles on our journey, at the only telegraph-station
between the Peake and Alice Springs. The officials are kindness
itself, welcoming us with all the hospitality of old friends, so
that we feel no hesitation in lingering a few days to look around
and prepare for the second part of our trip. Charlotte Waters
telegraph-station marks the conclusion of the first part of our
journey.
The Charlotte Waters telegraph-station is not the residence
likely to be selected by anyone having the wide world to choose
from. If the ground is not a monotonous dead level it ought to
be from appearances. Then again the site of the station seems
too big for it. There is no termination on any side except on
that of the creek, and that is nearly three-quarters of a mile
away. Apparently feeling the responsibility of the position in
the struggle to cope with it, the various buildings have spread
themselves out to the utmost. They look disconnected and
forlorn ; at any rate that was the impression produced upon my
mind. The site is evidently fond of the sun, for he salutes it in
the early morning; he bids it farewell the last thing in the
evening; and the full power of his rays is poured upon it
through the day. The only possible shade is that of a telegraph
pole or a stock-yard fence. The soil is hot; the pebbles, with
which it is covered, must be hotter still. Yerily a salamander
would cook in such a spot. “The Government House,” as the
operator’s residence is called, is the principal building, chiefly
remarkable for ugliness and heat. It is built of stone round
three sides of a square courtyard, the fourth being closed in by
a wall, in which is the solitary door giving access to an estab-
lishment comprising telegraph-station, post-office, store, dining-
room, sleeping apartments, kitchen, &c. Not a verandah exists,
and old Sol must have rare grilling within those walls during the
long summer months. Think of sweltering there listening to
the tick of the instrument! Oh, the monotony of such an
existence ! One would think an interruption to the line must
sometimes be a relief when the order to mount camels goes
forth, and away along from pole to pole the party proceeds for
perhaps a hundred miles to repair damages and link the old and
new worlds together again. On the day after arrival at
Charlotte Waters we cross the creek into rich pastures, where a
mob of Crown Point cattle are mustered preparatory to the final
start for the Adelaide market. They are a credit to the station,
and show what can be produced in quality and weight in the
north. Our course lies down the Charlotte through pictur-


esque country dotted over with box, showing that it is subject
to floods. There are many kinds of good stock bushes*
including salt and cotton bush, as also grasses and herbs o£
various descriptions. The soil generally is a sandy loam, not
calculated to stand the heavy stocking of the higher land as we
progress, but evidently a favorite feeding ground judging from
the number of cattle upon it. At the junction of the Charlotte
with the Finke high tablelands, on the south side ending in a
steep cliff, turn the river abruptly to the east, which forms as
it does so some fairly good waterholes. The gum and box in
the levels and flooded flats are thick with the undergrowth of
acacias, wallows, and a considerable quantity of other small
trees and bushes. None of the timber appears large, but there
are fine poles which are well adapted for station purposes. No
doubt many sleepers for the railway can be obtained up the
Finke, but as the timber is generally young the authorities
probably will see objections to its use. It is, however, well
known that box is most durable, not splitting with the sun
as much as gum does. On the south the tableland comes to the
river bank. It is about fifty feet above its level, of a stony
character, but splendidly covered with Mitchell and numerous
other grasses. Over the Finke Yalley to the east soft sand-
hills form its boundary. Some stand up high above the timber
trees in the stream bed; others again are slight elevations
broken by flats between. In one respect they are all alike,
since all furnish ample supplies of the most fattening herbs for
stock, besides numerous bushes and grasses. The river channel
here does not present the same broad white sandy bed
characteristic of it farther north, as it is affected by the
frequent flooding of the Charlotte Creek, flowing principally
through red loam clay and stony country, and bringing little
white sand with it. It has lately been in flood, filling the
"Wilyumpa waterhole, where we camp for the night. There
is a shallow well here belonging to Crown Point station, in the
river bed, now surrounded by water. The supply it gives is
excellent and inexhaustible. In so fine a part of the run it is
invaluable.
Another well was sunk by the telegraph party near the
junction of Charlotte Creek, but the water was brackish—fit
for stock, but not suitable for the requirements of the telegraph-
station when its usual supply fails. A further well was
therefore put down a few miles up the Finke, where an
abundant flow of pure water was obtained. Indeed in no
instance coming under my notice has water failed to be found
in the Finke at a depth not exceeding thirty feet; more usually
under ten feet. lieturning, I rode back on the south side of
Charlotte Creek, passing some fine waterholes in its channel
with box and gum fringing the banks. On the following day


we started for Crown Point, making a detour up Charlotte
Creek and some of its tributaries round Mount Daniel to the
Goyder. Higher up the creek offers greater facilities for
damming, as the ground is more tenacious and firm than below
the telegraph-station. The country around is generally firm,
but we pass some good sandhills with small plains. Opinions
cannot differ as to its carrying capabilities as a stock country.
Cotton and salt bushes abound, while grass of many varieties is
thick. Gidea is again met with in the higher creeks, but mulga
predominates, particularly as we approach the Goyder through
undulating country with sandy soil. This stream has only
partially run from the late rains, but its bed of sand is full of
water, as is proved by the scoop holes where the sand has been
removed for a few feet and where stock are now drinking. We
follow the stream up some ten miles, seeing some water on the
surface, and then turn off to the right for Crown Point.
About midway we drop into the Finke depression and continue
up the flats to the station, passing some curious hills and cliffs.
During the last two days we have seen nothing but good
country, and its carrying capabilities are unquestionable. The
station is situated on the rising ground at the margin of the
floods. To the west is a plain bounded by low elevations with
the usual covering of foliage met with since passing Charlotte
Creek, bushes, grass, and herbs being in abundance. To the
north Crown Point and Onetree Hill cliff stand conspicuously
out some two miles away; the first ending a range of hills on
the west bank of the Finke, the other the same on the east.
Each is absolutely flat on the top with steep weather-worn
sides. Here the Finke Valley is at its narrowest. Hill seems
so near hill that one does not wonder at the telegraph authori-
ties entertaining the idea of stretching the wire from cliff to
cliff, wisely abandoned for the less ambitious method of carrying
it over at a lower elevation on poles. The river bed for many
miles below this and until the Mac Donnell Ranges are
approached consists of pure white sand. The depth apparently
is not ascertained, as the influx of water is too great in nearly
every instance to be coped with. Immediately out of the main
channel here, as below, gum and box poles grow in immense
quantities. One wonders how it comes to pass that there are
so few of greater age or dimensions. Several days are spent in
examining the surrounding country. Lilia Creek, joining the
Finke to the west about fifteen miles up, is visited. Again is
seen the ribbon of sand instead of water characteristic of all
these rivers. Like the Goyder, this creek is lined with timber
of small kinds on the higher parts of its valley, and rough box
and gum of large size near the banks. On the north it is
bounded by the most extensive plain seen thus far. To the
south is Mount Humphries with other smaller hills, circled by


small plains and sandhills. Generally the lower Lilia country
is open, hut there is no mistake about it being a beautiful stock
country. In our ride we look at several wells in the Finke, all
of fresh water, at seven or eight feet.
Sunday afternoon was devoted to climbing Crown Point.
Tradition says two adventurous spirits have already made the
ascent years ago, but we prefer to ignore this as a presumptuous
boast. A spur affords a tolerably easy climb to the crown or
cap with projecting edge all round, something like a Tam o’
Shanter hat, or even more resembling an old college boy’s
“ mortarboard.” On one spot this ledge has broken away,
allowing the least agile of the party, with the assistance of a
rope, to reach the top —a flat surface of two or three acres.
The view is fine. The eucalyptus green belt of the Finke is
immediately at our feet, and winds far away in the distance ;
the universal table-topped hills of this district breaking the
landscape in nearly every direction, while across the Finke to
the east the soft sandhills roll one beyond another. We have
lugged up a pole, which is erected in a pile of stones to com-
memorate the visit, and after a short but exciting wallaby hunt,
which resulted in the wily game knowing the only way down as
well as we did, we lower our stalwart friend over the ledge and
seek level ground again, where we are disgusted to find our
flagstaff cannot be distinguished. Since crossing the 26th
parallel the enthusiasm of my companion has known no bounds.
According to him the natural vegetable products are by no
means only suitable to the brute creation. Cabbage saltbush is
extolled as a table vegetable of surpassing excellence, but though
promised it never appears upon the hospitable Crown Point
board. lam shown the “ munuri,” which my friend could only
describe as “ splendid and behold !itis an old acquaintance,
vulgarly known as “ pigweed.” It doubtless has valuable anti-
scorbutic properties, but as an article of diet it is surely time,
when a country has been settled for ten or twelve years, that it
were relegated to the cattle and sheep and the prosaic cabbage
substituted. The advent of a few Chinamen would certainly
settle the pretensions of both saltbush and pigweed as a
table vegetable. Under any circumstances they are much nicer
essenced down into beef and mutton. Preparations completed,
with fresh horses we start for Alice Springs. The team is
excellent, the horses going as if they meant to jump out of their
skins. Our course lies over the Finke, along the telegraph line.
Sandhills are around, but the track dodges most of them, keep-
ing generally on hard ground with open country until within
a few miles of the Horsehoe Bend, where they have to be over-
come. A store has lately been opened here at the junction of
two roads —one via Idracowra cattle station and Chambers
Pillar to Mount Birrell, and the other via the old depot on the


Finke Alice Well and Frances Creek to the same destination.
We went one way, returning the other. To Idracowra both
road and country are good, but on from there for about fifteen
miles to beyond Chambers Pillar the sandhills are a terror.
Soft and steep, they meet one in interminable rolls. Spinifex
luxuriates there, but withal it is not bad stock country. It is
seeding plentifully, as I am told it does annually, and then
cattle and horses are very fond of it. Leaving the sand some
easy road, through nice mulga country, is passed, and then some
more sand before Mount Birrell is reached. The road to the
east has some sandhills also, but there is not such a continuous
length of them as by Chambers Pillar. The distance, too, is
fifteen miles shorter. There is good water in the Government
well at Alice Creek, twenty-one miles from the Bend. It can also
be obtained at the old depot, but another well should be sunk at
Frances Creek to break the distance from Alice Creek to Mount
Birrell. Mount Birrell is situated a little to the east of the
Hugh. There are fine troughs, and a good well in the bed of the
river, out of which water is raised by a whip, which appears to be
the mode universally adopted. I understand it is the intention
of the owner, Sir Thomas Elder, to carry on the breeding of
horses, for which the country is well adapted.
The Hugh, whose broad bed of white sand, now so familiar,
affords plenty of water, runs through the property. Of grass
bush or saline plants there are sufficient for cattle, horses, or
sheep to thrive well on. There is now again a choice between
two tracks; one generally travelled up the Hugh via Dr.
Stone’s well and Owen Springs, the other a mere camel pad up
Olive Creek through the James and Waterhouse Banges. The
latter is said to save fifty miles —so grave a consideration that we
choose it, though warned of the perils of the “ Pinch.” The
going is good for twenty miles through open undulating salt and
cotton bush country, well grassed. Then we have five miles of
desert oak sandhills, not steep but heavy-going, though a tarred
pavement compared to the Chambers Pillar sand before reach-
ing the James Eange. This is a broken low range, presenting
no difficulties to us, as we pass through a convenient valley
without rising a yard, and strike for the Waterhouse through
about fifteen miles of sandhills, on which grows a forest of desert
oaks. Their trunks are fourteen or fifteen feet long, and should
be useful for building and fencing purposes, or possibly for
railway sleepers if the timber will stand in the ground. As we
approach the range a valley opens out, up which we proceed to
the foot of the “Pinch,” where we think it is time to pause
and look ahead, or rather over one’s head, for the “ Pinch ”
decidedly bars the view in front. The programme is soon
settled. We are going to drive up that precipice, and one of
the party, whose life is insured —under which circumstance


some people are more valuable dead than alive —is selected to
take the reins. The first attempt failed. When a buggy is
standing on its hind wheels leaning against a perpendicular
wall, with the pole pointing at midday sun, and you are hanging
on by your elbows to the front guard-iron to prevent yourself
dropping out at the back, the situation does not admit of artistic
driving. The near leader slipped, the oft leader stopped to
protest it was not a fly, and we found ourselves back at the
bottom. ’Tis weak to hesitate, so when some one had got ready
a volley of curses (it wasn’t the driver) with a rush and .a crash
we were at the top. On the return journey the horses were
taken out, and the proposal coolly made that I should sit in the
buggy to work the brake, the stalwart Joe acting as“poler.”
I fairly “ caved.” No man in his senses would attempt riding
down that descent into “the uttermost parts of the earth.” So
the brake is lashed down hard and the buggy lowered from
boulder to boulder —the first trap that ever passed up and down
that pass. Another mile brought us to the gap. It is simply a
doorway in the cliff, only fifty feet wide, the two walls standing
up perpendicularly perhaps a huudred-and-fifty to two hundred
feet. I mounted one only a few feet wide, piled rock upon rock
as if by Titans, smooth and slippery, with not a loose stone left.
For nine miles further the track is still in the spurs of the range,
but at Ooromina, a rock waterhole considered permanent, we are
through, and twenty miles of what is called plain are before us,
lying between the Waterhouse Range and Emily Clap. The
country is, however, bushed over generally, the watercourses
being marked by box timber. We follow a buggy track in a
tolerably straight line to Emily G-ap, a gateway similar to the
last, but on a grander scale. Its cliffs rise many hundred feet
overhead, wild and almost unassailable. This range is pierced
by several of these gaps, through which the various creeks make
their way, though how, wiser heads than mine may determine,
for the rock is hard as flint so that it appears impossible for the
action of water to wear it away. The range stands up almost
sheer from the plain on either side, forming but for these gaps
an impassable barrier.
What a change since leaving the Strangways ! Here grass
grows thick and luxuriantly. A hungry and thirsty appearance
can only be seen here when a drought rages, and droughts are
strangers to few parts of Australia. Yet though this is a grass
country there is plenty of saltbush in parts, the “ old man ”
kind in particular being very abundant. From the 26th parallel
there are many varieties of trees, besides gum, box, and mulga.
There are bloodwood, ironwood, beefwood, and whitewood. Of
bushes of the larger description there are many kinds—acacias,
emu bush, dogwood, orange, native hop, and a host of others.
Nearly all, too, form food for animal life during time of drought..


Many are always greedily selected by stock. In looking at this
part o£ the country one can discern few signs of severe drought.
Comparatively few bushes or trees are dead, and where they are
the result appears to be due to fire. It cannot be urged that
the country has never been put to the test of heavy stocking,
for on some of the permanent waters it has undoubtedly been
severely tried. This is simply what may be expected from a
country where bushes and grasses well known to stand drought
best grow in profusion. In the soft sand country the famous
parakilla is flowering to perfection with the gay hues of the
portulacca tribe. There appears no doubt that cattle can and
do Jive through the hottest summer where this plant, or rather
these plants, grow ; there are certainly two or three varieties of it,
probably many more. Passing through Emily Gap we leave Un-
doolya station about five miles to the right. It is pleasantly situ-
ated under the main Mac Donnell Range, with the lofty Undoolya
Mountain to the east, and the Slippanel and Jesse Gaps to the
south and south-west. Our course lies along a valley, between
ranges running east and west, picturesque and interesting in
the extreme. Occasionally the track crosses stony rises, but
generally there appears to be a deep loamy soil rich enough to
grow anything under the combined influences of sun and rain.
Alice Springs lies six miles from Emily Gap across the valley,
nestled in some small hills. Approaching it we leave Hever-
tree Gap to our left, where are camped the black police under
the command of Mr. Wiltshire. Nearer again we pass a store,
and then comes into view the telegraph-station, most important
from its situation of all on the long line from Port Augusta to
Port Darwin. We were not expected so soon, but from the
cordiality of our reception it is evident that a warm welcome
was ready for us at any time. From sounds proceeding from
recesses, into which we dare not penetrate, it is obvious that the
fatted calf is already killed and cooking, and when later on we
rise from the hospitalities pressed upon us by our kind enter-
tainers and gather round the cheerful fires, we receive some
information of the passing events agitating the busy life out of
which we have dropped. The imminence of war between
France and Prussia is touched upon as a thing concerning them
not. Even the election of their present members is passed by
as of little moment. The knighthood of Sir John Downer
evokes no enthusiasm. But as the wrongs of Ireland are to
Charlotte Waters so is the totalizator to Alice Springs. That
momentous question is of absorbing interest, and if the members
for Flinders do not obtain the legalization of the instrument
they must avoid having the Mac Donnell Ranges declared a
polling-place,
Alice Springs is undoubtedly the most interesting of all the
stations on the overland line. Its height above sea level is


variously stated at from 1,500 to 2,500 feet, but at any rate it
is tbe highest of these stations. Situated, too, in the range
dividing the water system of the continent, it is on the confines
of the great saltbush country, far beyond which it is questionable
whether sheep will thrive. The scenery around it is always
interesting, often striking, and sometimes magnificent. The
valley in which it lies has no counterpart in South Australia
that I have seen. It stretches away in the dim distance, east
and west, bounded to the south by the marvellous wall of hard,
flinty rock with the ready-hewn gateways through it, and to the
north hy the broken up main Mac Donnell Range, the source of
the rivers, creeks, and springs ; a range of granite, now in huge
boulders, and again decomposed into excellent pasture land.
Eighteen miles to the west of the telegraph-station is Temple
Bar, a gap through which the telegraph line passes; while
immediately opposite is Simpson’s Gap, a wonderful gorge in
the main range, with mighty cliffs towering up to the heavens,
between which lies a beautiful pool of permanent water. To
pass those narrow heights the traveller must swim that icy
stream upon which the sun can shine hut little. On the other
side the approach is difficult, so torn is the range, so rough the
boulders. Further to the west there are many of these gorges,
and one cannot wonder that the native lords of these wilds
have conceived the idea on more occasions than one that they
could defend them against the white man. High up on the face
of these magnificent cliffs grows a beautiful tecoma wherever
there is a little soil in the fissures of the rocks. Sometimes
it occurs in the form of a bush, at others as a creeper,
its flowers of creamy white hanging in bunches. As Alice
Springs is the repeating station the duties of the officers never
cease, necessitating the employment of a large staff of opera-
tors. Hence it is looked upon as a place of considerable
importance. Prettily and picturesquely situated on the banks
of the Todd under, yet in the range, it has much to recommend
it as a place of residence. Hot winds, surely, can never reach
it under the cover of all these hills far and near. There are
trees, too, around, and some planted by the residents already
shade the buildings. As to the buildings themselves it cannot
be said that they are structures of surpassing beauty or
convenience, though all, save one, may fairly meet require-
ments. That one is the telegraph-office itself. A single room
with low walls and iron roof, a door in the side, and a chimney
at one end ; it is cold in winter and hot and ill-ventilated
in summer. For a room continually occupied it is about as
comfortless as it could well be constructed. In the long cold
winter nights it must be miserable work attending to the duties
of the office in that poor place. Perhaps when funds are
available the Postmaster-General will, with that consideration


for those beneath his rule which actuates him, have some-
improvement made. There is an attempt at gardening, inasmuch
as a piece of ground is enclosed and a pump erected over a
shallow well adjoining, from which water is laid on. With soil,
water, and climate in favor of the production of most vegetables
and many fruits, the result appeared to me disappointing.
Surely where so many are employed it would pay to keep a good
gardener. The actual amount of rations saved by a continuous-
supply of vegetables would be considerable, to say nothing of
the health of the community. It is a pity that something was
not done years ago in planting vines and fruit trees, as well as
attention paid to a kitchen garden, in a locality like this.
Perhaps the authorities will take the hint and give instructions
to have the matter attended to without further delay.
A few cows are kept, which afford a supply of milk and
butter, but beef is obtained from Undoolya station. Only a
few sheep are now left out of the original flock. All reports,
however, agree in stating that these sheep did very well, and in
such a country there is no reason why, with proper attention,
they should not; but that attention under the ordinary black
shepherd it is simply impossible to expect, as it generally con-
sists of two-thirds of the twenty-four hours being spent in the
yard or in the camp. After one night’s rest I start with a pair of
fresh horses and a buckboard, under the guidance of Mr. Williams,
over the range for Bond Springs, the station he manages. The
road has not the number of “gibbers” to the square yard we have
seen in regions passed over, but it makes up for that in size.
Por that airy fragile vehicle to cross those impediments in
safety seems an impossibility, yet it does, and at a fast trot
too. It glides round one rock with scarcely an inch to spare,
to be cannoned into safety off another just when perdition
appeared to be our inevitable fate, I can vouch for my friend’s
nerve and good hands, or that buckboard would have been in
fragments long ago. In his opinion the principles of good
driving are very simple. His theory is the faster you go the
less time there is to be killed, so where the dangerous places are
he puts the pace on and gets it over. Thus far actual practice
has proved the correctness of the theory, for I have not heard
that he has killed himself yet. We turned and twisted through
the hills, over creeks, and along creeks, and eventually found
ourselves at Bond Springs station, on the Todd, once more.
The afternoon was spent in riding to the south-east through
a jumble of watercourses, hills, and valleys, with a soil largely
composed of decomposed granite, but excellent grazing land. Glum
and teatree are in the creeks, and mulga on the hills, with many
of the bushes common to the lower lands. We climb one enor-
mous blow of white quartz, but can detect no gold in it. In these
ranges there are many of these reefs, nearly all of them running


•from east to west. Those who have been out prospecting speak
hopefully, but apparently no good finds have been made as yet,
and with such an area of country to examine and so little
attention paid to it that could scarcely be expected. Bond
Springs station is placed nearly upon the top of the Mac Donnell
Range, but it has only the appearance of being in a number of
low hills. There are several waterholes in the creek, but why
the term “springs” is given others must explain. Following the
channel up a few miles and the range is passed through, the
creek taking its rise on a tableland or plain from the north.
"We ride on, and next at about eight miles are at Allan’s Waters,
, a creek running nearly east and west. As we proceed the country
becomes somewhat densely timbered with big mulga. Then we
cross the Harry, running parallel with Allan’s Waters, and the
country becomes more open. The Strangways Eange is now
only a few miles to the right, standing so as to give the im-
pression that the highest crest must reach a considerable
elevation. From this range the Birt, running parallel to and
about thirty miles from the Mac Donnell Range, takes its rise. We
arrive at the creek about sundown, and camp at the G-overnment
Well, which contains excellent water. There has evidently
been little rain here, as the creek has no water in it, and the
grass is drier than nearer the range. Extensive plains stretch
to the west, well grassed and bushed; and as we strike off for
Painter’s Spring to the west of our outward track, plains of
. saltbush on the mulga country are frequently met with. Birt’s
Creek, about thirty miles beyond the Mac Donnell Range, was the
farthest point reached during the trip. There the country looks
of an excellent pastoral character, but it is evident that per-
manent surface water is very scarce.
Where we again reach the Mac Donnell Range—at Painter’s
Spring —it has assumed an abrupt ascent, and so stretches away
in a defined line to the west, with a plain running at its foot
with evidently an immense extent of level country to the north
of it. Painter’s Spring is prettily situated a few feet up the
cliff. A hole has been sunk, and the water fills it and flows
over. The element could scarcely be purer, and probably the
supply could be largely increased. One solitary palm-tree, the
only one seen by me in the range, grows at this spring. From
the summit of the hill overlooking this water the view is exten-
sive, showing the range to be much more rugged than to the
east of the telegraph line. To the south, between Painter’s
Spring and the telegraph line, are Flint’s Springs, no doubt
permanent with anything like fair treatment, but they are
situated in Colyer’s Creek, another of the “ribbons of sand”
already spoken of—sand perpetually on the move, whether by
the action of water, wind, or the treading of animals. If there
is a hollow it fills it, as many of the settlers in the north


have found out to their cost, hut here in these ranges the
difficulty is not great to contend with. Where the sand came
from, in some of the creeks, is surprising, as the surface appears
to he soil and decomposed granite. Of game there appears
little for hundreds of miles, though on some of the waters black
duck, wood duck, and teal have been numerous. Some turkeys
also, a few emu, and occasionally considerable numbers of kan-
garoos, are to be seen, principally on the plain country. In the
ranges wallabies abound where there is plenty of cover of scrub
or rocks. Thus far the equilibrium of nature apparently has
been fairly kept. The most numerous of all native creatures is
perhaps the most harmless and least able to protect itself. It is
the beautiful topknotted pigeon, known in the old days on the
Darling as “the squatter,” from its sitting so still when
approached quite closely. These birds are somewhat smaller
than the ordinary pigeon and very plump, the flesh being very
delicate and white as that of a chicken —a peculiarity I think
unknown in any other bird of the pigeon tribe. They are so tame,
and when startled fly such a short distance, that they are not
likely long to survive the advent of the white man. It is
probable that in the course of a few years we shall have to
mourn the disappearance of this pigeon, as we have so many of
our most beautiful birds, though the inaccessible cliffs of the
Mac Donnell Ranges may enable it to maintain itself. The
sheepfarmers’ foe, the wild dog, is numerous over much of the
country. At Crown Point one came down in open daylight to
the station to meet his fate from a splendid kangaroo dog after
a brief but exciting chase and struggle. His scalp was pro-
nounced worth five shillings of Government money, and the rite
of denudation was promptly performed before the owner had
time to decently close his eyes, much less collect his discomfited
senses to protest against premature dismemberment. On several
occasions our camp was serenaded by strong bands of these
cheerful musicians. Whether they were sent on revenge or not,
who shall say? but one night in the Waterhouse Range, after
being more than usually demonstrative during the evening, they
later on even disturbed the equanimity of the impassive and
silent Jim, who never deemed it a matter for remark or expos-
tulation if they merely prowled around in an enquiring sort of
way, ate up the remains of his supper, or even sniffed at his
toes, but he did express himself in the limited but forcible ver-
nacular of the north when one made a viciously inquisitive
smell at his poll, apparently under the mistaken impression
that it contained something good to eat. It is astonishing how
few words are really necessary to express one’s meaning when
in earnest. Jim only used two, but dissent from the abduction
of his scalp was as plainly expressed as if he had poured forth
the contents of a dictionary with the eloquence of the “ Ornate ”


himself. Jim used them in the vituperative sense only, but in
the vocabulary of the northerner they are all-important. No
information can be conveyed without them, much less emotions
of joy, fear, or rage. In polite society these indespensable
words to the north are known not, but a celebrated lexicographer
has explained that they are “ frequently used by sailors as terms
of endearment,” as appears to be the casein our far out country.
Regarding the climate much misapprehension certainly exists.
There is no question that the thermometer rises to a great height
in much of the north. At Alice Springs, with its elevation, the glass
for from sixty to seventy days in the year registers over 100°. At
Charlotte Waters and the Peake it is hotter still; but this is com-
mon to the interior generally, both in Queensland and New South
Wales. It is surprising to hear that the hot blast of the north,
so familiar to us about Adelaide, and so well known in our
colonies, is scarcely felt beyond and about the
Peake; the Hottest wind felt there, lam told, is from the south-
east; so that it appears we must look for the birthplace of our fiery
foe nearer home than has been usually supposed. The steady
burning heat must, however, be very intense in many localities,
mitigated though it doubtless is on the higher land by cool
nights. The lower levels, such as the valley of the Finke, look
as if they could be sultry enough to be the chosen happy
hunting grounds of the festive mosquito ; indeed, during my
visit in May these pests were bad enough to try the most
angelic temper. As for the flies they were “as the sand upon the
seashore ”or the bed of the Finke for multitude. The northern
fly is a most interesting creature. He demands and compels
attention or even profound study. To ignore his existence is to
be unconscious of your own. He certainly is possessed of an
immortal soul, and looks forward to the en joyment of such delights
as the wildest fanatic never dreamt of, or he would not be so reck-
less of life. The joy of death in your boiling tea is only excelled
by the glory of self-immolation on your hot chop. The flies
are so anxious and determined to feed you that you could not
die of starvation in the north if you tried. Anyhow, these are
some of the thoughts that cross one’s mind when endeavoring
to eat a meal enveloped in a cloud of smoke that would choke a
steam-engine in a vain attempt to avert fly martyrdom. It
requires much resignation sometimes to acknowledge the
universal fitness of all things. The opinion is current that the
season in the north has thus far been exceptional in its heavy
rainfall, but this is erroneous. It is true that in the vicinity of
Charlotte Waters there was heavy rain in March and April, but
it fell off to the north, and so far as I know none of its tributaries
of any magnitude ran into the Finke. Nearer the Mac Donnell
Ranges the rainfall has evidently been lighter still, as many of
the principal creeks did not run at all or only partially, while


over these ranges to the north the fall must have been even
less. Much of the grass is dry, and there is no water whatever
in holes that certainly would have retained it. To the east and
on into Queensland we know there have fallen heavy and
continuous rains, causing the rivers flowing into South
Australia to pour their waters into Lake Eyre. But little of
northern South Australia has received such copious downpours.
Though the season is undoubtedly good, yet it must he admitted
there is much to be desired, while the river par excellence (the
Einke) has not run at all except to some extent above its junction
with the Hugh. This is the more disappointing, as in the pastoral
districts of Queenland directly competing with the north the
rains have been exceptionally heavy and constant. A comparison
of the rainfall this half-year shows that it is only above the
average at Charlotte Waters, one station out of three in the district
I am writing about. At Alice Springs the average rainfall is
11796 inches, and 6T90 inches have fallen for the half-year to
the end of June. It is impossible that there could be any con-
siderable flooding of creeks when during the six months there
has been no three-inch rain. It indeed seems rather a poor result
in a country where during the last ten years returns show that
there have been thirty-four falls exceeding three inches, six ex-
ceeding four inches, four of over five inches, two of over six
inches, and one of over eleven inches. The season may therefore
he considered an average one in the Mac Donnell Bauges, but in
no sense is it an exceptionally good one. Just about the
Charlotte Waters the rain for the half-year has been abnormally
heavy, being nearly as much as the average of the year. At the
Peake, however, the actual amount registered is less than the
average, being only 2465, against 5'436 for the year.
These figures surely ought to show that the taunt that I have
looked at the country through remarkably green spectacles is
scarcely deserved. There might be some justice in the charge if
the Einke had been in flood ; if I had seen that great barren bed
of sand a rolling river, or even seen it after the water had
subsided, leaving the lagoons and holes full. I can well imagine
that under such circumstances it would present a far more
inviting appearance than when I saw it, as I can also imagine
that it would look worse during a drought. Considering the
splendid season the Queensland squatters have enjoyed it
says much for these northern runs that under less favorable
conditions they have been able to compete with them, both as
regards the quality of fat stock and the prices obtained for it.
And when more attention is paid to breeding, weaning, and
spaying, all absolutely essential to growing good herds, it will be
found that the northern cattle can hold their own with any in
the colonies. Erom the nature of the country and the pasture
their condition must be so firm as to enable them to stand the


hardships of travel at least as well as any cattle wherever
grown. The distance to Adelaide is scarcely greater than from
most of the Queensland runs, the stock from which comes to
South Australia, and to a railway it is less, so much so that
when the line is finished to the Peake the northern runs will
he able to reach the market when the road is sealed to Queens-
land. The rival colonists have also to pay the five shillings per
head duty on stock entering South Australia, which to some extent
neutralises the cost of the greater distance northern owners may
have to travel or truck. The latter are, however, exceedingly
dissatisfied that the sum is so low, maintaining that it does not
do more than pay the cost incurred by the G-overnment in
opening up the roads, &c. They claim that if native industries
are to he protected the pioneer interest of all should receive
more consideration than it has received from the stock tax of
nominal amount now imposed. I gather that the subject will be
pressed upon the attention of the G-overnment and Legislature
when the tariff is under consideration during the present session.
Whatever is done in the matter there can be no doubt that the
pioneers in our own north country deserve a more generous
recognition than they receive at present. In a former article it
has been pointed out that a considerable amount of attention
has been paid to well-sinking, with results generally satisfactory ;
but the settlers do not forget that many of these wells have
been sunk in connection with the telegraph, and while admitting
their importance in opening up the road for teams and travellers
they point out that neither the supply nor the appliances are
sufficient to water large mobs of cattle. Thus far few, if any,
of these wells have been really tested, but after the railway
reaches the Peake mobs of cattle will be sent down whenever
the market is high, and then the value of being able to obtain
water will be shown. It is therefore obvious that the wells
must not be left without supervision and uncared for. The
required supervision can be best secured by encouraging some
sort of settlement at each well. In some suitable places town-
ships might already be declared, and licences granted to public-
houses. The running of a mail conveyance would meet the
difficulty in nearly every instance, as the change of horses would
naturally be at the wells, and in most cases there would be an
eatinghouse or store erected, with whose owner arrangements
to water stock could be made. It is gratifying to know that the
Conservator of W ater is fully alive to the necessity of proper
provision being made to protect as well as render useful the
wells already made. In addition to these he has also promised
to sink another in the James Range, and probably others at the
Frances Creek, the Old Depot, and the G-oyder. I trusty also,
that when the party are in the James Range they will be
instructed to cut down the crest of the noted Pinch in the


Waterhouse Range. Though nearly impassable it is hut very
short, and a few days’ work would render it practicable for any
team. The sites mentioned for new wells are all good, and if
fresh water is obtained the road between Charlotte Waters and
Alice Springs will be considerably shortened, certainly by not
less than fifty miles, and possibly more.
With the question of opening up the main road by a system
of wells is involved several others already alluded to. The
licensing of publichouses may be considered an evil in a new
thinly-populated country, apart from the convenience they are
to the travelling public as providing necessary accommodation.
Still “ the devil you know is better than the devil you don’t
know,” and even if licensed houses are badly conducted it must
be acknowledged that the widespread demoralising effects of
sly grog-selling are worse, and this practise is now undoubtedly
carried on. That a policeman stationed every two or three
hundred miles can put this illicit traffic down by the strong arm
of the law is about as reasonable as to suppose that he can
persuade men that spirits are less exhilarating than water.
Granted that the sale of intoxicating liquor in these outlying
districts is an evil, which admits of argument, it is certainly
better that the evil should be localised, and consequently put
under the supervision of the police, than that it should spread
from Dan to Beersheba. There is, so far as I know, no hotel
erected, and no attempt at laying out a township has ever been
made from Strangways Springs to somewhere near Port Darwin
not this side of Pine Creek at any rate. It seems to me quite
time that some places possessing natural advantages were
selected and surveyed. Alice Springs certainly is one of them.
That the revenue would benefit materially by the sales of allot-
ments is not to be expected ; but a township would certainly
spring up providing accommodation for travellers, a store where
supplies could be obtained, and a blacksmith’s shop, and thus
relieve the telegraph - station of many calls made upon its
resources. The Angle Pole is another fitting situation, and
others might be named immediately the railway route is decided
on.
The South Australian Grovernment, whoever the politicians in
office may be, are, like the Anglican portion of the community,
perpetually committing the sins of omission and commission
and if they do not as frequently and publicly confess they
“ have done those things which they ought not to have done,
and left undone those things which they ought to have done,”
some obtrusive member of the House or the community finds it
out for them. As an exponent of the requirements of the north,
however unworthy of the office, I think the sins of omission
have been prejudicial, not only to the deserving settlers of the far
interior and to its development, but detrimental to the advance-


ment of the colony. The railway has been slowly advancing
and the telegraph is stretched across the continent, the former
of great benefit undoubtedly in forwarding stock to market and
obtaining supplies—the latter practically of little use to men
living hundreds of miles from a telegraph - station, or even to
those having the privilege of sending messages by wire. More
is needed to bring the settlers into closer communication with
the centres of population than that potent slender thread which
probably has been the means of preventing more substantial
benefits being conferred ; a less rapid, but still a connecting
link more useful to the recipients, more valued by them, and
in these days universally recognised as indispensable in forming
new communities in unknown districts, is urgently required. I
allude particularly to mail communication, in which respect the
neglect has been and is still most marked. There is a wheeled
conveyance now running fortnightly from Strang ways to the
Peake, but it is not only allowed but compelled to take a week
to cover that hundred miles and back. For some inscrutable
reason it is obliged to remain at the Peake from midday on
Tuesday until Thursday morning, arriving at Strangways to
catch Saturday’s train, compelling a Sunday’s delay at Hergott
and the impossibility of reaching Adelaide before Tuesday
night; whereas by leaving the Peake on "Wednesday morning
and travelling as mails ought to travel and do travel in all
other parts of the colonies, Thursday’s train could be caught
and Adelaide arrived at on Saturday night. Father than lose
all this time the impatient ride for it, as I did, thus saving three
days, and so the mail loses passengers. It may be argued that
as the railway will so soon reach Kekwick Springs it is scarcely
worth while running more mails as far as the Peake, and this
possibly is so, but it is no reason why the present mail should
not travel a little faster, and the convenience of passengers be
more studied, The argument that the northern postal lines do
not pay is one that little influenced the authorities when
opening up communication with JSTew South Wales and Queens-
land. Yery many years ago when first established the mails to
the former colony must have been run at a heavy direct loss, if
they are not now. As to the mail to Birdsville, whatever the
indirect benefit to South Australia it must be a pecuniary loss.
The trade no doubt is important to us, and this is willingly recog-
nised by the authorities running a coach to that favored locality
from Hergott. The policy of doing this I believe to be far-see-
ing and wise ; but the northerners’ complaint is reasonable and
their chagrin easily understood when we consider that settlers
in a neighboring colony have postal facilities granted to them
which are denied to our own people similarly situated, but with
stronger claims. Who can deny that there is some cause for
jealousy when we find that South Australia pays six hundred


pounds per annum for running a three to five horse coach each
fortnight from Hergott to Birdsville and back—a distance of
about three hundred and fifty miles between these places, or a
total of seven hundred miles ? It must he confessed there has
often been more noise made about a less grievance.
It has been seen that the mail to the Peake is scarcely up to
the nineteenth-century idea of speed and convenience, hut it is
a Mercury of at least a double-barrelled pair of wing-power
compared with that which continues on to Alice Springs via
Charlotte Waters. The typical messenger is there represented
by three or four poor brutes weighed down by ponderous loads
of miscellaneous matter of general information, general utility,
or general torture. By certain regulations made and provided
a certain amount of matter can be sent without much reference
to whether that matter is useful, ornamental, or deleterious to
manners, morals, or life. It may be an improver to grace a
sable fair one, a shirt to propitiate her lord, a package of pills
and ointment, a parcel of tracts, or a pair of hobnailed boots, they
must go. There appears no limit to the quantity or weight
that may be sent in one pound packages, and how are
the settlers to obtain things reasonably quickly in any
other way than by the mail, slow, uncertain, and destructive as
it necessarily is ? The results to the owners of the articles must
be exceedingly unsatisfactory, and to the mail contractor
exasperating and ruinous. As to the animals who carry the loads
you will observe one with a cavity in the side you can lay your
arm in, and enquire, What has caused that ? Oh, that is a male
horse, and the whole thing is explained to the initiated. To the
curious uninitiated I may add that probably for thirty or forty
miles some pounds of loose horseshoe nails, broken pomatum
pots, a concertina, or coil of barbed wire have been working
unobserved through the pack into the unfortunate brute’s side.
I saw among the many various articles passing on per post
parcels of cuttings of vines and other plants, also of rooted
trees, a collection of tins too numerous to particularise, crushed
and broken, as how could they be otherwise ; this, too, with only
half the journey accomplished. What then would be their
condition when the destination was reached ? Careful enquiries
show that the average weight per mail is about four hundred
pounds. There is beyond Charlotte Waters a general bag, and
also eleven private bags, for which privilege the proprietors pay
two guineas each per annum. I have never known so much paid
for a monthly delivery. In my experience for the same sum the
bag was delivered weekly. The advantages of rapid wheeled mail
communication are so obvious —almost an essential as a factor in
opening up our far-away districts —that there is little necessity
to dwell long upon that aspect of the question. As matters
stand now the traveller can reach the Peake by a public convey-


ance, but if be wants to go further horses must be purchased,
with either packs or a buggy, and unless a practised bushman a
guide must be hired, and even then his progress is slow, anxious,
and so expensive as to be prohibitive to all but those obliged to
undertake the journey. Of the actual owners of stations how
many with even the assistance of their own horses and traps
have ever seen their property. Of the members of the present
Parliament perhaps two have passed the Peake and not one
Charlotte Waters, though they talk so glibly of the country.
As to the general public, beyond the Peake the whole is as a
sealed book, and why ? Principally or entirely because there
has practically been no possibility of seeing for themselves.
Had there been a mail coach there would have been long since
houses of entertainment and stores established; owners of
runs would have visited, and consequently paid more
attention to them; the übiquitous “traveller” on commerce
bent would have oft and again schemed and struggled —with
that modesty that becomes him so well —for the box seat.
The reporter would have penetrated to the deepest gorge
and climbed the loftiest peak of the Mac Donnell Range, and,
describing each hill, tree, plain, or “ gibber,” have left nothing
for my humble pen. This may sound of hyperbole, but in my
opinion neither bad seasons nor want of water have retarded the
progress of the country beyond the 26th parallel to Alice
Springs and the Mac Donnell Ranges generally so much as the
want of quick mail passenger accommodation. By this I mean a
wheeled vehicle to travel at the rate of eighty to one hundred miles
a day from the terminus of the railway to Alice Springs. It should
be looked upon as a most important factor in the future progress
of South Australia, as another link binding the Northern
Territory to us, and should be treated with no niggard hand.
I am met with the objection that it will not pay, and calculated
by the sale of postage stamps there is no denying the assertion.
Judged by the same argument no new stations would ever be
formed, and the country would remain idle for ever, for the
preliminary steps in such speculations are never directly
remunerative. In advocating the running of this mail I, how-
ever, freely confess that the sale of stamps has not been
considered by me. I look to the ultimate not to the present
aspect of the subject, and am persuaded that small as it may
appear it is of great importance to the colony, and should
receive the attention of the authorities.
I observe that tenders are invited for carrying a mail from
Crown Point via Idracowra to the Mission Station in the
Mac Donnell Ranges. Thirty miles north of Crown Point is
Engoordina, or the Horseshoe Bend. It is the juncture of roads
both up aud down, besides being the stopping place for the
night of the present mail. Here the two mails should separate.


one going up the Finke, via Idracowra, and the other via Mount
Burrell to Alice Springs. I may add that there is also a store
and eatinghouse. These advantages, as well as its position, surely
point out The Bend ” as the proper meeting place, besides
saving thirty miles to the proposed new contract. There may
be points influencing the Postmaster-General which do not
strike the outsider ; but, on the other hand, he probably is not
so well acquainted with some of the local details as a visitor to
the district. All must acknowledge the anxiety of Mr. Todd to
make the various postal lines as efficient as possible at the
smallest cost to the taxpayer, but I trust he will see that the far
north line has peculiar claims, and should not be considered
upon a purely pounds shillings and pence policy. Perhaps it
has not occurred to many people, but it is none the less true,
that the postman has been one of the most important of
pioneers in all the colonies. There is a mission still left for him
in the far north, and the sooner he sets about fulfilling it the
better. Push him along, Mr. Postmaster-General; civilisation
waits.
Intimately connected with the development of the north is
the existence of the aboriginals. When they come in actual
contact with the whites they disappear. To civilise and
Christianise, for I presume the two must go together, is but a
slow means of wiping them out; not so rapid as powder and
ball, but just as effective and certain. We have but to glance
back at the brief history of the colonies, at the results of all
the philanthropic efforts to see that this is so. The two
races cannot exist side by side, and the weakest wither away
before the ruthless march of civilisation. I acknowledge my
sympathies go with them to a great extent, but if our mission is
to “ replenish and subdue the earth ” then the natives are not
wanted, and ultimately, under the process enjoined, must go
under—-very soon, too, if the present system is continued,
though it is possible a different course of treatment might have
a different result. There is too much namby-pambyism about
the way we deal with the whole subject. If the Government
induce people to go on to the country they are bound to protect
them and their property. If it cannot be done otherwise the
blackman must be subdued or even removed somewhere else.
Certainly nothing can be more fatal to him than our “ replenish-
ing ” business. That the consequences of the system in
operation are disastrous to both races is undoubted. The blacks
disturb and spear the cattle, and the whites must drive them
back, or give up their runs as well as prospects in life for
the time being. Nor can the driving back process long continue,
as it is well known the numerous tribes are generally hostile,
and to encroach upon each other’s territory is but to come into
conflict. It must be acknowledged that at the present time our


relations with the blacks in the far north are very unsatisfactory.
Spearing and harassing of stock have been going on more or less
ever since the country was stocked, with occasionally the sticking
up of stations and attacks upon the whites. From all that I
can gather there is every reason to believe marvellous forbear-
ance has been shown by the settlers ; they undoubtedly have
often suffered great annoyance and loss without any serious
retaliation. The blacks in the various attacks have been the
aggressors in the most unprovoked and treacherous manner. In
fact the very trust and kindness with which they were treated
have been looked upon by them —as is often the case —as signs
of weakness, and gave opportunity for several deplorable con-
flicts. On the level open country they have given little or no
serious trouble. For instance, the Finke blacks appear to
have always been a pacific tribe, but those of the Musgrave and
Mac Donnell Ranges and further to the north are very different.
From the first these have to some extent defied the whites, and
do so still. In most of that country it is necessary to carry
arms, as life is not considered safe. The ranges offer such
natural facilities for killing cattle, as well as such cover when
the offence is committed, that one cannot wonder at attempts
being made. These difficulties, combined with the vast extent
of country unoccupied, render the holding of the outlying
stations an anxious task fraught with more dangers than the
public are aware of. The settlers have to contend with a strong,
determined, hardy tribe of men, by no means deficient in
courage, in the race now inhabiting those ranges. Their code is
a “ life for a life.” To them it does not matter who it is ; if
opportunity serves he must pay the penalty, though probably he
never saw the man he suffers for. These fellows are not the
men likely for some time yet to accept the inevitable. Indeed
there are not wanting indications that they will give much
trouble still. It surely would be better to grapple with the
question at once than continue the state of uneasiness and
uncertainty now prevailing.
When we consider the failures of each past effort to protect
the lives and interests of the natives, and at the same time turn
the country to our own uses, it must be admitted that if any
method can be pointed out giving promise of success in this
direction it is worthy of attention. I alw'ays have held that
tracts of country should be reserved for the benefit of the blacks
—not to waste, but put some stock upon them to begin with.
They could be put on one part of the run, and as they increased
more would be required ; the remaining part the blacks could
hunt over at pleasure. The station to be under the control of
a white manager and one or two assistants. In a short time the
property would more than pay all expenses as well as keep the
natives in meat. Of course the wild blacks must be made to


come in and remain upon the place, thus relieving the owners
and employes of runs round from the constant fear of spearing
of their stock or more serious attacks. I believe if such
a station were formed beyond the present runs on the
Mac Donnell Ranges and the blacks collected upon it one of the
principal difficulties of stocking that part of the north would be
solved, and the aboriginals themselves infinitely better off than
under existing circumstances. The black police, with their
officers, could be located upon the run to protect life and
maintain order. lam quite aware the first difficulty would be
to induce the blacks to come in and settle down on the country,
but as they understood there was food and safety this would be
overcome. As the country is taken from them under the
present system they practically have to do the same thing on the
various stations —but it is after the shooting, spearing, and loss
of life and property has been gone through. That this process
might be avoided or ameliorated by the adoption of the plan
suggested lam persuaded. Failing this some other strong-
handed action must be taken by the Government, or the settlers
themselves cannot be expected to do less than protect their own
lives and property. During the short time I was in the far
north Mr. Wiltshire and his native police were called
to stations hundreds of miles apart. One case was a
barefaced murder of a young blackboy employed by a traveller.
Cases of cattle spearing, and a determined attack upon a
station, which would certainly have succeeded but for a
combination of unexpected circumstances, also came under my
notice. This officer’s duties are most onerous, and I believe are
discharged by him in a manner most creditable to himself, and
certainly with much advantage to the district; indeed, but for
the awe inspired by the presence of his force it is more than
probable that the sable sons of nature would frequently assert
their claims not only to the country, but “ all that in there
is,” including a few white lives. I often heard it said that the
aboriginal difficulty is over—by men, too, who certainly ought
to know; but a few days later come reports to the police of
several outrages. The real truth appears to be that they have
been merely swept aside from the telegraph line, that is all.
Their numbers are little reduced, nor have they submitted to our
rule. By the camp fire in the far north many thrilling tales are
now told of fierce fights between the savage and his subduer—
the primitive weapons of ancient war against the resistless
powder of modern days, in which has been displayed the ring of
the true heroic metal. Some later pen will collect all these and
more not yet enacted, when the history of the wild life on the
telegraph line is written. It would be of interest to us now ;
it will be of double interest to those who are to follow.
From the outlaws of another race to the pariah of our own


is an easy transition, and perhaps not out of place. The
“ spieler ” is one of the characters of the interior. Whence
the derivation of the term seems obscure, but the animal him-
self is supposed to hail from Queensland, though that colony
may well decline the dubious honor of giving him birth. The
genus is common to all new settlements in the “ bush,” and he
emerges from somewhere when some race-meeting is on, and
retreats again into obscurity directly debts of honor due to him
are collected. He holds that “ base is the slave that pays,” and
like the poor hidalgo, is too proud to walk when a horse to carry
him is by any means, felonious or otherwise, procurable. “He
toils not, neither does he spin.” Dig he will not, and to loaf he is
not ashamed. Perhaps if he stayed long enough anywhere his
“sins would find him out,” and be shunted home to him,meantime
he is an excrescence flourishing upon the industry and credulity
of others. When horse-stealing, horse-swindling, and horse-
sweating are put down bylaws suitable to the out-lying districts,
then the “spieler” must reform or seek pastures new. If I
lived in the north I should prefer the latter, and the sooner the
better. Property has its responsibilities, but on the whole I
prefer struggling under them and riding and selling my own
horses if I want to part with them rather than be indebted to
the kind offices of the most accommodating of spielers for
relief. It is a pity that civilisation and Christianity are not as
effective with him as with the aboriginals, but on the contrary
he appears to thrive best in the vanguard of the replenishing
process.
That the telegraph line is well and truly laid must be willingly
acknowledged by even those who still question the wisdom of a
small colony ever undertaking the stupendous task. That so
few mistakes were made by those laying out the line, as well as
those engaged in the construction, speaks volumes for them.
Greater knowledge of the country has shown that distance might
have been saved, but considering how little was then known of
the route these errors dwarf into insignificance. If, however,
the iron poling is still to go on we have not yet done with the
expenditure, as the cost of carriage must be enormous. Sketches
of the north would certainly not be complete without some
notice of that philosophic animal the camel. He has so obviously
made it his home that it is difficult to believe he is an importation
of only a few years. He looks like antiquity itself, and an
involuntary respect comes over you as with his head in the air and
“a stately step and slow” he stalks over the “gibbers” with a lofty
contemptuous indifference exasperating to anything mortal onfour
legs, and inspiring the bitterest envy in the horse particularly.
There is no doubt that ever since the advent of the camel a
sense of the keenest injury has rankled in the mind of the
northern horse. He has looked upon himself as ill-treated by


nature in the matter of his “ poor feet,” and I sympathise with
him. I’m not well up in horse language, hut I’m sure I heard
an unhappy brute with a vindictive glare in his eye, and not a
sound foot to stand upon, one day suggest as he saw a string of
his rivals pace past that camel soles might he used as a kind of
stocking for himself. It is a hard case, and if nature must have
all those gibbers she was morally bound to deal justly between
the two animals. There are many other instances of decided
partiality, but I know of none so glaring as that of the camel. It
is truly a wonderful thing to see him march along with his load.
Nothing appears to come amiss except perhaps telegraph poles.
He has been known to protest against these as partaking of the
nature of “ the last straw that breaks the camel’s back.” Any-
thing else is a matter of supreme indifference; a huge plough
hanging on one side and a scoop on the other excites no remark.
Flooring boards tied across his back only disturb his equanimity
when passing through timber, as the ends knock against the
trees, nearly tearing his hump off, and that does make him swear
a bit. He is a valuable institution, and the north owes much to
him, and will owe more before the “ dessert blossoms like the
rose,” or is turned to the practical use of feeding sheep and
cattle.
Justice is proverbially blind, even in the temples where her
ministers sit to lift the scales from her eyes. She sees but
darkly, and in the far north she gropes with the thickest of
thick bandages in darkness that can be felt. Abstract justice
may be dreamed of or talked about, but no one would seriously
think of seeking the stern reality. Her seat may be anywhere
across the broad continent from Adelaide to Port Darwin, and
the poor perplexed northerner groaning under his injury arrives
at the conclusion that it is better to “ bear those ills we have
than fly to those we know not of,” or “bear the law’s delays,”
he knows not where, but fears at Palmerston. In the new and
uncongenial character of a philanthropist, I seek the seats of
learning in the metropolis to see if peradventure an answer can
be obtained to this plain question. A rogue steals my cloak, my
horse, my ox ; must I prosecute him at Port Augusta, Adelaide,
or Port Darwin, or shall I abandon to him my coat, camel, and
cow, thus obeying the scriptural injunction, though nineteenth-
century prejudices are against that. A proclamation is handed
to me containing two schedules. One defines the boundaries of
the Circuit Court at Gladstone, the other of Port Augusta, but
as the latter does not extend beyond the 26th parallel what
is to be done with the rogue with one leg on the other side ? It
ends with “ God Save the Queen,” which feeling, prayerfully
inclined, I echo, and that’s all the information. How many
luminaries of the law and pillars of the State have been
appealed to memory fails to record, but the array of six-and-


eight-pences is appalling. To the harassed seeher after truth
then appears, by the direct interposition of providence, the
interpreter of the law himself. He cut the Gordian
knot with characteristic decision in the safest of all safe
ways for himself. Bring your rogue along, we’ll tight it out,
I’ll back you up, and with a smile intended to inspire
confidence the embodiment of law and order passed on. But if
ever a bulge in a breast pocket suggested anything that in his
coat did a fat bill of costs, so the rogue may frisk around for
me —the coat, camel, and cow are all his. These despairing
reflections were interrupted by the action of the gifted junior
member for Flinders in soliciting a solution of the knotty point,
the vexed and vexing question in the sacred birthplace of all
legislation. The elucidation cannot be considered eminently
satisfactory, but such as it is I give for the information of the
northerners, and to strike terror into the heart of the rogue:—
“ The perliminary investigation in cases of felony occurring in
the southern portion of the Northern Territory may be held
before any justice of the peace, and the final trial takes place
in the Circuit Court for the district in which the preliminary
investigation is held unless otherwise ordered by the Supreme
Court. Palmerston is the Circuit Court for the whole of the
Northern Territory.” The gist of the whole is in the last
sentence. In any prosecution for felony, such as horse stealing,
it must take place in Palmerston, which is practically beyond
the reach of the settlers to the south of Central Mount Stuart
at any rate. The Attorney-General, however, adds that as
“ there are greater conveniences for communication with Port
Augusta, the expediency of altering the definition of Port
Darwin will be carefully considered.” Let us hope the con-
sideration will not occupy the attention of too many Ministries,
as it is not that that is so much wanted as prompt action.
When I first saw Mr. Horn’s question I began to think the coat,
camel, and cow might be saved, but things don’t look so rosy
now “ careful consideration ”is promised. Stick to it, members
for Flinders, or the rogue will get the best of it yet.
When in the agonies of thought one day in King William-
street at a well-known corner where men do congregate, anent
putting these articles into such a shape that the public would
not only read them, but wake up to the responsibilitjr resting
upon them as a people holding so vast a territory in selfish use-
lessness, a friend, whose chief avocation in life is to give im-
practicable and perplexing advice, on learning the cause
exclaimed, “ What is the use of saying it is so many millions of
square miles ? Bring out a map showing where you have been
and what you want us to know accompanying each article.”
And away sped Socrates to be equally instructive and comforting
to some other perturbed soul. Were I one of the proprietors


of the Advertiser at least a sheet of the ordinary news of the day
should he sacrificed to carrying out my adviser’s brilliant idea;
hut as that cannot be I am still oppressed with the feeling that
few will really comprehend the magnitude of the task before
them. Distance is but relative, and only those who have travelled
day following day on horse or camel across the monotonous
boundless Australian landscape can realise how endless, how
enormous it is. The enquiring lover of his country may well ask,
What shall we do with it ? What can three hundred thousand
people do with it ? lam not dealing with the coast line, either
north or south, or the settlements where agriculture is more or
less successful, hut of the vast interior that Nature’s voice—the
rainfall—has plainly proclaimed is pasture land; a rainfall light
in itself generally, though at and beyond the Mac Donnell
Ranges heavy enough for grain of many kinds to be grown if it
but fell in the winter months. But look at the records for the
last ten years, and it will be seen that the principal rains are
from October to March. But it is pasture land capable of such
development as would under wisely liberal legislation make
South Australia one of the first meat and wool producing
countries on the globe. A tenure fixed and long is wanted to
encourage the expenditure everywhere necessary to protect or
procure water, under the surface apparently in abundance, but
nowhere to be found ready in the necessary quantities on the
surface for more thau a few favored stations. On nearly all the
runs something is necessary to improve or protect the waters;
it may be only to fence them, and fortunate is the station if that
is all. Back from the known rivers, creeks, and springs greater
difficulty in obtaining water must be expected, but at what
depth or if indeed at all away from the telegraph line more than
a few miles is not known. Still, springs are known to exist
beyond the 26th parallel many miles to the west of the Finke,
and it is but reasonable to suppose they extend in other
directions. As a field for the energy, industry, courage, and
endurance of man it is boundless ; but let there be no deception
about it—before success can be assured the obstacles to be over-
come are enormous. lam not now writing of the stations taken
up and mostly partially stocked, but of the country away from
the telegraph line and the known waters, where before "a hoof
cau be put on something must be done to procure or conserve
water. With the past experience of our northern pioneers
before us, their trials, losses, and in many cases ultimate failure,
I am well aware it will need some great impetus to induce those
best fitted to contend wuth the difficulties attending the develop-
ment of a new country with a limited rainfall and no permanent
water to attempt it.
If 1 am asked the question, what are the requisites to ensure
success in such an undertaking I answer, either men who are


%
prepared to spend years o£ their life at it until the few stock
they begin with increase, men who will live hard, work hard,
and lie hard ; or capital, capital, capital. And to push the
country on as its most ardent sons desire a combination of both
is necessary. An influx of capital from both the old world and
the new, with the experience and skill, aye, and speculation that
years ago poured into western New South Wales and Queens-
land. I maintain the combined available strength and wealth
of South Australia would scarcely make an impression upon an
area so vast under conditions demanding not only the expen-
diture of thousands but of millions. The business man asks if
the stock and the wool are grown where is the market ? The
answer is, grow the stock in sufficient quantities and a market
will be found. Freeze the meat upon the line and ship at Port
Augusta if it cannot be taken down alive. The difficulty to my
mind is not raising too much but too little. Our local market is
so small that we glut it with a few hundred head, but if we
grew thousands where we have hundreds we should be doing an
important export trade. None of the colonies have beaten us in
wool, and as we go nearer in the tropics the absence of the
scorching blast of the north, with the accompanying clouds of
dust, are all in favor of the growth of good wool. But think not
that the climate is cool, for often it is hot as —well, we won’t go
into any extravagant similes such as Dante’s Inferno, flames,
fumes, or blazes, but simply say it is as hot as Australia can
well be, and that’s a bit tropical in parts. The mean temperature
at Alice Springs is about 70°, but the thermometer frequently
rises to 110°, and not infrequently to above that respectable
warmth. Of course when the heavy rains fall this heat brings
up abundance of grass and herbage, easily understood by those
acquainted with the climate but deceptive to those who are not.
To them it appears hard to believe that where grass grows so
luxuriantly the grain and fodder plants of cooler climates will
not. The answer, however, is plain. The natural grasses and
bushes are already planted and rooted, which may, and generally
do, die off, but the mature vigor is there to start into life
directly the moisture comes. The ground is full of seed, and
some start with every rain, often to die off. At other times
they may blossom and come to maturity, though only an inch or
two high. In more favorable circumstances, however, the
growth is good. It will thus be seen that even with the ad-
vantage of lying ready in the soil for the rain the seed of the
native plants frequently fail. Agriculture in such a climate is
impossible on any extended scheme ; to sow and expect to reap
a crop is but to fight against Nature. That many fruits and
vegetables can be grown is certain. The essentials—soil and
water —are to be found in many places, with heat everywhere in
the interior, and when people will be content to live on


vegetables and goat’s flesb a considerable population may settle
on country we now can turn to no better use than pasture—
after all one of the best uses.
Let us consider that this country is just on the edge of the
tropics, undoubtedly very favorably situated for breeding and
fattening stock (the vegetation points this out plainly), and if
the legislators of South Australia are wise they will frame
future measures to foster and promote this industry as the one
for the present at least best suited to the country. To a very
great extent the carrying capacity must be gauged by the rain-
fall. I think, however, the following estimate is approximately
correct, provided sufficient water is obtained :—From the Peake
to Cecilia Creek about twenty sheep to the mile, Cecilia to
Charlotte Waters thirty to fifty, Charlotte Waters to
Mac Donnell Eange and Bert’s Creek seventy to one hundred.
Of cattle a proportionate number, say six sheep to one head of
great cattle. The lower estimate from the Peake to Charlotte
Waters is due not only to the much lower rainfall, but because
there is a great deal of comparatively waste country. As a
whole the country is better than I anticipated ever seeing it,
but it falls far short of the roseate hues thrown over it by the
oratorical extravagances some of us have listened to, some of us
been beguiled by. Though not carried away by the fervid
language which would have been effective if it had borne the
stamp of truth with it, still I expected something, consequently
one of the keenest disappointments that could await an earnest
well-wisher of his country was mine as I approached in the
Mac Donnell Eauges one day, the scene of the labors of the
“historic good young man.” I recalled to recollection the
glowing impassioned words of the indignant “Apostle of
progress ” as he denounced the wicked enormity of allowing a
railway on the land-grant system to invade the earthly paradise
built up by the exertions and enterprise of the model young
colonist, whose “ heart would be broken ” if one yard of his
Eden (filled with a luxuriant growth of all the products the
denizens of the earth hold precious) were taken from him to
satisfy the greed of the hated monopolist. My companion
stopped and pointed out a few feet of sand and gravel of an in-
ferior description, enclosed by some sticks and bushes. That
the earthly paradise, where half the choicest products that
support man flourished! Where then are they; have they a
court in the Exhibition all to themselves, or are they still stored
up because all the camels and teams of the north do not suffice
for their transport? It did indeed demand a magician’s wand
to magnify that poor miserable few feet of barrenness into the
picture presented by the vivid imagination of the too credulous
apostle on that memorable occasion. The good young man,
what of him? was a natural enquiry. With a sardonic smile,


full of meaning, my friend replied —“ The place that knew him
shall know him no more,” and if the voice of lamentation is
heard it is not that we shall see his face never again. In
sober truth there can be no doubt that some fruits and many
vegetables can be grown in the far north, but so they can in
immense areas and under more favorable conditions in the south,
and to think of establishing stable industries of an agricultural
or a horticultural nature in such a climate, and so remote from
markets or population, is premature and even absurd. Let us
bend our best energies to turning the country to the uses Nature
has fitted it for rather than indulge in impossible dreams, which
if attempted to be realised must end in disappointment, if uot
disaster. But in accepting this view of the matter there is no
reason to doubt the future of South Australia, for if there is any
interest affecting us that admits of expansion it is that of meat-
growing. And with the probability of the eastern markets being
opened to us that of wool may be added, and in this respect we
may fairly hope to cope with the neighboring colonies. Of
cattle and sheep South Australia has less than either New South
Wales, Victoria, or Queensland, and she ought to carry as many as
all put together ; but that cannot be until wiser counsels prevail
and the far north country has poured into it some of the millions
of money, the enterprise and population of the old world. To
do that I know of but one way. Are those guiding our destinies
wise enough to adopt that, or will they still be influenced by
selfish and visionary considerations ?
Before laying down my pen I desire to thank each and all
those I came in contact with during my too brief visit for the un-
varying kindness and hospitality shown to a stranger having no
claims upon them. lam also indebted for assistance freely and
generously rendered, on many occasions greatly facilitating the
progress of the journey as well as contributing to its enjoyment.
Possibly some may think I have somewhat freely expressed
opinions where the “ oldest inhabitant ” would suspend judgment,
but it has been on subjects I was to a considerable extent conver-
sant with previously. Passing from this aspect of the subject to
the final one, 1 feel that my visit to the interior, and reflections
upon it, will not be in vain if I have succeeded in throwing a
little light on or exciting some interest in the Par North
Country.
Burden & Bonython, Printers, Advertiser Office, Adelaide.






