

pew ppw
*iLiv i
$-<1 Vgr
THE
ROYAL COLONIAL INSTITUTE.
EEGULATIONS.
18 7 5.


UNWIN BROTHERS,
PRINTERS.


THE
ROYAL COLONIAL INSTITUTE.
REGULATIONS.
CHAPTER I.
Constitution.
1. The Royal Colonial Institute is established to provide a
place of meeting for all Gentlemen connected with the Colonies and
British India, and others taking an interest in Colonial and Indian
affairs ; to establish a reading-room and a library, in which recent
and authentic intelligence upon Colonial and Indian subjects may
be constantly available, and a museum for the collection and exhi-
bition of Colonial and Indian productions ; to facilitate interchange
of experiences amongst persons representing all the Dependencies
of Great Britain ; to afford opportunities for the reading of papers,
and for holding discussions upon Colonial and Indian subjects
generally; and to undertake scientific, literary, and statistical
investigations in connection with the British Empire. But no
paper shall be read, nor any discussion be permitted to take place
tending to give to the Institute a party character.
2. The Institute consists of Resident, Non-Resident, and Hono-
rary Fellows.


8. A Council shall be chosen from the Resident Fellows to
conduct the affairs of the Institute, and shall consist of a Presi-
dent, Vice-Presidents (not exceeding twelve), four Trustees, twenty-
four Councillors, a Treasurer (who shall also be, ex officio, a Trustee),
and a Secretary (when honorary). The Council shall have power
to fill up any vacancies occurring in the above offices during the
interval between the annual meetings.
4. A portion of the Council shall retire periodically, hut be
eligible for re-election, viz. :—the President every second year, and
one-fourth of the Vice-Presidents and one-fourth of the Ordinary
Councillors every year; the names of those so retiring to be
previously announced by the Council,
5. Every Resident Fellow shall be eligible to fill any of the
offices in the Council.
G. The Institute shall not make or distribute any gift, dividend,
division, or bonus, in money, unto or between any of its Fellows.
CHAPTER 11.
Election and Admission of Fellows.
1. Every gentleman desirous of admission into the Institute as a
Resident Fellow, must be proposed and recommended according to
the Form No. 1 in the Appendix hereto ; and such recommendation
must be subscribed by two Fellows at least, one of whom must
certify his personal knowledge and approval of such candidate.
2. The Certificate thus filled up, shall be delivered to the
Secretary, and shall be exhibited in a conspicuous place in the
Rooms of the Institute, for at least one week previous to election,
in order that any Fellow objecting to the Candidate may communi-
cate with the Council thereon.
8. The Election of Fellows is entrusted to the Council, and the
names of those so elected shall be regularly announced from the
chair at each Ordinary Meeting.
4. Notice of Election shall be sent within three days to every


newly-elected Fellow, together with a copy of the Regulations of
the Institute, corrected to the date of issue, a list of the Fellows,
and a card announcing the days on which the Ordinary Meetings
will be held during the season. But no election of a Resident
Fellow shall be complete, neither shall the name of any person so
elected be printed in any list of the Institute, nor shall he be
entitled to exercise any of the privileges of a Fellow, until he shall
have paid his admission fee and first year’s contribution, or com-
pounded for the same as hereinafter provided for ; and unless these
payments be made within three calendar months from the date of
election, such election shall be void; this time may, however, be
extended at the discretion of the Council.
5. Gentlemen resident in the Colonies or India may be elected
as Non-Resident Fellows, in the same manner as Resident Fellows,
but they shall not be required to pay any admission fee. Should
any such Non-Resident Fellow come to the United Kingdom to
reside, he may, on payment of the usual admission fee, become a
Resident Fellow of the Institute, and thereby be entitled to all the
privileges and become subject to all the obligations of Ordinary
Fellowship.
6. The Council shall have the power of appointing as Honorary
Fellows, Foreigners or Colonists of distinction, or other persons,
whose association with the Institute may be considered advanta-
geous; but such Honorary Fellows shall not be allowed to vote
nor fill any office in the Institute.
CHAPTER 111.
Admission Fees and Subscriptions.
1. Every Resident Fellow shall, on his election, be required to
pay Three Pounds as his admission fee, and Two Pounds as his
annual subscription for the year ending on the 31st December
then next ensuing; or he may compound for his annual subscrip-
tion, either at his entrance by the payment of Twenty Pounds, or,


after the payment of five or more annual subscriptions, then by
the payment of Fifteen Pounds.
2. The annual subscription of a Non-Resident Fellow shall be
One Guinea, but he may compound for such subscription by the
payment of Ten Pounds. Any Non-Resident Fellow who shall
have become a Resident Fellow and wish to compound, may do
so by the payment of Twenty Pounds, or, if he shall have com-
pounded as a Non-Resident Fellow, by the payment of the same
sum as would have been required from a Resident Fellow, deduct-
ing the amount already paid on his compounding as a Non-
Resident Fellow.
3. No Fellow shall be entitled to vote or enjoy any other
privilege of the Institute so long as he shall continue in arrear.
Honorary Fellows are not required to make any payments. The
amount of Annual Subscription to be paid by Fellows absent from
England, or joining late in the year, or for a limited time, may be
varied by the Council.
4. So soon in every year as the Auditors shall have completed
their financial investigation, the name of every Fellow in arrear to
the Institute, together with a statement of the arrear, shall be
reported to the Council, and immediate notice of the same, with
an account of such arrear, shall be forwarded to every Fellow
whose name shall have been so reported. If the arrear be not
paid within one calendar month, or, in the case of a Non-Resident
Fellow within twelve months, from the date of such notice, or
within such further time as the Council may grant upon special
cause to them shewn, the name of the Fellow so reported, together
with a statement of the arrears, shall be suspended in the Rooms
of the Institute. If the arrear shall not have been discharged before
the second Ordinary General Meeting after such suspension, the
Council shall be empowered to remove such Fellow from the Insti-
tute ; and the name of the Fellow which has been so suspended
shall not be taken down until the arrear shall have been paid, or
the Fellow shall have been removed from the Institute.


CHAPTER IV.
Withdrawals and Ejections.
1. Any Fellow may withdraw from the Institute, by signifying
his wish to do so by letter, addressed to the Secretary at the rooms
of the Institute; provided always that such Fellow shall continue
to be liable for his annual subscription for the year in which he
signifies his wish to withdraw. He shall further continue liable for
such annual subscription until he shall have discharged all sums, if
any, due by him to the Institute, and shall have returned all books
or other property borrowed by him of the Institute ; or shall have
made full compensation for the same, if lost, or not forthcoming.
2. Whensoever there shall appear to be cause for the ejection of
any Fellow out of the Institute, the subject shall be laid before the
Council, and if a majority of the Council shall, after due delibera-
tion, determine by ballot to propose to the Institute the ejection of
the said Fellow, the President shall, in that case, at some Ordinary
Meeting of the Institute, announce from the chair such determina-
tion of the Council. At the Meeting next after that at which the
said announcement has been made, the Institute shall proceed to
determine the question, and on its appearing that two-thirds of the
Fellows present have voted for the ejection of the said Fellow, the
President shall proceed to cancel his name in the Register, and at
the same time pronounce him ejected in these words : I do, by the
authority and in the name of the Royal Colonial Institute , declare A. B.
to he ejected , and no longer a Fellow thereof.
CHAPTER V.
Annual Meetings.
1. The Annual Meeting of the Fellows shall be held in the
month of June.
2. Notice of this Meeting shall be sent to every Resident Fellow,
whose address is known, and shall be inserted in two or more news-
papers, one week at least before the day of Meeting.


8. The object of this Meeting shall be to elect the Council and
Officers for the ensuing year, to receive the Annual Report of the
Council, and to hear the President’s Address; and no new regula-
tion, alteration, or repeal of any existing regulation, shall be made
at such Meeting, unless proprosed by the Council.
4. The Annual Report of the Council shall be read to the
Meeting.
5. It being required to make certain annual changes in the
Council, as before specified, a sufficient number of printed balloting
lists, according to the Form No, 2 in the Appendix, shall be pre-
pared previously to the Meeting. One of these balloting lists shall
be sent to each Resident Fellow, with the notice of the Annual
Meeting.
6. The chair shall be taken at the hour appointed in the
notice of the Meeting, or as soon thereafter as twenty Fellows shall
be present, whereupon the Chairman shall appoint two or more
Scrutineers from among the Fellows present, to superintend the
ballot during its progress, and when it is closed, to examine the
lists and report the result to the Meeting.
7. Each Fellow voting, shall deliver his balloting list, folded up,
to one of the Scrutineers, who shall immediately put it into the
balloting-box.
8. The ballot shall close when one hour shall have elapsed from
the time of the Chairman taking the chair. The Scrutineers shall
then report the number of votes for each person, to the Chairman,
who shall declare the persons on whom the election has fallen.
CHAPTER VI.
Ordinary Meetings
1. The Ordinary Meetings shall be held on such evenings, and
at such hour, as may from time to time be fixed by the Council.
2. Visitors, if introduced by Fellows, may be present at the
Ordinary Meetings, such privilege of introducing Visitors being
limited to one only for each Fellow ; but should a Fellow desire to


introduce a second visitor, he can obtain from the Secretary
special card of admission.
8. At the Ordinary Meetings, the order of proceeding shall be as
follows:
A. The Minutes of the last Meeting to be read, and, if
their accurracy be not questioned by the Meeting, to be signed by
the President or Chairman.
B. Election of Candidates to be announced.
C. Papers and communications to be read and discussed.
4. At the Ordinary Meetings of the Institute nothing relating to
its regulations or management, except as regards the election or
ejection of Fellows, shall be brought forward, unless the same shall
have been announced in the notice calling the Meeting, or be
otherwise provided for in these Eegulations. But the Minute book
of the Council shall be on the table at each Meeting, and extracts
therefrom may be read to the Meeting on the requisition of any
Fellow.
5. No paper shall be read at any Ordinary Meeting of the Insti-
tute, unless it shall have been approved of by the Council, or by the
Committee on Papers and Publications ; but this approval shall not
be taken as expressing an opinion upon the statements made, or
the arguments used in such paper.
CHAPTEE YII.
Special Meetings.
1. The Council may at any time call a Special General Meeting
of the Institute, and it shall be imperative on the Council to
summon such Meeting, whenever required in writing so to do, by
at least twenty-five Fellows of the Institute.
2. A week’s notice at least of the time when, and the object for
which, every Special Meeting is to be holden, shall be sent to every
Eesident Fellow; and no other business than that of which notice
has been thus given shall be entered upon or discussed at such
Meeting.


8. A Special General Meeting, convened as herein provided, may
be holden on any one of the days appointed for the Ordinary
General Meetings, in which case the special business shall be
entered upon immediately after the ordinary business of the day is
closed.
4. No fewer than thirty Fellows must be present to constitute a
Special General Meeting.
CHAPTEE YIII.
Council.
1. The Government of the Institute, and the management of all
its concerns, are entrusted to the Council, subject to the Eegulations
of the Institute.
2. The President, two Vice-Presidents, or any three Members of
the Council, may at any time call a Meeting of the Council, and
when such Meeting is to be held, every Member of the Council
residing in the United Kingdom shall be summoned by letter.
3. In all Meetings of the Council, five shall be a quorum; and all
questions shall be decided by open vote, unless a ballot be demanded
by any three Fellows present.
4. Minutes of the proceedings of every Meeting of the Council
shall be taken during their progress, in a rough book, by the
Secretary, or in case of his absence, by a Fellow present, whom the
President or Chairman shall appoint for the occasion ; they shall
be afterwards copied into a fair Minute-book to be kept for that
purpose, read at the next Meeting of the Council, and signed by the
President or Chairman.
5. The Accounts of the Institute shall be from time to time
examined by the Council, who shall present and cause to be
read to the Annual Meeting a complete statement thereof, together
with a report on the general affairs of the Institute during the
preceding year.
6. The Council may refer particular subjects to Committees, to
be named by the President or Chairman, and such Committees
shall report to the Council the result of their proceedings. The


President and Secretary (when honorary) shall, ex officio, be Mem-
bers of all such Committees.
7. The Council shall, from time to time, publish the proceedings
and transactions of the Institute, and accompany them with maps,
papers, and other matter, as occasion may require.
8. Each Fellow shall he entitled to a copy of the publications of
the Institute; but the mode of distribution shall be decided by the
Council.
9. The Council shall, so soon as convenient, establish a Library,
Reading Room, and Museum, to which all Fellows, and strangers
provided with an order from a Fellow, shall be admitted, under such
restrictions as may appear to the Council necessary.
10. The Council may appoint persons, not being Members of the
Council, to be salaried Officers, Clerks, or servants, for carrying on
the necessary concerns of the Institute, and may define the duties
to be performed by them respectively; and may allow to them res-
pectively such salaries, gratuities, and privileges, as to them, the
Council may seem proper; and may suspend or discharge any
Officer, Clerk, or Servant from office, whenever there shall seem to
them occasion for so doing.
11. There shall be four permanent working Committees of
Council, under the following heads, named by the President or
Chairman (with power on special occasions to add to their number).
Ist, Finance and House ; 2nd, Library and Museum; 3rd, Papers
and Publications ; 4th, Correspondence.
12. Twice at least in each year a Committee of the Council shall
examine, in detail, the state of the Household, the Secretary’s
department, and the degree of care displayed in keeping the Official
Books, the Library, the Museum, &c.
13. The Council may establish, or recognize the establishment of,
Branches of the Institute, in any Colony or Dependency of the
British ‘Empire, any such Branch to consist of at least twelve
Fellows of the Institute.
14. The Council may appoint in any Colony or Dependency of
the British Empire, in which no Branch of the Institute exists, one
or more Fellows, as Corresponding Secretary or Secretaries.


CHAPTER IX.
Pbesident.
1. The President is Chairman of the Council, and of all Meetings
of the Fellows. One of the Vice-Presidents, or one of the Members
of the Council, shall supply the place of the President when he is
absent.
2. It is the President’s duty to carry out the regulations of the
Institute, to see that all the Officers of the Institute, and Members
of the Council and of Committees, perform the duties assigned to,
or undertaken by them respectively; to call for Reports and
Accounts from Committees and persons; to cause of his own
authority, and when necessary, Special Meetings of the Council
and of the Committees to be summoned, and to propose, from time
to time, to the Council such measures as shall appear to him con-
ducive to the welfare of the Institute.
3. It his duty, conjointly with the Council, to consider and
resolve on the names of Fellows who are to retire from the Council,
and of those to be recommended at the Annual Meeting to fill up
all vacant offices.
4. When prevented from being present at the Meetings of the
Fellows or Council, or from otherwise attending to the current
business of the Institute, he will be expected to give timely notice
thereof to one of the Vice-Presidents, or, in their absence, to some
other Member of the Council, or to the Secretary, in order that his
place may be properly supplied.
5. The President, or in his absence, the Chairman for the time
being, shall have power to rule and regulate the discussions arising
at any Meeting of the Institute.
6. In all Meetings of the Institute and Council, except in the
cases otherwise provided for, the decision of a majority of the
Fellows voting shall be considered as the decision of the Meeting,
the President or Chairman having a casting vote, in addition to
his own vote.


CHAPTER X.
Treasures,
1. The Treasurer is ex-officio one of the Trustees of the Institute;
and the Funds of the Institute shall be vested in his name, and in
those of the other four Trustees.
2. The Treasurer has special charge of all Accounts, and shall
see to the collection of all sums of money due to the Institute,
which, when received, shall be immediately paid to the Bankers of
the Institute.
3. In concert with the Secretary, the Treasurer shall keep a list
of the Fellows of the Institute, with the name and address of each
accurately set forth, which List, with all Books of Account, shall
be laid on the Table at every Ordinary Meeting of the Council.
4. He shall pay all accounts due by the Institute, as soon as they
have been examined and approved by the Council. But no drafts
on its Bankers shall be payable unless signed by two of the Council
and Countersigned by the Secretary; and the accounts of the
Treasurer shall be annually audited by two Fellows, one selected
from the general body of the Fellows and one from the Council,
proposed by the President or Chairman, and approved by the first
Ordinary Meeting held after the First of January.
CHAPTER XI.
Alteration of Regulations.
1. Any alteration in these Regulations, recommended by the
Council, may be proposed at the Annual Meeting, or may be sub-
mitted at any Ordinary Meeting, notice thereof having been given
under the provisions of Clause 4, Chapter VI., provided that such
proposed alteration shall have been exhibited in a conspicuous


place in the Rooms of the Institute, for at least one month
previous to the Meeting at which it shall be submitted.
2. Any twenty-five Fellows may propose to the Council any new
regulation, or the alteration or repeal of any existing regulation, by
letter addressed to the Secretary; and, if dissatisfied with the
answer of the Council, they may require that their proposition be
referred to a Special General Meeting, which the Council shall
convene for that purpose, within one month after receiving such
requisition.
3 No repeal or alteration of any of these Regulations, nor
addition thereto, shall be considered valid, unless concurred in by
three-fourths of the Fellows present and voting in each case.
14


APPENDIX.
No. 1. FORM OP CANDIDATE S CERTIFICATE.
CERTIFICATE OF CANDIDATE FOR ELECTION.
Name
Title
Residence
being desirous of admission into the Royal Colonial Institute,
We, the undersigned, recommed him as eligible for Membership.
Dated this
day of
• from personal knowledge.
Proposed
Elected
15


No. 2. FORM OP BALLOTING LIST.
ROYAL COLONIAL INSTITUTE. BALLOTING LIST FOR THE COUNCIL.
Offices.
Present Council.
Fellows changing Office or
going out of the Council.
List proposed for election
by the Council.
Names proposed by any
dissentient Fellow.
*
•
