









THE MAKING OF SOUND IN THE ORGAN
AND IN THE ORCHESTRA.


Terra Cotta Model of the most Ancient Pipe Organ.
Discovered, at Carthage (Front view.)
Frontispiece.


“ Observation is the most enduring of the pleasures of life.”
—George Meredith.
THE
Making of Sound in
the Organ and in the
Orchestra.
AN ANALYSIS OF THE WORK OF THE AIR IN THE
SPEAKING ORGAN PIPE OF THE VARIOUS CONSTANT
TYPES, AND AN EXPOSITION OF THE THEORY OF
THE AIR-STREAM-REED, BASED UPON THE DISCOVERY
OF THE TONE OF THE AIR, BY MEANS OF
DISPLACEMENT-RODS.
BY
HERMANN SMITH.
Author of “ The World’s Earliest Music," “Modern Organ Tuning,"
“ The A rt of Tuning the Pianoforteetc.
THIRTY ILLUSTRATIONS.
London:
WILLIAM REEVES, 83 CHARING CROSS ROAD, W.C
MCMXI


Printed by The New Temple Press, Croydon,


PUBLISHER’S FOREWORD.
-pHE last few years of the author s lifetime
1 were devoted to this work, and at the time
of his death the printing was concluded
with the exception of a few pages at the close.
These final pages are in the wording of another
and sympathetic hand and are indicated by a
foot-note. Mr. Hermann Smith lived to see
himself an acknowledged authority on the
subjects dealt with in this volume.
His conclusions were arrived at after long and
abstruse study of the questions treated of, com-
bined with the advantages derived from many
years of practical experience in the workshops.




CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I.
The Sources of Sound —The Inquisitive Instinct. Of Teaching and of
being Taught. Influence of Helmholtz. Lovers of Music and Lovers
of Instruments. Quality of Tone—What is the Orchestra for. The
Purpose of the Orchestra is to Disturb the Equilibrium of the Air.
All .Music an Aggregation of Simple Taps. The Organ an Agent of
Force 1-™
CHAPTER 11.
Time-distance defines Pitch. Of Differences in Quality. Relation of
Fibres as Mechanisms. Internal Motion amongst Fibres performed in
Equal Times. The Timing of a Violin-String. The Ear the Umpire of
Sound. Distance in Relation to Time—The Time-Distance • between
these is all a Measurable Mechanical Relation. No particular Aggre-
gate of Vibration essential to any Note —“ Per Second ” only a con-
venient Term. The Wolf in the Violin. Pitch resolves itself into two
Taps at the Drum of the Ear page U-27
CHAPTER 111.
Wind the Worker. The Hunter’s Whistle. Digs holes in the Air. The
Time occupied in the Operation. Engineering Contrivances in the
Clarionet, Flute, Horn, Bassoon. Music made by Chasms in Air. Bee,
Butterfly, Clarionet, Whistle. Pressure of Wind causing Rise in Pitch
—Clarionet and its Reed Action Described. The Vacuum in which
Sound is Born. Wind Instruments in Orchestra illustrate the Survival
of the Fittest page 28 36
CHAPTER IV.
Weighing the Wind. Orchestral Players Perplexed by Variations in the
Weight of Air. Diameters of Tubes or Pipes a Source of Differences in
Qualities of Sound. A Pith Ball dances to Vibrations. Lycopodium
Seed strewing Hills and Valleys. Violin Kicking up a Dust. Trans-
mission of Sound and Origination of Sound. How they Differ. Kicking
Surface of Violin and Violoncello. Bell’s Telephone Plate—M. Salet
Demonstrates its Amplitude of Motion—Lord Rayleigh his Estimate of
Audible Sounds. Strength of the Trumpet’s Tone. Organ Pipe. We
Control Air by Surrounding it with a Tube. Mouthpieces of Orchestral
Instruments are Fitted with Reeds as Flexible Valves—The Specific
Action is to Create a Partial Vacuum in the Tube. Why Partial?
vii


Work Done by Displacement of Air. Interdependence of Weight Pres-
sure and Telocity in Air. Compressed Air weighed by an Organ
Builder’s Wind Gauge—Description of the Anemometer. Table of Wind
Pressures and Velocities. Table of Pressures in Orchestral Wind In-
struments Determined by Dr. W. H. Stone. Mechanical Details of the
Organ, Clarionet-pipe and Mouthpiece. Air Converted into Wind is a
Change as Remarkable as Conversion of Water into Steam —Makes
every Wind Instrument a Wind Engine .... page 37-55
CHAPTER V.
The Tone of the Air. Blowing a Fleet of Air Bubbles. Limit of Expansi-
bility in Soap Bubbles. Russell Lowell, the Poet’s Description of Organ
Music. Limit of Tenuity beyond which Air cannot be Drawn by Air.
A Discovery of Essential Importance in relation to Musical Sounds.
The Quantity of Air Particles Contained in an Organ Pipe an Uncertain
Quality. Laing, Sir W. Thomson, and Clerk Maxwell on Soap
Bubbles as a Clue to the Kinetic Theory of Gases. Mathematical Cal-
culations of the Distances of Molecules of Air from one Another.
Imagination Necessary in Science—A Hogshead of Glass Beads.
Chasms made when the Hand Passes through Mass of Beads—The
Falling to of such Chasms. Air Particles in Similitude. Heat
Increases the Distance between Air Particles. The Pressure of Air is
Excluded upon Four Sides of Organ Pipe. Millions of Particles of Air
Squeezed out by Rise in Temperature. The Air Chasms made by
Cleaving the Incorporeal Air. Tree Sounds. Rain Music. Tvndall.
Notion of Friction. How I Discovered the Tone of the Air. Experi-
ments without Instruments. Displacement Rods Devised. Displacement
of Free Air. the Theory Explained of Pitch heard from Air under
Cleavage. Laws governing Pitches given by the several Rods. A
Travelling Chasm Vacuum Limit beyond which Air cannot be
Drawn by Air. How Stationary Chasms are Developed causing Tree
M ug i c page 56-7/,
CHAPTER VI.
The Cleavage of Air. The Moods of Bundles of Nerves. The Doctrine of
the Specific Action of the Senses. The Auditory Organ an Organ of
Touch. Contacts Essential to Perception of Sound. Raking Sound of
Pebbles on the Sea Shore. The old Anchor Vibrating to Blows
Transmission of Vibration through Mass of Material. Residual Vi-
brations after the Blow. Air has no Outside, will not harbour Residual
Vibrations. Air a Faithful Messenger, it is outside of Everything.
The Bell upon the Rook. The Nerve Fibres within the Ear become
the Sustainers of Residual Vibrations which are the Basis of our
Musical Sensations. Of the Persistence of Audition. Analogy in
the Persistence of Vision. The Ear not conscious of Separate Shocks
only of the Blending of Vibrations. Prof. A. Marshall Mayer
on the Durations of Residual Sonorous Sensations. Faraday on
Displacement of Air by Indraughts during Vibration—His Experi-
ment on Sand and Lycopodium Seed. Agitation of the Viewless
Air. The exceeding Smallness of Things Visible and Invisible C V
Boys’ Experiments, Demonstrations of Threads of Rock Crystal a
Millionth of an Inch in Diameter. Sir John Lubbock on Microscopic
Limitations. The Finger of Queen Mab, the Hammer Fist of Thor,
the Violin a Kicking Machine. Displaces Layers of Air as a Beli
does. Violin in Vibration displaces Layers of Air on its Surface-
Cleavage of Air produces Partial Vacuum. Suction a necessary Corel-
iary Grant Allen’s Definition Prof. Mayer’s Table of Durations
of the Residual Sonorous Vibrations. Continuous Sensations are
Agreeable. Discontinuous are Disagreeable. Undamped Vibrations.
viii
Contents.


Violin Tone with its superadded Cloud. The Cleavage " Tone of the
Air ” proved in a Simple Experiment with a Pencil and a Penholder
which themselves cannot Vibrate V a o e ‘O-ys
CHAPTER VII.
Interviewing an Organ Pipe. How the Organ Pipe works to make
Sound. A Flue 01 Flute Pipe called Diapason, the Several Parts
Described. Desohanel, his Orthodox Science. The Erroneous Theory
in vogue, Devoid of Proof. The Pipe Lip never Vibrates- a Sharp
Edge as Essential for the Air to be “ Split upon it is one of the
Commonest Errors of Teachers of Science. Tyndall on Helmholtz.
Their Theory of a Promiscuous Assemblage of Pulses. Quite Untenable
the Notion that the Pipe selects One out of these. The Stream of Air
does not go up the Pipe. The Demonstration and Proof of the Real
Action at the Mouth of the Pipe. The Wind-stream rushing over the
Mouth exercises Suction and Abstracts Air from the Interior oi * T Pe*
The Stream Reed described, its Outward and Inward Curve. Velocity
of Transit over the Mouth is converted into Velocity of Vibration by
the Energy of Suction. It becomes a To and Fro Movement because of
the Limit of Tenuity. The Initial Movement is Rarefaction not Con-
densation as the old Notion has it. This Solution of the Problein never
Previously Imagined. How the Invisible Action can be made Visible
and Palpable also V a 9 e 9.,-iOa
CHAPTER VIII.
Watching the Reed at Work—A Stream of Air possessing the Energy of
Wind having a To and Fro Motion with the form and effect of a Reed.
Its objective Existence capable of Demonstration. The Reeds of many
Sorts used for Musical Purposes. Single and Double Reeds. A Glassi-
fication of Reeds according to their Nature. The Column of Air in the
Pipe erroneously held to be the Source of the Sound. The River not
the Source of the Water. All Organ Pipes are simply Delayers—\\ hat
the outward Air can do with our Instruments—that is the Question.
My Theory in brief is that the Production of Sound in an Organ Pipe is
this, it is a Process of Suction by Velocity. Analysis of the Swift
Sequence of Action. The Stream a Life Force on which the Sound
depends. Like a Storm-wind driving along at CO Miles an Hour, in
large Organs sometimes attaining Hurrican Power. The Reed waiting
to be Born. Velocity of Passage transformed into Velocity of \ iora-
tion. The Wind-Stream sucks out Air-Particles by the Million. Perfect
Vacuum not obtained, only Partial Vacuum, the Condition being one of
Degree. The Wind Stream Reed, the Motion of its Vibration is an
xVctivity tempered by Rests. When and how I discovered the Nature
of the Organ Pipe and proved the real Activity taking Place in a lb it.
Open Diapason Pipe. The Metal Pipe, how Constructed. In all its
Parts Adjustable. The Broad Shaving tells the long sought Secret.
Dredging the Bees with Flour. A crisp little Bit of White Tissue
Paper a Means of Identification of the Reed. Experiments for every
Enquirer. Under the Curve of the Paper Reed. The Law discovered
of the Action of the aeroplastic Reed or Stream-Reed that as its
Arcs of Vibration are less its Speed is greater. That it is not
Analogous to a Free Reed since “ the Times vary with the Amplitude __
or defined strictly “the Times are inversely as the Amplitude.
Showing that it is unique amongst the Phenomena heretofore observed
in Musical Vibrations. No Swelling of Tone gaining Power with gain
of Amplitude. The Stream Wind Reed is the Creature of Air and
Times itself to the Element that sustains it. Certainly the Stream
Reed is not of the Free Reed Family T a 9 e 109-m


CHAPTER IX.
Thinning and Shocking- a Body of Air. Seeing a Yaouum. The Need for
the Imaginative Faculty and the Mind’s Eye. A Snap Shot of Mr.
Partial 1 acuum. The Vacuum behind a Bullet actually Photographed.
A Travelling-Void Experiment with long India Rubber Tube to illus-
trate the passing Pulse Sound as compounded of Pulses of Motion.
Only by Virtue of Arrest of Motion do they become recognisable by the
Ear as Sound. Rifle Bullets all have Different Pitches of Singing
Voices. Known by their Diameters as are the Sounds of the Displace-
ment Rods. The Uprightness of the Air-Reed—the Air Column at Rest,
'.hat disturbs its Equilibrium? Rarefaction has Priority of Condensa-
tion. The flexure of the Stream due to its Power to draw down the Air
Column on itself. Its Mode of Action. Pull Development of the
theory. The Zone of Rarefaction around the Mouth of Organ Pipe.
The Supreme Moment. Dr. Hooke on Springy Bodies. The Work of
tlie Stream Reed is specifically to abstract. Thinning the Air or
Rarefaction. The Reed the Generator of Power. The Node in the
open Pipe an elastic Fulcrum. The stopped Pipe has a stable or
unyielding Fulcrum. Recapitulation of the Mechanical Process. The
Moment of Rest. The two Condensation Waves. The Node the Place
of Recoil of these A Tight Place. Not Vibrations but Shocks result-
ing from Arrested Motion are the real Factors of Musical Sounds. The
lime-Distance between two Shocks fixes the Estimate made by the
o „ a i . of + P i tch V, Perlo .dioity and Rapidity. Tenth Part of a Second
sufficient for Recognition vage m _ m
CHAPTER X.
THE twn Sl vfr.V 0 he o Wind S a re a. m - F i ue Pi P es of Wood and of Metal. Both of
The Or-an RmUrl ® to P ped -,. How Distinct Qualities are Obtained.
Builder s Craft entirely Empirical, unheeding of Science.
Pines , B P eakln ° without Knowledge. Lecture Room Organ
Pitch Prnnf f w i se S a y i ng’- Diagram showing the Widths of the
1 itch. Proofs from Pipes made by T. C. Lewis. The Duleinna eon
Cu a rve d Wlth thG Diapason ’ Th e' Great Gap unaccounted for by
page 137-11,9
CHAPTER XI.
ALU RTe C dslonow r a y diitinctT* n Th ? Po T rpst F^ e in Canada-Its Mode of
ofbein Ipw ad ’ Opposite Law. The Importance to Students
TT P l™n u -J Face wRh Facts. Cavaille Coll, his Empirical Method
Helmholtz s Explanation in Orthodox Science shown to be fanciful’
nVo 6r C rrn lleC o’ a i 1 . or B' an - Ellis on Helmholtz. Pipes with beating
Octaves—The Halving of Diameters not alike. The Common Practice^
Emniricar d thV P H°aH th n e - 0C T ion by Leotl,rers ' The act «al Deficiency
17th Pine 1 D tf me b r °° OU /T B ' not at the 13th but at the
i ipo. r utility of the Laws of Bernoulli!—their so-railed Pnr
Iffie I(> Win^ y thna*+h r n ® c ' e ?tiflc Hypothesis. Dr. Stone’s Statement,
i lie Wind thus thrown into the Pine snelred T-ior*!- ±
Action-Suction by Velocity. The 6 M
Theory P Facts. Saying of Gerald Molloy. Saving of Goethe on
Hi h Pine T eWh/ S^ LaW ° + n Prp P a f atioa of a Wave in tubes. Velocity
in ± ipe Lengths demonstrated by Builders Ppaptinoiiv »*
Greater ™ e th Win Q d Reed « a thc Mou fof tt Pip/
iUFT? ln T Erroneous Teaching Confute/ bv FxneH
mental Tests. Increase of Depth from Front to Back always Flattens."


Calculating by Rule. Not available in English. Work. Amount of
Wind admitted at Foot an All Important Factor in the Pitch Length of
Pipes. Donkey Music morning Solo page 100-lbl
CHAPTER XII.
The Natural History of the Gamba Family—the Gambas, why so Called—
Old Method and New—the Pipe always has a Low Cut Mouth—its
Transitive Harmonies. The Imitation of the Violin Tone or String
Tone —Meaning of Stringy Quality in a Pipe—Violoncello Character-
istics. Octave of a free Violin String always Sharp. The lerms I
use. HSroplastic Reed. Air Stream Reed, Wind Stream Reed—the Idea
in each is the Same. My Discovery of the Fact that the Pitch of the
Air Reed varies when the Amplitude of its Motion vanes. Pitch of
Reed and Pitch of Pipe often at Variance. The Superstition of the
Bass-Tone. Tone has its beginnings in the highest Activity, ihe
Vibrations of the Air-moulded Stream Reed Isotonic not Isochronous.
The Gamba of Schultze. The Pencil held across the Mouth. A Violone
in a Lewis Organ, Description of. The Position of the Bar. The Boehm
Flute, its Parabolic Head. The Pit of the Gamba. The Ears at side
of Mouth, their Purpose in my Theory. The Gamba an overblown Pipe.
How the Bar acts—Diagram in Illustration. My Experiment with
Tissue Paper—Making the Reed Motion Visible —the Curve delineates
the Force—The Wealth of Tone in the Gamba. Experiments—the
Quarrel of the Pitches heard. The “ Woo hoo ” of the Difference.
Settling of the Fight going on Inside the Pipe. Taking Sides with
the little Gamba. Introductory Harmonics in Gamba lone, ifie
Descent of the uneasy Node page 162-177
CHAPTER XIII.
Holes in the Air. Hard W T ords. Compound Terms. Pharoah’s Kine. The
Intelligent Boy on Damping a String. Each Chapter sets out on a
Distinct Plan. Wave Lengths and Nodes. Step by Step in Argument.
Any body of Air changing Place makes a Hole—The Activity termed
Vibration. The Responsive Ear. The Phonograph, its Minute Move-
ments in Fortissimo—Todhunter on the Resistance of Air Particles—
Illustrated in Flight of Cannon Ball. Prof. Guthrie, Clerk Maxwell,
Thompson, on Approach caused by Vibration. Sir W. 1 homson on
Action at a Distance. Controversy in Nature. Tuning Fork an Instru-
ment to make Holes in the Air. Velocity of the Transmission of Sound
in Air—the Estimate for Wave Lengths. Dr. Koemg, Experimental
Pipe with the Position of the Nodes determined. The Sub Nodal and
Super Nodal Lengths largely Differing .... page 17K-IVI
CHAPTER XIV.
Waiving the Wave Theory. The End of One Wave Length—Suppose there
is no Second Wave—Knotty Questions. The Trespass of New Convic-
tions—The Wise Thrush. Innovation Good for the Soul. The Picture of
a String Vibrating. The Illusion of the Double Curve. Prof. Alfred M.
Maver on Waves of Sea and Air. The Picture Diagram but a con-
venient Symbol which stands for a Sonorous Wave. Emerson on 1 re-
paration of the Mind for Learning. Signor Bazzi, his Investigation of
a Water Wave—the Air Wave unlike the Water Wave. The Infinite
Length Sound Wave. Koenig’s Gas Flames, what they Shew. Tyndall s
curious lopping Travesty. Koenig’s Illustration of Comparative Dimen-
sions in Cube Pipes—Stopped. The Ocarina— The Suction Grasp of
the Wind Stream—the Breaking back of the contained Air in the
Stopped Pipe. The French Bourdons as good Hummers. The Hum-
ming Top is a Stopped Pipe and the Velocity of the Rotation creates
xi
Contents.


Suction. Tuning Forks on Resonance Boxes. Sympathy a Terra
merely, implies Synchronism. Tyndall’s Lectures, his Statement that an
open Organ Pipe consists virtually of Two Stopped Pipes page 192-MS
CHAPTER XV.
THE pfo7resl h Tvnd«ir Sto v Ped ? ipe “ th S Lip indrawn b y th e Suction in
n ) ews J* accordance with Deschanel’s—Stationary
Organ Pipe Theory of-the Vibrating Lip an Illusion-
Deschanel s Exposition Controverted—The Places of Nodal Division
menT of J the ag N a^ S both Open and Stopped Pipes-The Displace-
ment of the Node—The Cricket Bat simile—The Plug of Air in
dMereft P V P i a oHD erS t 0 the i >lug of , Wood in Stopped IMapason-The
HearCs plaOnlf concerned in making up One Pipe Vibration-The
nearts Beatings page 201,-217
CHAPTER XVI.
' J Jista fi ncC ~ Pro /- Donkin-Unequal Halves recognized by
apSSESSBsii
Whistle 10 " ACtl ° n the Mo " th of «>e Organ Pipe-Only °a
page 21S-229
Part 11.
Of Reeds and Reed Pipes.
CHAPTER XVII.
The One
Process, the othe/havino- 'Tono-ues of b \Tpfal CUr + C - nt bstracti re in the
pulsive—Every kind Loft’ l>" g by a C >™t Pro-
Miiller on the combined Reed and Pipe-The SMlfTf hp M S r ohanisl } 1 -
Laying the Tongue of the Leer! tw 00 An r- ? n °* 01cer in
the Reed’s Vibrftionl Three in
The Time of Rest—The Time of Recoil—How of ofForv ™ rd Motion—
Least Pressure— Metal Tongues readily Disturbed 7 tiff'a the ., Region of
the Organ Oboe Pipe—Effects r»f nio«?«+V StU i ■n ie Sensitiveness of
Reversi of the Effects in Fin! ot R * ed Pi Pes-exactly the
Oboes are made Conical throughout l3 not • • rumpe l ts ’ Morns' and
-Table of Diameters ofFlue pfpes-Pirfes o?!, Cylindrical Parts
Delayers in Regaining Equilibrium P R P i n tlfi be Regarded as simplv
Greater Length when the are P.f!? Re T ed Pipes ™of
Player drawn into the Cup by the partial £? t ® r—Llp of Trombone
TlbSffi! Btre,m ' S ”“™ th « PriLTln^nr. m p C 3 te Si*‘|
page 2SO-2io


CHAPTER XVIII.
Chief Laws of the Compound Action of Pipes and Metal Reeds as Ascer-
tained by M. W. Weber—Muller’s Experiments with Tongue of a Child’s
Trumpet. The Making of Orchestral Wind Instruments —Nature’s De-
fects—Manufacturer has to Correct them—The Harmonic Series-
Students Mistaught and Learn by Note, shirking Experimental Proofs.
Prof. Dewar Angry against the Superficial Scientific Education of
To-Day—Whewell on Retardation of Science by Assumptions—Helm-
holtz Corrected by D. J. Blaikley on the Question of Just Intonation of
Horns and Trumpets. Measurement applied to Clarionets and Elutes—
The Boehm Flute, its Parabolic Head. French Horn, its Conical Portion
giving the Harmonics out of Tune—Old Trumpet Experimented with—
its Cylindrical Portion giving the Uninterrupted Series of Har-
monics page ZH6-259
CHAPTER XIX.
Mattime. The Doings of the Master in Forestry. The Resonating Sphere
and the Physical Force from its Impulses—Prof. Von Dvorak’s Experi-
ment—The Turning of Water Wheel by Sounding the Proper Note of
Resonator—Departures from Scientific Conformity in Wind Instru-
ments. Actual compared with Theoretical Lengths—Shapes of Reed
Organ Pipes given. The Construction of Reed Pipes shown in Section.
Boehm’s Flute blowing a Quarter Tone Sharp. Mouthpiece of Horn
will also give the Notes Sharp if its ordinary Shape is Departed from
—Reference Table of the Vibrational Numbers of each Note of the
Scale at High Concert-pitch, with their Wave-lengths Specified.
Blaikley’s Experimental Demonstrations of the Nodal Positions in a
Conical Tube. How Shakespeare likens John O’Gaunt to the Slim Case
of a Treble Hautboy page %60-%75
CHAPTER XX.
Ctlindrical Pipes not to be Regarded as Closed Pipes. The Assumption
made by Teachers of Science that the Clarionet is a Closed Pipe not
Warranted. The Oboe like the Clarionet has a Reed Mouthpiece—lf
the Mouthpiece of the Latter is Considered to be a Closed End, why not
the Former? The Difference observed in Harmonic Series may be due
to Coincidence. Example of such Coincidence in the old Theory of
Beats by Dr. Young and the later one by Helmholtz —Denner’s Key for
Twelfths—The Places of the Nodes Examined—Bassoon with a Single
Reed Played by Lazarus. The Old Cromornes —Egyptian Arghool and
Greek Aulos —Japanese Hiohirichi, its broad Reed—The Chinese Cheng
Organ. Table of Notes given by the Clarionets. Wave Lengths of each
compared with Clarionet Pipe Lengths—Existence of the Octave Har-
monics in the Clarionet shown by D. J. Blaikley’s Experiments.
Further Tables —Distances from Primes to 12th Keyhole. My Problem
that the Harmonics heard produced from the Clarionet are not really
Twelfths but Octaves of the Open Pipe Lengths lying between the
twelfth Keyhole and the Holes whence the Note issues. Another Ex-
ample of Coincidence in Results, and Misinterpretation by Inferences
of an Orthodox kind. Time is the arranging Destiny for every Vibra-
tion. Shakespeare’s Meditation .... . page 276-259
CHAPTER XXI.
The Curious Likenesses and Unlikenesses between Organ Pipes and Orches-
tral Pipes. The Imitations in Quality by wholly Diverse Means—Old
Shapes in Organ Pipes often Retained by Modern German Builders—
One Kind of Organ Reed now Adopted for the Construction of all the


Stops—Some Reed Pipes Half Closed at the Top—Vox Humana—Orches-
tral Imitations of Orchestral Quality but after an Organ Manner—
Jealousies of Organ Builders and their Voicers—the Howling Wilderness
—ihe Higher Range of the Bassoon Stop has to Represent the Lower
I'art of the Scale of the Oboe. Organ Oboe is of Normal Ground Tone
while the Orchestral Oboe is of Purely Harmonic Tone—Organ Trum-
pet seldom a good Representative, its many Pipes doing the Work of
One only—Berlioz Laments the cold Unexpressiveness of the Organ
Tone and Advocates Free Reeds—Capability of Free Reeds to furnish
Orchestral Colour. Curious Relations of the Pipe Lengths in Repre-
sentative Instruments s page 290 303
CHAPTER XXII.
Madame Maba, her Voice of Compass of Three Octaves—lts Marvellous
Sensitiveness in Changes of Pitch in Vocal Sounds in Succession. Sir
John Herschel on Sympathy between Two Flutes. Grenie’s Free Reeds
at Notre Dame Cathedral—Organ Pipes, Absorption of the Tones of
Adjacent How the Trouble is Remedied. Organ Pipes in Unison
often Less in Power ivhen Combined than One of them Sounding alone
Similarity in Diameters to be Avoided in Unisons—Rapid Nodal
Changes made in Orchestral Trumpet. Node Signifies a Knot—Simili-
tude taken from Grass Stalks, Bamboos, etc. Order of Harmonics—
-37,.°' Intertones—Dimensions of Masses of Air—Diagrams, Cone
and Cylinder—The Artist and the Despotism of Space. Nature Obeys
uemus page SO 1,-318
CHAPTER XXIII.
THE n^fr. aSUle f°M t ! le Res i? tanc ?- Necessity of the Unseen in Pursuing the
Doings of Nature; Experimentalist searches with the Eye of Faith
trSrM a + ] +n B ' h M Kmd °/ I ?eli I <- vin S'- Not the Lengths of Pipes
that Count, but the Measure of the Resistance of the Air page 319-321
CHAPTER XXIV.
The Wonderful Find at Carthage-Model of the Organ as used by the
Ancients. Hydraulus (Water Organ) invented by the
gyptian. Drawings all Lost and Construction not Understood in
Later Centuries. Mr. W. Chappell (1874) had a Model made Con
struetion and Appearance only Partially Ascertained. In 1885 Small
Terra-cotta Mode! discovered in Ruins of a Temple at Carthage. Now
in St. Louis Museum Carthage. Pfere Delattre, the Director, had
Photographs made, and sent them to various Authorities. Rev F W
Galpin received one and made Model. This was Exhibited in London
a iV 0 * 11 ln 1904. Mr. Galpin wrote in “ The Reliouarv ”
a Full Account of Hydraulus. In all Essentials our grandest Organs
only Copy the Old Model. Water Organ no Toy. Vitruvius ssnVl onmr.
Specimens of Hydraulus had Ten Stops. Ctesibius, 300-246 uc Cham
po ion depicts Egyptian Smithy with Man standing on a Pair of
Be lows (figure). Mr. W. Chappell on this Topic Treading the
BeHows for Organs descended to a Late Period. Stanier sals St
Paul s Organ formerly thus Blown. Copy of Men tresuß™ Art,
from Sculptures on Obelisk at Constantinople, erected by Theodosius
prior to a.d. 395. Ctesibius tried to Obviate Tm-i .


working Levers, from MS. Psalter of Eadwine, showing Water Organ
of Xth Century. Ctesibius, by Water, sought Control over Air
Pressure V a 9 e 322-335
CHAPTER XXV.
Further Particulars of the Hydraulus. Whole Knowledge in Magazine
Articles of 1904. Galpin’s “ Notes on the Hydraulus.” Terra-cotta
Model in our Frontispiece. Size of Model. Air Pumps, Octagonal
Water Box. Wind Chest supporting Pipes in a Row. Nineteen Pipes,
all of One Diameter. Effect of Length on Pitch ascertained by
Ancients. They did Not Know that Quality was Determined by Dia-
meter. Real Organ Supposed to have been 10 ft. High and 4J ft.
Wide. Player Stood on Ledge Behind. Keyboard with nineteen Keys.
Possessoris Made the Model. Galpin says Two Large Holes were for
Levers for the Pumps. Galpin’s Working Model described in Detail.
Player of Hydraulus had to Watch the Action of the Blowers. The
Original Clay Model evidences Keyboard with Pivoted Keys. Key-
board not previously Traced further back than End of Xlth Century.
Organ in Magdeburg Cathedral described. Heavy Touch of Old
Tracker Organs. Optatian and Claudian on the Hydraulus Quoted.
Harmony Not Known at Period of Water Organ. Continued Use of
Keyboard suggested Harmony, aided by Greek Divisions of Lengths of
Strings. Figured Bass preserves Traces of the “ Way by which
Music Came ” . V a Q e 336-343
CHAPTER XXVI.
Concerning the Reservoir, and other Particulars of Interest. Ctesibius
Designed the First Reservoir for Air. Without it Promiscuity of
Pitch would have made Melody Impossible. Excess of Compression
in Water Organ betrayed by Overflow of Water in Cistern. Action
Described in Detail. Principle same as the Wind Gauge (Chap. IV).
Mode of Blowing All-important. Rim of Cistern Corresponds to our
Automatic Escape Valve. If Water Fell Below the Rim, Pitch would
Flatten; if the Water Overflowed, Pipes would Speak Sharp. Costly
Water Organs in Subsequent Centuries. Nero a Famous Public Per-
former on it. Water Organ a Pneumatic Organ as much as Ours.
Rimbault Wrong in Saving Lobsingcr Invented the Horizontal Reser-
voir-bellows in 1570. Lobsinger Substituted Wooden Ribs for Leather
Foldings. Diagonal Bellows with Fixed Weights do not give Unvary-
ing Wind Pressure. Cuming, of London, put a “ Horizontal Reservoir ”
into a Large Organ, 1762. Horizontal Reservoirs do not give Unvarying
Wind Pressure. “ Inverted Ribs ” with Automatic Cut-off secure Equal
Described. Range of Flue-stops from three to five Inches—Reed-stops
Pressure during Rise and Fall of Upper Board. Inverted Ribs
Described. Range of Flue-stops from three to five inches—Reed-stops
six to twelve Inches. Greater Pressures than ours Probably Used in
Water Organs ... paQ e 31,4-350
CHAPTER XXVII.
Summing Up. The Sources of Sound. Time Distance. Wind the Worker.
Weighing the Wind. The Tone of the Air. The Cleavage of Air.
Interviewing an Organ Pipe. Watching the Reed at Work. Thinning
and Shocking a Body of Air. Theory and Facts. The Gambas. Holes
in the Air. Waiving the Wave Theory. The Variability of the Node
Facts about Heeds page 351-363
INDEX V a 9 e MS




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.
PLATES.
Terra Cotta Model of the most Ancient Pipe
Organ. Discovered at Carthage (Front
view) Frontispiece
Plate A. Terra Cotta Model of the most
Ancient Pipe Organ. Discovered at Carthage
(Back view) .... Facing page 322
Plate B. Roman Hydraulus. Enlarged view
of Keyboard .... Facing page 330
FIGURE. PA on
1 The Hunter’s Whistle 29
2 The Old-Time Clarionet Mouthpiece in Sec-
tion QK
3 The same Mouthpiece in Full View . . 35
4 Organ Builder’s Wind Gauge .... 49
5 Organ Pipe Imitative of the Clarionet, in
Section ..•••••*
6 Displacement Rods, Cross Sections of . >7O
7 Flue-Organ Pipe, Vertical Section of . . 9b
8 Organ Pipe in Section, Showing the Wind-
Stream on the Point of becoming a Stream-
Reed 104
9 Organ Pipe in Section, Showing the Wind-
Stream converted into a Stream-Reed
Waving To-and-Fro at the Mouth . • 19b
10 Diapason Organ Pipe in Metal, Vertical
Section of • _ • • • 1
11 Widths of Mouths of Metal Organ Pipes
Relatively to Diameter of Pipe . • • i4d
12 Violone Organ Pipe with Bar, Vertical Sec-
TION OF . . • • • • •
13 Curve of the Stream-Reed, With and With-
out Bar . .


14 Du Koenig’s Experimental Organ Pipe,
Showing the Positions op the Harmonic
Nodes 189
15 The Illusion op the Vibrating String . . 195
16 Dr. Koenig’s Octave Cube Stopped Pipes . 200
17 Diagram op the Places op Nodal Divisions in
Stopped and in Open Organ Pipes . , 213
18 Shapes op Reed Organ Pipes, Bassoon, Oboe
Clarionet 268
19 Shapes op Reed Organ Pipes, Trumpet, Cor
Anglais, Vox Humana, and the Construc-
tion of Reed Pipes Shown in Section . 269
20 Comparison op Successive Divisions in Coni-
cal and Cylindrical Forms .... 314
21 Working Reproduction op the Roman
Hydraulus 325
22 Hydraulus. Enlarged Section of Key
Mechanism and Stop Action . . . 328
23 An Egyptian Smithy with the Ancient Pair
op Bellows. From a Tomb at Kourna . 329
24 Copied prom the Sculptures on the Obelisk
at Constantinople, Erected by Theodosius,
who Died a.d. 395 331
25 Mediaeval Organ prom MS. Psalter op Ead-
w'ine. Biow'ers using Levers . . . 334
26 Working Reproduction of the Hydraulus,
showing Wind Supply and Water Principle 337
27 Hydraulus prom a Contortionate of the Time
op Nero . ...... 347
xviii
List of Illustrations.


LIST OF TABLES OF REFERENCE.
TABLE. PAGE.
1 Table of Wind-Velocities and Pressures . 50
2 Table of Wind Pressures from Lowest Notes
to Highest on the Orchestral Wind In-
struments 52
3 Table of Results of Professor Mayer’s Ex-
periments on the Duration of the Residual
Sensations of Sounds 88
4 Table of Various Classes of Musical Reeds 110
5 Table of Dimensions of Lewis’s Open Dia-
pasons 148
6 Table of Measured Diameters of Metal Organ
Pipe Trumpet Compared with Oboe . . 241
7 Table of Diameters and Lengths of the Flue
Pipes of the Diapason, Geigen Flute, Sali-
CIONAL AND Vox ANGELICA .... 242
8 Table of Theoretical and Actual Lengths of
the Orchestral Horn and Trumpet . . 263
9 Table of Theoretical and Actual Lengths of
Organ and Orchestral Trumpet and Oboe . 265
10 Table of Theoretical and Actual Lengths of
Organ Pipes—Diapason, Vox Angelica, and
of the Boehm Flute of the Orchestra . 270
11 r J Cable of Vibration Numbers in the Scales,
Wave Lengths and Half-Wave Lengths . 271
12 Table of Notes of the Scale and the Lengths
of the Orchestral Clarionet Tube . . 284
13 Table of Primes and Twelfths of the Clar-
ionet AND THEIR TUBE DISTANCES . . . 287
14 Table of Lengths of a Set of Standard Pipes,
bach Pipe cut to Exact Length, as Tuned
by Mr. T. C. Lewis xx
ERRATA.
Page 27, line 10, after sufficient insert “ amount of recurring.”
Page 72, line 9, after chasm insert “ of parallel sides thinning oft to.”
Page 85, line 3, after exists add “ as threads.”
Page 90, line 2, from the bottom of page, for allusion read “ illusion.”
Page 92, line 12, for nor read “ not.”
Page 150, line 12, after through add “ that orifice.”
Page 237, line 7, for plate read “ place.”
Page 305, line 20, G and C, add “ to second C.”


c
Lengths.
inches
B
5g
A#
A
6|
G#
7
G
7i
n
7l'
*F
8.1
E
8|
D$
9l
D
9 s
r#
io| and 16th
c
II 1%
B
iig
A#
I2|
*A
I3l
G#
I4t
G
I 5s
F
16
*F
!7
TABLE OF LENGTHS OF A SET OF
STANDARD PIPES, EACH PIPE CUT TO
EXACT LENGTH, AS TUNED BY
MR. T. C. LEWIS.
The A is the pitch pipe,
from' which all other pipes
are regulated. This A is in
modern usage fixed by a tuning
fork, called the Normal Dia-
pason, its vibration period
435.4 per second.
In connection with lengths
of Organ Pipes there are
two determining factors,—the
strength of the pressure or
weight of wind operating at
the foot of the pipe, and
the temperature of the air at
the time in and around the
pipe, hence these conditions
are always to be named in
association with the pitch.
Here the measured weight of
wind is 3! inches, the tempera-
ture 65° Fahrenheit.
Diameter, *F ij inches, —*A i~, —*F g full.


The Making of Sound in the
Organ and in the Orchestra.
CHAPTER I.
The Sources of Sound.
7 ''HE construction of musical instruments, be-
sides its technical interest, has a generally
attractive hold on curiosity. Concerning
several favourite instruments there has been of
late years a large amount of information afforded,
both in volumes specially devoted to the subject
and in serial literature, and often distinguished
by the exhibition of a thoroughly practical know-
ledge of details. Information of this kind is
greatly appreciated by readers possessing me-
chanical tastes, and by those who find interest in
whatever relates to music and to musical science.
When any real insight has been gained the in-


quisitive instinct is not easily satisfied; it per-
petually seeks new food, and thus it happens that
in conversation on matters of music, disappoint-
ment finds voice, and in frequent comment tells
how the teaching stops short just at the very
point where it had become most exciting; the
chamber is not unlocked, the tale is left half told,
questions held in memory remain unspoken, the
book comes to an end. A tantalizing though a
common experience. After learning all we care
to learn about the making of instruments, we want
to know what is going on unseen; how, in fact,
the intrument is itself occupied in the making of
sound.
In the present volume it is my purpose to enter
upon a line of investigation on this subject, novel
in method, practical in aim, and capable of
affording answers to some of those questions
which are ever recurring to the reflective mind in
the Organ and in the Orchestra.
There are, no doubt, difficulties in the way of
approaching questions of scientific interest with-
out assuming on both sides too much capability
for being at ease in deep waters. Some employment
of scientific terms and phrases will be necessary,
but this need not imply any more than the general
acceptance of their aid in explanation. The
popular use of scientific phraseology is evidence
of a general sympathy with the aims of science
rather than of pretension to a full understanding;
for it is certain that literature awakens an intel-


lectual pleasure in the achievements of science
amcngst those who have not the leisure and do not
lay claim to the aptitude for the exact study of
science. The reciprocal pleasure of teaching and
of being taught comes to us very frequently only
long after school days are days of the past.
We take it as a truism that this is a scientific
age. A boy, on being asked by his teacher,
“ What is gravitation?” replied, “ It’s a stone fall-
ing to the ground instead of going the other
way.” On being further questioned why the stone
falls to the ground, his answer was, “ Because it
can’t help itself.” Answers received from older
boys often amount to no more than this when
explanations are sought regarding effects of every-
day occurrence in art and industry. Very pro-
bably that boy with his sturdy realism will
outstrip in the race of life his fellow-pupils who
are able glibly to repeat verbatim pages of lesson-
books, to fill up papers, and to pass examinations
creditably. All the laws of mechanism may be
comprehended in his answer, though he can give
no better explanation, and in after-life he may
stand the successful representative of practical
experience. In this vague form a vast amount
of stored-up knowledge exists: the power is
latent, exercised as habit, neither diffusive nor
distributive.
Nothing is more common an experience than to
find that the man most masterful in his craft is,
though with the best will to aid, quite unable to


afford the inquirer the needed explanation of those
matters in which the master has worked success-
fully, or to indicate means to ends, or to show
clearly relations of cause and effect. An enquiry
not directed from his point of view has no mean-
ing for him, except as a puzzle which he would
help to unravel to please you, although without
belief in any practical advantage from the effort.
On the other hand, it seems generally to be taken
for granted that apprenticeships are fast dying
out; we would acquire for life the power of living
more readily than our fathers were content to
acquire it. Hence the industrial value of science
will come to be regarded as in its being a short-
hand of experience, so that those who by intent
will learn the system may extract the knowledge
it embodies; the familiar conclusion, “it is, be-
cause it is, becomes less conclusive as knowledge
increases from more to more. Curiosity aroused,
the mind will seek insight into the hidden causes
of effects, all the more because they are hidden,
and therefore tempt that instinct for power which
finds delight in conquering.
Musicians, young musicians especially, cannot
wholly escape the scientific tendencies of the
time; they are compelled to enquiry by the general
necessities of educational equipment; no student,
old or young, can now hope to pass examinations
without undertaking the study of Helmholtz. The
publication in 1875 by Mr. A. J. Ellis of his
translation of Helmholtz’s “ Sensations of Tone ”


was the introduction to a new period in the histor/
of music in this country. A second edition
enlarged in 1885. The influence of Helm-
holtz now, like that of Darwin, extends beyond
the class-rooms and libraries; it diffuses itself,
and colours the language of society; wherever
intellectual interest exists his name is a household
word; in all circles where music is cultivated as
an art and as a source of enjoyment, reference is
made to his theories, superficial it may be in the
main, yet not without refining value, and un-
deniably a token of homage to his power. The
great thinker having expounded a theory, has
founded a belief.
Passing now from the general and literary to
the more particular aspect of our inquiry, note how
lovers of music group themselves into classes,
exhibiting different types of enthusiasm. Some
never pass the limit of the personal, the singers
and performers alone occupy their attention; some
are enthusiastic chiefly upon the music as afford-
ing pleasure, as exhilarating or as appealing to
sentiment, and upcn the composer as a favourite,
all the chief composers having the allegiance of
sects of adorers; others esteem music as it dis-
plays erudition, develops form in accordance with
art tradition, and exhibits command over the
resources of instrumentation. There is again a
large group affected the most by quality of tone,
whether in single instruments and voices, or in
masses of contrasted character. These lovers of


music do not merely follow the music, they follow
the instruments, trace them through the orchestra
with eager references, and delight in recognitions.
Each instrument is to them an individual presence
with which they are more or less in active sym-
pathy. To belong to this group it is not necessary
to be a musician, even as it is not necessary to be
a painter in order to find in a picture a treasure-
store of enjoyment. Then we may note how
members of one group often have likings and
tendencies blending into those characteristic of
another group; but on the whole the inference
to be drawn is that persons included in the first
two classes will care very little about instruments,
whilst those in the two latter will care a great deal
about them.
Besides artists who find in their chosen instru-
ments a companionship little less than human,
and whose care is a care growing into passionate
regard, there are those who, whether artists or
listeners, have a keen appreciation of tone-quality,
and who almost invariably have a love for instru-
ments themselves as tone-producers, regarding
them with quite as strong an interest as they
bestow upon the performers who play upon them.
When Joachim lays down his violin they cannot
look upon the instrument with indifference; they
know that it has a value well nigh beyond price,
but they are thinking of its unexhaustible wealth
of tone of its shapes of beauty, and of the unerring
skill of the master who fashioned it. The spell


it has exercised over their emotions causes them
to fix their gaze upon it with curious wonder, as
though by intent looking they might discover the
secret of its power. On the other side is the
clarionet, with which each famous player has
made pleasure almost a “ delicious pain ” —has so
wrought upon listening ears by a magic all his
own, that freely we say, hardly deeming it hyper-
bole, “he has drawn us out of ourselves.” How
are we to account for it? The instrument is of no
extreme costliness like that of a Stradiuarus or a
Guarnerius. Yet matched with the violin, the
clarionet, in the irresistible beauty of its tone,
can claim a place in the orchestra held by no other
instrument. The one instrument depends for
value greatly upon structure, upon peculiar fea-
tures due to origin; the other is apparently free
from any considerations ether than those of
tubular form, a simple reed, and mechanism.
The lover of instruments leaves them reluc-
tantly, lingers with a consciousness that there is
something he will be always wanting to know;
he remembers how different an instrument is under
different hands, how the best does not display
its worth until the best player comes. Construc-
tion cannot be everything that perplexes us.
Some more intimate knowledge of interior struc-
ture might help if such occult attainment were
but possible to ordinary powers of vision. There
are proportions and relations which escape mea-
surement, Action and interaction are capricious


under the hands of new masters. What is there
going on that is unseen ?
The majesty, beauty, and variety of the organ
seem incomprehensible when we look down upon
the ranks of pipes whence the many-voiced tones
have issued. There is nothing to the eye in that
ambiguous-looking miscellaneous array adequate
to account for that which the ear has heard.
Thus, though the organ be dumb and the
orchestra vacant, there will never be wanting in-
centives to thought. If one should ask, “What
is the orchestra for ?” the commonplace question
would receive perhaps the commonplace answer,
To provide us with music.’’ No; it has a more
elementary office than that. Suppose a reader
who has gone thus far is on the alert, the obvious
reply to be expected is this—“ for the making
of sound.” The reply would be strictly in order,
yet we should have still to say “ No, the part it
plays is more prosaic than that.” The root of
the question goes deeper. The office of the
orchestra is to disturb the equilibrium of the air,
Whether imitating the twittering of a bird, or
revelling in the glories of symphony, chorale, or
oratorio, we accomplish nothing more than this.
To orchestra and full-voiced chorus add the
thunders of the mighty organ, and the work is
still the same—we disturb the equilibrium of the
air. The answer is purposely brought down to
this simple statement. The primitive fact cm-


braces and includes all sequences and modifica-
tions.
The unfelt motion of sound and the felt motion
of the air are the same in origin. We may indeed
affirm hearing to be a higher mode of feeling.
As the softest wafture of the air is an exhibition
of force, so the most delicate accents of music
are exhibitions of apportioned degrees of force.
Conscious or unconscious agency need not enter
into our considerations, nor even the ability of the
ear to hear. The motion is there, and in its
plainest aspect it is to be regarded in the strictest
scientific sense as a manifestation of force or
energy.
All musical instruments, whatever their nature,
will come under the definition of machines for
disturbing the equilibrium of the air; the human
voice does not escape inclusion by the same defini-
tion. In like relation the human ear, marvellous
in receptivity as it is, associated with our own
individuality, is in its first effect a recording
machine, taking a register of impulses as they
arrive; these impulses, by their number, degree,
and grouping, denoting the character of the dis-
turbance in the equilibrium of the air. Though
it is customary to speak learnedly of condensation
and rarefactions, of vibrations and waves, the ear
knows nothing of waves; it is percipient only of
arrested motion: in consequence of which in-
convenience the music of the spheres was never


heard by human ears; the first requisite for
possibility, “ arrested motion,” was lacking.
The definitions—-that matter is built up of
atoms, that the cell is the foundation of all
organism, and all organic life an aggregation of
simple cells, help to direct us to a right compre-
hension of nature and of the processes of nature.
In like method it appears to me the process of
the making of sound will be best rendered clear
for our comprehension by approaching it on a
similar basis of simple elementary fact. Thus
our ultimate analysis of sound will bring it down
to this: an aggregation of simple taps. The
tappings at the ear reaching our consciousness
as “sound” are the records of some earlier activity
not sound, but only impulse. The taps differ in
periodicity, in strength and rapidity, in number
and in grouping; they have no other distinction,
and how sound becomes to us music is a question
of time-distances in relation to impulses. The
ear takes no note of condensations and rarefac-
tions and vibrations, nor of states or conditions
in the intervals between impulses; its record is
of blows or taps at the window of the vestibule.
We deal with units, reasoning onwards to thou-
sands thousandfold. Happily for us, the ear does
its own counting in secluded chamber, with won-
derfully intricate apparatus, presenting us only
with results, independent of our liking or dis-
liking them; and we have no choice but to accept
the result, be it noise or music. Who among us


would net envy the elephant its power of closing
the external ear at its pleasure and calmly defying
life’s worst vexations.
The organ is an assemblage of wind instru-
ments : its office is the same as that of the
orchestra. The influence a great organ has over
us has never been adequately set forth in prose
or poetry —perhaps never will be. The best des-
cription, the finest in the language, is that given
by Lowell, the American Poet, in the cathedral
scene in his “ Legend of Brittany,” through
several stanzas of admirably sustained power.
The poem itself is of rare beauty.
A cathedral appeals to the eye, but however
noble or rich its architecture, without an organ
appealing to the ear, there is a sense of
incompleteness. A cathedral organ seems to
inhabit the vast building which is its home.
You visit it as you would visit a friend
whose voice inspirits with new life or ex-
cites you to moods of joy or sorrow, of tender-
ness or of triumph. You think you have been
listening to music; what you really have been
hearing was the working force of four horse power
converted into sound. Go down into the crypt;
see there the engine, with rods and cranks and
pistons, working to and fro in unconscious
strength. The engine has been lifting weights;
the weights have compressed the air and driven it
perpetually into reservoirs and channels; a power,
moving tons.


Force stored up, waiting to be set free by rapid
fingers; neither sound nor music—they are but
our human apprehension of it; only force, tens of
power, traversing choir and nave, and bowing us
down with a sense of littleness beneath its gran-
deur ; indeed a marvel, could we truly understand
it, —ten thousand ears filled and nothing lost;
neither anything left but memory. Contrasts of
force fix our attention. The force we are con-
sidering is so powerful, that we feel the quiet
stones under cur feet are stirred and tremble as
the great surging waves of tone of the deep bass
roll past. So delicate the same force, that its
existence in the air would be unknown except for
the equally delicate finely organised living
mechanism by which we detect its presence. Out-
side the ear a simple mechanism, with tap, tap,
tap; inside, the inner ear, with mysterious com-
plicated mechanism, a spiral shell, a transmuting
chamber, so small that a grain of wheat and a
drop of dew would fill it, —so small that it would
house only a very little snail in its spiral walls.
Here are the thousands of nerve-hl aments, making
music for us out of the messages received, dis-
pensing pain and pleasure as faithfully as fate,
on the one side of the veil, music,—on the outer
side, the tappings only of arrested motion.
My object has been to bring the reader into the
mood for conceiving the physical action which is
prior to records of sound and perceptions of
music, and thus from the very beginnings of force


to investigate the making of sound, and endeavour
to ascertain, if only in small degree or such extent
as may be possible to us, how tone-quality in the
various instruments is developed, or to speak more
literally, how it grows cut of its source of ori-
gination.
One of the first things learnt concerning the
organ is that it is blown to a fixed amount of
weight upon the bellows, and that consequently
the pressure is uniform. It is a half-truth, not
the whole truth, and has given rise to blinding
misconceptions of the nature of the instrument.
Granted that the skill of the builder has secured
uniform pressure (and it is seldom the fact that
it has), yet, paradoxical as the statement may
seem, every pipe in the organ is speakng to a
different pressure, to a different strength of wind.
As soon as the compressed air in reservoir and
channels arrives at the foot of the pipe, new
conditions are encountered; air is no longer air in
its simple state, it is endowed with force, and on
the instant of freedom becomes wind. It is this
force you have to consider as waiting at the foot
of every pipe. How that force is brought under
command, and trained to produce motion having
characteristics capable of ultimate transformation
into sound, constitutes the problem of quality of
tone in that class of musical instruments in organ
and orchestra ruled by Wind—the worker.


CHAPTER 11.
Time=distance alone defines Pitch.
Having in view a certain method of con-
sideration, a musical instrument was
defined by me as a machine for disturbing
the equilibrium of the air; and in conformity
with that definition, sound was to be regarded
as a manifestation of force, estimated as work
done by expenditure of power; and it was further
stated that the motion of sound as it affected
the sense of hearing consisted of an aggregation
of simple taps.
Under the purely mechanical aspect thus pre-
sented musical feeling was excluded from recog-
nition. The attention is by this method fixed
upon the conclusion that whatever is wrong, bad,
or imperfect in a musical instrument, equally with
whatever is good, pleasing, or perfect, should be
attributed to causes, ascertainable if our per-


ceptions are keen enough, in the same way as the
mechanical relations of other instruments and
appliances used in the arts and sciences. Good-
ness, to use a plain word, expresses, in reference
to mechanism, our sense of its regularity, of its
fulfilling the end for which it was designed. A
still more important corollary is, that the distin-
guishing qualities of musical instruments, as also
qualities of degree, are due to a fitness of pro-
portion in the relation of parts and component
parts, so that the character of the natural struc-
ture as regards material, combined with the
artificial arrangement, is always exhibited in the
work produced, which work is—sound. Gene-
rally speaking, no doubt it is fully admitted that
bad workmanship and bad materials account for
the badness of an instrument; but on the other
hand we do not as confidently assert that the
goodness is referable solely to goodness in the
workmanship and materials. There are many
points in the character of an instrument not
dependent on industrial tests. Quality in sounds
is only mysterious because we do not see deep-
enough into the nature of things, and yet the
fineness of judgment in our sense of hearing
exceeds greatly any other means of comparison.
Of this one thing we may always be sure : if
a musical sound reaches the ear deficient in
Quality, harsh and unpleasant, the agent pro-
ducing the sound is in some way disproportioned,
and is working with an irregularity in its action..
IS
AND IN THE ORCHESTRA.


The same kind of irregularity as that which is
felt affecting the ear, has been thrown off upon
the air which is the medium, by the agent. Beau-
tiful tone is dependent on the uniformity of
action of a mechanism suitably proportioned.
In almost all instruments, by an empirical
method of treatment, men have sought, and will
still be seeking, to arrive at perfect patterns of
instruments. The aim has been an open one, —
the means often hidden, or undemonstrable.
Granted that it is so, we ought not to be content
with the assertion readily volunteered that this
instrument is a good one, and that bad, nor to be
merely acquiescent in the choice of the best—
repressing curiosity as to causes of goodness.
It does not satisfy me to be told that this horn
gives a splendid quality of tone, and that the
-other horn is vile. Where the contrasts are not
so great as this, comparison of quality is as fully
a subject of interest. To know why the differ-
ences exists is to the thinker in science or art the
all-important attraction. To this end many minds
may work, so that by slow degrees, perhaps, the
right knowledge will be attained in reference to
all instruments, and surety made more sure.
In using the term mechanism we imply both
the mechanism of nature and the mechanism
arranged by man. Thus we say the interior
mechanism of fibres 13 brought into play when a
piece of wood is under vibratory action. The
regularity cr irregularity of the relative motion in
i6
THE MAKING OF SOUND IN THE ORGAN


the unseen activity is made known to the ear, so
that a plate of wood, such as is chosen for use
in making a violin, is relied upon, first by the
eye according to the apparent evenness of struc-
ture in the grain of the wood, and further by the
evidence of freedom and uniformity of tone as
tested by the ear. That test is so readily applied,
and rendered so prompt and unerring by habit,
that the result is accepted as final, and few persons
think of the actual fact brought to our knowledge
under the guise of musical tone —namely, that
the relation of fibres and tissues in the wood
is as true as mechanism that is apportioned to its
fit relation by human skill. The internal motion
is being performed in equal times, and the musical
result is dependent on each and every step in the
process. A complete and perfect instrument is
but a large illustration of the same truth, every
part influencing the whole in the most direct
manner for a destined end, and although in
minuteness and delicacy the internal working is
beyond the powers of vision, we know by reason-
ing, as well as by conclusive means of demon-
stration, that, to suit our purpose, wood and
metal, fibre and skin, have been arranged and
disposed, ordered and combined, with a certainty
and accuracy not surpassed by the mechanism of
a steam engine or a chronometer. If indeed it
were possible to see this working, this process of
action and interaction, solely as mechanical, with-
out a thought of reference to musical sensation,
*7
AND IN THE ORCHESTRA.


there would be cause for wondering how human
hands had been able to accomplish, and that
blindly, so perfect a mechanical design.
Let us take the simplest instance of a work
performed, with mechanical truth in the result,
by the aid of the ear alone. The timing of a
single string of a violin to a to-and-fro movement,
exact and as calculable as the revolutions of a
wheel or the strokes of a piston, is accomplished
now in an almost primitive manner. The fibre
stript from cane, or from the bark of some tree,
was used in the earliest days for the production of
musical sounds; so rude the condition of man
and his doings that it might be said that nature
was trained to a mathematical regularity of work
for human pleasure before figures were invented.
•Civilization progressed, music became an art,
musical instruments were developed in forms of
beauty, the fibres fine and carefully selected, and
in strands worked into strings with a skill dex-
terous and admirable. The manner of timing
the string was always the same. Men called it
tuning. In the quaint phrase of old Master Tan-
sur—“ Musico Theorico,” as he styled himself—
“ The ear is the umpire of sound.”
Now, as then, can it be said that musicians re-
cognise anything more than the function of tuning
in the mechanical operation they so often per-
form ?
Supposing the power of hearing suddenly lost,
the idea of timing the string would startle with
i8
THK MAKING OF SOUND IN THE ORGAN


its significance. Yet, considered apart from
musical sensation, the ear only tests the accuracy
of motion, tests the exactness of the fraction of
time to which the string is brought in executing
one movement to-and-fro. Remember, not the
accuracy of the musical note of a thousand or
two thousand vibrations per second, which the
musician imagines he is concerned with. Give
me your close attention on this point of differ-
ence. The bearing of the distinction between
the single and the aggregate will be seen as we
advance in the consideration of cause and effect
in the structural variations in musical instruments.
In mechanism, time rules both design and
results. Number is unimportant. A violin string
in its excursions traverses a distance so small
that the thought of attempting its measurement
with exactness is little likely to be entertained.
Examine a clarionet; look at the reed by which
it sounds; note how it is fitted to the beak-
shaped conical mouthpiece. Here we get nearer
to the perception of timed motion, because, the
tube accounting for musical proportions, we do
not think of tuning the reed. Noticing how
little is the space allowed for the to-and-fro
motion of the reed, we are not far from the
association of distance in relation to time.
The compound word “ time-distance ” is used
by me for the sake of clearness. To speak of
intervals of time involves the idea of hearing, and
in some degree of waiting, whereas my aim is to


make clear the actuality of distance. Distance
as a measurable mechanical relation, capable of
infinite division, exact always in proportions to
time. Thus we can say “ time-distance ”in re-
lation to impulses, meaning the difference in time
between the starting of two successive impulses
as indicated by the space traversed by the first
before the second is started. So also, speaking
in reference to the agent, the “ time-distance ”of
two strokes or two vibrations should bring to
mind the space passed over by the agent of
sound. A mental measure is made or taken as
of an action visible, and of time related to the
action.
Minds given to the cross-examination of facts
are also inclined to cross-examine the reception
of facts by other minds. My experience in this
line has led me to know that, very generally,
scientific explanations are interpreted in a way
leading to great confusion; even readers of
familiar science, men of more than average
intellectual capacity, and finding recreation in
reading works of the best writers on science in
the popular view of the presentation of the sub-
jects, are, by the extreme plainness of explana-
tions, drawn into “ believing that they believe,”
with a perfect clearness, the exposition set before
them. Perhaps it is inevitable that it should be
so, because the analogical method is almost always
chosen as a means of approach between minds.
Whilst, by the teacher, limitations of analogy


are distinctly defined in his own train of thought;
yet by the recipient, on a different platform of
thought, the analogy is often carried beyond
idealism with a literalness of application which
entirely defeats the utility of an otherwise effective
mode of reasoning.
The terms “ wave,” “ wave-motion,” “ wave-
length,” and others introducing analogies with
water, although necessary in systematic expla-
nations, have been the cause of misapprehensions
and misconceptions very difficult to efface. One
can remember instances of measuring off “ six-
teen feet” sound-waves in a drawing-room to
find the best place for hearing a pedal note, and
many other curious involvements. Very fre-
quently one finds that a musical note, as it is
called—say the familiar C of the philosophical
standard of pitch 512 vibrations per second —is
not supposed to be completed until that number
of vibrations has had existence; and so of other
notes of other pitches. The notion entertained
is not very different from that of having so many
shelled peas to the pint.
This, as many have affirmed to me, is with
musicians the general idea, “that absolutely 512
vibrations were necessary, neither more nor less to
produce as a perfected note treble C.”
Nowhere to my knowledge is there to be found
in popular expositions any statement sufficiently
clear to prevent readers falling into errors of
conception tantamount to this: of numbers of


vibrations and of series of waves spaced off like
park railings, a given number to the yard, making
an extension in distance a necessity for the exist-
ence of sound-waves of a stated and impressive-
looking standard of length.
Suppose we discard saying the note treble Cis
given by vibrations per second, and say given
per minute, or per hour. We should then get
rid of the perplexity of an appreciable number
which could be mentally allotted to a musical
note. Say 60 times 512, and then multiply by
60 again. We should be able to start freely with
a new formula, and a new sense of proportion;
thus, the treble note C is produced by 1,843,200
vibrations per hour. That would provide a more
imposing standard. The fact is we really have
nothing whatever to do with hours, minutes, or
seconds, nor with numbers of vibrations, nor with
any relation of numbers within distances. Num-
bers have afforded us the necessary means for
arriving at accurate estimates of ratios in relation
to tne phenomena of sound, but beyond that they
mislead the attention from the only real fact with
which the ear is concerned—viz., that the note
treble C is that which we recognise when the time-
distance between two vibrations is equal to the
512th part of a second. The same of all musical
sounds, there are some sounds the human ear is
capable of appreciating, which, if we could not
give demonstrable proof of the accuracy of cal-
culation, would seem beyond natural powers; as,


for instance, a note which the ear will recognise,
and of which it can be affirmed with but little
chance of error, or of material deviation from
truth, that the time-distance of any two of its
vibrations is equal to the 32-thousandth part of
a second.
Carry your thoughts to the clarionet, and con-
sider the fact that, when the reed is producing
the note treble C, it is closing and re-opening
minute spaces that would barely admit the thick-
ness of a sixpence, so very narrow is the chasm.
In the performance of the action to-and-fro it
completes one vibration, and between any two
vibrations of a musical note we have selected, the
time-distance is equal to the 512th part of a
second, neither more nor less. If the reed failed
in truth in keeping this relation in any one in-
stance, if it failed in leaping its required distance
exact to that minute fraction of time, the note
would be false. We do not conclude that the
ear would detect one error admixed with general
accuracy, because it is probable that in the
physiological relations of the organ of hearing
some persistency of action may be essential for
attracting our consciousness, and the larger com-
pound effect in sensation would absorb a casual
interference. Nevertheless, it is error of this kind
which disturbs purity of tone in the proportion
that it exists, and any great extent of error,
especially with variety in irregularity, would to
falseness add harshness. All instruments are
2 5
AND IN IHE ORCHESTRA.


liable to fluctuations in the regularity of their
vibrations, because instruments are awakened into
activity by impulses, and the impulses themselves
originate in some source which may be regarded
as continuous, —therefore not able absolutely to
preserve uniformity. The fact, for instance, is in
evidence in the difference between players upon the
same violin. The bowing of the violin, the in-
tonation of orchestral wind instruments, the
voicing of organs, betray irrepressible liability to
irregularities; the mechanism of nature is not
wholly under command by the mechanism of
man, otherwise we might reasonably assume that
every violin would be perfect, every singing voice
faultless, every organ a masterpiece in tone-
quality. That satisfaction is so seldom attained
is the surest of attestations to the insuperable
difficulties man encounters in his endeavours to
train nature to the services of art.
The wolf in the violin, the quack in the
clarionet, the lamentable subsidings of horns, the
high-flying screams of voices and organ-pipes,
are exhibitions of inabilities to do—what ? Simply
this : inability to execute a time-distance in re-
spect of two taps ” required for the organisation
of a given musical note, which the ear shall
recognise everywhere in the aggregation of taps
constituting the note of that particular pitch.—
aggregation as regards our feeling of their pre-
sence, but really a simple sequence of accurately
timed impulses launched on the air. Numbers


are nothing; the time-distance is everything.
Distinct as atoms in chemistry—as cells in
organization; the particular atoms to build up, and
no other; the particular kind of cell for each
character of organization, and no other; the
particular time-distance between impulses in the
aggregation special to each note, and no other
time-distance. This may seem a trivial conclusion
to enforce, and will be trivial to you until you
picture in your mind the reality of the unseen
mechanical efforts to do and perform an act of
precision, and also gain a clear conception of the
way in which the ear identifies mechanical action
by time-distance, and—by nothing else. In
another book of mine, to be published as one of
this series, a fuller reference to the organ of hear-
ing will give emphasis to the relations indicated.
To particularize the inability previously stated,
let us take the violin. The instrument perhaps
will give you with perfect purity its note treble
C, vibrating in its time-distance equal to the 512th
part of a second; but when you will call upon it
to give, say a note requiring a time-distance equal
to the 412th part of a second, it may happen that
this is its known bad note, —called the wolf,
—so the wolf suddenly breaks out, and in
that way declares the inability in its fibres
to execute that particular ratio in vibration.
Some interference prevents; some hidden ir-
regularity in its structure disturbs; it is
baulked in the efforts it has put forth; the energy


in its fibres is racked; the note is partly false,
and painfully harsh. Just that little difficulty
of hitting the mark, of making each throb or
pulse of motion true to time, of succeeding in its
efforts to make its fibres leap to-and-fro with
accurate and regular precision. How question-
ingly the artist looks at his instrument, anxious
to discover the inherent cause of the evil. He
wishes he could find out the secret, looks earnestly,
and if he gave his thoughts words would say, as
the child says to the companionable dog, “ Can’t
you talk ?”
So of the clarionet, the player, either from
inexperience or from some casual defect of lip,
cannot control the reed to execute certain notes;
all others are true, but some particular time-
distance the reed will not go through properly,
more or less may be required and will be done,
but not that particular leap towards the beak and
back again within the precise time demanded in
regular succession. The expert player will at last
conquer difficulties of this sort, as they are less
attributable to inherent defects. Of voicing
organ pipes there will be more to say later on;
but the inabilities are clearly due to failure in a
particular effort. Some weakness or disproportion
spoils the attempt to execute the precise “ time-
distance ” required of the vibrating agent. The
effort at precision is made, but disproportion of
power causes it to fall short of its aim or to
overshoot the mark. The special character of the


organ, that each pipe is designed to give one note
—therefore to perform one time-distance only—
will allow this method of investigation to be pur-
sued with peculiar interest.
There is one point to remember, that although
two taps at the ear will define the particular
musical pitch, the time-distance of these should
recur regularly (in periodical repetition) in order
to arouse the fibrils of the auditory nerve to
attention—in other words, a sufficient stimulation
is required.


CHAPTER 111.
Wind the Worker.
YOU will remember, perhaps, that in my first
chapter, the answer to be given to the ques-
tion, “ What is an orchestra for ?” was, that
“ all musical instruments, whatever their nature,
come under the definition of machines for dis-
turbing the equilibrium of the air.” This reply
we have still to bear in mind throughout the
progress of our theme.
The hunter’s whistle is very primitive in struc-
ture, merely a cavity with two openings; it may
stand as the rudimentary type of all the instru-
ments from which our modern orchestral wind
instruments have been developed, and as is usual
in the simplest forms, the peculiar and distinguish-
ing feature of its action is most strongly marked.
This peculiarity, which I ask you carefully to
notice, is, its change of pitch to every changing


pressure of the stream of air passing through its
apertures. Beginning with a low blackbird’s call,
and gradually increasing the force of blowing,
the pitch rises with the rising wind-pressure until
it reaches a note intensely shrill. The little thing
if attached to an organ bellows can be made to
give sounds of piercing strength, almost rivalling
the whistle of the steam engine. If I vary the
energy of the stream of wind I vary correspond-
ingly the period in which the work is done in the
Fig. 1.
The
Hunter's
Whistle.
Side View.
whistle, and the extent of that variation is ex-
pressed in changing pitch; in fact I have no means
of keeping the pitch constant if I in the least
degree alter the stress of wind; rise it will if there
is the least increase in the energy of the wind
doing the work. What is work ?
Here, then, we enter the domain of Wind the
Worker. Considered in reference to our organ
and orchestra, wind is an engineer, employed on
a specific kind of work. His work is the dis-
placement of air, and he is required to move the


particles of air bodily from their place, few or
many, according to the effect intended, and to
work very rapidly; in reality he has to dig holes
in the air, and shovel the particles away faster
than the powers of the air can fill them up. Big
holes take him longer than little ones, but he
brings up corresponding forces, and is ever on the
alert not to be taken at a disadvantage, and is
always under orders. In a contest there must be two
sides in real or imaginary opposition, with fortune
swaying the victory from side to side. Even in
play we find our enjoyment in the exercise of
■contest; it matters little what it is about, only
let us have something in the “pull devil, pull
baker fashion, and in a moment princes and
workers are merry and life is worth living. Carry
this idea of contest all through music and you
will see it is everywhere the same. The artist
is always in the arena, always deftly engaged
with the powers of the unseen. Watch the horn
player at his best, and see how narrowly he
escapes defeat, or perchance ignominiously fails
in the contest; he has to measure the forces
opposed to him, a mere matter of temperature
befools him; if the heat has expanded the air
there are fewer particles in the tube; then, should
his effort have been overmuch for the changed
condition, his notes fall sharply beyond the mark,
pass the line of true intonation, and if he is a
true artist his look of self reproach confesses
defeat.


The cup of the horn and the lips of the horn
player, the mouth-pieces of the clarionet and flute,
and reeds of oboe and bassoon, are engineering
contrivances very beautifully varied to do the
required work of displacement, and capable of a
most refined accuracy in digging holes or making
chasms in air, large and small, with sides cleanly
cut, or smoothly rounded off, in accordance with
artistic design. It is the nature of these chasms
to fall together with shocks or concussions, every-
one timed in regularity. It is also in the nature
of these chasms in air to occupy time in collapsing.
These shocks originate the vibrations in air which
we appreciate as music. It may be the shocks
recurring in the thirtieth part of a second, or in
any proportioned time up to the 1-30,000 th part of
the second; whatever instrument is the prime
mover in the action the result is the same, the
method is the same, and in no other way can we
obtain music. Ihe simplicity of nature can be so
easily traced that the simplest mind may follow
up the clue. Take a fan in hand and move it as
rapidly as you can, and you do no more affect
the air to sonorous vibration than does the butter-
fly with its wings at eight or nine strokes per
second; the depressed air compacted in pillows
under the butterfly’s wings lazily follows upwards
the insect, its motion thus supporting the little
fellow all the time it moves; if, however,
that same fan should be attached to machinery
capable of moving it to and fro one or


two hundred times a second, then sounds
would be produced as they are by the bee’s
wings.
The bee can accomplish that which the butterfly
cannot, because it can move its wings with a speed
sufficient to create a partial vacuum beneath,
wherein the particles of air from either side the
little chasm come into collision, rushing together
with a shock; that shock cannot be brought about
unless the air particles in mass are for a fraction
of time separated, and the cleanness of the division
between the two hosts will determine the intensity
of the shock. No shock, no sound.
The same with this whistle. If I blow lazily
there is only a rushing passage of wind, indistinct,
fluffy; but on blowing softly with a clean pre-
cision of current, then a clear low sound is heard,
rising with increase of pressure of the wind. This
changing pitch is analogous to that which is
observed in wing-motion, and which we shall find
in all orchestral wind instruments when the force
of action is increased. I showed you that I had
no power over the whistle to obviate this tendency;
and now I shall have to point out the very beauti-
ful compensatory devices possessed by our
orchestral instruments, and without which they
would fail in suitability to the demands of
modern music.
The mouthpiece of the clarionet may be con-
sidered as another form of whistle under different
mechanical arrangement.


The disc whistle has, as you will see, two
apertures, and through these a stream of air is
blown, which in its passage draws to itself the air
contained in the cavity, a portion of which it
carries away, thereby causing a partial exhaust,
and when a certain degree of vacuum has been
attained an internal collapse occurs, producing a
shock; the strength of the current can only bring
about a proportional degree of exhaust, requiring
a particular limited amount of time for its pro-
duction, the time being that fraction of a second
which we express as measuring “ pitch.” If the
strength of the current is increased, then the work
is accomplished in less time, —the pitch rises.
Always a question of work in relation to time;
thus one aperture is larger than the other, and if
the larger aperture is outward in position when
the whistle is blown through, the pitch is sharper
than when the smaller aperture is outward, —the
work of displacement to produce the shock is
easier by means of a larger outlet.
The mouthpiece of the clarionet is shown in
two illustrations, one of them being a view of
it as cut through the middle, the other an external
view, with the reed bound on to the beak by
cord in the original style, which I prefer to show,
as characteristic of the instrument until the very
recent date when our modern metal ligature was
introduced, superceding the old ways. The reed,
you see, is perfectly straight, and is thinned away
to a very fine edge at the tip; during the blowing,


the reed bends towards the curved line of the open-
ing called the table and springs back again, the
stream of air, acting as it does in the disc whistle,
creating a partial exhaust in the mouth-piece, pull-
ing the reed after it by the suction, and closing for
a fraction of a second the opening through which
the stream entered; the stream on its way to its
exit, being cut off, causes a vacuum in the bounded
space of tube or cavity behind it, a shock ensuing
on the exit of the pulse (in the same manner as
when a shot leaves the tube of a gun and a
report follows and the gun has kicked); the reed
then, being released from the suction, springs back
again, and the process is repeated, one such to-
and-fro motion being one vibration.
The enlarged space at the bottom of mouth-
piece makes the shoulder joint into which the tube
pipe fits, and thus the bore is continued of the
same diameter.
The tube of the clarionet is pierced with holes
covered by the fingers or by keys, and the pulse
passes out by the first opening which it finds left
uncovered. The instrument consequently affords
a succession of notes of defined pitch, and is
incapable of executing the glissando or glide, as
the hunters’ whistle does. Here, therefore, ’we
have a new order of things, length determines
pitch, the circular form of the whistle is ex-
changed for an elongated form like a tunnel, and
the conditions of the work are altered. For every
note a distinct degree of displacement of air is


necessary, and the intensity of the note depends
upon the celerity with which the displacement can
be accomplished; consequently this difficulty
arises, that the pitch varies with every change
Fig. 2. Fig. 3.
The old-time Clarionet Mouthpiece.
[in section) [fall view)
of intensity. Then it is that this beautiful con-
trivance of the reed comes in to solve the difficulty.
As regards the succession of notes, the player
literally makes a new reed for every distinct note


he produces. How so ? In this way. The higher
the note the shorter does he make the reed, by
causing the lip muscles to act upon it in a new
position in relation to the reed’s length, and he
is further able to modify the action of the reed
by the greater or lesser degree of pressure applied.
A skilful readiness in the use of these resources
is to the expert player a habit, almost instinctive
in sureness of adaptation to its ends. Hence when
the current of air sent in advance of the reed
is increased in strength, tending to sharpen the
pitch, the player, instantly modifying the action
of his lips, compensates that tendency and the
intonation remains true. So, by a law of natural
selection and survival of the fittest, only those
wind instruments which are capable of being
governed by these delicate compensations, remain
in our orchestras.


CHAPTER IV.
Weighing the Wind.
ONE hundred cubic inches of air weigh thirty-
one grains. The weight of air and the
variations in that weight are the source of
most of the perplexities and difficulties that beset
the orchestral player. It is important also that
you should clearly understand that the definite
weight of air makes possible the obtainment of
“ qualities ” of tone. One pipe differs from
another, whether it be a pipe orchestra or in
organ, chiefly if not solely, in the relation that the
working power bears to the definite weight of
air contained in the pipe acted upon. The dia-
pason pipe and the salicional pipe differ in theii
proportional diameters; the differences in their
qualities of tone are in the main determined by
the differences in the bulk, and consequently in
the weight, of air acted upon by a fixed strength


of wind. What is the size of a particle of air?
a child asks, and we cannot answer. It is
“measureless to man.”
Each particle has size and weight. The truth of
the statement can be proved by science indubit-
ably, although we are driven to speak of
a gg re S ates . an d to calculate by grains-weight and
cubic inches.
A pith ball has weight; in substance it is one
of the lightest of solids that we can find suitable
for our purpose. If we suspend a pith ball, say
of the size of a pea or a small marble, by a fine
thread so that the ball touches the side of a glass
tumbler or bell, and then set that bell in vibration
by drawing a violin bow across the edge of the
bell, the ball will be set in violent motion, swing-
ing away from and falling to again in rapid
repetitions, striking against the side of the glass.
Again, if we take a rod of glass or of metal, and
cause it to vibrate, not laterally or swinging to
and fro as a reed, but after the manner called
longitudinal vibration, excited by means of a
rubber, the rod will vibrate internally from end to
end, through all its particles, and although you
hear the sound of vigorous vibration, not any
sign of motion can the eye detect; yet, if the end
of the rod be brought near a suspended pith ball
so as just to touch it, the ball will fly off, as if
kicked by an invisible toe.
The pith ball placed on the sound-board of a
piano, or on a violin held in horizontal position


whilst sounding, will literally dance about and
exhibit the same kind of excitement. If you
were deaf to the sounds going on, you could at
all events witness the activity due to vibration.
You may, indeed, go a little farther, a little
nearer the verge of the unseen, by taking lyco-
podium seed and strewing the top of the violin
with a few million seeds. One stroke of the bow
and you will find that in the twinkling of an eye
a world of mountain and valley has been pro-
duced out of chaos. The seed has been thrown
up in ridges, lifted by the force traversing the
fibres of the wood, and when the shock has
passed the seed has fallen. By the picture left
upon the wood we can trace the track of the
whirlwind upon the surface, and tell where in
the underground commotion the shock was at its
greatest intensity. The seeds, fine as they are
almost to impalpability, and multitudinous, have
weight; their upheaval occupied time; and the
height to the tops of their mimic mountains
indicates the expenditure of absolute force. By
renewed vibration you could keep up a ceaseless
agitation of the seeds, changing the aspect of
their mountain ranges as a kaleidoscope by motion
changes anew its pictured symmetry.
In the hands of a philosopher the vibration of
lycopodium seeds in this fashion is a scientific
experiment. To the eyes of a child looking on
it is playing at “ kicking up a dust.” Of the two
I prefer the child’s notion. I cannot leave you


to your placid observation of the physiographic
distribution of lycopodium seeds. Look more
intently, look with the mind’s eye, and you will
perceive that these musical instruments, at the
same time that they are kicking up the pith balls,
and kicking up a dust, are also kicking up all the
particles of air reposing on their surfaces, sending
them up like balls to a distance; yes, to a mea-
surable distance, and having them fall back again
in myriads in impulses and shocks, the intensities
of which have been determinable by the intensities
of the vibration set up by the originating agent;
and the distances to which the various particles
have been thrown up have varied accordingly in
degree over the whole range of fibrous surfaces.
How vigorous is the vibration of such solid sub-
stances is known to the touch. Place but the
finger-tips in contact, and the bit of wood will
send a thrill through the framework of a man.
Students are voluble about wave motion, and
waves of sound, and are content to know little or
nothing concerning the nature of the shocks which
originate the motion. The theory of the trans-
mission of sound is a subject quite distinct from
this of the origination of sound,which is to be
studied separately. The particles of air engaged
in the transmission of vibrations do not move from
their place, but in the origination of vibration the
compulsion to move is the cause of the shock.
The sonority of a violin is dependent upon the
peculiar relations of surfaces to elasticity and


arrangement of wood fibres in the structure of
the instrument. The number of square feet of
wood surface presented to the air by a violoncello
is very great, since interiorly as well as exteriorly
the air is everywhere in contact with its fibres.
A pocket handkerchief possesses surface, and the
aggregate of fibres in it, taken merely as surface,
has extraordinary power of propagating vibration
to the air reposing thereon. If a tuning fork is
sounded, and if, after the sound has seemingly
died away, ceasing to be audible, the stem is
then brought into contact with a handkerchief
held up outspread, then the vibration will spread
along the fibres and the sound swell out with new
life; a striking instance of the susceptibility of
fibres to vibrations, and of the effect of surface
in their propagations. The string of a violin
may consist of a few fibres of silk or gut, and if
merely stretched on supports incapable of con-
ducting vibration, would be little able to effect
the air with sound. A string presents little more
than the surface of a line to the air, and has but
a very limited extent of motion.
Musical instruments, however, are cunningly
constructed to utilise this motion by transmission ,
by means of a bridge and a sound post, as in the
violin, or by one long bridge as in the pianoforte.
The string itself has actually great abrupt-
ness in its motion, and pulls with a jerk upon
the bridge as a rein jerked pulls upon the horse s
bit. The violin bridge in the shape perfected by


the genius of Stradivarius is, as you will see if
you think over it, so shaped as to fulfil the office
of a spring, with the elasticity of fibre disposed
as in a carriage spring, so that on its two
feet it sustains the whole down-bearing pressure
of the four strings. The wood of the instrument
which takes up the vibration of the string con-
sists of a multitude of fibres, each fibre in its
separateness is agitated, also the whole of the
fibres compacted together sways in elastic union,
with a full-fronted motion, and mass in motion
tells with musical effect. One fibre, one leaf,
one gnat may vibrate unheard by our ears; but
in their myriads these gnats and leaves and
fibres gather a resistless power,—we cannot choose
but hear.
Stringed instruments are powerful by reason
of the large compact army front they present.
1 hey present large kicking surfaces, and can
use them vigorously. The elastic vigour of the
particles of wood fibre greatly exceeds that of
the particles of air. In vibrative activity wood
fibre is tenfold more vigorous than air. Judge,
therefore, how the massed army of air recoils in
the shock of collision with the unbroken fronts
of the army of compacted wood fibre. In the
recoil be sure there is a time during which the
combatants are for a brief space separated, are
parted, the air hurled a distance, and returned in
swift rebound. The minute distances we are
picturing in our mind may be thought too small


to be estimated. The extent, however, of the
vibrations of the diaphragm, or iron plate, of
Bell’s telephone, has been approximately deduced.
M. Salet, by an ingenious application of the
glasses used to demonstrate Newton’s rings of
colour, has estimated the amplitude of Bell’s
telephone plate, at the 2 to 3 ten-thousandths of
a millemetre. As a further instance of minute
measurements of physical effects ventured upon
by philosophers, there is Lord Rayleigh’s state-
ment before the Royal Society, that in an ex-
periment he found “ sound audible whose ampli-
tude was less than a ten millionth of a centimetre.
There is a marked distinction between stringed
and wind instruments in the way in which force
is brought to bear upon air. In the stringed the
molecular structure of wood is the medium
through which the force is exerted, so that there
is a difference in the constitution of the com-
batants, so to speak, as of a difference in race.
It is wood in direct contest with air; but in wind
instruments we have to use air against air, and
by necessity within a very restricted area. The
energy in the vibration of the wood fibres is dis-
played over an extent of surface which is the
source of its efficiency, the spring from which
the volume of tone is obtained. In wind instru-
ments we have to endow air with a new character,
to give it an added strength for working our
will, and the want of area is compensated by a
capability for intensifying sounds which reaches


beyond any degree of power possible to a stringed
instrument.
The sonority of an assemblage of stringed in-
struments is, as regards intensity, in no way com-
parable to the intensity to be obtained from a
clarionet or a trumpet. The body of tone pro-
duced by a double bass in a room, grand and
full as it may seem, affects but a very limited
range in open air; but a trumpet or a post-horn
may be heard more than a mile away. How this
distinction of character arises I hope to make clear
to you, not as a matter of acknowledgment, but
of comprehension, why it is so.
Air having weight possesses also inertia, and
it obeys the laws common to ponderable bodies.
An important law peculiar to gaseous matter is,
that its density is commonly proportional to the
pressure that confines it, —that is to say, by
doubling the pressure we compress air into half
its former bulk; and on the other hand, on
removing half the ordinary pressure from any air,
it expands to twice its ordinary bulk. This
simple law governs everything we do in con-
nection with wind instruments in the process of
sound-making.
In acoustics, condensations and rarefactions
are common words. Considered in reference to
wind instruments, the least degree of rarefaction
is a first step towards a perfect vacuum; that is
to say, it is the least partial vacuum possible,
and between that and a perfect vacuum there are


but differences of degree; and, whatever the
degree, the denser masses of air on either side or
around any groups of particles of rarihed air, are
ready to rush together, and will do so unless held
back with for a time greater power, by a force
impelling in an opposite direction. This is saying
in other words that air disturbed will find its
equilibrium as water will find its level.
In order to get air under our control, we
surround or encompass it with a tube, and call
the tube a wind instrument. It is in fact a
machine constructed for a specific operation, and
as an air gun is constructed to ht it to propel
bullets, this is constructed to enable us to propel
invisible air particles after a particular fashion,
called vibration. In both instances the result is
that of obtaining “ vacuum,” with a difference of
degree; consequently the word “partial ” is pre-
fixed, because a perfect vacuum is not to be
obtained, and is not necessary, since sufficient
intensity is secured by eliciting degrees of partial
vacuum.
To complete a wind instrument we require a
mouthpiece of some sort. The mouthpieces are
fitted with reeds, which in regard to the part
they play are valves —flexible valves. These
reeds are formed of cane or of metal, or of
muscle, according to the class of instrument.
Thus, for clarionet, oboe and bassoon, cane is
used; for trumpets, trombones, horns and the
like, the muscles of the lip are used, veritably as


reeds; and for the reed pipes of the represen-
tatives of both classes in organs, metal reeds are
used.
Just for a while, and for the sake of uniformity,
the estimate of 31 grains weight of air may re-
main before us as a measure of proportion to be
identified. According to the law stated, the 31
may be doubled in the same bulk, or the number
of inches for the weight may be more or less.
Variations in degrees of temperature and of mois-
ture will cause differences in the proportion of
weight in relation to bulk. The knowledge that
air has weight enables us to affirm that in order
to effect displacement of air, a certain amount of
work has to be done; the further knowledge that,
under the ever varying conditions of the atmos-
phere we move in, the weight will of necessity
vary, makes us aware that the work required for
any given displacement will be greater or less in
amount, according to the influence of those con-
ditions, and the calculation to a nicety of the
amount of work necessary for the exact result
in pitch aimed at, is the greatest of musical
troubles.
The player, in blowing through the mouth-piece,
hurls, let us say, 31 grains weight of air against
the same amount of air in the tube; as the passive
air cannot slip aside, or get out of the way sur-
reptitiously, it is compelled to go forward in the
direction in which it is urged by the momentum
of the incoming current. Instead of free air the


player uses compressed air—that is to say, denser
air, air weighing more than free air for the same
number of cubic inches; therefore you readily
correct the first supposition of equal weight, and
think it may be doubled, say 62 grains weight
against 31, a guess quite inadequate; as a matter
of fact the player has the advantage of adding
weight to an extent hardly imaginable, unless
you have given serious thought to the question.
Moreover, we become acquainted with momentum,
or the amount of force resulting from weight
associated with velocity. Pursuing the operation
we shall find that the current of air in consequence
of its swiftness causes a great suction in its rear,
whereupon the flexible valve closes up, as a door
slams to, and the vacuum that ensues is increased
until the compressed pulse of air has reached the
outlet of the tube, when the process is reversed,
the external air rushes in with a shock, and, the
reed having swung back, if the action described
happens to be the last of a series, then equilibrium
is restored.
Passing for the moment the fuller details of
action when vibration is repeated at rates of 5 00
times a second and so forth, let us attend more
particularly to the lesson you should get by
heart ” about the weight of air. Weight, pressure,
velocity—these three are one in interdependence.
In the organ we can work out a practical illus-
tration of the problem. Compressed air is used,
and there is a very simple apparatus which pro-


vides a ready means for ascertaining how much
the air is compressed, and everything in the organ
depends on the how much.” The common
phrase is that we “ weigh the air,” and we say the
weight is three inches or five inches, as the case
may be, according to the extent to which the top
of the bellows has been weighted. A glass tube
formed in the shape of the letter U is partially
filled with water, and the water of course stands
at the same level in both arms; one arm is free
to the atmosphere, the other is fixed to the reser-
voir holding the compressed air; consequently
the pressure drives the column of water a certain
distance higher up in the free arm, so that the
water level stands lower in the arm invaded by
the compressed air. Then the difference shown
between the two levels is measured, and the num-
ber of inches is read off, and spoken of as the
weight.
An organ reservoir is expansible, it rises and
falls, and is generally a bellows with weights
placed on the top, and the glass tube for con-
venience is made with one arm prolonged, bent
over, and fitted into a case with a pipe-like foot
to be inserted into a hole in the bellows, or in the
sound-board, or wherever the ascertainment of the
pressure is required. Glass tubes of this kind
are used for many purposes of art, industry, and
science, and the proper name is “ difference mano-
meter,” because we read off the difference of levels.
Organ builders call it a “ wind gauge,” sometimes


we find it called an anemometer, and when used
in observatories for ascertaining the daily force
of the wind, the name anemoscope is applied to it;
the instrument then has a cup-mouth horizontally
Fig. 4
Organ
Builder's
W ind
Gauge.
a .. . top of tube into which the water is poured.
b . . . level up to which filled
c . . . foot admitting compressed air.
placed, and turned in the direction the wind
blows from. Hence we get a “ table ” very
suggestive and useful to all who care to think
about the nature of wind instruments, organ or


orchestral. The following table has been con-
structed to show the velocity and pressure on a
square foot of surface corresponding to different
heights of water supported in the gauge, and to
different familiar designations of the intensity of
wind.
Designation
of
wind.
Velocity
in miles
per hour.
Inches
of water
supported.
Pressure
on a
square foot.
Gentle breeze 3’25 croi ... o'S^oz.
Pleasant breeze 6'5 CVO4 ... 3*3302.
High wind 16*25 0*25 ... ilb. 502.
Storm or gale 32-5 r ... SIR 302.
Great storm 56 29 3- ... 151 b. goz.
Hurricane 7961 6- ... 31IR 302.
Tremendous hurricane 97-5 9- ... 461 b. 120 Z.
On comparing either of the two outer columns
(those of velocity and pressure) with the middle
column, it will be seen that the pressure increases
as the square of the wind’s velocity. Recent cal-
culations, founded on elaborate recording mech-
anism, give reports of wind velocities that are held
to be more strictly accurate, but these will not
affect our enquiry, which is directed to differences
of pressures.
The ordinary organ pressure is three inches, and,
referring to the table, you will see that when the
gauge records three inches the pressure per square
foot is 151 b. qoz. ; therefore; whatever the super-
ficial area of the bellows may be, that will be the
ratio per foot; the wood-top of bellows will of
course be reckoned in the weight. So also every


inch more of water supported tells that there has
been 51b. 30Z. added for each square foot. The
reservoir supplying the reed-stops is very com-
monly weighted to six inches. Notice how largely
the amount of the pounds must be made up on
the bellows. Then, again, in large organs the
wind frequently, for reservoirs supplying certain
reed stops, is fixed at nine inches, and we are
required to place the enormous amount of qblb.
120 Z. for every sq. foot of surface. In some
organs this even is doubled. Further, notice what
for any given pressure m;ist be the initial velocity,
of the stream entering at the foot of the pipe, and
think of all that is implied in a fact having that
significance. More astonishing still is the follow-
ing table, which we owe to the late Dr. W. H.
Stone, himself a player on many instruments.
Nothing of the kind has been done previously,
and this is due to the rarity of the combination
of conversance with the higher branches of science,
and practical skill with knowledge of wind instru-
ments. I have witnessed Dr. Stone’s experiments,
and give you his own words describing the
method for obtaining the data. “ The wind-chest
in this case is invariably the human thorax; the
experiments were made for the purpose of deter-
mining what the pressures within the thorax
actually were. A water-gauge was connected with
a small curved piece of tube by means of a long
flexible india-rubber pipe. The curved tube,
being inserted in the angle of the mouth, did not,


after a little practice, interfere with the ordinary
playing of the instrument. The various notes
were then sounded successively, and the height at
which the column stood was noted. The follow-
ing table was obtained as an average of many
experiments.”
Table of Pressures.
From lowest notes to highest
Oboe 9 in - to I 7in-
Clarionet ... ... ••• isin. 1° Bin.
Bassoon min. to 24m,
Horn si n - to 27m.
Cornet ••• min. to 34m.
Trumpet 12m. to 33m.
Euphonium ... ... ••• 3in. to 40m.
Bombardon ... ... ... sin to 36m.
Among orchestral instruments, the clarionet
displays a remarkable peculiarity. The order of
pressure is reversed; the lowest notes demand the
greatest pressure, and the highest the least, whilst
as will be seen, all the other instruments begin
with low pressure, and need powerful wind to
evoke the high notes. And what pressures they
are! The organ is weak, indeed in comparison.
Multiply 40m. at slb. 30Z. per square foot per
inch. The value of such a tabulated record can-
not be thoroughly recognized until you place the
former table of velocities, weights, and pressures
side by side with this, and examine them together:
then these figures will acquire a fuller emphasis,
and will sufficiently explain the cause of the


superior intensity characterising the orchestral
wind instruments. If a corresponding record of
Fig. 5.
Section
of
Organ
Pipe
imitative
of the
Clarionet.
the power of the human voice could be obtained,
no doubt the index would reach a high figure.


It has been estimated that an ordinary effort of
the voice, as in calling, is equal to Sin. pressure.
The engraving illustrates the mechanical details
of the organ pipes, imitative of the clarionet. The
pipe is entirely of metal, and is shown in section;
the solid lead block A holds all the parts of the
mechanism, and is enclosed by the boot B, which
takes the office of the mouth cavity in relation to
the orchestral instrument. C is the brass reed
tube. It is a half cylinder, and in earlier times
on account of it shape was called “ the shallot.”
The reed-tongue D is of thin brass, is wedged in
its place by the little piece of hard wood E,
and the wire F which can be slid up or down,
being bent in a way to give it elastic spring yet
firmly to press, enacts the part of the lip-muscle,
and determines the vibrating length of the tongue.
The upper portion of tube G extends in conical
shape to about 3m., when the diameter becomes
about 1 in., and from that point the tube (for the
clarionet stop and for this note) of perfect cylin-
drical form, is prolonged for about 15m. The
direction of the wind is shown by arrows. The
boot would probably be twice the length, and be
more pointed at the foot, but with this explanatory
comment it will be obvious that the strict represen-
tation here of the full length would have been
needlessly inconvenient.
As a matter for observation, I would ask you to
notice that the two clarionets differ in an im-
portant particular. The orchestral clarionet has a


reed tongue, perfectly straight, and on the mouth-
piece there is a peculiarly delicate curve. In the
organ clarionet these conditions are reversed, and
the curve is on the reed tongue itself. In both
cases the curve is the product of the most refined
art and the most patient skill, and exercises a
determining influence in the quality of the tone
produced by pipe and by player.
For reflection, thisweighing the wind tells
us in impressive terms that a musical instrument
is a wind-engine, in which, as a working force,
air is converted into wind; a change which, in its
physical effects, is as remarkable and momentous
as the conversion of water into steam.


CHAPTER V.
The Tone of the Air.
THERE is a limit beyond which bubbles cannot
be blown. Those beautiful aerial soap
bubbles, with their glorified rainbow colour-
ings so enchanting to youthful eyes, sailing away
in the blue sea of light, further sometimes than
eyes could follow, or may be—alack too often,
to our regret—no sooner blown than vanished in
sudden implosion, which we heard or seemed to
hear.
Explosion, some would say, but I consider that
■the act is one of implosion, the gradual thinning
of the envelope permitting the denser outward
air to break in, and implode the fairy-like globe.
Yes, blowing bubbles was a lesson in patience,
and sometimes, as I see it going on around me, I
recognize the lesson many times reflected in the
parables of our human doings.


The life of a bubble depended first upon the
fluid whereof the shell of the bubble was
fashioned, that is to say, it was necessary that
the fluid should have a permanent viscosity or
power of clinging together, and that we became
aware was to be obtained from the washing-tub,
—no soap-suds, no bubbles; next, it depended
upon the regulated strength of the stream of air
blown into the pipe by which we gave it being;
and, thirdly, on the warmth or temperature of the
breath we blew. If the constituents of the fluid
were too poor in soapy particles, it was very
trying work indeed to get our little fleet of globes
launched in fit sailing succession: how softly,
how tenderly we had to blow lest a shade too
much of ventured force should burst the fabric;
and as for the power of a bubble to rise, that was
due to relation of temperature, the warm ex-
panded particles of air within the filmy globe
being lighter than the particles of the outer air
surrounding it. This property of air, “ expansi-
bility,” we shall find greatly troubling our repose
in organ pipe experiences.
That there was art in the blowing of bubbles
we knew, and prided ourselves on our transient
accomplishments,—the science underlying the
simple process we did not know, and perhaps
should have been unable to awaken curiosity
thereon. Childhood has its pleasures in beauty,
;and, as year follows year, the beautiful never
ceases to attract; the interest in it grows excite


ingly in some temperaments, and when the mind
awakens to the perception of causation and con-
nection of phenomena, there comes an unconquer-
able irrepressible longing to penetrate to the
depths, to get to the roots of things, and trace
upwards from stem to branch, from branch to
leaf, from leaf to fruit, from fruit to seed; we
want to know , —which is, in other words, to say
that we are curious and want our curiosity
satisfied. Curiosity is an innate endowment
of the individual, and the extent and the direc-
tion of it altogether personal. Now, in the old
fashioned phrase, “between you and me,” I draw
upon your curiosity, and if you have it not, if
you don’t want to know about bubbles or organ
pipes, well, that is a pity, for I seek to make
both interesting.
I remember how, long after my bubble blow-
ing period, my passion grew for beautiful sounds;
how the rich rolling diapasons were to me a more
than royal presence, sought longingly, dwelt upon
lovingly, accepted with thankfulness of heart,
and the memory thereof carried away as a bless-
ing. Happy days of youthful enthusiasm, —then
I felt as Lowell felt, the vaulted cathedral was
to me the dwelling place of the organ, reared
for it, as by the Greeks the Parthenon was reared
for the Phidian statue of Jove to abide in. This
is one of the stanzas in Lowell’s pathetic “ Legend
of Brittany —-
58
THE MAKING OF SOUND IN THE ORGAN


Then swelled the organ: up through choir and nave
The music trembled with an inward thrill
Of bliss at its own grandeur : wave on wave
Its flood of mellow thunder rose, until
The hushed air shivered with the throb it gave;
Then, poisiug for a moment, it stood still,
And sank and rose again, to burst in spray
That wandered into silence far away.
Grand diapasons that stood there, towering
above me, reaching into the dimness of the arch-
ing roof, a very forest of mystery. How I longed
to know, to penetrate into hidden recesses, with
eager questionings and adventurous hopes,—for
youth walks with a halo of imagination around,
feels itself destined for enterprise, and believes
in “ knight errants,” and that there were giants
in those days. Time came introducing me to
larger life, gave me the coveted familiarity with
organs, made me serve in the ministry of sound,
and yet how many years it took me to find out
that the secret of the diapason organ pipe lay in
the one simple relation of phenomena,—viz.,
that there is a limit of tenuity beyond which air
cannot be drawn by air. The discovery was to
me of essential importance, provided the clue
whereby to trace the relations of the varied modes
of origination of musical sounds, and, after all,
it was a lesson simple as that of the philosophy
of soap bubbles.
Days of youth, how far away they seem. As
Faust would have again his fresh green spring,


so would we; but in these our times there is no
compact available of the kind that he speculated
in; the usurer he went to has retired from busi-
ness, and we have to go on getting grizzled, and
cannot cheat ourselves by any myth, nor be
cheated out of growing grey.
Air is of very ancient existence; an organ
pipe, very modern. When I speak of the tone
of the air, I mean of air in itself before it is
held in the pipe, or, rather, before the pipe is put
round it. This may seem a curious statement;
well, it is, and so intended to be. To enclose a
portion of common land we fence it round, and
in that field so enclosed there are millions of
blades of grass. If we move our fences it is
only to encompass another portion with other
and different millions of blades. So with air;
millions of air particles, the invisible common
air. An organ pipe is a certain receptacle,
formed in certain shape to contain a certain
quantity of air,—no, I don’t mean that, I mean
an uncertain quantity of air. Now ponder on
that definition, for it is the gist of the whole
question of the behaviour of organ pipes. You
know what an organ pipe is, and distinctly
remember some shapes,—for instance, on the
forefront of organs. That may be taken for
granted, and illustrations of organ pipes to be
given later on will place us on a common footing
of acquaintance.
But about air ? Perhaps you do not know what


a i r i S) —not precisely ? We breathe the air on
our first introduction to society, and go on daily
in benign familiarity with that exhilarating ele-
ment ; we burn the air in our lungs, and we use
the air to make speech with, and song, and noise
also, and all screechable abominations. Our
books tell us that air is an elastic fluid consisting
of oxygen and nitrogen, and that it about the
sum of general knowledge thereon; knowledge in
this case being the equivalent for accepted belief,
for we do not presume to know oxygen from
nitrogen if we saw either. Philosophers, scientific
men, do know; but, they have to think out the
further acquaintance, and to rely upon imagina-
tion to help them through, and it taxes the brain
power of very highest intellects to get the fuller
insight, the faith in the unseen, the truth that
foretells.
A few sentences convenient for our purpose
occur in Laing’s “ Modern Zoroastrian.” Re-
ferring to some abstruse speculations of Sir W.
Thomson, Clerk Maxwell, and others, he says;
“ It is singular how some of the ultimate facts
discovered by the refinements of science corre-
spond with some of the most trivial amusements.
Thus the blowing of soap bubbles gives the best
clue to the movements of waves of light, and
through them to the dimensions of molecules and
atoms, and the collision of billiard balls, knocked
about at random, to the movements of those
minute bodies, and the kinetic theory of gases.”
6i
AND IN THE ORCHESTRA.


Then he tells of investigations on “ the tenuity
of the thinnest films of soap bubbles just before
they burst, and when they are presumably re-
duced to a single layer of molecules.” The
methods of such investigations, he resumes,
“ involve such refined mathematical calculations
that it is impossible to explain them popularly;
but they all lead to nearly identical results which
involve figures so marvellous as to be almost
incomprehensible. For instance, a cubic centi-
metre —the hundredth part of a metre —of air is
calculated to contain twenty-one trillions of mole-
cules, —i.e., twenty-one times the cube of a mil-
lion, or twenty-one followed by eighteen ciphers;
the average distance between each molecule
equals ninety-five millionths of a millimetre,
which is about twenty-five times smaller than the
smallest magnitude visible under a microscope.”
Imagination is as necessary to us as it is to the
scientific men who attacks these problems, and
the conclusions arrived at are not mere fancies,
for the highest intellects of the human race ac-
cept them with serious regard. The commonest
surroundings of nature are not to be understood
without imagination, and the aid of analogy of
the seen and the unseen. I once saw a hogs-
head of beads, glass beads such as are sent out
to make up into the improper clothing in vogue
with black chiefs and squaws, cannibals, and the
rest of them, on occasion of introductions to
missionaries and explorers. It was a curious


sensation, plunging hands into millions of small
glass beads, every bead separate and a space
between each, spaces all the same, as surely as
the beads were all the same. When disturbed,,
they all closed in again, in the same relation; it
was impossible to leave a hole, for, as soon as
made, the beads fell in more quickly than the
hand could be withdrawn. Now I want you, in
imagination, to see the air as consisting of
particles, each distinct as beads are distinct, and
with interspaces surely there, separating particle
from particle. Further, recognise that air has
properties denied to beads. Air particles expand
under the slightest degree of increase of heat,
and contract when the heat is reduced. The
beads, when disturbed in the mass, fall together
under the influence of gravity,—the mass of air
when divided closes up under the influence of
elasticity.
Now you will see why I stated that an organ
pipe was of certain shape to contain an uncer-
tain quantity. The pipe is always full of air-
particles, but these are in quantity perpetually
varying as the temperature varies; additional heat
causes them to bubble over, and the pipe holds
less by millions than a moment before; what it
does hold is of lighter quality because the par-
ticles have expanded, and the mass being lighter
is more quickly acted upon by the vibrating
agency at the mouth of the pipe; consequently
the pitch of organ pipes is never absolutely fixed,


in the nature of things never can be. Happily the
ear can bear something less than perfection, but
the deviation from accuracy is too commonly a
source of perplexity to the organist, exasperat-
ingly sure, but seldom understood. The vibrating
agency at the mouth of the pipe is the real tone
producer.
The pressure of the air particles upon one
another is calculated by philosophers to be equal
to fifteen pounds to the square inch. This pres-
sure is, upon four sides of the organ pipe, ex-
cluded, so that all the influence of change is con-
centrated towards the mouth and the top open-
ing, resulting in greater and more energetic
activity at both these places. Now, supposing
that we have the temperature of air around the
organ registering sixty degrees, which is a very
ordinary condition at the commencement of a
service, and you may suppose any quantity of
millions upon millions of air particles enclosed
by the organ pipe. Now, suppose again that the
temperature rises to eighty degrees, a difference
quite within the range of experience. And now
let me tell you what will have happened in such
a case. One fourth of all those millions will
have been squeezed out of that organ pipe into
the open air, in order to leave room for the inner-
most fellow molecules to expand, as they cannot
help doing. Yes, millions crowded out and re-
jected.
When a soap bubble goes jaunting off into the


sunlight, the heat soon begins to tell upon it,
and each air particle—every one as good as its
neighbour—gets excited, wants more room, room
for the millions; and lo ! the jostle within strains
the subtle envelope to its utmost tenuity, the
limit of expansion is reached, —the bubble bursts.
This conduct is in the nature of air: is due to
its elasticity and its expansibility. Do not won-
der that an organ goes so terribly out of tune
under change of temperature; wonder rather that
the mighty creature, with its untameable energies,
is ever at any time under command, and is able
by manifold compensations to impress us with
the sense of its majesty and dignity, its composure
and calm beauty.
As I told you of the beads, the hand with-
drawn from the myriads of glistening globes
makes no register of its passage, so in like man-
ner with water (which itself is composed of
globes), it closes in upon that which divides it, —
and so, with the finer element we move in, we can
Cut through the incorporeal air
And leave no scar.
This was in truth a pastime I amused myself
with, and of a truth no scar, but a very memor-
able impress upon the mind, for in cleaving the
air I found that my swift sword “ put tongues
into those wounds,” and the air answered wil-
lingly in tones that caught my ear and arrested
it to attention. Surely the Dryads spoke Nature’s


oracles, and enounced her laws. How came these
tones into being? How am I able to evoke the
tones of the air at command ? What is their law
of existence, with no instrument to give tem
birth ? How is this possible ?
Questions are the charters of intelligence;
without them we cannot uphold the right of pro-
gress. What questions I put urged by curiosity,
and what answers I secured by investigation, you
will learn presently, when I tell my adventure
and what befel.
Perhaps some elderly readers may remember
how, many years since, I assisted at the Unbuild-
ing of an Organ, and wrote a description of my
experiences. Yes, in those days, eager in my
quest, I could worry round an organ like a terrier
round a wheatrick, and, as may be supposed,
constant observation left me bundles of unsolved
problems, and to bring these into law and order
it became necessary for me to seek independ-
ently for some law in the constitution of air,
governing certain observed relations of a particu-
lar class of phenomena, and in the end it was
my good fortune to find it. By a curious asso-
ciation of ideas my thoughts turned often to the
question of the causation of sound in trees by the
action of the wind. It was thus it became my
delight, on a stormy night, to go out and find my
best contentment in the concert of tree music, at
a time when autumn had stripped the leaves
66
THE MAKING OF SOUND IN THE ORGAN


away, all except perhaps that noted by
Coleridge:
The topmost twig that looks up at the sky.
Glorious music it is, too! Listen, and you will
hear the varied sounds of oak, ash, sycamore,
poplar, and birch; each can be distinguished by
very decided differences in the character of the
sounds brought out from their branches during a
high gale. How light and airy when the silver
birch waves her pendant tresses; how grand a
sweep of tone when the tall Lombardy poplar
bows his head whilst the storm king rushes by.
In the hot summer time, in the country, sur-
rounded by trees, how pleasant is the rain music.
Can any sounds be more soothing than the soft,
cooling music of the rain rhythmically falling
in a leisured plenitude, drop following drop,
millions after millions upon the thirsty leaves ?
We listen in a quiet of gladness to that full music
of the summer rain; no other sounds come upon
the air, all nature around is hushed, and is with
us listening to the rhythm of music in tranquil
flow, as it would never end, falling and falling
for aye:
Peacefully the rain song falling,
In continuous murmur falling,
Murmuring soft and low ;
Moving me,
And soothing me,
With a dreamy reverie,
Till I almost seem to know
Why the clustering roses blow


Dimly seem to understand
How silently in faerie land
The airy temples grow.
The infinitude of numbers, how it baffles us.
Millions of raindrops in succession; yet, with a
definite time distance between each drop—a dis-
tance in space, a distance in time. So it is with
all music. Music is nothing but motion, and con-
cerns itself with time, —only with time. When
the riven mass of beads falls together, although
it seems almost an instantaneous movement of
the whole, the movement occupies time; when a
mass of water is riven it closes up so quickly that
it seems to act in the briefest instant of time.
With air, however, it is different; we have to
conceive of the rate of motion, and this is the
attitude of mind that I would arouse you to
during the exposition following of tree music.
The common orthodox doctrine, of the friction
of the air being adequate to produce such musical
tones in the trees, was not at all acceptable to my
mind. My reasonings led me to very decided
conclusions as to the orgination of these tones.
Professor Tyndall tells how the friction of the air
upon the boles of the trees produces the music
of the pine forest. But Muller, the great investi-
gator, referring to another though similar question
concerning origination of sound—whistling—very
pertinently remarks : “ How the friction produces
the sonorous vibrations in this case is not evident,
for the sounds produced by friction of other


bodies arise from the periodic adhersion of the
body exciting the friction how this intermission
of adhersion of friction can take place between
the air and the solid borders of an opening which
do not themselves vibrate, is difficult to explain.
That the motion of the air traversing the opening
is periodically arrested by the friction can be
more easily imagined than proved.
Experiments were necessar y in chspr oof of
friction. Trees and branches sway, they do not
vibrate; unless to tremble, be to vibrate. Swaying
is indeed a to and fro motion, but the word
differentiates such motion from vibration proper,
or continued periodic motion. There are differ-
ences of rigidity or pliancy in the branches, in
the roughness or smoothness of the bark, and in
the stoutness and slenderness of the limbs, in
these several respects each kind of tree has its
general character and distinctiveness. It occurred
to me, as experiments with a gale of wind were
out of the question, that the swift rush of air past
the branch of a tree could be conversely illus-
trated by the swift stroke of a rod through still
air.
Upon this reasoning a number of rods were pre-
pared, all of them alike in extent of surface and
in smoothness, so as to eliminate the question of
friction, if differences were shown to arise. Each
rod was in section sword like, and each differed in
only one particular,—viz., in the thickness at the
back, for the front edge was sharp, as seen in the


figures here given. Striking a rod swiftly through
the air, as with a sword stroke, I found that each
rod elicited a musical tone; each rod a distinctly
different musical note : and thus was made evident
the Tone of the Air, belonging to air alone, and
due to the elasticity of the air. The rods, al-
though they give tones (each its own tone and not
another’s), do not vibrate, either in their length
or in their solid particles, nor is the extent or
the sweep of the stroke a determining cause as to
Fig. 6. Displacement Rods
(Cross Sections )
the pitch of the tones elicited. The rods are
like wood laths, five feet long, and all an inch
and a quarter in width.
Such length of rod, allowing a wide sweep, is
desirable in order to obtain high velocity in the
curve described by the upper portion, or that
farthest from the striker. Striking with the sharp
edge forward, a rod, in its swift passage, will
literally cleave the air, will divide it, and the
extent of that cleavage will be determined by the


thickness of the bacK of the rod; one cleaving the
mass of air making a gap three quarters of an
inch wide, another half an inch, another three
eights of an inch, another one quarter of an inch,
and the tones respectively heard will be treble
G, C, F, C, and always the same, provided that
the speed of the passage of the rod through air
is the same. Greater speed will cause a little rise
of pitch. The rods are not necessarily V shaped,
as round or any other form will exhibit the same
phenomena, only with less truth and clearness.
To show that these dozen or so of rods (varied
only in thicknesses of back), to prove that their
tones by swift cleavage of air were different,
amounted to little more than matter of passing
interest, unless beyond these facts we could dis-
cern the law by which they were related. The
law discovered itself in this way : two rods gave
sounds an octave apart, and these rods proved
to be one twice the thickness of the other at the
back. Invariably, and as expected, other ratios
of pitch from rods with proportionate differences
followed, two thirds the thickness always gave the
fifth, three fourths always the ratio pertaining
to the interval of the fourth. Here we have the
] aw __the pitch heard from air under cleavage
is inversely as the amplitude of the displacement.
But, having the law, what is the actual hidden
operation by which tone, originates?
Let us go back to our bubbles. When the least
degree of tenuity that the film will bear has been
AND IN THE ORCHESTRA.


exceeded, the bubble—does what?—falls to-
gether; for remember that the air within has been
rarer, and so compared with air without, is in a
state of partial vacuum kept up by the viscosity of
the film, and when that breaks up the denser
mass outside falls to, with a shock. You have
never thought of it in that way before; perhaps
not. Now a rod swiftly passing through air will
give rise to a travelling void or chasm of a nearly
triangular shape, and across this partial vacuum
the whole array of air particles on either side
leaps into collision, and the pitch of tone heard
is determined by the distance of the leap, or in
other words by the extent of the displacement
of free air.
The operation is the same when the mass of
air in a gale rushes past a tree, and through its
myriad branches raises one predominating swell
of tumultuous sound. Like a post in a river, so
is a branch in a rushing wind; the water closes
round that which impedes its way, and leaves a
hollow in a triangle formed as it streams onward
past each side and meets at a point forward; the
branch also impedes, and the air rushes past and,
meeting again from either side quickly as it can,
also leaves a hollow or partial vacuum in which
sound is born, and this because, as I have said in
an earlier sentence, there is a limit beyond which
air cannot be drawn by air; for although we have
divined a chasm and a vacuum, imagination must
exercise its faculty for keener vision, and perceive


that these will not suffice to give us tones. The
partial vacuum is caused by the suction exercised
by the rod in its swift passage, and the continuity
of the suction must be broken so as to produce
periodic shocks at intervals ot time distance cor-
responding with the pulses of vibration in the
pitch heard. You should imagine a chain, of
successively formed and successively vanishing,,
equal sized, but minute chasms, at equal distances.
A travelling chasm.
Perhaps it may help you if I suggest the assoc-
iation of ideas, —how the raindrops, forming a
chain of brilliance reaching down from the clouds,
originally a stream descending, became drops
because the limits of cohesion had been exceeded
under the influences of gravity and air. Then
again, we have the equivalent conditions in our
tree music; there indeed is not a travelling, but a
stationary chasm; and if it always remained a
chasm between the meeting course of two streams
of rushing air, we should have no sound. The
chasm has to be broken up and reformed, —as,
for instance, for the note G, it has broken up at
the rate of three hundred and eighty-four times-
per second, and the time between each operation,
according to nature’s way, is the time it takes
the air particles to leap into collision across the
chasm. The degree of vacuum got up by the
velocity of the wind measures the intensity of
the sounds heard. The sailors in a gale hear in
their ships the weird wailing sounds amongst the
73
AND IN THE ORCHESTRA.


fine cordage of the topmost sails, and the shrieks
and sounds are produced in the same way as, in
our drooping birch trees, is the high pitch of
tone which distinguishes them from oaks and
•sycamores.
Sometimes no doubt the sounds due to the fine-
ness of the cordage are mingled with sounds due
to the tenseness of the cords when the wind would
play upon them as it does upon the telegraph
wires, but the sounds I mean would arise when
■such cordage was not strained in right lines but
in arcs under the force of the wind, and these
sounds would follow—regulated, in comparative
degrees of pitch, by the thinness of the affected
cords, and by the strength and the velocity of the
wind.
The trees with thin branches give high tones,
and those of sturdier build yield deeper tones.
Much more I could tell you, but the chief interest
in these observations of facts and revealings of
nature’s ways is that it enables us to connect
phenomena, and to find that organ pipes and all
devices of mouthpieces of musical instruments
work under the same law of limit.


CHAPTER VI.
The Cleavage of Air.
WHAT an exhilarating sight it is, the vision
of the boundless sea again—the sea that
has nowhere all around, and only here
and there on its edges touches somewhere —and
is so absolutely free, so independent of us, that
in the fitness of things we can fancy it might
some day go nowhere, and leave us looking
upon a valley where once was the North Sea.
After the blank amazement, what fun there would
be; what a migration upon stilts; for, be sure,
not a few of the somebodies would venture forth-
with through slime and ooze, and weeds and
sands, and pebbles and boulders, carefully avcid-
ing great gulches with monsters of the deep
floundering and dreadfully despairing of the
way out. What a topsy turveydom of British
life not to go to the seaside next summer; what


indeed should we do without the sea ? Quite
sedately, seriously if it suits you, let me ask
where are the uses of imagination if you don’t
imagine? Or, what the use of Sir J. Crichton
Browne, telling us before the British Medical
Association of the hygienic value of the imagina-
tion? Very well, most admirable Crichton, I
imagine myself at the seaside for my health’s
sake. I sit down beside you on the shore. I
feel the wafture of the invisible air, know that
it is taking a mask of my face (no copyright, for
it cannot hx it). I look upon old ocean’s advanc-
ing waves, watch their quick retreat, and hear the
raking of the multitude of little pebbles jostling
one another and toddling ineffectively after them,
and then suddenly they stop short in their exer-
tions, and there is a moment’s quiet. These states
of consciousness come to us, and why? Because
we are bundles of nerves, not because we are flesh
and bone. Here let us pause and give thought
to that term, much abused in heedless common-
place, “ the nerves.” The nerves are the reins of
life, guiding and controlling every perception,—
they fix the degrees of receptivity that each in-
dividual has to the impressions of the outer world,
and after the will has determined upon action
they modify its decrees and regulate the effective
energy of every act. Only by the nerves do we
become even aware of our existence.
The physiological doctrine of “ the specific ac-
tion of the senses ” has a particular importance.


Each organ of sense responds only to a certain
kind of stimulation. Thus the optic nerve re-
sponds only to the agency of light, the auditory
nerve responds only to the stimulus of sound, the
tactile sense only to impressions of touch. But,
in effect, “ kind ” of stimulation resolves into “ de-
gree ” of stimulation; for the sense of touch is
aroused merely by simple contact, —by one act;
upon the auditory organ, which is a still more
delicate organ of touch, we need numbers of
contacts, up to thousands; upon the organ of
sight we require millions of contacts; for whether
we call them impressions or shocks, aerial vibra-
tions or etherial vibrations, they are all in the
nature of contacts, differing only in degrees of
motion. And, for our perception of such degrees
of motion, each organ of sense has its definite
office, not to be delegated to another sense.
Sever one nerve and all the network of nerve
fibrils emanating from it becomes dead, insensible,
and life is as if it were not. Those particular
degrees of motion recognized by us as sound, are
perpetually going on around us, and were the
auditory nerve destroyed we should certainly
perceive much of the vibratory agitation as
“ touches,” but with a very different signification
to that given to us by the organ of hearing.
That long raking sound of the pebbles rolling
after the wave, is made up of a multitude of con-
tacts of the pebbles with one another, and of the
tremor of vibration in the interior of the pebbles
;;
AND IN THE ORCHESTRA.


from these shocks. In the same way, if we strike
a slab of stone, or a bar of iron, or a block of
wood, an interior agitation is set up which works
to the surface; the vibrations of the molecular
structure seek the path of greatest ease, —that is to
say, they free themselves from the agitation by
throwing it to the surface, and the shocks are then
transmitted to the molecules of air there lying;
and the molecules of stone, of iron, of wood, are
able to do this because they are quicker in their
motions than are the molecules of air.
Here is an old anchor awkwardly lying on the
beach, reminding me (oddly enough) of the famed
statue of the dying gladiator. How ever that
association comes I know not, but I strike the old
out-of-work anchor a rousing blow, and receive a
response of ringing tone, and I notice that the
sound continues after the blow, and the tremor
can be felt, too, giving a tingling sensation to the
hand. The round ring of the anchor, drooping
as a model head, that I also strike, and find it
gives a tone of different pitch. The disturbance
thus set up we call vibration, for it is a to and fro
motion, common to so many solid substances
when similarly disturbed. Woods and metals can
be caused to transmit vibrations of different rates
from other sources—for instance, from a tuning
fork but each also has a rate of vibration of its
own in the mass, which rate can be determined
by a single blow, because we compare the sound
heard with other sounds of known musical pitch.


The sound, being musical, indicates that the mass
from which it proceeds is regular in its structure,
is in fact an aggregation of particles that are all
related alike and possess an equal elastic resis-
tance, and the elasticity determines the rate of
motion in vibration.
The distinction which I wish you clearly to-
keep before you is that, in transmitting vibrations
the response is one for one; but that, under the
commotion excited by a blow upon the mass, the
answer is many vibrations for one. Now the
question all this bears upon is, how is it that
from air you can get the responding one for one,
but not many for one? The oracular answer
should be, because you cannot get at it from the
outside. Air has no outside. As I have shown
you, the cleavage of air is necessary before you
can get tone from it, —can elicit its own tone.
In a block of wood, or metal bar or slab, there-
exists, after the blow, a residual vibration. But
air will not harbour residual vibration.
Air is a bad conductor of sound; you would not
think so, but it is so; and all the better for us
that it is so, else the superabundance of sound
might prove confusedly disturbing. No, the air
is a faithful messenger, delivers the message as
received, neither adding to, nor taking away
therefrom.
The air is a vast ocean, without, for us, any
surface of its own; not any possible Gallic ex-
tension of Eiffel towers would place us outside


it. Air has no outside, but is itself the outside of
everything around us. It takes the mould of
everything, yet is imprisoned by the boundaries
it encompasses. We hear the bell sounding afar
on the white gleaming rock; the air bears to us in
a bee line every little shock, repeating each from
particle to particle, till they come upon the ear and
enter in, delivering the message for the ear to
interpret; yet withal what a thin line the mes-
sengers travel along! We could almost imagine
seeing the aerial roadway, like rays from the sun.
A lane of light above the waves, so clear, so fine;
a gossamer thread out of all that surging vibra-
tion direct and straight; one to you and one to me;
strung with beads as tiny dewdrops on the
strands of the spider’s web; for we are but as
points at ends of a line of vibrations, and as far
as we are concerned all the rest of the sound
goes nowhere, —or, we know not where, and
perhaps in some way these are, for all that con-
cerns us, convertible terms.
Nature is tantalizing in her simplicity. We
look for something new, and, 10, it is the
same fact only put before us in a new fashion.
Curiously enough, in the inner ear, past the drum
skin, past the little oval window impenetrably
glazed, past the vestibule and all knowledge of
air, imbedded in liquid, like grasses tremulously
waving, the delicate bundles of sensitive nerve
fibrils, thousands in number, become the sustainers
of residual vibrations, and these residual vibra-


tions become the source of all our pleasantness
and delight in the mere to and fro motions, the
periodic succession of minute shocks, of the
tremors which are the cause of sound, and the
basis of musical sensations.
In order to understand the question of residual
vibration, consider that a wheel may be turned
at a rate so rapid that the separate spokes are no
longer to be seen, but blend in one impression
as of a solid revolving disc. So a lighted stick
may be whirled round so rapidly, that the
travelling point of light is no longer to be fol-
lowed by the eye, which sees only a perfect ring
of light. These well known phenomena are due
to what is called the persistence of vision, for
the nerve sensation of vision continues after the
passage of the exciting object. In a similar man-
ner, the organ of hearing is endued with persist-
ence of audition, and after each shock—after
each single vibration—the excitement continues
for a brief interval of time, and if the little shocks
follow one after another with a sufficient degree
of rapidity, then the sensation excited by one
remains until the next arrives. It is this persist-
ence that constitutes the blending condition which
is essential in sounds called by us musical, giving
us a sense of smoothness, so that the ear is not
conscious of the real separate succession of shocks
or vibrations of which every musical note is made
up as we can indubitably prove to be the fact
by methods familiar to science.
8i
AND IN THE ORCHESTRA.


Residual vibrations are thus seen to be of para-
mount importance, as giving character of dis-
tinguishing nature to instruments of music, and
also as effecting our own organizations as
governed by bundles of nerves, which are played
upon by outward phenomena.
The American physicist, Prof. Alfred Marshall
Mayer, has pursued the enquiry in reference to
what are called “ beats ” in music, and by experi-
ments has ascertained how, in such wider relations
of time as these relate to, the residual vibration
plays a part in the conditions of harmony. Pre-
sently I will give you a table of calculations he
has made of the durations of the residual sonorous
sensations, which will interest those who intend
to go on thinking.
But just now we must fix attention on the bell
we were speaking of, and show how it is connected
with the question of “ the cleavage of air.”
If sand is strewn upon a bell, on the bell re-
ceiving a blow, the sand will leap up, and gather
in lines as mimic ranges of mountains, and these
are called nodal lines, the vibratory movements
at such places being in opposite directions. If
very fine powder such as lycopodium be mixed
with the sand, it will not move with the sand to
the nodal lines, but will form little heaps in the
centre of the segments, which thus represent val-
leys, and these heaps will be in a state of violent
agitation, with more or less of gyratory movement,
so long as the vibration continues.


This phenomenon, after long baffling the re-
search of philosophers, was shown by Faraday to
be due to indraughts of air and ascending cur-
rents, brought about by the vibratory agitation of
the metal. This little fact shows us how real is
the displacement of the air that it can carry with
it the light powder, and then, as the excitement
subsides deposit it quietly in mounds: it tells
likewise how strong must be the excitement on
the surface of the metal, every particle vibrating
with an energy capable of lifting the grains of
sand and driving them forward in the course the
movement is taking. Without the demonstration
by means of the lycopodium powder, few would
realize that the viewless air was as agitated, and
in literal truth more agitated, than the particles
of sand. Consider this then, —the vibratory
movement in wood or metal is far more rapid
than it is in the air, something like fourteen or
fifteen times. The layer of air-particles resting
on the bell may be vibrating under the influences
of many surrounding disturbances, and the bell
as to its essential tone be not impressed thereby;
but, as regards the metal, the particles of metal
in contact with that layer of air, in whatever least
degree disturbed, cannot do other than transmit
their agitation to the air; and so of intensity, the
air takes up every degree of intensity.
Imagination is only a higher kind of believing,
and science helps us to believe in things we cannot
see, in acts we cannot be spectators of. Concus-


sion cannot take place without in the act disengag-
ing heat. I strike these two large pebbles together,
I hear the sound, but am doubtful about the heat
if I rely only on what my sense of touch tells me
of, for the pebbles give no evidence of heat; yet
what science says is true, as surely as it is true
that the flush that blushes on a maiden’s cheek
from some excitement within, warms the air that
passes over it.
Grant me that belief, and now I want you to
believe in the unseen movements of air, for
vibrations pass like heat from particle to particle,
and, in order to obtain sound, some act of con-
cussion is necessary. How very minute these
may be we can hardly conceive, except by the
aid of comparisons and analogies. We reason
from the known standards of measurements, to
find out actualities of relation which imagination
alone can take cognizance of. The exceeding
smallness of things that are visible leads the
mind on to the assured belief that there are verities
equally definite, although they must ever remain
invisible.
An interesting example is this. In micro-
scopical and other scientific work, very fine sus-
pending fibres are necessary, —such as silk fibres
and the threads thrown off by spiders. Mr. C. V.
Boys, F.R.S., has succeeded in making fibres bv
mdt.ng rock crystal in an oxyhydrogen jet, d
he sl ! bstanc u e mto rods of g reat fineness, and
then attaching them to the tail of an arrow, which


is shot from a crossbow as the rod is again
melted: and the ends of these fibres are the finest
things known to exist, because it is impossible to
trace them up to the end with a microscope; they
are certainly not more than one millionth of an
inch in diameter. They can be handled, though
the eye cannot see them nor the microscope reveal
their existence. Sir John Lubbock states that,
with the most perfect microscope, the smallest
particle that we can see is about the hundred
thousandth part of an inch. That marvel of our
day—the phonograph—makes traces on wax too
fine to be seen in some places, yet that they are
definitely there is proved by their effect; they are
made by motions of the air, and back again excite
motions in the air which appeal, strong as the
voice, to the ear.
Remember though that there is no ear located
within machine or behind the disc, no hearing
apparatus to translate these motions into intelli-
gent appeal. Motion is all that the disc is capable
of. We outside the machine supply the ear, the
attentive ear. How delicate the motions of that
metal disc poised on a spring,—yet how infinitely
more delicate is that little membrane taking the
same part in the organ of hearing. How sur-
passingly tender must be those aerial shocks which
it takes up and magnifies for us, so that the nerves
tremble and the brain is overborne by the tremen-
dous majesty of sound presented to it, by merely
an active little hammer knocking at a window.


Tapping lightly as the fairy finger of Queen
Mab, or thundering, as with the hammer fist of
Thor.
Now set yourselves thinking of the small effects
that the small distances implied, while we talk
further of shocks and concussions,—yet, small
though they may be, how real they are.
In producing sonorous vibrations in air, every
musical instrument displaces a certain amount of
air, there is a transition of impulses from one
medium to another, and between these two there
is a line of demarcation where sound originates.
In some earlier chapter, I have said that a violin
is a kicking machine, and, indeed, is of such
design as to be a kicker of some energy. The
bell, and the old anchor, and the pebbles, come
into the same category. The layer of air which
lies upon the bell, and everywhere encloses it, is
thrown off from its surface when the bell vibrates;
each vibration is an energetic act recurring at a
rate equal, say, to two hundred and twenty times
in a second, and the intensity is distributed in
divisions of greater and lesser strength,—as is the
nature of surface vibrations. The particles of
metal kick up or away the particles of air, the
metal particles retreat rapidly, so that before the
air particles recoil there exists, for a brief space,
a line of cleavage between air and metal; then,’
in that partial vacuum, comes the recoil of the air
and the transmission of the concussion from par-
ticle to particle through the surrounding air, all


with that rapidity of recurrence which we by car
recognize as sound, —the space-distance is minute,
the time distance is brief.
The cleavage of air is here equivalent to that
obtained by the rods described in the previous
chapter, and the extent of surface is able to yield
a fulness of tone through varying intensity, which
is due in great measure, to the inherent capacity
of the metal favouring residual vibrations. The
same may be said of the violin family, the dis-
tinguishing beauty of tone being due to persistent
residual vibration of fibres, with great extent of
surface to enhance the influence.
You should observe that, although in producing
tone in the air by cleavage with the rods, a de-
finite extent of displacement is necessary for each
particular tone, for there is no intermediate agent,,
and the air acts solely by a law peculiar to itself
in this mode of action; but, when instruments
themselves define the tone, they enforce the re-
currence of vibrations at the rates demanded. In
these relations, therefore, of transferred vibra-
tions, the cleavage distances may be very minute,
and such differences as may exist be dependent
upon intensity of excitement rather than upon
any particular relations of pitch, whilst the large
extent of surface accounts for the effectiveness of
the aerial displacements.
Cleavage brings in its train a condition of
partial vacuum, and, wherever a partial vacuum
exists, suction is a necessary corollary. Suction
8/
AND IN THE ORCHESTRA.


N
V
B
D
C
c
Cl
64
128
256
16
26
47
16
1
26
iV
=■
•0625 se c.
■0384 „
■0212 „
G x
348
60
1
60
=
•0166
99
c*
512
78
1
7E
=
•0128
99
E 2
640
90
1
90
=
•oin
99
G*
1024
log
1
109
=
•0091
99
C3
1
768
I 35
•0074
99
is, as Grant Allen defines it, a separative energy.
It is, in fact, the ruling energy in all musical in-
struments, and essentially supreme in wind
instruments.
At this point we may well give attention to
the promised table of results of Professor Mayer’s
experiments on the duration of sensations of
sound. The problem afforded by beats in music
is too wide for consideration just now, and all
we need care for is setting out of the facts
ascertained concerning the ear’s sustainment of
vibrating energy after the primary reception of
impulses:
“Column N gives the names of the notes
column V their respective vibrations per second,’
column B the smallest number of beats per second
which the corresponding sound must make with


another in order that the two may be in harmony,
or, as it is generally stated, may make with the
other the nearest consonant interval. If forty-
seven beats per second of C l , for example, blend,
then the sensation of each of these beats remains
on the ear of a second. In column D are given
these durations in fractions of a second. As these
fractions are the lengths of time that the sensation
of sound lingers in the ear after the vibrations of
the air near the drum skin of the ear have ceased,
they are properly called the durations of the
residual sonorotis vibrations.
“You will observe that the duration becomes
shorter as the pitch of the sound rises. Thus,
while the residual sensation of C is of a
second, that of Cs is only The knowledge
thus acquired aids us in the following calculation :
the table shows that if C [ is sounded with a note
which makes with it forty-seven beats in a second,
then these beats will fuse into one smooth con-
tinuous sensation, and the notes must be in har-
mony. What is this note? It is found in this
manner : C 1 is made by 256 vibrations per second,
and the note which will make just forty-seven
beats with it in a second must make 256 plus 47
or 303 vibrations in a second. This number of
vibrations makes a sound a little lower in pitch
than jjE 1 . This is the minor third of C l . Mak-
ing similar calculations throughout five octaves,
we have found the nearest mnsonant intervals:


Of C is its major third.
„ C „ minor third.
„C 1 „ minor third, less £ semitone.
„C 2 „ minor third, less £ semitone.
„ C* „ second.
„C 4 „ second, less £ semitone.
Observe that the interval of these residual sensa-
tions contracts as we ascend the musical scale.”
The calculations are derived from a series of
experiments, and will bear thinking over. There
is another passage that I note in connection:
“ If flashes of light or beats of sound succeed one
another so rapidly that the sensation of one flash
or beat remains till the next arrives, you will
have continuous sensations that are not unplea-
sant. In other words, continuous sensations are
pleasant, but discontinuous or broken sensations
are disagreeable.” You will not fail to perceive
that sounds that are musical derive their
character as such from two conditions, and that,
where we have read beats, we may substitute
“ shocks ” or “ concussions.” The first condition
is “ periodicity ” of shocks, impulses, or con-
cussions, under the general term vibrations, —the
second condition is “ rapidity ” of such recurring
vibrations, and the sound is musical to the ear
because the periodic shocks blend by means of
residual vibrations.
Further, you must understand that this so-
called “continuity ” is an allusion, for the separa-
tivity of each vibration remains exactly as isolate


and successive as at the instant of origination.
But the transformation is Nature’s way of making
up with the old stage property : it is the same
thing again with a new mask.
Having stated that air does not harbour
residual vibrations, and having pointed out, not-
withstanding that we are conscious of the existence
of such in objects apart from ourselves—inasmuch
as that they give distinguishing tone qualities so
characteristic to one class of instruments, the
violin family, which holds residual vibrations very
strongly—there is certainly some appearance of a
puzzle, if not of actual contradiction. The
reflective reader, given to pondering on the seem-
ing paradoxes that I dispense, may very naturally
ask, Then, how do we get our perception of these
effects? Some might even demur to the assumed
indications, and say that, in the violin the quality
is accounted for by the series of higher harmonics
known to be associated in its tones; but such
argument is negatived by the fact that all sonor-
ous substances do not alike give these effective
harmonics, yet, of the duration of sound elicited
from them, we have no doubt. As those quartz
fibres that I referred to, though unseen, can be
touched, so these residual vibrations in many
substances are palpable, and cannot be without
effect upon the air; and the effect, a residual effect
of undamped or lingering vibrations, musically is
as of a cloud of tone enveloping and pervading
succeeding tones, as, for instance, in the harp.


the peculiarity of which is that the sounds mostly
continue undamped. It is the same in the violin
when the strings are plucked; but, when acted
upon by the bow, we must regard the same cloud
of tone as equally pervading through the succes-
sive vibrations of each note. We know how
very distinct is the quality of sound from a
plucked string from that of a bowed string.
Well, residual vibrations are undamped vibra-
tions, or partially damped only, issuing with
lessened amplitude, and, in their tender impulses,
nor disturbing harmony, for though ever weaken-
ing, they are, in their time distances, exactly in
correspondence with the originating impulses, and
are transmitted to the air with the same exactness,
and received by the ear as truly distinct as those
of the larger impulses within which their motion
pervades. Thus we can understand how their
presence causes quality distinct from harmonic
quality, for these are of the original stock, are
of the first generation; and when they mingle
with third and fourth and other generations,
another new and compound quality necessarily
arises. Therefore, in estimating violin tone, we
cannot fully account for its quality without this
superadded cloud, associated with the series of
harmonics, as an essential whereby it is known
to the ear as violin quality.
Wind instruments differ from stringed instru-
ments in this particular effect: The violin holds
these residual vibrations strongly, whilst the organ


pipe does not vibrate in its substance as a sound-
board, but gains sonorousness by resonance, and
in its action, as I hope to show you, illustrates
the cleavage of air.
Wood organ pipes may be found to vibrate on
two of the sides, but is not conceded by builders
that the vibration conduces to any real advantage
in sound. The ideal is by solidity and weight to-
obtain firmness in all pipes.
You can try the experiment of cleavage of air,,
as you sit in your chair, with a pencil as illustrat-
ing one diameter and a penholder as illustrating
a lesser diameter. Strike one through the air
sword-like, and listen to the pitch of the tone
that follows, then with the other make a similar
stroke through the air, and you will find that
difference in diameter has elicited a different pitch
in air. The pencil and penholder do not them-
selves vibrate, —the tone comes from cleavage of
air.
Any stick or rod will afford similar means for
experiment, a metal stair rod gives the same tone
as wood if diameters are alike.


CHAPTER VII.
Interviewing an Organ Pipe.
THIS should be pleasant pastime to a musical
enthusiast. Fairly carried out, something
might come of the enterprise. If one could only
get on a friendly footing, and have a real good
•conversation personally conducted—an unabashed
questioner on one side and a complacent replicant
on the other—what a world of trouble in thinking
it would save. Then, to know that one would
have the strict truth in reply to every question,
no finesse, no fencing, no deprecative humility,
from an uncorrupted organ pipe; the prospect of
so delightful a case of interviewing made easy
would open a volley of questions that have been
years in reserve.
But the fancy has to go,—one more unattain-
able. When you cannot get the victim to speak,
it is, I understand, permissible for the operator


to supply both questions and answers; at least,
by inference, it may be held to be the recognized
custom. My disposition being so very retiring,
I confess that, whatever my eagerness for know-
ledge, opening a conversation is apt to be not
a little perplexing. How many things I should
like (to know about the organ pipe. True. I
made his acquaintance many, many years ago,
and have found out “ a lot of things ’ about him,
his ways, nature, habits, and behaviour, but have
not yet got to the bottom of his character. Know
all the family, all alike very reticent, and won’t
let you too easily into their little mysteries.
The questions that one might ask seem to be,
perhaps are, endless. Experience confirms me
in the desire ever for further investigation; there
is much that, to the practical eye, is hidden, and
the problems are deep. So all of us say. I go
afishing.
By the way, allow me to introduce you to Mr.
Diapason Organpipe, a most admirable com-
panion, deaf as a post, and looks much like one,
and won’t speak unless blown up.
As regards details, this may stand as a repie-
sentative organ pipe. Actual proportion is not
considered, and, indeed in different varieties the
proportions differ. Only the lower portion of a
pipe is set out in illustration ; for a pipe having a
mouth of the height shown, we should require,
for its full length, many additional inches, and, as
it would not be worth while to enlarge the page


to that extent, you are left to imagine the pipe
full and complete. It is not in my province to
teach you organ building; all that I aim at in
these pages is to bring to your comprehension my
idea of the unseen process, —how the organ pipe
works to make sound.
Vertical
Section
of a Flue
Organ Pipe.
Fig. 7.
Looking at the illustration, Fig. 7, you see all
the parts which constitute a speaking pipe, called
a “ flute or flue pipe.” How very few in number.
How extreme the simplicity of means, for ends
so various,—beauty and delicacy, brightness and
sweetness, dignity and strength, in every kind of
96
THE MAKING OF SOUND IN THE ORGAN


degree, all attained by simple modifications of
the several parts, which, like the features of the
human face, combine in changes of infinite
variety. This illustration, which is a vertical
section of a wood pipe in outline, 1 will describe
by the lettering. A stands for the body of the
pipe. B is the block, which is shaped according
to the builder’s decision of what is desirable for
the particular stop, for some stops it is more cut
away than others, and the block influences the
fullness and direction of the flow of wind before
the outer edge of its upper surface is reached; in
some instances the cavity below the block is more
or less filled, and always with a purpose in view.
C is called the cap; it faces the block, and is
adjustable, is held by screws, whilst the block is a
fixture, glued in its place; this cap is usually hol-
lowed out in a greater or less degree, and with
slope upward, which, as you can readily imagine,
is designed to control the way of the wind and
give it a certain rebound.
As first made, the cap would meet the block
at its upper line, and close the cavity; its office,
however, is to define a windway of very exact
degree, and its upper edge is carefully pared
away with a chisel: the little linear space thus left
between the cap and the block is termed the wind-
way, and the minutest shaving taken off beyond
that decreed for the particular pipe, will disturb
the relative balance of tone, pipe for pipe. So
fine is the adjustment here, that you would hardly


understand how it can be reckoned by rule, yet
it is most exactly prescribed, and is measured by
the degree of admission of a thin wedge,—
literally, it can be done to a hair’s breadth; so
important, that if the line of way exceeds its
proper space, the cap requires to be planed again,
and refitted. D goes by the name of beard, or
lower lip, and is fixed on the cap; sometimes
it is made large, and the purpose it serves will
be explained subsecmently. Often the beard is
omitted altogether, and is little needed for the
smaller pipes. The same may be said of E,
projections on either side of the mouth, very useful
when the pipes are of a class requiring them,
but in many pipes absent. Ears can be modified
in size and shape, yet they may be considered
fixtures, and we shall have to speak of them
again when describing the further development
of their functions in metal pipes. F is the foot,
which is fitted into the bottom of the pipe; it is
of uniform bore, and is frequently found to
be partially plugged with cross pieces of wood,
driven in according to judgment for each pipe.
G shows the bottom of the foot thus treated.
One would say, why not have the bore made
of reduced size, accurate to scale • but the builder
replies to your happy thought, that it has been
tried before now, and, on the whole, the builder
knows that, by the old fashioned way, he can
control the results that he wishes to obtain, better
than by any other method.
9§
THE MAKING OF SOUND IN THE ORGAN


The flush of wind is thus determined, and, to
all intents and purposes, the wind pressure is
thus modified to order for each pipe.
L is the lip, which is wedge like in appearance,
it is really the boundary line of the upper range of
the opening M, termed the mouth; according as
the lip is cut high or low, so is the quality of
tone, and thus in the several stops of the organ
the height of the mouth varies, and for each the
exact measurement is set out by rule suitably in
relation to the diameters and the lengths of the
pipes, and to the classification of the pipes as
“ stops,” which have their variety of tonal charac-
ter solely by reason of such differences.
When air (which has been compressed by bel-
lows in a weighted reservoir) is blown into the
foot of an organ pips, the cavity below the block
becomes a chamber of dense air, the particles of
air being squeezed together beyond endurance, so
that they seek to escape from the dark hole
through the narrow fissure we have called the
windway, and you hear a rushing wind at the
mouth of the pipe. So far I have described all
the details concerned in producing sound in an
organ pipe, and a marvellously simple piece of
mechanism it is; active in results, able to stir
men and women to the depths of their nature,
and also to shake them on their feet. As truly a
mechanism as the steam engine is, and that dark
cavity, like the cylinder of the steam engine,


holds the working power. Air has become wind,
—a working power.
At this stage of insight into the mechanism, it
is natural to the imaginative mind to ask how the
issuing air acts to produce that effect in the pipe
which we name vibration, or rapid periodic mo-
tion of the column of air in the pipe, recognised
as musical sound. At the period when the inves-
tigation first occupied my attention, the scientific
world contented itself with generalizations about
organ pipes, deposed to what it thought the organ
pipe ought to do, and thereupon assumed that it
did so.
The books of science taught then (as in the
main they teach now) that an organ pipe of
certain stated pitch must be of the specified
length set down according to learned deductions
as its right length, and the usual explanations
followed of condensations and rarefactions, of
nodes and segments, and wave lengths. One book
copied another; but the pages, brimful of science,
were provokingly barren of any genuine elucida-
tion of the questions which haunted the brains of
thoughtful enquirers, and which could not be laid
by figures and formulas, aided by imposing
mathematical signs. Descriptions were not all
sufficing to the student: he wanted to know the
why and wherefore, to certify for himself how
vibrations came to be vibrations, and how the
action accomplished the attributed results. In
one treatise after another, statements are found
100
the making of sound in the organ


that “ the air is driven against the sharp edge of
the lip or mouth,” or “is split upon the sharp
edge, and by concussion caused to proceed inter-
mittently,” and, again, “the air strikes against
the upper lip, and a shock is produced which
causes the air to move in an intermittent manner”;
but how the agent actually produces in such
manner the result called vibration, not an inkling
of enlightenment is afforded.
In Professor Privat-Deschanel’s “ Natural
Philosophy,” translated by Professor Everett, a
work highly esteemed as a text book, the follow-
ing passage occurs in explanation of the organ
pipe, and is rather fuller in detail; “ The air
from the bellows arrives through the conical tube
at the lower end, and before entering the main
body of the pipe has to pass through a narrow
slit, in issuing from which it impinges on the thin
end of the wedge placed directly opposite, called
the lip. The lip is itself capable of vibrating in
unison with any note lying within a wide range,
and the note which is actually emitted is deter-
mined by the resonance of the column of air in
the pipe.” This is orthodox science. It might
reasonably be termed inferential physics, for the
statements are so perversely at variance with
facts that it is not possible that either writer can
have even attempted to ascertain—still less to
have demonstrated—that the facts are as asserted.
Practical experience affirms that the lip of the
organ pipe does not vibrate: press it with the
IOI
AND IN THE ORCHESTRA.


hand, or hold it in a vice to deaden the assumed
vibration, and you will not destroy the note, or
interfere with the continued sounding of the pipe.
As to “ the air entering the main body of the
pipe ” that is a notion that is delusive.
That a sharp edge is essential to the functions
of the flue organ pipe is one of the commonest
errors entertained by philosophers, and it forms
the groundwork for whole pages of false theory.
A sounding pipe, perfect in finish, may have its
lip quite blunt, by measurement at the edge half
an inch in thickness. Sometimes the chamfering
of the lip to a fine edge is desirable, sometimes
not; and it is for the builder to decide according
to the quality and character of each stop. The
art of voicing consists, in one particular, in so
directing the stream of wind that it shall avoid
striking the lip, and shall glide past without
concussion upon the edge, for the real vibration
depends upon quite another causation.
Professor Tyndall, following Helmholtz, puts
forth a theory of a promiscuous assemblage of
pulses, fluttering and clamouring at the lip of
the pipe, one of which, out of a thousand or so,
it selects, and that periodic pulse is installed as
the reigning pitch of the pipe. This elegant
fancy of a selective pitch, is a fair seeming ex-
planation, and under the commanding name of
this popular writer is generally accepted, for
nothing better had been previously devised in the
laboratory of the philosophers; yet the study of


the organ pipe as it is, in every mood of its
behaviour, makes the theory quite untenable. Not
too strictly interpreting an ideality in expression,
there yet remains an implied choice or selective
preference which is not in any sense borne out by
the teachings of experience. In practice there is
nothing adventitious, —-the artist has some pre-
science of the powers that are to work his will.
The pipe is a mechanism designed to a precise
intent, which it fulfils : it speaks but as it must.
There is no selective power, for the hand that
fashions it, ordains.
The condition of things at the initial stage of
action at the mouth of the pipe is indicated by
the sketch, Fig. b.
The wind stream rushes over the mouth, making
a very slight curve of inclination outward, and,
as yet, you must suppose, without sound. Now,
if you will think for a moment you will remember
some analogous experiences of the effect of a
rush of wind. It will bang a door for one thing.
If you blow across a key you get very promptly
a whistling sound, and the unthought-of little
cloud of dusty particles, so apt to collect in
the barrel of the key, will perchance bring you
momentary dismay. This is what happens in
the pipe : it is not possible for a stream to rush
over an opening without exercising suction., and
drawing to itself whatever there is near the aper-
ture capable of being lifted, and carried off by
such a force.


Consequently, the work of this stream of wind
is to abstract all the air particles it can from the
region of the pipe near the mouth, as you see in
the sketch is lightly depicted.
Fig. 8.
Organ Pipe
in section,
shewing
Wind Stream
on the point of
becoming a
Stream-Reed
to and fro.
The diagram is but a rough one, and I have
taken the liberty of exaggerating the size of the air
particles, because otherwise you could not see them.
The most powerful microscope yet invented will
not help you; indeed philosophers have made
very precise calculations as to the size of the
molecules of air, and reckon that if we could


manage to make a microscope twenty-five times
as powerful as any yet made, we might possibly
have a chance of seeing them in a state of nature.
Looking forward, future generations, take note!
My theory of the operation is that flue organ
pipes are actuated by a stream reed , that this
stream of wind passes over the mouth—not enter-
ing the pipe or striking the lip—that the velocity
of transit in emission is converted into velocity
of vibration , or, in other words, to and fro
motion; the stream becoming a reed in mechanical
movement, but still retaining its stream nature, it
carries away or abstracts particles of air from the
mouth continuously. That first stroke of suction
creates a state of partial vacuum behind the
stream, and this, increasing by the continuity of
the acting force, becomes a stronger vacuum,
with an impetus of air particles themselves rush-
ing down tne pipe upon the stream with accelerat-
ing energy of motion, multitudinously rushing
upon and bending the stream reed outwards in a
constantly increasing curve, as far, propor-
tionally, as you find indicated outward in Fig. 9.
As the stream is driven so far away from the
mouth, clearly we can understand that the ab-
stracting power is lessening, will go on lessening,
and there comes an instant when the stream is
able to assert the mastery and return to ‘ as you
were.” Not so, however, for there is a new con-
dition to reckon with; the dense stream finds
nothing behind it, there has been a limit of


tenuity beyond which the air in the pipe could
not be drawn, so that at the back of the mouth
there exists a void into which the wind stream is
sucked, and has to give up some of its own sub-
stance to hi I up the partial vacuum caused by its
Fig. 9.
Organ Pipe
in section,
shewing the
Wind Stream
converted
into a
Stream-Reed
to and fro.
earlier act. The extent to which the stream dips
inwards is shown also in Fig. g, and is about one-
third of the whole distance traversed; and I find
that the wind-stream-reed, of the dimensions
pictured, would travel the whole range more than
five hundred times during the time that it takes.


me to put down this dot. Both on the forward
journey and the return journey the reed pauses,
poised as it were for an instant; then, after its
rest, starts suddenly off again with such energy
that the mass of air particles cannot follow it as
quickly, and there exists an area of cleavage, and
the shocks follow swiftly, and timed as is a
weaver’s shuttle, —the difference is in degree like
that between the pace of a mill wheel and a
planet.
Many interesting developments fall to this
theory, which I have been half a lifetime in-
doctrinating my friends and the public with,
always finding eager listeners. The curious thing
is that musical and scientific investigators ne\er
had hit upon the solution of the problem ever
before them, or imagined that suction is the
real active force in the making of sound in organ
pipes and other wind instruments. One precon-
ception blinded the thinkers; they always
supposed that to account for sound the first
operation was condensation, —they did not ha\e
an idea that, truly, the first initial stage was, as I
have pointed out, rarefaction.
I fancy some of my readers saying to them-
selves, “ One would think that you had seen these
wonderful movements which you so precisely de-
lineate.” Eh ? So I have,—seen them with these
eyes. And you may see them for yourselves,
may cause the invisible to be palpable; only
remember that illusions are essential to true


seeing. Forget not the residual sensations; their
value was impressed upon your attention in the
last chapter. And now I will proceed to des-
cribe how you may accomplish this deed of magic
without leave of the fairies.


CHAPTER VIII.
Watching the Reed at Work.
OUR last interview closed leaving us gazing
abstractedly upon an abstracting agent,
and you were waiting for me to demon-
strate its objective existence, for I hope that you
have passed the stage of doubting the reality of
its existence. The unseen agent I have named a
stream-reed. In my papers which appeared
several years since in the scientific serial known
to some of you, called Nature , in which I wrote
upon organ pipes and other matters of sound, I
used the term aero-plastic reed or air-moulded
reed; and, long before that I had, in 1868, written
of it as an air-reed. It is of little consequence
how we designate the agent, so that we obtain a
definite idea of the thing signified. At present,
for the popular conception of such an acting
force, I think the term wind-stream-reed best
I0(>
AND IN THE ORCHESTRA.


defines it: and, for brevity, stream-reed will suffi-
ciently answer our purpose. We have attained
that condition of insight that we contemplate air
possessing the energy of wind in the formal
action of a reed , which in a musical sense means
an agent of sound having a to and fro, rapid,
periodic motion, as of beating the air,—in fact, a
wing-like stroke. But there are reeds of many
sorts used for musical ends, apparently very dis-
similar, yet going under one generic name. The
following classification specifies mechanical dis-
tinctions which are of real importance when an
endeavour is made to form a consistent theory
of the functions of musical reeds:
Single Reeds : in Action, Striking Reeds.—viz.,
In the Egyptian Arghool ... A Tongue of Cane.
In the Bagpipe (Drone) ... A Tongue of Cane.
In the Clarionet ... A Tongue of Cane.
In the Organ A Tongue of Metal.
SINGLE Reeds : in Action, Free Reeds passing
through their frame, —viz.,
f A Tongue of
I Metal.
In the Cheng or Chinese Organ
In the Harmonium A Tongue of Metal.
Also in the American Organ, Accordeons, and
many other Instruments.
Single Reeds : in Action, Lapping or Abstract-
ing Reeds, —viz.,
( A Stream of Wind
■i or Tongue of
I Rushing Air.
In Flutes and Flageolets
no
THE MAKING OF SOUND IN THE ORGAN


( A Stream of Wind
or Tongue of
I Rushing Air.
In Organ Pipes
Paired Reeds : in Action, Compressible Reeds, —
In the Bassoon Lips of Cane.
In the Oboe Lips of Cane.
PAIRED Reeds : in Action, Extensible Reeds, —-
In Horns and Trumpets ... Membranous Lips.
In the Larynx (the Instru-
ment of song)
| Lip-like Ligaments.
From this table you will see how wide a signifi-
cation the term “ reed ” has, and yet how, in in-
struments of such varied type, and having such
varied modes of inducing vibration by wind, the
principle of action is the same in all. That prin-
ciple is suction.
At the present time, our attention is exclusively
directed to the organ pipe. Your text books of
science will tell you that “ the column of air in
the pipe is the source of sound,” and, with that
oracular phrase, students are mystified into the
belief that they know all about it, and need not
ask any questions. As well, say that the river is
the source of the water. Now, let me give you
a statement equally oracular, because you will
not understand it. All organ pipes are simply
Delayers. It is what the outward air can do with
our instruments that determines what we can
do with them to get music. How quickly can
the outside air penetrate the tube to get into
Ill
AND IN THE ORCHESTRA,


communication with the agent of vibration?
That is the question. There will be no ambiguity
in this, when you understand it, as you shall
before long.
The reed is the thing to watch now, and after-
wards, or rather during that vigilant inspection,
curiosity will inevitably be aroused to ascertain
what is going on within the pipe, for in that
household you will become aware that there is a
dual existence, and will be shown that the note
of every organ pipe is not single, but is a con-
cord, always consists of a duality of tone; —the
two distinct tones of the stream-reed and of the
pipe may be separated, and again blended at
pleasure. T hen also, there will come into notice
me progeny of harmonics, sometimes very nu-
merous, and seldom entirely absent.
All that has to be set forth cannot be crowded
into one chapter, therefore, as far as possible,
observation will centre upon the reed itself, and
its motion. My theory of the mode of the pro-
duction of sound in an organ pipe is that it is a
process of suction by velocity , and the brevity of
the phrase leaves it, let me trust, sufficiently ex-
pressive. lhe theory of the action upon the
body of air in the pipe will be reserved for sub-
sequent elucidation; all that is advanced at pre-
sent is that the stream-reed is an abstracting force.
Your attitude is—thinking it out.
In one illustration, previously, you had the
wind-stream depicted as on the point of becom-
112
THE MAKING OF SOUND IN THE ORGAN


ing a reed, and in the second illustration as con-
verted into a vibrating stream-reed. Now, let us
take our view at an earlier instant of time, when
there was no symptom of development of a reed,
—the time when it was simply an issuing current
of compressed air. The condition implied can
easily be brought about. Thus:— Place a card
large enough to cover the mouth so that it rests
on the inner margin of the windway, forming the
edge of the block. Suppose that we have before
us a diapason organ pipe known as CC. It is
called Bft. C. The half wave length for this
pitch is Bft. Sin. in the atmosphere, and philo-
sophers tell you that the pipe ought to be the
same in length; but our perversely natured pipe,
speaking the note CC, is only /ft. din. It is in
interior breadth 4|in., and in depth din. The
windway is a narrow fissure barely the twenty-
fourth of an inch wide, and on the inner margin
of that we place a card or plate covering in-
teriorly the whole area of the embouchure , and
then we admit the wind-current at the foot of
the pipe from the organ bellows.
Premising that, for convenience of our analysis,
the swift sequence of action is suspended, we
note that the stream of wind—and, as yet, it is
nothing more than a stream—is directed slightly
diverging from the vertical, and sufficiently so to
cause it to glide up the inclined plane of the
lip. This stream is the life-force on which the
sound will depend for its existence. “ That,


everybody knows.” True, they may. But, how
many readers ever think, if they know, that its
force is that of a storm-wind driving along at a
rate of sixty miles an hour. The anemometer,
or wind gauge, proves it to be so, and that, more-
over, in some stops of large organs, the pressure
per foot given by the bellows is equal to that of
a hurricane.
If now the plate be removed from the back of
the embouchure , a change takes place. There is
a gradation in the change, the order of which
may be worked out, leaving yet the sound, as
Shelley says of the flowers, “waiting to be born.”
The stream is instantaneously transformed into
an air-moulded reed. The velocity of passage is
to become endowed with a new power, the veloc-
ity of vibration. How is this investiture accom-
plished ? How. afterwards does the transversal
vibration of this aero-plastic reed call into exist-
ence the longitudinal vibration of the column of
.air in the pipe, or, better, say, of the rod of air
surrounded by a cylinder of metal, or by a
wooden trough, both known as organ pipes?
These and many other questions press for
answers. Observe that, as yet, we have no sound
from the pipe, for we suppose the reed just to
have made the first movement of change,—no
more, and why that? The change has come, and
the reed bends, curving outwards.
In the last chapter I showed you that, at this
initial stage of activity, this wind-stream sucks
114
THE MAKING OF SOUND IN THE ORGAN


out and carries away a whole concourse of air
particles from behind the mouth at the bottom
of the pipe. What prevents it from continuing
to do so in the same line of current unbroken,
taking away, in fact, all the air particles that are
in the pipe, or can get into it, —what stays this
compelling power ? What hinders it from exhaust-
ing the pipe of its contents? I can but reply
that there is a limit of tenuity beyond which air
cannot be drawn by air. The wind-stream is
compounded of air particles, and these, swiftly
rushing, by virtue of that velocity of transit draw
all other air particles to them, according to the
degree of energy that is in them. According to
their strength is the number of captures duly
meted out to them on the held of action. If we
suppose “ a stopped pipe ” as the pipe under
question, why is it not absolutely exhausted of
air particles by the current, which weakens not,
and is perpetually renewing itself ? Again I
give the same reply. Do you not know that,
with all the resources of mechanics, the obtain-
ment of a perfect vacuum is a task like unto that
which was the curse of Tantalus? As, therefore,
there are degrees of vacuum, we cannot escape
the conclusion that there are limits of attainable
tenuity of air, proportioned strictly to the power
of the force acting, whether that power be exer-
cised by this aerial mechanism, or by mechanism
of valves and pistons. The condition is one of
degree. Quiescence resisting Energy.


Now, watching the reed, as we were doing
with fixed attention, we found the onward rushing
stream—which, if the current failed not, ought,
like Tennyson’s “brook,” to go on for ever—was
suddenly diverted from its line of motion, and
had forced upon it an added condition of motion,
named vibration. Note well what this transmu-
tation is,—this new state. Let me define it. The
motion of vibration is an activity tempered by
rests. I will demonstrate this on another oc-
casion.
I well remember the day when I first had the
audacity to try and confirm by vision the action
of the air-reed, which I had mentally conceived.
I was like the astronomer, searching for an un-
known planet, because it ought to be there. I
thought that my ideal reed ought to be there, and
a large metal pipe, a 16ft. CCC, standing within
a few inches of the floor level, gave me one day
my opportunity.
An organ was in progress of building by Mr.
T. C. Lewis, the workmen were all away at dinner,
and I found myself,—alone. Yes long ago, in
the year 1864.
The illustration shows the kind of pipe. It is
given here in miniature, so you may suppose
yourself looking at it with the telescope reversed,
making the pipe look small. A metal pipe differs
in many particulars from the wood pipes sketched
in the previous chapter. The pipe block that
you saw in the wood pipe becomes here a mere
116
THE MAKING OF SOUND IN THE ORGAN


plate, and it is termed the languid (D). The
diagram shows its shape, the straight portion
forms the inner edge of the windway, and this
languid has the advantage that it can be moved
in slight degree by pressure or tapping. The
tapping of a metal rod passed up the foot open-
Fig. 10.
Vertical
Section of
Diapason
Oigan Pipe
in Metal.
ing (F) enables the voicer to raise its edge, or from
above by pressure to lower its edge, in the due
relation desired to the edge line of the under lip.
By such simple means the all important direction
of the wind current is regulated. In the metal
pipe every part is fixed, and yet is adjustable.
You can press the upper lip (L) in or out, or
ii 7
AND IN THE ORCHESTRA.


vary the width of the windway in the minutest
degree by pressing the under lip inwards or out-
wards, and adjust the ears in like manner to
correct position. The foot hole is also contracted
or enlarged to regulate the amount of wind to
each pipe.
The moment when I was about to see the un-
revealed was a moment of flush and fever. I
was like the small boy in the temerity of firing
his first cannon.
Not a creature was there; all was silence.
Nothing but this monster standing beside me;
measuring a yard round, with a wide mouth of
about nine inches, and two inches in height. On
the floor lay a broad shaving of pinewood; one
that it is the pride of the workman to produce, of
perfectly even texture, fine as a tissue, white and
shining like silk, and this I shaped to my purpose.
Stealthily I stepped round to the bellows, filled
them with wind, wedged down the pedal key, and
started the pipe into life; then I caught up the
broad shaving, held it deftly to the mouth of the
monster, and to my joy saw it absorbed by the
stream as though it were lost, and in an instant
starting upward the ideal reed of my imagina-
tion. Soon the stream failed at its source, and a
great silence came, so that my own breath seemed
panting to betray me to the first comer; then I
sat down and pondered long. The all possessing
ardour of the enthusiast you perhaps may not
I 18
THE MAKING OF SOUND IN THE ORGAN


know, but you can see what I saw, and verify my
experience in calmer mood.
There is a country custom, when the bees are
about to swarm, to dredge them with flour as a
means of identification; if the flour travels the
bees will have journeyed with white jackets on.
So I place a white jacket on my reed, and detect
and display his movements. Take a piece of
white tissue paper —I should in my eagerness
have used a Bank of England note if I had had
one —and let it be nearly of the size and shape of
the mouth of the pipe, with an additional margin
to allow of gumming the edge to a card for con-
venience of holding it in the position wanted;
then advance the card, holding it to the level of
the outer edge of the windway; the tissue is, in
fact, a paper reed, but flaccid and inanimate. As
you advance it to the windway, no sooner is it
caught in the current than it darts upright, and
becomes incorporated with the wind-reed, —
Grows with its growth
And strengthens with its strength.
This same crisp little bit of paper will reveal
to your eyes the treasured secret of the organ
pipe, tell you how its wealth of varied tone is
wrought, show you its fine arcs of flexure, how
it bends less for its inward than for its outward
stroke. Listen, and you shall hear the domestic
wrangle of the reed and pipe; look, and you shall
witness how in its high caprice it transmutes in
i ig
AND IN THE ORCHESTRA.


a flash to harmonic speed, and leaps exultant to
its octave. Truly, an Ariel imprisoned, held
captive, endowed with form, and clothed with a
white vesture, making it, in all its motion, visible
as bees.
Most marvellous is the energy of suction when
the stream-reed—remember, it never ceases to be
a stream when in recoil it throws itself in-
ward and bends over, for the rushing wind is
there in full force,—actually there under the
curve of the paper-reed.
Notwithstanding the presence of the paper-reed,
the tone of the pipe is not perceptibly affected,’
nor its speech injured in any degree, nor its power
impaired. Look at the illustration Fig. gof the
last chapter, that fan-like display is what you
actually see before you; but, of course, the reed’s
fath only is described by that form, since at one
instant the paper is at the extreme outward line of
the fan, and at another at the extreme inward
edge; but you seem, through what is termed per-
sistence of vision, to see it in all its places at once,
so rapid is its real movement. Always the wind-
stream is on the inner face of the paper-reed, and
the paper by suction adheres to the wind, the
movement of the one is the movement of the other
The most interesting, and perhaps the most
important fact disclosed in my investigations of
the physical action taking place at the mouth of
organ pipes, according to my aero-plastic reed
theory, is this,—that the wind stream-reed has a


law of its own, unique among the phenomena
heretofore observed in musical vibrations. I have
stated it in Nature in these terms: “As its arcs
of vibration are less, its speed is greater” All
our knowledge of rods and strings, of plates and
membranes, would lead us to expect the usual
manifestation of the law of isochronism, that, in
the air-reed considered as a free-reed or rod fixed
at one end, and vibrating transversely, the law
would be observed : “ Though the amplitude may
vary, the times of vibration will be the same.”
Yet here we meet with its absolute reversal, —
viz., the times vary with the amplitude, or defined
strictly,—the times are inversely as the ampli-
tude.
The information does not rest on theory;
every eye may verify it. A principle so strange,
when first its action was observed, might well
lead to disbelief in one’s senses, although the
mind had by its reasonings led up to the fact,
and sought for it as the one thing needed to give
consistency in theory, and make it a perfect
whole. Familiar as the air-reed has been to me,
the one secret had been hidden from my eyes;
seeing, they saw not. Faith in the known mode
of activity of the transversely vibrating free-reed
had blinded me, and it was only after long
reasonings forced upon me by presence of in-
dependent harmonics not belonging to a free reed
—whose first harmonic would be higher than an
octave twelfth—that my faith was shaken. Then
I 21
AND IN THE ORCHESTRA.


it was that, conceiving the new idea of the prin-
ciple of action, I looked, hoping to find my
reasoning confirmed; yet, let me confess it, the
first sight of the reality startled me not a little
with self-confusion. Here was an every day
fact, constantly before me it had been, beautiful
in its simplicity, waiting to be acknowledged,
and I so stupidly blind as not to see it.
How such experiment may be made you will
learn in a future page. Vary the experiment,
repeat it again and again as I have done, and the
fact will be confirmed beyond possibility of
doubt, that, the length of reed remaining un-
altered, if by extraneous influence the pitch of the
note is lowered whilst the pipe is speaking, cor-
respondingly with the changing sound, the path,
of the wind-reed will be lengthened; or, con-
versely, if the pitch be raised, simultaneously with
the quickened velocity the wind-reed will be seen
to shorten its stroke; no swelling of tone gaining
power with gain of amplitude; not the counter-
part in action of a metal reed, nor acting as a
tuning fork. The creature of air, it times itself
to the element that sustains it. This aero-
rhythmic law provides the only way possible to
the air-reed to work out the transmutations of
energy essential to its functions. The constitu-
tion of air itself necessitates the conformity in.
mechanical relations. Certainly the stream-reed
is not of the free-reed family.


CHAPTER IX.
Thinning and Shocking a Body of Air.
SEEING a vacuum! I have often thought
that I should like to see a vacuum; yes, to
see it for the satisfaction of proof. This
may be considered tantamount to asking to be
allowed to see nothing,—not exactly that, but,
nevertheless, some extremely subtle superann-
uated condition of air made visible. It is of little
use for me to tell you that, in that pipe, when
speaking, there is an existing vacuum—that it is
there, only you cannot see it—but, take my word
for it it is really there. Yet my assurance and
my exhaustive demonstration, my attempts to
cause you to see it “in the mind’s eye,” these
count for little if you lack imagination; for it is
to the imaginative faculty that all argument of
this kind appeals, more particularly so when we
discourse of “ the infinitely little.” My desire,
123;
AND IN THE ORCHESTRA.


which seemed so unattainable, is somewhat as-
sured by the fact that, very recently, the ingenuity
of man, pushing to the verge of Nature’s bounds,
has caught sight of a vacuum, and fixed the
portraiture. A snap shot into the world of the
unseen has revealed, not, indeed, the identical
“Mr. Perfect Vacuum,” but “Mr. Partial Vacuum,”
a, very near cousin of the same.
Here is the statement. An experiment in rapid
photography is described in Scribner's Magazine ,
which shows that a bullet, in order to ascertain
the velocity required, was fired through a dark
room so as to break an electric circuit in its
passage, and thereby illuminate the room by an
•electric spark. “The duration of the spark is
almost infinitesimal, but a well defined photo-
graph of an object moving at a greater velocity
than sound is obtained. Such a picture shows
the condensation of the air in front of the bullet,
the vacuum behind ii, and the eddies and currents
produced in the surrounding atmosphere by its
motion.” Is not that confirmation strong, by
Nature writ? Will you, can you, doubt that the
rushing wind-stream reed that I tell you of is a
vacuum maker? Well now, I want you to give
me your attentive eye, and mentally to trace the
process, and track the progress from point to
point of the phases of the vacuum.
More recently, another confirmation comes to
hand, a photograph has been taken of a partial
vacuum. A draught of air passing through a


cracked pane of window glass, is actually seen
in the photograph creating a partial vacuum, the
condition of the dispersion of air particles vary-
ing, so affects the reflections of light that this
operation of nature is made visible.
To give you another hold on the reality of the
action taking place, just try this experiment;,
and, if you do not reach the condition of seeing
you at least will find that your tactile sense will
afford you illustrative evidence. Take a length
of indiarubber tubing, six or eight feet, or about
a quarter of an inch in diameter, and soft and
flexible; close one end air tight by plug or by
tying, and hold that end in the palm of your left
hand; then with the right hand take the other
end, and, at about two or three inches distant
from the opening, pinch the tube tightly, and
from out of the two-inch portion suck out all
the air you can; then instantly, to prevent any air
getting in again to that part, with the thumb and
finger at this end opening pinch the tube airtight,,
also let the middle part of the tubing be loosely
held across one hand; if now, below that small
portion which you hold, then exhausted of air, you
suddenly take away your finger and thumb, a
pulse of rarefaction due to that exhaust will
travel all along the tube, you will feel the throb
as it passes across your open hand, see contrac-
tion and dilation of the tube, and receive the
shock on the arrival of that pulse of motion at
the closed end in your other hand, —that two


inches exhaust affecting the whole length of
tubing. That is truly a palpable way of proving
a vacuum. How far such a travelling pulse would
go before the dissipation of its energy I cannot
say, but much greater lengths of tubing might
be tried to test how far. Wherever a pulse of
motion passes in the air it leaves a partial vacuum
in its wake, as surely as the rushing bullet is
followed by a travelling void, or partial vacuum
behind it.
When a pulse of motion passes up an organ
pipe it presses the air transiently before it, and
also thins the body of air behind it transiently;
and its exit at the open end of the pipe throws
back a shock of motion into the interior of the
pipe, for the denser outer air immediately invades
the opening and pushes back the weaker air
opposed to it, and compacts it. For “sound,”
you should remember, is nothing but motion,
and is compounded of these pulses, which only
bv virtue of arrest of motion become recognizable
by the ear as sound. I speak of one pulse, and
analyze its course and recourse, and our musical
sounds consist of hundreds and thousands and
tens of thousands of these, whilst the second
hand of the watch marks one second. The exit
of the bullet from the gun is of similar nature,
and leaves a shock behind it, signified by a loud
report caused by the impetuous inrush of air to
fill the vacuum after the explosion. The con-
ditions are complicated by the facts of the expan-


sion of gases, suddenly and with enormous force,
and by the fact that the bullet is a solid sub-
stance instead of a mere pulse of disturbance;
but the likenesses and the differences you can
readily discriminate. In the case of the bullet,
we are dealing with force that is great; in the
organ pipe, we have only the “ infinitely little,”
magnified by the ear, it is true, and impressing
our consciousness with a sense of power, but,
nevertheless, in itself marvellously minute.
When the bullet has left the gun, you know
the fact by the kick at your shoulder, and, on
leaving the gun, the bullet begins to sing beauti-
fully, and a distant bystander, whom, in mid air
it passes, if experienced in the ways of war, could
tell you by the sound what kind of rifle it came
from. The bullets of the Minie rifle, the Snider,
the Whitworth, the Martini, all have different
singing voices. Their musical sounds are born
in that vacuum behind, are precisely of the same
nature as the musical sounds given by the dis-
placement rods described in my earlier chapters.
The diameter of the bullets, together with the
relative velocities, determine the pitches of sound
heard, and it would be possible—given the dia-
meter of any bullet and its velocity and pitch
to determine therefrom the velocities attained by
other bullets, if you knew their diameters; be-
cause the pitches of the musical sounds given by
them in their passage through air would form an
index to the differences, and a discriminating


keen musical ear could tell how far the pitch
rose or fell beyond that calculated on such
formula. Do not imagine that this is a digres-
sion, a wandering away from the subject; quite
otherwise, for I intend that it should help you
to comprehend the shocking nature of the organ
Pi? - .
The pulse on leaving the organ pipe is not a
solid substance, and, therefore, does not sing
rejoicing in its freedom. If you will remember,
I told you that the tone heard from a displace-
ment rod came from the chain of little chasms
formed by suction in its passage. It was not
one shock, but a sucession of little shocks in
air, so the bullet makes a chain or series of
little chasms in its wake, and the distance of these
from each other in space coincide with the time-
distances of the shocks.
As regards music making, the pulses of the
organ pipe are irrespective of space ranges, and
issue from a fixed place, having a definite time-
distance determined by the length of the pipe,
the dimensions of pipe, and the acting force in
co-relation. A single pulse would die out in-
stantly, and be of no effect in the pipe as a
vibration; mechanically, it requires to be backed
up by a succession of pulses, and this is ac-
complished by the agency of suction. So, you
see, the principle is the same, although applied
in a distinctly different manner. I want you to
follow me whilst I seek to make the process clear


to you according to what I conceive to be the right
interpretation of the way that nature works.
Repetition is inevitable. Do not weary of it,
it is the Teacher’s best aid to ensure comprehen-
sion of any subject demanding demonstration
and explanation, or explication, as the old
teachers called it.
Retracing, somewhat, the argument in the last
chapter, you will find we arrived at that point of
analysis when the wind-reed makes its first out-
ward bend, and we can now consider my theory
of the action of the working reed upon the body
of air encompassed by the pipe.
The isolated reed, before any change takes
place, has no innate tendency to swerve from up-
rightness ; it can neither blow in nor out, nor can
the atmosphere have influence, for it is equal on
both sides; the air column within the pipe is at
rest, it has no self stimulating power of vibration.
What then disturbs this equilibrium? Some in-
ternal exciting cause is needed which shall pro-
duce, with determination of priority, condensation
or rarefaction. Orthodoxy says that condensation
comes first in order. According to my view it is
rarefaction, for it is obvious that the reed, as it
now stands, has no power to produce a con-
densation; it does not, as they assume, strike
against the sharp edge of the upper lip, it simply
asserts its own strong upward-rushing force.
The reed must bend before it will vibrate, but
what is to make it bend? To cause this flexure,


the only alternative is rarefaction, and in the
stream-reed we possess a power exactly suited to
exercise the required function. The act of rare-
fying occupies time, must take place within the
pipe, yet is not spontaneous, but it is only to be
induced by some previous act. The provocation
belongs to the reed. Consider its mode of action;
in velocitous rush over the mouth, its dense
stream making around itself a rarefied atmos-
phere, it causes the approach of the quiescent
column, carries off all the particles of air lying
in the nearest layers, and would go on abstracting
indefinitely, if there were no counterbalancing
causes coming into operation, but it brings down
on itself the power that bends it. Suction by
velocity has created a partial vacuum; the air
column within the pipe, passing outward with the
impetus of expansion, begins to bend the reed
over, the excited air particles not only press for-
ward to fill the places of the lost, but eagerly
crowd out upon the top of the reed, irresistibly
drawn into the zone of rarefaction around the
mouth, —a region where velocity has ensured least
pressure; and, through this same “law of least
pressure,” there is, outwardly, a loss of support
to the under surface of the reed near the tip,
favouring there the curve of flexure, the pressure
necessarily varying and diminishing from the
root upward. Pause and think over that.
As yet we have no vibration, for simultaneously
with the exterior action the interior rarefaction is


extending high upward, the air particles are rally-
ing from further distances awakened by the
agitation of those in advance, throughout the
whole length and breadth of the pipe, uneasy as
bees in a hive; whilst these particles are swarm-
ing towards the mouth, they are drawing away
from the main body of their supports, their own
elastic energy is diminishing, they are more and
more thinned in numbers, and the new levies
come up to the front exhausted of their early
vigour. Now is the supreme moment of the
reed’s advantage, now its watchful ally, the ex-
ternal air, pierces the weakest line just under the
sharp edge of the lip, and with it dashing in as a
wave of condensation with cumulative pressure,
drives back the outflowing wave, and the whole
pulse of motion courses upward with impetuous
vigour and precipitates itself expansively into
the upper air; meanwhile the stream reed, rising
with renewed power to recover its upright posi-
tion, which it had overpassed, commences again
to further exhaust the lower region of weakened
air particles which yet are able to make a bold
front, to attack the reed again, and bend it out-
wards; a second time the reed and the external air
dash inwards on the thinned ranks still holding
the pipe; they advance far into the interior, but
midway are met by a recruited army; the wave of
rarefaction is returning as a wave of condensa-
tion ; —then comes the shock of war, and vibration
is established. The invading wave has been re-


pulsed at the spot hereafter memorable as the
node, and the conflict renewed and continued
will chronicle no victory to either, unless other
and foreign forces are brought in; for, as I shall
show, we have resources within command enabling
us to sway the equipoise and give supremacy to
the reed.
“I do suppose,” as Dr. Hooke says in his quaint
talk on “ springy bodies,” “ I do suppose the
particles behave,” and that the action takes place
in the manner I have described; the analogy is
not strained, nor have I used one phrase in as-
sociation of ideas which I do not think fully
justified by the physical relations of the process.
Therefore, do not dismiss this as the sketch of
a fancy battle. Watch for yourselves; place
within the pipe at the back of the mouth some
fine filaments of cotton, or fluff, or down; then
with a wire or rod advance them from the interior
to the inner edge of the windway, and you will
see them shot with energy, not upward into the
pipe, but outward, full in your face with an un-
mistakable trajectory. Do we not bring into
activity the same force, “ suction by velocity,”
when we blow through one little tube over
another tube leading down to a well of perfume,
and draw up thereby scent laden globules caught
in the belt of wind passing over the tube’s orifice,
dispersing fine odour sprays into the atmosphere ?
The work of the stream reed is specifically to
abstract. By reason of abstraction, rarefaction


ensues, condensation correlates therewith, and the
product is vibration.
The reed is the generator of power, and the
node is the fulcrum of vibration, the place of
reaction, with this peculiarity that it affords an
elastic fulcrum sensitive to the encroaches of the
column of air above it. In the stopped pipe, on
the contrary, there is a stable unyielding fulcrum,
and the results from this difference are very re-
markable, as will be seen in another chapter; but,
at present, I can only allude to one result, which
it seems desirable not to omit reference to at this
stage of the exposition. It is an essential feature
of my hypothesis that the initial movement or
prelude to vibration in the pipe is distinct from
successive movements both in its course and
character; it extends throughout the pipe, is con-
tinuous but diminishing in degree, and is without
a node, which is only fully established at the
second course, and then because a contrary pulse
motion has been set up, we have rarefaction ex-
hibiting itself as working in opposite directions.
As corroborating my estimate of the mode of
initiatory action, it may be important to notice
that the interval between the first effort or gasp of
the pipe, and the full possession of its powers, is
distinctly perceived by the ear. All musicians
acquainted with organs are conscious of this,
and it is matter of usual comment with them
how that the stopped pipes are, on the contrary,
remarkably quick of speech, instantaneous in


articulation; they feel this without reasoning of
the why or wherefore. As in stopped pipes there
is no supernodal air column, no requirement for
an effort, similar to that awakening motion to
perfect vibration in open organ pipes, the verdict
of the ear is in both cases consistent with and
corroborative of the hypothesis. Experiments with
the peculiarly constructed pipes called “ gambas,”
now generally introduced into organs, throw in-
valuable light upon the process of tone making
in organ pipes : but of this, more anon.
To recapitulate this mechanical process which
I want you clearly to follow,—first, the stream-
reed excites rarefaction in the pipe from the
mouth upward, and is itself bent outward by
the air it draws out, and it takes a curve in shape,
because the pressure of the air on its outer face
necessarily varies in degree of force, being strong-
est at the root, and weaker upon the middle and
tip; consequently the yielding is expressed by a
curve, just as it is in a blade of grass waving. As
rarefaction proceeds it arrives, relatively to the
coercive force then operating, at such a point of
balance of effect that it begins to react, and
actually to suck the reed back, which at the
moment of rest it is able to do. So the reed
strikes back, throws itself beyond its natural
vertical line into the partial vacuum that it had
created; then inevitably a portion of its sub-
stance is cast into the pipe; then from the impetus
recovering itself—and a moment of rest is here


also not to be avoided —it strikes back, cutting
off from itself at the mouth’s edge so much
of its substance as during that brief interval
between its entrance and exit has been issuing.
It is an absolute severance of a mass of dense air,
which forces itself upward, and leaves in its path
of passage a still higher degree of rarefaction.
Imagine this pith of air pursuing its course inside.
But, before it has gone far, that recovery of the
reed just stated will have begun, and, as soon
as the stream regains its outward flow, it will
have recommenced to rarefy, until once more its
extreme outward curve has been attained.
Imagine, then, this position of affairs, —the
pith of air thinning the air more and more behind
it, nears the outlet at the top of the pipe, and the
stream-reed also thinning the air in the lower
part of the pipe. Now, see the consequence,
these two rarefying powers pulling in opposite
directions suddenly give way, and at the moment
that (at the top of the pipe) the pulse of motion
finds exit, the dense external air rushes m as an
invading wave of condensation, so, at the self-
same moment, the stream-reed, returning, enters,
passes the mouth, throws in its wave of conden-
sation, and the two waves meet in full shock, and
are thrown back in recoil with equal vigour; and
the spot where this takes place we call the node.
It is said to be a place of no motion, a description
which causes some misapprehension; it is rather
the place of least translation of air, but will be


best understood as being a very tight place. This
course of action and reaction goes on in perpetual
repetition whilst the pipe is sounding. The suc-
cession of shocks, rapid and periodic, constitutes
musical sound, —literally and actually nothing
but motion; and the time distance between one
shock and the next shock determines musical
pitch. Do not forget the explanation I gave in
an earlier chapter,—that the hundreds and thou-
sands of vibrations by which we assume to
denominate the pitch of notes are illusory and
non-essential. Not these, but the time distance
between two shocks fixes the estimate made by
the ear of pitch. Again, we speak of vibrations
as producing sound, whereas, truly, we should
recognise that, not vibrations , but the shocks re-
sulting from arrested motion, are the real factors
of musical sounds.
Five hundred and forty vibrations per second
constitute treble C concert pitch,” says your
musical scientific instructor. But I can wink my
eye in the tenth part of a second, and many
musical notes of perfectly defined pitch often do
not last longer than that. What then will be-
come of the hundreds of vibrations not used up ?
Ah! don’t answer. Let your scientific instructor
go,—wink !


CHAPTER X.
The Task of the Wind-stream.
THE two organ pipes already described and
illustrated represent pipes that are called
•“ flue pipes,” and are types of by far the
greater portion of the “ stops,” or distinct series
of pipes, of which an organ is comprised. Of
these pipes there are two classes, the open and the
stopped; and both are of two kinds, —wood and
metal. All are actuated by the wind-stream reed.
It is very curious that all the distinct qualities of
the stops are obtained simply by differences, —by
relative variations in details; and by how small
degrees these pipes differ the ordinary observer
could scarcely recognize, for the pipes are as
much like one another as a flock of sheep, and
the shepherd knoweth his sheep, and the organ
builder tells one from another in all his seeming
medley of pipes; his trained eye notes minute


■differences which inevitably carry consequences
in tone.
I have shown you how the two kinds of pipe,
wood and metal, are constructed to attain the
same ends: that, although in the metal pipe every
part is to all appearance immovable, it is, never-
theless, in every part adjustable in detail, whilst
the wood pipe has but one adjustable part called
“ the cap,” or lower lip, and that is fixed in
position by two or more screws. The platform
within the mouth filling the space beyond the
wind way is called “ the block ” in the wood pipe,
and called tne “ languid ” in the metal; and it is
by varying relatively the level of the edge of the
•cap to the edge of the block, or of the lower lip
to the edge of the languid, that the inclination of
the wind-stream is determined. If the cap is set
low, the angle of flow outwards is increased;
contrariwise, it is lessened; and the art of the
voicer regulates to the finest degree what is re-
quisite for the quality and the speech of each
particular pipe. If the wind is much thrown
■outward the speech is slow, if more vertical in
inclination, the speech is quickened; if too much
so, the octave may sound instead of the ground
tone; if too much inward or outward, the pipe will
not speak at all. As in the wood pipe we can
•adjust the cap, in the metal pipe we can attain
the same by pressure upon the lip.
One more power of adjustment remains,—the
width of the narrow slit through which the wind


issues is capable of being varied by alteration of
the inner surface of the cap, and in the metal
pipe we have precisely the same capability of
variation by the yielding of the metal inward or
outward; very simple yet very beautiful com-
pensations. In the variation in construction
nothing is done without a purpose, nor can you
make any one of these minute changes without
causing at the same time a flattening or sharpen-
ing of the pitch of the pipe, or a diversity in
intonation or quality. Then there are the relative
differences in the height and width of the mouths
of pipes to consider, for the height with the width
will regulate the amount of harmonic tone present
in the sound of the pipe, and these are the main
factors in quality of tone; added to these is the
grand paramount distinction of dimensions of
pipes. The wood pipes vary greatly in cross
section,—that is, in the proportions of breadth
and depth, and the metal pipes also in their
relative diameters differ. The sources of change
are so many that no two organ builders make their
organs alike in quality, because each favours
different scales, and different relations of detail.
Without entering deeply into the principles of
the craft of organ building, there are certain
matters of fact very necessary to be known
before the full meaning of a theory, such as I
have laid before you, can be estimated, or its
consistency judged of with true understanding.
In all our scientific treatment and consideration,


it should not be forgotten that the organ builder’s
craft is entirely empirical, is not beholden to
science, but has grown out of the individual per-
ceptions, the likings of each man for particular
character and combination of qualities,—ever the
old doctrine, the old affirmation guided all, “ The
Ear is the Umpire of Sound.”
So organ builders heeded not science, and
scientific men understood not the ways of organ
builders. According to law and custom we ex-
pect to find that an organ pipe being of a stated
length, its octave pipe would be half that length,
and apparently it is so. In like manner we expect
the octave to be of half the diameter of the larger
pipe. Oh, no! says the builder, “ the scale
halves at the seventeenth.”
“ Indeed ! I should have thought that it would
have been at the thirteenth pipe, or, perhaps, more
correctly, at the twenty-fifth. Why is it as you
say ?”—“ Because we like it so.”
Truly it is a matter of liking, and we shall find
many curiosities of procedure if we extend the
examination. Sometimes science plumes herself
on the fact that organ builders follow her
teachings because they insert mixture stops pro-
ducing corroborative harmonics, carrying out
Nature s system. A close investigation shows
it, however, to be done in a very dodgy, un-
natural way. The mixture stop begins any-
where, and is characterized by continual breaks,
doubles back, and begins again, any way but


Nature’s way. Some organs have more of the
series of these harmonics in mixture stops than
others, —it is a pick and choose, as you like it.
The organ builder’s justification for what he
does is summed up in the phrase, “it sounds
best,” and science sweeps aside, haughtily.
Consequently, both parties know very little of
each other, and many statements which are er-
roneous in fact, and misleading in inference, are
made by our best teachers in science, both in their
books and lectures, whenever they touch upon
organ pipes. Considering that intellects so highly
trained hold in aversion any approach to inexact-
ness, this is not a little surprising; and the
strangeness of it is that the errors arise through an
ancient human custom now supposed obsolete
among philosophers of “ speaking without know-
ledge,”—-a .custom to which, unfortunately, we are
all of us more or less prone in our every day life.
There is little difficulty in understanding how
it happens that errors respecting organs arise,
and are perpetuated. Experimental philosophers
occupied with the weightier matters of science,
are rarely musicians or familiar with wind instru-
ments. Of the trouble and anxiety these, in their
caprices, give in a workshop, and at home with
the artist, they have no knowledge. The organ
pipe (generally a very diminutive specimen) is
brought into the lecture room; it is caused to
prove what is wanted, more is not looked for; it
comes like a beauty into a ball room, dressed up


to play a part, and be amiable and gracious. The
practical man knows that organ pipes are very
like human beings, of whom Goethe says :“ We
do not learn to know people when they come to
us; to learn their real peculiarities we must go
to them.” A wise saying, which will bear repeat-
ing.
Bearing in mind the working power of the
stream-reed, we approach the organ pipe with a
new insight, and can obtain answers based upon
actualities; we can trace cause and effect when
we are brought to consider the dimensions of
pipes, and consequently of the form as well as
the extent of air column whereon this power is
compelled to act.
Here is a little diagram, the study of which
is of an importance little likely to be understood
on the leading lines of the leading text books of
science; but, viewed by the light of the theory I
am impressing upon you, old facts put on a new
significance. It represents the scales of the
widths of the mouths of pipes in different pro-
portions to the circumference. When the metal
is laid out on the fiat, the lines indicating the
intended proportion are marked upon it, and
these guide the worker, and to the practical eye
and hand tell what stop the pipe belongs to; for
in a series of pipes all are cut to follow the
particular scale chosen. As at the mouth the
curve of the diameter in front is burnished down
to a straight line, the diameter of the finished


pipe at the lower part is somewhat larger than
at the upper part of the pipe.
The widths of mouth shown by the different lines,,
each one taking more off the circle of the languid
and setting the windway back, are spoken of as
proportional to the circumference, —thus, a, b, c r
Fig. 11.
Widths of the Mouths of Metal Organ Pipes
relatively to diameter.
d , e are respectively a sth mouth, 4th, 4|, 2/y|,.
2/yth. mouth. You will understand that a stop is
carried through upon the scale chosen, the true
proportion being kept up, else the character and
quality of the particular stop would be lost.
Think for a moment, and you will find that the
task of the wind-stream, within its given period of
145
AND IN THE ORCHESTRA.


time, must be easier the nearer its line of working
strength approaches B, and the wider the extent
of line it occupies. The full meaning of these
relations to the pipe we shall see when we con-
sider the lengths of pipes as they stand in the
organ, and the lengths assumed to be there ac-
cording to the laws of nature.
Scientific writers affirm that the length of an
organ pipe for a given note corresponds to the
length of the wave in air, with an absolute rela-
tion thus expressed. Professor Tyndall says:
“ The length of a stopped pipe is one fourth that
of the sonorous wave which it produces, whilst
the length of an open pipe is one half of the
sonorous wave.” Professor Balfour Stewart, in
his “ Elementary Lessons in Physics,” says :“ In
an organ pipe of this kind, the upper end closed,
the primary note is that of which the wave length
is twice the length of the pipe the wave length
of the sound produced by an organ pipe is equal
to the length of the pipe, so that it is only half of
that produced by a'shut pipe of the same length.”
One is curious to know why there is this differ-
ence of statements from two leading teachers of
men : perplexing to the students in want of a
leader.
Professor Tyndall demonstrates his affirma-
tion, showing that a stopped tube resounds to
the note mid C of 256 vibrations per second. The
wave length in air of this note he states to be
fifty-two inches. Then, in proof, he measures


the jar or tube used in his lecture, and says:
“By measurement with a two foot rule, I find it
to be thirteen inches, precisely a fourth of the
wave length.” He then proceeds to affirm the
same of organ pipes, and to prove it by tuning
forks and by sounding the pipes to the same note,
and believes he has justified his assertions. His
hearers do him that justice due to a teacher, and
go home believing also. The proof is, however,
altogether illusive. No speaking organ pipe of
that length ever gave the' note of that pitch.
Let us put the assertion to the test. My object
lies beyond the rectification of a philosopher’s
misapprehension, and is meant to show not only
that an organ behaves itself in a manner different
from that with which it is accredited, but also
why it does so; to show how important a matter
in the nature of its action is this neglected differ-
ence, and how wide its bearing on the whole system
of musical wind instruments. Here at my hand
is a stopped pipe sounding mid C. I measure it
interiorly from languid to stopper; it is eleven
inches in length, and has a diameter of one and a
half inches. Here is an open pipe, same pitch,
same diameter, and its length is twenty-three
inches. Observe, our stopped pipe is half an
inch less in length than half that of the open
pipe; yet again notice that it is longer than that
pipe would be if severed at the true nodal dis-
tance from the languid. How can we read eleven
H5
AND IN THE ORCHESTRA.


as “ precisely thirteen,” and twenty-three inches
as twenty-six inches? Under the strange notion
that it is no matter if there is a difference, this
has been done, and the truth of facts lost sight of,
or disguised, in the convenient phrase, “ approxi-
mately correct.” The phrase assumes that there
is a standard claiming nature’s allegiance. We
want to know not what is correct, but what is
true? Further, here it may be well to remark
that if you stop the same open pipe at the top,
the note obtained will not be an octave deeper,
it will be nearly a tone sharper than that; if you
■stop the pipe at the centre, the note will net be
the same as the open one, it will be considerably
flatter; in neither case a good tone, since for its
proper sounding in such condition the lip would
require to be cut higher, perhaps arched, and lan-
guid lowered. Every detail we come upon tells
plainly of the working power of the reed.
The fundamental importance of the recogni-
tion that pipes of the same pitch varied between
themselves as to lengths, was not perceived;
nevertheless a qualifying condition was admitted,
that pitch was affected by depth of the pipe,
that is its distance from front to back; but width
does not affect pitch.” As regards “ depth,”
in no work within my knowledge does there
exist any attempt at a solution of the problem
how such a result ensues that depth interferes
with pitch. It seems to be taken account of only


as a disturber of the harmony of things; yet see
how significant it is under the new theory of the
working abstracting wind-stream reed. The
actual law operating admits of most precise state-
ment when this generating power, having its
special task, is acknowledged,—viz., the dif-
ference of pitch in pipes of varied diameter (other
things, of course, being equal) is proportional to
the differences existing between the area of the
cross section of the pipe and the area of the
mouth; the difference in pitch is greatest when the
depth from front to back is greatest. It should
be observed that increase of depth always flattens
pitch, and tends to deprive the pipe of harmonic
force. As regards the further assertion that
“ width ” is without effect on pitch, this also is
inexact, and misses the very point which should
have led to further investigation. It is not true,
because the same amount of wind acting over a
wider area cannot do the larger extent of work
with expenditure only of the same amount of
energy. The pitch of every pipe is affected by
the width of mouth relatively , —that is to say,
by its proportion to the diameter of the pipe.
Here are some figures to exercise your thought
upon, measurements of pipes taken from Mr. T. C.
Lewis’s factory,—these three pipes all giving
the same pitch, speaking the same note. (The
Society of Arts pitch 535 per second is the stan-
dard.)


ccc
Dimensions
(in inches).
Length
Open Diapason ;
Pedal Bass (wood)
16 by 14
13ft. 3 in.
Open Diapason ;
No. i (wood)
10 by 7I
15ft.
Open Diapason:
No. i (metal)
Diameter
10 inches
15ft. 4m.
The width of the mouth of the pedal bass for
16ft. tone is 14m.; of the open, in wood, 7~in.;
of the open, in metal, one fourth of the circum-
ference : it is called a fourth mouth. The height
of the mouth of the pedal bass is s^in.; of the
open wood, 2|in.; of the open metal, 2|in.; and
the windways are for the pedal bass, iin.; of the
open wood a full sixteenth of an inch; of the
metal open, one eighth of an inch bare.
At the philosophical pitch of 512, used in most
scientific books (as by Tyndall), the wave length
of the technically called sixteen foot pipe reaches
17ft. 4m. At the 535 or usual organ pitch at
that time, the calculated orthodox length for 16ft.
wave length would be 16ft. Sin.
If we take a dulciana, the softest speaking
pipe of that rank, we find its diameter is only
s|in., and its length is 16ft.; its mouth 3§in., its
windway a sixteenth and a thirty-secondth. Now,
compare these; what remarkable differences in
pipes supposed to display the same truth to


Nature’s law ! Between 13ft. 3m., and 16ft, what
a gap unaccounted for by science. Is it not of
some interest to the investigator both to know
and to interpret? Note the immense strength
of the wind-reed of the pedal bass, —one quarter
of an inch in thickness. Consider what is implied
in that fact. Here I may as well remark that,
when I alluded to the severance of a part of
the stream of air in the recoil of the reed when
it entered the pipe on its inward throw, that the
amount of air so issuing, I would Pot have you
suppose that it passed out at the top of the pipe;
on the contrary, very little action is perceived at
the top of the pipe, scarcely any wind passes out.
Whatever amount is thrown in by the stream is
immediately sucked back when the reed passes the
vertical line of the mouth on its return outward.


CHAPTER XL
Alliance of Theory with Facts.
1 REMEMBER how in my boyish days my
1 imagination was excited by a description I
read of some forest forges in Canada, fed
with big pine logs, located to take advantage of
great falls of water; how tall timber shafts were
built up beside a precipice, and an upper stream
was turned to send a vast stream of water down
the shaft, passing an orifice at the back of the
forge; how the liquid column, down rushing with
accelerated velocity from its great height, set up
so strong a force of suction upon the fires by
drawing the air through, that the furnaces were
kept night and day at a white heat, —no labour
needed, no bellows blowing; only the fires to be
fed, and nature did the work. This strange
forest work exemplifies the principle of the organ
pipe, suction by, velocity. Sometimes I have


thought that the spirit of the Canadian forest
from that time hence forward haunted my brain,
dwelt there in some hidden recesses, and, in the
unconscious gropings of the mind, became a
prompting presence,—luring me to those re-
searches which have ever had so strong a hold
upon my curiosity. We often speak of our in-
herited tendencies which impel us whether we will
or no. But may we not be the passive servitors
of other tendencies equally strong, and not pre-
natal? Some deep rooting impression finds a
lodgment and will not be eradicated. How often
one goes hunting about in the brain for something
one wants to remember, mentally asking, “ What
was it I wanted to remember?” and no answer
comes. All is a blank waste that renders not
up a ghost of the vanished thought; and, vexed
at the hopeless loss, one gives it up, and turns the
mind out to grass. Then some time after, when
desire has been forgotten even, you suddenly
wake to find that the mind has been thinking,
unknown to yourself—thinking on its own ac-
count —and in a flash that which you sought is
present before you, bright, clear, complete, 7e-
membercd. It makes one feel foolish —I know
it makes me feel so —and I question seriously
whether my mind is my servant, or I am my
mind’s servant. You are not your mind, your
mind is something more than you. To know
thyself ! Ah, yes,- —but who does ?
The other day I came upon this sentence in a
I 5 I
AND IN THE ORCHESTRA.


little book by Dr. Gerald Molloy : “ The true test
of a theory in physical science is to bring it face
to face with the facts of nature, to see if it is
consistent with these facts, and if it can help us
to explain them.’ There is a saying of Goethe
to the same effect: “ Theory in and for itself is
nothing worth, but in so far as it makes us believe
in the connection of phenomena.” The theory
that I have been endeavouring to elucidate—that
the physical action taking place at the mouth of
organ pipes is a process of suction by velocity—
bases its claim upon your acceptance on this same
test; that it explains convincingly the relations
of action and results, and the sources of differ-
ences and particularities exhibited by organ pipes,
and in all the questions that arise in practice is
able to trace fact to consequence, and to connect
phenomena. No other theory has been equal to
satisfying the practical enquirer, or has been free
from most perplexing errors of statement, or from
conclusions for which the evidence brought for-
ward is inconclusive and distrustful.
The position at which we have now arrived in
the examination of the dimensions of pipes and
their associated manifestations of pitch, brings
out very palpably the contradictions involved in
the orthodox theory, and I can confidently place
my theory face to face with facts, because on
facts it is founded.
A student, well read in all that the best text
ooxs in acoustics can teach, coming to the prac-


tical study of organ pipes, and seeing in a grand
organ so multitudinous an array of pipes—the
unison pipes of the several stops, conspicuous for
diversities of diameter as well as of length—
would naturally expect that here, if anywhere,
he would find confirmation of Reynault’s law :
“ The velocity of propagation of a wave of the
same intensity in straight lines, is less according
as the section of the tube is less.” No ! this small
comfort is denied him; he is in a world of con-
trarieties; the law is abrogated; he will find the
organ world de facto governed on principles the
exact opposite,— the velocity is greater as the
section is less. Investigating, he will find that,
on closely comparing the lengths of pipes the
octaves of each other, the apparent relation of one
half the length is not borne out; differences suffi-
ciently important to attract enquiry do exist, and
the diameters of pipes in a series do not follow
on a similar rule of halving at the octaves; for
instead of the octave or the double octave being
in that ratio, he must count to the seventeenth
pipe before he will arrive at a pipe half its dia-
meter: a fact noticed in the last chapter.
Calculation will shew that a circle one inch
in diameter does not stand in the relation of half
to a circle two inches in diameter, and that a pipe
one inch in diameter can contain but a fourth in
volume of that which is two inches in diameter.
So that neither the thirteenth pipe nor the seven-
teenth pipe can hold the assumed relation to the


originating standard. Many other anomalies
present themselves the further the enquiry is pur-
sued, and the organ builder’s justification is that
what he does is felt by the ear to be the best.
In the scientific study of organ pipes, it is
customary to refer to “ the laws of Bernoulli!,”
the relations of lengths of pipes, and of the
fundamental tones and harmonics having been
formulated by D. Bernouilli a century and a half
ago. In the course of years, however, observa-
tion showed that in their application they did
not altogether correspond to facts; hence we
come upon the term “ approximate relations,”
used by writers, and to what is called the “correc-
tion of the laws of Bernouilli.” In this correction
(here quoting from Dr. Stone) “ the hypothesis
is made that the change from the constraint of
the pipe to a condition in which no remains of
constraint are to be perceived takes place sud-
denly at the point where the wave system leaves
the pipe. It is, however, evident that the
divergence which takes place may be conceived
of as sending back to the pipe a series of reflected
impulses instead of the single reflected impulse
which returned from the open end of the pipe
according to Bernouilli’s theory, and that these
elementary impulses, coming from different dis-
tances, may be altogether equivalent to a single
reflected impulse from a point a little distance
from the end of the pipe” And Helmholtz
says: “ Theory also agreeing with experiment.


shows that the phases of the reflected part of
the wave are the same as they would be if the
reflection did not take place at the surface of
me opening itself, but at another and somewhat
different plane. Hence, what may be called the
reduced length of the pipe (or that answering
to the pitch) is somewhat different from the real
length; and the difference between the two de-
pends on the form of the mouth, and not on
the pitch of the notes produced, unless they are
so high (and hence their wave lengths so short)
that the dimensions of the opening cannot be
neglected in respect to them.” And this is the
fanciful orthodox scientific way of accounting
for those differences in lengths which I placed
before you in the last chapter.
It is noticeable that we generally And that the
experiments of this kind made by scientific men
are with small pipes, eight or twelve inches in
length, made for them by organ builders,—nature
dressed up for the occasion, and tutored to play
a part. From such experiments deductions are
made to cover a system, and they can scarcely
under the conditions be other than faulty. It is
only when we range over an organ factory, and
examine of set purpose all sorts and sizes of pipes,
that we discover the largeness of divergence from
theory, and recognise the startling amount o
facts that are left unaccounted for by very learned
investigators. In the so-called corrections of t e
laws of Bernouilli, the supposed distance—or,
*55
AND IN THE ORCHESTRA.


more deferentially stated, the distance mathe-
matically calculated—to which we are to imagine
the wave is expelled for reflection and to con-
sider and .accept as being equivalent to an extension
of the air column—taking together both the dis-
tance assumed at the open end and at the mouth
—the whole addition is quite inadequate to re-
present the actual amount of variation that comes
before us, and leaves the difficulty very much the
same. Remember, I showed you by data how one
pipe was deficient in length to the extent of one
foot four inches, another to one foot eight inches,
and another to three feet five inches. What
imaginary amount of reflection can we admit as
being able to account satisfactorily for the dis-
parity in the last given instance; and, of course,
if the correction fails to satisfy us here, it fails
in validity as a support to a theoretic explanation,
and does not explain.
It is said that some of the pipes in old Dallam’s
organ at Exeter Cathedral measured two feet
across. Fancy the length of such pipes! What
tubs they must have been. The scientific cal-
culator would find it as difficult to account for
the lost length in these pipes, as to account for
the lost tribes of Israel.
Recurring a moment to the Helmholtz words
just quoted, he surely misses the real significance
of the conditions, and makes too much of “ the
form of the mouth ” as accounting for the lost
length of pipe, in fact not much more than a hap-


hazard guess, and even then he does not say
how or in what way it is a factor in the results.
So also says Ellis of the master in referring to
this passage.
Under my theory all difficulties of interpreta-
tion vanish, because we recognise breadth of
acting force, and nearness to acting force ; hence
the position and scale of the mouth have real
import. Also, the comparative diameter mainly
determines what extent of effect these have upon
the necessary length of pipe in conformity to
pitch, and not to perceive this is to miss the true
purport of the process of evoking vibration. No
proportion in the scale of the mouth can outdo
the effect of absolute distance (from windway to
the pipe’s back) accompanying larger diameters;
and it will follow with the certainty of law that
the larger the diameter of pipes the less will be
the lengths of the pipes, if in pitch they are in
unison. In this statement I do not include the
reed pipes, which follow laws different from those
of flue pipes. The metallic reed pipes do follow
Regnault’s law, although not referred to.
The musical tones however, in both these
systems of pipes are the result of suction by
velocity,” and the distinction is that in the reed
pipes the suction is set up by a propulsive cur-
rent, and in the flue pipes by an abstracting
current, and the influence of the diameter affects
the length in an opposite manner; therefore, in
reed pipes, as the sectional area is less, the length
i57
AND IN THE ORCHESTRA. .


.is less. A knowledge of the fact is of importance
to every student of acoustics, although few are
aware of the existence of the differences I have
■stated.
If a pipe of the diameter illustrated in the last
•chapter has a mouth of the extent of the line e,
it is evident that the wind-stream will have more
fulness of effect upon the column of air than it
would if the mouth had only the extent of the
line a, and in like ratio you may consider the
-effect of extent as given by b, c, d; so you ckn
readily understand how, with a larger diameter
-of pipe, the command over the column of air
must be less comparatively throughout the series,
whatever the particular scale adopted. Distance
will always count, and large pipes by nature’s
decision be, in comparative relation, short pipes.
There is a greater mass of air to be moved, and
more time is occupied in moving it: hence time
rules the lengths in every instance, and needs
mo correction. An intelligent perception of this
law will clear away many of the difficulties
which beset the enquirer, and will give confidence
in attacking other problems.
One organ builder, of scientific attainments,
M. Cavaille-Coll, empirically determined a rule
in regard to practical work which has suited
his purpose with his own workmen, although
it cannot lay claim to accuracy in the scientific
sense. I know that on its first introduction for
•consideration we spent many hours in testing its


truth on all varieties of pipe, and found that the
rule would not work to any available extent in an
English factory. That it should suit M. Cavaille-
Coll is reasonable enough, because, conditioned
by a particular practice, a prescribed quality of
tone, definite pressure of wind, and training of
workmen accustomed to such routine as such a
rule enforced, guidance of or by some set stan-
dard might prove useful, —as it were a sort of
supernumerary master in the master’s absence:
but it is questionable if any other value attaches
to it. In every factory there are set-out rods kept
in permanence for every series of pipes, showing
the lengths that have been determined upon by
long usage. Still, the calculations are interest-
ing in that they serve to attract attention to
the great discrepancies that exist between scientific
theory and everyday practice in organ building.
From the calculated wave length which it is
assumed an open pipe should be for a specified
pitch, the Frenchman’s rules are:
“From one half of the wave length—deduct,
in the case of square pipes or pipes of rectangular
section, twice the depth of the pipe , and for round
or cylindrical pipes an amount equal to five thirds
of the diameter .” The latter proportion is thus
less than the former, and evidently the need for
the difference arises from the nearness of the act-
ing wind-stream to the enclosing wall which
surrounds the air column, upon which its influence
is to be effective and prompt. Only with such a


guiding idea in estimating results, can we see why
it should be so, and are not merely left to the con-
clusion that it is because it is.
M. Cavaille-Coll relied upon his method of
calculating reduced lengths for the ascertainment
of the nodal division in respect of pipes for the
flute harmonique. Taking the exact length for
the body of the pipe (less five thirds diameter),
he pierces the hole for the node at the exact dis-
tance, from the open end, of a quarter of wave
length; and the pipe then, providing the mouth
is of proper height only, speaks the first harmonic
tone instead of the fundamental. I cannot see,
in the system adopted by M. Cavaille-Coll, any-
thing more than a rule of thumb procedure; for
however much he may value it, in the daily prac-
tice in the factory it must be subject to modifi-
cations from a variety of causes. To mention
only one which is never remarked upon in
scientific comments, —the wind admitted at the
footfiole; this is perhaps the most important, most
governing influence that is brought to bear upon
the behaviour of the pipe. Diameter may be the
same, width of mouth the same, bellows pressure
the same; but, if the amount of wind admitted
at the foot is increased, the whole aspect is
changed, quality, pitch, power, are all in new
relations, and these cannot be affected without
affecting the length of pipe,—consequently the
reduced length can never be adjudged to be any
fixed amount of reduction by rule or ratio. In
i6o
THE MAKING OF SOUND IN THE ORGAN


point of fact additional amount of wind is equiv-
alent to a change to higher pressure, and the
size of the foot-hole is the foundation of the
constitution of the pipe. The printers are harry-
ing, so I must needs cut short my cogitations.
That donkey that I heard this morning ended
his braying quite as abruptly. What a queer
sort of music it is that a donkey delights himself
with. The wise say his windpipe is fashioned
unlike other creatures, and has a corkscrew twist
from end to end. Query, in what way is this
related to his peculiar melodic functions, and to
other folks’ crankiness?


CHAPTER XII.
The Natural History of the Gamba Family.
THE “ gambas ” form a class of pipes variously
constructed in scale, and are so called from
the quality of their tone imitating the old
“ viol da gamba ” and its modern representative,
the violoncello. Thus we have organ stops named
“ viol da gamba ” or “ viole de gambe,” and in
sixteen feet tone one usually called violone.
Then we must note that there is the old method,
and the more modern method both directed to
the obtaining of the same imitative result.
Under the old method, the general character-
istics of the class as regards the structure of the
pipe are: cylindrical pipe of comparatively slen-
der scale, low cut mouth, full winded at foot and
slow in speaking; the slow speech is a necessity
of the aim to imitate a particular well defined
quality of tone, as we shall ascertain presently,


and is caused by the wind being, as it is techni-
cally termed, “ much thrown out,”-—that is, the
line of force of the current of wind is set more
outward than ordinarily; for, without such an
arrangement, the fundamental or ground tone of
the pipe would not secure its hold. Some
harmonic would permanently usurp possession,
for the stream reed, being short in consequence
of low mouth, and strong in substance from ex-
cess of wind, would keep to the harmonic as the
flute harmonique does. The latter has a low
languid, or interior level within the mouth, whilst
the gamba has a higher languid in relation to
the under lip of the mouth thus directing the
stream at a more oblique angle to that level.
The tone has decided introductory (and, as I call
them) transitive harmonics; that is to say, they
follow one another, dying as soon as born. They
are distinct, and in the reverse order to those
harmonics which are incorporated in the tone.
Of their sequence, although but momentary, the
ear conveys a clear impresssion to our conscious-
ness. We call the tone of all “ gambas ” a
stringy quality, and it is a very interesting en-
quiry how this peculiar pipe tone is built up. The
characteristic quality pertaining to all stringed
instruments whose tone is elicited by the bow
does, we may well suppose, arise through a pro-
cess bearing a close analogy to the process that
we here analyse.
The violin tribe is unequalled for the rapidity


with which tone is elicited; therefore we seem
to be at fault in our particulars of imitation as
described. The truth is that it is a disadvantage,
this slow speech of the “ gamba,” often felt to be
excessively slow. Most skilful voicing upon this
which I have named “ the old method,” is needful
to give sufficient time for the appearance of the
introductory harmonics without too greatly de-
laying the fundamental; for it is a nice point
to strike the mean between having the wind so
much thrown out that the pipe will not speak
any tone, and risking by giving quicker speech
the sudden “ flying off to the octave ” with ob-
stinate persistence not to descend.
The action of a violin string is a swinging
action, only worked up gradually to its full
amplitude by the serrations natural to the hairs of
the bow, hence its swing is accumulative whilst
seemingly prompt.
By “ stringy quality,” musicians mean the tone
of the bowed string. Amateurs talk eloquently
in their way, of the string tone and its beautiful
purity, and of the reed tone and its abominations
(meaning the free reed tone as heard in harmo-
niums and American organs). Not heeding that
the best judges of quality in sound class the
stringy quality as the nearest allied to reed
quality; and, indeed, are accustomed to speak of
these stops which best imitate the viola tribe, these
geigens and gambas and violones, as decidedly


“ reedy stops ”; otherwise they would be poor
representatives.
The violoncello in the orchestra, so characteristic
in tone, has always its introductory harmonics.
These are sharp to the fundamental tone into
which they merge, and they give thereby that
breezy effect which is so pleasant,—just a freshen-
ing touch of sharpness, and no more.
Octaves of a free violin string are always sharp
to the note of the whole string, and the roughness
that we hear is commonly referred to the grip and
bite of the bow; the sharpness is minute, yet
sufficiently potent to give definite character. The
ear is as easily deceived as the eye is. The
imitation may pass for the real, and be enjoyed
as much; just as they say that flirtation pleases,
although it is known to be made up to pass for the
preference that it simulates.
You will find that I use the terms air reeds, or
aero-plastic reed, or preferably air-stream-reed,
to express the agent of vibration in flue organ
pipes, the idea being the same. In considering
the nature of the gamba organ pipe, and in deter-
mining the relation of its stream reed to its air
column, one of the facts discovered in my in-
vestigations on sound should always be borne
in mind, —viz., that the pitch of the reed is
dependent not on vibrating length, but on vibrat-
ing divergence,—on the amplitude of the reed s
motion. The pitch of the air column is not
necessarily the same as the pitch of the stream
i65
AND IN THE ORCHESTRA.


reed; they may be, and often are, at variance,
and this pipe affords a happy means of demons-
trating assertions which I have on occasion made,
—that the tone of every organ pipe is dual.
As regards the reed, whatever the modifications
of length by heighth of mouth, of thickness by
varied wind way, or of strength by amount of
wind pressure, the final result is bound by this
law of divergence. In the typical air-stream-
reed, any deviation from the direct line of force
taken by the issuing stream of air, that, however
minute it may be, is the beginning of vibration.
Its highest possible rate of vibration begins upon
its least divergence from the direct line; conse-
quently, its highest pitch is its inceptive tone at
this stage or condition of untamed energy.
Whether such condition can be maintained or
not, that ideal must be assumed as preparatory
to analysis on the system formulated under my
investigations. The bass has always been scholas-
tically considered the basis and commencement
of musical tone. Every relation of tones has been
examined upon that ground, and the notion has
undoubtedly been the source of many errors;
one might almost say in the nature of super-
stitions, so tenacious has been its hold, so blinding
its influence on the perceptions. Conformably
with the system that I uphold, tone has its be-
ginnings on the highest activity, and descends to
the lowest and slowest. The development of
its mechanical relations proceeds by definite


degrees, and the issue depends upon the affinity
existing between the pipe and the reed, both pos-
sessing definite form, power, and character, and
blending these by law. The vibration of the air
moulded stream reed is thus shown to be isotonic ,
not isochronous. The laws of its vibrations are
identical with those of the things most like itself,
of sound waves, of light waves.
The “ gamba ” of modern usage is held to have
been devised by the famous organ builder
Schulze. Take note that the whole treatment
under the Schulze system depends upon the fact,
well-known in experience, that if you hold your
hand or your finger near the mouth of any speak-
ing organ pipe, there is forthwith a sensible flat-
tening of its pitch, deepening with the nearer
approach of the hand. In tuning organs it is
the ordinary custom to test pitch by this simple
method, determining thereby whether the pipe will
best bear flattening or not for its nearer approxi-
mation to a desired pitch in concord with others.
Suppose yourself to be tuning a set of “ gamba
pipes; you would notice perchance that a restive
pipe continually darting off to harmonics would
be corrected and steadily held in check so long
as your hand or finger was near or across its
mouth. We can thus well understand how it
might occur to Schulze that the temporary ex-
pedient could be made permanent. This is what
he did ; he fixed a small bar across the mouth.
The device proved successful. In pipes thus
16/
AND IN THE ORCHESTRA.


treated the tendency of the reed to settle at the
octave is suppressed, speech is quickened, more
wind may be given without danger, and the
quality becomes in consequence more charac-
teristic, more “ stringy.” The method extended
to pedal pipes produces a stop of remarkable
beauty, called the violone. Here is a diagram,
only roughly proportional, but near enough,
Fig. 12.
Vertical
Section of
Violone
Organ Pipe
with Bar.
illustrating one of the violone pipes (CCC), as it
stands in one of Lewis’s organs.
It is, say, yin. by 5m., is cut up one fifth, ais
the foot, b the block or languid, c the cap, d the


mouth, e the ear, f the bar. The position of the
bar is such that the upper edge is at two thirds
the height of the mouth, and its distance from
the vertical line of the mouth is one third, the
bar itself being in width three quarters of an
inch full.
Now, you will no doubt notice the peculiar
shape given to the block by the builder, how it
dips back and leaves a hollow for the air. The
decision that this shape is the best for the perfect
Quality of tone desired is only arrived at after
many experiments. You know how Boehm was
particular in his flutes about the parabolic head
he devised, deeming it to possess in that specific
shape a peculiar acoustical virtue. Perhaps it is
a heresy to say it, for people do not give up semi-
sentimental notions readily, yet such it is in my
judgment; for Boehm was so taken by the
scientific exposition of the parabola business
as not to see that it was a mechanical relation
in question, applicable to the flow of fluids and
liquids generally, and not a particularly impor-
tant acoustical problem involving calculations of
focus and of a system of reflected waves, and I
know not what. Not but that Boehm was per-
fectly right in adopting that form within the head
of the flute, only that it is not well to be over
righteous in acoustics.
The violone pipe before us shows a similar
provision, but in a simple commonplace fashion
quite as effective as the more elaborate form. Here


is a plain wedge-shaped pit at the back of the
mouth, lying like the backwater to a mill stream;
and the effect is not unlike, for it steadies the
flow during withdrawal by yielding up gradually
its reserve, and in this way sudden fluctuations
are avoided, and, as we may say, a better average
is maintained both in resistance and supply. For
the sole purpose of this pit in the pipe is to steady
the tone , experience having proved that this
treatment is the best for securing the desired
result. “ The ear is the umpire of sound,”
a saying of old Master Tansur.
Gradation in withdrawal. Now, the suction
exercised by the stream reed upon the bottom of
the air column resting on a level languid is subject
to variable degrees of exhaust, by reason of
cumulative effects, to which all uniform motion in
flow is subject unless there should be an absolute
balance of acting and resisting powers, a condi-
tion which can rarely be attained without some
provision in the nature of a governor. So this
pit of air may be considered a governor prevent-
ing jerkiness in degrees of exhaust, since the
reserve of air particles is drawn upon whenever
the mean of force is exceeded either by variable
strength at the windway, or by cumulative effects;
the wedge shaped form rendering aid by grada-
tions which are compensatory, since the depth of
the pit is greater as the distance of the incline
from the mouth of the pipe increases, and so
equalizes in continuity of results,-—viz., in steady-
I/O
THE MAKING OF SOUND IN THE ORGAN


ing the air column. In all the difficulties of an
organ, there is none greater or more provocative
of trouble than the ailment called unsteadiness.
We note the provision of ears. Builders say
that the ears are added to pipes to steady the tone.
They knew by experience that ears do favour to
this end, and, without investigating why they do
so, are content with the practical result. On the
theory that I have built up, you will readily per-
ceive that the purpose that they actually serve is
to prevent any flank movement of the atmosphere
during the vibration of our stream reed to and
fro. Consider a moment. The angle formed by
the vertical line of the mouth, and the line of
force of the outwardly inclined stream of air pre-
sents an opening of weakness, and these ears are
as ridges or outworks thrown up to guard against
any premature invasion by the external air, which
is thus only allowed to pierce through at its
proper time, and then only just under the edge
of the upper lip.
The “gamba,” as a typical pipe, has three
specialties: overblown wind, to give a stiffer kind
of reed: a low cut mouth, as a provision for
shortness of reed; and wind much thrown out,
as a means compulsory for ensuring a greater
amplitude to the reed’s motion, the result of the
combination being that the tone is rich in har-
monics. Harmonics precede the ground tone,
follow it, and coalesce into it, and linger behind
as though the last to quit the pipe.


Applying the stream-reed theory to the Schulze
gamba, we shall see how fruitful it is in illustra-
tion of the actual process of tone making. Here
is a little diagram which will show you the form
of curve as described by the stream reed when
without and when with the bar at the front of
the mouth. If A is giving the octave, it would
remain with the amplitude shown, but with the
bar the curve becomes as at B, having twice the
amplitude. This is inevitable in descent to the
fundamental pitch of tone; if A had been giving
Fig. 13
Curve of
the Stream Reed
without bar ( a)
with the bar ( b ).
the second harmonic (the twelfth) instead of the
octave, then its amplitude would have been one
third only that of B because as I have written,
the air stream reed does not obey the law of
isochronism , to which the strings submit, and this
you should always remember.
In examining this modern type of gamba we
shall find that the wind is not so much thrown out
as in the older class of this species, and herein lies
the real meaning of the difference, for by the
agency of the bar an equal extent of amplitude
is enforced in the air reed or stream reed; but the


form shown is a new form, and see how grace-
fully it bends,—yes, happily we can see, for the
new form bears an impress highly significant.
A little bit of tissue paper deftly applied will
enable us to watch the process of nature. This
method of experiment is given in detail in a
former chapter. Take away the bar, and the pipe
will not sound its ground tone; it is only able
to produce its string of brilliant harmonics. Look
at the stream reed; it is but a little space it
traverses whilst these high notes are sounding in
your ears. Now, advance the bar across the mouth,
and see how in coy consent the air reed comes out
to you with a fine curve, and all the power of
the pipe is affirmed coincidently with this visibly
extended amplitude of the reed’s motion.
You can change from one state to another by
this movable, bar, and you have to notice that the
reed is almost upright in stem at the root, but
bends over arching at the tip. Notice also that
tne inward curve of the reed when within the pipe
is less than the outward curve at its full throw
or amplitude. The explanation of this difference
would be quickly divined if you fully compre-
hend the way in which the reed builds itself up
in a curve, leaning outward upon the external air;
the air composing the reed issues from the wind-
way in a dense stream; the particles are most
compressed at the root, and gradually expand
and become less energetic as they reach higher
freedom, —the velocity of the upward stream
173-
AND IN THE ORCHESTRA.


motion attracts the external air with force,
strongly to the root, bearing with lessening force
on the less compressed portions higher up. The
gradation of force so manifested gives rise to the
curve: the curve delineates the force, —we may
say that the curve expresses the constant flow of
the surrounding air to this diversified region of
greatest and least pressure, its impulse being in
graduated power from root to tip. By the bar
we interfere with the full direction of the flow
or rush of the outlying air, concentrate it more
on the lower portion of the stem, and shield the
upper or tip portion of the reed from its in-
fluence. This upper portion having thus lost so
much of its natural support is bent by the out-
flowing nodal wave of the pipe in a more supple
curve, and bent out to an extent equal to provid-
ing then the required amplitude for producing the
ground tone pitch. The form is its own; the
curve of the “ gamba ” is not the same as the curve
of the diapason.
There is another remarkable feature peculiar to
these pipes: the artist can shade the quality with
less fulness of ground tone, and with more varied
and delicate hues in the harmonics, which never-
theless come out more brightly in the contrast,
and compensate the ear with a new variety, toned
with less body yet with equal depth, through the
brightening of the harmonic colour and the more
refined blending of the whole. There is nothing
174
THE MAKING of sound in the organ


more beautiful in all the varied wealth of an
organ than a well voiced “ gamba.”
The distinct agency of the stream reed and the
relation of the air column therewith being evident,
the inference follows that the note produced is-
dual, is of two almost unisonous notes blended
into one sound. Quite unexpectedly, when I was
experimenting, a chosen pipe furnished me with
the talisman to prove its truth. When the reed
and the pipe are suitably mated, the unison is-
one of perfect agreement; but the reed rules,
always. It may be sharp to the pipe, but the
pipe can never be sharp to the reed; for on the
first intimation of such the reed is roused, and
starts forth to a note of higher velocity.
How slight a matter may derange the union of
the reed and pipe. If we take a slender metal
pipe of the gamba stop (say, tenor E, which is
of very graceful proportions), it furnishes very
interesting experiment. We can remove the little-
bar; and then, if we tease the pipe with a pencil
at the mouth, peace is disturbed. Our beautiful
little “ gamba ” is very sensitive and high spirited,
and cannot help letting us hear a little of the
inner life of the house when things go a trifle
wrong. There is one particular place across the
mouth for the fixture of bar: if, resting the pencil
at the upper points of the projecting ears, you
leisurely bring it down, you will hear the chang-
ing harmonics; then, halting just a hairs breadth
or so before the true position is arrived at, all tone-
175-
AND IN THE ORCHESTRA.


will be lost, and there will suddenly break forth
a wailing “ who-hoo, who-hoo ”; that torture will
continue until you relieve the suspense by moving
the pencil another shade in descent, when the
discord will resolve into the perfect tone instan-
taneously, as two dewdrops when they touch melt
into one. Precisely the same “who-hoo” as we
hear when tuning two separate diapason pipes
so nearly in tune that they are only a shade out
of unison, and just on the point of accord. The
“gamba” pipe and the reed were similarly at
variance. The air reed, not having quite yielded
to the outward influence of the bar, was a trifle
sharp to the pipe; the supernodal wave was too
short and unable to affect a synchronisation with
precision, and therefore the phenomenon of beats
was manifested.
We could have lengthened the supernodal wave,
and flattened the note by adding a piece to the
top of the pipe, when concord would have fol-
lowed, as it did by lowering the bar; for in tuning
it matters not which note of two is altered to
bring about unison. We might alter either pitch
of pipe or pitch of reed; but by the lowering of
the bar we flatten the reed, and cause thereby the
descent of the node (then an uneasy fulcrum)
and the lengthening relatively of the supernodal
column. As a listener remarked, “ there was
surely a fight going on inside.” We settled it by
favouritism, taking sides with the little “ gamba,”
.and gaining the reed over in concession of its
1 76
THE MAKING OF SOUND IN THE ORGAN


strength for the sake of concord. This is the
explanation as it suggests itself to me, practically
exhibiting how a strong reed drives the node
higher up in the pipe, and how a weak reed
favours the opposite; thus determining the varia-
tions in the lengths of pipes of unisonous pitch,
—so long an unsolved problem. Another point
of some importance is also illustrated : that the
earliest harmonics in the theoretical series may be
out of tune with the fundamental. Here the in-
troductory or transitive harmonics are, it is evi-
dent, all sharp to the ground tone; minutely so,
since the influence of the bar does not come into
effect until its flattening power ushers in the
fundamental.


CHAPTER XIII.
Holes in the Air.
O interest, to explain, to instruct. These
1 aims combined, make demands which, when
the subject under attention is of a scientific
nature, the everyday vocabulary will not satisfy.
Always my desire is to simplify, therefore you will
not suppose that the technical or scholastic terms,
and hard words, are introduced without heed or
without need. There is, in truth, no little diffi-
culty accompanying the endeavour to avoid them,
and, when used, to take care that they do not
give rise to misconceptions; a difficulty increased
by the evergrowing custom of appropriating
ordinary words to scientific uses with specialized
meanings, and under limitations of definitions
which only trained minds can fully grasp the
application of. Plain words are wrested from
their homely meanings, synonyms are abstracted
i;8
THE MAKING OF SOUND IN THE ORGAN


from their natural groups, and similitudes are in
bondage as symbols. It is an old and inevitable
evil. A “ moment ” is not now the old moment
which we knew, it is an alias for another idea.
“ Constant,” “ frequent,” “ inert,” “ force,” “power,”
“ energy,” and a hundred others, all have new
faces. We do not understand “ dissipation ” in
these days as the old folks understood it; it is
now the monopolized brand of some recondite
learning which, with others of like sort, the gene-
ral reader is constantly meeting with, and fancies
that in its new relation he understands, and yet
is at the same time conscious that he only dimly
comprehends.
Hard words are perplexing, hard meanings are
worse. Granted that many feel this to their be-
wilderment, and irreverently mutter “ scientific
jargon,” still it is but just to remember that
great thinkers and teachers, having to state new
ideas, new conceptions of the relations of things,
find their difficulty in the very superabundance
of terms already in use, and the alternative before
them is either to bring old words into new uses,
or to coin new words to express new ideas. New
coinage comes to us with a foreign look, yet
gradually it is accepted, and in the end becomes
as we say “ popularized.” New compound terms
are met with in every-day reading. Electricity
has inaugurated among the populace a reign of
energy, exemplified in edicts concerning “con-
servation of energy,” “storage of energy,” “ dis-


sipation of energy,” “ potential energy,” “ kin-
etic energy,” “ kinematic energy,”—the two last
having so homely a music, that the old lady
who wanted them interpreted thought they must
have something to do with cows; she was led to
think of the distinction of kine, early associated
in her mind with Pharaoh’s kine, the fat and the
lean. Memory takes me back to an incident
which has a bearing on this question, as you will
recognize. An intelligent boy, who was one of
a party attending a scientific lecture, was eagerly
looking and intently listening, when the lecturer
said, “Now, you see, I damp the string,” &c.;
the boy whispered to his mother, “ How did he
do it?” The reply was, “Don’t you see, he
presses the string with his fingers.” The puzzled
child asked, “ Does he squeeze it out of the
string ? I didn’t see him lick it.” The child had
got the idea of “ water,” and it was necessary, in
his mental sense of fitness, that something “ wet ”
should be introduced into the operation, else the
word “ damp ” was to him as if used for decep-
tion. We smile at the child, yet there is some-
thing for us to reflect upon—that science has not
enough words for her purposes, notwithstanding
that one dictionary announces its claims to
superiority by possessing sixty thousand more
words than the next biggest brother dictionary.
Where the speaker uses a word in one sense, and
the listener is accustomed to interpret that word
in another sense, the ways of confusion are end-
i8o
THE MAKING OF SOUND IN THE ORGAN


less, and it is this kind of misconception that we
have most cause to be vigilantly on guard against.
That there should be dark places left but half-
illumined in the progress of the chapters is un-
avoidable, because of the need of time and space
for unfolding the whole design and argument.
It is as though three-parts of a picture had been
presented, another, a fourth part, being indis-
pensable to the telling of the story, and to the
bringing out the full point and purpose of the
grouping of the composition.
Each chapter has had its distinct plan, and
each its special development. My design is to
furnish the evidence, which shall enable us to
bind together in one whole, the reasonings de-
rived from each branch of the argument which has
occupied attention.
I have been made aware in many conversations
that some readers are a little perplexed with
“ wave-lengths ” and “ nodes,” terms I have lately
used in relation to organ pipes. Here lam speak-
ing of readers who have not gone through a course
of reading in acoustics, and are not learned in the
laws and definitions. How, they ask, do we know
anything about wave-lengths and nodes? Frank-
ly, they wish to have it proved to their compre-
hension, and perhaps one may detect a flicker of
suspicion that the existence of such is an assump-
tion due to the scientific imagination.
On looking backward, I see how the question
naturally arises; and therefore, I introduce an


illustration which will enable me to satisfy en-
quiries. To begin at the beginning, step by step
in argument up to the proof. The vast mass of
air around us is in incessant activity. And why ?
Because conditions are perpetually changing.
The varying heat on a revolving planet ensures
that it shall be so. The next proposition is that
any body of air moving—from whatever cause,
whether of varying heat or of varying moisture
associated therewith—when it changes its place,
will, to state it plainly, “make a hole,” into which
hole another body of air will rush, and so on
ad infinitum. Whether the movement is to us
imperceptible, or reaches the terrible force of the
tornado, the question remains the same. Next,
we note that solid bodies moved from their place
leave holes in the air, which are sometimes filled
up leisurely and sometimes with violence; but
the swiftness with which the moving is effected
determines the result; so that, if the hole is filled
with easy gradation, we may be unconscious of
the going on of such process - but, if the filling
up is done with sudden shock or collision,
“We cannot choose but hear.”
When in “ The Tempest ” we are told that
“ the isle is full of noises,
Sounds, and sweet airs, that give delight, and hurt not.”
it is implied that some sounds do hurt, paining
the ear; yet those that hurt not, sweetest and
softest, are veritably shocks, concussing the ear-
drum.


From least to greatest there is but a question
of degrees. Any such holes, therefore, we call
“ a partial vacuum.” Now, note that my room is
an epitome of the outside world, inasmuch that
the heat is varying and the air in constant change.
The slightest draught is continually attracting
air, and so we may regard all the movements
as continuous in direction. I have said that all
air movements are the same in kind, and now we
have to note that differences in results are due
to differing conditions in the origination. Some
of these movements —which are of masses con-
tinuously onward sweeping —affect us with a sense
of noise or sound by an almost tactile perception
of the passing; but the greater part of the
movements of air appreciable by the ear are, from
conditions of origin, vibratory.
Here, then, investigating musical vibrations, we
come upon a new range of thoughts, and have to
consider activity as being also continuously re-
versed in direction, ever to and fro. In this
mode, due to particular action in origination,
very small powers can develop great intensity.
When such movements making holes in the air,
are rapid, and recur in equal times (called
periodic), they are able to impress us in a peculiar
way, because we possess an apparatus or organ of
sense whose sole office is to be sympathetically
responsive to such to and fro activity of air. The
world of the ear is thus a select domain out of the
larger world of the air. The lesser is the same
i»3
AND IN THE ORCHESTRA.


in kind, but infinitely more delicate, and specially
so all that is comprised under the word musical.
We are accustomed to lay too much stress upon
“ vibration ” itself, whereas it is but a mode
familiar to us in musical experience in instruments
in action, and we should remember that all that
really affects us in vibration is the succession , or
rapid repetition of shocks, which need not
necessarily be “to and fro.” This is clearly
demonstrated by Savart’s Wheel, and Seebeck’s
Siren, and others, which in another volume of
mine I have fully described.
Leaving aside the many issues to which reason-
ing might lead, we must perforce for brevity
restrict our attention to the movements associated
with musical sounds. The immediate cause of
sound is some mechanical action. Every musical
sound, at the time of its origination and during
its continuance, occasions in the neighbourhood of
its origin an actual displacement of air particles,
in mass or volume equal to the degree of force
expended in its production, and the extent of such
displacement is proportionate to the degree of
strength in the acting power. Where we miss in
due estimate seems to be in not sufficiently appre-
hending how that the air is
The gentlest of all gentle things,
and that the ear to a most illusionary degree
magnifies, amplifies, and exalts all that it brings
to our consciousness. I was never more impressed
with such reflections than recently when examin-


ing the latest phonograph. The little instrument
was in action, its small disc delicately poised,
and vibrating in movements scarcely perceptible,
—yet not a sound in sign of that activity.
A branched tube attached to the instrument was
handed me, when, on placing the two in the
openings of my ears, excluding all outside sound,
I heard the full power of a piano-organ as loud
as if I heard it in the street not a dozen yards
off. Removing the tubes, not a note was heard;
and, by contrast, I felt dazed by the silence. Re-
placing the tubes, the operatic air was still going
on, ground out in all the brilliance of trills and
chords fortissimo. Almost it passes belief that
the small disc could be the source of such a
volume of sound. Yet, discarding the tubes and
merely rolling a piece of paper in a cone would,
in its proper position, enable the apparently quiet
disc to break the silence and fill the room with
the same sounds heard freely by all; though
in this way, not so powerful in tone as when con-
fined to the secluded laboratory of the ear.
Those larger movements of air which effect
displacements are limited in extent; their in-
fluence to displace reaches only to a distance
which bears proportion to the character and force
originating the disturbance; for, however far we
may imagine it to extend, somewhere or other
it comes to a standstill. The resistance of the
air against expulsion from its place is very great.
Of its opposition to the progress of solid bodies
i»5
AND IN THE ORCHESTRA.


disturbing it, Professor Todhunter tells us, “ illus-
trating how great is the resistance of air particles
to a body moving through it with great rapidity,
that a cannon ball being fired off travels let us
say six thousand feet before touching the ground ,
if the air had offered no resistance, it would have
sped to a distance of over twenty thousand in one
unbroken rush.”
Resistance is in its degree the same to small
forces as to large. The line of limit therefore
must always be where the influencing force has
become so lessened in power as to be unable
further to move the air particles from their place,
that is to say, when the mass moving, finds
that the surrounding air opposed to it equally
balances by resistance whatever remaining power
it puts forth as effort to dislodge. But let us ask
ourselves, why should we suppose that here at
this limit all the original energy has died out?
The coarser manifestations of power, it is true,
have been stayed; over and above these, however,
there are finer degrees of influence that remain
unexhausted, and are taken up by the delicate
elasticities inherent in the air particles, and by
them propagated through a further stage of
existence.
For our immediate purpose of understanding,
I will now refer to an experiment brought to the
notice of the scientific world by Professor Guthrie.
It excited much interest at the time, and some
controversy, in which Guthrie, Challis, Clerk-
186
THE MAKING OF SOUND IN THE ORGAN


Maxwell, Thomson, and others took part. Pro-
fessor Guthrie’s experiment was introduced as
“ Approach caused by Vibration,” and Clerk-
Maxwell classed it as “ Action at a Distance,”
and said “ here is a kind of attraction with which
Professor Guthrie has made us familiar. A disc
(attached to one prong of a tuning fork) is set
in vibration and is then brought near a light sus-
pended body, which immediately begins to move
toward the disc as if drawn by an invisible cord.
What is this cord ? Sir W. Thomson has
pointed out “ that in a moving fluid the pressure
is least where the velocity is greatest. The velo-
city of the vibratory motion of the air is greatest
near the disc. Hence the pressure of the air on
the suspended body is less on the side nearest
the disc than on the opposite side; the body yields
to the greater pressure and moves toward the
disc. The disc therefore does not act where it is
not. The force is therefore a force of the old
school, a case of vis a tor go, a shove from behind.”
It was this controversy which gave me the
opportunity to propound in a scientific journal
my views on sound and organ pipes, and thus
several papers of mine appeared in Nature.
From the first I called attention to the fact that
suction by velocity initiated vibration in organ
pipes.
The experiment has high import in connection
with our present argument. It establishes a prin-
ciple. Striking a tuning fork with a degree of
187
AND IN THE ORCHESTRA.


force, we set it vibrating. The first effect of
that activity is a displacement of the air in the
immediate vicinity of the fork. Do not notice
the sound, consider only the motion. The tuning
fork makes a hole in the air, and there is a
great commotion around. No ant hill, trodden
upon suddenly, could be in more troublous agita-
tion. The suction caused by the velocity of the
vibration creates a partial vacuum, and into this
hole the surrounding air is pushed, and promptly
thrown out again. The energy of the fork is ex-
pended in this contest. How far does the dis-
placement extend ? Surely only to a very little
distance. It is closed in by a limiting zone of
resistance, and then the elasticities stored up in
the air particles beyond, carry forward the finer
impulses that emerge out of the contest, spread-
ing them far and wide; and this is the after-glow
of the energy.
In consequence of the uniform elasticity of the
air particles, the impulses are transmitted in
uniform time, and the time thus occupied is our
measure of the velocity of propagation. There
is a specified time to a specified distance, and the
relation of these has been ascertained and veri-
fied in many ways; and as the mean of the scien-
tific statements we get the rule that, at a tem-
perature of 6o° F., the velocity of the transmission
of sound in air is 1120 feet per second (some
calculate 1124), and the estimate for wave-lengths


is based on these figures, dividing the velocity by
the number of vibrations of the given note.
Fig. u
Dr. Koenig's
Experimental
Organ Pipe,
shelving the
positions
of the
Nodes.
The organ pipe illustration is one given by
Koenig, the famous maker of acoustical appar-
atus, and it affords as good proof of wave-lengths


and nodes as can be desired. The organ pipe has
three circular holes made on one of its sides, and
these are covered with membrane, above which is
a hollow wooden cap, provided with a gas burner,
and they are all placed in connection with gas
tubing, when the hollow chambers become filled
with gas. The position for the chambers has
been ascertained by long experimental work, and
each burner is at the place of a node. On light-
ing the burners and causing the pipe to sound the
fundamental tone, the middle burner is seen to be
greatly agitated by the vibration in the pipe,
whilst the other two are scarcely affected. If,
however, the pipe is made to sound its octave
instead, the two outer burners are in commotion,
whilst the middle one is quiet. Should the flames
be turned low, they are blown out by the agita-
tion of the membranes. We thus have conclusive
proof of the position of the nodes, as well as of
their actuality, and also of definite wave-lengths.
You will notice how the great node is not at the
centre, but is considerably nearer the mouth of the
pipe: and this is always so. Even if a pipe
should be made to give sound responsive to the
action of a tuning fork, the node will be nearer
the mouth, and consequently the pipe cannot be
so long as the calculated wave-length in free air
for the same pitch, for the tuning fork acts upon
it by suction in relative degree. In our organ
pipe (pitch note A) we see how great a difference
arises from the abstracting force of the wind
i go
THE MAKING OF SOUND IN THE ORGAN


stream; here the supernodal portion of the length
is sixteen inches, and the sub-nodal portion only
twelve inches. More of interest on these matters
will come before you in another chapter.
igi
AND IN THE ORCHESTRA.


CHAPTER XIV.
Waiving the Wave Theory.
THE end of one wave-length is the beginning
of the second. But suppose that there is no
second wave! What, then, is the length
of the first? Here is a problem, equivalent to
that propounded by the college student, “What
is the length of a limited line with the other end
cut off?” We have some knotty questions im-
mediately before us, so that this introduction is
perfectly in order, and if we have to reason in a
circle, will let it be so far a departure therefrom
as is supplied by working spider like, with lines
radiating from a centre and attaching themselves
to fixed points, and so making the circumference
many sided, as all philosophic thought should
be. That last point to every one is clear, and, if
this were a lecture, should be pointed by “ hear,
hear.”


Whatever new interpretations come, facts re-
main. Our chief scientific men, who have gone
through the range of a particular division of
science, do not care to have the fabric that has
been reared pulled about without just cause,
shown by reasons obvious, and mathematical;
they are satisfied with the structure in which they
have been bred and matured, and will not rush
out because some man in the street says that he
sees flaws that they have not discovered. No,
my ardent friends, they will not heed your objec-
tions.
The scientific man typically is the man of faith
or assurance; virtually faith and assurance are
the same in attitude; they take the same stand
against the trespass of new convictions, and non-
conformity only comes about by reason of doubt,
or sense of incompleteness in knowledge, or, on
the other hand, through an eagerness for greater
truth incited by some gleam of light that in an
unwonted manner arrests attention. In the way
of recognition, a new fact in science has the
advantage over a new truth; money may, per-
chance, be made out of it. But a new truth
has often a reference only to interpretation, and
may have to wait long for attention. The man
of mark or position may enforce a hearing for
his speculations even, but the unobtrusive thinker
and worker needs sublime patience, for the suitors
to the world’s ear are many; by and by, he or
some other who has worked for the same truth


will get the moment of recognition which be-
speaks the ear of the coming centuries.
That wise thrush that I hear out there in the
orchard has been talkng to himself in sweet short
musical phrases for the last hour and more, happy
as a bird can be with nothing to think about.
Surely it can only be discontented folk who lose
their time in writing. Why should I bother my-
self with what some man in America has said.
Innovation is good for the soul, somebody said.
My readers are aware of my objections to the
term wave-motion on account of the mental con-
fusion it produces on the popular mind, and
therefore, although to a certain degree one is
obliged to accept terms which are the currency of
science,—yet, as far as conveniently I could, I
have avoided the use of the term wave, and have
fixed the idea on pulsation,—pulse, or throb, or
shock being the real cause of sound. My care
has been chiefly with the mechanical action taking
place in • instruments as sound producers, rather
than with what the air does with the motion after-
wards; and for the same reason readers should
not expect the elementary details of acoustics to
be set forth here, which can be found in any text
book of the science, should the reader incline to
the study thereof.
The wave theory is undoubtedly a stumbling
block to many; they do not consider that what is
taught is not a literal resemblance of air waves
and water waves, but a mental semblance, a pic-


ture in fact held to be true for the purpose of
furnishing a common ground for reasoning upon
and up to certain other conclusions. So, of the
curves drawn, in series, and crossing and recross-
ing, and superposed, they are only representations
agreed upon as helping us when we would discuss
conditions which elude our perceptions. The
usual picture of a string vibrating equally each
side a central line, and dividing in two or more
sections is, of course absurd, as depicting a state
actually existing, because a string cannot be in
The Illusion of the Vibrating String.
two places at one time; and, although you may
believe you can see it so, it is truly but an ocular
deception. The double curve, above and below
line, which is usually presented as a theoretical
example of what a wave is, gives an erroneous
idea, which some readers never grow out of.
Professor Alfred M. Mayer, one of the best
of American teachers, very concisely sets this out.
“ The curve,” he says, “ is not a real picture of a
sonorous wave; it is merely a good way of show-
ing its length, and the manner in which the air


is condensed and rarefied in it; for sonorous
waves are not formed of heaps and hollows like
the waves you have seen on the sea. They are
not heaps and hollows of air, but only conden-
sations and rarefactions of air. In short, the
curve figured is merely a convenient symbol which
stands for a sonorous wave.”
The scientists carry the symbolism still further
in their mathematical investigations in the science
of acoustics, and their reasonings carry higher
meanings than the reader of ordinary intelligence
can follow, however acute he believes his mental
perceptivity to be. Here the wise saying of
Emerson comes aptly to hand: “No man can
learn what he has not preparation for learning,
however near to his eyes is the object.”
In the last chapter, wave lengths were referred
to, but not as intending to involve you in con-
sideration of the complexities of the wave theory.
We can use the term wave lengths for simple
convenience, and pass by other associations of
thought with water waves. There are, however,
two or three points in the behaviour of water
waves upon which some note of warning may be
useful. Consider how, in water waves, the main
influence is gravity, which, in respect of air
waves does not enter into calculation. The
student of course has this pointed out to him,
but it rankles ever after in his mind as false
analogy. In two other ways the resemblance
fails, —unnoted to the teacher, I believe, although


if known to him these ought to have been fairly
stated, because, when the student is left to find
out the weak points in a demonstration, his
confidence in his teacher is lessened. It is one
essential feature in sound waves in air, represent-
ing a definite pitch, that the distance from crest
to crest is absolutely uniform, irrespective of
amplitude of wave. Truth of pitch is bound up
in this veracity. In water waves it is quite other-
wise. Some years since, Signor Bazzi investigated
this question, and by a series of experiments de-
monstrated that in a water wave, a lessening
amplitude was accompanied by an increase in the
length of the wave.
Again, there is another incongruity, inasmuch
as the water wave first originated, determines
where the distance for the crest of the second
wave shall be, and the degree of force in the
origination is the factor associated with the force
of gravity to apportion such distance. The
simplest instance for observation is that of a
wind passing over a still lake. The wind press-
ing on the surface of the water, the water yields,
and the wind forces the water before it, heaping
it up to that degree beyond which its power loses
grasp; the limit of its ability to heap has been
attained, the water in a mass falls back, and by
its impetus re-undates, and fixes its crest, com-
pleting a wave length. The result has been a
compound of two forces. The wind is a con-
tinuous forward moving force; it is the water
197
AND IN THE ORCHESTRA.


that breaks up by action of gravity. The sound
wave in air is, on the contrary, due to periodically
recurring force; pulse after pulse. That is the
meaning of the oracular statement introducing
this chapter. Until the second pulse is started
the first sound wave has infinite length.
In organ pipes the true wave length is best
ascertained by means of the apparatus illustrated
in the previous chapter. The full length of an
organ pipe does not afford a right estimate. A
wave length is the distance between two nodes
doubled, but when an open organ pipe gives its
fundamental tone (which always means the lowest
tone the pipe is capable of giving) there is one
node only in its length, and the half ventral
segment which occupies the upper end is not in
an exact way measurable; still less can we rely
upon the ever variable length of the segment
portion existing at the mouth end. The posi-
tions of the two flames in Koenig’s pipe define
the nodal distance with accuracy, and when we
know that distance, the relative length for the full
wave of the whole pipe is easily arrived at. The
pitch note A. in the 4ft. octave. Thus the gas
flames for the nodes of the octave are shown to
be sixteen inches apart, and when the octave note
is sounding, the great node of the fundamental
tone is absent. If, therefore, the octave nodes be
sixteen inches apart, the double of that is the
length for the octave lower, so that, according
to wave length, this pipe (illustrated with the
198
the making of sound in the organ


flame attachment) should be thirty-two inches
in length. It is, however, only twenty-eight
inches, and, as it is drawn to scale, you can ob-
serve that it has lost four inches in the sub-nodal
portion, in consequence of the abstracting power,
and suction office of the wind-stream.
Very curious it is that the same pipe is figured
in Tyndall’s book on sound with a portion cut
off at the top equal to these four inches, thus
making it agree with the orthodox teaching that
the node is at the half length of the open pipe
when speaking its fundamental. How Tyndall
could have allowed such a travesty of nature
to be given passes understanding. It is false
to science, and a libel on Koenig, whose work is
always faithful and true. Yet neither author nor
publisher seem to care. We should have expected
eagerness to cancel such a leaf of misrepresenta-
tion, even if it cost money to do so.
Before advancing further in the exposition of
nodal relations in an open pipe, I draw your at-
tention to the stopped pipe, which, although
teachers place the consideration of the open first,
is the real foundation upon which all calculations
should rest. Here we have another of Koenig’s
models, designated to illustrate practically the
laws of linear dimensions. Two stopped pipes,
the larger one giving a note which is an octave
lower. Notice, however, that it contains four
times the volume of air which in pipe length
would be required as the lower octave of the


smaller; so that we see how great the differences
in proportions may be. We might have a pipe
twice the length only of the smaller for this same
tone, or, varying between these, might use a
variety of irregular shapes, if the proportions of
mouth and pressure of wind were duly arranged.
Thus the stopped pipe betrays peculiar features,
having apparently little relation to the law of
wave lengths, and these should have been thought
Fig. 16.
Koenig's Octave Cube Pipes,
Stopped,
worth enquiring into. Evidently they express
the degree of coercive force exercised by the wind
stream. Compare here the previous explanation
of the wind upon the water wave. There is a
limit to the power of the stream upon the enclosed
air, within the pipe, and when that limit is reached
it loses grasp upon it, and the air falls back
with a shock upon the interior; then the stream,
recoiling, catches hold again and draws again
up to the limiting point of the tenuity that can be


borne, and the process is repeated continually,
ever the same. If the stream be made stronger by
pressure of wind or by greater amount of flow,
the work will be accomplished more quickly, and
the pitch of the note will not reach to the lower
octave. A still greater distance will follow if
the width of the mouth is increased, provided
always that a required modification in the height
of mouth also is made; and in proportion to the
extent of mouth, so will be the variation in pitch.
The ocarina is a remarkable example of a stopped
pipe of erratic form.
It should now be plain to you that the degree
of tenuity to be brought about is the same in
pipes, if the working power is the same. In
the breaking back of the volume of contained air
from the suction grasp of the wind stream, the
pulse is originated; and the action, repeated in
equal periodic times, constitutes the pitch of
sound that we hear. Thus there is necessarily a
longer time distance between the pulse periods
of the larger of the two pipes than there is in
those of the smaller pipe, quite irrespective of
length. The French, you know, gave the name
of bourdon to stopped pipes, which is the same
their humble bee is known by, and the old pipes
of this class were considered good humrmrs.
The humming top is your real typical bourdon.
The pitch of its tone is determined by the size of
the aperture or mouth, the dimensions of the
cavity, and the circumference of the top, re-


latively to the velocity of rotation. The principle
is precisely the same as that of the organ pipe,
suction by velocity , and the partial vacuum arises
in consequence of the drawing out of air particles
by rapidity of rotation, —it is, in point of fact, a
rotating organ pipe. In recent times hollow tops
are supplied with small metal reeds, and by simi-
lar action these also are vibrated by suction of the
atmosphere, as the top turns in one continuous
direction; the pitch in this instance, however,
depends in the main on the elasticity of the reed,
and its length.
In the evolution of the organ something more
than humming is demanded of the stopped organ
pipe for artistic satisfaction; and experience tells
us that an accurate relation of length of pipe best
secures good tone. The quickness of speech
characteristic of this class of pipes tends to make
it a great favourite, and pure lieblichs are much
coveted by musicians. Even the so-called reson-
ance boxes, upon which tuning forks are mounted,
are simple examples of the stopped method,
chosen for their quick responsiveness over dis-
tances in preference to open pipe method, when
fork is set to call on fork apt in sympathy.
Remember that when we accuse tuning forks and
boxes of sympathy, the word “ sympathy ” under
such usage is merely synchronism sentimentalized.
Ah, what wonderful organs we should have if the
pipes were endowed with emotion and sentiment,
and were played by passionate pilgrims !


You who possess Tyndall’s admirable lectures
on sound (models of the art of exposition) have
no doubt noted and regretted that but little in-
formation is given concerning organ pipes; but
there is one passage, a statement of fact, which I
do not remember finding elsewhere, —not even in
text books issued since he gave those lectures:
yet it has a most important bearing. I heard
those lectures by his invitation, and that statement
I seized upon immediately. It is more than
thirty years ago, and I have not yet lost the
memory of the mood of fascination in which the
lecturer held us, as under a charm; indeed, I
should enjoy hearing those lectures over again
at the present day. Comparing open pipes and
stopped ones, he said : “an open pipe consists
virtually of two stopped ones, with the central
nodal surface as their common base. The mere
inspection, therefore, of the respective modes of
vibration proves the relation of a stopped pipe
to an open one to be that which experiment es-
tablishes.” I took this up as a key to open many
doors, but there was one lock I came upon in
which it got hampered.
205
AND IN THE ORCHESTRA.


CHAPTER XV.
The Key and the Key-barrel.
KEYS are of many kinds. There is the
domestic key with a barrel, and it fur-
nishes a very complete example of a
stopped pipe. You may lecture upon it, and
deduce from it quite satisfactorily a full theory
■of the organ pipe. On blowing across the open
hollow end of the barrel, most boys can elicit a
shrill whistle. If there are crumbs or atoms of
dust in the barrel they are drawn out, sometimes
very disconcertingly, by the stream of air blown
across, and, proceeding to experiment, the end
thereof is generally that the key is found sus-
pended on the lip of the performer. Thus the
force of suction is well exemplified. In the
process the key is almost emptied of the air it
contained, and the consequence is that the external
.air rushes to get in and fill the emptiness, and


if the lip happens to get too near and to be in the
way to stop that rush, it is pulled in instead.
Remember that a giant blowing across the mouth
of a stopped diapason would run a similar risk
of having his ruddy lip drawn into the pipe.
Just also, by the same process as the crumbs are
lifted up out of the key barrel, so water may be
lifted up and diffused in spray.
I have already directed your thoughtful atten-
tion to a noteworthy passage in Tyndall’s lectures,
which to me, had great significance, and I proposed
to comment further thereupon, because I held it as
a key worth using, though hitherto it has been
unnoticed by specialists. Indeed, Tyndall him-
self seems not to have made any use of it, and
having made the statement never after referred
to it, or sought to work out the inevitable infer-
ences it carries with it. Let me repeat it here :
“An open pipe consists virtually of two stopped
ones, with the central nodal surface as their
common base. The mere inspection, therefore,
of the respective modes of vibration proves the
relation of a stopped pipe to an open one to be
that which experiment establishes.” I said that I
came upon a door in which that key got hampered,
and I place before you the quotations, following,
from one of the best recognised scholastic text
books. Tyndall’s views, as gathered from his
book, are in complete accordance with these
formal expositions of theory, although not set
forth with so elaborate a display of analysis.


In Baseband's " Natural Philosophy,” trans-
lated by Prof. Everett, the theory of wave motion
in organ pipes is set out very fully. The term
applied to specify such kind of activity is curious,
—viz., “ stationary undulation that contra-
diction is, however, meant to convey the notion
•of a system of to and fro movements in a body of
fluid (air or water) so contained or included
within limits as to perpetually repeat its move-
ments within a given space.
We thus consider the stationary undulation of
air in a pipe, as we should contemplate a system
of waves set up in a body of water confined in a
trough, but moved or agitated in a definite man-
ner. Evidently a wave, started at one end, would
be reflected at the other, and might meet other
waves advancing in opposite directions. Such
■conception applied to air was a great help in
investigation, but instead of considering relations
of level—that is of rise and fall, of elevation
and depression—we consider relations of equili-
brium : that is, relations of condensation and
rarefaction, —of compacted or expanded particles
of air. Sometimes we show these states by draw-
ings, in which they are indicated by shadings
dark and light, graduated in degree, or adopt the
mathematician’s diagrams of curves with their
humps and hollows. Thus we get a common
language in which the subject can be discussed
and elucidated. The trouble is that we are always
in danger of accepting similitudes as counter-
1206
the making of sound in the organ


parts, and of allowing to our imaginations all the
implications involved in the terms we use; and
it is for this reason that I object greatly to many
of the terms, and, whilst having no choice but to
use them, endeavour to minimise the prejudicial
effect by varying the terms with others less com-
mitted to doctrine.
I have selected Deschanel for quotation, but
wish you to understand that the same explanation
(in reference to open and stopped organ pipes) is
given by Helmholtz, and by the writers of the
various text books regarded by students as
authorities in the science of acoustics. Whatso-
■ever is taught in schools and colleges is in the
main accepted as “articles of faith,” and such
teaching as is embodied in these paragraphs
passes unquestioned. My adverse fate does not
allow me this mood of acquiescence. I have to
question.
After stating the theory of nodes and segments,
Deschanel goes on to explain the recognised
differences between stopped and open organ pipes.
He says:
In this case (of a stopped pipe), a condensation propa-
gated towards the end is reflected as a condensation, the
forward moving particles being compelled to recoil by the
resistance which they there encounter; and a rarefaction
is, in like manner, reflected as a rarefaction. On the other
hand (in an open pipe), when a condensation arrives at an
open end, the sudden opportunity for expansion which is
.afforded causes an outward movement in excess of that
which would suffice for equilibrium of pressure, and a
2oy
AND IN THE ORCHESTRA.


rarefaction is thus produced, which is propagated back
through the tube. A condensation is thus reflected as a
rarefaction, and a rarefaction is, in like manner, reflected
as a condensation.
Then, as if conscious that the reader might
be somewhat perplexed by the contrariety of
dispositions affirmed concerning these two dis-
tinct species, he preceeds to enlarge upon his
explanation, and offers some very original infor-
mation about the vibrating lip of organ pipes.
Do not omit to notice the four times which all
the text books impressively announce as the
essential feature of a stopped pipe:
The period of vibration of the fundamental note of a
“ stopped pipe ” is the time required for propagating a
pulse through four times the length of the pipe. For, let
a condensation be suddenly produced at the lower end, by
the action of the vibrating lip, it will be propagated to the
closed end and reflected back, thus travelling over twice
the length of the pipe. On arriving at the aperture where
the lip is situated, it is reflected as a rarefaction. This
rarefaction travels to the closed end and back, as the con-
densation did before it, and is then reflected from the
aperture as a condensation. Things are now in their
initial condition, and one complete vibration has been
performed. The period of the movements of the lip is
determined by the arrival of these alternate condensations
and rarefactions, and the lip, in its turn, serves to divert a
portion of the energy of the blast, and it in main-
taining the energy of the vibrating column. The wave
length of the fundamental note of a stopped pipe is thus
four times the length of the pipe.
In an “open pip a condensation, starting from the
mouthpiece, is reflected from the other end as a rarefaction.
208
the making of sound in the organ


This rarefaction, on reaching the mouthpiece, is reflected
as a condensation, and things are thus in their initial state
after the length of the pipe has been traversed twice. The
period of vibration of the fundamental note is accordingly
the time of travelling over twice the length of the pipe,
and its wave length is twice the length of the pipe.
Since the wave length of the fundamental tone is four
times the length of the pipe if stopped, and only twice its
length if open, it is obvious that the wave length is halved,
and the frequency of vibration doubled, by unstopping the
pipe.
The affirmed “ vibrating lip ” is a strange effort
of scientific imagination and delusion, which a
moment of real investigation would have dis-
pelled: there is no vibration of lip in a speaking
organ-pipe, the practical man who builds organs,
smiles at the learned professor.
Now, I would ask, where the necessity for
imagining this fourfold procession in a stopped
pipe? To make up the time, forsooth? But, if
each wave starts from a common base at the
central node, and the open pipe in its upper
half is a double of the lower half, then, logically,
an open pipe should need an eightfold traversing
or, what would be throughout the whole length,
the corresponding four times travelling of the
wave from open end to open end. No! The
open pipe, being in reality two stopped ones, the
wave motion of the upper half is only a duplica-
tion of that of the lower. The time of the upper
half of the open pipe is not an added time, for
the pitch is unaltered : not an added time, but


a concurrent time. Each pulse of motion having
a common origin with a participant effect out of
a central node, the time of the one is coexistent
with the time of the other; and what is true of
the procession of the wave in one stopped pipe,
should be held to be true of two when placed
together. Two horses pulling at one pole go but
one distance simultaneously; two wheels on one
axle tree make a common advance. As the cal-
culation of wave length of an open pipe is quite
inadmissible on the supposition of a fourfold
traversing of the length of the pipe in conformity
with the explanation of the stopped pipe, the
only alternative, for consistency’s sake, is to
admit that the same analysis of the motion in the
open pipe is equally applicable to the stopped
pipe in explanation of its mode of action. The
logic of things demands this, or you must give
up the theory of an open pipe being two stopped
pipes.
To my mind, the scholastic exposition, of
which Deschanel is the mouthpiece, is too arti-
ficial in construction, and, so far as I understand
the nature of organ pipes, this imagined course of
a wave four times over the pipe’s length before
the period of one vibration is completed, is quite
uncalled for; the need for the conditions does
not exist, and the conditions themselves seem
due only to a supposititious claim of formalism,
under which the inexorable fetish, wave length,
has to be arranged with and satisfied. Anyhow,


this is the elaborately constructed lock in which
my key gets hampered.
In the system which I have developed, and in
previous chapters elucidated, you will remember
that the wind-stream, operating by suction, pro-
duces a rarefaction as the initial act of vibration,
and that the recourse is a condensation; and such
acts renewed constitute the series of vibrations.
At the starting point, therefore, we differ from
the teachers, who always commence with a con-
densation, and only on such a condition seem
able to offer an explanation of the organ pipe.
On my view, a condensation is always reflected
as a rarefaction, —a rarefaction is always reflected
as a condensation, whether the pipe be stopped
or open. There is a change of condition which
takes place at the node; more exactly, we might
say that the one transforms into the other. One
piece of evidence, I think, we have that the four-
fold course is a fancy. Thus the fundamental
tone is numbered I; the second partial tone,
which is the octave, is 2; and the third partial
tone, which is the twelfth, is 3; and for the sake
of obtaining the corresponding exhibition of
nodes, in both stopped and open pipes, we must
compare the No. 3 partial tones in each, since
although we And the distance between two nodes
as you have seen illustrated in the pipe by Koenig,
yet the octave is cut out in a stopped pipe
by its nature. Stopped pipes include only the
odd numbered harmonics in their possibilities
21 I
AND IN THE ORCHESTRA.


of tone manifestation. The rule is that when
you find the places of two nodes, then twice that
distance is the wave length. Now, the measure
of the nodal distance for this No. 3 tone is the
same whether it is found in stopped pipe or in
open: the two nodes stand at the same distance
apart in each pipe, stopped or open. The truly
pertinent question is, why should the calculation
for the wave course be twice only in the open, and
yet must be reckoned to be four times when
occurring in the stopped pipe? Surely, if the
tone is the same, if the period of vibration is
the same, and if twice the distance between the
nodes is the wave length, why have we to calculate
it at four times in the one instance, when twice
satisfies the theory in the other?
Do you play at cricket? Here the illustrations
of a stopped pipe and an open pipe giving tones
that, in pitch, are alike. The pipe (Fig.i) has a
stopper, P, fitted tightly in the top, but capable
of being pushed in, more or less, to obtain the
desired exactness in pitch. At the lower part,
where the mouth would be, the diagram is marked
with the letter V, signifying that here the condi-
tion of the wave is one of rarefaction; here is
the imagined middle of a ventral segment, whilst
at the top, at the inner face of the stopper, there
is a node, marked N. From the mouth to the
node is a distance said to be equal to one fourth
of the wave length; the shading indicates grada-
tion from expansion to condensation, and the


arrows point out the direction of the movement.
We agree, by such graphical method, to represent
Fig. 1 2 3
Diagram of the places of Nodal Divisions in
Stopped and Open Organ Pipes.
the movements taking place in wave vibration.
Fig. 3 shows, in another formal way, the two


half segments corresponding and meeting, end
for end, at the central node. The original mean-
ing of node is a knot, and in botany the joints of
reed stalks and grasses have the same name, and
in this design we might well vary the crossing of
lines by making two loops knotted at the centre,
with perhaps more truth in the symbolism. Get
the picture in your mind of the line going up to
the node, and no further, and returning, com-
pleting its own half of the figure. An open pipe
is represented by Fig. 2. The pipe, as regards
the node, is divided into two unequal halves, and
for convenience I have coined the two terms,
sub-nodal and super-nodal. The actual extent
of the disparity between the unequal halves I
have already stated, and in these sketches you
will find that the distinction is preserved. Fig. 3
shows the node as the text books would have it, —
at the centre; Fig. 2 shows the displacement of
the node according to nature. Notice, also, that
the stopped pipe (Fig. 1) shows the node higher
in position than it is in the open pipe (Fig. 2).
That likeness is true to nature.
Now return to our game. Suppose that, at
cricket, you stand with bat firm, and that, as you
hold it rigidly to the ground, a ball is bowled to
you; the ball, striking the bat, is blocked, and
recoils with force. That is the case of the
stopped pipe, and your bat, fixed there in readi-
ness to stop the ball, is the stopper. But you
can be ready in another fashion. You swing


your bat backward, and every time the ball is
bowled bring the bat swiftly forward; meeting
the ball exact to time, you cause it to recoil with
added energy from the blow. That is the case
of the open pipe. The readiness is all. If your
bat swings forward to time, it is there to send
back the ball as sure and certain as if you stood
with the bat fixed as the club of Hercules. In
both these cases your bat acts as the node, the
wind-stream is the bowler, the pulse of motion is
the ball, which can be met by a fixed resistance,
or by a swinging resistance just as effectually, if
it is up to the place right to time. In the open
pipe, the super-nodal wave of condensation
swings in, always exact to time, and at the true
nodal line meets the sub-nodal force in full shock.
A plug of air acts the part of a plug of wood.
Hitting back is all the purpose of the game. If
a wrong length were given to the pipe, it would
cause a miss, over and over again, and such a pipe
would be condemned, as you would be, if you
miscalculated the time of your swing and got
put out. For a bad pipe cannot keep up the
game, it plays tricks, flies off to harmonics, and
betrays its imperfect constitution. It is a ques-
tion of time-distance, for the pitch of the air-reed
governs all other relations and rules the length
that the pipe must have.
There is another feature of time relationship
which you will now be prepared to apprehend. I
hazard no paradox in affirming that in an open


organ pipe there are three different velocities
concurring to produce the one fundamental tone
which we call its pitch tone, —the super-nodal
wave having one velocity, and the sub-nodal wave
having for its course and recourse two different
rates of progression. If the doctrine is strange,
it is not unnatural. Think of the swing back of
the bat, the pause before recovery, and the swift
impetus of the forward stroke, all concurring to
make up the estimated time. A glance at Fig. 2
tells you that the demonstrator will have to
account for the unequal velocities. Does the sub-
nodal wave move more slowly, lest over its shorter
course it should arrive too soon at the nodal line
where it has to meet and repel the super-nodal
wave? There is no escape from the fact that the
super-nodal and sub-nodal waves in the pipe are
of different lengths, nor from the conclusion that
these unequal waves do perform their distances
in equal times; and that relatively the velocity
of the one must be greater than the velocity of
the other, so that conditions of action must exist
which in mechanical equivalency bring about the
due synchronisations, which is all that we de-
siderate, whatever may be the way in which the
period is fulfilled. The mechanical energy of
the wind-stream is now seen to be of supreme
importance in the problem, and we cannot but
wonder that teachers have neglected to estimate
it, and failed to take it into account in their
theoretical analysis. The wind-stream reed, in


its outward stroke, has a gradually lessening
velocity; then succeeds the interval of rest; then
the inward stroke of quick energy and rapidly
increasing speed. Reactions between upward and
downward motions, extensions and contractions,
rarefactions and condensations, are not necessarily
equal in time. Many familiar instances come to
mind; the tilt hammer is raised slowly or quickly,
but the time of its fall is unaffected by the differ-
ence, and the synchronisation of its blow is as
readily preserved • the bow is bent, the string ex-
tended deliberately or sharply, yet the contrac-
tion in recoil occupies the same time. A good
parallel to our reed’s action is found in that of
the heart. The spymograph shows the move-
ments of the heart’s auricles to consist of two
distinct velocities and a space of rest —systole,
dyastole, pause —in ever renewed circuit; the three
(contraction, dilation, rest) making up the rhyth-
mic period of the heart’s beat.
I have a heart, a little heart ;
It beats, but not for you.
So ran the pretty song in the days of our grand-
mothers. Sweet old songs that I remember, and
regret that they have gone. They had a tuneful
lovableness, missing now in the new period of
posings and platforms. The heart’s beatings go
on as ever, recorded by, and useful to, demon-
strators, physiologists, and poets.
21/
AND IN THE ORCHESTRA.


CHAPTER XVI.
The Variability of the Node.
THE displacement of the node sometimes
receives notice in works on sound, but with
little further comment than an admission of
some slight correction of Bernouilli’s laws being
necessary for bringing about actual conformity
between scientific statement and natural fact.
Even the evidence offered is in such general terms,
that the attempted interpretation is of too doubt-
ful a kind to attract the attention, and so the
matter has escaped anything like thorough in-
vestigation. Beyond the knowledge of some
displacement of the node from the theoretical
position it was supposed to occupy, there is
another fact to which I have called attention, and
that is the variability of the position of the node
according to conditions and influences.
In my explanation of the acoustics of “Orchestral


Instruments Old and New,” I have had to remark
upon the nodal changes taking place under the
impress of quality and pitch by the performer,
according to his will and intent for musical ends,
and have wished that all players should appre-
hend the truth that every outward change per-
ceived by the ear is accompanied by an inward
change equally real and positive.
Some years ago I introduced the subject in
the pages of Nature , my paper therein being
entitled “ On the Variability of the Node,” until
then an unrecognized phrase in relation to
acoustics.
From the time of Savart it has been known
that the nodal division of the open organ-pipe
does not take place at the exact half of the
length, that the half nearest the embouchure is
the shorter of these “ unequal halves ” —a con-
tradictory term apologized for yet sanctioned, I
believe, by the late Prof. Donkin.
The displacement of the node is perhaps the
most significant fact that in the natural history of
organ pipes presents itself to the attention of
the investigator, be he student or teacher. Why
it should have been passed by as though its
meaning were not worth wrestling for is incom-
prehensible. Since Savart wrote no light has
been thrown on this singular phenomenon, for
the explanation which has been afforded (pre-
sently to be quoted), cannot be called in any
degree satisfactory. In the illustrations of nodal


division given in various scientific works there
is a puzzling contrariety hardly to be accounted
for except on the supposition that our engravers
are as niggardly conservative in design as the
buried Egyptians, or that the engravings them-
selves are the cherished heirlooms of our pub-
lishers. In one work a representation of the
manometrical nodal division after Koenig will be
given, but carefully corrected and revised by the
aid of a pair of compasses; in another a beau-
tifully accurate copy of the original, so lopped
to suit the size of the page that much mental
effort and distortion of reasoning are incumbent
on the reader in vain attempts to bring the
engraving into harmony with the accompanying
text —young eyes are mystified : it needs cold
“ well-worn eyes ” to appreciate these fine econ-
omies of the publishing art; in another the
manometrical nodal positions will be properly
defined, and, by some negligent inconsistency, on
an opposite page an organ pipe be depicted,
admirably exact to theoretical localization, yet in
direct contradiction of knowledge. Faults of
this kind should not be allowed to pass; they
weaken faith in the teacher and are harassing to
the enquirer.
Koenig in his own illustrations represents the
displacement of the node as it is indicated under
experiment, for this one condition of truth to
nature had been too often before him in his mano-
metrical flames to allow of his disregarding its


faithful portraiture. The difference he shows to
exist as to position corresponds very closely with
that we arrive at by other means, by calculation
of scales, and by the practical teachings of ex-
perimental study of the relations and arrange-
ments of organ pipes. Of the cause of the
displacement Koenig offers no elucidation.
The following explanation is quoted from Prof.
Airy’s treatise on “ Sound and Atmospheric
Vibrations.” In the section on open organ pipes,
he says:—
“ It was found by Mr. Hopkins, of Cambridge, that the
node next the open mouth of the pipe was somewhat less
distant from it than that given by theory, or which
amounts to the same thing, that the place where the air
has always density as the external air is not exactly at the
pipe’s mouth but somewhat exterior to it.”
The extent of the disparity would be but very
imperfectly comprehended under this vague de-
lineation. Other authors have attempted explana-
tion, in substance the same as the above, to
account for the disparity; the summary of the
whole is, that science brings forward no better
plea than the surmise of a probable place, some-
what exterior to the mouth, which the air-wave
of the lower half of the pipe has to attain before
it can be properly said to be completed in length.
Truly an illogical conclusion if this line of rea-
soning is carried out. In common fairness the
upper half of the pipe might be credited with a
reasonable amount of wave-prolongation.


A displacement of some sort thus receives
acknowledgement, although as yet the variability
of the node is unsuspected.
The actual extent of the disparity between the
“ unequal halves ” can be ascertained. It is sub-
ject to laws of relation of as definite a character
as are found in other dynamical problems when
the elements of calculation are delicately de-
fined. An approximate estimate will be suffi-
cient for the present purpose. As more distinctly
representative, I use two simple terms, super-nodal
and sub-nodal.
If a standard open diapason pipe be made for
some designed pitch, whatever that pitch may be
it may safely be predicted that the pipe will
stand considerably short of the full theoretical
length; aesthetically judged for musical quality,
of the vigour demanded from an open diapason,
it ought to be about one-eighth less, a difference
much affecting the veracity of the scientific argu-
ment.
Doubtless it would be Somewhat a novelty for
a scientific lecturer to tell his audience that one-
eighth of the whole wave-length was lost by con-
version into organ-pipe vibrations, yet, unless he
innocently accepts the ironical reply of Galileo
on the pump question, that “ perhaps nature is
indifferent to a few feet,” he is strictly in this
dilemma; if the pipe is a natural standard of
wave-length, the velocity of sound in air com-
puted on the basis of the pipe’s length falls very


far short indeed of the philosophical estimate,
1,125 f ee t per second; on this ruling the latter
should be pronounced to be irreconcilably wrong,
or else the frank admission made that there is no
“ necessity of relation ” that the wave-length in
an organ-pipe, giving a defined pitch, and the
wave-length in the free air corresponding to that
note should be identical.
Taking the several classes of pipes, from the
diapason to the vox angelica, ranging from the
pipes of the most vigorous to those of the softest
intonation, the amount of difference from full
measure varies from one-eighth to one-twelfth
less than that which theory demands. The loss
is mainly due to the cause which enforces nodal
displacement.
Our immediate inquiry is, what is the extent
of displacement of the node, and what its varia-
bility ? Divide the length of the already reduced
pipe into seven equal parts, and the unequal
halves will be in the ratio of 4to 3- Four parts
belonging to the super-nodal half, and three
parts to the sub-nodal half, subject to a relative
variability, according to the position of the pipe
in the range of octaves, and subject to a fluctu-
atmg variability determined by force of wind,,
diameter of pipe, character of scale, relative size
of mouth, mode of voicing, and other details,
changing the proportion, perhaps, to 6 : 5, or even
to 7 : 6. Whatever the extent of the variability,
change in result rigidly follows change in detail.
223
AND IN THE ORCHESTRA.


with a calculable value. When, instead of the
fundamental note, the pipe vibrates in harmonic
nodal divisions, the lowest half-segment takes
upon itself almost the whole difference, and not
merely a proportional share in comparison with
its segmental relation to the whole pipe. A re-
markable fact, but one fully accounted for in
the theory I have put forth, and which I have
termed the aero-plastic reed theory, for it is easy
to me visibly to demonstrate that the harmonic-
independent and the harmonic concomitant are
originated in the pipe by totally distinct natural
processes.
The nodal difference detected by Mr. W.
Hopkins was much smaller in extent, but there
is an important distinction not to be overlooked :
his experiments (recorded in the Transactions of
the Cambridge Philosophical Society, vol. 5)
were not made with organ pipes, but with glass
tubes supported in position over a glass plate,
the plate being set in vibration by friction. He
expressly rejected organ pipes by reason of their
intractibility and of the difficulty of obtaining
results from them of the nature desired.
In like manner we continually find experiment-
alists rejecting organ pipes as insubordinate
pupils; they prefer dumb pipes and the artificial
speech by tuning forks, and having obtained such
negative evidence, make a clean transfer of their
conclusions to all argumentative reasonings and
expositions of the nature and functions of the


original, living, speaking organ pipes. The Hon.
A. Strutt (now Lord Rayleigh), in his paper on
the Theory of Resonance, printed in Phil. Trans.,
Nov., 1870, says : .
“ Independently of these difficulties, the theory of pipes
or other resonators made to speak by a stream of air
directed against a sharp edge is not sufficiently understood
to make this method of investigation satisfactory. For
this reason I have entirely abandoned this method of
causing the resonators to speak in my experiments, and
have relied on other indications to fix the pitch.”
Notice how the “ sharp edge ” dominates the
thought even of this great thinker.
Prof. Airy was as evidently dissatisfied with the
state of theory and experiment, using such phrases
as these: “ the matter, however, demands more
complete explanation“ that obscure subject,
the production of musical vibrations in a pipe
by a simple blast of air;” “possibly when the
mathematical calculus is farther advanced, this
may be shown,” &c. Beyond the province of
mathematical analysis his survey was keen, and
with foresight of the results of possible experi-
ments.
At the present date our best authorities are in
effect repeating the assertion of Biot that “the
particular properties of the vibrations of confined
air in tubes are not yet sufficiently explained.”
The disturbing influence of some unknown
agency may be discerned in Dulong’s experiments
of filling organ pipes with various gases, and


estimating the velocity of sound in these gases
by the pitch produced. Similar experiments on
this method are referred to by Herschel, and he,
noticing how the results gave for hydrogen gas
a velocity differing by one fourth from that which
theoretically had been calculated, could only
account for it by supposing an impurity in the
gas used for the experiments. There is little
need to resort to the supposition of an impurity;
it is quite sufficient to know that an agreement
in length of organ pipe and aerial wave-length
was assumed which does not exist, and that, more-
over, the mechanical nature of the organ pipe,
and its delicate apparatus so wonderfully bal-
anced for the attainment of its ends, had escaped
observation. The admirable method of experi-
ment for ascertaining the velocity of sound in
gases, devised by M. Kundt, by means of glass
tubes and lycopodium seed, is free from the
same source of error; and, as might be antici-
pated, comparison shows a marked difference in
estimates. In respect of carbonic acid gas and
hydrogen gas, for instance, Dulong differs from
Kundt, his estimate in the one case being less by
one-fifth of the whole, and the other more by
one-fourth; the divergence interprets itself, indi-
cating the relation of their densities to the com-
pelling force, the unseen mechanical action at
the mouth of the organ pipe. This will be clear
when the “ air-moulded reed ” is fully understood
in its nature and functions. When the magnetism


of the earth is perceived, the dip of the needle to
the north or south of the equator in accord with
its localization is explained.
The confession of “obscurity” amounts to a
confession that the old theory has been found
wanting, that it is inadequate to deal with facts.
Whether in dealing with the larger questions here
brought into discussion, or with the simpler class,
the mere modification of structure, it is equally
incapable. If, for instance, a stopped pipe is
pierced through the stopper and a short open
pipe inserted, say a third or fourth the diameter
and a third or fourth the length, what will be
the effect of this on the pitch ? The old theory
would reply, the added length would cause a
flattening of pitch, and then will come a proviso
for safety’s sake, that if the change converted
it into an open organ pipe then the pitch would
be raised in accordance with the open length.
We go to Nature for her say in the matter, and
find that the pitch is raised not flattened, and
that the extent is about a quarter of a tone, and
that further lengthening of the smaller pipe takes
back the pitch again just its quarter tone. If
another stopped pipe is drilled at the back with
a hole of a diameter a third or fourth of that of
the pipe, but so that it shall be at a higher level
than the lip or edge of the mouth, in effect
shortening the air column by admission of ex-
ternal air at a higher point, what will be the
result ? On the old theory we should expect the
22/
AND IN THE ORCHESTRA.


pitch to be higher in consequence. Appealing to
the ear we know that, on the contrary, it is
flattened. These results cease to be anomalies
when viewed under the new theory, and indeed
they would be predicted with confidence as the
necessary outcome of the conditions.
As regards “ fixity of wave-length,” that
characteristic reappears in a new relation, and we
find that, the super-nodal half wave of the pipe
corresponds very closely with length in atmos-
phere. The cause of the displacement of the node
is due to changes or differences in the strength of
the physical action taking place at the mouth of
organ pipes.
The proposition that in an organ pipe there is
no constant wave-length for an ascertained pitch,
will no doubt be discountenanced as novel and
revolutionary, but it is true and will have to be
acknowledged. A further proposition that in an
open organ pipe there are three different velocities
speeding at different rates, concurring in every
vibration, and essential to the synchronic time of
its note, has a still more aggressive aspect defiant
of law. Not so. It is because law—“ known
law,” does not cover the facts, is unstable in its
applications, and is deficient in prevision, that
there is room for a new hypothesis which does
not play fast and loose with nature; the utmost;
exactitude of length in an organ-pipe is as indis-
pensable in this as in the older theory, but the
relation is one of proportion to a system, and


the least and every variation will make imperative
suitable or corresponding modifications in other
portions of the structure. Only a whistle, yet
with more to marvel at for delicacy of organiza-
tion and beauty of adaptation “ than is dreamt
of in philosophy.


PART 11.
CHAPTER XVII.
The Action in Reed Organ Pipes.
THE second great department of organ tone
comprises pipes which are known as reed
pipes.
Among the many problems in organ pipes that
come before the sedulous enquirer, there are none
more puzzling than those which arise in the in-
vestigation of the reed pipes of the organ. It
is the habit of men generally, when such problems
are more than ordinarily perplexing, to say, “ Give
it up,” and discharge the need for further worry-
ing about them. Thus it is that we are left with
so many questions unanswered, problems un-
solved, and difficulties unremoved. Incidentally,
in former chapters, I have entered into details
concerning the reed organ pipes; but there are


yet some interesting comparisons to be made and
investigations pursued which may now be appro-
priately considered, and the latest results of my
thought to be set down to help you in the way of
understanding.
“To know” is a common acquirement, but
“to understand” is a more difficult process; it
means that you should mentally realise what is
before your thought, and perceive its varied rela-
tions. Now, I hope that you have understood
the practical working out of my theory respect-
ing the class of organ pipes called the “ flue
organ pipes;” because we have now to consider
the nature of the “reed organ pipes,” which are
quite distinct, are a class by themselves, different
in structure, different in action, and which do not
obey the same laws. Where reed pipes apparently
follow the acoustic deductions —or it is assumed
that they do; or in the familiar words, “near
enough,” are admitted as exemplars of the law—
I think that it will be found that, upon closer
scrutiny, and in a broader field of investigation,
such conclusions are wrong. We are so ready
to say “ near enough,” and believe in it. The
scientific thinker, too, has often to yield to that
alluring form of compounding for lack of know-
ledge, all the time having misgivings about
doing so.
The two classes of organ pipes are: (A) having
tongues of air, acting by a current abstractive;
(B) having tongues of metal, acting by a current


propulsive. In pipes (class B), there is a true
transport of air from one end of the tube to the
other; whilst in class A, there is no current of
air through the pipe. Bear in mind this dis-
tinction, for it is very important to the true under-
standing of the laws governing these reed pipes;
and take note that, although working by modes
so different, the result in both cases is precisely
the same, —the action brings about suction by
velocity, as the true agent of sound.
From a mechanical point of view, every vibrat-
ing reed is a reversing mechanism, and by the
arrest of its motion it is able to impress the air
with successive pulses of motion. Free reeds, of
course, come under class B, along with the strik-
ing reeds; but as I shall have some future ex-
position devoted to them, I do not make further
reference to them now.
Before proceeding further, I will quote a very
significant statement by Muller :
The sound yielded by a reed or tongue is much altered
in pitch when a tube or pipe is superadded to it, as in the
oboe, clarionet, and bassoon. . . . The air which sets the
tongue in vibration has to traverse the whole length of
the tube before escaping into the atmosphere; and the
instrument is a compound of two, of which the sonorous
vibrations are regulated by different laws. The pitch of
the reed and that of the tube sounded separately may be
quite different; but combined, they react on each other or
accommodate themselves to each other in such a way that
only one note is heard, which is neither always that of the
fundamental note of the reed alone, nor that of the column
of air in the tube sounded without the reed.


Since the experimental researches of M. Weber
and Johannes Muller were recorded, very little of
an elucidatory kind has found its way into our
literature. Their investigations on this question
(and very patient and painstaking they had been)
were directed chiefly to ascertaining how the
pitch was affected relatively by the varying of
lengths of tubes prefixed and affixed to reeds;
and Muller particularly had regard to membran-
ous reeds. His investigations comprise a mass
of information on the subject of acoustics, buried
in his work, “ Elements of Physiology,”—a
curious place of resort to which to direct the
musical student.
The mechanical details of a reed organ pipe
are illustrated in the engraving given at page 53.
The pipe is entirely of metal, and is shown in
section. The necessary length of tube for the
given note fits into the cone G; the solid lead
block A holds all the parts of the mechanism,
and is enclosed by the boot B; the brass reed tube
C is a half cylinder (in the factory, it is called
the reed : but in earlier times, on account of its
shape, it was known as the “ shallot,” by reason of
resemblance to that esculent); the reed tongue D
is of thin brass, and is wedged in its place by the
little piece of hardwood E; and the wire F,
which can be slid up or down from the outside, is
bent in a way to give it elastic spring, yet firmly
to press on the tongue, the vibrating length of
which it determines. The direction of the wind
235
AND IN THE ORCHESTRA.


is shown by the arrows; the boot would propor-
tionately be longer than here given, for it would
be obvious that the strict representation of full
length would be needlessly inconvenient.
It should be observed that the little tube C has
a perfectly level surface to receive the tongue.
If the tongue is lifted from underneath upwards,
it stands away from that surface, providing that
a little strain has been put on the metal to give
it that position; but such a method is not ad-
missible, first on account of crudeness of tone
arising from the sudden contact of tongue and
tube, and next because the shifting of the wire to
obtain exact pitch would destroy the position
that had been obtained, and would necessitate
a new arrangement of lift and strain. There-
upon comes the most delicate adjustment, that
tries the voicer’s skill and patience beyond any
other demand made upon his practice and
sagacity. Ihe tongue needs to be curved so
finely, so accurately, to produce clear and certain
tone, —a very trifling maladroitness and the
quality aimed at is missed. The curving is
accomplished by passing a hard burnisher repeat-
edly along the upper surface of the tongue when
it is held fixed on a level table or block; some
workers use a test block that has been shaped in
a hollow form to give a graduated curve accord-
ing to some accepted standard; the tongue placed
flat on the level block is, by the stroking pressure
of the burnisher, brought to take the exact shape


of some particular part or portion of the curve
which will give the spring required for the parti-
cular tongue under hand. The eye and hand
need long training to secure that hair’s breadth
nicety of curve essential to good quality.
Practised voicers will accomplish what they want
without any other aid than fine judgment. The
process of curving is in principle the same as that
which we practise when drawing a strip of paper
between finger and thumb nail to cause it to curl.
The right form of curve is that which will leave
sufficient opening for the passage of the wind for
a particular note, and with such a gradation in
the admission of that wind as is suitable for the
intended quality; at the same time securing that,
by meeting the face of the tube progressively
from root to tip as it bends and closes to under
the influence of the pressure of the wind, the
tongue shall avoid jarring. Sometimes, when the
tongue is not rightly curved it will go down on
the tube like a flap, close the aperture, and not
springing back, give no sound. You must not
look for this fine curve in the tongue shown in
the engraving; but when you have the opportunity,
examine the tongues of reed pipes when finished
in the organ, and you will then appreciate the
delicacy of the voicer’s art.
In studying this class of pipes, I want you to
understand how very varied are the lengths of
pipes for the same pitch,—varied to an extent
that is quite confusing to the reader who has only


been taught musical acoustics by the books
accepted as college authorities. Presently, I
will bring before you some measurements in
contrast, and seek to find some order amidst the
confusion by appealing to nature’s verities. Wave-
length is, we know, one of the academic pro-
fessor’s fetiches, and he looks serious when
sacrilegious hands are laid upon it.
In order to comprehend the action of a metal
reed used for musical ends, it is best to consider
it wholly from a mechanical point of view. The
reed, by virtue of its elasticity, is, in a technical
sense, a reversing mechanism. As a mechanical
agent, the reed does work, that is work in relation
to time; the reed, by its nature, when disturbed,
vibrates, and its activity is periodically limited by
rests. During these rests, the direction of the
activity is reversed. This activity is not so
simple a matter as it seems to be, —merely spoken
of as vibration. Put to its musical purpose, the
reed under investigation proves itself to have
great complexity in its mode of vibration, al-
though the schools have neither recognized the
fact nor its meaning.
d he time of a reed’s vibration consists of the
time of rorward motion, of the time of rest, and
of the time of recoil; the times of these relatively
are not equal. When the tongue is first under
the influence of the wind, the air on both its
surfaces is of equal pressure; and, upon an in-
crease in the flush of wind, the tendency would


be to separate the tongue still further away from
the little tube, the wind forcing its pathway
through the opening provided. This would occur
were it not that a current of air passing quickly
into a tube exercises suction at the orifice of
entry; thereupon the elastic tongue yields in the
direction of the plate of suction, and for a time
closes the orifice, therewith increasing the suction
so that it is held there. The current of wind
having been sent forward with impetus as a true
propulsive force, leaves behind it a partial
vacuum, which is strongest immediately upon
the inner face of the tongue, and the yield of
the tongue to this is helped by the continuing
of the wind’s power in the boot. There then,
upon the inner.face of the tongue, is a region of
least pressure , which continues to exist during
the transit along the pipe of the pulse of com-
pressed air to the rim of outlet. When that
point is reached, there is a momentary arrest of
motion, then the external air rushes in to restore
equilibrium, and in doing so causes the shock,
in which the tongue recoils, and forthwith the
action commences as before. The equilibrium is
only attained after the agitation of vibration has
ceased.
The brief time of one act of complete vibration
is therefore capable of analysis thus : The time
of the forward motion is occupied by a move-
ment, the quickness of which is gradually in-
creasing until abruptly checked; the time of rest


is that during which the tongue, having least
pressure on one side and greatest pressure on the
other, closes the orifice, until the exit of the
pulse breaks the continuance of rest; the time of
recoil is the least in duration, for the tongue is
as an elastic spring held down by pressing on its
tip, and when released can have but one fixed
distance for its extent of recoil. The precise dis-
tance of the play of the tongue having been
regulated by the curve given to it, the recoil is
always of the same degree of celerity. Con-
sequently, the three divisions of the time of a
vibration are to be estimated relatively thus:
the first may vary a little; the second may vary
greatly; the third varies not at all. These are
practical considerations of importance if we
would understand the actual mechanical opera-
tion involved in nature’s process.
A difference in excess of the degree of wind
pressure that originates the process will necessarily
increase the strength of the suction, and will also
cause a quicker transit of the current through the
tube, thus varying the relative proportion of these
three divisions; and, in so doing, the pitch of the
note given by the pipe will be higher. Compara-
tively, metal tongues are stiff and unsuited for
giving other than their own proper pitch as
regulated. They are readily disturbed by casual
impediments; but they are susceptible in a slight
degree to the lengthening of the time of rest as a
result of added length of pipe. Experiments
238
THE MAKING OF SOUND IN THE ORGAN


should be made with the larger pipes, as the
smaller are easily “ upset,” and fly in an erratic
way to notes of unexpected relation, not harmonic.
Utmost regard has to be paid to length in reed
pipes. A proper length of tube to reciprocate
action is indispensable; any inaccuracy upset-
ting the tone, and giving rise to strange freaks of
behaviour. The slim, tapering oboe is so sen-
sitive that, if made only a quarter of an inch too-
long, or if we merely pat the bell whilst sounding,,
the tone will immediately leap to its third above,
—a tone not in the harmonic series, and about as
puzzling a problem as that of some echoes falling
successively by thirds.
The effect of diameter upon the two great
classes of pipes is startling to those who have not
investigated any of these problems; for it has-
exactly the reverse effect on Class A to that of
its exercise upon Class B. The mass of air in the
pipe is in the one class (that of pipes having
reeds of metal) under the influence of an ener-
getic propulsive current, and in the other class
(that of pipes having reeds of air) under the
influence of an abstracting current. Hold this
distinction fully in mind, for the difference in the
mode of action will, if clearly apprehended,
enable us to reconcile many apparent anomalies-
in the behaviour of pipes which are so perplexing
to enquirers.
Considering a current simply as flowing—that
is to say, without the energy associated with the


word propulsive —the nature of a tube or conduit
is to cause friction between the walls of the tube
and the particles of the substance flowing through
the tube, whether of water or of air. The friction
of air upon air is also a calculable effect. As
regards ordinary tubes and conduits, the scientific
experiments of Seebeck, Regnault, Kundt, and
others show that the effect of friction in retarding
the velocity of a wave in propagation is not so
insignificant as might be supposed. It is great-
est upon those of tones of highest pitch, and it
increases as the diameters of the tubes are less.
In musical pipes of the propulsive class, exactly
the same relations are preserved. If two pipes
of different diameters give the same pitch note,
then the pipe of larger diameter will prove to be
•of greater length; in fact, the opposite of the law
obtaining in pipes of the abstractive class. In a
narrow pipe, the friction is in excess; but with
an increased diameter, the current gains greater
freedom, and, coincidently, that inner motion,
vibration, is less impeded. Pipes of this class
(for brevity here called propulsive in action : the
trumpets, posaunes, bassoons, oboes) have this
•characteristic, that the whole of the wind passes
through the body of the pipe, and makes its exit
.at the upper orifice.
Now, we know that in flue pipes the amount
of wind actually passing up the interior is
scarcely noticeable, and such a distinct contrast
.ought certainly to have suggested to our scientific
24O
THE MAKING OF SOUND IN THE ORGAN


Trumpet,
Diameter at root of reed
„ upper orifice
Length from tip of reed
Oboe.
Diameter at root of reed
5
» upper orifice
Length from tip of reed
(including bell).
investigators that possibly the laws deducible for
the one class might not be really the laws applic-
able to and governing the other. Organ trum-
pets, and horns do not conform to the shapes
of the orchestral types, but are made entirely
conical. The oboe, however, more nearly follows
the original, being very slender, and expanding at
the top suddenly into a terminal shape called a
bell. An actual comparison of measurements
will afford the clearest illustration of the effect of
form. Two pipes sounding mid. C, 268 vibrations
per second :
The oboe bell is not ordinarily reckoned in the
effective length, yet it is not altogether to be dis-
regarded. From its juncture at the tube up to the
rim it is 3m., with a diameter expanding from fin.
to i|in. I have reckoned the bell into the length,
which otherwise amounts only to Compare
these with the orchestral oboe where the bore com-
mences and the note C is given by that por-
tion of length without the bell, and which will
measure from the tip of reed to the finger hole


All these are
“ flue
’ or whistle fifes.
Diapason
. Diam
2 inch..
...Length 221 inch.
99 * * • •
I STb ii ••
,1
22J „
,, —
T 1
A B ” ••
••• 99
22fr 99
,,
11
ii ii -•
• •• 99
23 11
Geigen
11
G „
... 99
23 11
Flute
T i
1 4 99 * *
... 99
23i ii
Saliconal —
Iw 11 ••
... 99
23 & .1
Vox angelica.
ii
I „ ..
... 99
23i 1.
igi m . Now you see the trumpet seems to come
“ near enough ”to the theoretical length. But the
oboe, even if taking it at the full length, looks
rather disconcerting; and then the orchestral
length, with between four and five inches missing,
how is the poor sorely worried student to
account for the loss ?
The effect of diameter will be traced very
clearly in the following specimens of pipes which
all are in unison to the same C :
Notice how regularly it follows that the larger
the diameter, the less is the length. Here is one
that is still less—a rohr flote —which, though its
diameter is i|in., is shorter than any, is but 21Jin.;
and this is due to difference in treatment at mouth
and foot. There are variations in the hohl flote
and other pipes, all of which readily find explana-
tions under the theory of the air reed doing work.
Our metal reed pipes work , but on a distinct
system; and, as shown in trumpet and oboe, the
resulting length is by its special law of action
greater whenever the diameter of the pipe is


increased. And why ? Because the outer air has
the readier access to the interior, and can there-
fore bring about equilibrium sooner when the cone
is wider. The purpose of vibration, for musical
ends, is to disturb the equilibrium of the air; and
the function of a pipe is to delay the time of
regaining equilibrium,—hence pipes are simply
delayers. So if the trumpet were but the length
of the oboe, it would by its wide diameter allow
of too quick an activity beyond that intended,
and it would speak sharp ; hence, to cause delay,
we have to increase the length of pipe if we want
the pitch in unison with that of the oboe.
How comes it then that, whilst reed pipes are
sharper in proportion to their diameter, the flue
pipes are flatter when larger? Because the mode
of work is different, and a wide flue pipe gives
the air reed more work to do at every vibration
before it can establish a node in the interior of
the pipe. The node is the fulcrum of vibration;
necessary for the enhancement of power, and for
the setting up of a reciprocal activity in the pipe.
The lengths of these reed pipes, as we see, very
nearly coincide with the average of those of flue
pipes of the same pitch. This observed fact has
had a misleading influence, causing the two
classes of pipes to be regarded as governed by
the same laws as to wave lengths : hence the reed
pipes have escaped the investigation which is their
due, considering the important part they play.
The action of these may be illustrated in a simple


way. Take six or eight feet of india rubber
tubing of |in. bore (for this length defines action
best); coil the length round your hand, and,
placing one end in the mouth, blow through the
tube sharply; at the same time allow the tip of
your tongue freedom of play near the orifice, and
you will find it drawn suddenly to the tube by
the suction of the current passing down it, and
released only on the exit of the current into the
atmosphere. Lightly pressing the coil in your
hand, you may likewise feel the throb of the pass-
ing air pulse. The trombone player is conscious
of his lips being forcibly drawn into the cup by
a like cause. Organ and orchestral trumpets and
oboes and all of like propulsive action are subject
to this power, and only through it are able to
generate tones. Suction is thus seen to be the
final cause of vibration. The vacuum exists until
the initial pulse of the vibration has made exit
at the outer orifice, or in the succeeding courses
until the pulses reach the colliding point or place
of the prime node.
Always thus in every musical pipe the current
is essential to the mode of suction; but with the
striking difference that, in the flue pipe, there is
continuity of stream, and the continuity of flow
is made available by conversion into reciprocating
motion called vibration. In the propulsive class,
the action is effective through discontinuity, by
abrupt cessations and sequences of stream. Pulses


of air upon air, swiftly following at equal time
distances, these make music.
Harking back to the paragraph respecting fric-
tion, I would have you observe that in a flowing
current the central portion of the stream moves
faster than the outer portions; and that the ease
or freedom of the central portion or core of the
stream, whether of air or water, is greater in pro-
portion as the cone is wider; therefore there is
more friction in the pipe of the oboe than in the
pipe of the trumpet, as a comparison of their
diameters will indicate.
The next chapter will collate further evidence,
including measurements, of some orchestral in-
struments, and will point out that these varying
relations of pipes result from a natural standard
which underlies all empirical changes; and show
how Muller’s statement applies, and what refer-
ences may be drawn therefrom as to the nodal
system in reed pipes.


CHAPTER XVIII.
Compound Influences of Reeds and Pipes.
I AM thinking of some hints, by way of caution,
that may be needful in the enquiry before us.
We are very apt to fall into ways of speech
that are convenient, conventional, or technical.
By listeners, these are generally understood with
their limitations; but when the same freedom is
carried into writing, the reader, if of the student’s
critical bent of mind, may get confused unless
he makes allowance for colloquial ease, and is
willing not to insist too much upon strict literal-
ness of interpretation. I am thinking how often
one speaks of the wave length of a pipe of a cer-
tain pitch, and perhaps names the figures, when
rightly they should be doubled; so when we in-
dicate a certain wave length, it is often merely
the half wave length that we refer to.
For instance, when speaking of a sixteen foot


pipe and of the wave length corresponding
thereto, we generally imply that it is—and per-
haps in our mind picture it—as of the same
sixteen feet in extent; whereas, properly speaking,
the pipe is but of half wave length. This, again,
is subject to correction. The theoretical calcu-
lations upon which our knowledge is based re-
quire that from half an inch to one inch should
be added for every foot, according to the stan-
dard of pitch from which the reckoning is made,
so that the demand for the sixteen foot pipe is
that it should be from sixteen foot eight inches
if the pitch is high (C 537.5), or to seventeen feet
four inches if the pitch is low (C 512).
This correction should always be remembered,
for it is important when we are comparing the
sounding lengths of various instruments. In the
relation of length of flutes, oboes, and clarionets,
the demand theoretically is for twenty-five or
twenty-six inches, and not two feet merely. Again,
we speak of the beats of two primary tones,
when it is the overtones or partials that actually
beat. We talk of a column of air, associating
the idea of a column with uprightness, and yet
admit the application of the word column to a
coiled form —as to the air in the tube of a horn
and grant that it is scientifically a convenience
and an accepted usage. We talk of air moving
in waves; when critically enquired into we mean
waves moving through air. And, so on, numerous
other examples might be cited. Although we


should endeavour to attain precision in state-
ments, particularly in connection with scientific
matters, yet the poverty of language and con-
versational laxness conspire to hinder us; and
what I would point out is that you should dis-
tinguish between each instance whether the
sayings bear evidence of conversational freedom
or are intended to express in their literalness the
ultimate of scientific exposition. To define is
essential; but we are not always able to main-
tain the exactness that belongs to definition, for
to do so would lead to wearisome repetitions.
In my last chapter I gave you a quotation from
Muller, and you should now refer to it, as it is a
statement from which important inferences are to
be drawn. The considerations that I am about
to bring before you will require some close think-
ing if you are to follow the path in which I lead,
and I will say at once that I am, as goldseekers
say, “ prospectingbut, like them, although un-
certain what the worth of the find may be, I
am sanguine of useful results, and in any case
believe that the investigation is desirable, if only
for the mental exercise and the excitement of the
game.
The chief laws of the compound action of reed
instruments ascertained by M. W. Weber are of
sufficient importance to be placed on record here,
for they are almost unknown in studies of
acoustics. We are here to notice the influence
of tube and reed upon each other, quite irrespec-


tive of practical needs or of artistic use, because
in modern ways the reeds are not left free to
initiate the series of results specified; they are so
lip controlled by the player as virtually to be
fresh reeds for each note produced. But in the
early types of orchestral instruments it was other-
wise, and frequently the reeds were enclosed in
caps, or were so sounded as to be left to their
own manifestations without lip control; and as
regards organ pipe reeds, each is restricted to its
one particular note. But by knowing what oc-
curred in these experimental instances with reeds
sufficiently flexible for such indications, we are
in a position to apprehend the influences that,
unseen by us, are at work in all alliances of tube
and reed, and are the cause of so many tantaliz-
ing perplexities both to makers and to players of
instruments. Muller sets forth these details as
valuable in themselves, and in his case applicable
to his researches into the action of the vocal
cords which in his day were but imperfectly
studied and very variously understood. Weber’s
laws are:
1. The pitch of a reed may be lowered, but cannot be
raised by joining it to a tube.
2. The sinking of pitch of the reed thus produced is at
the utmost not more than an octave.
3. The fundamental note of the reed thus lowered may
be raised again to its original pitch by lengthening the
tube ; and by increasing the length of the tube after this,
the fundamental note can be again lowered, but only to a
certain extent.


4\ The length of the tube necessary to lower the pitch of
the instrument to any given point depends on the relation
which exists between the frequency of the vibrations of the
tongue of the reed and those of the column of air in the
tube, each taken separate!}-.
. lus: the fundamental note of the reed instrument
sinks gradually as the tube is lengthened, until the tube
acquires such a length that it would separately yield the
same fundamental note as the reed of the instrument
without the tube; the pitch of the instrument then suddenly
uses to the pitch of the reed. By increasing still further
the length of the tube, the pitch of the instrument may be
again lowered to the “ fourth ” of the descending scale;
and when the length of the tube has reached the double of
that which would give the same note as the fundamental
note of the reed, the pitch of the instrument again rises to
that note. By still increasing the length of the tube, the
pitch may be again lowered to the minor third, after which
it again rises to the original note, During the transition
two different notes can be produced by varying the force
of the blast.
6. If the note yielded by the reed corresponds with any
one of the series»of harmonic tones of the tube, the pitch
of the two united does not necessarily differ from that of
the reed alone, if they be sounded by a gentle blast; but
by blowing more strongly, the octave below the original
note, or the fourth, minor third, or other intervals of the
descending scale, corresponds to the numerical series
h ro> iv may be produced.
Muller also found that the delicate vibrating
metallic tongue of a child’s trumpet could by
successive blasts of increasing strength be made
to rise through the whole extent of an octave and
a half without intervals; and in several instances
he found that, in experimenting with membran-


cus tongues, the pitch of the instrument con-
tinued to fall for a longer period,—namely, till it
was nearly as low as the lower octave; that in
such cases the rise to the fundamental note of
the tongue did not occur when the tube was of
about such a length that its fundamental note
was that of the tongue, but not until the tube had
doubled its length; and he adds, “the cause of
this difference I could not determine.” We trace
in these instances the effect of delicateness, or
extreme sensitiveness in the vibrating agent.
The compound action of reeds and tubes when
associated in the production of sound assumes a
new interest when we inquire specifically into the
effects of such influences upon orchestral wind
instruments, these influences of reciprocal inter-
action being variable, and therefore comparative
in their incidence, according as it is the power of
the reed or the pipe that preponderates.
First in consideration is the form of the pipe,
and next the degree of elasticity or sensitiveness
in the reed. As to form, there are two types, the
conical and the cylindrical; and yet the curious
part of the matter is that in no instance is the
true form conical or cylindrical preserved in our
wind instruments. Undoubtedly, we have been
led by our text books to believe that nature has
very beautifully, very considerately, provided for
us a perfect series of harmonics, true in intonation,
and in fact just the thing that we want to in-
delibly impress upon us the immense superiority


of nature over man, puny man. Meekly enough
we accept the teaching, only to find after years
of discretion have matured our views, after
practice has confronted us with veritable facts,
tnat nature has not fulfilled the contract assumed
m her name, declines to do so, and leaves us to
our remedy. That remedy, remember, is not
science, it is industrial art. The manufacturer
reluctantly finds that he has to circumvent
nature. What years of infinite patience, of life-
long devotion, he expends in the endeavour to
correct nature, and to make his instruments fault-
less, and fit for the highest demands of musical
art!
I have laying before me on the table side by
side an oboe of the latest up to date pattern, and
a B? clarionet also of the most perfected model.
For years the skill of manufacturers has been
directed to remedying nature’s defects, and to
obtaining throughout the range of each instru-
ment true intonation. The exacting ear of the
player has to be satisfied; perhaps it is one note
that is generally found to be weak on the instru-
ment compared with others, or some intonation
imperfect, or some particular harmonic false or
not to be relied upon. After endless trouble,
maybe, the particular defect has been rectified,
and it frequently happens that the modification
made to ensure that result acts deterioratmgly
upon some other note; and thus the labour has
to be gone through again and again, each maker


now supposing up to his period of latest effort
that he has achieved the nearest to a perfected
instrument that is possible,—until at least he
takes it afterwards a point or two nearer.
Now I want you to notice that the manufacturer
reaches towards perfection by departing from
nature as she is fixed up by some of our orthodox
teachers, and by relying upon art instead. When
I lay stress upon nature’s defects, of course I
mean in relation to our assumed “ law and order ”
rulings, and to our musical requirements; for we
cannot suppose that nature has any consideration
for our fancies in demanding of her more than
she has provided to suit her own taste, if she had
any, before we were born.
We have been taught to believe that the oboe
is so made as to be a true cone, and to exemplify
the laws relating thereto, giving in perfect in-
tonation the series of harmonics pertaining to an
open pipe. Alike of the clarionet, it is stated
that it is a perfect cylinder, and consequently it
gives notes an octave lower in pitch than the
oboe. Therefore it is a stopped pipe and there-
fore it is incapable of giving any other than the
harmonics called the uneven, the first of which is
“the twelfth.” The student by rote repeats the
teaching—“ it may be for years, it be for ever ”
—and perhaps has gone up for examination on
the strength of it, and of other remembered facts,
to be rewarded by the coveted “ Mus.B.’ Now
supposing he makes a bond fide examination him-


self, which is quite a different intellectual process,
he will find that neither instrument acts up to its
principles; that the oboe is not a true cone, nor
the clarionet a true cylinder; that, before the
springing out of the bell, the bore of each tube
has already begun some distance up to widen out.
If he is a truth seeking student—and I assume
that there are such left—he feels angered as at a
fraud, or annoyed as at a reservation misleading
him, and says Why was I not told this? Pro-
fessor Dewar (he of air liquifying renown) very
recently strongly animadverted on the misleading
assumptions of our text books, and spoke of a
standard book in which it was stated that m such
and such conditions such and such chemical
results would follow. Questioning “is it so?”
he tried it, and found that it was not so. Whereat
he grew angry against the pot hunting superficial
scientific education of to-day which relies upon
text books and examinations, saying “ this
scholarship hunting and fellowship hunting stamp
cut all originality and individuality from young
men; research educated great men like Faraday
and Davy.” Therefore look to it, and make
examinations yourself.
_ ,* s cur i° u s that Professor Dewar succeeded
m his great experiments by the use of high
vacua; it was in this that nature helped him.
Vet it is not so very long ago that the doctrine
was held that “nature abhors a vacuum,” a
-doctrine which—as Whewell pointed out in his


“ History of the Inductive Sciences ” —“ retarded
science a century by preoccupying men’s minds
against observations.” On any question, indeed,
this is the evil, —the assumption that doctrine
settles it. Let us enquire : that is or should be
the motto of to-day.
If, concerning this oboe and clarionet, we ask
why this departure from doctrinal form, the
maker will tell us that only so, by patiently
attained variation, could the instruments be
brought to give the scale of true primary tones
and true harmonics in relation to them. Observe,
therefore, how needful it is that art should correct
nature. Professor Helmholtz, I think it is, who
says that we make much of the beauties of
nature, and forget that there are uglinesses of
nature also. Even this great man falls now and
then into errors of assumption, like lesser folk.
Helmholtz writes; “ Horns and trumpets have
already naturally just intonation brass instru-
ments naturally play in just intonation, and can
only be forced to the tempered system by being
blown out of tune.” Referring to this statement,
Mr. D. J. Blaikley says : “ This must be taken
only as being particularly, and not generally,
true; that is, though the ideal brass instrument
has such characteristics, this ideal is not neces-
sarily attained in practice.”
It is the most difficult thing in the world for
a scientific man and a practical man to get on the
same platform of enquiry and to see things in the


same light; they unintentionally mislead one
another, do not put the right questions, do not
give the right answers, because the aims of each
are so different, and the ignorances of each so
diverse.
Let me remark that organ builders know noth-
ing of -flats. The chromatic notes are always
called sharps; thus a pipe is C£, and is not
alluded to as a D(,. The custom is one of con-
venience, and I follow it here. Measuring this
oboe, I find that it is from the tip of the reed
to the rim of the bell, twenty-four and a half
inches long, and the note given by that length is
Measuring this clarionet called an A
clarionet, I find that it is, from tip of reed to rim
of bell, twenty-six and a half inches long: and
the note given by that length is C#, being a sixth
lower than the oboe.
I have likewise the two others, the C clarionet
and the Bp clarionet, respectvely 2igin. and 25m.
in length from tip of reed to rim of bell; their
lowest notes being E and D in the four foot
octave. Also before me is a Boehm flute, 23jin.
long from highest margin of mouth hole. It is
m general required that you should calculate
twice over the interior distance from the mouth
hole to highest point of tube; by such proceeding
another half inch becomes added to above length.
It is considered that this part above mouth hole
is a stopped pipe, therefore to be doubled in
relation to wave length. For my own part. I


doubt the validity of the argument, as I do not
estimate that in a mechanical sense it is so related
to the column of air; all that is apparent to me
is that the little recess formed in the head of the
flute provides for a small reserve of air particles,
which in an infinitesimal degree may give more
work to the air reed. But in the main I look upon
it as a sort of air cushion yielding under suction,
and by its shape gradually giving way according
to the stress of power exercised; in fact, a
regulator against the formation of eddies pre-
judicial to the smoothness of the air reed’s action.
The lowest note is mid C, or 2ft. C as it is called.
I may remark in passing that the old Chinese
flute has a head of considerable length that is left
quite open, and forms a counter balancing column.
My purpose is to bring before you different forms
of wind instruments, and these with different
modes of blowing.
A French horn furnishes another example. If
we take the C crook apart from the body of the
instrument, we have a length of ioß|in., including
the mouthpiece. A friend who is a proficient
horn player kindly undertook to ascertain the
tones obtainable from this portion, and fixing
upon the eighth harmonic as the representative of
pitch, it was found that (downwards) the har-
monics became increasingly out of tune, flat; and
oppositely, the higher range showed an increasing
degree of sharpness. The diameter showed an
enlargement from the most contracted part at


junction of mouthpiece four sixteenths of an inch,
to the extreme end, where it was seven sixteenths,
for a length of nine feet, this would seem a small
difference. The lowest note was 16ft. A, but con-
siderable skill in blowing was required to bring
it up near proper pitch. The instance is, however
small the divergence in diameter, that of a conical
tube with its complete series of harmonic tones.
The length of tube is not equal to the theoretical
length for the fundamental note. We wanted a
further instance in a perfectly cylindrical tube,
and my friend possessing a fine old trumpet (of
date about 1750), took that portion which is
cylindrical and with the mouthpiece attached
furnishes a length 4ft. u|in., and it was found
that its fourth harmonic was G. This therefore
was the second octave of its proper fundamental
tone, for all the series 1,2, 3,4, 5, &c., were duly
produced; but the two lower notes were very un-
certain, and each about a whole tone flat, and
neither could b§ got to sound in true pitch with
the fourth harmonic. The bore was seven six-
teenth of an inch, in this respect being approxi-
mative to the clarionet; but, unlike that instru-
ment, it gave the uninterrupted series of
harmonics. A fact that is worth pondering upon
deeply. The lowest note given was Ain the eight
foot octave.
Thus, here are two examples, a cone and a
cylinder, sounded by the same means, —viz., the
lips vibrating in a cup mouthpiece; and the vibrat-


ing agent, you will notice, is both vigorous and
sensitive. I want you to regard the characteristics
of each mouthpiece in all these varied compound
instruments, because of the comparative analysis
that we have in view.


CHAPTER XIX.
The Perversity of the Ways of Reeds and Pipes.
WHILST I write it is May time! Ever wel-
come spring come again, and I am not yet
tired of mother earth.
The chestnuts make a welcome shade
Beneath their glistening crowd of spires,
And ere the purpling lilacs fade,
Laburnums droop their golden fires.
In days like these, when hearts are young,
Let life leap high to grasp the bloom,
And leave no song of joy unsung,
Nor yield a thought that tends to gloom.
Thus I sang as I sat looking out on the green
loveliness of the fresh morning, in warm sun,
and delicious air. So I sat musing, fanned by
unseen wings, feeling somewhat as Coleridge
felt, “it was a luxury to be.” Then I spied a
wise thrush, beguiled by the mysterious thrill of
spring and the intuition of her long ancestry into


the belief that for her it was high time to begin
nest building. Into the thick ivy that covers my
garden wall she flitted, and after a while out
again; each time she dived into the darkness
carrying little bits of stick, dried grass, and other
odds and ends that she fancied,—innumerable
times with feminine persistency and untiring
patience. Suddenly I bethought me, this will
never do; eh, eh, my ladye, that wall is no fit
place for your domestic anticipations, —the prowl-
ing pussies will soon bring you sorrow. So I
had to disturb her very seriously; and that in-
cipient dream, that I indulged in for a moment,
of a pleasant little nursery to watch, had to go,
and as it vanished it crossed me with a shade of
gloom. Still I lilted my song; I liked the idea
that I was subject to the influences of such a
dawn of reviving life. Then, after awhile, that
grand old avenue at the back tempted me out.
Yes, I would go for a stroll. At the park gate I
met Father Time. “ Goodness me,” I said, “ why
you look quite young this morning.”—“ Do I?”
he questioned, and went by; but by the glance
of his old eyes, I do not think that he believed
it. Most old fellows do though: curious, is’nt it 5
And I pass on singing to myself,
My heart is young whilst daisies grow,
and soon find peace under the trees, overarching
like some cathedral nave. I was half way along,
when on a sudden instant, arrested by the light
that fell, my gayness of heart vanished, my


beautiful avenue had been spoilt. It was as if the
south west wall had been shattered. The grass
was heaped with the lopped branches from the
lofty trees; great limbs green with the life of
spring lay crushing the tender sprouting new
growth of May that showed not yet the faintness
of the coming death,—the myriads of young
leaves that yet held the freshness of the dawn.
Ah, it was sad to see beauty destroyed. The
sacrilege brought gloom. I learned that the
Master in Forestry had so ordered it. Decay had
set in amongst many noble branches, and the
lopping was a necessity, else disaster might have
followed. Yet was I sad; gloom deepened
gloom, and my words had been in vain. What
the worth of my philosophy that could not last
one hour? I begin to wonder if lam wiser than
I was when life was young. When I came in,
and sat myself to write, it seemed to me that I
was acting as the master forester. Was I not
lopping off cherished doctrine? This had to go,
and that; and letting in light that was objection-
able, destroying the symmetry that others had
pride in ? Perhaps so! These things have to
be. Let me trust not heedlessly have I done so,
and let me hope that I have planted slips that
betimes will grow.
I left you pondering over the details of lengths
and pitches of two tubes, one cylindrical taken
from the trumpet, and one conical taken from the
horn. Although the harmonics had not, as a


Theoretical length. Acttial length.
Difference.
Horn A, n8in io8- 4 in. ...
9*i n -
TrumpetG,66in 594i* 1, •••
series, the correctness essential to a musical
instrument in this unmodified state. —yet it was
sufficiently evident that the prime tone for the
horn’s conical tube was 16ft. A, and for the
trumpet’s cylindrical tube was Bft. G. But that
in the character of results there was no distinc-
tion between the two different kinds of tube. If
we further examine the figures, we shall hnd
additional corroboration ;
So that, allowing for any trifling variation from
accuracy in measuring, which in curved tubes
there is some liability to, we find that each shows
tne deficiency of one tenth from theoretical length
of an open tube. No sign whatever of the
peculiarity of the cylindrical tube shown in the
clarionet. This compound here of the lip reed
with the column of air of this great length shows
that the mass of air pulsating m the tube has
an effective strength of impulse thoroughly con-
trolling the lips.
In Nature, I hnd the following paragraph
which has an importance not lightly to be passed
over in cur enquiries, for it shews how real, as a
force, an air pulse is, even when passing throug
free air, although our senses do not enable us to
feel the influence except as sound :
Prof. Von Dvorak of Agram, used a very simple apparatus
for demonstrating the oscillation of the air m sown P c ‘


nomena. In an ordinary resonating sphere, the short neck
is replaced by a small metal plate with a conical hole
opening inwards, its shortest diameter being about 2mm.
When the resonator sounds, the passage of air is strong
enough to extinguish a lighted match. If a small paper
wheel, resembling a water wheel, is placed a little below
the opening and the resonator stands about 3 cm. in
front of a wall, the blowing of a horn or the rapid singing
of the proper note is capable of setting the wheel in
rotation.
How much more therefore must be the active
force of the impulses within a tube confining the
energy and causing a reaction upon the agent of
vibration ! A far greater addition we must reckon
upon when there is a stream of air passing into
the mass of contained air to excite it to pulsation,
for the reaction must be equally powerful upon
the agent of vibration. Some persons are, I
know, inclined to think little of the penetrating
force in reed instruments; but I am led to con-
sider that it has a considerable modifying im-
portance on the results obtained from musical
tubes.
We are not so much concerned with scientific
conformity in musical instruments as we are with
the departures from it, because what we want to
know is the actual sequence or non-sequence of
facts; for it is from disease or departure from
health that we learn the causes working for
health. So, if we find assumed laws departed
from in the realm of acoustics, we hope by inves-
tigation to be placed upon the track for ascer-


Theoretical length.
Actual
length.
Dif.
Organ trumpet, 24I mid.
C.
23l-
11*
„ oboe „ „
i8i.
6*.
Orchestral „ ,,
i9i-
5i-
taining the why and wherefore, —the cause influ-
encing the variation.
The trumpet and the oboe in the organ, and
also the orchestral oboe, that were noted stood
thus, comparatively ;
As I explained, the oboe in an organ has a bell
which has only a small effect in comparison with
the additional length it affords, the total of pipe
being 2i|in.; the expansion has been very sud-
den, so that if we allow that the bell has for, say,
i in. an effect not negligible, we can fairly place
the length at about the same as the orchestral
oboe, or nearly so. The pressure of wind being
different, the result may be affected; although
not enough to disturb our calculation for the
purpose in view. Now we see that the orchestral
oboe loses nearly a fourth of its theoretical
length; but something must be allowed for the
fact that the note issues from a lateral hole not
equal to that of the tube in diameter. The small
hole is always taken as being equivalent to a
length beyond itself for the proper pitch length,
as it has a flattening effect - therefore in reckoning
we add half an inch, and say that the length
is igf.
On the other hand, as the conical bore has begun
at that spot to increase beyond its true form


which therefore, by the law explained, causes an
increase of length as related to pitch—we are
thrown back upon our earlier figures or
and so get a mean between, —viz. iß|in., which
is the three fourths of the theoretical half wave
length. Now, why has the oboe lost one fourth
of the length assigned to the pitch note ?
Weber laid it down as the law in relation to
reeds and tubes that three fourths of the half
wave length is the proper relation of the speaking
length of tube of the compound, reed and pipe.
This is the true standard for all instruments
of the propulsive class and it is to be regarded as
modified in relation to varying diameters; all
larger diameters according to their degree of
divergence demanding length to be increased,
and also allowance to be made for greater or less
amount of wind and for greater or less degree of
pressure, for amount and degree are practically
convertible in effect, the one often doing duty for
the other.
The organ trumpet is to be estimated on these
lines, and not on those applicable to diapasons
and other pipes : hence its apparent relation to
those in length is deceptive. It is the enlarged
diameter that causes it to approach the open
pipe length. The main impulse of the current
passes into the cone of air in a central course;
and thus in a wide pipe, as compared with its
course in a narrow pipe, the current has exchanged
the friction upon the sides for the lesser friction


of air upon air. It is still restricted, but less
so, as the cone expands,—as of a swift river es-
caping the confinement of banks, flooding the
full expanding delta with a distinct central
stream, yet agitating its waters with gradually
decreasing strength, and then becoming diffused
in the surrounding ocean.
If two orchestral oboes are measured, differing
but a sixteenth of an inch in the bore at the hole
whence issues C, then the length of the one with
the smaller bore will be found to be ic)4 m - instead
of I9±in. These varying relations require to be
studied, keeping in view the law which underlies
all empirical changes.
That you may more fully recognise the differ-
ences in organ pipes (all speaking the same mid.
c), I introduce these illustrations.
Bassoon is shown in hg. I ; the oboe, with a
more slender cone and spreading bell, in fig. 2;
the clarionet, a cylindrical tube, in fig. 3; the
trumpet, a widely spreading cone, in hg. 4; a
pipe called cor anglais in hg. 5 ! an( i vox humana,
a short cylindrical pipe, half covered, in hg. 6.
pier, y shows, in sectional view, the construction
of & the reed pipes, which as regards the reeds and
blocks are practically the same in all, the line
shewing the reed is exaggerated, actually its dis-
tance away from the tube is very small.
The differences in tone quality are mainly de-
rived from the shapes and lengths of the various
pipes. The clarionet has the peculiarity of giving


a tone of an octave lower in pitch; but then the
reed is provided in accordance to be itself of
that pitch. The clarionet pipe is, as you will
Fig. 78.
Shapes
of
Reed
Organ Pipes
(I) Bassoon,
{2) Oboe.
(3) Clarionet.
see, more than half the length of the oboe pipe;
it reaches to nearly two thirds of the height of the
comparative pipes, a puzzle you can now
account for. Sometimes the oboe has a hole


made near the junction of the bell to the tube;
and sometimes it has a half covered top to the
Fig 19,
Shapes
of
Reed
Organ Pipes
(4) Trumpet,
(5) Cor Anglais,
{6) Vox Humana,
(7) Construction op
reed pipes
sheivn in section.
bell, which, bent a little more freely open or more
closed, constitutes a most delicate way of tuning
by occlusion, without interfering with the reed,


Theoretical
Actual
length.
length.
Organ Diapason, diameter 2in....24J mid. C.,
,...22|...,
•2jin.
Vox angelica, rin 24! mid. C..
■— 23i— •
Boehm flute mid. C..
— 23i—
which often betrays a perversity almost human
in obstinate disregard of betterment.
In order to give more completeness to our
survey, the Boehm flute was introduced; and in
a previous chapter measurements were given of
flue organ pipes of diameters varying from one to
two inches, in which, as I have stated, the law
is that the larger the diameter the less the length.
Now, placing these together, we find;
The vox angelica is the softest winded pipe, and
hence the near approach to the assigned half
wave length. For the sake of reference, you will
find the detailed table very desirable to have
before you, together with the vibrational numbers
of the scale at high concert pitch, in use at the
time when these investigations were carried out.
As will have been seen, I do not note small
fractions as the sixteenth of an inch, as such
would have no discernible practical effect.
Another consideration should not be lost sight
■of, that the mode of blowing modifies results.
Boehm states that it was his habit to blow his
flutes so as to make them sound a quarter of a
tone sharper than the pitch that they gave under
other lips. A very slight departure from the
•ordinary shape in the mouthpiece of the horn will
2/0
THE MAKING OF SOUND IN THE ORGAN




cause the notes of the instrument to rise a quarter
of a tone. The upper G on the Boehm flute
emanates from a hole that is but io|in. from the
extreme point in the flute head beyond the mouth-
piece, showing a considerable difference from
calculated length. The fifth, G, is less in like
degree, being only in lieu of i6|in.; and
the other notes are similarly given by reduced
lengths.
The oboe is held to be an open tube; but, as we
shall see, it exemplifies Weber’s rule of three
fourths. Let us take a convenient note, say D,
because it lies within the cone higher than the
point where the enlarging towards the bell begins.
D (theoretical).
22m.
Boehm Flute.
2oiin.
Oboe.
lyin.
The instruments are the latest modern make, high
concert pitch, the D being 303 vib. Allowing for
the flattening effect of diameter of the hole, you
will see how closely it is upon the three fourths
length. Now for another curious comparison:
Let us take the octave of that D. The hole for
that stands high in the tube; it is absent on most
instruments, the note being then made as an har-
monic.
D (theoretical),
uin.
Boehm Flute.
S^in.
Oboe.
6Jin.
What I want to show to you is that there are
causes at work which are ignored in all the usual
formal demonstrations; and if the student chances
2/2
THE MAKING OF SOUND IN THE ORGAN


lo note discrepancies, it is no sufficient answer to
whistle to him “ Oh, no ! we never mention it,”
and say that the point in question is merely
practical, and concerns only the makers but that
the theory is all right, is quite unimpeachable,
and so on. We should at least recognise the
causation that modifies the application of the-
oretical rule, and try to find out why and how.
Better to seek out and acknowledge the mystery,
even if we have to leave it to time to find its
proper solution for us.
It is no resolving answer to give, saying, But
this a cone; and that a node occurs at the apex
of the cone; but that the apex is cut off because
the reed has some breadth, and room must be
found for it. Why, in a cone, is the half seg-
ment lost, and the place of the node shifted?
Well, here we have an instrument that is a cone
and not a cone; and I cannot reconcile it that
at the top of the reed, where the greatest dis-
placement exists, we are, in the abstruseness of
argument, to place a node.
Some years ago Mr. J. D. Blaikley brought
before the Musical Association some very in-
genious experiments, and was engaged in demon-
strating the acoustic laws of the cone, showing
that they were those of an open pipe; and cer-
tainly the enquiry was one of great interest. I
grant that I am somewhat exacting, but I cannot
altogether concede that the experiments—-which
conclusive in respect of a cone tested


by means of resonance—hold in all particulars
the same for instruments which speak by a
vibrating agent having cognizable force.
In the oboe, we must remember that the pressure
in blowing, as registered by the wind gauge,
ranges from nine to seven inches. The mechanical
effect cannot be negligible; and whilst the re-
sonating cone is equal in length to an open pipe
that is of the same pitch, the orchestral instru-
ments depart from this accordance, and show
varied results for different degrees of enlarged
diameters, and as in the oboe indicate the gover-
nance of the laws formulated by Weber. The
trumpet of the organ here illustrated you have
■only to imagine enlarged to twice or three times
its diameter, and it would be found to need, if
the pitch was to be retained, a lengthening that
probably would bring it practically to a condi-
tion equal to free air,—that is to say, the tube
would exercise no restriction on the equilibrating
influence of the external air. Still, I suppose it
would not as a reed pipe have escaped from
Weber s law; inasmuch as, although the musical
alliance of reed and pipe would have been brought
to the impoverishing point and the reed left
rampant, any graduated contraction of the dia-
meter of the cone would by perceptible degrees
show the operative influence of the law. There-
fore I think it quite wise to seek everywhere
amongst reed instruments for the operation of
law on the basis of Muller’s statement that such


instruments are “ a compound of two, of which
the sonorous vibrations are regulated by different
laws.”
Why does the oboe part with one fourth of its
length? Why does the clarionet part with half
of its length? Structurally they are alike, only
one is fat and the other is thin. Remember how
Shakespeare noticed the latter fact, for the haut-
boy in his day was carried in a slim black case,
and Falstaff makes witty avail of it. “I told
John o’ Gaunt he beat his own name; for you
might have trussed him and all his apparel into
an eel skin; the case of a treble hautboy was a
mansion for him.”


CHAPTER XX.
Further Perversities.
AS Professor Von Dvorak has shown by his
experiments, that a merely resonating con-
dition obviously produces a clear mechani-
cal effect, it surely is not too much of assumption
to affirm that a propulsive current is an influence
to be reckoned with in estimating the state of
the interior of a pipe at the time when it is giving
forth musical sounds; that state cannot fairly
be supposed to be the same as when simply a
pipe is responding to the call of a tuning fork.
The force is not immediately expended, but we
may reasonably infer that its penetrating power
extends some distance within the pipe, and there-
fore we might expect to hnd the first node
at a point distant from the tip of the reed where
the agitation is set up; for, independent of the
motion of vibration of the air, there is a true
2;6
THE MAKING OF SOUND IN THE ORGAN


transport of air through the pipe. Bearing this
in mind, and also that the stream’s propulsive
energy becomes dissipated with extreme rapidity
immediately it approaches an outlet; and that in
a cone each successive disk or layer of air having
a larger area for dispersion causes the outer
reflected energy to have greater intromissive
power than it has in the cylindrical form of tube;
then presumably the aggregate of these me-
chanical relations should afford us some percep-
tion of the causes at work to induce those
peculiarities which it is the nature of reed pipes
to exhibit.
The cylindrical pipes I can by no means
regard as “ closed pipes. The term is evidently
a misnomer, misleading by its preoccupying con-
clusion. When similar results are attained by
two distinct methods of causation, we call it
“ coincidence;” and such it appears to me to be
in this case with our musical instruments, and
nothing more. There is nothing to be seen that
structurally differentiates the oboe and the
clarionet. If one is a closed pipe, why not the
other be called the same? The one particular
feature of variation is in the harmonics; but this
may be a question of coincidence only, the
specific causation of which demands and awaits
investigation.
My meaning may be illustrated by reference
to the theory of beats; formerly it was held that
the beats were between the tw 7 o primaries calcul-


able on the system of ratios. Since the discoveries
of Helmholtz that the beats are between the
partials, or between combinational difference
tones, the theory so long believed had to be
abandoned. Nevertheless, the coincidence is
there, so that we can still calculate upon the old
method, the practical results derived by means of
the old and the new theories being exactly alike.
So these harmonic characteristics may be of
different origin when pursued to their mechanical
relations, and the effect be merely one of coin-
cidence.
It would be very interesting work to carry out
experiments to determine when and how and by
what degrees the difference in the producing of
the octave or not took place between the states
cone to cylinder, and vice versa cylinder to cone;
say a cone tapering to end with a diameter of
three quarters of an inch, then by various experi-
ments changing by gradual transitions at the
open end until the cone became a cylinder; or
from, say, a large mouthed cone to a large
cylinder. What freaks would it portray in the
process? Would the even harmonic be parted
with suddenly and the odd harmonic take its
place, or should we witness dramatic develop-
ments of character and displays of double ances-
try mingled ? An enthusiast might wish to be a
millionaire in order to pay on a liberal scale for
these sweet fancies. It is money that answers
questions better than any oracle.


Now, continuing our instrumental comparisons,
in the clarionets, the figures are, for the note D,
21-tin.; for E, iqin.; for F (which is well out of
the influence of increasing diameter) we get
i;|in., and so on; all too near the outward wave
length relation as giving the prime in low double
octave. For the upper D, we find loin.; E, pin.;
and F, B±in. Compare these with our table,
the relation of these being the quarter wave
lengths.
Now, at between five or six (or six and a
quarter) inches from the tip we have a key, which,
opened, gives vent to facilitate the production of
the twelfth. By theory, upon opening a lateral
hole in the upper part of the instrument, a node
there existing is destroyed, and a ventral segment
or loop takes its place. In practice, it is found
that it is not necessary for the opening producing
the formation of a loop to be made exactly in the
place assigned to the nodal centre in theory,
it is sufficient if the opening be near enough to
hinder the presence of a node at the place, and it
it is in this relation that this key does duty for
each successive twelfth. Now, if the node of the
prime tone exists exactly on the face of the reed,
where does the opening of this key transfer it
to? Denner placed his key higher than it is
found in modern instruments. The twelfth, when
it is produced, must have in each case its own
proper node, and the question is. where? And
how does it differ in position from the node
279
AND IN THE ORCHESTRA.


pertaining to the prime tone when that is being
produced ?
My inference is that with all the prime tones
a node does exist at a distance varying between
two and four inches from the tip of the reed.
But when the twelfth key is opened and the prime
node interfered with, how are we to account for
the twelfths, whose existence must depend upon
certain aerial conditions being maintained in the
tube at the time that they are sounding ? The
inches that the key hole of the twelfth is from
the tip of the reed cannot be the length due
and essential for each separate harmonic twelfth
successively. There is undoubtedly an aerial
condition as to length of tube and position of
node within the length of which in mental vision
you ought to be assured for each and every note
heard, whether it be a primal note or a harmonic
note. My suggestion—with my usual tendency
to paradox—is that, instead of a twelfth, we are
actually obtaining an octave. Kind readers will,
not unkindly, think that lamin a fog. Yes, per-
haps, I may be! Yet let me hope that in good
time I shall come out of it. Be patient until I
bring such corroborative evidence as I can in
support of my delusion. The real problem to
think of is not of a musical but of a mechanical
affair. The question is solely one of time, of
time-distance. It is this, What delays the
reaction of the reed? Answer the question, and
the secret of the clarionet is open to you.


The single reed of the clarionet cannot be the
cause of its peculiarity as to depth of tone or as
to its odd series of harmonics, as contrasted with
oboe and bassoon; because the double reed will
answer equally as well. Lazarus tells how, when
he was a boy, the bassoon was played with single
reed, yet without any change in character of tone
or sequence of harmonics.
The old cromornes were cylindrical, yet they
were played with the double reed; and the
Egyptian arghool and the Greek aulos, also
cylindrical, were played with a single reed; and
all these had the characteristics of the clarionet.
Then in modern days we have the saxophone
which is played with the clarionet reed, and being
allied with a conical tube of large diameter ex-
hibits in every trait the specific character of
oboe and bassoon. That the nature of the
reed is not without influence is found in affix-
ing an oboe reed on the clarionet (which by
contrivance may be done), when the oboe series
of tones and harmonics is brought out, and very
evidently this is because the reed is too fine to
accommodate itself to the production of lower
octave tones.
Another feature is exhibited by the Japanese
hichirichi, which has the characteristics of a
clarionet and yet is played by a broad double
reed; but, unlike our bassoon reed, its Japanese
reed, is largest at the bottom part, which is in-
serted in the top of the pipe whereto it nearly
28i
AND IN THE ORCHESTRA.


corresponds in diameter. This instrument also,
when an oboe reed is applied, instantly trans-
forms itself, and gives the tones of the normal
octave and harmonics of an open tube. Curiously
too, the difference is that, whilst giving the
double octave, its tones accord very nearly to
corresponding length of wave; yet with oboe
reed, it takes up the three quarter relation, and
rises not an octave but a fourth all through its
series, and with the octave harmonics to the same.
The little instrument is so instructive that in my
book “ The World’s Earliest Music,” I have given
an illustration and an analysis complete in details,
and to that I refer you, feeling assured that to
many students and readers it cannot fail to prove
interesting.
Of the Cheng organ I have often spoken, and
that again, in the same volume is the subject of
illustration and examination; but let me allude
here to the strange peculiarity that its pipes only
sound by covering with the finger the one little
hole in each, which is provided near the reed
end, at from two and a half to three inches dis-
tance, convenient for the finger. Of course, like
the pipe organ, each pipe gives only one note,
and that from the open end; but this little vent
hole evidently prevents the existence of the node
necessary to me speaking of the prime tone,
which can only be produced from the pipe when
the integrity of its column is complete. The
reed itself, which is of metal, is not of a nature


to give harmonics. So here we have evidence of
a very early discernment of the effect of inter-
fering with the condition of the column of air at
a particular portion of its length.
Blindly perhaps, yet with a certain sagacity
which seems common to the primitive races, they
hit upon the right way of controlling that essen-
tial condition of a speaking pipe which we call
nodal formation. The method of the Chinese is
the reverse of ours: they start with a pipe in a
state (by design) of impaired integrity, and then
make the air-column perfect by closing the pin-
hole. On our organ method, we start with the
perfect condition, and by design open a hole to
destroy that completeness, having a still further
design of causing the pipe to give a higher octave
note truly and freely.
Proceeding with our measurements, these are
the wave lengths for the specified corresponding
notes of the orchestral clarionet. The lowest D
is from the A clarionet, and the others are from
the B flat and C instruments. I want you to
notice presently the two or three deepest notes,
and the way that they are influenced by a nearness
to the bell when we come to the harmonic ques-
tion; but for the moment, attend to the wave
length, and then to the pipe length,—that is to
say, the length between tip of reed and the hole
whence the note named, at its actual pitch,
issues :


Notes.
Half-wave Lengths.
Pipe Lengths.
D
44l in.
2i^in.
D#
4 I ain.
2oJin.
E
39?in.
19m.
F
37iin-
i7fin.
F #
35in-
i6fin.
G
33in.
1 54 in.
G #
3i|in.
I 4sin.
A
2giin.
i4in.
A%
27fin.
I 3fiin-
B
26.jin.
i2|in.
C
24fin.
u|in.
1 he panoply of metal on the tubes prevents a
fine accuracy in measurements to sixteenths of
an inch. Moreover, there is variation on the
instruments in relative size of the holes, so that
a hole placed higher than acoustically it should
be will be compensated by having the hole
smaller, and so the pitch of the note will be
flattened; for occlusion plays an important part
m all wind instruments. Thus it happens that
we may find that, in a given note of actual pitch,
the position will be a little different on a B flat
instrument to that which it has on the C instru-
ment, and so on. All such manufacturers’ con-
veniences must be allowed for, not forgetting
considerations of the cross fingerings, which,
when introduced, affect the internal relations of
the tube. In the higher ranges of the instru-
ment, these cross fingerings altogether disturb
the comparative measurements, and make calcu-
lations too complicated for one to follow cut; so


I restrict the examination within the small range
of our table. The pipe lengths for each note
are, as you will observe, very near to the lengths
that stopped organ flue-pipes would show for
speaking lengths.
Now I take you a step further in the enquiry.
Our key hole for the twelfths is at a fixed distance
for all. It stands at s|in. from tip of reed. If
the pipe length for D is 2i|in., the relative length
of tube for its twelfth (A) would be on the same
system one third of that, —viz., /in. and a frac-
tion; and the same proportion applies to all the
lessening lengths of the progressively higher
twelfths. Then the last of these, as required for
the twelfth of C, would measure 3§in. The
series, therefore, lies between these limits, —/in.
and 3§in. It is midway of these that our key hole
stands. Remember that I told you at the com-
mencement of this enquiry that I was only, as
gold seekers say, “prospecting.” I may be in
error; but, as I read the matter, when there is a
node at the top of pipe at the time when the pipe
is sounding its prime or ground tone, that node
remains likewise when the prime no longer
sounds, but has given place to the twelfth; with
the difference that another additional node is
formed, which necessarily finds its place at one
third of the distance from the lower end, since
the half segment must open wide at the mouth
or hole whence the tone issues.
In the instance above named, the position of this


harmonic node would be at seven inches from the
D key hole, so that our twelfth key hole has no
node near it for its opening to destroy; it forms
in sucli case merely an easing ventage. Even if,
as I have assumed earlier, the node of the prime
lies some little distance from the tip, then the con-
dition remains merely ventage, not obliterating
the node. The reason that the octave harmonic is
not available in the clarionet is that this node at
the upper end is not abolished. Some very care-
ful experiments made by Mr. D. J. Blaikley show
that the octave or even harmonic had a faint
■existence in the tone of the clarionet; and this
in a measure confirms my view that the upper
node is not exactly at the face of the reed, but
some inches lower down, and thus would be
susceptible to influences to which it might trans-
iently yield, and also be slightly shifting, as the
length of tube was varied in speaking different
notes.
When we have G sounding as twelfth to C,
the speaking length of which is ii-in we have
an opening of twelfth key hole within two inches
•of the spot where theoretically a node must
maintain its existence, which would seem peril-
ously near being destructive. Here do not forget
that, unlike other instruments, the clarionet
requires greater wind pressure for low notes and
least for the harmonic range. Having all these
points under consideration, it seems to me reason-
able to conclude that the part of the pipe between


Primes.
Twelfths.
Distances from
primes to i2th
key hole.
Half wave
lengths of mhs.
D produces A
i5i
145
99
A#
i 3b
13^
E
99
B
i3
I3i
F
95
C
n*
I2|
n
99
c#
105
iii
G
99
D
9i
G#
„
9r
iof
A
9!
E
8f
9i
a#
99
F
7S
B
99
H
6 if
8J
C
99
G
5*
8J
the tip of the reed and the twelfth key hole is of
very little importance, as contributing length in
relation to each harmonic.
Then I grow bolder, and intimate that the
formation of these harmonics is due to the normal
octave condition of the pipe calculated as an open
pipe,—no twelfth, but by coincidence a tone of
that pitch, emanating as the natural tone from
that length of pipe which lies between the twelfth
key hole and the hole whence this prime tone
issues. My argument may be thought ingenious
merely. May it not point to some problem worth
thinking about ?
Examine with me these figures in inches :
Here we see the proper half wave lengths of an
open pipe (we have done with the dottble octave
depth of pitch), and here we see how closely the
distances from the twelfth key hole are in con-
formity with these, the pipe or tube speaking in


its normal octave. How we can discern, too,
the effects of freedom and of occlusion. The first
note shows actual excess in length, for the bell
has begun to widen out, and part of the length
calculated is ineffectual as of a tube confining the
vibrations. The second and third are also within
the sphere of influence of the bell in their degree.
The next five are fairly at the proper standard of
relation to the notes given; but in the last three
instances the effect of the occlusion induced by
the length of tube below (unemployed in the
formation of the note) begins to tell upon the
speaking length, and shortens it considerably for
those notes, —as manufacturers find to their cost,
giving them infinite trouble in working out com-
pensatory modifications for the higher ranges of
the instruments, and involving many cross finger-
ings to trouble the players.
Clearly understand that what I intend to be
inferred is this, that the length of pipe specified
for each note is speaking in its normal octave as
open pipe, not in its double octave as the prime
tones do, and that in the middle of such lengths
there is a node, maintained whilst the vibration
continues. The holes being so small as compared
with the bore of the tube, the occlusion (or, I
should say, partial occlusion) delays the time
of the return of the vibratory wave each side
of the nodal centre; and thus we find in the
instance of the G that the wave external is
whilst the wave interior can only accomplish


a distance of s|-in. within the same period of
time.
Time is the arranging destiny for every vibra-
tion, as with that aggregate of vibrations which
we call life; and ever it is to us that “the
mysteries ” are the themes the most interesting
to the human intelligence, now, when we know
so little; even as in olden days, when men knew
so much, when they lived with the hours, with
the woods and hills and streams, feeling them-
selves incorporate with the blue domed earth
upon which they lived, moved, and had their
being, conscious as they were of that nearness to
nature which we have lost. And yet, why is it
that we vex ourselves, and let our brains be dis-
turbed by curious searchings and expectant
questionings ?
We are such stuff
As dreams are made of, and our little life
Is rounded by a sleep.


CHAPTER XXL
The Organ Representatives of the Wood=wind.
The organ representatives of the orchestra pre-
sent a curious involvement of likenesses and
unlikenesses. The imitation of the stringed
family devolves on the geigens, gambas, and
violones, all of which are flutes in construction,
with air-reed action; and in this fact of their
imitation throwing us directly upon the question
of the origin of tone-quality. Some actual re-
semblance we do see in metal reeds found sub-
stituting cane reeds, and performing in similar
modes of action. Then again the trumpet family
—the lip-reed instruments. These find their
imitation substitutes in metal reeds differing in no
respect from those metal reeds used for the reed
pipes of oboe; the vox humana has also a brass
reed allotted to it.
Another contrariety in the deputy is seen in the
2 go
THE MAKING OF SOUND IN THE ORGAN


organ horn, which is sometimes represented by a
flute pipe, called horn diapason, a wooden pipe
in German named the wald-horn. When allotted
to a pipe with metal reed the quality is much more
that of the cornopean than of the true French
horn, or else is thick and unsympathetic. Old
organs often had reed pipes of strange shapes
and curious names—button-regal, bear’s-foot,
virgin-royal, and the like; and doubtless the
builders obtained by them certain varieties of tone
then deemed to be of value by contrast with the
other reed tones. The vox humana was one of
these, now a cherished relic of old times.
Nor have the modern German builders entirely
discarded these old shapes, and it is possible that
in a not far off future builders may find their
account in resorting to variety in the shapes of
reed pipes,, for the sake of characteristics of tone
which with all their skill voicers of reeds do not
at present obtain. There are certain veiled
qualities of tone, very alluring and charming,
which are yet wanting in organs; qualities
which we need if only for the sake of giving due
equivalents for the tone of instruments scored
for orchestral use; for with whatever number of
stops an organ—even a large one—is furnished,
the variety indicated resolves in the main into
repetitions, and shows upon investigation little
real distinctive quality. There are 16ft., 8 ft.,
and 4ft. over and over again, disguised by termi-
nology, yet persistent in family likeness, and


often deficient in those refinements of art and
education which best decide character, and should
enable us to discriminate between the several
stops, however similar in kind. I use the word
education in reference to pipes themselves to
signify more than the art which determines scale
and proportions; more than the skill of truthful
formation; for beyond these, which are definite,
there lies that result of individual tact called
quality—quality not in kind only, but in grade,
so that the same is throughout a whole series
educed , brought out even from refractory speci-
mens, by the patience and sagacity of the voicer.
The pipes of the several reed stops of the
organ are precisely alike in construction as
regards the parts performing the office of reeds,
and the illustration previously given of the struc-
ture of the clarionet organ reed, real size, should
be referred to. (-page 53 .)
The beak or shallot may be more or less open or
close, deep or shallow under the tip of the tongue.
The tongue itself may be parallel in its width,
or may diverge in shape, diverge to greater width
at the tip than at the heel, or be of different gauge
in scale of thickness according to the custom of
each builder; but the constructive parts are prac-
tically the same. The differences in tone quality
are mainly derived from the pipes above the
block by virtue of their shapes and lengths.
Thus shown in Chapter XIX.; the bassoon is of
the form shown in F 1 g. 1 (p. 268); the oboe, a more
292
THE MAKING OF SOUND IN THE ORGAN


slender cone, with spreading bell, Fig. 2; the
clarionet, a cylindrical tube, Fig. 3; the trumpet,
Fig. 4, is a cone, spreading much more widely
than the bassoon; the vox humana, Fig. 6. The
pipe of compound shape, Fig. 5, is a specimen of
pipe only occasionally used for the tone called
cor anglais, or some cognate kind, and is found
in foreign organs of modern make as a free reed
stop, a stranger without companions of its own
class—at its best a solo for special effect. Fig. 7
delineates the construction of the reed as fitted
within the foot of pipe.
There are departures from the particular details
of form assigned here to given stops, because the
builders have preferences, traditional or other-
wise; as, for instance, the oboe may not have
the hole shown here at the junction of the bell,
or may have a half-closed top, after the method
shown in the vox humana; or clarionet varied,
as in old organs it was customary to give it a
cone shape. The old “ portunal ” stop was of
wood, conical in shape, and yet that shape was
adopted to secure the particular tone charac-
terizing the clarionet. Seidel says of it, “ Its
beautiful tone is of very peculiar quality, similar
to that of the clarionet.” In modern days the
student learns that the cylindrical shape of tube
is the one thing needful for producing clarionet
tone, yet practical work shows that it is not
needed. The vox humana may differ considerably
in different organs. Some of the reed stops are


in some instruments made double lengths, thereby
obtaining harmonic tone, and are perhaps dis-
tinguished by being named orchestral; and again
some reed stops, for the saving of space, are
made only half length, and then to soften their
tone a half-closed top is added, by which the
strength may be regulated, and in some measure
the pitch also, so that the desired character of
tone is obtained by compromise.
Considering an organ as for the time being
taking the place of an orchestra, we have neces-
sarily to set aside the question of what is called
the legitimate school of organ playing, and to
dismiss from our thoughts the methods and
designs of organ builders. The views of the
builder are hrst traditional and next personal
and he carries them out to the extent of his
ability. Be his ability great or small, his avowed
object is to impress his mark upon his work that
all men may know it. Outside these classes,
organ builders and organists, there is the vastly
larger class of organ listeners. The listeners
are not unfrequently players, and demand their
satisfaction, each according to his nature and
condition; and organs have an air of public
property, so that presumably every listener is
competent to criticize both work and performance.
To the ear of an orchestral player an organ as
ordinarily to be heard is an insipid affair. The
charm, the variety, the life are wanting, and
neither the depth nor the mass of tone and power


can long compensate the ear for the invigorating
qualities absent. The imitations of reed instru-
ments are rank imitations. The organ builders’
reply to objections is, that they are confessedly
imitations after an organ manner, understood by
all who have to do with organs; that to attempt
anything further would be not only undesirable,
but unsuitable to the organ character. He aims
at no more than he has accomplished. If any one
unconvinced should as a customer require, for this
occasion only, a genuine reproduction of favourite
orchestral instruments, the difficulty confronts
him at once that it is not in the market. Who
is to do it? It is seldom that a voicer possesses
critical knowledge of the instruments to be
imitated; he has not studied in a practical school
the genius and peculiarity of each instrument,
neither does he seek from professionals verdicts
upon his work, so that the tendency is always
to settle down to an average standard.
In certain stops for the solo organ, perhaps a
higher refinement is aimed at, and excellent re-
sults are sometimes attained by expert voicers;
yet, as a rule, the reed-voicing in this country is
usually estimated as below the mark of skill dis-
played in foreign organs. There is heresy in
hinting such a thing, for organ builders, from
master to man, are jealous conservatives, and
consider organ building has been carried to the
utmost bounds of perfection in their particular
shop; that no further improvement is to be looked
295
AND IN THE ORCHESTRA.


for; and the next generation will only have to
imitate the present. Does not every organ builder
plume himself particularly on his reeds, and hold
that his diapasons are the finest diapasons pos-
sible? Diogenes might search for an organ
builder who willingly admits that any other organ
builder’s work beats his own: particularly his
diapasons. Two such folk looked in upon an
organ by a rival builder that was beng played in
a church. After two minutes’ impatience, sup-
pressed criticism found tongue. “ Call that an
organ, says one. Organ ! heugh ! ” responded
the other, I call it a howling wilderness—let’s
go! Delightful self-complacence; the pride
that makes us human, and that keeps us so.
I he class of organ which is to the level of the
popular taste and is pretty generally distributed
over the country, ministers but little to the enjoy-
ment of the cultivated musician. The prices paid
for organs tend to reduce all considerations to
one, simply trade profit, buyer and seller disguis-
ing alike to each other their thoughts about the
transaction by specious references to art and
excellence. The raising of the standard of work
can only follow on the public demand, and such
demand can only be expected upon the elevation
of public taste, which in its turn depends on the
familiarity with the examples of the highest class
of work; so that what with cheap work and poor
P m Ti™ m a vlclous circle > hope of escape from
which but little is vouchsafed us at the present day.


A really fine organ, one affording satisfaction
to a musician is necessarily a costly instrument;
examples are therefore comparatively rare, and
still more rare is the chance in individual ex-
perience of finding one in the hands of a musician
fully equipped in orchestral knowledge, and able
to display the instrument with a view to orchestral
effects, and to the ideal of an orchestral listener
or player practised in estimating quality of tone.
Unquestionably it is a moot point with organ-
ists whether the organ should be treated by the
player with the design to reproduce orchestral
effects, beyond, perhaps the toleration of Dead
Marches in “ Saul,” and Wedding Marches from
the vestry, with their golden conclusions, the
majority of organists rule decidedly against in-
fringements of the legitimate organ style—that
is to say, their style, towards which they hold
strict allegiance. Even if a concert organ is in
question, and they are called upon to give a treat
to the people, some twinges of conscience after-
wards makes them doubtful of the propriety of
ttieir conduct in so tampering with the dignity
of the king of instruments. Ever in the world
the conflict of the old faith with the new.
The believer in modern transcription style
thinks it shrewdness to surmise that these old-
fashioned organists have not the natural gifts of
ear to find delight in tone-quality, nor the keen
perception that is able to discriminate the fine
shades of tone-quality; and in like manner the
2q;
AND IN THE ORCHESTRA.


orchestral player, or amateur listener, guesses
that the organ builder does not give true imita-
tion reed stops, for the apt reason that he does
not know how.
Assuredly such scepticism, however natural, is
altogether erroneous. The two faiths, although
in the letter so distinct, are yet capable of being
reconciled in the spirit. That is legitimate which
can be properly fulfilled; if it cannot it is a tra-
vestie. Styles for which neither the organ nor
the player are suitable, prove themselves wrong
by being unsatisfactory to players and to hearers.
The simple questions are, in the end, Have we
the organ fit ? Have we the player capable ?
Taking the organ as it is, let us see how far it
fails to answer the demands of a lover of music
who, with knowledge of instruments, and with
reminiscences of the orchestral tones haunting his
t oughts, seeks in the organ the means of repro-
ducing them at pleasure. The first enquiry
would be directed to the names of the reed
stops. The first step of the kind in the scheme
of the organ is the oboe, then the bassoon; and
ere, on the threshold of the investigation, a
strange anomaly is perceived, they are not dis-
tinct occupiers of complete ranks, but divide the
key-board between them; practically there is but
one quality of tone extended right and left.
This is a serious disappointment. The player in
his thoughts dwells upon his remembrances of
orchestral phrases; in the real instruments the


range of the bassoon overlaps the whole of the
lower range up to within an octave of the high
limit of the oboe. The same melody played
note for note upon both instruments will be of
wholly distinct quality as first given by one, and
then by the other; within the same octave the
two instruments in the orchestra may be answering
one another as two voices with clear individuality
to our recognition, for the quality of tone in the
lower range of the oboe is vividly different from
the quality characterizing the upper range of the
bassoon, and most charming differences they are
for contrast or for blending. The organ player,
not having this distinct command, is foiled in his
intent, and feels that he neither has bassoon nor
oboe. The clarionet has certainly a more dis-
tinct assignment as a separate stop; it begins
generally at tenor C, though sometimes it is
found carried down an octave lower in extent.
When the clarionet exists on the same manual
with oboe and bassoon, the player is deprived of
his resources for contrast. Rightly, the clarionet
should be allotted to another manual.
The trumpet is a stop which, although it pro-
fesses to be imitative, is voiced for general effect,
with a view to mixing well in the full organ; and
we miss, therefore, the true trumpet clang—the
tone which should be thin, yet brilliant, —piercing,
yet reverberant. When a good specimen is found
it is valued. It must be confessed, however, that
the organ builder and voicer of the ordinary


stamp and average skill seldom rise above the
conception that a bassoon quality lies in a snarl
mixed up with a growl; oboe quality, in wiry
wailing, or bagpipe pungency; and the trumpet in
rattle and blare. In giving these there are many
degrees of excellence, varying in success. The
truth is that, to be just in the matter, the limit
of aim should always be considered when criti-
cizing the reed stops for quality. They are
intended to be representative to the point of
recognition, but hardly more, excepting where
there is a solo manual and separate solo organ;
then the voicer is taxed to higher efforts, and his
success in producing orchestral oboes and
clarionets, and trumpets, is again limited by his
natural taste for, or opportunities of, studying
the actual tone qualities in the originals. What-
ever value individuals may set upon good imita-
tive character, the chief purposes of reed stops in
the organ are, in the builder’s point of view,
contrast and power.
To the musical artist the organ would also be
deficient in those shades of character which arise
m instruments through the changes in register,
as developed in a ground tone of scale succeeded
y harmonic scales. Thus the clarionet has its
three registers, and ever fresh variety in tones.
The organ builder’s idea of right is to have a
well balanced even scale all through, and such
suggested resemblances would be foreign to his
faith. He could hardly be persuaded to violate


traditions and attempt such caprice. In another
and more important matter the organ betrays
deficiency, and by its nature fails in giving the
life-like effect, of the orchestra. The organ, in
the sonorousness and majesty of its fulness, in
its number of stops, with many grades of soft-
ness and delicacy, of penetration and of power,
and with the massive richness of its effects,
affords us variety and expression, yet withal is
inanimate. Its expression is the expression of
degrees of strength; its variety displays itself in
changefulness, and when the high flood of sound
comes rushing upon us from the swell, and ebbs
away to the dim distance, we feel the effects of
nearness and remoteness, as of the forces of
nature, which though human hands may set
them in motion, lack the life that is ours —they
act apart.
In his “ Instrumentation and Orchestration,”
Berlioz bewailed the cold inexpressiveness of the
organ, and with the true instinct of the composer,
combined in him with the keen perceptivity of
the practical man understanding throughly the
tools of the musician, he saw the need of sounds
for a finer fulfilment of orchestral imitation than
the organ afforded, and boldly advocated the
addition of a separate organ for this purpose
upon the free reed system; seeing in it the only
natural resource for real crescendo and dimin-
uendo, the swell, the fall, the emphasis, and
appealing influence of sounds verified by touch


and eloquent by breath. Free reeds literally
breathe their tone; and are capable of being so
modified by surroundings and by treatment that
representative effects can be obtained of a kind
denied to the organ, with its orthodox depart-
ments of great, swell, and choir.
The one objection hitherto has been that whilst
organ pipes fluctuate in pitch according to
temperature, free reeds maintain their pitch under
those changes. Such objection ought not to be
insuperable if organists would only consider free
reed stops as the solo artist, not necessarily to
be mixed up in the general chorus. The puny
methods usually contemplated, of sets of reeds
m harmonium pans surreptitiously introduced,
into the organ, will not further the musician’s
aim; there must be a certain largeness of treat-
ment and free enterprise, and not until that view
is taken up will there be the hope of reproducing
from a key-board the charms of orchestral beauty
and colour, vivid with human feeling.
In the construction of reed pipes there are one
or two particulars to mention, which in trade
practice are well known, though left out of ac
■count m scientific writings. The organ clarionet
is furnished with a reed which is an octave lower
in pitch than the pipe-length would indicate, in
is respect following the nature of the real in-
strument; hence the pipe for a given note will be
no iced on comparison to be shorter than the same
note exemplified in the other stops-oboe, bas-


soon, trumpet, &c., which are all of normal
length.
The clarionet is more than the half-length of
such. This may be to you seemingly a puzzle, if
not a contradiction. It arises from the fact (of
which few students or teachers are cognizant)
that all reed pipes are much less in length than,
according to scientific statements and calcula-
tions, they ought to be. They are nearer three-
fourths only of the length assumed as calculated
from wave length. Therefore the clarionet reaches
to two-thirds of the height of the comparative
lengths of other stops; but proportions are again
subject to variation from the effect of diameters
of pipes upon the pitch. The law appertaining
to all reed pipes is that increased diameter de-
mands greater lengthfor a given pitch the
pipe of largest diameter will exceed in length the
pipe of lesser diameter. This is the opposite of
the law ruling flue or flute pipes; with them in-
creasing diameter calls for curtailment of the
length.
Always this is to be remembered that reed pipes
are distinguished by action with a current that
is propulsive, and that there is a true transport of
a body of air through the pipe. In flute pipes,
on the contrary, the action is abstractive, —the
current passes over externally, and carries away
air from the mouth of the pipe.


CHAPTER XXII.
Influence of Dimensions upon Quality.
IT is related of Madame Mara that she was
I able, within the compass of three ocatves, to
produce twenty-one hundred distinct changes
of pitch of vocal sounds in succession, or an
average of one hundred changes between each
two whole tones of the ordinary scale. That
such fineness of approximation between appre-
ciable sounds should by effort of the will be
possible, may well excite our wonder; but inde-
pendent of the intellectual divination of such
results torecasted by the ear, the greater marvel
is the physical capability of the vocal organs to
obey the command of the will.
In studying wind instruments there is one
particular we become acquainted with which
strikingly illustrates the mechanical difficulty
that has to be overcome in feats of this kind
3°4
THE MAKING OF SOUND IN THE ORGAN


designed to exemplify musical skill in the fine
artistic controlling of the singing instrument. It
is very noticeable that with most voices and with
most wind instruments there are certain con-
secutive notes in the compass requiring on the
part of the artist the utmost vigilance and delibe-
rate attack, in order to their production with
accurate relation to other notes and with the
designed truth in respect of pitch. The particular
to which I would call attention is the influence
of the interior dimensions of the instruments in
swaying certain consecutive tones with tendency
to be flat or sharp, as the case may be, generally
however to flatness; and further to make you
aware of the fact that the influence is greater in
cylindrical and uniform shaped tubes or cavities
than it is in conical or in irregular shaped tubes
or cavities. This I will presently try to explain
to you by diagrams. I have frequently found
the difficulty arise with treble C and C or notes
close to that region in the scale, and with the like
notes in the octave above and sometimes in the
octave below; so much so that it taxed all one’s
resources to secure to the higher note of the two
its independence, and to preserve it from tipsily
merging its identity in that of its companion
note. I think I remember that Sir John Herschel
in his “ Treatise on Sound ” alluded to an instance
of two flutes similarly influenced, one being tuned
to C and the other to and when these were
blown simultaneously by way of experiment, the
X


pitch of the Cjj melted into that of the C; but he
merely cited the fact without offering any ex-
planation. My instances were with free reeds.
Another instance bearing on the point is found
m the record of Grenie’s experiments. Grenie
was one of the first introducers of the free reed
to European notice for modern musical use. He
lived in the time of the first Napoleon. It is said
in his trials at Notre Dame the tones he produced
were of such power that they shook the columns
of the Cathedral, and so much was anticipated
from his doings, that a commission of enquiry
was ordered, in which Cherubim, the composer,
took part. However, the special matter that
concerns us in the account, is the statement that
Grenie had found on advancing from the tenor
region of the scale upward he was compelled to
make the feet of his pipes six inches long, and to
keep that uniform length for some distance for-
ward, no matter what differences existed in other
respects between the pipes standing as a series
in that portion of the scale; otherwise, if he
graduated the lengths, as was usual in organ
building, symmetrically diminishing the lengths
of the feet, then he did not obtain true intonation
from his free reeds. It should be noted that
Grenie used the usual organ sound-board with
slides, and his free reeds were in pipes as in the
ordinary arrangement of an organ. I well re-
member reading about this in my youthful days,
"days of the long long ago,” and how puzzled


was at the, to me, seeming caprice of nature, this
curious preference for six inches. Then, as now,
I was always wanting to get at the meaning of
facts, yet no elucidation of the mysterious prob-
lem was vouchsafed to the reader: the bare state-
ment only was there, a record of something that
was considered a curiosity of sufficient importance
to be put into history, and there left.
In organ building it frequently happens that
trouble arises from sympathy between two pipes,
causing unsteadiness in the pitch of one or of
both, so that when one is speaking the other
draws it from allegiance to its proper pitch of
tone. There are several causes for such display,
but generally the trouble is due to the influence
of the mouths, which when they happen to be
too near together, and at the same level, will
sympathize; the one pipe be trying to time itself
to the constitutional pitch of the other, behaving
in a maud ling sort of way, familiarly known as
“ wobbling,” and very trying it is to the patience
of the tuner. One means of avoiding the liability
is now generally provided in the structure of the
instrument, the sound-board being arranged so
that the alternate pipes are planted at different
ends, because it is found that the pipes seldom
draw in the manner named when the difference
in pitch exceeds a semitone. Another way is to
elevate the particular pipe prone to error, by
making the foot considerably longer than that of
its neighbour, in order to raise the level of the


mouth, and get it out of the way of temptation to
go wrong. In the swell box of an organ, pipes
are often subject to peculiar influencing by sym-
pathy, arising from relative position or from some
local cause as regards dimensions of the box or
may be of the building surrounding it. Grenie’s
difficulty had not its origin in external conditions
or influences; his free reed pipes had not mouths
after the fashion of pipes of the diapason class
called flute pipes or flue pipes, liable to be
affected by contiguity, and therefore it is clear
that the difficulty was of internal origination.
Experience has taught me that the air in the
foot portion of the pipe took part in the vibration
set up by the reed. The real signification of the
fact stated is this, that a method of uniformity
tends to neutralize sympathy. The too great
nearness of likeness in dimensions, existing be-
tween any two pipes, boxes or cavities in which
sounds are originated, will according to position
in the scale tend either to sympathy or to indiffer-
ence. The standing of the note in nature deter-
mines its relations, makes it associated with
particular dimensions, whatever the instrument
from which it is produced. We may make differ-
ences, and in one case may by the disparity
neutralize sympathy, and in another case though
using the same means may emphasize or
strengthen sympathy. This doctrine holds good
of the voice and of solo wind instruments which
produce a series of tones from one source,, equally
3°8
THE MAKING OF SOUND IN THE ORGAN


as of the pipes of organs each restricted to one
tone.
In order to understand the unseen working of
the predisposition we are speaking of, we should
be able to imagine the condition of the air within,
when an instrument is being sounded and when
a pipe is in that state of internal activity called
“ speaking.” In a speaking organ pipe the
column of air has definite divisions by nodes; the
theory I suppose you to be familiar with, so far
as not to need a restatement here, since all
that I wish to call attention to now is the dis-
tinction between nodes as to rank and influence;
for instance, in the organ pipe there are great or
superior nodes, and the. lesser or inferior nodes.
As the tone is compound so the nodes are com-
pound, the lesser nodes co-existing with the great
central node.
Remember, nevertheless, that when a pipe
speaks its harmonic tone and the ground tone is
absent, then the great node is absent. The nodes
are aways centres of power—places of re-action,
whether great or small, and their influences are
to be regarded if we would comprehend the subtle
activities concerned in the behaviour of musical
instruments. Very different from organ pipes are
the orchestral wind instruments. The flutes,
oboes, clarionets, and bassoons, in a large range
of their compass are free from the royal rule of
the great node, and are subject to the viceroys of
lesser rank, those who are second or third in de-


gree and divide authority,—in other words, the
first and the second harmonics dominate. Horns,
trumpets, and the like, are practically wholly free
from the great node, and in great measure given
up to the fitful sway of a lot of petty chiefs, and,
as is natural in such case, the allegiance is often
doubtful and wavering.
Consider now as a matter of fact the state of
the trumpet given up to the influences of a dozen
distinct nodes, and the next instant parcelled out
amongst thirteen, and again cut up to be swayed
by fourteen co-equal rulers. Is it a wonder then
that even with inanimate things, such as particles
of air, there should be some hesitancy whom to
serve, so little difference being pronounced in the
comparative strength of the powers on either side
of the boundary to compel submission ? Is it not
hke a game of human fate, of tribal policy, of
social relations ancient and modern? I like to
endow my constituents, my asrial millions, with
luman impulses and with the powers of puppets.
No, metaphor has not taken me away from my
original consideration how Madame Mara ruled
her voice with tyrannical will, sure in aim, un-
mching in resolve. So do all great artists rule,
with strong will they aspire, and therefore they
achieve. Imagine the almost infinitesimal dif-
ference m dimensions between the nodal limits
of asrial activity allotted to the ninety-ninth part
ot a tone, and the succeeding instant to the hun-
dredth part of a tone. Yet the artist by a change


in thought decides and definitely marks off the
difference. In the vocal organ there are actual
changes in space in the length, breadth, and
conformation of the several parts employed in
the production and emission of successive notes,
changes so minute yet so real that our measuring
machines, however near our idealizations, would
fail to make plain to our sense the delicate inter-
actions of the mechanism. The infinitely little is
the only real wonderland now left to us.
As regards certainty of intonation, the influence
of nodal divisions cannot be wholly absent from
the cavities of the vocal organ, though the actual
definition would be much less strong than in
instruments in which length has the more deter-
mining effect, as it has in the trumpet and kindred
tubular forms. The term “ node,” by its deriva-
tion, signifies “ a knot,” and the original concep-
tion of a tube with nodal divisions mentally re-
ferred to the knotted stalks of reed grass, canes,
and bamboos, in which length formed the basis
of consideration. In sounding cavities, the par-
ticular effect of length is lost, and the idea wanes
dim, for the reality has become weak. The out-
lines are undoubtedly there, to be empictured as
embossed pattern-work, richly crossed with faint
traceries, and shifting imageries.
The length of the trumpet when a high note is
sounded we may conceive to be divided into a
number of sections, each limited by nodes; as,
for instance, let us say the note sounded required


as a condition of its existence that the vibrations
in that particular tube should define fourteen
sections separable by intervening nodes; the next
possible higher note is one requiring to be defined
by fifteen sections. To accomplish this transi-
tion, the fourteen sections occupying the whole
length of the tube will each have to be shortened
by one fourteenth, and the fourteen bits of space
or fractional lengths so deducted will go to make
up the new allotment—the fifteenth. The length
of the tube remaining the same, there is no other
way of finding room for the new note but a new
apportionment of space. Nature likes her ease,
and takes time even for such a change as this,
and except by urging will not bestir herself to
bring it about. The inertia of air is as real as
the inertia of a mountain. In all these harmonic
instruments you have to give nature a helping
lift- As you ascend the scale each note requires
urging with additional vigour of breath in order
to break up the nodes, and enforce a re-arrange-
ment. Do not forget that the order of the har-
monics, the growth of the intertones, proceeds by
steps of one and one. It is no question of sound,
or music, or choice of nature. The tube cannot
be divided into fourteen and a half, or into any
portion less than required for the one whole step
from fourteen to fifteen. The whole length of
the tube always demands equal division, because
under no other condition is it possible for a state
of vibration to be sustained. What is true of the


transition from fourteen to fifteen is true for all
other relations of harmonics. And now I want
you to fix your thoughts on the differences in the
space dimensions, and on the bulk of matter
occupying such space, which matter has to be
moved into new relations whenever the time of
the vibration is changed.
The dimensions of masses of air limited by
tubes or other enclosures, are spoken of as the
dimensions of such tubes, and the tubes as
vibrating when it is air within the tubes that is
in a state of activity. Let us think of the air
itself, think of it as it is during any particular
state of vibration, and picture to ourselves a
visible change into another state of vibration.
When the dimensions of a mass of air divided by
nodes are large, a change in the number of nodes
is easier in proportion as the dimensions into
which the subdivisions take place differ in large-
ness, and this for the reason that the step is more
decisive. When the differences between the
changed states are small in proportion to mass,
then the change is impressed with less certainty,
for the reason that the vibrating air is disposed
to retain its first state. The difficulty is this,
that too great an excess of vigour in the agent
of vibration readily goes steps beyond, whilst
too little energy fails to rouse sufficiently to en-
force the change designed. The consequence is
that the higher the harmonics so the finer will
be the judgment required in the artist, and


the more perfect the control of the means em-
ployed.
The following diagram will show the influence
of variations of form in affecting the relation of
similar dimensions when there is a change from
one nodal division to another.
Fig. 20.
Comparative successive Divisions in Conical
and Cylindrical Pipes or Tubes.
Here you see there is a certain length of line
divided into eight parts; it may represent any
length of tube because the same reasoning will
apply to all lengths and divisions, and all relative
changes in nodes from note to note. The cylin-
drical form is shown in the lower diagram, first
by the dotted lines as of the full length, and then
as reduced by one eighth, and we may suppose


thus to have under view the difference between
the length of a nodal section belonging to one
particular harmonic note, and the lesser length
occupied by the nodal section of the succeeding
higher note. Above this is shown the conical
form which also is similarly marked. We have
one-eighth difference displayed, but supposing the
difference a sixteenth or a thirty-secondth part
only, the diameters being unchanged, the differ-
ence in the dimensions of the full length and
the lessened length of the relative nodal sections
would then be so trifling in proportion to the
whole, that the vibrating activity would not easily
take up new divisions, would be disposed to con-
tinue its own pace, and require additional stimulus
to cause it to agree to more rapidity of movement,
with its imperative readjustments of nodal
lengths throughout the tube. Now compare the
conical form with the cylindrical, —the arrows
show the direction of the force, the tendency of
any activity seeking expansion being always to
the place of greatest ease, —and you will not fail
to observe how, between any two eighths in the
cylindrical form, there is no difference in the
amount of air under influence. In the conical on
the contrary, between any two sections, each suc-
cessive section towards the outlet allows of greater
expansion to the travelling wave of condensed air.
The same argument holds as regards wide
bore and narrow bore. As it is length which is
most affected by nodal changes, the proportion so


affected tells far more upon the narrow bore than
upon the wide, so that one-eighth length is more
than one-eighth as regards the mass affected.
Therefore the difference of dimensions between
the nodal divisions of one note and of another
note is greater in a conical than in a cylindrical
bore, and is greater in a narrow bore than in wide
bore, the consequence of which is that conical
bores and narrow bores favour the production of
harmonics and aid the clear definition between
note and note. Why? Because there is less sym-
pathetic relation when there is more difference in
dimensions; there is always less liability to be
drawn into falseness of intonation when, in the
transition from note to note, the nodal condition
you would enforce is markedly distinct from the
nodal condition prior to it.
There is reciprocity between equals. As dis-
parity tends to distinctness in action between two,
so, on the other hand, likeness favours indisposi-
tion to change of state. Again, an excess of dis-
parity allows minor characteristics of superiority
in the lesser of the competing powers to obtain
influence. Thus, in Grenie’s pipes, when the feet
were of a length to enter into sympathy with the
main length of the pipe, or to be neutral, all went
well; but a proportion of relation of the two was
arrived at, when the sympathy made certain notes
false; then, instead of graduating lengths, it
became necessary to give an excess of length to
the feet too great to enter into sympathy, where-


upon the natural superiority of strength in the
rising pitch, note by note, held its own. So also
when cavities such as are used with reeds nearly
resemble each other in dimensions, the generating
agent is able to impress the successive pitches of
a series of notes, with little regard to the relative
proportions and dimensions of such cavities.
The lesser harmonics in the tones to which the
cavities are vibrating maintain activity in spaces
as nearly alike that they are indifferent to varia-
tion of form, and rely for distinction on inherent
energy. Nevertheless, do not disregard the fact
that every tube, every cavity, however small, and
whatever its proportions, is in sympathy with
some particular pitch or pitches, and will
strengthen some particular tone or harmonic tones.
And this natural leaning it is which makes the
art of regulating tone so difficult. Nature has
fixed certain proportional dimensions, as regards
short tubes and cavities, favourable to the note
treble C. The proportions suitable to the next
note are so near to it that C|: will comfortably
take up its abode in the cavity suited to C, and
will try to oust the original occupant; but with
notes further on the distinct relation lessens,
and indifference follows, the notes taking their
allotted dimensions without demur, whilst per-
haps an octave higher the same trouble will
break out again from similar relations of pro-
portions on a lesser scale, in the cavities used.
To avoid such derangement it is sometimes


necessary to erect little shields to ward off the
sympathy.
In the vocal organ there is a like wilfulness
about certain notes and contiguous notes, and
about certain shakes, so that some are more diffi-
cult than others for certain voices to accomplish.
The too great nearness in likeness of the form of
cavity, and tension of muscles and ligaments co-
ordinating, compels sympathy in vibrating agen-
cies. The artist has ever to contend with the
despotism of space; yet that which has power to
turn the balance, that it is which ultimately has
the mastery. In all ages it has been the same,
the artist’s will is supreme, and nature always
obeys the genius strong enough to lead her.


CHAPTER XXIII.
The Measure of the Resistance.
TO pursue with imagination the doings of
Nature, is for us the necessity of the unseen;
so much is hidden from visual perception,
that intelligently to comprehend her constructive
methods, makes demands upon higher powers
than those possessed by the eye alone. Many
readers, even the thinkers, never seek beyond the
obvious. The experimentalist, not content with
that, seeks to reveal; he in his work searches with
the eye of faith.
Imagination is a higher kind of believing, it
is useful to every reader, and should be cultivated,
were it only as an indulgence.
We have been considering through many
chapters pipes and tubes, fixing lengths in feet
and inches, and taking note of pitches with de-
cisions upon lengths, but who amongst you stays


his thoughts awhile to consider that these lengths
are secondary to the real initial work of nature,
that actually it is resistance that counts, not the
lengths. The pipe is the measure of the resistance
of the air to the pulses of motion travelling
through the pipe seeking a passage to the outlet.
Vibration in the mouthpiece of an instrument
sends forth pulses of motion (known ordinarily
as “ waves.”) Follow in imagination one of these.
The pulse represents a certain amount of energy,
which overcomes the resistance of air in the pipe.
As soon as the pulse of motion reaches the end of
a musical pipe, and throbs into the open air, it
meets a less resistance than that which it had en-
countered during its passage through the pipe or
tube. In springing out, it has by its energy
forced back the immediate front of the encom-
passing air, and gone off into comparative free-
dom, comparative only, for it has to submit to
the resistance inherent in the mass of outward air.
Now contemplate the after results of the exit
of this pulse. In leaping out into the open, the
pulse by its velocity of motion, has inevitably
created a “ partial vacuum ” around the outlet or
end of the pipe,—in literal fact, made a hollow,
or place less closely packed with air particles.
Conceive then that the circle of an air that has
been pressed back, does with heightened degree
of elastic force rush forward filling that hole, and
so to speak, hits back with a shock which pene-
trates up the tube, and makes itself felt at the


mouthpiece. This shock or return force is indis-
pensable to a system of vibration giving musical
results.
Here we arrive at our destined point. The sole
purpose of the pipe is to secure -periodicity to
recoil, its length is always the measure of the
resistance.


CHAPTER XXIV.
The Wonderful Find at Carthage.
IN the Museum at Carthage there exists an
actual representation of the Organ as used
by the ancients. The Organ, called
Hydraulus, or Water Organ, was invented by
Ctesibius the Egyptian, a man famous for his
inventive genius, who lived in the time of
Ptolemy Euergetes I, the successor of Ptolemy
Philadelphus, in whose reign the musical pro-
fession flourished greatly.
Although elaborate descriptions of this inven-
tion had been preserved in writing, unhappily
the drawings accompanying these had been
utterly lost. In consequence of the deprivation
of so necessary an aid, the construction of the
instrument, and the method of its action, had
not been fully understood through later centuries.


Plate A.
Terra Cotta Model of the most Ancient Pipe Organ
Discovered at Carthage (Back view).
To face page 322.




Commentators and translators helped one an-
other to perpetual confusion. In our own day
however much had been done to clear away old
misconceptions, and demonstrate the true func-
tion of the water in the instrument. Mr. William
Chappell in his History of Music published in
1874 (which unfortunately did not proceed
beyond volume I.), arrived very nearly at a settle-
ment of the disputed points left by earlier
attempted explanations. He subjected all
documentary evidence to rigid investigation, and
from various designs that had appeared in manu-
scripts, or mosaics, or on medals, he selected one
the plan of which seemed most feasible, and had
an experimental model made, capable of proving
the part played by water in the organ invented by
the Egyptian mechanician.
Other researches followed by later writers,
and the principle of the Hydraulus was no
longer a matter of conjecture. The details,
however, of the construction and the appearance
of such an instrument as actually in use with the
Greeks and Romans—these were but partially
ascertained. Illustrations had been for the most
part imaginary, long after the disuse and total
disappearance of the Water Organ from
civilised life, and no further enlightenment was
anticipated.
In 1885 however there was discovered, in the
ruins of an ancient Temple at Carthage, a small
model of the Hydraulus and iis player. The


model is of baked, uncoloured clay, such as we
call Terra Cotta, and it is now in the museum of
St. Louis, Carthage. By good chance, the Rev.
Pere Delattre was the Director, he recognized the
value of this find to the musician and the
archaeologist, and instead of being merely con-
tent with the acquisition and with the routine
performance of putting it in a case with a label,
he had it photographed from several points of
view, and with a liberality rarely practised at
public institutions, he presented copies of the
photographs to many persons known to be inter-
ested in the historic development of the Organ.
In this way the photos came into my hands, Mr.
A. J. Hipkins received copies, so also did Mr. G. A.
Audsley, who has made ample use of them in his
great work on the Art of Organ Building (now
complete in two large handsome volumes, imperial
qto); but the most important result of this
diffusion of knowledge came from the copies
presented to the Rev. F. W. Galpin. This well-
known connoisseur, who possesses a museum con-
taining I suppose the largest collection of old
musical instruments to be found in this country,
was not content with seeing, but, hred with en-
thusiasm, determined to set about making an
actual working model of the Water Organ. The
making was no light undertaking, as those who
know anything by experience of experimental
work may well judge; it was the work of years,
but it was accomplished, and admirably accom-


Fig. 21.
Walking Reproduction ot the Roman Hydrant us.


plished too, and, completed and perfectly play-
able, was exhibited June, 1904, at the Special Loan
Exhibition of Musical Instruments, Manuscripts,
etc., held by the Worshipful Company of Musi-
cians at the Fishmongers’ Hall. The show has
passed away, memorable to me and others for
this unique exhibit, which recalls for us a picture
in the life of three nations, that alike have passed
away.
Mr. Galpin wrote a full account of this relic
recovered at Carthage, of the sources of informa-
tion regarding the instrument it represented, and
of the classical references to it, upon which he
relied in working out his reproduction. This was
printed in a magazine named “ The Reliquary,"
known only to a restricted circle of the learned.
The paper was fully illustrated, several photo-
graphed views of the pottery model being given,
and his own reproduction described, with dia-
grams clearly explaining its working. At the
time of the exhibition several papers gave ac-
counts taken from this document, some illustrated,
thus securing some wide-spread attention from
the general public; yet in the nature of such
mediums, evanescent.
That the subject was of more than passing in-
terest amongst music lovers and organ players
was evident, and in conversations expressions of
regret were heard that musicians had not a per-
manent record at command in book form. Con-
vinced of the genuineness of the interest displayed,
326
THE MAKING OF SOUND IN THE ORGAN


I have been induced to believe that my present
volume would form a fitting place for housing
a chronicle of what is known of the Ancient Water
Organ, and for showing what the Rev. Mr. Gal-
pin has done in bringing home to us a realistic
example of this forerunner in the art of building
Organs.
True we do not use Water Organs, but the mar-
vellous thing clearly brought before our eyes is,
that in all essentials of structure as a musical in-
strument, we in our grandest organs are but copy-
ing the old model, building up the same on an
enlarged scale, able to do so by reason of the
advance of mechanical appliances.
The Water Organ was no toy instrument, it was
the outcome of an early age of science, the in-
vention of a man of recognised genius. It existed
in an unbroken line of public favour eight or
nine centuries, esteemed alike in the palaces of
Emperors and nobles and wealthy citizens, and
was held worthy of a victor’s skill in the great
games and festivals, the victorious professor re-
ceiving the laurel crown so highly prized by
Greeks and Romans.
Called by the Greeks the Hydraulikon, and by
the Romans the Hydraulus, Vitruvius states that
some had as many as ten stops, from which it is
evident that it possessed a musical capability of
no mean standard, and that its sounds were agree-
able in quality, since the playing of the instrument


Fig. 22.
Hydraulvs, Enlarged Section of Key Mechanism and
Step Action.


was a desirable feature in private entertainments,
the poets praising the Hydraulus for its
“ full-sounding, and most sweet song.”
The date of Ctesibius and his inventions is
fixed between the years 300 and 246 B.C. for the
most important period of his life. Little doubt
can be that before his time a pneumatic blown
organ of some sort was in use founded upon the
bagpipe, and then developed on the mode of
action common in Egypt in the smithy or smelting
furnace; the men engaged standing upon the
bellows to force the air into the hre by their own
weight.' A scene of this kind is depicted in
Champollion’s great work, taken from a painting
on the wall of one of the tombs at Kourna. Mr.
An Egyptian Smithy with the Ancient pair of Bellows.
From a Tomb atKouina.


W. Chappell in his History gives a copy of this
Egyptian smithy, which he thus describes:
“ The smith is heating a rod of iron, and his two assistants
are blowing the bellows. These are in every sense, pairs
of bellows, for the blower has one under each foot. He
throws the weight of his body first upon one leg, and then
upon the other, drawing up the exhausted bellows at each
movement of his body by a string. This mode of action
proves that in ancient times bellows were furnished with
val ves, like those of the present day ; for, if otherwise, the
exhausted bellows could not have been thus drawn up by
hand.”
The illustration is instructive, showing how
little is changed even in the progress of century
after century. Men walk in the footsteps of their
fathers, and build the streets of their cities, fol-
lowing on the tracks first made over the wilds.
Later pictures shew us men and boys similarly
employed on diagonal bellows, like our domestic
pattern, but on a vastly bigger scale. Some records
concerning large organs in the middle ages state
that sixty or seventy blowers, in like fashion
treading on the tops of bellows, were required
to supply the large amount of wind called for to
keep the pipes going. Even in some parts of
Germany the method is still in use. Dr. Stainer
in his Music of the Bible stated that :
“ These diagonal bellows and their treaders remained in
existence quite up to the end of the last century. The
Organ in the comparatively modern cathedral of St. Paul’s,
London, was blown after this fashion. It possessed four
such bellows, each measuring 8 feet by 4. But other large


Plate B.
Roman Hydraulus. Enlarged View oj Keyboard.
To fare page 330




organs had as many as eight, or ten, twelve, and even
fourteen. The bellows-treader used to walk leisurely
along, and throw his weight upon them in rotation.”
Copied from the sculptures on the Obelisk at Constantinople, erected
by Theodosius, ivho died a,d. 395.
So long does custom live. The primitive de-
vice, like an idol, held men’s minds in subjection.
That organ pipes suffer in pitch whenever the
pressure of the air coming to them varies, must
have been a matter of common experience even
with the earliest makers of organs, and certainly
men, standing upon bellows, would have brought
this disadvantage into prominence, to plague
every Egpytian or Greek musician in Alexandria.
By taking note of this early custom, when
probably the existing organs had arrived at the
stage of using diagonal action, we can better under-
stand the improvement achieved by Ctesibius, the


value attributed to it, and the popularity that lasted
for ages. He used the weight of water to regu-
late the strength of the air-pressure that was to be
allowed to the wind-chest and the pipes. Yet
this simple fact had been so obscured by
writers of later periods, that no ingenuity
of theirs seemed ever able to explain how
a water organ was a water organ. Some told how
“ boys were employed stirring the water about, or
“ pounding it to keep it active,” others to the
“ boiling of water to make the pipes sound, or to
“the toiling and labouring of the water, as in a
cauldron,” of “the pipes having been bent down
into the water,” and of “ the waving of the air-
columns through the means of water, and so on,
all illusionary.
The first full description of the Hydraulus is
by Heron of Alexandria, a pupil of its inventor.
Philon, the mechanician of Byzantine, refers to
Ctesibius, he having learned from him the nature
of air, and especially its elasticity; and he men-
tions the Hydraulus as a kind of “ syrinx played
by the hands, and that the kind of bellows by
which the pnigeus or air condenser was filled with
air was made of copper.”
The fuller description given by Vitruvius Pollio,
the Roman architect, between 20 and n, 8.C., was
the chief source of information for subsequent
writers, Vitruvius himself not having as it would
seem any knowledge of Heron’s writings, the
oldest extant copy of whose Fneumatika not being


older than the fourteenth or fifteenth century. It
is evident that Vitruvius had a personal know-
ledge of the Hydraulic Organ, and was interested
in it. Strange to say he doubted his powers
of explanation, for he concludes his chapter
saying,—
“ I have endeavoured, to the best of my ability, to
explain this obscure subject in writing; but it is not an
easy matter. Neither will this explanation be intelligible
to all, beyond those who have had some practice in things
of this kind, But if they can understand but little from
this description, yet, when they know the thing itself, they
will certainly find every part of it to be curiously and
ingeniously arranged.”
Mr. W. Chappell gives the Greek text of Heron,
and the Latin of Vitruvius, with translations of
both. Reading these with the light thrown upon
the whole subject by the actual reproduction of
“ the thing itself ” under the hands of the Revd.
F. W. Galpin, the description appears to me per-
fectly clear and intelligible.
The principle that “ liquids transmit pressure
equally in all directions, and the pressure they
produce by their own weight is proportioned to the
depth,” was the basis upon which Ctesibius pro-
ceeded in designing the Hydraulus; when in later
ages this doctrine was lost sight of, then the
whole affair became a perplexing puzzle.
The illustration (Fig. 25) shows the blowers
working levers; there are several ancient illustra-
tions of this mode of employing men in the


Medieval Organ from MS. Psalter of Eadwine.
Blowers using Levers.


making of music, and the commentators pro-
ceeded to explain the design upon the assumption
that the blowers were engaged in pumping water
into the vessels or cisterns, whereas the contrary
was the case, for the fact is now made clear that
they were pumping air into a cistern or cisterns
already partially filled with water.
This design shews a water organ of the 10th
century, it is copied from the MS. Psalter of
Eadwine in the Library of Trinity College, Cam-
bridge. Further historical details will be found
in Hopkins’s book on the Organ from which these
blocks, Fig. 24 and 25, are taken.
Water being practically non-compressible, its
purpose in the cistern was to resist the continually
compressed air, driven by the blowers into the
bronze receiver within the cistern. The diagrams
will shew the arrangements for this purpose, and
in due place will be explained.
The invention of Ctesibius had for its object
a better control over the degree of air-pressure
brought to bear upon the pipes, when giving out
their sounds. Ctesibius in this way sought to
obviate the fluctuations of pitch which resulted
from the employment of boys as weights move-
able, alternately stepping on and off their bellows.
In other words “he substituted the static force of
water disturbed in its level for the mere gravita-
tion weight of heavy bodies.”


CHAPTER XXV.
Further Particulars of the Hydraulus.
MANY learned disquisitions concerning the
ancient Water Organ are available to the
student; the summary of the whole know-
ledge will be found in magazine articles of the
year 1904.
From the descriptive “ Notes on the Hydraulus ”
of the Rev. F. W. Galpin I give enough of detail in
explanation of the illustrations here presented. The
frontispiece of this volume gives the front view
of the Terra Cotta Model, the place for the or-
ganist being behind (as seen in this and in other
illustrations) where the player shews himself
peering round the end pipe directing the blowers.
The Model is 7 inches in height and 2\ in
breadth. At the sides are shewn the two air
pumps, cylinders of copper; in the middle the
large, octagonal water box or cistern, a pipe from
which enters the transversely placed wind chest


Fig. 26.
Working Reproduction of the Hydraulus, showing Wind Supply
and Water Principle.
Z


supporting the pipes in row, the mouths of the
pipes being distinctly exhibited; 19 pipes are to
be counted, and are all of one diameter. This
tells us that the effect of length had been well
ascertained for pitch, but that as yet the ancients
had not arrived at the perception that the quality
in such sounds was determined by the diameter
of pipe. Wear and tear, and the crumbling tooth
of Time, are probably responsible for some cur-
tailment in the lengths of the pipes from the ori-
ginal standard. The real organ represented by
this model is supposed to have been 10ft. high,
and 4|ft. wide.
On the obverse side the terracotta model shews
the ledge on which the player stands, a part of the
legs of the player still remains, and about half of
the body, and most important of all, a keyboard is
there, shewing the 19 keys for the 19 pipes, the
keys hinged or centred upon pivots at the back.
The name “ POSSESSORIS ” impressed on the
model is that of the maker, who, from fragments
of similar organs, and some characteristic lamps
found in the same pits, similarly impressed, was
evidently the potter and provider of these pious
offerings to the Goddess of the Temple by devout
worshippers, and toiling pilgrims to the shrine.
One point for the curious is the meaning of the
two large holes immediately below the front pipes.
Mr. Galpin infers that they represent the holes
for the levers of the pumps, and says “ This was
of course an exigency required by the potter’s art,
338
THE MAKING OF SOUND IN THE ORGAN


the levers in the original being centred one on
either side of the body of the instrument.” For
myself I must say I do not think the suggestion
is convincing, but rather should imagine that it
was customary to hang or support these offerings
upon the walls of the sanctuary, and that as re-
gards the organ model, support would be found
according to custom on pegs on the wall, or on
frames, and the holes would be for the admission
of these supporting pegs.
The working reproduction by Mr. Galpin is
shown in diagram. (See Figs. 22 and 26.)
A A are air pumps on either side; each metal
cylinder is fitted with a wooden plunger B
covered with leather and furnished with a valve
C. The pump levers are centred on either side
at D. The air is forced from each of the pumps,
which are worked alternately, through a pipe E
into the transverse wind chest G, lifting in its
passage the little valve F which closing again
prevents its return, as minutely described by
Vitruvius. From the soundchest G there passes
downward a pipe H leading into an inverted
bell or funnel of metal, standing on short feet
and immersed in water contained in the box K,
called “ara” because of its altar shape. When
the air is pumped into the wind chest, being
unable to return, it passes down the pipe H and
forces the water out of the bell J into the box or
cistern K, the air within being held in a state of


compression owing to the weight of the expelled
water.
On the top of the wind chest is the sound-
board 00, consisting of an upper board and a
lower board through which holes are bored, form-
ing a communication between the sound chest
and each of the pipes placed in rows above.
Between the two boards are inserted metal
sliders P P, one for each note, pierced with holes
corresponding to those in the soundboard, but in
their normal position closing the outlets with
their surface. These sliders have little projections
R to prevent them being drawn in too far. On
pressing down the boxwood key T, which is cen-
tred at U, the slider P is pushed as. far as the
pin R, when its holes coincide exactly with the
holes in the soundboard and so allow the com-
pressed air to pass up and cause the pipes to
sound. The slider is attached at S by a short
hook to the end of the key lever the shape of
which is distinctly shown in the ancient model.
The keys in the real organ were about eight
inches in length and two inches wide.
The stops M M are like small taps, and are
furnished with small iron handles to turn them.
These stops admit the wind at will from the wind
chest G by a small opening L to either or all of the
three channels N N N cut in the upper part of the
windchest immediately below the holes com-
municating with the three rows of organ pipes.
One of the stops M is shewn turned to admit the


sound to the front row of organ pipes. It is
obvious that the player of the organ had to
give his attention very closely to the technical
acquirements of the blowers, so as to check their
action if too rampant, since should the enforced
rise of the water into the space K K reach beyond
a prescribed level, the pressure would too greatly
disturb the pitch of the pipes. Hence we learn
that the wrathful player had probably to contend
with amateur blowers, who shewed their incom-
petence by causing the water to bubble and
overflow.
To the musician and antiquarian the little clay
model has a very notable value, since it affords
indubitable evidence of the existence of a key-
board with pivoted keys many centuries earlier
than had previously been supposed, for a key*
board had not been traced further back than the
close of the eleventh century, when in the Cathe-
dral of Magdeburgh an organ was erected having
a keyboard consisting of sixteen keys. The keys
were an ell long and three inches broad, and were
struck by the fist of the player. Not that crude-
ness should be attributed to this method of mani-
pulation, for the valve resistance in a large organ
at that period of organ building would neces-
sarily be great. There are old tracker organs in
London at the present time in which the pressure
required to force down the keys is calculated by
the players in hand-pounds and foot-pounds to
represent during a service some tons of handi-


work. In the water organ the touch was probably
extremely light, else the contemporary writers
could not have spoken so often and admiringly
concerning that feature; the poet Optatian says
“ a fitting accompaniment in the smooth flowing
chant, and in a word binding together in perfect
order and rhythm everything there is,” —and
Claudian affirms the same,
“ With flying fingers as they lightsome bound
From brazen tubes he draws the pealing sound.”
The high praise of the player is the more credible,
inasmuch as in the early centuries of the use of
the water organ, harmony was unknown, chords
had not been invented, the player merely drew
single notes in some known and well ordered re-
lation of succession. Indeed it would almost
seem that the continued use of a keyboard was
essential to the dawn of the idea, that it suggested
the invention of harmony; harmony as a system
growing out of perception of a similitude to the
old Greek divisions of the length of strings and
their proportions one to another, educed by an
arithmetical process of the mind, attested by the
audition of the ear as possessing musical charm,
and fitness of relation of sounds blending into
unity.
Out of this simple mechanical expedient, a
little lever, hinged, or pivoted, and pressed down
by the finger, there grew rules for the distances of
fingers from key to key, as from i to 3 to 4 or 5,


and so on, making recognised intervals; next the
pressing down of two or more of these levers
simultaneously would follow, and arrest attention
to compound sounds. Each distinct combination
of sounds elicited in an orderly manner, very
quickly received general approval. Such observed
distances of finger touch and of the relation of
the spacings between the keys led naturally to
the perception of an underhand arithmetic, then
to the construction of systems of harmony, simple
no doubt at first but ultimately smothered m
pedantry, increasingly complex as fol-
lowed century. The figured Bass, the %% | and
the rest, retained in the scores of the old masters,
preserve very clearly these traces of the way by
which music came, in its predestined and pre-
figured evolution of harmony.


CHAPTER XXVI.
Concerning the Reservoir, and other Particulars
of Interest.
ANOTHER point, not sufficiently grasped
by those who have written about the
Water Organ, is that in the invention
of Ctesibius we have the first designed reservoir
for air in the construction of an organ (the
origin in fact of our reservoir combined with
feeders), acting automatically to preserve a
definite regularized pressure of air supply
to the pipes. The principle was most important,
since without it the promiscuity of pitch in the
selected pipes would prove but a mocking of
melody. As, in our organs, when the pressure ex-
ceeds the weighted limit a valve opens to permit
the escape of the disorderly influx, and will not
allow a greater pressure of air to be attained, so it
was arranged in the water organ that any excess


of compression was betrayed immediately by an
overflow of the water over the edges of the rim
of the cistern, and the escape of the air in bubbles
was erroneously attributed by observers to the boil-
ing of the water. First, it was necessary that the
water poured into the cistern should reach only
to a certain definite mark within it when in equi-
librum, that is to say the level should be the same
in both KK, and J, and this level we should (by
our reckoning) say, was so many inches below the
rim. The Blowers forcing air from their pumps
into the bell or funnel J push out the water from
J into KK, disturbing therefore the equilibrium. J
being an enclosed cistern and KK an open one,
the water in the latter will rise to a higher level
and the difference caused between the levels of
the water in J and KK by the action of the com-
pressed air is reckoned in inches. A difference of
three inches is called by organ builders a three
inch wind,” and is frequently the standard pres-
sure for church organs, and for reed stops six
inches and more.
The principle is precisely that of the wind-
gauge described in Chapter IV, ‘ Weighing the
wind,” and illustrated on page 49 an te- Second,
it was necessary that the blower or an attendant
should watch the rise and level of the water, and
be ready to check and restrain the over-zealous
man at the pump. It is a mistake to suppose,
as some have done, that it did not matter how
the blowers blowed.” In point of fact the con-


duct of the blower was a serious matter, far more
so than in our pneumatic organs. In the water
oigan the rim of the cistern corresponds to the
escape valve acting automatically in our form of
reservoir. If the blowers did not keep up the
le\el of the water to just below the rim (supposing
that to be the recognised arrangement), then the
pitch of the organ pipes would become flat in
proportion to the distance of the level below the
normal, for the air would be less compressed and
consequently the weaker in effect; if, on the con-
trary, the blowers exceeded the power required,
causing the water to overflow, as if boiling over
the cistern, then the result necessarily would fol-
low that the pipes would speak sharp, because the
waste of water going on would lower the static
level within KK and J, and consequently the
distance between that lowered level and the rim
level increasing more and more as the water was
wasted, the difference as between the levels might
soon be such that the blowers unchecked instead
of “a three-inch wind” might force up the pres-
sure of air to six inches or more. Hence the
vigilant eye over the blowers, with no doubt
sundry words accompanying, as indicated by the
o d illustrations, will not be passed over without
sympathetic appreciation of the trials of the early
organists. 3
As the centuries advance we read of large and
cost y water organs, and of their use in public
entertainments; the Emperor Nero himself was
346
THE MAKING OF SOUND IN THE ORGAN


famous as a public performer and a competitor
for the laurels bestowed on popular favourites.
Doubtless in these instruments the difficulties in
water regulation were overcome by some suitable
devices, automatic or otherwise, and a near
approach to uniformity of pressure obtained.
Fig. 27.
Hydranlus from a ContortionaU of the Time of Nero
Writers, even those of modern days, seem to
have been misled altogether by the term water
organ, for they fail to apprehend that the instru-
ment was in fact a pneumatic organ and entitled
to that recognition quite as truly as are our latter-
day organs.
The horizontal reservoir-bellows, by which we
are able to regulate pressure, was by Rimbault
attributed to Hans Lobsinger, of Nuremberg,
about 1570. Upon closer investigation however


this seems to be erroneous, and that the improve-
ment made by Lobsinger was the substitution of
wooden ribs in the diagonal bellows for the
leather foldings which up to that time had been
in general use.
Writers of repute at the present day give cur-
rency to the notion that the diagonal bellows when
bearing fixed weights (in contradistinction to
human force acting) give unvarying wind to the
speaking pipes. Organ builders know to the con-
trary, that the pressure varies with the extent of
fall of the upper board. Perhaps it needs some-
thing of training in organ building, or of daily
familiarity with the work at the factory, to escape
the mistaken conclusions, and they are many, so
readily come to by outsiders who, clever in science,
are deficient in practical experience, and perhaps
are not receptive to information from workers in
the trade of making organs.
The “ horizontal reservoir” as we call it was
not in use until one Cuming of London in 1762
put one in a large organ. A crude form it is
said was earlier put in a small organ. The
assumption that with the horizontal form an un-
varying pressure of air was obtained is erroneous.
Facts give no warranty for the belief; a more sus-
tained supply was gained, but the old defect was
not got rid of, and the organ blower held com-
mand below, the desired steadiness of wind was
at his sturdy disposal.
After a long period, however, some ingenious


builder thought of a remedy, now called “ the
inverted ribs,” and thus completed the usefulness
of the reservoir, which with an automatic cut off
or escape valve now secures, if properly con-
structed, equal pressure during the ascent and
descent of the upper board; instead of using the
inverted ribs one builder of acknowledged
sagacity prefers the single fold ribs, and is able
by springs, exteriorly or interiorly fixed, to com-
pensate all unevenness due to the movement of
the ribs. The varying support given by the ribs
to the weighted upper board in their progress of
expanding, or the loss of support in the degrees
of unfolding—these movements finds counteract-
ing movements in the springs, and thus a balance
of forces is secured in automatic operation. The
compressed air within the reservoir is constantly
forcing the ribs outwards, making them a sup-
porting power against the downpressing weight
above, consequently when that air is drawn away
to the wind chest to feed the pipes, the ribs fall
in, the support they gave becomes lessened and
in proportion the dead weight gains full effect,
with such differences in pressure as without sure
compensating devices would be unbearable in
music.
So great is the practical value of the Reservoir
that it is found advantageous in large organs to
have several reservoirs each weighted to give a
different degree of air pressure according to the
character of the stops fed by each. The range of


pressure for flue slops may be from three to five
inches, and for reed stops from six to “twelve-
mch-wmd ” or even higher, but if the statements
that have come down to us are to be believed con-
cerning the great distances at which the sounds
of the pipes of the largest water-organs were
heard, the conclusion we are driven to must be
that in the ancient usage enormous pressures were
at times brought to bear in water-organs, possibly
greater than any that we employ, else sounds so
powerful as are vouched for on record could not
have been obtained. It has been stated by old
historians that the sounds of a large organ erected
in a temple or palace in Jerusalem were heard at
Mount Olivet.


CHAPTER XXVII.
Summing Up.*
IN concluding my work on “ The Making of
Sound in the Orchestra and the Organ,” let
me set out, as briefly as may be, the con-
clusions to which my investigations have led me.
If I do this in a style which may look authorita-
tive or dictatorial, it is because I think each
individual statement here made has already been
proved in the body of my book. So let me begin
at once, and I promise that brevity shall rule.
THE SOURCES OF SOUND.
The office of the orchestra and every instrument
in it, and of the organ and every pipe in it, is
merely to disturb the equilibrium of the air.
* This chapter has been written by another hand, from
suggestions and notes left by the author of this book. It
is almost impossible to condense Mr. Hermann Smith’s
conclusions and discoveries and without the context such
a summary is apt to be misleading. But it was thought
best to make the attempt.


The ear is in its first effect a recording machine,
taking a register of impulses as they arrive.
These impulses, by their number, degree and
grouping, denote the character of the disturbances
in the equilibrium of the air.
The ear knows nothing of waves, but is
percipient only of arrested motion.
Sound is an aggregation of simple taps on the
ear.
time distance.
Time distance (i.e., the interval of time between
two taps) alone defines pitch.
Leaving musical sensation out of the question,
the ear only tests the accuracy of the fraction of
time to which (say) a string is brought in
executing one movement to and fro.
Time-distance means the difference in time
between the starting of two successive impulses,
as indicated by the space traversed by the first
before the second is started.
The t) terms “wave,” “wave-motion,” “wave-
length,” have given rise to misapprehension and
misconception.
It is a mistake to suppose that five hundred
and twelve vibrations are necessary before treble
. 18 P roc l uc ed. The note can be played many
times in a second and the vibrations need only


be at the rate of five hundred and twelve per
second, i.e., the five hundred and twelfth part of
a second for each vibration; in other words we
recognise the note as treble C when the time-
distance between two vibrations equals the five
hundred- and twelfth fart of a second.
The violin “wolf,” the clarionet “quack,” the
horn “ cuck ” simply show inability to execute
two (or more) taps at the time-distance which the
ear will recognise as the time-distance of that
note. Time-distance is everything.
WIND THE WORKER.
In the organ and orchestra wind is an engineer
displacing air.
The chasms thus made fall together with
shocks, each one regularly timed.
The clarionet player makes a new reed for each
note produced, the higher the note the shorter the
reed.
WEIGHING THE WIND.
The definite weight of air makes different
“qualities” of tone possible.
The differences of quality between, say, the
diapason and the salicional are determined by


the differences in bulk and weight of air acted on
by a fixed strength of wind.
The transmission and origination of sound are
different theories; the particles of air engaged in
the transmission of vibrations do not move from
their place, while in the origination of vibration
the compulsion to move is the cause of the shock.
In reference to wind instruments, the least
degree of rarefaction is the first step toward a per-
fect vacuum, or the least partial vacuum possible.
The player uses compressed air, not free air,
i.e, air weighing more, bulk for bulk, than free air.
By its swiftness the current of air causes a
great suction in its rear; the flexible valve closes
up, and the resulting vacuum is increased till the
compressed pulse of air reaches the outlet of the
tube, when the process is reversed.
Weight, pressure, velocity, are one in inter-
dependence.
In the clarionet the order of pressure is
reversed; the lowest notes want the greatest
pressures, the highest the least, while all the other
instruments begin with low pressure and need
powerful wind for the high notes.
THE TONE OF THE AIR.
Soap bubbles burst not from but
from mplosion, the outer air breaks through the
gradually thinning envelope.


There is a limit of tenuity beyond which air
cannot be drawn by air, and this fact gives the
clue to trace the relations of the various modes
of origination of musical sounds.
The “ tone of the air ” means its tone before the
pipe is put round it.
An organ pipe contains, not a certain, but an
uncertain, quantity of air, and this is the gist of
the question of the behaviour of organ pipes.
Air consists of particles as distinct as beads,
with interspaces separating the particles; but,
unlike the beads, air expands with heat, and
additional heat makes the air particles bubble
over out of the pipe, so that the pitch of organ
pipes is never absolutely fixed. If the tempera-
ture rises from sixty to eighty degrees, one fourth
of all the millions of air particles in the pipe will
be squeezed out into the open air.
Cleave the air with a wooden rod shaped like
a sword, and the air answers in tones. Each rod
makes a different note according to the thickness
of its back edge, and greater speed causes a rise
in pitch. The pitch of air under cleavage is
inversely as the amplititude of the displacement.
The sword gives rise to a travelling chasm, and
the pitch of the tone heard is determined by the
extent of the displacement of free air.


THE CLEAVAGE OF AIR.
The ear is endued with persistence of audition,
as the eye is with persistence of vision.
Residual vibrations are of paramount import-
ance, and play a part in the conditions of
harmony.
Residual vibrations are of paramount import-
ance in determining quality of sounds.
The vibratory movement in wood or metal is
fourteen or fifteen times more rapid than in air.
In producing sonorous vibrations in air, every
musical instrument displaces a certain amount of
air, there is a transition of impulses from one
medium to another, and between these two there
is a line of demarcation where sound originates.
Cleavage brings a condition of partial vacuum,
and suction is a necessary corollary.
Suction is the ruling energy in all musical
instruments, and is essentially supreme in wind
instruments.
Residual vibrations are undamped or only
partially damped vibrations.
The violin holds these residual vibrations
strongly, while the organ pipe does not vibrate in
its substance as a sound-board, but gains
sonorousness by resonance, its action illustrating
the “cleavage of the air.”


INTERVIEWING AN ORGAN PIPE.
When air compressed by a weighted reservoir
is blown into the foot of an organ pipe, the
cavity below the block becomes a chamber of
dense air, the particles of which seek to escape
through the windway.
Professor Privat-Deschanel says: “ The note
which is actually emitted (from the organ pipe)
is determined by the resonance of the column of
air in the pipe.” This is perversely at variance
with the facts.
The art of voicing consists, in one particular,
in so directing the stream of air that it shall avoid
striking the lip of the pipe, and glide past
without concussion on the edge. Real vibration
depends upon quite another causation.
It is not possible for a stream of air to rush
over an opening without exercising suction.
The flue pipes are actuated by a stream reed,
this stream of wind passes over the mouth, not
entering the pipe or striking the lip; the velocity
of transit in emission is converted into velocity
of vibration , or to and fro motion; and the
stream becomes a reed in mechanical motion.
357
AND IN THE ORCHESTRA.


WATCHING THE REED AT WORK.
1 he mode of production of sound in an organ
pipe is a process of suction by velocity.
The stream of wind is directed diverging
sufficiently from the vertical to cause it to glide
up the inclined plane of the lip. This stream is
the life-force on which the sound depends for its
existence.
The stream-reed bends, curving outwards.
The motion of vibration is an activity tempered
by rests.
The law of the wind stream (stream-reed) is:
As its arcs of vibration are less, its speed is
greater .”
We look for this law to be observed;
Though the amplitude may vary, the times of
vibration will be the same.” But we find the
complete reversal of this; the times vary with the
amplitude —or, the times are inversely as the
amplitude.
THINNING AND SHOCKING A BODY OF AIR.
There is a vacuum in the speaking pipe, though
you cannot see it; but a photograph has been
taken of a partial vacuum.


When a pulse of motion passes up an organ
pipe, it presses the air transiently before it, and
transiently thins the body of air behind it, its
exit at the open end throws back a shock of
motion into the interior.
What disturbs the equilibrium in the pipe?
Orthodoxy says condensation; I think it is
rarefaction. The wind-reed has no power to
produce a condensation; it does not strike the
upper lip, but simply asserts its own upward
rushing force.
The work of the stream-reed is specihcially to
abstract; rarefaction ensues on abstraction,
condensation correlates therewith and the result
is vibration.
The initial movement or prelude to vibration in
the pipe is distinctive in course and character
from successive movements; it extends through
the pipe; is continuous but diminishing in degree,
and is without a node.
The stream-reed excites rarefaction from the
pipe-mouth upwards; is bent outward by the air
it draws out, and takes a curve in shape.
The hundreds and thousands of vibrations by
which we assume to denominate the pitch of notes
are illusory and non-essential; the time-distance
between two shocks fixes the estimate the ear
makes of pitch.
Open and stopped pipes, wood and metal, are
all actuated by the stream-reed.
Bearing in mind the working power of the


stream-reed, we approach the organ pipe with a
new insight.
Pipes of the same pitch vary as to lengths.
Depth of pipe interferes with pitch; increase
of depth flattens, and deprives the pipe of har-
monic force.
THEORY AND FACTS.
My theory is that the physical action at the
pipe-mouth is suction by velocity , which con-
vincingly explains action and results. No other
theory satisfies the practical enquirer.
Reynault’s law says: “The velocity of
propagation of a wave in straight lines, is less
according as the section of the tube is less”; the
organ world is governed on the exactly opposite
—the velocity is greater as the section is less
The metallic reed pipes do follow Reynault’s
law; m reed pipes, as the sectional area is less,
the length is less.
The wind admitted at the foot-hole is the most
powerful influence on the behaviour of the pipe •
diameter, width of mouth, bellows pressure, may
all be the same; but increase the amount of wind
admitted at the foot, and quality, pitch and
power are all m new relations which affect the
length of the pipe.


THE GAMBAS.
Gamba tone has decided introductory (or
transitory) harmonics, which follow one another,
dying as soon as born.
The gamba has three specialities—over-blown
wind, a low cut mouth and wind much thrown
out. Harmonics precede, follow and coalesce into
the ground tone, and linger behind as though the
last to quit the pipe.
The curve of the stream-reed is not the same
in the gamba as in the diapason.
The note produced is dual; when pipe and reed
are mated, the unison is perfect, but the reed
rules.
HOLES IN THE AIR.
Any moving body of air makes a hole into
which another body of air will rush.
The differences in result are owing to differing
conditions of origination.
When such movements are rapid and periodic
they make a musical tone in the ear.
We lay too much stress on vibration. All that
affects us is a succession of shocks, which need
not be “to and fro.”


WAIVING THE WAVE THEORY.
The wave theory is often a stumbling block.
1 prefer pulsation” to “wave.” The analogy
of water waves is only partially applicable, the
main influence being gravity.
The full length of an organ pipe affords no
right estimate of wave-length.
The term, vibrating lip” of the organ pipe, is
a delusion.
I assert, in opposition to the teachers, that
vibration in an organ pipe begins with a
rarefaction.
In the organ pipe there concur three different
velocities to produce its pitch tone—the super-
nodal wave has one velocity, and the sub-nodal
wave two different velocities.
THE VARIABILITY OF THE NODE.
The displacement of the node is a very
significant fact in connection with the pipe.
The disparity between the “unequal halves”
caused by that displacement can be ascertained.
_ There is no necessity for the wave-length in the
pipe, for a defined pitch should be identical with


the wave-length in free air corresponding to that
note.
The node is displaced by changes in the
strength of the physical action at the mouth of
the pipe.
There is no constant wave-length for an
ascertained pitch in a pipe.
FACTS ABOUT REEDS.
Lengths of pipes vary for the same pitch.
The time of a reed’s vibration consists of
forward motion, rest and recoil, and these are
not relatively equal. The first may vary a little,
the second greatly, the third not at all.
Weber’s laws lay down the true relations
between pipe and reed.
The student thinks a cylindrical bore is
necessary for the clarionet; practice shows it is
not needed.
The organ clarionet has a reed an octave lower
than the pipe length would indicate.
All reed pipes are much shorter than according
to scientific calculations they ought to be.
When an organ pipe speaks its harmonic tone,
and its ground tone is absent, the great node is
absent.




INDEX.
A.
Air, Cleavage of, 75.
Air cleavage, Transferred
vibrations in, 87.
Air column, How steadied,
170.
Air, Compressed, in organ,
47.
Air, Controlling it, 45.
Air, Disturbing the equili-
brium of, 8.
Air, Holes in, 178, 182.
Air impulses uniform in
time, 188.
Air, Inertia of, 44.
Air, Pressure of, 64.
Air, “Putting a pip©
round,” 60.
Air reservoir, Earliest, in
Ctesibius’s Water Organ,
332.
Air, “Shocking” a body
of, 123.
Air, Tenuity of, limited,
59, 115.
Air, Tone of, 56.
Air, Travelling chasm in, 73.
Air, Velocity of sound in,
188.
Air waves not affected by
gravity, 196.
Air, Weight of, 47.
Airy on vibration in pipes,
221.
Anchor, Experiment with,
78.
Arghool, Egyptian, 281.
Aulos, Greek, 281.
B.
Bassoon, 267.
Bassoon pipe, 268.
Beads, Experiment with, 63.
Bear’s-foot reed pipes, 291.
Beats, 82.
Beats between partials and
not primaries, 247.
Bell, Experiment with, 83.
Bellows, Ancient pair in
Egyptian smithy, 329.
Bellows at Constantinople,
in fourth century, 331.


Bellows blown by sixty or
seventy men, 330.
Bellows, Horizontal, not in-
vented by Lobsinger, 348.
Berlioz’s “Instrumenta-
tion ” —organ inexpressive,
301.
Bernouilli’s laws, 154, 218.
Biot on vibration in tubes,
225.
Blaikley, D. J., quoted, 255.
Blaikley’s acoustical experi-
ments, 273, 286.
Boehm’s theory of the flute.
169.
Bores of pipes, 315.
Bourdon pipes, 201.
Bubble, Life of, 57.
Bullet leaves vacuum behind
it, 124.
Button-regal reed pipes, 291.
C.
Carthage, Water Organ
model at, 325.
Cavaille-Coll’s empirical
rule, 159.
Champollion’s book referred
to, 329.
Chappell, W., “History of
Music,” 330.
Chappell, W., on bellows in
Egyptian smithy, 330.
Cheng organ, 282.
Chinese pipes, 283.
Clarionet, Beauty of tone, 7.
Clarionet’ Cross fingerings,
Clarionet, Length fixes
pitch, 34
Clarionet makers try to
remedy defects, 252. ]
Clarionet, Mouthpiece of 1
described, 32-3, 35.
Clarionet phenomena dis- ]
cussed, 279.
* Clarionet pipe, 268.
Clarionet, Quack, 24,
■ Clarionet, Reed, 23.
Clarionet, Single reed not
cause of odd harmonics,
. 281.
Clarionet, Sonority of, 44.
Cleavage of air causes
vacuum, 87.
Concussion causes heat, 84.
Concussion of air, 86.
Condensation reflected as
rarefaction, 211.
Condensations and rare-
factions, 44.
Condensations and rare-
factions which come first,
129.
Cone, Action of wind-
stream in, 277.
Cor Anglais pipe, 269, 293.
Cromorne, 281.
Ctesibius, Inventor of the
Water Organ, 300-246 b.c.,
329.
Cylindrical and conical
tubes, 262.
Cylindrical pipes not
“closed pipes,” 277.
D.
Dechanel on organ pipes,
207.
Delattre, Pere, photo-
graphed Water Organ
model, 324.
Dewar, Prof., on mislead-
ing textbooks, 254.
Diapason experiment at
Lewis’s factory, 116.
Diapason pipes', 95-6.
Diapason pipes described,
97-9.
Diapason section of metal
pipe, 117.


Dimensions, Influence on
quality, 304.
Divergence, Law of, 166.
Divisions in conical and
cylindrical tubes, 314.
Dulciana, Facts and figures,
148.
Dulong’s experiment, 225.
Duration of sensation of
sound—shorter as pitch
rises, 89.
E.
Ear a recording machine, 9.
Ear a transmuting cham-
ber, 12.
Ear, Nerves of, 80.
Ear percipient of arrested
motion only, 9.
Ears of organ pipes, 171.
Ear the umpire of sound, 18.
F.
Fibres, Finest known, 84.
Flue-pipe, Illustration, 96.
Flue-pipe, Sharp edge not
essential to functions, 102.
Flue-pipes, Lengths and
diameters, 242.
Free reeds keep pitch under
changes of temperature,
302.
French horn, Analysis of,
257.
G.
Galileo on the pump, 222.
Galpin, Rev. F. W., made
model of Water Organ,
324
Galpin, Rev. F. W., Model
described, 339.
Galpin, Rev. F. W., Size of
Water Organ, 338.
Galpin, Rev. F. W., wrote
account of Water Organ,
326.
Gamba, Action of pipe and
reed, 175.
Gamba, Beauty of, 175.
Gamba curve of stream-
reed differs from diapason,
174.
Gamba family, Natural his-
tory of, 162.
Gamba invented by Schulze,
167.
Gamba tone discussed, 165.
Gamba tone has transitive
harrmmics, 163.
Geigen stop, 290.
Gravitation, Boy’s explana-
tion, 3.
Grenie’s experiments, 306.
Grenie’s pipes, 316.
Guthrie’s experiment, 186.
H.
Harmonics proceed by “ one
and one,” 312.
Harmonic tones main fac-
tors in quality, 139.
Harmony grew out of Greek
divisions of strings, 343.
Hearing a higher mode of
feeling, 9.
Helmholtz, Influence of, 5.
Helmholtz makes too much
of the “form of the mouth,”
156.
Helmholtz on horns and
trumpets, 255.
Helmholtz on wave phases
is wrong, 155.
Heron, of Alexandria,
describes Water Organ, 332.
Herschel quoted, 305.
Herschel’s experiments, 226.
Holes in the air, 178.
Horizontal reservoir used
Cuming in 1762, 348.


Horn and trumpet com-
pared, 263.
Horn, Difficulties of, 30.
Humming top a bourdon,
201.
Hunter’s whistle, 28-9.
Hydraulus, or Water Organ,
322.
I.
Implosion and explosion, 56.
Instruments become active
by impulses, 24.
Instruments, Distinguish-
ing qualities of, 15.
Instruments, Stringed, why
powerful, 42.
J.
Japanese hichirichi, 281.
K.
Kelvin, Lord, on pressure
of moving fluids, 187.
Key as stopped pipe, 204.
Keyboard, Water Organ
had, 340.
Koenig’s experimental organ
pipe, 189.
Koenig’s octave cube pipes,
200.
Kundt’s experiments, 226.
L.
Laing’s “Modern Zoroas-
trian ” quoted, 61.
Lowell’s “Legend of Brit-
tany ” quoted, 59.
Lycopodium seed experi-
ments, 39.
M.
Magdeburg Cathedral organ
keyboard described, 341.
Mayer on air and water
waves, 195.
Mechanical action cause of
sound, 184.
N.
Nodal differences, 224.
Node, Displacement of, 223.
Node, Fulcrum of vibration,
133.
Node means “knot,” 311.
Node remains when octave
changes to twelfth, 285.
Nodes centres of power, 309.
Node, Variability of, 218.
O.
Oboe bell, 241.
Oboe, Effect of air pressure
in, 274.
Oboe pipe, 268.
Old theories wrong, 227.
Open diapason figures, 148.
Open pipes, Nodal divisions
in, 213.
Orchestra, Real purpose of,
8.
Organ builder and imita-
tions of orchestral instru-
ments, 295.
Organ builders conserva-
tive, 295.
Organ builders’ craft em-
pirical, 140.
Organ inhabits the cathe-
dral, 11.
Organ insipid to orchestral
player, 294.
Organ is inanimate, 301.
Organ pipe designed for
only onetime distance, 27.
Organ pipes are “ delayers,”
111.
Organ pipes, Card experi-
ment, 113.


Organ pipes, Cause of
ditferences in pitch, 147.
Organ pipes, Conditions at
mouth, 103.
Organ pipes, Duality of
tone of, 112.
Organ pipes, Effect of dia-
meter, 239.
Organ pipes, Experiment
with fluff, 132.
Organ pipes, How sound
made in, 99.
Organ pipes, Initial move-
ment of air distinct from
the rest, 133.
Organ pipes, Interviewing,
94.
Organ pipes, Length does
not fix pitch, 145.
Organ pipes, Length no
guide to pitch, 198.
Organ pipes, pitch never
fixed, 63.
Organ pipes, Prof. Stewart
on, 144.
Organ pipes, Pulses issue
from a fixed place, 128.
Organ pipes, Vibration in,
!o°.
Organ pipes, Widths of
metal mouths, 143.
Organ playing, Schools of,
294.
Organ playing, Style in,
297.
Organ reed imitates the
clarionet, 54.
Organ reed imitations not
satisfactory, 299.
Organ, Wind pressures in,
13.
P.
Pitch, No constant wave
length for, 228.
Phonograph experiment,
185.
Pith ball experiment with
rod, 38.
Privat-Dechanel on organ
pipes, 101.
Pulse of air makes partial
vacuum, 320.
R.
Rain, Music of, 67.
Rarefaction reflected as
condensation, 211.
Rayleigh, Lord, Theory of
resonance, 225.
Reed, Action of air in pipe,
129.
Reed a reversing mechan-
ism, 232.
Reed generator of power,
133.
Reed pipe in organ, 53.
Reed pipes, Action in, 230.
Reed pipes, Details of, 233.
Reed pipes, Muller on, 232.
Reed pipes sharper if dia-
meter is increased, 243.
Reed pipes shorter than
science calculates, 303.
Reeds and pipes, Compound
effects of, 247.
Reeds and pipes, Perversity
of, 260, 276.
Reeds, Classification of, 110.
Reeds, Varied length for
same pitch, 235.
Reed, Vibration analysed,
236.
Reed, Watching it at work,
109.
Reed, What delays its re-
action, 280.
Residual sensations of tone,
90.
Residual vibration, 79, 81,
92.
Resistance, Measure of, 319.


Resonance boxes are stopped
pipes, 202.
Reynault’s law of waves, 153.
Ribs, Inverted, 349.
Ribs, Inverted, secure
balance of forces, 349.
Rod, Experiment with pith
ball, 38.
Rods cause travelling void,
72.
Rods, Notes of, 71.
Rods, Toning air with, 70.
S.
Sand, Experiments with, 82.
Savart on nodal division,
219.
Savart’s wheel, 184.
Saxophone, 281.
Schulze invented gamba,
167.
Science lacks words, 180.
Scientific teachers, Errors
of, 141.
Scientific terms necessary, 2.
Scientists men of faith, 193.
Seebeck’s experiments, 240.
Seebeck’s syren, 184.
Seidel quoted, 293.
Sensations, Continuous,
agreeable, 90.
Sense, Organs of, 77.
Shallot of reed, 292.
Shock used instead of wave,
194.
Solo stops and refinement,
295.
Sound an aggregation of
simple taps, 10.
Sound, Duration, of, sensa-
tion of, table, 88.
Sound recognisable by
arrest of motion, 126.
Sound transmission, 40.
14*nd wor k done by power,
Stewart, Prof., on organ
pipes, 144.
Stone, Dr., on pipe vibra-
tion, 164.
Stopped pipes, 199.
Stopped pipes, Nodal divi-
sions in, 213.
Stopped pipes only have
odd harmonics, 211.
Stopped pipes quick of
speech, 133.
St. Paul’s organ formerly
blown by “ treaders,” 330.
Stream-reed, Action of, 130.
Stream-reed, Curve of, 172.
Stream-reed excites rare-
faction, 134.
Stream-reed, Its work is to
abstract, 132.
Stream-reed of air, 104,106.
Stream-reed, Theory of, 105.
Stringed instruments, Dis-
tinction between them and
wood, 43.
Stringed instruments, Why
powerful, 42.
“ Stringy ” quality, 164.
Suction by velocity causes
organ pipe to sound, 112.
Suction by velocity the only
satisfactory theory, 152.
Suction the final cause of
vibration, 244.
Super-nodal waves, 215.
Sympathy between pipes,
307.
Sympathy, Remedies, 307.
Synchronous air movements,
183.
T.
Tanser’s “MusicoTheorico,”
18.
Tenuity of air limited, 59.
Theoretical and actual pipe
lengths, 270.
Theory and facts, 150.
3;o
THE MAKING OF SOUND IN THE ORGAN.


Time arranges each vibra-
tion, 289.
“Time-distance,” 14.
lime-distance” between
two vibrations, 22.
Time-distance fixes pitch
136.
Todhunter on resistance of
air particles, 186.
Transitive harmonics of
r gamba, 177.
Trees, Cause of sound in,
66.
Trees, Music of, 68.
Trumpet and oboe com-
pared, 241.
Trumpet harmonics, 313.
Trumpet, Nodes in, 310.
Irumpet, Organ and orches-
tral, 265.
Trumpet pipe, 269.
Trumpet, Sonority of, 44.
Trumpet stop, True clang
missing, 299.
Trumpet, Tone analysed,
313.
Tubes all sympathise with
some pitch, 317.
Tuning fork and handker-
chief, 41.
Tuning is timing, 18.
Twelfths analysed, 287.
Tyndall’s error, 199.
Tyndall’s, Open pipe con-
sists of two stopped ones,
203.
U.
“ Unequal halves ” of pipes,
222.
Upper board, Pressure
varies with fall of, 50.
V.
Vacuum, Degrees of, 115.
Vacuum, Feeling a, 125.
Vacuum, Seeing a, 123.
Veiled qualities of tone
wanted, 291.
Vibrating hp of pipe, 209.
Vibrating string, Illusion
of, 195.
Vibration in mouthpiece of
instrument, 34.
\ ibration is activity tem-
pered by rests, 116.
Vibration more rapid in
wood than air, 83.
Vibration numbers and
wave lengths, 271.
Vibration numbers mis-
leading, 22.
\ ibrations not real factors
of sounds, 136.
V ibratory motion appeals
to ear, 183.
Violin a “kicking machine,”
Violin quality, 92.
Violin retains risidual
vibrations, 91.
Violin, Sonority of, 40.
Violin string, Effect on
bridge, 41.
Violin string, Motion of,
164.
Violin tone elicited rapidly,
163.
Violin, Wolf in, 24-5.
Violone, Section of pipe,
168.
“ Virgin-royal ” reed pipe,
291.
Vision, Persistence of, 81.
Vitruvius, 20-11 b.c., 332.
Vitruvius on Water Organ.
332.
Voicing is directing the
stream of wind, 102.
Von Dvorak on oscillation
of air in sound, 263.
Vox Humana, 267.
Vox Humana pipe, 269.


W.
Waiving the wave theory,
192.
Wald horn, German, 291.
Water Organ, 322.
Water Organ a pneumatic
organ, 345. 347.
Water Organ, Dimensions
of, 338.
Water Organ, Extra pres-
sure revealed by overflow
of water, 341.
Water Organ had nineteen
pipes, 338.
Water Organ, Importance
of steady blowing, 341.
Water Organ no toy, 327.
Water Organ, Our organs
only copy it, 327.
Water Organ, Player stood
behind, 336.
Water Organ, Principle
same as modern wind-
gauge, 332.
Water Organ, Water re-
sisted compressed air, 335.
Water Organ, Water used
to regulate air pressure,
339.
Water waves analysed, 197.
Water waves, Gravity the
main factor, 196.
Wave and pipe lengths, 284.
‘ ‘ Wave-motion,” Idea causes
misapprehension, 21.
Waves meet in shock in
organ pipe, 135.
Wave theory a stumbling
block, 194.
Weber on reeds and tubes,
266.
Weber’s laws, 249.
Wind gauge, 49.
Wind instrument must have
mouthpiece, 45.
Wind instruments com-
pared, 279.
Wind instruments, Mechani-
cal difficulties of, 305.
Wind pressures in the
organ, 13, 50.
Wind pressures in wind in-
struments, Table of, 52.
Wind pressures, Table of, 50.
Wind stream, 104, 106.
Wind stream a vacuum
maker, 124.
Wind stream dips inwards,
406.
Wind stream. How inclina-
tion determined, 138.
Wind stream, Importance
of mechanical energy, 216.
Wind stream, Its task, 137.
Wind stream reed, 109.
Wind stream reed, Law of,
120.
Wind stream theory of
action on body of air in
organ pipe, 129.
Wind the worker, 13, 28.
Wind, Weighing the, 37.
Wood wind, Organ repre-
sentatives of, 290.
Words change in meaning,
179.
Printed by The New Temple Press, Croydon.


CATALOGUE B
REEVES’
MUSICAL LITERATURE
LIST
Containing Works arranged under the following headings
BIOGRAPHY 1 ORGAN
HISTORY
CRITICISM
./ESTHETICS
ESSAYS
ORCHESTRA
PIANO
VIOLIN
VOCAL
WAGNER
ETC.
" Mr. W. Reeves, who has established his claim to be regarded as the
recognised publisher of English Musical Literature, has a strong list of
books for the amateur and the professor.’’— Publishers’ Circular.
“ The best and safest method for the inexperienced to adopt, is to make
application to some leading and trustworthy publisher of musical books of
the class in question, relying on his judgment and the traditions of hie
house to supply what is genuine and suitable. *V itbout being invidious,
we may say that such a tmblisher is Mr. W. Reeres. Bazaar.
" The Press which in recent j ears has given to the musical world so much
that is of intrinsic value. Sheffield Daily Independent.
PUBLISHED BY
W. REEVES, 83, Charing Cross Rd., London, WA
Revised Editions of this Catalogue Ji are issued in the Spring and
Autumn of each year.


ANNOUNCEMENTS.
SIX SPIRITUAL SONGS FOR UNACCOMPANIED CHORUS
(with Piano Accompaniment for Practice). By Rut-
iand Boughton. Op. 30; 1. A Prayer; 2. St. Bride’s
Milking Song; 3. St. Bride’s Cradle Song; 4. The Bird
of Christ; 5. Song of Easter; 6. The Kingdom of
Heaven. Bvo, Is. 6d. net. Any number sold separately.
AESTHETICS OF MUSICAL ART, or, The Theory of Beauti-
ful in Music. By Dr. Ferdinand Hand. Translated
from the German by Walter E. Lawson, Mus.Bac.
Cantab., etc. Third Edition. Crown Bvo, cloth, ss.
Dedicated by Kind Permission to the Bight Bev. the Lord
Bishop of London.
VOCAL SCIENCE AND ART. Being Hints on the Produc-
tion of Musical Tone. By the Rev. Chas. Gib. The
Boy’s Voice, Muscular Relaxation, The Art of Deep
Breathing, Elocution for Ordination Candidates. - With
Numerous Illustrations, together with an Introduction,
Notes and Diagrams by J. F. Halls Dally, M.A.,
M.D., B.C. Cantab., M.B.C.P. Lond., etc. Crown
Bvo, cloth, 3s. 6d.
ADVICE TO YOUNG ORGANISTS. By J. T. Field. 2d.
ON THE MODAL ACCOMPANIMENT OF PLAIN CHANT.
A Practical Treatise. By Edwin Evans, Senior,
F.8.C.0. (Author of “Handbook to the Works of
Brahms,” “How to Compose Within the Lyric Form,”
etc.) Part I, Theoretical; Part 11, Practical School of
Plain Chant Accompaniment, consisting of 240 Exer-
cises, with an Appendix of Notes. This work is dedi-
cated by special permission to Cardinal Vaughan, Car-
dinal Archbishop of Westminster. Crown Bvo, cloth,
3s. 6d. net.
MUSIC-DRAMA OF THE FUTURE. I, An Essay on Choral
Drama; 11, The Growth of Dreams; 111, Uther and
Igraine, a Choral Drama ; IV, Articles of Proposed
Scheme for the Temple Theatre. By Rutland
Boughton and Reginald R. Buckley. Frontispiece,
Bvo, limp cloth, 2s. net.
(Continued on page 1,8.)
2


MISCELLANEOUS.
The Imrst Music Printed from Engraved Plates in
England.
PARI HEN 1A Or the First Musick ever Printed for the Vir-
ginals. Composed by three famous Masters, William
Pyrd, Dr. John Bull and Orlando Gibbons. Trans-
lated into Modern Notation and Edited by E. F. Rim-
bault, LL.D., F.S.A. With Fac-similes of the original
Engraved Title, showing a Lady playing the Virginals,
a page of the Music, and the Curious and Interesting
Dedication, Followed by the whole of the Music
arranged for the Piano in the Modern Nota-
tion this forming a further 50 pages. Together with an
account of the Virginals, Method of Playing, Early
References, etc. By Db Rimbault. This Reprint
limited to 250 copies only. Folio, gilt top, rough edges,
imitation old boards, clotfi back lettered To Subscribers.
12s. 6d. (pub. 215.)
The Virginal or Virginals f;om Henry the Seventh’s time to nearly the
close of the 17th century, included all quilled Keyboard instruments, the
Harpsichord, Spinet, etc. Henry the Eight, according to a contemporary,
played well on the Virginals. Queen Mary is said to have equalled if not
surpassed Queen Elizabeth in music playing, the Regals and Lute as well
as the Virginals. The first music for this tribe of instruments—including
the Harpsichord—was the “ Parthenia.” It consists principally of
“ Pavans and “ Halliards,” in common use for dancing purposes in Queen
Elizabeth’s time, “ Preludiums,” “ Fantazia of Foure Parts,” etc.
The printing of music from engraved copper plates is supposed to have
begun at Rome where a collection of Canzonets was engraved by Simone
Verovio in 1586. In France towards the end of Louis XlV.’s reign the
great house of Ballard began to make use of engraving, some of Lully’s
operas being printed from type and some from engraved copper plates
The Germans, of course, practised the art, one early book of Exercises
being composed and engraved by the great John Sebastian Bach himself.
In England “ Parthenia ” was the first produced, appearing in 1611.
Virdung in 1511 is the oldest authority mentioning the virginals, but
Rimbault quotes the following proverb that was formerly inscribed on a
wall of the Manor House of Leckingfield, Yorkshire, and if, as thought to
be, as old as the time of Henry the Seventh (1485-1509) contains a reference
earlier than Virdung :
“ A Slao Strynge in a Virginall sonndithe not aright.
It doth abide no wrestinge it is so loose and light;
The sound board crasede, forsith the instrumente, (>
Throw misgovernance to make notes which was not his intente.
RATIONAL ACCOMPANIMENT TO THE PSALMS. By F.
Gilbert Webb. Post Bvo, 6d.
3


504 OLD WELSH AIRS. The Lays of My Land. Alawon Fy
Ngwlad. Collected by N. Bennett. Arranged for
the Pianoforte or Harp by D. E. Evans. With 12
Portraits of the old Welsh Harpers, and a short Account
of their Lives. Together with an Essay on Pennilion
Singing. Portraits of 10 Celebrated Pennilion Singers.
198 pages, the original two volumes bound in one vol.,
folio, cloth gilt, lettered 12s. 6d. net.
The above is the largest collection of Welsh Airs ever published and
includes some of the oldest Cambrian melodies extant, and contains in the
one volume the original publication to subscribers issued in two volumes
at £2 2s. Notwithstanding the collections of Parry, Jones, Thomas and
others, hundreds of old Cambrian melodies still remained scattered
throughout the country in manuscripts, or were retained in the memory
of harpists, Pennilion singers and others who loved and cherished the
folk-songs of the past.
To collect some of these treasures, and rescue them from inevitable
oblivion, says the compiler, has been to me a labour of love for more
than half a century * * I secured many an old air of exquisite beauty
from some venerable harpist, or aged Pennilion singer tottering on the
brink of the grave.
ENGLISH GLEE AND MADRIGAL WRITERS. By W. A.
Barrett. Bvo, cloth, 2s. 6d.,
“ Mr. Barrett is highly to be commended, no less for the vast amount of
reliable information which he has collated upon the subject in hand, than
for the concise manner in which, for the benefit of the reader, he has
compressed it into a small space.”— Monthly Musical Record.
NATIONAL SCHOOL OF OPERA IN ENGLAND. Being
the Substance of a Paper read before the Licentiates of
Trinity College, March, 1882. By Frank Austin.
Post Bvo, sewed, 6d.
MODEST IDYLLS FOR MUSICAL SETTING. By Ernest
Alfieri. Is. net.
SONGS FROM THE RAVEL. (Words for Musical Setting.)
A Book of Prose-Lyrics from Life and Nature. By
Ernest Austin. Op. 30. Crown Bvo, sewed, 2s. 6d.


CRITICISMS, ESSAYS.
MODERN TENDENCIES AND OLD STANDARDS IN MUSI-
CAL ART. By J. Alfred Johnstone, Hon. L.Mus.
T.C.L. Author of “Touch, Phrasing and Interpreta-
tion,” “The Art of Teaching Piano Playing,” etc
Crown Bvo, cloth, ss.
IMAGINARY INTERVIEWS WITH GREAT COMPOSERS
(Chopin, Haydn, Mendelssohn, Paganini, Beethoven,
Handel, Rossini, Schubert, Liszt, Berlioz, Mozart,
Wagner, Tchaikovsky, Cherubini, Hugo Wolf, Borodin,
Schumann and Sullivan), a Series of Vivid Pen Sketches
in which the Salient Characteristics and the often Ex-
travagant Individuality of each Composer are Truth-
fully Portrayed. By Gerald Cumberland. Frontis-
piece. Crown Bvo, cloth, gilt top, 6s.
“ They are vivid impressionist sketches, cleverly executed, and very
interesting'.”— Music.
Rutland Bouohton, in the columns of The Musical Standard writes:
“ These are not mere fantastic juggleries, but studies of the various
composers from their own standpoints to their art. They afford, with one
or two striking exceptions a really valuable insight into the very nature
of the different masters; and so into the nature of their music. And
because of this the book will be a great help to the musical student.”
“ . Each of his interviews is the revelation of a personality and each
is a masterly piece of literary presentment .... Sir. Cumberland has put
musicians under a debt of gratitude by placing in their hands a book that
will do more than inform, that will inspire.”—PEßCT A. Scholes in
Musical Opinion.
“ To conjure up visions of the creator of a wonderful symphony or a
great choral work in his surroundings, and to picture the various influ-
ences that are making their indelible mark on his manuscript; what can
prompt a wider understanding, a keener appreciation and a sounder criti-
cism of the finished score? .... The book should be read by all music-
lovers.”— Manchester City News.
“ All lovers of music will delight in the perusal of this extremely read-
able volume the reader will learn much of that psychologyoal ■com-
plexity that often accompanies great and creative genius. Although th
interviews are but sketches they contain nothing that is not essentially
true and characteristic.” —Montrose Standard.
THE PLACE OF SCIENCE IN MUSIC. By H. Saint-George.
Addressed to advanced students of that branch of musi-
cal knowledge commonly called Harmony. Bvo, sewed,
Is.
Mr. Baughan rejects the academic view of form as i firmly as : Mr Saint-
George rejects the academic view of harmony and counterpoint The
academics base their harmonic theories on laws of nat "Jf in
Saint-George shows do not exist ae l olne ‘ r ' j w
the attack which will end in the total discomfiture of the academics. J. V.
Runciman in the Saturday Review.


.ESTHETICS, CRITICISMS, ESSAYS.
THE FUTURE OF MUSIC, Coming Changes Outlined in
Regard to Composer, Conductor and Orchestra. By
Louis Laloy. Author of “ Aristoxene et la Musique de
I’Antiquite,” “Claude Debussy,” “Rameau,” “La
Musique Chinoise.” Translated by Mrs. Franz Lie-
bich. Bvo, cloth, 2s. (paper, Is. net).
“ This book points to a time when new modes of scales will take the
place of the now familiar diatonic forms, and many other changes are
likely to ensue. The possible forms these changes may take are set forth
in this most interesting publication, together with a general survey of
musical history.”— lrish Presbyterian
“ This little book is one of the most enlightening things we have read
for some time, and all musicians—professional and amateur—will be the
wiser after carefully assimilating the author’s views. The translation by
Mrs. Liebioh is excellently done.”— Cheltenham Examiner.
THE SYMPHONY WRITERS SINCE BEETHOVEN, Schu-
bert, Schumann, Gotz, Brahms, Tchaikovsky, Bruckner,
Berlioz, Liszt, Strauss, Mahler, Mendelssohn, Saint-
Saens, etc. By Felix Weingartner. Translated by
A. Bles. Many Portraits. Cr. Bvo, cloth, gilt top, 6s.
“ Most stimulating and suggestive, full of acute thinking, of felicitous
expression.”— New York.
“ The book is certainly well worth reading.”— Daily Chronicle.
“ A most fascinating book * * * the works of the various composers are
critically discussed in regard to form and orchestration.”— Musical Star.
GREATER WORKS OF CHOPIN. (Polonaises, Mazurkas,
Nocturnes, etc.), How they should be Played. By
J. Kleczynski. Translated by Miss N. Janotha and
Edited by Sutherland Edwards. With Portrait, Fac-
simile, etc. Crown Bvo, cloth, ss.
“ A new book on Chopin which will doubtless receive a warm welcome
from the lovers of the greatest genius of the pianoforte. * * * What give*
this book a unique value of importance as a novelty is that it includes
what is left of Chopin’s notes for a pianoforte method which, brief as it is,
contains some valuable and interesting hints which will benefit all pianists
and students.”— New York Evening Post.
MEZZOTINTS IN MODERN MUSIC. Brahms, Tchaikov-
sky, Chopin, Strauss, Liszt and Wagner. By Jas.
Huneker. Third Edition. Crown Bvo, cloth, gilt top,
Vs, Pd.
Contents.— The Music of the Future (Brahms)—A Modern Music Lord
(Tschaikowsky)—Richard Strauss and Nietzsche—The Greater Chopin—A
Liszt Etude—The Royal Road to Parnassus — A Note on Richard Wagner.
" Essays filled with literary charm and individuality, not self willed or
over assertive' hut gracious and winning, sometimes profoundly contempla-
tive, and anon frolicsome and more inclined to chaff than to instruct—but
interesting and suggestive always.”— New York Tribune.
6


MUSIC AND MUSICIANS. Essays and Criticisms, by Robert
Schumann. Translated, Edited and Annotated by F.
R. Ritter. Portrait of Robert Schumann, photo-
graphed from a Crayon by Bendemann. First Series,
7th Edition. Thick cr. Bvo, cloth, 419 pages, Bs. 6d.
Ditto. Second Series, Third Edition. Thick crown Bvo,
cloth, 540 pages, 10s. 6d.
There are two sides to musical criticism, both equally interesting-; the
one, which is scientific analysis of musical form and treatment, possible
only to experienced musicians, the other, which is the spiritual percep-
tion of the aesthetic side and influence of music, possible for any great
mind whose perceptions are keenly cultivated in the highest canons of
any art. Schumann represented the ideal musical critic, in that both
of these essential points in criticism are to be found in his writings.—
From the Introduction to “ Buskin on Music.”
Scarcely find words sufficiently strong to express our delight * * ♦ a
book so rich in thought, so full of humour, so remarkable for its refined
sarcasms, so original in its criticisms, so sprightly and elegant in lan-
guage.—K\ni, Mf.rz in the Musical World.
The translations are vigorous and clear, and the exact sense of the
originals, as far as possible, has been preserved. —New York Musical
Courier.
A disquisition upon the value of Schumann’s labour as an art critic
seems quite uncalled for at the present date. Suffice it to say that it can
hardly be over-estimated, and that his writings are as interesting and
instructive at the present as they were when they were first penned.—
Monthly Musical Record.
There is no use in trying to quote characteristic passages, because the
volume is of such uniform merit and such continuous interest that it is
impossible to make a selection. Musicians who take up the book will not
find it easy to put it down again.— Athenczum.
Most fascinating reading, even to those who are not deeply versed in
music. —Westminster Review.
MOZART'S DON GIOVANNI. A Commentary, from the
Third French Edition of Charles Gounod. By W.
Cr, ark and J. T, Hutchinson. Crown Bvo. cloth. 3s. 6d.
HOW TO PLAY CHOPIN. The Works of Chopin and their
proper Interpretation. By J. Kleczynski. Translated
by A. Whittingham. Fifth Edition. "W oodcut and
Music Illustrations, Post Bvo. cloth. 3s. 6d.
“ Contains the cream of Chopin's o is o P , g
admirers of Chopin and players of his music we snouxu y
h.. mud. to tell u. about the gre.t P-.m-t, • bul
composer, Chopin as a composer remains becoming every year
tradition of his playing and teaching m natui y b attempt to
more and more vague. So our author des P an( j touch ’of the
snatch from oblivion any remembrances of the manner and tone
master.” —Academy •


THE DEEPER SOURCES OF THE BEAUTY AND EXPRES-
SION OF MUSIC. By Joseph Goddard. Author of
“Musical Development,” “A Study of Gounod’s Re-
demption,” etc. With many Musical Examples. Crown
Bvo, bevelled cloth, 3s. 6d.
Contknts. —Chaptek I. — The Seeming Anomaly between the Human Origin
of Music and its Elevated Beauty. Chapteb ll.—Abstract Musical, like
Natural, Beauty is a Chance Fitness or Coincidence, of which the Visible
Conditions are the Plasticity in Human Faculties and the Diversity in
Outward Nature. Chapteb lll.—Timbre and Vowel-Sound briefly Analyzed ;
the Sensibility formed in the Ordinary Course of Natural Evolution to
answer to them, lets into our Nature the World of Harmony. Chapteb
IV. —The Larger Reasons why Music is Free of the Objective World, and
Discontinuous. Chapteb V. — Contrast in Scenic Effect and in Music.
Chapteb VI. — The Source of those Distinct Suggestions of the General
World which are Fundamental to the Musical Sensation—Position, Direc-
tion, Movement and Visual Form. Chapteb Vll. — The Second Factor in
the Inherent Connection between Music and Motion: the Sense of the
Horizontal latent in the Principle of Time. Chapteb Till.—Tonality. The
Principles of Unity and Delimitation. Chapteb IX.—Statement of the Full
Case for the Explicability of Musical Expression from the Standpoint of
the Influence of Speech. Chapteb X.—Darwin’s Hypothesis of Musical Ex-
pression. The Tendency of Music to Grow Old. The Influence of In-
herited Feeling in the Effect upon us of Art and Nature. Chapteb Xl.
The Limitation involved in Music being' the World of a Single Sense, is a
Source of its Power. Statement of the Principle of Arbitrary Association.
Chapteb Xll.—Summary and Concluding Remarks.
BEETHOVEN’S PIANOFORTE SONATAS Explained for the
Lovers of the Musical Art. By Ernst von Elterlein.
Translated by E. Hill, with Preface by Ernst Paper.
Entirely New and Revised Edition (the Sixth). With
Portrait, Facsimile and iew of Beethoven’s House.
Crown Bvo, cloth, 3s. 6d.
He writes with the ripe knowledge and thorough understanding of a
practical musician. Every musical student or amateur can safely trust
him as a competent and agreeable guide. This English translation is most
opportune, and will doubtless assist many a lover of Beethoven’s music to
appreciate more keenly the master’s Sonatas.”—E. Paueb,
BEETHOVEN’S SYMPHONIES in their Ideal Significance,
Explained by Ernst von Elterlein. Translated by
Francis Weber. With an Account of the Facts Re-
lating to Beethoven’s Tenth Symphony, By L. Nohl.
Second Edition, with Portrait. Crown Bvo, cloth.
3s. 6d.
This small volume is intended in the first place, and more especially, for
the earnest and thoughtful amateur, to whom it is to be a guide and com-
panion in the artistic enjoyment and conscious appreciation of Beethoven’s
Symphonic Masterpieces. At the same time the work may not be unwel-
come also to the practical musician.


FROM LYRE TO MUSE. A History of the Aboriginal
Union of Music and Poetry. By J. Donovan. Crown
Bvo, cloth, 2s. Cd. net (pub. 55.)
Chapters 1. Musical Impression. 2. History of Aboriginal Music 3
Music and Individuality. 4. Fusion of Rhythm and Tones. 5. Fusion of
Tones and Words. 6. How Harmony was Developed 7. Definition and
Diagram of Evolution of Music.
SCHUMANN’S RULES AND MAXIMS. For young Musi-
cians. Sewed, 2d.
" The ‘ Rules and Maxims ’ might have been entitled ' Proverbs,’ for the
truth of none of them, can be called into question, and they give students
the very best advice.”— Figaro.
" A valuable store of hints and information, shrewdly written and per-
tinently put.” —Musical Opinion.
BEETHOVEN’S SYMPHONIES Critically Discussed by A.
Teetgen. With Preface by John Broadhoitse. Second
Edition. Post Bvo, cloth, 3s. 6d.
" We must say that many of his observations are not only acute but
extremely just.”— Musical Times.
" Mr. Teetgen gives evidence of deep knowledge of his hero's works, he
supplies the reader with food for thought and reflection. We commend this
little book to the attention of our readers.” —Musical Opinion.
“ Mr. Teetgen is a devout, though not a blind, worshipper of Beethoven.”
—Musical Standard.
PURITY IN MUSIC. By A. F. Thxbatjt. Translated by J.
Broadhouse. Crown Bvo, cloth, 2s. 6d.
Contents.—l. On the Chorale. 2. Church Music other than the Choral.
3. Popular Melodies. 4. The Educating Influence of Good Models. 5.
Effect. 6. On Judging the Works of Great Masters. 7. As to a Liberal
Judgment. 8. On Perversions of Text. 9. Choral Societies.
Schumann says:—“ A fine book about music, read it frequently."
WOMAN AS A MUSICIAN. An Art Historical Study. By
F. R. Ritter. Bvo, sewed. Is.


BIOGRAPHICAL.
AOME MUSICAL RECOLLECTIONS OF FIFTY YEARS.
By Richard Hoffman. With Memoir by Mrs. Hoff-
man. Illustrated with many Plate Portraits. Crown
Bvo, cloth, 6s. 1910
Richard Hoffman, born Manchester, 1831, a distinguished pianist, a
successful and popular teacher in the States and a noteworthy composer.
Delightful reminiscences of musicians and musical affairs in America
and England. The account of Mendelssohn’s leading of the “ Elijah ” at
Manchester ; of Jenny Lind and her appearance at Castle Garden and her
tour of America under T. P. Barnum, throughout which tour Hoffman
accompanied her as the solo pianist; of Thalberg, Yon Bulow, Gottschalk,
Liszt, and many others, and of the audiences and concerts throughout the
country fifty years ago, makes most interesting reading.
Richard Hoffman studied under Pleyel, Moscheles, Rubinstein, Dohler,
Thalberg and Liszt and, of course, has much to say of all these great
masters. There are some twenty-five illustrations, including Patti, Jenny
Lind, Liszt, Charles Halle, Gottschalk, Von Bulow and Mr. Hoffman him-
self. The volume also contains Mr. Hoffman’s essay on “ How to Stimu-
late Thought and Imagination in a Pupil.”
MOZART: THE STORY OF HIS LIFE AS MAN AND
ARTIST. According to Authentic Documents and
other Sources. By Victor Wilder. Translated by F.
Liebich. To which is now added a Comprehensive Bib-
liography of Mozart Literature from every source,
English and Foreign and a List of his Compositions
Published and Unpublished. With 23 Portraits
gathered from Various Sources. With Index. 2
volumes. Crown Bvo, cloth, 10s.
Jan. Ev. Engel, Imperial Librarian, writing from the Mozarteum, Salz
burg (Mozart’s birthplace) on behalf of the Mozart Society, says
[ Translation .]
I congratulate the publisher on the exemplary correctness of the edi-
tion and the author on having had at his disposal such rich and almost
inexhaustible material from ancient down to most modern times, as
foundation for his excellent work. This beautiful and valuable work,
which has been translated with great thoroughness, has every right to a
place in the foremost ranks of English literature to the honour of the
great master whose life and work the gifted author has had presented to
the English people in a most attractive way, besides conveying to them
his appreciation of his (Mozart’s) immortal compositions in a manner
that has not been done previously in English.
“ This biography in two handy volumes and published at a moderate
price, will, we are sure, be warmly welcomed by the thousand and one
admirers of one of the most astounding geniuses in musical history.”—
Pall Mall Gazette.
“ Its merits are its enthusiasm, its judicious selection from an enor-
mous mass of material, and its oonsecutivencss.”— Birmingham Gazette.
Abihtjh Simons, in an appreciative notice in The Saturday Review
said s—'" The book is living, and to read it is to suffer over again this
perfect and punished life.”


MUSICAL MEMORIES. By William Spark, Mus. Doc.
(late Organist of the Town Hall, Leeds). Revised
Popular Edition. With 16 Portraits. Thick crown Bvo,
cloth. Published at 6s.
“ A pleasantly written book of reminiscences of a large number of
distinguished persons in the world of music -. . . . Dr. Spark knows how
to tell a good story, and has not a few new and old to tell; while the
tone of his book is so invariably cheerful and good natured.”—Safurdaj/
Review.
“ The author speaks of things that he understands and of persons
that he has known.”— St. James' Gazette.
“ Just one of those pleasant books which are instructive without being
tedious, and amusing without being frivolous. The book is very pleasant
reading and we counsel our readers to get it without delay.” —Musical
Standard.
TCHAIKOVSKY. His Life and Works. With Extracts
from his Writings and the Diary of his Tour Abroad in
1888. By Rosa Newmarch. Edited with Additional
Chapters by E. Evans, 1908. With a Complete
Classific Account of Works, Copious Analyses of Import-
ant Works, Analytical and other Indices; also Supple-
ment dealing with “The Relation of Tchaikovsky to
Art-Questions of the Day.” Portrait and Index.
Thick crown Bvo, cloth, gilt top, 7s. 6d.
“ The chapters written by Mr. Edwin Evans, Senr., are excellent and
should be perused with attention, as they denote a keen, critical insight
and a broad outlook on matters generally. * * * The popularity of 1 Chai-
kovsky in England is certainly not on the wane, and the present volume
will doubtless be welcomed by the many admirers of the Russian master."
—Morning Post.
“ A well planned and in parts fascinating study of a composer whose
rare charm of melodic beauty and fine sense of musical proportion have
completely captured the taste of the time * * * It is the fullest and
most authoritative monograph of Tchaikovsky available for ng is
readers.” —The Scotsman.
“ Issued from the Press which in recent years has given to the musicsd
world so much that is of intrinsic value—that of the firm of Willi
Reeves, publisher of The Musical Standard- this volume dedicated to
Henry J Wood, who has helped to realise so many of Tchaikovsky s
masterpieces, and to his wife* is first in the field >u thoroughncßs and
in style. • * • is so presented as to be of absorbing interest to the or
dinary lover of music, of value to the student, and indispensable to such
al de y sire to have at’hand reliable analyses of the composition of th
greatest of Russian composers. Rosa Newmarch is notice
to a greater degree than anyone in this country for bringing ”°
Tchaikovsky. To her pen is due the best and ripe t of the
matter the volume contains; although e wor , Tokaiitovskv was
also of such a character as to merit high pr b J g]y appre oiated
a world artist and he speaks in a langu S assuredly rank among
by the scholars of all nations. 6 vo „ Daily Independent.
the standard works relating to musical art. -Shelia uauy v


NOTICE OF ANTHONY STRADIVARI. The celebrated
Violin Maker known by the name of Stradivarius, pre-
ceded by Historical and Critical Researches on the
origin and Transformations of Bow Instruments, and
followed by a Theoretical Analysis of the Bow and Re-
marks on Frances Tourte. By F. J. Fetis. Trans-
lated by J. Bishop. Facsimile of a Letter of Stradi-
varius. Bvo, cloth, ss.
The greater part of the matter in above is the work of M. Yuillaume,
who spent the greater part of his life in studying the principles which
guided Stradivarius in his labours. With the aid of Fetis and his addi-
tional suggestions and matter the now celebrated work was produced.
CHOPIN: THE MAN AND HIS MUSIC. By James
Huneker. Author of “Mezzotints in Modern Music.”
With Musical Examples. Thick crown Bvo, cloth, 10s.
“ Mr. Huneker is a Chopin enthusiast. He accords admiration to Brahms,
to Wagner, to Tchaikovsky: his worship is reserved for Chopin. Being
gifted with clear insight and imagination which grasp many and diverse
moods Mr. Huneker is a sane critic and a manly There is no pre-
tence at new material in the book. Mr. Huneker has garnered all that has
been written about the composer and he has threshed out the grain from
the chaff. The result is, therefore, of value.”— Musical Standard.
“ The volume will at once take its place in the front rank of books on
Chopin the masterly chapter of 74 pages on the etudes will soon
be found indispensable bv all teachers and students of the pianoforte.”—
The Nation (U.S.A.)
“ A work of unique merit, of distinguished style, of profound insight
and sympathy and of the most brilliant literary quality.”— The New York
Times.
“Of works on Chopin published since Niecks’ life, this is by far the
most important.”—G. C. Ashton Jonson in “ A Handbook to Chopin’s
Works.”
LIFE OF CHOPIN. By Franz Liszt. New and very much
Enlarged Edition. Translated in full now for the first
time by John Broadhoxjse. Crown Bvo, cloth, 6s.
George Sand describes it as " un peu exuberent en style, mais rempli
de bonnes choses et de trfes belles pages.”
G- C- Ashton Jonson says in his “ Handbook to Chopin’s Works ” :
“For the personal reminiscences of one of the greatest composers by one
of the greatest executive artists of the world must be invaluable to the
Chopin student.”
Franz Liszt has written a charming sketch of Chopin's life and art.”—
Ency. Brit.
“ Liszt’s criticisms upon his separate works have all the eloquent mys-
ticisms to be expected from him ; and the biography is a book musicians
will always prize.’’— Sunday Times.
It will afford the student the greatest help in understanding the
undercurrent of emotion which characterises the works of Chopin.”—
Morning Post
“ Let ns therefore contribute one good word to help it forward, as we
would tend a flower which springs up spontaneously over the grave of
one we love.”-r-3fusicaZ Times.


FREDERIC CHOPIN: HIS LIFE AND LETTERS. By
Moritz Karasowski. Translated by E. Hill. New
Edition Revised and further Letters added written
during the composer’s Sojourn in England and Scot-
land, 1848-9. Second and Revised Edition. With 8
Portraits and a Facsimile. 2 volumes. Crown Bvo,
bevelled cloth, 10s.
“ Chopin is and remains the boldest and proudest poetic spirit of the
age.”—Robebt Schumann.
“ A book with which all students of Chopin must needs be acquainted.
It contains a good deal of first hand information and is our only source
for many valuable documents.”— The Guardian.
übove's Dictionary o/ Musicians says:—The truth about Chopin’s birth,
family, health, character, friendships, early training, and the dawn of his
career as a player and composer was not known until the publication of
Moritz Karasowski’s recent and trustworthy biography.
“ The first serious attempt at a Biography of Chopin.”— Pkof. Nifxks.
“ Gives bits of information found nowhere else and the Letters of Chopin
make the book invaluable to those who would really know the Polish
master. ” — M usical A meriea.
MAKERS OF MUSIC. Biographical Sketches of the Great
Composers. With Chronological Summaries of their
Works and Facsimiles from Musical MSS. of Bach,
Handel, Purcell, Dr. Arne, Gluck, Haydn, Mozart, Beet-
hoven, Weber, Schubert, Berlioz, Mendelssohn, Chopin,
Schumann, Wagner, Verdi, Gounod, Brahms and Greig,
with General Chronological Table. By R. Farquharson
Sharp. Portrait of Purcell. Third Edition. Crown
Bvo, cloth, ss.
The author’s endeavour throughout this work has been to convey an im-
pression of the personality of each composer, as well as to furnish bio-
graphical detail. At the end of each biography is a tabulated list of the
composer’s works and dates of production, together with a facsimile from
one of his original manuscripts. A useful volume, got up in good style and
well adapted for a gift or prize. Has speedily run into three editions.
TEMPLETON AND MALIBRAN. Reminiscences of these
Renowned Singers, with Original Letters and Anec-
dotes. Three Authentic Portraits by May all. Bvo,
cloth, 2s, 6d.
VERDI: MAN AND MUSICIAN. His Biography, with
especial Reference to his English Experience Por-
traits by F. J. Crowkst. Bvo, cloth, 3s. 6d. (P
7s. 6d.)
BALFE: HIS LIFE AND WORKS. By 1W- A. lT
Crown Bvo, bevelled cloth, 3s. 6d. net (pub. 7s. 6d.)


CHOPIN; AS REVEALED BY EXTRACTS FROM HIS
DIARY. By Count Tarnowskx. Translated from the
Polish by JS. Janotha. With Eight Portraits. Crown
Bvo, cloth, 2s. 6d. net (or paper cover, Is. 6d. net).
" Throws many curious sidelights on the character of the great com
poser.” —Sunday Sun.
“ The notes on Ohopin were written by special request and under the
direction of Princess Marceline Czartoryska. From her, Count Tarnowski
received many interesting details as well as letters written by Chopin, in
which the master alludes to many of his compositions as well as to the
conditions under which they were written. Really an absorbing little
tome, etc.”—lf usical Standard.
BEETHOV EN. By Richard Wagner. With a Supplement
from the Philosophical Works of Arthur Schopenhauer.
Trans, by Edward Dannreuther, Third Edition.
Crown Bvo, cloth, 6s.
This characteristic essay, a written exposition of Wagner’s thoughts on
the significance of the master’s music, may be read with advantage by all
students.”—W. H. Webbe in The Pianist’s A. B. C.
It is a plain duty to be familiar and even intimate with the opinion
of one famous man about another. Gladly therefore we welcome Mr.
Dannreuther’s translation of the work before us. Mr. Dannreuther has
achieved his task with the conscientiousness of his nature and with a
success due to much tact and patience.”— Musical Times .
BIOGRAPHICAL DICTIONARY OF FIDDLERS. Includ-
ing Performers on the Violoncello and Double Bass,
Past and Present. Containing a Sketch of their
Artistic Career, together with Notes of their Composi-
tions. By A. Mason Clarke. 9 Portraits. Post Bvo,
bevelled cloth, ss.
“ We may here take the opportunity of recommending a useful book to
all lovers of violins and violinists. Fiddlers, Ancient and Modern, is prac-
tically a little Biographical Dictionary, well arranged with some excellent
portraits.” —Northern Whig.
CHERUBINI. Memorials illustrative of his Life. By E.
Bellasis. Thick crown Bvo, cloth, 6s.
The standard biography of Cherubini.
FRANZ LISZT. By T. Carla w Martin. 12mo, bound, Is.
LIFE OF BEETHOVEN. By Louis Nohl. Translated bv
John J Lalor. Third Edition. With Portraits and
Facsimile. Crown Bvo, bevelled cloth, gilt edges, 3s. 6d.
" A standard biography.”


SKETCHES OF ENGLISH GLEE COMPOSERS. Historical
Biogiapliical and Critical. From about 1735-1866 Bv
U. Baptie. Post Bvo, bevelled cloth, ss. ’
LIFE AND WORKS OF MOZART. By A. Whittingham
Cloth, Is. 6d. (or paper, Is.)
LIFE AND WORKS OF HANDEL. By A. Whittingham.
Cloth, Is. 6d. (or paper, Is.)
THE BACH LETTERS. Letters of Samuel Wesley, relating
to the Introduction into England of the Works of Bach.
Ed. by E. Wesley. Second Edition. Bvo, cloth, 2s. 6d.
DICTIONARY OF 4,000 BRITISH MUSICIANS. From the
Earliest Times. By F. J. Crowest. Crown Bvo, cloth
2s. (paper, Is.)
A Dictionary of British Musicians—a work devoted exclusively to the
names of native composers, instrumentalists, vocalists, writers, etc., who
have contributed to the making of English musical art from the earliest
times to the present. Blank spaces are left to each letter for any addi-
tional names to be written in.
PURCELL. By William H. Cummings, Mvs.Doc. Crown
Bvo, cloth, 2s. 6d.
The only available life of this great English musician. Dr. Cummings
spared no time or tiouble in making it as far as possible a complete and
exhaustive treatise.
CHERUBINI. By F. J. Croavest. Crown Bvo, cloth, 2s. 6d.
Contents Birth and Parentage—Under Sarti—Earliest Works—Visits
London— Lodoiska — iledee—Les Deux Journees — Faniska —Berlioz and Ah
Baha —Cherubini’s Overtures—A Sacred Music Composer—Mass in F
Mass in D minor—Mass in C —Requiem in C minor—Requiem in D minor
—Cherubini’s Prolifieness—At Catel’s Grove—Death, Obsequies and Career
—His Influence upon Music—Estimate of his Dramatic Works—Of his
Sacred AVorks—lnfluence as a Teacher—Temperament and Disposition-
Anecdotes of Cherubini—Catalogue of Compositions—lndex.
SKETCHES OF GREAT VIOLINISTS AND GREAT PIAN-
ISTS. Biographical and Anecdotal, with Account of
the Violin and Early Violinists. Viotti, Spohr, Paga-
nini, De Beriot, Ole Bull, Clementi, Moscheles, Schu-
mann (Robert and Clara), Chopin, Thalberg, Gottschalk,
Liszt. By G. T. Ferris. Second Edition. Crown Bvo,
bevelled cloth, 3s. 6d. (or cloth, gilt edges, 4s. 6d.)
A very useful book for a prize or gift.


PORTRAIT GALLERIES.
SIXTY YEARS OF MUSIC. A Record of the Art in England
during the Victorian Era. Containing 70 Portraits of
the most Eminent Musicians. Oblong quarto, boards,
cloth back, 2s. 6d.
NATIONAL PORTRAIT GALLERY OF BRITISH MUSI-
CIANS. By John Wauriner, Mus.D. Trinity College,
Dublin, Introduction by Joseph Bennett. Over 500
Photo Portraits of well-known and eminent living Musi-
* cians of Great Britain and Ireland, with short Bio-
graphical notice of each. The whole bound in one
handsome oblong folio volume, cloth lettered. Offered
for 7s. 6d. net (published 14s. net).
REEVES’ CATALOGUE OF MUSIC AND MUSICAL
LITERATURE. Ancient and Modern, Second-Hand
and New; containing the Contents of Libraries recently
purchased, with a large quantity of Curious, Scarce, and
Useful Music : Full Scores, Organ Music, Duets, Trios,
Quartetts, Quintetts, Sextetts, Septetts, etc.; Tutors,
Historical, Theoretical and Biographical Works in Eng-
lish, French, German, Italian, Spanish, Dutch, etc.,
including some Works of the greatest rarity and value.
On Sale for Cash. This Catalogue sent post free on
application.


HISTORY.
THE MUSIC OF THE MOST ANCIENT NATIONS. Par-
ticularly of the Assyrians, Egyptians and Hebrews;
with special reference to recent discoveries in Western
Asia and in Egypt. By Catl Engel. With numerous
Illustrations and Index. Thick Bvo, cloth. Published
at 18s., now offered for Bs. 6d. net.
Contents Chapter I.—The Oldest Records on Music. Representations
of Musical Instruments on Ancient Sculptures and Painting’s—National
Music applied to Ethnology—Monumental Records referring to Assyrian
Music—The Ruins of Nimroud, Khorsabad and Kouyunjik—The Extent
to which the characteristics of Assyrian Music can be Ascertained from
the Representations of the Instruments—The Gradual Development of
Music from its Most Primitive State, demonstrated by a Comparison of
the Music of Modern Nations in Different Stages of Civilization—The
Earliest Musical Instruments—Examples of Musical Scales in Use among
Nations in Different Stages of Civilization—The Earliest Development of
Vocal Music—The Degree of Progress in Music attained by the Assyrians
—Their Accomplishments in other Arts. Chapter II. —Musical Instru-
ments of the Assyrians. The Harp—Traces of the Ancient Oriental Harp
in Europe—The Assyrian Lyre and the Nubian Kissar —The Assyrian
Dulcimer and the Persian Santir—The Asor —The Tamboura or Guitar—
The Double-pipe—The Trumpet—The Drum— Assyrian Bronze Bolls found
in the Ruins of Nimroud—Tambourine and Cymbals—Remarks on the
Dancing of the Assyrian Musicians—Traces of some other Assyrian In-
struments—Conjectures on the Antiquity of Stringed Instruments Played
with a Bow—Some Peculiar Similarities between Ancient Asiatic and
European Instruments—The Names of Musical Instruments. Chapter 111.
Assyrian Musical Performances. Various Combinations of Musical In-
struments—Description of the Assyrian Bas-reliefs in the British Museum
on which Musical Performers are Represented—Other Representations of
Assyrian Musicians briefly Described —The Characteristics of the Per-
formances —Fondness of the Assyrians for Music—Their Songs—Music
employed in their Religious Worship—Court Bands of the Kings—
Rhythmical Character of the Music—Oriental Music of the Present Time
Choruses of the Dervishes—Call to Prayer of the Muezzin—Character of
the Assyrian Instrumental Accompaniments —Harmony not Entirely
Unknown to the Assyrians. Chapter IV.—Musical System of the
Assyrians. Resemblance of the Assyrian Music to that of other Ancien
Oriental Nations—The Pentatonic Scale—The Present Existence of the
Pentatonic Scale in various Asiatic Nations evidenced by Tunes from
China Siam, Java, Hindoostan, Burmah and Japan—High Antiquity of
the Pentatonic Scale in Asia-The Order of Intervals in which the
Assyrian Stringed Instruments appear to have been usually Tuned Traces
rfTh”“»..lonl. Scale ...a* the Ancient
Nubian Kissar-Subdivisions of the Whole Tone-Diffusion of the Penta-
tonic Scale—The Pentatonic Scale of the Ancient American Indians
Traces of the same Scale in the Music of the Scotch and other Celtic Paces
-The Peculiar Character
Egyptian instruments—Various Harps-Bruce’s Harps-Egyptian name of
Egyptian ins Tamboura —Peculiar Stringed


bourines—Curious Instruments of Percussion —The Sistrum—Crotala, Cym-
bals, Bells—Vocal and Instrumental Performances—The Egyptian Musical
Instruments compared with the Assyrian—Opinions of some Musical His-
torians. Chapter Vl.—Music of the Hebrews. Gradual Development of
the Hebrew Music—Musical Instruments —Diversity of Opinion respecting
the Real Nature of some of the Hebrew Instruments —Josephus’ Account—
The Chatzozerah—The Shophar—The Magrepha—Nebel and Nofre—The
Hebrew Lyre—Vocal and Instrumental Performances—Hebrew Music of the
Present Day—Literature of Hebrew Music—Eastern Origin of our own Music.
Grove’s Dictionary says of Carl Engel :
“ His attainments as a musician, his clear insight into books in many
languages, his indefatigable perseverance in research, and the exercise of
a rare power of judicious discrimination, made him one of the first
authorities oh his subject in Europe, he became a collector when oppor-
tunities were more frequent than they are now for acquiring rare instru-
ments and books. He thus formed a private museum and library that
could hardly be rivalled except by a few public institutions.”
CHRONOMETRICAL CHART OF MUSICAL HISTORY.
Presenting a Bird's Eye View from the Pre-Christian
Era to the XXth Century. By C. A. Harris,
A.R.C.0., etc. On linen, folded in case, 2s. net (on
special paper, Is. net).
Prof. Proui says: — l have examined your chart with great interest,
both plan and execution seem to me to be excellent. You have managed
to get a wonderful amount of information into a very small space. I
think the Chart should be most useful and cordially wish you success.
Dr. T. H. Yorke Trotter, Principal, London Academy of Music: “Ex-
tremely well got up and will be useful.”
Dr. F. J. Earn, Principal, London College of Music: “Your very useful
chart .... extremely well drawn up, showing in a compact form a great
deal of information, and is a useful comparative form. Several professors
have expressed delight with it.”
Trinity College, London: “The Library Committee desire me to express
their most cordial thanks for the donation of a copy of a ‘ Chronometrical
Chart of Musical History ’ to the College library.” —Shellei Fisher,
Secretary.
“ Like a Bovril tabloid—much nourishment in a little room.”—Head
Mistress, South African School.
Sure to be very useful to students . . . excellently arranged and
seems to be very accurate and thorough.”— Dr. Ralph Dunstan.
Excellent chart . . . and is certainly valuable in helping the imagina-
tion to grasp synchronous events.”—H. Osmond Anderton, Esq., Librarian
to Birmingham and Midland Institute School of Music.
CATECHISM OF MUSICAL HISTORY AND BIOGRAPHY.
By F. J. Crowest. Revised and Enlarged Edition.
Tenth Thousand. 187 pp. Post Bvo, cloth, 2s. (paper, Is.)
This work gives special attention to English musicians, and is brought
down to 1905. 6
Musical Education says:—"An excellent little book—yet not so little
since it contains an immense amount of information—historical, biographi-
cal and critical—in a very email compass. **


THE GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT OF MUSIC.
Described in Chapters on the Study of Musical History.
By Edward Dickinson. With an Annotated Guide to
Music Literature. Over 400 pp. Thick Bvo, cloth, 10s.
Chapters 1. Primitive Music. 2. Music of the Ancient Cultured
Nations: Assyrians, Egyptians, Hebrews, ©reeks and Homans. 3. Song in
the Early Christian Church. 4. The Catholic Liturgy. S. The Catholic
Liturgio Chant. 6. Beginnings of Polyphonic Music. Popular Music in the
Middle Ages. 7. The Age of the Netherlar.dcrs, 1400 1550. 8. Choral Music
of the Sixteenth Century. 9. Early German Protestant Music. 10. Pro-
testant Church Music in England. 11. The Madrigal—The Opera—Modern
Tonality. 12. Early Growth of Instrumental Music. 13. The Violin and
its Music: First Stages of the Suite and Sonata. 14. Keyed Chamber In
struraents : Progress of the Clavier Suite and Sonata. 15. The Italian Opera
in the Seventeenth Century. 16 The Opera Buffa, Seventeenth and Eigh
teenth Centuries. 17. Rise of the Opera in France, Seventeenth Century.
18. Italian Opera Seria in the Eighteenth Century. 19. Introduction of
the Italian Dramatic Forms into German Religious Music. 20. Johann
Sebastian Bach, 1685-1750. 21. Handel, 1685-1759. 22. Opera-Comiquc in the
Eighteenth Century. 23. Gluck, 1714-1787. 24. Haydn, 1732-1809. 25. Mozart,
1756-1791. 26. Beethoven, 1770 1827. 27. The German Romantic Opera.
Weber, 1786 1826. 28. The German Lied. Schubert, 1797-1828. 29. Piano
Playing to about 1830. 30. Schumann, 1810-1856. 31. Mendelssohn, 1809-
1847. 32. Chopin, 1809-1849. 33. Programme Music. 34. Berlioz, 1803-1869.
35. Liszt, 1811-1886. 36. The Opera in the Nineteenth Centhry to about
1850. I. Italian Opera. 37. The Opera in the Nineteenth Century to about
1850. 11. French Opera. 38. Wagner, 1813-1883. 39. Recent Music in Ger-
many and Austria. 40. Recent Music in France. 41. Recent Music in
Italy. 42. Recent Music in Russia, Bohemia and Scandinavia. 43. Recent
Music in England and America. Bibliographical List. Index.
Mr. Dickinson in his Preface says:—The vastnoss and complexity of the
study of the history of music are bewildering to those who enter upon it
unassisted. This volume is intended to clear the way by indicating the
problems, the method and the materials. The narrative and critical por-
tion gives a terse and comprehensive summary of music history, showing
what are the important subjects involved and their connections and rela-
tions. The bibliographical sections lead the student to the best critical
commentaries in the English language on every phase and detail of the
subject.
“ Mr. Dickinson has written a book of unquestionable value the
author’s critical judgment is highly discriminating.”— Musical Standard.
Mr. Ernest Newman in the Manchester Guardian writes :—Mr. Dickinson
has had the excellent idea of furnishing the musical student with a guide
to the best literature in English upon the Art For Mr. Dickinson’s
general treatment of his subject one can have nothing but praise. His
method is to take each stage in the development of music separately,
characterise it in a short but highly concentrated chapter and then give
references to the complete English literature upon the subject. His sum
marics are models of sound judgment and swift statement, not more than
once or twice, perhaps, could one find fault with either their completenesi
in every essential point or their cool and Catholic impartiality. The
bibliographical guides are practically as full as they could be made
the total omissions are exceedingly trifling, while the extent and the
accuracy of the information conveyed make the book indispensable to
Undents and to public libraries.


MANUAL OF MUSICAL HISTORY. From the Epoch of
Ancient Greece to our present time. By Db. F. L.
Bitter. Second Edition. Cr. Bvo, bevelled cloth, 2s. 6d.
“ An agreeably and cogently .written volume, dealing with a variety of
topics which bear mo eor less directly on the history of music.”—W. H.
Webbk in The Pianist’s A. B. C
“ Portable and well arranged ** * well up to date and contains a useful
index. Students preparing for examinations will find the book distinctly
serviceable.”— Teacher's Times.
THE STUDENT’S HISTORY OF MUSIC. History of Music,
from the Christian Era to the present time. By Dr. F.
L. Ritter. J hird Edition. 478 pages of Letterpress
and 72 Plates of Musical Illustrations. Thick crown
Bvo, cloth, 7s. 6d.
“ To such as are preparing for examination this valuable work must
render great service.”— Christian Age.
" A reliable guide to those students who as he says * feel the desire, the
want, of a deeper and more general knowledge of and information as to,
the growth and progress of their art than is common.’ That this intention
has, been successfully carried out in the present volume we can conscicn
tiously affirm.”— Musical Times.
. t]l p exception of Mr. Hullah’s Lectures, we can recall no book
in tlie English language of recent date which attempts to cover the same
ground Both as useful to the student as a work of reference, and as
intereßting and instructive to the general reader on musical subjects, this
Musical Record**™ R confldentl y be recommended.’ '-Monthly
A HISTORY OF PIANOFORTE MUSIC. With Critical
Estimates of its Greatest Masters and Sketches of their
Lives. By John C. Fillmore. Edited with an Intro-
ductory Preface by Ridley Prentice. Crown Bvo
cloth, 3s. 6d.
Synopsis The Pianoforte and its Immediate Precursors (the Harpsi
■Oiord and Clavichord)—Polyphonic Music (Bach, Handel, D. Scarlattf)-
MnTic P ( h R n H MU T 'pi.' , Ha - vdn > Mozart) —The Emotional Content of
Music (Beethoven)—The Classic and the Romantic in Music (Weber Schu-
bert Mendelssohn Chopin and Sohumann)-Teohnique of the IMrst Clas-
smal Period-Technique of the Second Classical Period-Technique of the
liansition Period—Technique of the Romantic Period— Minor Conuoosers
and Virtuosi of the Different Epochs-Index. Composers
hands L of BayS °/ I* : r“. m y Judgment the work should be in the
■nands of every earnest student.
•‘ The only work of its kind in English. It groups the comoosers and
their works into epochs and gives a clear description of the different
composers ‘an d” their «"• “ f 8,1 neatest
mSTORV OF HUNGARIAN MUSIC. By J. Kaldy (Director
i It 6 Hungarian OperaJ. Crown Bvo, bevelled
cloth, 2s. 6d. net.
YnusicliThelf 0 ” Mir 0 anywhere else ■• • • Bb °uld he on everv
musical shelf. —lnternatwnalen Musikgesellschaft.


THE RISE OF MUSIC. Being a Careful Enquiry into the
Development of the Art from its Primitive Puttings
forth in Egypt and Assyria to its Triumphant Consum-
mation in Modern Effect. Especially bringing out the
Influence of the Church upon the Joint Development of
Harmony and Notation—the Importance of that Great
Central Development the Enweavement of the Scales—-
the Creative Consequences of the Clavier Type of In-
strument and the Explanation of a New and Perfect
Order of Beauty resting upon our Tempered System.
By Joseph Goddard. With Illustrations of early In-
struments and numerous Musical Examples drawn from
Ancient and Modern Sources. With Index. Thick
crown Bvo, cloth, gilt top, 7s. 6d.
It will be seen that this work is not a history of music in the ordinary
sense, but rather a tracing of the organic unfolding of the musical art.
At the same time it presents a perspective of both the history and con-
stitution of music, in which history is seen to elucidate theory and theory
history.
Readers will greatly appreciate the numerous musical examples culled
from all sources which appear throughout the book.
“ Musical enthusiasts, whom the technical language of their art does
not appal, will delight in this scholarly book. Mr. Goddard’s object is
to show that music, commonly regarded as the youngest of the arts, had
its roots in primeval man, but needed a longer time to develop into a
fully constituted art than did painting and literature. It was compara-
tively easy for the painter to perfect his art. He had his model, Nature,
always before him. The poet, in like manner, once he possessed an alpha-
bet, had only to look around him to find the grandest subjects ready to
his pen. But the musician had to discover and fix his own rules and
principles, slowly revealed to him by the march of science and by chance
inventions. The ancient Egyptians, for instance, used the flute, lyre and
harp, but, as Mr. Goddard points out, the mass of our modern musical
forms date only from the invention of the clavier type of instrument, a
little over a couple of centuries ago. Modern dramatic music, too, springs
as an art form largely from the light interludes played in the Italian
theatres only two centuries ago. Mr. Goddard’s book is well illustrated
and should find a place in many a musical home.” —The Christian World.
AN ACCOUNT OF THE RISE OF MILITARY MUSIC IN
ENGLAND. Being Memoirs of the Royal Artillery Band,
its Origin, History and Progress. By H. G. Farmer.
With 14 Illustrations. Bvo, cloth, ss.
The Records of the R.A. Band date as far back as 1762, and its history
may fairly be stated to represent the growth of the military band.


THE WORLD’S EARLIEST MUSIC. Traced to its Begin-
nings in Ancient lands. By collected Evidences of
Relics, Records, History and Musical Instruments, from
Greece, Etruria, Egypt, China, through Assyria and
Babylonia to the Primitive Home, the Land of Akkad
and Sumer. By Hermann Smith. With 65 full page
Illustrations and Cuts, nearly 400 pp. Crown Bvo,
cloth, 6s.
“ I return the sheets you entrusted to me of ‘ The World’s Earliest
Music.’ There is nothing 1 I could criticize in those interesting pages.”—
A. J. Hipktns in a letter to the Author.
“ Should be in the hands of every musician Most interesting is
his Chapter upon the music of Japan.”— Pall Mall Gazette.
“ Technically though it occasionally must be, the book is one which
should charm all music lovers.”— Morning Leader.
“ The book, which is profusely illustrated, is most interesting, and is, in
its handsome cloth binding, well worth its published price, 6/-” — The
Musical Star.
“ I confess to a very considerable ignorance, natural and acquired, of
the ancient instruments; but it seems to me that Mr. Smith has got as near
the truth as a twentieth-century mortal can.”—J. P, Runciman in The
Saturday Review.
“ It is a pleasantly written volume dealing with the earliest conditions
of music in ancient lands. From rook carvings, wall paintings, tablets
and vases, sculptures, papyri and so forth, .Mr. Smith has drawn the
materials for a volume which has involved an immense amount of research
and contains a vast* quantity of information conveyed in a very lucid and
readable manner.”— ; H. A.. Scott in The Academy.
“ No more enthusiastic worker, nor patient student, exists than Mr
Hermann Smith. The structure, character and capabilities of every kind
of musical instrument have been the objects of his study for many'years.
To an intense love of his subjects he adds an attractive style. . . . The
lilting of the ear in music is a liking by inheritance, transmitted as a
fa-iai type is. This view is new, etc.”— Birmingham Daily Post.
THE PAST AND THE FUTURE. An Inaugural Lecture at
Gresham College. By J. Frederick Bridge, Mus. Doc.
Crown Bvo, sewed, 6d.


ORCHESTRAL.
A Work of Original Besearch and Study.
THE INSTRUMENTS OF THE MODERN ORCHESTRA
AND EARLY RECORDS OF THE PRECURSORS OF
THE VIOLIN FAMILY. With 500 Illustrations and
Plates. By Kathleen Schlesinger. Two handsome
volumes, thick Bvo, cloth, gilt tops, 18s. 6d.
A reviewer in a long notice in the Times says :
“ We do not hesitate to recommend the volume to all lovers of music
who would know something of the instruments which produce the mar-
vellous tone colour of the modern orchestra, or desire, by aid of the large
and clear illustrations, to recognise the various forms which are now to be
found in our large military and municipal bands. It is in the second
volume that the importance of Miss Schlesinger’s work appears and the
results o f original research are evident .... a new light is here thrown
on the early history of the violin family, and in any future work on this
subject account will have to be taken of the research disclosed in this
volume The index to the two volumes is carefully and lucidly com-
piled ; but the most noteworthy section in this respect is the bibliography.
It occupies a hundred pages and is the finest work of its kind since ‘ De
Fidioulis Bibliographia ’ and will be found of great value to all musicians.
. . . Miss Schlesinger’s volumes are full of interesting and useful in-
formation, and in the domain of archseology and musical history suggest
now possibilities.”
John Bboadhotjse in the Musical Standard writes : “ Far surpasses any
book on the subject which it has been our good fortune to read. The
whole line of the investigation is in every sense of the w«rd original; not
trusting the researches of her predecessors, Miss Schlesinger has, during
many years, gone fully and deeply into the matter for herself; and.
having arrived at conclusions quite at variance with those of other
writers, she is not afraid to say so. The tone of the book is moderation
itself It may be safely assumed—and the assumption will stand
good until some further evidence is discovered—that our authoress has
proved herself to be right and the others wrong The volumes are
beautifully printed in large and clear type, on excellent paper, and are
alike a credit to printer and publisher.”
The music critic of the American Musical Courier in an able essay says:
“ It is a great work in two volumes with over five hundred illustrations
and plates. .... She [the author] is a kind of musical Darwin who has
given no end of toil and trouble to trace the ancestors of our instruments
into their humble and remote sources.”
“ It is no mere echo of' other historians but a work of original research.
This is made clear by the fact that novel conclusions are reached and
new verdicts given. It would seem that we shall be compelled to recon-
sider and probably to reconstruct our notions as to the origin of the
violin A splendid book which will become a classic. The many
years of laborious and persevering study given to its compilation and
composition will bo appreciated by generations yet to come.—Birnung-
ham Gazette and Express. , , , ...
“Miss K. Schlesinger lias at length published in book form thei results
of her interesting researches concerning the origin of the violin family. -
Review of Reviews . . . , __ +1
E. van der Straeten writes in the Sir ad: “ This work ranks am g 1
most remarkable modern literature on the subject.”


ON CONDUCTING. By Richard Wagner. Translated by
E. Dannreuther. Second Edition, cr. Bvo, cloth, ss.
A Treatise on Style in the Execution of Classical Music, written by a
practical master of the grand style.
Wkingaetner, speaking of this celebrated work, says : —" Wagner’s book
laid the foundation for a new understanding of the function of the con-
ductor, in whom we now recognise, not only the eternal factor that holds
together an orchestral, choral or operatic performance, but above all the
spiritualising internal factor that gives the performance its very soul.”
Grove's Dictionary says : “ One of the finest -of his minor publications,
and to a professional musician perhaps the most instructive. A Treatise
on Style, giving his views as to the true way of rendering classical music,
with minute directions how to do it and how not to do it, together with
many examples in musical type from the instrumental works of Beethoven,
Weber, Mozart, etc.”
NOTES ON CONDUCTING AND CONDUCTORS. By T. R.
Croger, F.R.G.S., F.Z.S., also the Organising and Con-
ducting of Amateur Orchestras, with three full-page
Illustrations of the Various “Beats’’ and Plan of the
Orchestra. Third Edition, Revised and Enlarged.
Crown Bvo, cloth, 2s. (paper, Is.)
A mine of good things.”— Musical Opinion.
“ one of the , best glides to conducting.”— Music Trades Review.
“ A capital little book brightly written and full not only of entertaining
and racily-told anecdotes, but also of clear and sensibly-expressed opinions
on musical matters.”—The Stage. *
“The book appeals particularly to conductors of provincial societies,
whether instrumental or choral; it is written in a pleasant style, and is
Musical hmtS bj ° ne wh ° knows Ilis subject well.”— Monthly
“Many practical hints on the organizing and conducting of amateur
orchestras and choral societies.”— M.oviiino Post.
HOW TO PLAY FROM SCORE. Treatise on Accompani-
ment from Score on the Organ or Pianoforte, By F.
Fetis. Translated by A. Whittingham. With 40 pages
of Musical Examples. Crown Bvo, bevelled cloth, 3s. 6d.
Contents:—lntroduction. 1. On the Different Arrangements of Voices
and Instruments in Scores (Partitions). 2. On Vocal Parts; Instrumental
Parts, their Fixed Pitch and the Manner in which they are Written. 3.
Concerning the Manner in which the Accompanist should Road a Score in
order to grasp its Substance and its Details. 4. The Mechanism of Ac-
companiment. 5. Concerning the Influence of the Accompanist on the
A nealist. 6. On Difference of Style. 7. On the Accompaniment of Early
Music without Orchestra, the Duets and Trios of Clari, Durante, Handel
and the Psalms of Marcello. 8. On the Reproduction of Ancient Orches-
tral Accompaniments. 9. On the Modern Style of Accompaniment. 10. On
Mozart, Cherubini, Mehul, Spontini, Rossini and the Modern School. 11.
Conclusion.
This popular and useful book might have been entitled “ The Art of
Making Arrangements for the Organ or Pianoforte from Pull Orchestral
sub' °^. ber ® oorGj, -'’ s contains all that is necessary to know upon this


ORGAN
MODERN ORGAN BUILDING. Being a Practical Explan-
ation and Description of the Whole Art of Organ Con-
struction, with Especial Regard to Pneumatic Action.
Together with Chapters on Tuning, Voicing, etc. By
Walter and Thomas Lewis (Organ Builders). With 76
Illustrations Drawn to Scale and Reproduced from
Actual Working Drawings, together with Diagrams,
Tables, etc. 4to, cloth, 7a. 6d. 19 1
The Authors’ Preface reads :
“ In writing- this treatise our aim has been to explain in a compre-
hensive and practical manner the mysteries of the up-to-date organ. That
is to say the twentieth century organ, the embodiment of the experience
of the past.
“ The tracker organ has not been touched upon, for it has an extensive
literature of its own.
“ A word on the drawings hereby published will not prove out of place.
Although it requires a certain amount of experience in order to ‘ read ’ a
drawing quickly and easily, those reproduced in the pages of this work
should present no difficulties to anyone acquainted by sight with organ
mechanism. To those with little or no knowledge of the subject, but
desirous of learning, the course is obvious. They must make the acquaint-
ance of some ardent amateur or professional organ builder, and solicit
explanations.
“ The acoustical portion of the work is based upon the exposition of
acoustics as left by the Professors Helmholtz and Tyndall.
“ A lengthy list of organ stops has not been included, for the reason that
in this work we have gone more into the actual methods of producing the
various qualities of tone, than into the assembling of vague names, and
more or less indefinite descriptions, of the almost endless varieties of stops.
“ As the merit of a preface is in being short, wo will conclude with the
earnest hope that this attempt, despite its imperfections, will go some way
towards clearing up the doubt and uncertainty which still clings around
the pneumatic and electro-pneumatic organ.”
SOME CONTINENTAL ORGANS (Ancient and Modern) and
their Makers. With Specifications of many of the fine
Examples in Gevnny and Switzerland. By James I.
Wedgewood. PoiA Bvo, cloth, 2s. net.
Contains specification and a brief critique of some of Hie famous old
Continental organs as they exist at the present day. Describes also severl
up-to-date Continental organs. Amongst other or = ail ® ? t ' Heidcl-
given of those at Haarlem, Cologne, Aix-la-Chapelle, Frankfurt. Heidel
burg Him, Stuttgart, Einsiedeln, Strassburg and Antwerp. Tins work
forms a valuable supplement to Hopkins’ and Bimbault’s great oea ise.
“Mr Wcdf-ewood remarks on all details such as workmanship, tone,
peculiarities of mechanism, cost, etc. We thoroughly recommend the book
to those who are interested in organs. "—Bazaar.
THE PEDAL ORGAN. Its History, Design and Control.
By Thomas Casson. With folding Diagram. Bvo.
sewed, Is. net.


THE ORGAN FIFTY YEARS HENCE. A Study of its
Development in the Light of its Past History and
Present Tendencies. By Francis Burgess, F.S.A.,
Scot. Bvo, Is. net.
“ All organists should read Mr. Francis Burgess’ lecture on ‘ The Organ
Fifty Tears Hence.’ We have every sympathy for the opinions Mr.
Burgess expresses, though we have our doubts as to whether the un-
popularity of electric action is not fully justified, eto.” —The Church
Union Gazette.
“ Gives us an excellent summary of what has been and is being done
towards improvement in organ construction and tone, and his criticisms
are always sound and convincing.”— Glasgow Herald.
A PRACTICAL TREATISE ON ORGAN BUILDING. By F.
E. Robertson. With Working Drawings and Appen-
dices for ready calculation of all parts. Text in one
vol. Demy Bvo, and numerous plates in a royal 4to
yol. 2 volumes, 31s. 6d. net.
Many books upon Organ Building have been published in recent years,
but for fulness of information not one approaches Mr. Robertson’s work,
wherein practical details and directions are given in every department of
Organ construction. The book is of course based upon old Don Bedos’
famous work, and contains the most valuable portion of Dr. Topfer’s Ger-
man treatise, together with his learned diagrams and illustrations.”—
Hermann Smith s “ The Making of Sound In the Organ and In the Or-
chestra.” W. Reeves.
MODERN ORGAN TUNING, The How and Why, Clearly
Explaining the Nature of the Organ Pipe and the
System of Equal Temperament, Together with an His-
toric Record of the Evolution of the Diatonic Scale
from the Greek Tetrachord. By Hermann Smith.
Crown Bvo, cloth. 3s, 6/J.
The greatest authority on acoustical matters connected with organ
pipes who has ever lived.”-G. A. Audslei in his Art of Organ Building.
“ I have road ‘ Modern Organ Tuning’ with great interest. It is a
book of value and should find appreciative readers. It should be a hand-
book with students of the organ and organ tuning.”—A. J. Hipkins.
Simple non technical terms set out with an attractiveness and lucidity
* nCVe S- SCe ” sl ”'P*ssed the history of the evolution of the diatonic
e rom ne Greek tetrachord * * * by no means intended for organ
alo ,?° _ ~t h® historical explanations add to the fascination of
this volume. — Daily Telegraph.
tllnin r i e f book 18 j nst su , ch an other as its author’s similar manual on the
for'the h' anos ’ a workmanlike handbook; full of sound practical advice
tor the craftsmen concerned. —Scotsman.
Recommended to the notice of organists with the fullest confidence that
gZIZ tb Pleasure and proflt from its perusal.”—Scottish


RINK S PRACTICAL ORGAN SCHOOL; A New Edition.
Carefully Revised. The Pedal Part printed on a Separ-
ate Staff, and the Preface, Remarks and Technical
Terms translated from the German expressly for this
Edition by John Hiles. The Six Books Complete, hand-
somely bound in red cloth, gilt edges, ob. folio, 10s. 6d.
net (issued at 205.), or the six parts 7s. 6d. net (issued
at 6s. each), parts sold separately.
The best edition ever published of this Grand Classical work. No other
edition will bear comparison with it for care and skill in editing, nor tor
beauty of engraving and excellence of printing. One special merit of this
editipn is that the bar lines arc bold, and that they are drawn right through
the score, instead of through each staft, as was the custom in days gone by.
The student who will take the trouble to test this edition against any
othPr, will at once perceive the advantage he gains from this clear and
distinct style of “ barring ” ; to an advanced performer the matter may be
perhaps of less importance, but even he cannot fail to appreciate the com-
fort of increased legibility.
As a royal road to thorough and sound Organ Playing in all styles, there
is no other School which will bear comparison with this : a Beginner
can follow no better course than to go through it slowly.
A SHORT HISTORY OF THE ORGAN, ORGANISTS AND
SERVICES OF THE CHAPEL OF ALLEYN S COL-
LEGE, Dulwich. With Extracts from the Diary of the
Founder. By W. H Stocks. Crown Bvo, sewed, Is.
THE EARLY ENGLISH ORGAN BUILDERS and their
Works, from the loth Century to the Period of the Great
Rebellion. An Unwritten Chapter on the History of
the Organ. By Dr. E. F. Rimbault. Well printed.
With woodcuts, post Bvo, cloth, 3s. fid.
ANALYSIS OF MENDELSSOHN’S ORGAN WORKS. A
Study of their Structural Features. For the Use of
Students. By Joseph W. G. Hathaway, Mus. B. Oxon.,
127 Musical Examples. Portrait and Facsimiles. Crown
Bvo, bevelled cloth, 4s. 6d.
THE MAKING OF SOUND IN THE ORGAN AND IN I HI.
ORCHESTRA. With.many illustrations. By Hermann
Smith. Crown Bvo, cloth, 7s. 6d. In the Press.
Highly recommended by the late A. J. Hipkins.
ORGANIST’S QUARTERLY JOURNAL of Original Composi-
tions. Edited by Dr. W. Spark, os. per part. New
Series Volume, 160 large pages, oblong folio, bound in
cloth, 18s.


THE ORGAN PARTS OF MENDELSSOHN’S ORATORIOS
AND OTHER CHORAL WORKS. Analytically Con-
sidered. By Orlando A. Mansfield, Mus. Doc.,
F.R.G.O. With numerous Musical Examples. Crown
Bvo, cloth, 4s. 6d.
HENRY SMART’S ORGAN COMPOSITIONS ANALYSED.
By J. Broadhouse. Crown Bvo, bevelled cloth, 2s. 6d.
THE INFLUENCE OF THE ORGAN IN HISTORY. By
Dudley Buck. New Edition with Illustrations. Crown
Bvo, sewed, Is. net,
CATECHISM for the Harmonium and American Organ. By
John Hiles. Post Bvo, sewed. Is.
REFORM IN ORGAN BUILDING. By Thomas Casson.
Crown Bvo, sewed, Gd.
THt. MUSICAL STANDARD. A Weekly Newspaper for
Musicians, Professional and Amateur. Established
nearly Half a Century. The Organ of no Clique. In-
dependent Criticisms. Correspondents in all Parts of
the World. Translations of Important Articles from
the foreign musical press. Illustrated Supplement
every week. “The Violin and String World” given
with the number the last Saturday of each month.
Price Twopence (by post, 2jd.). Annual Subscription,
10s. 10d., 6 months, ss. 5d., 3 months, 2s. 9d. (Abroad
12 months, 135., 6 months, 6s. 6d.) Terms for Adver-
tisements on application to the Manager. Cases for
winding, Is. 6d. net (by post, Is. 9d.).
Pcrtraits °f eolebratcd musicians are given from time to time in “The'
Musical Standard. Price 2d. each. List of Portraits that have already
appeared sent post free on application.


PIANOFORTE.
THE ART OF TEACHING PIANOFORTE PLAYING. A
Systematised Selection of Practical Suggestions for
Young Teachers and Students. By J. Alfred John-
stone. Author of “ Piano Touch, Phrasing and Inter-
pretation,” “Modern Tendencies and Old Standards
in Musical Art,” etc. Thick crown Bvo, cloth, ss.
Many pianists who add to concert playing the labours of a teacher;
many young students about to enter upon the duties of the teaching
profession as their life’s labour; and indeed, not a few of those who have
spent years at the work of giving lessons in pianoforte playing, fail to
achieve the success their abilities deserve, simply for the lack of some
clear, systematic practical knowledge of the art of teaching. In this
volume methods are suggested, hints are offered, principles and rules are
formulated, courses of study are sketched out; and all these are suffi-
ciently general and varied to furnish a useful guide for the teacher
without circumscribing his individual genius or running any risk of
stunting his development.
“ Every teacher of a practical mind will, of course, desire to possess a
work of this kind.”—The Music Student.
“ The work of one who is both an experienced instructor and a thorough
musician.” — Nottingham Guardian.
“ The most comprehensive handbook for teachers that we know . .
the chapter on finger exercises is excellent.”— The Literary II arid,
“ To read this book thoroughly is to a pianist a liberal education . . .
the most comprehensive handbook for piano professors wc have ever met
w ith.”— Cheltenham Examiner.
“Gives good advice on every essential point . . . . it is because such
teachers as the author have emerged, that English pianists have arrived
at celebrity.”— Birmingham Gazette and Express.
“ The two main practical divisions, technique and interpretation, occupy
a space which their high importance-requires .... anything that Mr.
Johnstone now takes upon himself to pen concerning the piano and its
surrounding attributes is looked at twice at least.”— The Register,
Adelaide.
“ Text books on the teaching of music are at present very few in num-
ber and Mr. Johnstone’s eminently practical treatise is a valuable addi-
tion to the pianoforte student’s library the arrangement of the
book is the best possible proof of the author’s ability as a master of
method .... we congratulate Mr. Johnstone on his work, which is un-
doubtedly one of the most valuable contributions to the hteratuio o
pianoforte teaching, and should be in the library of every earnest teacher
and student.” — Aberdeen Daily Journal.
AN ESSAY on the Theory and Practice of Timing in General
and on Schiebler's Invention of Tuning P-ano-orte
and Organs by the Metronome in Particular,
lated by A. Wehrhan. Crown Bvo, sewed, Is.
PRACTICE REGISTER for Pupil’s Daily Practice. A
Specimen, Id., or Is. per 100.


REEVES’ VAMPING TUTOR. Art of Extemporaneous Ac-
companiment, or Playing by Ear op the Pianoforte,
Rapidly Enabling anyone having an Ear for Music (with
or without any knowledge of Musical Notation) to Ac-
company with Equal Facility in any Key with Prac-
tical Examples. By Francis Taylor. New Edition,
to which is added Instructions for Accompaniment
with Equal Facility in every Key illustrated by Ex-
amples. Folio, 2s.
PIANOFORTE TEACHER’S GUIDE. By L. Plaiuy. Trans-
lated by Fanny Raymond Ritter. Crown Bvo, boards,
Is,
“ Evidently written by a pianist who is a thorough master of his instru-
ment as well as a good teacher.” —Educational Times.
“ Some of the finest pianists of the day owe much of their technical
facility to Plaidy’s excellent method.”— Bazaar.
REEVES’ THE POPULAR PIANOFORTE TUTOR. Instruc-
tions, Scales, Exercises, Tunes. Folio, Is.
THE ART OF TUNING THE PIANOFORTE, A New and
Comprehensive Treatise to Enable the Musician to Tune
his Pianoforte upon the System founded on the Theory
of Equal Temperament. By Hermann Smith. Crown
Bvo, limp cloth, New Edition, thoroughly Revised, 2s.
Readers will welcome this note of approval signed bv A. J. Hipkins a
name long associated with the Pianoforte and familiar'to most musicians
in the musical literature of the present time. No better voucher could be
esired of the fair claims of this little book upon the reader’s attention and
confidence. “I have had the privilege of reading the proofs of Mr. Her-
mann Smith’s clear and exhaustive treatise on Pianoforte Tuning, and I
am satisfied that for the professional tuner, or the amateur who desires to
un cis an the subject and put the knowledge he acquires into practice,
here is no book upon it yet published that may be compared with it. I
recommend all tuners or would-bc tuners to study this unpretending and
X WOl " wherein the theory is laid down in clear and correct terms,
and the practice, as far as this is possible, is indicated judiciously.”
THE DE'PPE FINGER EXERCISES for Rapidly Developing
an Artistic Touch in Pianoforte Playing, carefully Ar-
ranged, Classified and Explained by Amy Fay (Pupil
ot lausig, Kullak, Liszt and Deppe), Folio, English
Fingering, Is. 6d. (Continental Fingering, Is. 6d.) r
that Hfrr S Fm/<T eS 'T™* .f® asked by a wel lknown pianist to sav
system and*iT 1 WaS t , rained up to hls seventeenth year on the Deppe
method *•* ° Wes h ' s ™jderful technique almost solely to that
ticallv of th n correspondent adds that Herr Sauer speaks as enthusias
tically of the Deppe method as did Miss Amy Pay.


PIANO TOUCH, PHRASING AND INTERPRETATION. By
J. Alfred Johnstone ( author of “The Art of Teaching
Piano Playing,” etc.) Crown Bvo, cloth, 3s. 6d.
“ We can unreservedly recommend this book to all musical people who
are pianists.”— Cheltenham Examiner.
“ This is a book of rare educational excellence—the work of an expert
of acknowledged standing and experience, who possesses not only a very
complete knowledge of his subject, but also the faculty of expressing
himself in clear and unmistakable terms.”— Aberdeen Daily Journal.
“ Valuable hints on phrasing.”— Freeman's Journal.
“ A thoughtful and instructive discussion of many vexed questions of musi-
cal taste and particularly of musical execution, with a special reference to
the inner mysteries whereby the piano is made to talk to you.”— Scotsman.
“ Without any difficulty, the author disposes of most of the cant about
‘ touch ’ and shows that the so-called mystery is only a matter of proper
technique. Willingly would I quote from the text, only I think it better
for the reader to get the book and go through it quietly, marking his
favourite passages for future reference.”—The Musical Star.
“ The aid he gives to the student in search of the best annotated edi
tions of works is invaluable.”— Sheffield Daily Independent.
"Deals at some length with the technique of pianoforte-playing"
Yorkshire Post.
TECHNICAL STUDY IN THE ART OF PIANOFORTE
PLAYING (Deppe’s Principles). By C. A. Ehren-
fechter. With numerous Illustrations. Fourth Edi-
tion. Crown Bvo, bevelled cloth, 2s. 6d.
Contents :—Position—Arm —Wrist—Fingers; Touch (Tone Production);
Legato: Equality of Tone; Tension and Contraction; Five Finger Exer-
cises ; Skips ; The Scale ; Arpeggio Chords ; Firm Chords ; High Raising of
the Arm; Melody and its Accompaniment; Connection of Firm Chords;
The Tremolo; The Shake (Trill) ; The Pedal ; Fingering.
A detailed eMKI exhaustive exposition of Deppe’s principles of the Piano-
forte technic in ail its features, notably with regard to touch and pas-
sage playing, showing 4ns immense advantage to be gained by their appli-
cation. from the elementary to the higher stages of technical development.
A piano student writes Most useful. I am always rereading and
studying it. It has helped me a lot.”
A professional musician who studied after this method, writes in an issue
of the Musical Standard as follows : “ I am sure many must have felt with
me that the old system of teaching was useless for the production of a
technique fit to grapple with the appalling difficulties of much of the music
of the modern romantic school of composers. Let all whom arc ambitious
to overcome such difficulties attack them on the lines laid down by C. .
Ehrenfechter, and I am convinced they will find, as I have done, their
desires realised in a most astonishing manner.
PIANO TEACHING. Advice to Pupils and Young Teachers.
By F. Le Couppey (Prof, in the Conservatory of Music,
Paris, etc.) Translated from the Third French Edition
by M. A. Bierstadt. Post Bvo, cloth, 2s.
'* Well worthy of perusal both by young teachers and pupils. The book
contains sound advice, particularly applicable to the study of Pianoforte
playing.”—W. H. Webbe in The Pianist’s A. B. C.


WELL-KNOWN PIANO SOLOS. How to Play thorn with
Understanding, Expression and Effect. By Charles
W. Wilkinson. First Series. Containing 26 Articles
dealing with the Works of Binding, Scarlatti, Paderew-
ski, Handel, Rubinstein, Scharwenka, Schumann,
Godard, Delibes, etc. Crown Bvo, Is.
Contents of the First Series Binding, Hustle of Spring. Scarlatti,
Pastorale e Capriccio. Paderewski. Minuet in G. Handel, Harmonious
Blacksmith. Rubinstein, Melody in F. Scharwenka, Polish Dance.
Schumann, Nachtstiicke. Godard, Mazurka. Delibes, Pizzicati from
Sylvia. Grieg, Wedding Day at Troldhangen. Elgar, Salut d’Amour.
Paderewski, Melodic. Raff, La Fileuse. Tchaikovski, Troika. Godard,
Berger et Bergeres. Chaminade, Pierrette. Moszkowski, Etincelles.
Paderewski, Minuet in A Major. Grieg, Norwegian Bridal Procession.
Liszt, Regata Yeueziana. Chaminade, Automne. Moszkowski, Serenata.
Lack, Yalse Arabesque. Schumann, Arabeske. Chopin, Etude in G Flat.
Durand, First A r alse.
Second Series, Dealing with Works by Schumann, Schiitt,
Rubinstein, Chopin, Heller, Rachmaninoff, Schubert,
Dvorak, Bendel, Grieg, Wach, Guttmann, Jensen,
Cnaminade, Sibelius and Mendelssohn. Uniform with
above, Is.
Ihird Series, Dealing with Works by Lavallee, Rheinberger,
Mendelssohn, Chopin, Henselt, Schiitt, Moszkowski,
Strauss, MacDowell, Schubert, Schumann, Durand,
Scott, Hoffmann, Stiehl, Beethoven, Grieg and
Chaminade. Uniform with above, Is.
Diaws one s attention to the beauties in a piece, explains difficulties here
and there, draws attention to a pedal effect and any peculiarity of finger
ing, and generally gives all the information a professor is expected to
give to his pupils.
Described in detail in a manner to be understood by the youngest
student, and with a charm that must ensure the popularity of the book.”
—Aberdeen Daily Journal.
“ In plain language free from technicalities proffers valuable help to the
budding piano soloist.”— Leicester Mail.
DELIVERY IN THE ART OF PIANOFORTE PLAYIN'G, On
Rhythm, Measure, Phrasing, Tempo. By C. A. Ehren-
fechter. Crown Bvo, bevelled cloth, 2s.
“ Deads with rhythm, measure, phrasing and tempo as applied to piano-
torte playing explains the difference between the subjective and objec-
ive in delivery and expresses his opinion that a performance of the born
artist must of necessity be subjective, while the wavering, undecided, and
“" lnS ”^ ed a “ ateu r will be safest in giving an altogether objective render
o- he section with reference to accent is particularly good. There arc
21™P°anisVrl Ta ß°c a fl ° m W ° rkS ° f mastere -”- W - H - Webbe .u


HANDBOOK TO CHOPIN’S WORKS. Giving a Detailed
Account of all the Compositions of Chopin, Short
Analyses for the Piano Student and Critical Quota-
tions from the Writings of Well-Known Musical
Authors. By G. C. Ashton Jonson. The Whole
Forming a Complete Guide for Concert-Goers, Pianists
and Pianola-Players, also a Short Biography, Critical
Bibliography and a Chronological List of Works, etc.
Crown Bvo, cloth, gilt top, 6s.
Will be found equally useful and helpful to concert-goers, for whom it
forms a permanent analytical programme, to pianists, and to those ama-
teurs of music who can now, owing to the pianola, pursue for the first
time a systematic and co-ordinated study of Chopin’s works, a delight
hitherto denied to them owing to their inability to read or play the more
difficult compositions.
“ Here in one compact volume, is all that it is necessary to know about
Chopin and his works except by the leisured enthusiast * * * Each separ-
ate opus is placed in its proper sequence, and attached to them are brief
extracts, again from very many writings, together with Mr. Ashton
Jenson's own lucid criticisms. The task is well done; nothing has ap-
parently been left out that ought to have been put in, and never once
can our author be accused of being tedious. The book should be greatly
studied by all.” —Daily Chronicle.
“ We would go further and welcome this carefully compiled handbook
in the interests of all musicians.” —Daily Telegraph.
“ It is obvious to us that Mr. Jonson has done exceedingly well, ana it
is to be hoped that the many lovers of Chopin will reward his labours by
purchasing his clever, eminently practical and highly interesting and
instructive handbook.” —Mtisical Standard.
“ A most useful addition to Chopin literature in the English language.”
—Musical Times.
“ A volume full of interest and instruction, even for those who think
they know their Chopin well already.”— Truth.


TECHNICAL AND THEORETICAL.
MODERN CHORDS EXPLAINED. (Tho Tonal Scale in
Harmony.) By Arthur G. Potter. With Musical Ex-
amples from the Works of C. Debussy, Richard Strauss
and Granville Bantock. Bvo, limp cloth, Is. (paper
cover, 6d. net).
“ Well worth reading 1 .... writes with conviction, and his observations
on modern harmony, with examples ranging from Purcell to Strauss and
Debussy, should interest every musician.”— Daily Mail.
“ Will undoubtedly interest tiiose students of harmony who have been
striving to analyse chords for which there seemed to be no solution on the
diatonic scale.”— lrish Presbyterian.
THE HARMONISING OF MELODIES. A Text-Book for
Students and Beginners. By 11. C. Banister. Third
Edition, with numerous Musical Examples. Crown Bvo,
limp cloth, 2s.
Chapters ; —lntroductory, The Resources of Harmony; Harmonising with
Common Chords Only, General Principles; Couplets of Common Chords;
Plan, Rhythmical Structure, Phrases, Cadences; Cadences in Connection
with Modulation, Melodies in the Minor Mode; Continuity, Congruity with
Words ; Illustrations of Harmonising the same Melody in Different Ways
with Changed Mode ; Florid Melodies, Unessential Notes, Different Forms
of Harmonising; Pianoforte Accompaniment to a Melody; Arpeggio Ac-
companiment; Accidentals and Chromatic Passing Notes, A Caution.
Summary.
EXERCISES IN VOCAL SCORE READING. Collected from
the Works of Orlando di L asso, Palestrina, Vittoria,
Bancroft, Bedford, Peter Gorton, Byrd, Gibbons, Croft,
Rogers, Boyce, etc. For Students preparing for the
R.C.O. and other Examinations. By James Lyon,
Mus. Doc. Oxon. 4to, paper covers, 3s.
Although there are books on vocal score reading, in existence, the author
has found the exercises contained in this book— taken from the ivories of
writers of the early contrapuntal school— of the greatest possible value in’
his private teaching, and he ventures to think that students preparing
for diplomas where vocal score rending is required, will welcome such a
collection as this
EXERCISES IN FIGURED BASS AND MELODY HAR-
MOMZATION. By Dr. James Lyon. 4to, paper
covers, 2s.
EXAMPLES OF FOUR PART WRITING FROM FIGURED
BASSES AND GIVEN MELODIES. 4to, paper covers,
4s.
These exercises are printed in open score so as to be of use in score
reading tests. This volume forms a key to “ Exercises in Figured Bass ”
by the same antho


HOW TO COMPOSE. A Practical Guide to the Composi-
tion of all Works within the Lyric Form, and which
include the Valse, Gavotte, Mazurka, Polonaise,
March, Minuet, and all Ordinary Dance Forms; as also
the Nocturne, Impromptu, Berceuse, Beverie and
Similar Characteristic Pieces. By Edwin Evans,
Senior, F.1t.C.0. (author of “The Relation of Tchai-
kovsky to Art-Questions of the Day,” “A Handbook to
Brahms’ Works,” “The Modal Accompaniment to
Plain Chant,” etc.). With 60 Musical Examples.
Crown Bvo, cloth, 2s. 6d. (paper, Is. 6d. net).
This work is a store of the most valuable and practical musical know-
ledge, so condensed as to be of immense utility for its purpose.
The plan adopted is that of gradually developing a full composition
under the render’s own observation; and of explaining to him every
feature as it occurs in such plain terms that the merest average musical
knowledge is alone required for its comprehension. The principles of
this little book me in complete accord with those of the very highest
authorities; and full indices have been provided in order to bring every
fact of its contents within instant reach. Independently of composition
it is of special interest to the general reader ; whilst to the musician and
student it is invaluable. This work is based upon the analogy of the
above to lyrical poetry ; advantage being taken of the reader’s knowledge
of the latter.
“ A daring subject to tackle, and one that in most cases would be
better left alone. We must confess that we opened the book feeling very
sceptical; but the author —who is well known as one of the most thought-
ful of our musical litterateurs— has handled his subject in a manner that
compels our admiration. To the young musician who feels that he has
something to say, we strongly advise the immediate purchase of this
thoughtful and distinctly practical treatise. It will save him from that
loose, meandering, formless music so characteristic, unfortunately, of
many of the early works of our young composers.”—Aberdeen Daily
Journal.
PRONOUNCING DICTIONARY OF MUSICAL TERMS. By
Dr. Dudley Buck. Sixth Edition, with the Pronunciation
of each Term accurately given. Edited and Revised by
A. Whittingham. Crown Bvo, cloth, Is. (paper, 6d.)
A most valuable and useful little book to all musical people. The method
adopted for giving* the correct pronunciation of each term is most concise
and clear.
HARMONY, EASILY AND PROGRESSIVELY ARRANGED.
Presenting in a Simple Manner the Elementary Ideas as
well as the Introduction to the Study of Harmony.
With about 000 Musical Examples and Exercises. By
Paul Colberg. Crown Bvo, cloth, 2s. (paper, Is.)
August Wilhelmj says “ This work distinguished by brevity and
clearness I most warmly recommend it.”


THE RUDIMENTS OF GREGORIAN MUSIC. By Francis
Burgess, F.S.A., Scot. Crown Bvo, 6d.
Plainsong or Gregorian Music, is the generic name given to that great
system of ecclesiastical melody formulated by the primitive Church and
retained in later ages as the official chant for use during the most solemn
acts of Christian worship. As a system it represents the accumulated
knowledge of several centuries usually accounted great by those who
respect tradition and whilst its peculiar and characteristic solemnity
marks it out as an ideal form of sacred music which the modern composer
may study with profit.
“ An entertaining and instructive brochure.”— Burton Daily Mail.
“ A very clear and concise treatise.”— Liverpool Daily Post.
EXERCISES ON GENERAL ELEMENTARY MUSIC. A
Book for Beginners. By K. Paige. Fourth Edition,
Part I. Price 9d. Part 11., price Is. Crown Bvo,
sewed (2 parts complete in cloth, 2s. 4d.)
Contents of Part I.—l. Pitch. 2. Length of Sounds. 3. Time. 4. Time
and Accent. 6. Intervals. 6. Scales. 7. Transposition. S. Syncopation. 9.
Signs and Abbreviations. 10. Notation. 11. Miscellaneous Questions and
Exercises.
Contents of Part ll.—l. Triads. 2. First Inversion of a Triad. 3. Second
Inversion of a Triad. 4. Dissonances. 6. Suspensions. 6. Sequences. 7.
Cadences. 8. Dominant Sevenths, etc., etc.
“ We have much praise not only for the genera! arrangement of the book,
but for the lucid manner in which the questions are put. The Chapters on
Time and Accent are exceedingly good, and there are some useful exercises
.to accustom the pupil to transposition. We are especially pleased, too,
with the method of writing incomplete bars, and asking the pupil to supply
the missing parts with rests; also of requiring notes to be changed into
rests and rests into notes.”— Musical Times.
THE ARI OF MODULATING. A Series of Papers on Modu-
lating at the Pianoforte. By Henry C. Banister.
With 62 Musical Examples. Crown Bvo, limp cloth, 2s.
Moreover in writing a composition there is time to think, devise and
contrive ; but that which is the subject of the above work is promptness,
readiness, and quick thought under special circumstances.
Not only at examinations— viva voce— but in actual experience, is ability
required to pass rapidly with very little “ process ” from one key to
another.
“A great portion of the book is taken up with analyses of the modula-
tions employed by the great composers in their most significant works—
these are always scholarly and ingenious and certainly show how by prac-
tice wedded to adequate knowledge it may be possible to pass rapidly with
very little of what the writer calls ‘ process ’ from one key to another.”—
London Musical Courier.
THE STUDENT’S BOOK OF CHORDS. By Pascal Need-
ham. Crown Bvo, sewed, 6d.
The Author saj’s : —A very large number of music students, executive and
theoretical, have expressed to me from time to time a desire for a cheap
book, in which the chords with their inversions and resolutions are briefly
and clearly exolained. To these students I dedicate this work.


ELEMENTARY MUSIC. A Book for Beginners. By Dr.
Westbrook. With Questions and Vocal Exercises.
Thirteenth Edition. Crown Bvo, cloth, Is. 6d. (paper.
Is.)
Contents:—l. The Staff and its Clefs. 2. Notes and their Rests. 3.
Bars and Time. 4. Accidentals. 5. Keys and Scales. 6. Intervals. 7.
Musical Pitch. 8. Accent. 9. Secondary Signs. 10. Ornaments and Groups
of Notes. 11. Voices and Scores. 12. Church Modes. 13. Italian and other
Directions. 14. Foreign Note-Names. 15. Questions. 16. Vocal Exercises
“ His explanations are extremely clear. The questions at the end will
be found very useful.” —Musical Times.
“ This little primer is one of the best of its kind, and forms an admir-
able course of preparation for the local examinations in music * * * * it
ensures, as far as a book can, an intelligent and thorough grasp of the
elements of musical knowledge. The questions at the end of the book will
be found invaluable to teachers.”— Journal of Trinity College, London.
HOW TO MEMORIZE MUSIC. By C. F. Kenyon. With
numerous Musical Examples. Crown Bvo, cloth, 2s.
(paper, Is.)
‘‘Mr. Kenyon proves himself an excellent guide; and indeed we know
of no other work devoted to the subject with which he has dealt so thor-
oughly and so successfully.” —Glasgow Herald.
“ Points out the paramount importance of being able to play from
memory. 51 any useful hints are given on the course of study to be
adopted.” —Morning Post.
“ A most valuable little book of eight chapters, containing valuable
information on the art of memorising, with many illustrations.” —Western
Morning News.
“ May do much good inducing young pianists to exert their brains to-
gether with their fingers.” —Yorkshire Post.
HARMONY AND THE CLASSIFICATION OF CHORDS.
With Questions and Exercises. By Dr. J. H. Lewis.
Vol. 1, Bvo, boards, cloth back, ss.
Ditto, Vol. 2. Bvo, boards, cloth back, ss.
COUNTERPOINT : A Simple and Intelligible Treatise. Con-
taining the most Important Rules of all Text Books, in
Catechetical Form ; (Forming an Answer to the Question
“What is Counterpoint?”) Intended for Beginners
By A. Livingstone Hirst, Educational
Series, No. 6). Crown Bvo, sewed, Jd.
THE ART OF MODULATION. A Hand-book Showing at a
Glance the Modulations from one Key to any Other in
the Octave, consisting of 1,008 lor the
Use of Organists and Musical Directors Edited by
Carli Zobli.br. Third Edition. Roy. Bvo, cloth, 4s.
(paper, 2s. 6d.)


HOW TO HARMONIZE MELODIES. With Hints on Writ-
ing for Strings and Pianoforte Accompaniments. By
J. Henry Bridger, Mus.Bac. AVith Musical Examples
throughout. Crown Bvo, cloth, 2s. 6d.
The above work deals with a branch of the subject of Harmony which
-in the past received but scant consideration in the standard treatises;
and though of late years works have appeared dealing more or less fully
with the subject, there are some points which, as the result of many
years’ teaching experience, the author considers require to be treated in
greater detail to afford the students the necessary guidance; such, for
example, as the treatment of the cadences and of accidentals. The present
work is an attempt to supply this, and is almost entirely practical.
Chapters : Method of Study — Cadences and Analysis of Melodies — Final
Cadences—Middle Cadences —Harmonization with Primary Chords—Domin-
ant Seventh and Secondary Chords—Use of other Diatonic Discords—Florid
Melodies—-Accidentals, Modulation and Chromatic Chords—Harmonization
in Three and Five Parts—Part-Writing for Strings—Adding Free Accom-
paniments.
“ The book is full of musical examples and to facilitate comparison the
majority of the examples are in the key of C, major or minor.”—
Cheltenham Examiner.
MUSICAL SHORTHAND for Composers, Students of Har-
mony, Counterpoint, etc., can be Written very Rapidly
and is more Legible than printed Music, with Specimens
from Bach, Handel, Chopin, Wagner, Mendelssohn,
Spohr, Mozart, etc. By Francis Taylor, 14 pages,
12mo, sewed, 6d.
“ Composers and Students of Music expend a vast amount of time in mere
painful mechanism.” We have only six totally unlike signs. These from
their simplicity can be written with great rapidity, one dip of the pen
sufficing tor an entire page, and the writing being as legible as possible.—
Preface.
TRANSPOSITION AT SIGHT. For Students of the Organ
and Pianoforte. By H. Ernst Nichol. Third Edition,
with numerous Musical Exercises. Crown Bvo, cloth,
Is. 6d. (paper, Is.)
There is no need to dwell upon the usefulness or even the necessity of
transposition to the organist or the accompanist of songs. The practice of
transposing upon the lines here laid down developes the “ mental ear,”
quickens the musical perception and gives ease in eight-reading; as it is
evident that, if the student can transpose at sight, he will not have much
difficulty in merely playing at sight. The author has made free use of the
tonic sol-fa as well as the old notation in his many musical examnles.
A FIRST ROOK OF MUSIC FOR BEGINNERS, Embodying
Recent English and Continental Teaching. By Alfred
Whittxngham. Sixth Thousand. Crown Bvo, sewed, 2d.
The two principal objects kept in view in writing this little book were
Thoroughness of Definition and Regular Order in the arrangement of Sub-
jects. It differs from all other similar works in that all the technical
terms in music are introduced in the Answers not in the Questions.


MUSICAL ANALYSIS. A Handbook for Students, By
H. C. Banister. With Musical Illustrations. Crown
Byo, limp cloth, 2s.
This series of Papers has not been intended as a Treatise on its bound-
less subject; only illustrative of the way in which students may go to
work in the interesting process of Analysis. To work at it is much more
interesting and improving than to read Analysis already made for them.
The student should look out for beauties, even of the simpler kind, as
well as endeavour to solve recondite problems. Try and enjoy the land-
scape and not merely map out the country.
“ This neatly-got-up volume is indispensable to all students of music. It
is at once thorough and popular, scientific and interesting, and whilst most
instructive, it is charmingly luminous.”— Gentleman’s Journal.
THE STUDENT’S HELMHOLTZ. Musical Acoustics or the
Phenomena of Sound as Connected with Music. B>
John B roadhouse. With more than 100 Illustrations.
Fourth Edition. Crown Bvo, cloth, 7s. (id.
«In his Preface the author says The object of the present book is to
give in'one volume! a good general view of the subject to those who ca
neither spare time to read, nor money to buy a number o: large and
expensive works.’ A perusal of the book justJl.es us in asserting that this
desir.s most satisfactorily earned out; and it is not too muck to say
tint although the plan of the work excludes the possibility of minutely
SsLti " every subject treated upon, any careful reader may obtain so
clear Ln'inslght into the principle of acoustics, as to enable him no only
to pass an examination but to store up a large amount ot general kno
led«e upon the phenomena of sound.”— Musical limes.
“ The Student’s Helmholtz will bo very useful to many
whom much in Helmholtz’s work must appear obscure. Is null
the book whenever an opportunity offers itself. -De. Huile.
This work has been specially designed for musical students preparing
for examination.


YIOLIN.
THE VIOLIN AND OLD VIOLIN MAKERS. Being a His-
torical and Biographical Account of the Violin. By
A. Mason Clarke. With Facsimiles of Labels used by
Old Masters and illustrations of a copy of a Gasparo da
Salo. Crown Bvo, cloth, 2s. net (paper, Is. net).
The Author in his Preface says : “ I set to work with the object of pre-
senting in a concise form such information as I have thought necessary,
or at least of interest to every one who elects to take up the violin either
as an object of recreation or serious study. In order to facilitate my
labours, I have consulted the leading British and foreign authorities on
the violin and kindred instruments. I have also during many vears de-
voted much time to the inspection and study of genuine old instruments.”
Contents: Part I.—Historical. 1. Introductorv and Early English 2
I, y A. J 3 '/!' an f e ' 4 ’ German y- Part ll.—Biographical Violin Makers of
m Old School. 1. Italian, with Labels. 2. German and Tyrolese, with
Labels. 3. French, with Labels. 4. British, with Label. Part lII.—On
Instrumen°t Pment ° f ClaBsical Music for the Violin and other Stringed
THE ART OF HOLDING THE VIOLIN AND BOW AS EX-
EMPLIFIED BY OLE BULL. His Pose and Method
proved to be based on true Anatomical Principles. By
A- B. Crosby, M.D., Professor of Anatomy. Por-
trait, Diagrams and Illustrations. Bvo, cloth, 2s.
(paper, Is.)
of ID the ab ° Ve aie S ° me interestin " recollections and anecdotes
OF THE VIOLIN and other Instruments
Played on with the Bow from the Remotest Times to the
Piesent. Also an Account of the Principal Makers,
English and Foreign. With Coloured Frontispiece and
numerous Full-page Illustrations and Cuts, By William
- andys, F.S.A., and Simon Andrew Forster. 390
pages, Bvo, cloth, 7s. 6d. net (published at 145.)
information FOR PLAYFRS n -p\ *
Makers nf H r LAYfcRS ’ Owners, Dealers and
facturers TnT In f St ™ nts > Als « for String Manu-
and OhsA k f ™ m Personal Experiences, Studies
8 - By WILLIAM Hepw °RTH. With ll-
of MillimetrP Tn a " d Guarnenus Violins and Guage
2s. Gd. and Centlmetres 5 etc. Crow- Bvo, cloth,
7iol^ T Xld^ , T\i 1 P S 8 rB a e r^r Pin F«board~BridB:e-TailPiet,e-Baddle-
itruments in Genera/ Use— Post -On the Stringing of Bow In
the Bridge—Bow—Violin Case r ■ ° Bln T , Cleamn 8" of the Instrument and
ioi,n Case Repairs Preservation— Conclusion.


TECHNICS OF VIOLIN PLAYING. By Karl Courvoisier.
With Illustrations. Tenth Edition. Cloth, 2s. 6d.
(paper, Is.)
“ It is my opinion that this book will offer material aid to all violin
players.”—Joachim.
“ As far as words, aided by diagrams, can make clear so practical a
subject as the playing- of a musical instrument, this little book leaves
nothing to be desired. The author, who was a pupil of Joachim, has
treated the subject in a most thorough manner, and we can highly recom-
mend his little book.” —Educational Times.
“ Illustrated in the clearest possible manner, by really admirable
drawings.”— Graphic.
“ Courvoisier, a pupil of Joachim, has aimed at presenting an exposition
of the methods of that great master, in which attempt he has, according
to Herr Joachim’s own explicit declaration, been very successful.
Scotsman.
“ A most thorough exposition of everything connected with this difficult
instrument.” — Schoolmaster.
TREATISE ON THE STRUCTURE AND PRESERVATION
OF THE VIOLIN and all other Bow Instruments. To-
gether with an Account of the most Celebrated Makers
and of the Genuine Characteristics of their Instruments
By J. A. Otto, with Additions by J. Bishop. V ith
Diagrams and Plates. Fourth Edition, further En-
larged. Crown Bvo, cloth, 3s.
Contains instructions for the repair, preservation and brinpii* out the
tone of instruments ; tracing model for violin mutes and fiddle holde ,
list of classical works for stringed instruments. This woik is especial y
valuable for makers of violins.
HOW TO PLAY THE FIDDLE. For Beginners on the
Violin. By H. W. and G. Gresswell. Eighth Edition.
Crown Bvo, cloth, 2s. (paper, Is.)
Joachim says “ Contains many Teaching Violin-On In-
Contf.nts -General and Introductory , . Violin Im-
struction Books-On ™"vita
portanoe of Buying a Good One How Testing 0 r Making Trial
--The Merits of Old Fiddles Age and " d Historical-
of a Fiddle-Preservation and Repair of History of Some Celc-
Few Short Remarks of a General Charac g d p 0 Bridge—
brated Violin Makers-The Sound Bar and F f°"erb o ard-The Strings-
A Few Words on the Pegs, Mute, esin The °Method of Tuning the
The Mode of Stringing-The Bow-Bowing- fhe Method "^.^Har-
Violin—Some Rules to be Observed b pi av ing with an Accom-
monics-Remarks on the Shift-The Shake-On Playing
paniment-Concluding Observations. w ho are
“ We can cordially recommend this clever i e wor
studying the violin.” — Graphic.
FACTS ABOUT FIDDLES. Violins Old aTld
Broadhouse. Fourth Edition. Crown Bvo, sewed, bd.


THE VIOLIN, Its History and Construction. Illustrated
and Described from all Sources. Together with a List
of Tyrolese and Italian Makers. With Twenty-nine Il-
lustrations and Folding Example of the First Music
Issued for the Lute, Viol and Voice. From the German.
of A itki k and Niederheitman. By John Broadhouse.
Crown Bvo, cloth, 2s.
“ The learned and instructive treatise of Abele, skilfully rendered by
J. Broadhouse and supplemented by a version of Nioderlieitmann’s list of
Italian and Tyrolese violin makers, a compilation invaluable to collectors
and connoisseurs of rare fiddles * * * a work wlfich forms a noteworthy
addition to the small number of English books upon tills interesting
subject.”— Scotsman.
The importance of this work has been long recognised on the Continent,
where it is eagerly sought for at a high price. The above is a full trans-
lation, special attention has been given to a proper rendering of technical
portions.
HOW TO MAKE A VIOLIN, Practically Treated. By J.
Broadhouse. New and Revised Edition. With -17 il-
lustrations and Folding Plates and many Diagrams,
Figures, etc. Crown Bvo, bevelled cloth, 3s. 6d.
Contents: —Introduction—The Parts of the Violin—On the Selection of
Wood—The Tools Required—The Models—The Mould—The Side-pieces and
Side Linings—The Back—Of the Belly —The Thickness of the Back and
Belly—The Bass Bar—The Purfling—The Neck—The Finger Board—The
Nut and String Guard—Varnishing and Polishing—Varnishes and Colour-
ing Matter—The Varnish—A Mathematical Method of Constructing the
Outline—The Remaining Accessories of the Violin.
This new edition has had the advantage of being revised throughout by
a celebrated violin maker.
THE VIOLIN AND STRING WORLD. Monthly (in Continu-
ation of “The Violin Times.”) With Portrait Supple-
ments. Annual Subscription 2s. 6d. (Abroad 35.)
SKETCHES OF GREAT VIOLINISTS AND GREAT
PIANISTS. See “Biographical Section.”
STRADIVARI US. By Fetis. See “Biographical Section.”
BIOGRAPHICAL DICTIONARY OF FIDDLERS. See “Bio-
graphical Section.”
VIOLIN MANUFACTURE IN ITALY and its German Origin.
By Dr. E. Schebek. Translated bv W. E. Lawson.
Second Edition. Square 12mo, cloth, 2s. (paper, Is.)
HOW TO REPAIR VIOLINS and other Musical Instruments.
By Alfred F. Common. With Diagrams. Crown Bvo.
cloth, 2s. (paper, Is.)


VOCAL.
THE THROAT IN ITS RELATION TO SINGING. A Series
of Popular Papers. By Whitfield Ward, A.M., M.D.
With Illustrations. Crown Bvo, cloth, 2s. (paper, Is.).
Contents; Anatomical Structure of the Throat; What we see with the
Laryngoscope ; How we Sing ; How we Breathe ; How to take Care of the
Voice; Hints to Voice Builders; How the Voice is Destroyed; Common
Throat Affections of Singers, together with their Treatment, etc.
TWELVE LESSONS ON BREATHING AND BREATH CON-
TROL. For Singers, Speakers and Teachers. By Geo.
E. Thorp. Crown Bvo, limp cloth, Is.
TWENTY LESSONS ON THE DEVELOPMENT OE THE
VOICE. For Singers, Speakers and Teachers. By
Geo. E. Thorp. Crown Bvo, limp cloth, Is.
Mr Thorp’s two books have from time to time been recommended by
various eminent vocal specialists as giving practical aid and advice for
the training, care and development of the voice. They are free from any
biased “ system ” or “ discovery.”
TREATISE ON THE TRAINING OF BOY’S VOICES. With
Examples and Exercises and Chapters on Choir-Organ-
ization. Compiled for the Use of Choirmasters, y
George T. Fleming. Crown Bvo, cloth, 2s.
GRADUATED COURSE OF EXERCISES FOR BO\
CHORISTERS. With Pianoforte Accompaniment.
For Use in Conjunction with Above. By G.
Fleming. 4to, album, sewed, Is.
Ditto, Boy’s Voice Part only, 6d.
MUSICAI HINTS TO CLERGYMEN. Management of
69 “c".action of Male Voices, Manxmen J*
the Voice, The Service. With twenty specially written
Exercises. By Geo. F. Grover. Crown Bvo, sewed, Is.
SOME FAMOUS SONGS. An Art Historical Sketch. By
F. R. Ritter. Bvo, sewed, Is.
HOW TO MANAGE A CHORAL SOCIETY. By N.
mL boc Third Edition. Revised. Crown Bvo, sewed,
6d.
HOW TO SING AN ENGLISH BALLAD. By E. PBiir,
Edition. Crown Bvo, sewed, bd.
teevenrn duuu) , brighter gems than those which
“ Tt wou,< ? be difficult to find a o "-multrated London News.
lie within the cover of this little wor


PHYSICAL DEVELOPMENT IN DELATION TO PERFECT
VOICE PRODUCTION. By H. Travers Adams, B.A.
Bvo, sewed, 2s. net.
.n^ i 8 for student « and is divided into section.,
such as Vibration, Breaks and Registers, The Speaking Voice, Attack
Practical Application, Breathing, Inspiration, Final Exercise in Inspira-
Pr °r; ti EXPl f ra^° n ’/ C^ e ° r Foroed Inspiration, Completion of Breathing.
Practice of Sounds. Placing, Classification of Voices.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE FLORID SONG. Or Sentiments
on the Ancient and Modern Singers. By P. F. Tosi.
Translated by Mr. Galliard. With folding Musical
Examples. 184 pages. A Reprint of this Celebrated
Book, first published in 1743. Crown Bvo, boards with
vellum-like back, price 6s. (pub. 10s),
lafe'harieTtfnn 0 311 StUdeDtS ° f Method of by the
fro m frequently been treated to quotations
from this remarkable wont. To the teacher and student of singing- it has
a pccahar message. It stands for all that is sound and final fn the nhd
changeless Sln Thof e a wh Bh ° W ,f th ? t the ffisthetics and “orals of the art are
reprift oTa work & h ! althful “«*“tal stimulus should read this
old Italian sine-ers mil “presents the best thought and practice of the
oju Italian smgeis and singing masters.”— The Etude.
bodiis practical .treatise on singing in which the aged teacher em-
he art was nroban rIC,!Ce tha * ° f M 9 ““temporaries at a time when
Manv ofTts rp!!! 7 m °re thoroughly taught than it has ever been since.
ld VuZral WoUld BtlU be hi?hly Nonary of
CATECHISM OF PART SINGING. And the Choral Services.
y John Hides. Third Edition. Thick post Bvo,
sewed, price Is.
SinfferS 0,1 ever - v point of interest in reference to the vocal
VOICE PRODUCTION AND VOWEL ENUNCIATION. By
T. F. Mewbxirn Levien. Diagrams by Arthur C. Beh-
rens. Post Bvo, sewed, 6d.
VOCAL EXERCISES FOR CHOIRS AND SCHOOLS. By Dr.
Westbrook. Post Bvo, sewed, 2d.
RUDIMENTS OF VOCAL MUSIC. With 42 Preparatory
Exercises. Rounds and Songs in the Treble Clef. By
1. Mee Pattison. Second Edition. Post Bvo, sewed, 2d.


WAGNER.
JUDAISM IN MUSIC. Being the Original Essay together
with the Later Supplement. By Richard "Wagner.
- Translated from the German (Das Judenthum in der
Musik) and Furnished with Explanatory Notes and In-
troduction. By E. Evans, Senior. Crown Bvo, cloth,
3s. 6d.
“ It at last becomes possible calmly to seek to draw from this essay
those valuable lessons relating to art-culture which are therein contained,
not in that aspect of the main subject by which Wagner was most ex-
cited or his adversaries most offended, but in those subsidiary references
and explanations by means of which he then thought merely to support
his case but to which time has given a greater value than to the case
itself The noise and disturbance created by the publication of the above
work drew public attention for the first time to Wagner s prose writings
and created a demand which has continued ever since.
“This ‘human document’ shows Wagner in a pecuMarly personal light
and as such it will be read with interest by those who believe that the
composer of the ‘ King ’ never wrote anything which is not worth reading.
credit' tS ZT also be given to the translator for the evident care and
impartiality with which he has annotated both the origina esaay an
sunnlement his footnotes being of a kind, indeed, to help the reader
uppSo“bly to a correct under.t.udlug .1 line ot thought .««
from
have tried know the difficulties of Wagner’s prose .... veiy illumin
ating footnotes.” —Cheltenham Examiner.
BAYREUTH AND MUNICH. A Travelling Record of Ger-
man Operatic Art. By Vernon Blackburn. Crown
Bvo, stiff boards, Is. net.
1. Tb. Phllo.oph,
mgroSor?. ®.* «• t "° a ‘ p ““-
THREE IMPRESSIONS OF BAYREUTH. The 1908 ami
Previous Wagner Festivals. By Bose Xotw . ' «
Two Facsimile Programmes. Crown B\o, c ,
.. -nzrzr ** - *
musical and susceptible hearer /'-Yorkshire Post.
cal Examples. By Gustave Ivobbe. Sisth
Post Bvo, bevelled cloth, gilt top, 3s. .
To be appreciated in the smallest wav Wagner must be studied
advance.


WAGNER. “ Der Ring des Nibelungen.” Being the story
concisely told of “Das Rheingold,” “Die Walkiire,”
“Siegfried” and “ Gotterdammerung.” By N. Kil-
burn. Crown Bvo, sewed, 9d. net.
WAGNER. A Sketch of his Life and Works. By N. Kil-
burn. Sewed, 6d.
WAGNER’S “ PARSIFAL.” And the Bayreuth Fest-Spiel-
haus. By N. Kilburn. Crown Bvo, sewed, 6d.
BEETHOVEN. By Richard Wagner. See “ Biographical ”
Section.
ON CONDUCTING. By Richard Wagner. See “Orches-
tral ” Section.
WAGNER. See “ Makers of Music.” (“ Biographical ” Sect.)
, ; See “Mezzotints in Modern Music.” (Esthetics,
etc., Section.)


MISCELLANEOUS.
M VNUSCRIPT MUSIC PAPER.
(a) 12 Staves. Roy. Bvo (10 by 64). Ruled even, 5
quires (120 sheets), the lot 2s. 6d.
This is pre-eminently the Musical Students’ Paper, as it is light, port
able, smooth and easy to write upon; each sheet, too, will hold a large
quantity of matter. There is no paper better suited for Exercises on
Counterpoint and Harmony.
( h) 12 Staves. Oblong folio (14 by 10). Ruled in
groups of 3 Staves for Organ Music. 5 quires
(120 sheets), the lot ss.
The paper is of the same size as ordinary oblong folio, Organ Music,
e.g ., Boat’s Arrangements, etc.
(c) 12 Staves. Folio music size ruled in threes (10 by
14). 5 quires (120 sheets), the lot, ss.
Exactly the same in size as ordinary folio printed music so that upon it
Songs or Organ Pieces may be written just as they are to be printed. It
is a very useful paper, as Manuscript music written on it can be bound
with Printed Music.
(d) 12 Staves. Quarto size (11® by 9J). 5 quires (120
sheets), the lot, 3s. Cd.
(e) 12 Staves. Oblong quarto (9J by Ilf). 5 quires
(120 sheets), the lot 3s. 6d.
(f) 12 Staves. Folio music size, ruled even (10 by 14).
5 quires (120 sheets), the lot ss.
(p) 12 Staves. Folio music size, full score, 24 staves
(10 by 14). 5 qtiires (120 sheets), the lot ss.
(/i) 14 Staves. Quarto size (Ilf by 9J). 5 quires (120
sheets), the lot 3s. 6d.
MANUSCRIPT MUSIC BOOKS. Quarto size, 6d. ; Octavo
size, 6d. and 3d.; Brass Band books, 3d.; Exercise book,
oblong, 4d.
CHOIR ATTENDANCE REGISTER.
No. 1. Ruled for a Choir of 20 or less for One Year,
beginning at any date. Is. 6d.
No. 2. Ruled for a Choir of 40 or less, for One Year,
beginning at any date. 2s.
No. 3. Ruled for a Choir of 60 or less, for One Year,
beginning at any date. 2s. 6d.
CHOIR LISTS FOR SUNDAY SERVICES.
No. 1. Morn, and Even. Printed inßed_ * s - 4d. Pe r^.
No 2 Morn., Aft. & Even. Printed in Red. Is. 6d. per 100.
No. 3. Morn. & Even. Printed Red & Black Is. Bd. per 100.
No. 4. Morn, and Even. Printed in Red. xs. 4d. pei 100.
47


ANNOUNCEMENTS.
Continued from page 2.
A COMPARATIVE VIEW OF THE DEVELOPMENT OF
OPERA IN ITALY, GERMANY, FRANCE AND ENG-
LAND. By Joseph Goddard. Showing the Cause of
the Falling Back of the English School in the Modern
Period; and the Compensation which that Falling Back
Involved. With numerous Musical Examples.
HANDBOOK TO THE VOCAL WORKS OF BRAHMS. A
Historical and Descriptive Account and Complete
Analysis of every Vocal Work of Brahms. Treated in
the Order of their Opus Numbers. With many Ori-
ginal Translations of the Words. By Edwin Evans,
Senr. Thick Bvo, cloth.
MUSIC DURING THE VICTORIAN ERA. Being the
Memoirs of J. W. Davison, Forty Years Musical Critic
of “The Times.” By his Son, Henry Davison. With
numerous Portraits and Facsimiles. Thick Bvo, cloth.
THE NATIONAL MUSIC OF THE WORLD. By H. F.
Chorley. Edited by H. O. Hewlett. Contains many
Musical Illustrations. New Edition with Index. Crown
Bvo, cloth, 6s. 1911
The subject matter of the above volume is treated of under the divi-
sions of Music from the East, Music from the South, Music from the
North, and Music from the West.
THE HISTORY OF THE VIOLONCELLO, Together with a
Full Account of all the Most Eminent Violoncellists
from the Earliest Times to the Present. Containing
the Results of Original Research and Study. By E.
van der Straeten. Illustrated throughout by a large
number of Portraits from Early Engravings, Private
Collections and Original Paintings. Facsimiles of Ori-
ginal Manuscripts, Autograph Letters and much other
matter Published for the First Time. Thick Bvo, cloth,
a handsome volume, the like of which on this subject
is not to be found in any other language.
Printti hy the New Temple Press , Grant Road, Croydon. 5000—5—11
48








