



Cpr-






THE ROAD TO WIDGEWONG






u i j «pBHfe jp ' , 9s^
if ,' i iJr *™b5&-
WESt * 'W
.fiH| W &&&' ,. i»wwB
( -K;- ,„' .1®^?
« jeF jjg 4B ■ >*
' '"' , -• WL j if 'X i
”***■ ■ fi m j®
’* ,. -^nL'■ ik • ■■
jg||^|^^|||||^^
“HAVE YOU SEEN ANYTHING OF THOSE TWO BOYS


THE ROAD
TO WIDGEWONG
LESLIE LEE
AUSTRALIA:
CORNSTALK PUBLISHING COMPANY
89 CASTLEREAGH STREET, SYDNEY


' >
c
■ 15:.. 1""° •:
w „ #
Wholly set up and printed in Australia
Eagle Press Ltd., Allen St., Waterloo
for
Cornstalk Publishing Company
89 Castlereagh Street, Sydney
Registered by the Postmaster-General for
transmission through the post as a boo*


TO
MY DEAR SON
DAVID




CONTENTS
TWO BOYS IN TROUBLE
MR. RODGER IS TOO KIND
BUYING A BILLY-CAN
THE SKELETON IN THE BUSH .. ..• • :
OLD TROMBONE MAKES FRIENDS ..• • ■
AFRAID OF DINGOES
SNAKE YARNS AND HUNGER .... • • 1
BUSHED .. .. .. .. • • • • 1
THE ROAD AT LAST
MYSTERY OF THE SKELETON IS SOLVED
JIM’S DOG CLAIMS FRIENDSHIP ..
MORE TROUBLE WITH TRAINS
TRAMPING AT NIGHT —TALKING SWAGGIE .. 1
WORK .. .. • • • • • • 1
QUEER SW AGGIES AND AMUSING BIRDS . . . - 1
KING BILLY OP BURRAWONDILLY . . . . 1
TRAMPING WITH BLACKFELLOWS . . . . 1
BAD SW AGGIE STEALS THE RIFLE .. .. 1
KING BILLY TO THE RESCUE .. .. •. 1
A GATHERING OF MUSICIANS .. .. • • 1
THE SW AGGIES’ CONCERT . . . . - • 1
A NIGHT UNDER A BRIDGE —AND AFTER .. 1
LOCKED UP FOR EATING LAMB .. .. .. 2
ESCAPE .. .. .. • • • • 2
THE BUSH-FIRE .. . . . - .. 2
STICKING TO THE BLACKFELLOWS .. .. 2
A POLICEMAN VISITS CAMP .. .. . • 2
SICK, LOST, AND STARVING .. .. .. 2
KING BILLY IS THE HERO .. .. •• 2




CHAPTER I
TWO BOYS IN TROUBLE
It’s an awful thing to have your dad taken away
suddenly by death, so that you 11 never see him
again in this life; that is what happened to me. It
was the biggest trouble I ever had. But it was
worse for mother.
Then mother got aunty and sister Polly and
young Jim to live with her on the selection. Aunty
was an old maid, and was living by herself, any-
how. They had Old Bill to do the heavy work.
Although he was old he was strong enough. And
he lived in a little bark humpy by himself, which
was all I knew about him though he knew a lot
about everything.
Mother reckoned she would keep Jim for the
farm and give me a chance in Sydney, though she
could hardly spare me, and it hurt to be so far
away from each other. She wrote to Mrs. Jones,
who said she could get me into an office, so I went
to Jones’s to live.
Mr. Fallow’s office had two girls in it who typed
letters and things on typewriters, which were the


first I had seen; he had men in his office, too,
though they were out of it most of the time with
persons called clients. This was where I went to
work.
Bob lived in the same street as the Joneses; he
was still going to school, when Old Bones would
let him, which was when he wasn’t drunk; Bob was
often away from school.
Why Bob lived with Bones I don’t know;
he was pretty miserable there. I often asked him
how he’d like to go with me out into the country
where there were bush and birds, paddocks and
creeks, hills and gullies and everything; he said he
would like it, so I promised to take him to Widge-
wong with me if ever I got any holidays. It hap-
pened that we went before then, in a big hurry,
because we both struck trouble on the same day.
Mr. Fallow was a take-down, as I soon found out;
the girls talked about him, though they helped him
just the same. One day he made a sick-looking man
pay sixty pounds deposit on a business that wasn’t
any good, and when the man found this out he
wanted his money back; but Mr. Fallow wouldn’t
give it back.
The man hung about the office for three days,
and he was very miserable. He came in one day
while Mr. Fallow was out, and begged of Miss Jen-
kins to help him, but she said that she couldn’t. So
he went away looking more miserable than ever,
and I asked Miss Jenkins if he was very poor.


“Oh, his is a pretty bad case, all right,” she said,
“out of work for months, and thought he d better
buy a business with the last of his savings so as to
have a job; the boss got his cash, he got nothing.
Now the poor chump says his wife and children are
starving and wants his money back.”
“Won’t the boss give it to him?” I asked.
“What!” said she, “Here, take this money to the
bank and don’t ask any more silly questions.”
Well, I took the little bag which had the bank-
book and the money in it, and Miss Jenkins told me
to be careful because there were sixty pounds in
notes in the deposit. So I was careful, and made
straight for the bank, for I was proud of being
trusted to do this job.
Along the street I saw the miserable man, and
I wondered if Miss Jenkins was right about his
wife and children. I stopped and asked him, and
he said it was true, God help them!
I know well enough I shouldn’t have done it,
because the money wasn’t mine; but I took the
bundle of notes from the bag and gave them to
the man, because they should have been his, sure
as life. He was so upset that he nearly let the
bundle drop; he caught hold (of my hand, and
shook it, and said something about God blessing
me, then cleared for his life —or for his money at
any rate.
The bank was only a hundred yards farther on,
so I hurried there, because it was near to three


o’clock. But when I was inside I remembered
that I’d have to tell the bank-clerk what I had
done, or tell a lie. I dodged both by returning
to the office, very slowly and full of thinking.
Putting the bag into the safe, where it would
remain without being touched, till at least next
day, I told Miss Jenkins that I felt very sick and
wanted to go home.
“Too many meat-pies, that’s what’s up with you,
by the look of you!” said she.
“Might be,” said I.
“You’ve put the bag back in the safe?”
“Yes.” said I.
“All right, you may go, but mind you’re here
early in the morning!” said she.
I went; and I did feel sick, so I didn’t tell a lie
about that, anyhow.
Reaching our back lane I sat on the kerb and
thought about everything in my life; and I won-
dered why I hadn’t seen Bob for two days, though
I guessed that Old Bones had locked him in again
and given him a hiding, which was a habit he had.
Dad never used to thrash me, or even cuff me.
Our schoolmaster never thrashed boys, either;
but he’d tell us we were not just animals, but
human beings, and should know right from wrong;
if we didn’t know he was there to tell us; then
if we did wrong we should feel ashamed of our-
selves and say a good prayer and start again.
Sometimes I tried it.


By and by I went in to tea, which was early
because the Joneses were going out. Mrs. Jones
said she was glad I was home, and asked me to
keep an eye on the place till they came back. I
said I would, but when they had gone I went back
to the lane and sat on the kerb again. I reckoned
I’d have another try to find out what was wrong
with Bob, though Old Bones had said he’d tan my
hide if he caught me hanging about the gate.
Wondering about Bob made me forget my own
troubles for a time. I reckoned that the best thing
to do would be to go and tell a policeman about
the way Bob was treated, then the policeman
would have Old Bones punished and Bob set free.
But I remembered that I couldn’t tell about myself,
because Mr. Fallow would be sure to say I stole
the money, and maybe I’d be put in gaol for it. Still,
I could tell about Bob, then clear back to Widge-
wong, and mother would make things right again.
With thoughts like those, which kept coming and
going over and over again, more minutes passed
than I knew; and still I had not decided what to
do.
Old Bill used to say that troubles would unravel
themselves if you’d let them; and that’s what
happened this time, for Bob came up the lane,
carrying a bundle, and I was jolly pleased to see
him.
“I’m oflf Joe!” said he
“How?” I asked.


“I’ve got to clear out now, so I’ve just come to
say good-bye.”
“Why, what’s up?”
“He was going to belt me, so I tried to dodge
him, but bumped him. He fell down the steps
and cracked his head open on the bricks. He’s
dead, all right!”
“Gee!” said I.
“So now if I don’t clear out I’ll be put in jail
for life,” said Bob.
“And if you go into the bush you 11 be lost and
starved to death,” said I.
Had I done right, I’d have told Bob to go and
tell the big policeman all about it, because it was
only an accident, and Old Bones himself was to
blame; but I didn’t do right.
“You’re in a fix now, Bob, said I.
“Sure enough, I am,” said Bob.
“I thought he must have had you locked up
again.”
“For two days; and then he was going to finish
up by giving me a hiding.”
“Well, he can’t hurt you now.”
“I don’t know,” said Bob; “at least, I mean if
I got caught and put in jail I’ll be hurt pretty
badly.”
“To be locked up in jail must be terrible,” said
“Well, good-bye Joe! I’d better be going!
“We’d better be going, you ought to say, Bob.”


“Why, what do you mean, Joe; you’ve done
nothing!”
“Perhaps I haven’t; but I was going to write
to mother and ask her if I could go back to Widge-
wong. Now we’ll both go.”
“Well, we’d better be quick,” said Bob, looking
pleased.
“We will be quick,” said I. “The Joneses are
up the street, so come in with me and get some
things and we’ll soon be out of this.”
We were soon in my little room on the back
veranda. Bob helped me turn out my box of
clothes and things while w r e decided what we
should take with us, for we couldn’t carry much.
It would have been fun to have a big swag of
blue blankets each, and a black billy, and a flour-
bag for tucker; then we would have been “humping
the bluey,” all right.
But there were no blue blankets, and no billy-
cans. There were two rugs on my bed, so we took
one each, and rolled extra clothes inside them.
I had a good leather belt which I put around
my waist, though I had braces on as well. Into
a calico bag that mother had made for me so as
to keep things tidy, I put all the handkerchiefs I
could find; also an old fishing-line and a few other
little things that might be handy. I put into my
pocket a good big clasp-knife and all the money
I had saved from what mother used to send me
each little while; and I didn’t forget matches.


“I hope we shan’t be caught, said Bob.
“We won’t be caught,” said I, “but we had better
hurry, because we must be miles away in the bush
before morning.”
As it was nearly dark we lost no more time,
we shouldered our swags, as we called our rugs,
and sneaked out the back way.
While passing through the yard Bob saw young
Bill’s new tomahawk sticking into a block of
wood.
“We must have this tomahawk, Joe,” said he.
“Right, Bob, bring it,” said I, though I knew it
was neither his nor mine; but a swaggie must have
a tomahawk.
Reaching the back gate, and looking over the
lights of the city into the blackness, we wondered
which was the quickest way to the bush; but we
didn’t stop to wonder —we did it while going, be-
cause time was precious, though the world was
full of it.
We were lucky enough to get out of Hickey-lane
without being seen; but we struck trouble at the
corner of the street, for some boys were there
who knew us, and we saw them too late to dodge.
“Hello Joe! Hello Bob! Where to?”
“Oh, we’re just going to Manly for a trip,”
said I.
“Camping are you?” said one.
“Dicken!” said another.
“Yes, camping,” said Bob.


“Sure enough,” said I.
“Gee, you’re lucky! I wish I was going”
“We’ve got to hurry or we’ll miss the boat,
said I.
Some of them walked a little way with us, ask-
ing questions, but they soon got tired and left us
to ourselves.
“Now we’ve been seen escaping,” said Bob
“Well, I put them off the scent, because we’re
not going to Manly; so perhaps it is lucky that
we were seen.”
“Hope you’re right,” said Bob.
Then we were silent as we went on, because it
did not seem a good time to be talking.


CHAPTER II
MR. PODGER IS TOO KIND
Walking along back streets, we arrived near the
railway-station from where all the trains start that
go to the country and to Queensland, and Vic-
toria, and South Australia. It was lucky for us
that we didn’t meet trouble on the way, for the
back streets were often full of robbers and bad
people, who’d knock you down for sixpence and
wouldn’t pick you up for a shilling—as Old Bill
would have said.
Before going on to the railway-station we stood
awhile in the shadow of a tall building, and won-
dered if it would be safe to buy tickets to some-
where, just as if we had nothing to be afraid of,
though I had only twenty-six shillings and Bob
had no money.
As we couldn’t decide, and couldn’t stand there
talking all night, we went on and trusted to luck
which is a risky thing to do when you are un-
lucky, as we were.
There was such a mixed-up crowd of people on
the platform that two boys carrying rug-swags


shouldn’t have made anyone suspicious but we
thought that every one who looked at us new we
were running away, and we began to be scared.
I looked about and still wondered what we shou
do. Seeing a notice about the Cooma mail, I told
Bob that Widgewong was on the same line though
not so far away as Cooma.
“Well, that’s the train for us,” said Bob.
“And that’s the train we’il take,” said I, and
chance it!
After a little bother we found the ticket-office,
and bought two tickets for Campbelltown, for I
had decided to do what a shearer once told me he
had done. It wasn’t a right thing to do, but I
couldn’t help that.
We bought some things to eat, also, then got
into a carriage and hoped the train would soon
start.
A ticket-man came along and looked at our
tickets, and at us, and at our tickets again.
“Anyone with you?” says he.
“We’re with each other,” says I.
“You’re in the wrong carriage,” says he.
He explained that we were in a first-class car-
riage, though our tickets were for second-class,
which I had not thought of. So we had to change.
Three men were in the carriage into which the
ticket-man put us; but they were all on one side
and didn’t take much notice of us.
Bob and I settled into a corner and were be-


ginning to feel comfortable in body and easy in
mind, when Mr. Podger got in with a lot of lug-
gage, and he nearly fixed us for good. It was lucky
for us that the train started as soon as he and his
luggage were all aboard.
I was whispering to Bob about our tickets, telling
him of my plan to go a lot farther than Campbell-
town, when Mr. Podger leaned over and patted
Bob and said something about him being a nice
boy and a clever boy.
“And where do you think you are going?” asked
Mr. Podger.
“Cooma,” said Bob.
“Oh!” said Mr. Podger, nodding towards the
other men, “and is that your father—or your uncle,
perhaps ?”
No, said Bob, “they don’t belong to us.”
“We’ re by ourselves,” said I.
And you’re going to Cooma,” said Mr. Podger.
“Yes.”
“That’s a long way for two little boys—a long
way; but I’m going there too; I live there.”
We didn’t say anything. Bob looked at me as
if he thought I had better do the talking, but I
thought I’d better say nothing, then I couldn’t be
sorr} for what I said. We pretended to be
sleepy.
But Mr. Podger wouldn’t leave us alone. He
leaned over a bit closer and smiled.
Sleepy, eh:' he asked; “well, you’ll have plenty


of time to sleep by and by. I’ll look after you.
My name’s Podger, Mr. George Podger—what s
yours? ,
When Mr. Podger told us his name he sat up
straight, swelled his chest and looked towards the
other passengers, then smiled at us and patted Bo
on the head again.
We didn’t answer Mr. Podger’s question, but
that didn’t stop him asking another.
“And who are your friends in Cooma?
“The Godfreys,” said I, which was the first name
I could think of, perhaps because a Mr. Godfrey
had been my schoolmaster.
“Godfrey —Godfrey,” repeated Mr. Podger, as if
trying to remember. “That is strange very. In
what part of Cooma do they live?”
“Oh, they live a good bit out of Cooma,” said
I. seeing that I had made a mistake.
“Don’t know them,” said Mr. Podger, “and I
know every man, woman, and child for fifty miles
around.”
“Well the Godfreys are just sixty miles out from
Cooma,” said I, thinking I was very smart.
“Is that so?” said Mr. Podger. “On which
road?”
“On the Kosciusko road.”
“Hum!” said Mr. Podger. “And what is your
name?”
“Charles Godfrey,” said I, remembering, when
too late, that Bob had spoken my name.


“Ho!” said Mr. Podger, “Bob calls you ‘Joe’ for
short, I suppose?”
“Yes,” said I, “it is just a nickname.”
“Who got you ready to come on this journey?”
“Mother did.”
Huh! And she didn’t make you wash your face
and clean your boots and brush your clothes and
put on a clean shirt, eh?”
“No.”
“Did your mother give you any money for the
journey?”
When Mr. Podger asked that question I won-
dered if he was one of those flash robbers who
get chummy with strangers so as to be able to
take all their money easily, and kill them perhaps;
so I didn t tell him I had about a pound in my
pocket.
Only a shilling; but she bought us some cakes
and peanuts and chocolates to eat in the train.”
Huh-huh! said Mr. Podger; “you are not telling
the truth. Now own up, and tell me everything,
or I’ll hand you over to the police at the next
stop.”
I didn’t answer, because I was too scared to tell
any more lies. So Mr. Podger asked Bob to own
up and shame his big brother.
“My brother doesn’t tell lies,” said Bob.
“Hum-m-m !” said Mr. Podger. “H’m-m-m ! well,
I H look after you and see you safely there. Now


let us have some sandwiches, then we’ll have an-
other talk.”
Mr. Podger opened a bag and took out of it
sandwiches and cakes and a flask of hot coffee.
This was the first time I had seen a flask for keep-
ing things hot —they are good, all right.
Bob and I ate as much as Mr. Podger gave us;
though we did not like him, his tucker was good.
We also had a drink of coffee, which was almost
too hot to swallow, and it made us feel bettej,
but I was still uneasy about Mr. Podger, because
I thought he might really hand us over to the
police. I wondered how we might escape from
him, for he was sure to make trouble for us,
anyhow.
While Mr. Podger was busy drinking the last
of his coffee, Bob nudged me with his elbow and
whispered,
“What will we do, Joe?”
“Sh! Wait!” said I.
After Mr. Podger had finished his refreshment
he became drowsy. The other passengers were
asleep, and we wished that Mr. Podger would go
to sleep, too.
Mr. Podger was very fat; his stomach wobbled
about with the rocking of the train; he folded his
hands across it, leaned back in his seat and blinked
at Bob and me till by and by his eyes kept shut.


“Bob!” I whispered, “If he stays asleep we’ll
get out at the next station and chance it.”
“Good!” whispered Bob.
Then we kept quiet and pretended to be very
sleepy. After a time the train stopped. Mr.
Podger awoke and blinked at Bob and me, and
looked at his watch, before we had time to stand.
When the train left the station he went to sleep
again.
Each time the train stopped Mr. Podger awoke,
though he was fast asleep while it was going;
and we wondered if he would keep that game up
all the way to Cooma, because we wanted to get
out like anything.
After a long time we stopped at a big station
with a lot of lights about it. Air. Podger woke
again, but this time he kept awake. We expected
something bad would happen, because we were
now so scared of Mr. Podger nothing he did
pleased us; but he was in a good humour this time,
and no mistake.
“Ha! Refreshments soon—next station. Are
you going to have any refreshments, boys?”
We didn’t answer because we did not know
what he meant or what he might try to lead us
into; but he did not seem to mind.
“Hum ! Good boys, though foolish—very foolish;
but I’ll see you through, and we’ll have a good
talk soon. In the meantime you’re in my charge,
boys—remember that!”


Mr. Podger seemed to claim us just as if he
had picked us up somewhere, and we could not
understand him at all; but I suppose he couldn’t
understand us, either, after the whoppers we had
told him.
The train stopped at another big station and a
man called out:
“Ten minutes for refreshments!
Nearly everybody got out of the train and hur-
ried along the platform. All the passengers in
our carriage got out. As Mr. Podger went he
told us to stay there and be good boys and he would
bring us back some nice hot-pies and coffee.
“Thank you!” said I.
As soon as Mr. Podger was out of sight we left
the carriage, going along the platform the opposite
way as quickly as we could, and taking our swags
with us.
When we were past the train we came to the
end of the platform, and on to the railway track,
where it was much darker. On the opposite line
a train of trucks was waiting; some of the trucks
were piled up with goods, while others seemed to
have only a little in them.
“Now is our chance,” I said to Bob; “let us climb
into one of these low trucks and trust to luck!”
There I was again, trusting to luck when I should
have used common sense.
We got into a truck, and the train started almost
at once, which did seem a bit of luck after all our


troubles. But as I listened to the engines puffing
up the line and down the line, and watched the red
lights and green lights, I saw there was no luck
for us in railway travelling.
The goods-train was taking us back toward
Sydney, and we couldn’t jump off without killing
ourselves.


CHAPTER 111
BUYING A BILLY-CAN
Well, it was no use grumbling; when luck is
against you the only thing to do is to keep on
trying your best and take no notice of the bad luck.
That will make it turn all the sooner.
Of course it was worse for Bob than for me,
because he thought his trouble meant jail for life
or hanging for death, and neither would do a boy
much good in this world.
The night was black as ink; but there were
plenty of stars in the sky, which made it a bit
lighter. The air was very cold and the speed of
the train made it like a bitter wind that blew right
through to our bones.
Our truck had no cover. It was full of bags
of stuff that felt like dirt, and the tops of the bags
were about level with the sides of the truck. We
were lying on these bags looking at the stars, and
I never knew before that so many were in the sky
—there were millions and millions and millions
of them.
“Fm freezing, Joe,” said Bob, shivering.


“So am I,” said I. “If we could squeeze down
among these bags and put our rugs over us we’d
be better. But they are packed too close.”
“I wonder what Mr. Podger thinks has become
of us.”
“Can’t say, Bob; but I am wondering how far
this goods-train is going before it stops.”
“It might go all the way to Sydney!”
“It might.”
“Do you think we could jump off while it is
going up a hill?”
“We’d break our necks —no good to us, Bob!”
“Well, I hope it stops somewhere. We can’t go
back to Sydney or we’ll be caught, sure as eggs!”
Bob began to shiver again so I said we would
try to climb into the next truck; for it had a cover
over it which seemed to have blown back from one
corner.
The job of climbing across was not an easy one;
but we did it after a struggle. I’ll never do it
again. Bob slipped off the bumpers in between
the trucks, and would have fallen under the train
only his arm was through a rope on which he
hung till his feet found the bumper again. It
was a close shave and frightened both of us.
We found later that this truck was loaded with
bags of wheat. The uncovered corner, into which
we climbed, had a space between the bags and the
sides of the truck, and in this space we soon packed
ourselves.


We had to snuggle close, but this was all the
better; putting our rugs around us as well as we
could and keeping our heads below the edge of the
truck made us warmer.
“I’m glad we changed trucks,” said Bob.
“It’s a good job we’re alive to be glad,” said I.
“You’ll never catch me doing that again.”
“Not at night, anyhow,” said Bob.
“Nor day, neither,” said I.
Not feeling inclined to talk we sat huddled
there listening to the train noises, and by and by
we went clatter-bang-rattle-bump into a station and
stopped with a whole heap of rattles and bumps.
Wondering if it was a good place to get out
at we peeped over the side of the truck and found
we were right alongside the platform, along which
two men with lanterns were walking—and toward
us, too.
Bob and I ducked without waiting to see more.
Soon the train went on again.
Bob pressed closer to me as if he were afraid.
“What is the matter?” I asked. “Afraid of the
dark?”
“No, I’m not afraid of the dark, though maybe
I wouldn’t feel afraid if it wasn’t dark.”
“Then what are you afraid of?”
“Don’t know. I’m just afraid, that’s all.”
I put an arm around Bob’s shoulders and told
him he wasn’t afraid at all, but only thought he
was; and that we would soon be out in the bush


the sun shining and the birds singing and
the flowers smelling and everything happening to
make us happy.
“Do you think we will, Joe?”
“Jolly well sure of it. It’s only this train tra-
velling that is putting the bad luck on us.”
By and by we stood up and had another good
look around. The bush was thick each side of the
line, which made it a good place for escaping.
But it was no use trying to get off the train while
it was going, so we popped down again so as to
be warm, and we ate our cakes to satisfy our
hunger, then felt better.
“There might be something good to eat in these
bags,” said Bob.
“Wheat!” I said, feeling at a corner of a bag.
“Good for chooks,” said Bob.
“Until it is ground in a mill and made into wheat-
meal or flour,” said I, “though I knew a swaggie
who tried to live on whole wheat, which he ate
raw, but he died before he finished trying. I’ve
seen persons eat it whole, when boiled for a long
time, and they didn’t die. We’ll take some, any-
how.”
We cut a hole in the top of a bag of wheat and
half filled our calico bag with the grain.
By and by the train stopped again; looking out,
I saw we were at a good place for a try at escap-
ing. Thick bush was on each side and we were a


fair distance from the station, which seemed to be
only a small one, with a few houses at the back.
“Now is our chance, Bob!” I said, eagerly.
Making sure that we had all our things together
I climbed down to the ground, then helped our
swags and Bob down, crept straightaway from the
train, through a fence, and into the dark bush
where there were no houses.
We stopped awhile to get breath and to arrange
our swags so they would be easier to carry.
The goods-train shunted to a siding, and a pas-
senger-train came tearing and snorting along, and
was past and gone before you could wink, leaving
the darkness blacker than before.
We waited while the goods-train shunted back
and went on again. We saw the station officer
go into a room where a jolly fire was blazing, and
we wished we could go in too, and have a good
warming.
But we made another start through the bush.
When we were out of sight of the station, and of
the few houses that were on the other side of the
line, we stopped again. The way was rough and
the bushes wet with dew; and it was dark, and
quiet, and mysterious.
Standing still, we looked, and listened, and
breathed; all the rest of the world seemed to be
asleep, excepting Bob and me. Suddenly we heard
a squeaky squeal, and a rustling of leaves, which


made us jump; afterwards Bob said his skin
frizzled all over; so did mine, but I didn’t tell
Bob.
“Wha-what was that?” whispered Bob, in a
stuttering voice.
“Possums!” said I.
It was only the unexpectedness of the noise that
scared me for a moment —then I knew a possum
was the cause. If you know what makes a noise
it does not frighten you as it does when you don’t
know.
“Oh well, they can’t hurt us,” said Bob.
“Sure they can’t!” I agreed.
All the same, we got closer to each other, and
listened to other bush noises, which seemed to
come after short spells of quietness.
While looking about into the darkness I thought
I saw a road, or glimpses of one, through the trees;
so I told Bob we would go and find out, because
a road is a great comfort in the bush.
Sure enough it was a road—a good hard, broad,
mainroad.
“Our luck is changing, Bob.”
“I feel better on this road,” said Bob; “I wonder
where it leads to?”
“It might be the main southern road. Anyhow,
we will walk along it till daylight, then go into
the bush and camp, and have a sleep.”
The darkness did not now trouble us so much,


and we were becoming used to the bush noises;
so we walked along cheerfully, though we did not
speak often.
When about a mile along the road Bob stopped
dead and caught my arm.
“What is the matter?” I whispered.
“I thought I saw a light ahead of us,” said Bob,
“Yes, there it is!”
Stepping toward Bob I saw a light, sure enough,
or maybe a flicker of fire.
Very cautiously we went on. As we drew
nearer to the light we saw it was a fire on the
ground, beside the road, and under the branches
of a big tree.
Getting closer we could see a log on the ground
by the side of the fire. As we crept nearer the log
began to snore. Then we knew it was not a log,
but a man rolled in a blanket; we were scared for
a moment.
Holding our breaths for ever so long we backed
away for fear the man might wake up. But he
kept on snoring, louder and louder till the loudest
snore burst; then he was quiet again.
We stopped backing when a fair distance from
the man, and whispered about our adventure, for
it was one, sure enough.
“And did you see his billy-can?” asked Bob.
“No I didn’t see it,” I replied.
“Well, it was there, Joe, close to the fire. We
want a billy-can. What is he sleeping there for?”


“He is a swaggie, Bob; they sleep like that,
sometimes, when the weather is fine, and they
don’t want to be bothered with pitching their
tents.”
“We ought to get that billy-can,” said Bob, as if
he couldn’t get it off his mind.
I agreed with Bob that we ought to have a billy-
can—but we both knew it would be stealing to
take the swaggie’s. And we were swaggies our-
selves, or close enough, anyhow.
But we did want a billy-can; and Bob struck
the idea of how to get this one without stealing
it.
“Joe, that swaggie can go to any shop and buy
another billy-can, but we can’t. Supposing we creep
up and take his billy-can and leave a shilling there
for it; that would be buying it, fair enough.”
So I got a shilling ready, and we crept up, and
crept up, just like blackfellows, till we were close
to the fire; and there was a beautiful black billy-
can, sure enough.
I lifted the billy-can carefully, without saying a
word, and Bob lifted something else; then I put
the shilling on a flat stone near the fire and we
crept away, and crept away, till we were back to
our swags at the edge of the road.
“And all he did was snore!” said Bob.
“We will soon be bushmen, all right, Bob.”
“If we had guns we could be bushrangers,” said
Bob.


“That would be no good,” said I. “Didn’t you
feel afraid?”
“Not much, Joe; but I’m glad you were with
“What did you pick up?”
“It is like a big scone.”
“Damper!” I cried, as I took it from Bob.
“The old billy-can cannot be worth a shilling, so
I took that for the difference.”
“Well, it was a fair deal. Now we must get on
our way.”
We followed the road a short distance, but we
were very tired and sleepy, so when we saw a good
log by the roadside we sat on it for a rest.
We sat there for many minutes because we
didn’t feel inclined to walk any farther; perhaps we
were a bit scared and uncertain, which is not a
good way to feel. At length we left the road and
went a short distance into the bush. Finding
another big log we cuddled ourselves up beside it,
and wrapped our rugs around us, and looked at the
dark sky through black trees.
Bob thought there might be wild animals, or
snakes, about. I told him that if there were they
would be more afraid of us than we should be
of them; and it was too cold for snakes, anyhow,
and he’d better have some sleep, because it would
do no good to be scared.
By and by Bob went to sleep with his head


leaning against me; but I was more scared than
Bob, and very cold. I couldn’t go to sleep for a
long time, though perhaps it only seemed a long
time. And the thoughts of all that had happened
to us since we left Sydney kept squeezing into my
head, though I tried to think about nothing.


CHAPTER IV
THE SKELETON IN THE BUSH
The s\vaggie whose billy-can we had bought was
holding my neck with one hand, and Bob s neck
with the other. He was laughing a terrible laugh
like many laughs made into one; laughing hard,
and long, and loud; and ending with a chuckle like
nothing ever heard before.
When I awoke I knew it was only a dream.
Bob’s arm was around my neck, nearly choking
me, but he soon awakened when I pulled his arm
away. Then he wanted to know where we were,
and said he was frozen to bits.
“We are here,” said I, “and I am cold enough,
too.”
Rising from somewhere was the sun —we could
see the light of it glittering on the tall trees on a
rise the other side of the road —and away down
along the way we had come kookaburras were
laughing as if they had never seen anything half
so funny in all their lives. Perhaps they had not,
though I do not know what they were looking at.
“Kookaburras! Can’t they laugh!” I said, as Bob
looked at me as if to ask about them.


“They frightened me for a moment,” said Bob.
“They must have had a good breakfast!”
“I thought the swaggie was laughing, and try-
ing to choke me; but it was only a dream.”
While listening to the kookaburras’ laughing-
chorus we stretched our legs and our arms until
some of the stiffness got out of them, then looked
about to see where we were, though that might
not help us much.
V\ alking to the edge of the clump of bushes in
which we happened to be, we found we were still
in sight of the swaggie. We thought we had
gone a long way from him.
In a tree near the swaggie were the kookaburras,
laughing like fun; and the swaggie was sitting up,
looking at them, though he seemed to be half
asleep. At last he unrolled himself from his
blankets, which were blue, and woke up properly.
He poked his fire together, and put more wood on
it, till it blazed. We wished we were there and
the swaggie miles away.
A water-hole was close to the swaggie’s camp. I
suppose he was about to get water and boil the
billy, because he looked everywhere around, then
scratched his head and looked again. He walked
into the middle of the road and looked up along it,
and down along it, then came back to his fire and
scratched his head like mad.
Looking about once more swaggie seemed to
see the shilling that we had left on the stone, for


he put his hands on his knees and bent down to-
ward it. He looked at it from north, and south,
and east, and west, then stood up straight and
scratched his head with both hands at once as
hard as he could go.
The kookaburras had been quiet for a time, but
they began to laugh again, as jolly as anything.
Swaggie stepped back, shaking his fist at the birds,
and shouting, but we couldn’t hear what he said.
Then he threw a stone at them, which made them
fly to a dead tree across the road, and laugh louder
than before. That made him go mad, if he wasn’t
mad already, and dance on one leg at a time. Then
rolling his swag, he took his tucker-bag off a tree
and started down the road; but he turned round
once, before he got out of sight, and shook his fist
at the kookaburras.
Bob and I laughed, though we were sorry for
the swaggie, and Bob named him “Billy-can
Swaggie.”
“He must think the kooraburras took his billy,”
said I.
“Perhaps he does, Joe; or he might think they
laughed at him for losing his billy.”
“I didn’t see him take the shilling; did you,
Bob?”
“No, I didn’t; I wonder if he left it there?”
“If he didn’t take it, we will get it back; we did
our best to pay him for his old billy-can.”
“Is he a real swaggie?”


“He is, sure enough; but he is one of the ratty
kind, who never do what a sensible one would.
“Do they work?”
“Work! No, they don’t work; they just live
along anyhow, and there is not one of them would
change with anybody.”
“Well, perhaps they are sensible, after all.”
“Don’t you believe it, Bob. But he is gone, now,
right out of sight; you wait here till I get the
shilling.”
Running across to the clearing where the
swaggie had been camped, I saw the shilling still
on the stone, and I soon put it in my pocket; a
little tin of tea was near the stone, so I took it
as well.
I got back to the scrub just in time; Bob had
seen the swaggie returning, and made signals for
me to hurry.
“Quick, Joe! let us go for our lives!”
“No —wait awhile, perhaps he hasn’t seen us.”
Billy-can Swaggie went to where the shilling
and the tea had been; when he couldn’t find them
he dropped his swag, and his tucker-bag, and took
off his hat and scratched his head. By and by he
got down on his knees and crawled about.
“Might be trying to find tracks, Bob; but he
won’t, because the grass is too dry.”
Something made Billy-can Swaggie look toward
us. Though we were well hidden by the scrub we
went back to our swags in a fright, and hurried


down into a gully, which was not really a gully
but only the beginning of one.
Trying not to tread on soft earth, nor on any
place that would show our footprints, we went a
fair distance into the bush before we stopped to get
breath and to fix our swags so they would be
easier to carry.
The gully became more rocky and deeper farther
from the road. By and by there were pools of
water in it; then water all the way, with ferns
alongside, birds in the trees and the scrub, and
wildflowers here and there. But we were too
anxious to notice them much.
After a good walk we stopped near a clear pool,
by the side of which was a big, flat rock, with the
sun shining full on it, and we decided to have
breakfast here.
I showed Bob how to make a billy fire, and how
to hang the billy above it on the end of a thick
stick, and how to put a green twig across the top
of the billy to keep the smoke out of it. For if
smoke gets into the billy the tea will be smoky,
and if you leave the lid on the billy it will be a
trouble to get off when the water boils, and by the
time you do get it off the water might not be boil-
ing.
Keeping the blaze going with dry sticks we soon
had the water boiling. I put only a little tea in so
that it would not be too strong, then stirred the


tea-leaves down with a stick, and lifted the billy-
can off the fire.
We ate our chocolate with the damper though
it would have been good enough without anything.
We drank our tea straight from the billy, because
we had no cups or mugs. To save waiting too long
for the tea to cool I swung the billy round and
round a good many times, and Bob was surprised
that the tea did not spill.
After breakfast we felt satisfied and comfortable,
though pretty tired. So we sat in the sunshine
while we rested and talked, and watched the birds,
and looked at the wildflowers, and sparkling trees,
and big grey rocks.
Bob asked me if I really and truly did intend to
leave Sydney, or if I had only said so to help him.
As true as sunshine, Bob, I wouldn’t tell you a
lie about it.”
“We’ve told some whoppers since yesterday.
Joe!”
“We have, true enough, Bob. But those which
we told wouldn’t hurt anybody the least bit. I’d
ne\ er tell a lie that would bring harm to anyone,
and I never told dad a lie, nor mother either.”
Do you think there ever was anybody who
never told a lie?”
“Perhaps there was, Bob; what about George
Washington ?”
I ve thought of him, but it might not have been


true; perhaps he did not cut down the cherry-tree,
but only said he did.”
“Or perhaps his father said he said he did on y
to make out that George was a Wonder.”
“Anyhow,” said Bob, “if George did cut down
the cherry-tree it was best for him to say he did,
perhaps that helped him to become a president.
“I bet it did. And I know one thing, Bob if
you never tell one lie you will never tell any more.’
“I suppose that is right, Joe.”
“And if you do something wrong and tell the
truth about it, that is the only trouble you have.”
“Yes, and if you tell a lie about it at first you
have to keep on telling them.”
“But there is one thing about it, Bob; it is easy
to tell the truth about doing something wrong if
you think you will be forgiven.”
“That makes all the difference.”
Then I told Bob all about the £6O. Talking
about this and about lies kept us busy until we
were a bit rested; then I said we had better be
making tracks.
Getting our things together, we walked on down
the gully because we wanted to keep away from the
road until Billy-can Swaggie had gone a safe dis-
tance.
“Supposing they send a black-tracker after us?”
asked Bob.
“It would be no use trying to hide our tracks
from a black-tracker; but they wouldn’t know


where to begin looking for our tracks, because we
made none between Sydney and here. If they
knew where we left the train, and came after us,
nothing we could do would keep them from track-
ing us.”
“Have you ever seen one tracking?” asked Bob.
“No, I haven’t,” said I, “though I’ve seen one
riding along the road with a mounted policeman,
and Old Bill told me that he had just finished
tracking a man a hundred miles through the bush
and everywhere.”
“They are clever, all right.”
“You can bet they are; nobody can fool them,
no matter how much they try; Red Indians aren’t
anything to black-trackers.”
“Well,” said Bob, “I’m glad they won’t be after
us.”
By this time we were much farther into the
gully. It was deeper and wider, with cliffs and big
rocks on each side; on the ground were ferns and
dead trees and bush rubbish, while scrub and
flowers grew wherever there was no rock. We
couldn’t help picking some wildflowers, though it
was a useless thing to do.
The air was hot, and we were hot, so we stopped
by a clear pool amongst rocks, and ferns, and had
a drink.
Lying on a flat rock at the edge of the pool, we
put our lips to the water and sucked it into our
mouths. It was good.


After quenching our thirst we sat in the shade
of a thick bush and watched the little black sailors
darting about on the surface of the water. Soon I
went farther into the bush, and when going back
to Bob I got a proper scare.
Happening to walk around a big rock I saw a
skeleton at the foot of it, in a shallow crevice. The
bones were white and bare, but the skull had some
long hair still on it; bits of a girls rotted clothes
were about, and an old rag doll was close to the
bones.


CHAPTER V
OLD TROMBONE MAKES FRIENDS
When I got back to Bob he asked me if I had
trodden on a snake or seen a black-tracker, so I
must have looked as sick as I felt.
“No, Bob; but I saw a real live skeleton, and it
scared me just for a minute; though it really isn’t a
thing to be afraid of, because it is dead enough,
and is a little girl’s skeleton, anyhow.”
“A skeleton!”
“Yes, Bob,” said I; and for a minute both of
us were silent.
“How did it get there?”
“I don’t know.”
“Was she lost in the bush?”
“I suppose she was; and starved to death, and
left her skeleton lying on the ground by the rock,
and nobody ever found it.”
We sat there, thinking, for many minutes. The
bush seemed to become more and more lonesome
all the time, till I thought I would have to get up
and go straight back to the road; but Bob spoke
and broke the bad spell that was getting hold of
me.


“It ought to be buried,” said Bob, as if he had
been thinking it out.
“So it should,” I said.
Then we sat and thought some more, though I
couldn’t tell exactly what I thought, and I suppose
Bob couldn’t either.
I took Bob to where the skeleton was lying.
“Poor little girl!” he whispered.
“We can’t take it away to a grave-yard, Bob,
but perhaps we can cover it up where it is.”
We rolled a big stone into the hollow just above
the head, and another below the feet; then we
packed around the big stones with little ones and
covered the skeleton with ferns and soft scrub, and
green gum-leaves, and placed a few flat stones on
top.
With a bit of charcoal, which we found near a
burnt stump, we printed a notice on the side of the
big rock to say that the bones of a little girl were
buried there.
Then we sat on a rock to have a rest, for we
were very tired.
“When she was lost why couldn’t they find her?”
asked Bob.
“It isn’t easy to find anyone who is truly lost.”
“What about a black-tracker?”
“I don’t know, Bob. Perhaps there were no
black-trackers about; or they might have been sent
for too late—after the ground for miles and miles
had been trampled over by searchers.”


Somehow we didn’t like leaving the place,
though anyone might think we would get away
from it as quickly as we could. There were many
wildflowers about, so we plucked some, and put
them on the grave; and Bob said he hoped the
little girl would know she was now buried.
The finding of the skeleton put us off going
farther down the gully just then. We went back
toward the road, which was not so far away, and
struck it near the spot where Billy-can Swaggie
had camped. Another swaggie was camped there,
and the sight of him made us stop.
“It isn’t Billy-can Swaggie, anyhow,” said Bob.
“Let us go on.”
When the swaggie saw us approaching he
stopped attending to his fire; holding himself up
still and straight, and sticking one leg forward, and
stretching one arm out high in front, he laughed
out of his whiskers.
“Good morning!” said I, politely.
Ha ! ha ! ha ! ’ laughed the swaggie.
Then he recited a bit of poetry, which I remem-
ber, but I don’t see much sense in it.
Here they are —no they ain’t—
Keep yer elber outa me eye;
Row they come—the ladies faint—
Keep off me corns you guy—
The royal percession’s cornin’!
It now is passin’ by!”
As soon as he finished he stood for a minute like
a statue, all excepting his face, for there couldn’t


be such a funny expression and such whiskers on
any statue in Australia, nor in the world, perhaps.
From a long bag he took a brass-band instrument,
which I knew was a slide trombone, and blew some
awful noises out of it, then he laughed again. We
were glad when he continued attending to the fire.
“He’s mad!” whispered Bob.
“Only a little. Often a swaggie is a bit funny
In one way or another, but most of them are harm-
less.”
We sat on a log till Old Trombone had boiled
his billy, then we asked him if he would let us
boil ours by his fire and he said to help ourselves.
I filled our billy and hung it over the fire. While
waiting for it to boil we sat on the log again and
watched Old Trombone. He was tall, with sky-
blue eyes, thick eyebrows, and a lot of dirty-white
whiskers; his face seemed to twinkle as well as
his eyes.
He took from his tucker-bag some damper and
corned beef, and commenced his dinner; then he
asked us if we had any tucker.
“Only wheat,” I replied.
“Huh?” said he.
“It takes a long time to cook,” said I.
“Wheat?” said he.
“And it needs a bit of chewing,” said Bob.
“Huh?” said he, “Wheat?”
“Yes,” said I.
“Have a bite with me,” said he.


That is how we came to have dinner with Old
Trombone. The tucker was corned beef and
damper, of which Old Trombone had a good
supply. He didn’t seem to mind how much we
ate, so we ate as much as we could.
“Travellin’?” he asked, as he chewed.
“Yes.”
“Which way?”
“South.”
“Ha! ha! ha! same as me—l’ll look after you I”
“Thank you!” said we.
“Camping here another night,” said he; “Plenty
of tucker; no hurry. You stay with me an’ we’ll
travel together.”
After dinner Old Trombone sat in the sunshine
and smoked an old pipe, while Bob and I sat on
the log and tried to decide what to do. By and by
we decided without trouble, because Billy-can
Swaggie came along the road.
When Billy-can Swaggie saw Old Trombone he
stood still in the road for a minute, then came
straight toward our camp. Perhaps he had not
seen Bob and me, but it was a jolly good job we
saw him. And also it was lucky that our swags
were not unrolled, and that we had left them be*
hind Old Trombone, so that he did not see us
shoulder them and run.
When Bob and I were well into the bush again
we stopped to get breath.


“I wonder if he is walking up and down the road,
trying to find out who stole his billy ?” said 1.
“Perhaps he is; but we didn’t steal his billy!”
“No, I forgot that, but he thinks it was stolen,
so it wouldn’t make things any better for us if he
caught us.”
Somehow, I wanted to stay in the bush for a
time; and I hoped we would find enough to eat
here; though I knew it was easy to become lost,
and only blackfellows could live here for long. So
we went on again, and kept going till we came to
the edge of another gully, which was very deep.
As we stood on the top of the steep side we could
see pools of water along the bottom; and away
down at the end of the gully was a blue hill which
looked more like a blue sea.
Sitting down on the brink of a precipice, from
where we had an unbroken view above the tree-
tops along the gully to the blue hill, we talked
about all the great men who had explored in Aus-
tralia. I reckoned that to be an explorer would be
better than anything else.
We climbed around the precipice into the tops
of the big gum-trees, then among their trunks;
and through scrub of all kinds, and ferns, until we
reached the creek, which we followed; though it
led us amongst the roughest tumble of rocks, and
dead timber, and ground rubbish that I ever saw.
A much bigger creek, or maybe it should be
called a river, flowed along a bigger gully by the


foot of the blue hill. Other blue hills came into
view, melting away one after the other. We had
to stop and admire them, though we were in a
hurry to make camp and cook our tea, as the sun
was near setting.
We set about building a wurley by the side of
a big log, which was higher than my head from
the ground. Here was a good patch of clean sand,
and on it we could make a fire without fear of
setting the bush alight.
Soon we had the wurley built and the wheat
cooking, but the wheat had to boil for a long time.
While waiting we fetched to our camp all the
big chunks of wood we could find, then cut a lot
of soft bush and fern for our beds. By this time
the wheat was boiled soft, so we began our tea.
Being very hungry we could have swallowed
that wheat whole, like fowls do; but I knew we
should get pains if we did, because we have no
gizzards; so we chewed and chewed, and the sun
went down behind the hills, and everything grew
darker, and solemn, and quiet, till the gully was as
lonesome as could be. I wondered if we really
should get lost and starved to death.
When the wheat was eaten we built our fire up
with big chunks of wood, then went to bed in our
wurley. It was a jolly good bed; underneath were
the soft leaves and ferns and on top were our rugs;
our feet were close enough to the fire to feel


the warmth, and by and by it was very dark except
for the patch of firelight.
Bob cuddled against me and I cuddled against
him. I thought of the Babes in the Wood and
hundreds of other things of which I couldn t keep
track.
“Joe,” Bob whispered.
“Yes, Bob?”
“I hope the little girl will know that her bones
are now covered up nice and tidy.”
“I suppose she will, Bob,” said I, though 1
didn’t know.
A few minutes passed while everything was still
and silent, then Bob whispered again, and this time
it was what I was thinking myself.
“Do you know a prayer Joe?”
“Yes, Bob.”
“We ought to say it.”
So I taught Bob a prayer which dad had taught
me, and we kept on saying it, over and over again,
softly, till it put us to sleep; though I do not know
who was asleep first.
“Spirit of God within me, help me in being good
and kind, healthy and strong, clever and true,
clean of body and in mind.”


CHAPTER VI
AFRAID OF DINGOES
I awoke at dawn, stiff with cold, for our fire was
nearly out. The sun rose before Bob woke, and the
tree-tops on the hill were sparkling with its light.
We did not see the sun for a good while after*
wards, because the gully was deep.
Bob looked at me when he was properly awake,
and he seemed to be wondering about everything,
as I had been since daybreak; but he didn’t speak
for a minute.
“We didn't get eaten by wild animals," he said
at last.
“No. WeTe all right,” I answered, "though
possums have eaten our wheat.”
“And I’m dead hungry and half frozen,” said
Bob.
“So am I. If we were blacks we’d soon find
something to eat. I heard wongas and a lyre-bird
a little while ago. There is the lyre-bird again;
just listen to him!"
“Gee!”
I had heard lyre-birds in the bush before, buf


Bob hadn’t, so it was a treat for him. We forgot
about being hungry while we listened.
First, he whistled his natural whistle a few
times; then he was a black magpie; then a whip
cracking; a cockatoo; a dog barking; a saw saw-
ing; then he was all the birds he knew. He seemed
so happy and glad to be alive that he had to keep
on whistling and calling or burst. I wished that
we could see him.
“Is only a bird whistling and making all those
noises?” asked Bob.
“That’s right, Bob.”
“Is he good to eat?”
“I suppose he is; but I wouldn’t kill one of them
unless I was nearly dead with starvation and had
no chance of getting anything else.”
Several kookaburras flew down from the hill and
had a laughing match, or concert, in an old dead
tree.
“Ha! ha! ha! ha! Hoo! hoo! he! he! ha! ha! ho!
ho! ha! kOO! koo! kuh! kuh! kook! kook! koo!”
they laughed.
Then they went all over it again many times and
finished with a long gurgling chuckle, as if they
were having the greatest fun in the world, or any-
where else.
We got out of the wurley and poked our fire to
find red coals with which to start a blaze, because
we had only one box of matches and we would
have to be careful of them.


When a good fire was again burning we had a
drink of water and wondered what we should have
for our breakfast.
The sun was now higher and the far hills
were floating in a beautiful blue haze. Nearer to
us, the tree-tops were splashed with golden light,
which also fell in patches on the ground beneath
the trees, and was all along the scrub and open
places on the river-banks.
Insects buzzed and birds twittered; but the
solemn silence, like in a big church, did not take
any notice of the birds and insects. We seemed to
be thousands of miles from towns and people; and
as I sat there thinking, I grew terribly lonely and
full of fancies.
I fancied I was made of gum-trees; then I looked
at a blue cliff with golden sunshine on its top, and
I felt as if I were part of the cliff; then I thought
I might change into the trunk of a gum-tree with
soft pink and white and grey bark.
Bob was very quiet, too, so I suppose the spell
of the bush was on him, as well; it was no wonder
we jumped when we heard a dog barking away
along the hill-side. We looked at each other with-
out speaking for a full minute.
“What was that?” asked Bob.
“It was a dog,” said I.
We kept quiet a while, then the dog barked
again.


“That’s a hunting bark, Bob. The dog is hunt-
ing something.” _ ,
“Do you think they are sending bloodhounds
after us Joe?”
Bob was frightened. .
“Don’t be silly, Bob, you’re thinking of Uncle
Tom’s Cabin, I suppose.”
“Well, what other dog might it be?”
There sounded a few more howls, and I suppose
it was the loneliness of Big Gully that made them
so terrifying.
“Why, it could be a dingo.”
I didn’t mean to say anything about dingoes, but
it just slipped out, and Bob was more scared than
ever.
“They don’t eat human beings, do they Joe?”
“I’ve never heard of them doing so, said I, but
they might if they were nearly starving.”
More howls sounded, and the dog seemed to
be working down into Big Gully. Bob and I stood
up and wondered if there was really anything to
be scared about.
But when the ’next howl sounded it seemed so
close that Bob started to run, and I ran too; or
maybe I ran first, or we might have both started
together.
Soon we were up on the branches of a tree with
our hearts thumping like anything. From there
the gully seemed deeper, the cliffs higher, and the
bush wilder than before.


50 THE ROAD TO WIDGEWONG
We climbed up the tree as high as we could and
listened to the dingo as it howled now and again
and came closer and closer.
Bob tried to argue that dingoes never eat men,
or even boys, because he’d read all about them. I
told him that he could get down if he liked, and
go and meet the dingo if he liked, and bring it in,
and tame it if he liked.
If a great big strong starving dingo met live
meat, Bob, and that live meat was a boy about as
big as you, you’d be safer up a tree.”
‘‘Did you ever see a dingo?” asked Bob.
Yes, I saw a real wild one when I was out ifi
the bush with dad one day; but dad had his gun
and sent a charge of shot after it, and it didn’t wait
for more,”
“It didn’t try to bite you, did it?”
“Dad didn’t give it a chance; but we had a calf
killed a few days before, and the same dingo must
have killed it.”
Well, said Bob, ‘‘l read about-
Something made us both look towards a clear
space on the side of the hill; perhaps it was the
noise, for we had no sooner heard it than a big
grey wallaby hopped into the clearing and sat up
with its head high in the air.
There s a kangaroo, Joe. Look quick I” cried
Bob.
I see it, Bob, but it’s a wallaby, not a 'roo.”


AFRAID OF DINGOES
“I’ll bet you the dingo is hunting it,’’ said Bob.
becoming very excited.
The wallaby hopped off again along the hill-side,
dodging behind some big rocks, and it was soon
out of sight among the bushes. Big Gully didn t
seem quite as lonely as it had done before we saw
the wallaby.
Now that I wasn’t so excited I began to think
that the yelps we had heard sounded more like
those of a beagle than of a dingo; they were really
not like a dingo’s yelps at all.
Soon I heard the yelping again, and then I was
just about sure that the dingo was only an
ordinary tame dog hunting a wallaby.
Dingoes howl only at night; at least, that was
the only time I had ever heard them, though I
suppose they’d howl in the daytime as well if they
wanted to. They howl in a funny way too, that
isn’t in the same language as dogs.
I felt a bit foolish about it, so I tried to make
Bob look foolish too —which was a mean thing to
do.
“The next time you run away from bloodhounds,
Bob, don’t ask me to follow you,” I said.
“You ran first!” said Bob.
“No, you were the first to run!”
“Well, you were first up the tree.”
“I ran faster, that is why.”
“Because you were more frightened; but you
said it wasn’t a bloodhound, anyhow, Joe.”


“Well, never mind,” said I, “We were both
frightened of a tame dog hunting a wallaby —and
there it is!”
The dog had just yelped again and had come
into sight.
“Gee!” said Bob, “I wish that was our dog!”
Something made the dog come much nearer than
the wallaby had done. It took no notice of us but
ran along here and there with its nose close to the
ground trying to pick up the scent again, which it
had lost.
It came so near to us that we could see blood
over its sides, and I remembered being told that
the blood came there because the dogs beat their
tails against their sides as they hunted, though
somebody else said that prickly bushes made the
blood come.
The dog soon found the scent again and gave a
yelp as if to say “Hooray!” and set off after the
wallaby at a good pace while Bob and I climbed
down to the ground.


CHAPTER VII
SNAKE YARNS AND HUNGER
We hunted for food all day long but found nothing
but green geebungs, which we were afraid to eat
for fear of getting a pain in the stomach. Then we
wandered back to our camp.
As it was late in the afternoon, we went looking
for firewood so as to have enough to last all night.
Not far away a big tree had been blown down,
and it was half dead, with most of its branches
shattered where they had hit the hard rocks.
I knew that half-dead wood was better than any
other kind for keeping fires in, so we carried all
the broken branches we could down to our camp.
Next, we cut a couple of thick logs that were so
heavy that it took the two of us to carry them,
one at a time.
Then we sat by the fire, as the air was getting
cold, and had a rest and a talk while the sun was
setting.
“This is quieter than Sydney, Bob,” I said.
“It is, Joe. There doesn’t seem to be a live thing


for miles and miles around except ourselves and
a few little birds twittering in that tree.”
“Oh there’s plenty of live things about, but they
are quiet. There are wombats in their burrows,
and there are sure to be flying-squirrels about here,
and native bears; we know there are possums and
wallabies, and I heard a wonga-pigeon calling this
afternoon while you were having a drink; there are
lyre-birds and plenty of other birds about, as well.”
“Lizards too,” said Bob; “and what about
snakes?”
“There are snakes all right,” said I.
“I don’t like snakes,” said Bob.
“Well, we should be thankful that we’re in Aus-
tralia and not in a country where most of the wild
animals are fierce and would eat us up as soon as
look at us. Snakes aren’t dangerous if you leave
them alone; a snake is easy enough to kill, too,
with a good whack across the back to break the
spine, and then one on the head to settle it. That’s
the safest way.”
“Have you ever killed any, Joe?”
“Yes, I’ve killed a few,” said I, because I had.
“But they were only little ones to some dad killed.
And this is true as death: we had a neighbour who
had a hen setting on eggs and a whopping big
carpet-snake came along and swallowed all the
eggs. Mr. Wilson was just coming in when he
saw the snake sliding away from the hen’s nest
with a middle to it just as if all blown up. He had


no stick, or stone, or gun, so he just kept his eye
on the snake and called Mrs. Wilson; but she
didn’t hear him. So he dropped his hat near the
snake's head and the snake kept its eye on the hat
while Mr. Wilson got an axe from the woodheap
and chopped the snake’s head off. When the rest
of the snake had done wriggling, Mr. Wilson
rescued the eggs by cutting the snake open. Only
one was broken, and that was addled, so we won-
dered how the snake liked the flavour of it. The
rest of the eggs were put back under the hen, and
when the time came for them to hatch, chickens
came out of all of them!”
“If anyone else told me that yarn I wouldn’t be-
lieve it.”
“It’s true, Bob, though we wondered how the
snake could get those eggs down his throat with-
out breaking them; but snakes have elastic
throats.”
“Why did the snake stop and watch the hat?”
“I’ll tell you why, just as dad told me. A snake
thinks that anything that can move from one place
to another is alive, so when a hat is thrown down
near it, the snake wonders what kind of an animal
the hat is, and if it is good tucker, and it stays still
as death watching; or it might think the hat is
something dangerous, so keeps its eye on it long
enough to make sure.”
“I suppose that is right, Joe.”
“Have you ever heard that if you kill a snake at


any time of the day it won’t really die till the sun
goes down?”
‘‘Suppose it’s a cloudy day?”
“Makes no difference; the sun sets just the same,
doesn’t it?”
“Well, how does the snake know when the sun
sets?”
“Oh it knows; no one knows how it knows, but
it does know all right; and unless you chop its
head right off it is likely to go around looking for
something to bite, no matter how much you kill
it.”
“Blacks eat snakes, don’t they?” asked Bob after
he had thought about the other for a time.
“Yes,” said I, “blackfellows enjoy snakes just
like we enjoy wallaby, but they always must kill
the snakes themselves or they won’t eat them. A
blackfellow will kill a snake by jumping into the
air and landing with a heel on the snake’s head;
and with no boots on, either.”
“You wouldn’t catch me doing that!” said Bob.
“Nor me, either,” said I.
“But why do blacks want to kill the snakes,
themselves?”
“Because a snake is supposed to bite itself when
it is dying, if it gets the chance, which makes the
flesh poisonous; but dad said he didn’t believe it
so I don’t either.”
“What was that!” asked Bob, jerking his head
round.


“What was what?” I asked.
“I heard something rustling in the bush,”
whispered Bob.
“Very likely it was a bandicoot,” said I, with-
out taking much notice, for I wanted to tell Bob
another true snake yarn. “Have you ever heard how
snakes go in pairs, and if one is killed its mate will
come looking for it?”
“No, I haven’t heard that!”
“Well, I have, and I think it is true, sometimes.
We had a swaggie grubbing for us on our selec-
tion, and he told us that one day he killed a beauti-
ful tiger-snake and thought he’d carry it to the
next town and sell it to the publican. He had to
camp that night by the road, about six miles from
Avhere he killed the snake. It was a fine night, so
he didn’t pitch his tent but slept under a tree; the
dead snake was in an empty flour-bag (at least it
was empty before the dead snake was put in)
which the swaggie put on the ground alongside
him, and left it there all night. He reached the
town next morning, went into the pub, and put the
flour-bag on the counter. The man asked him
what he had there, and the swaggie told him it
was a dead tiger-snake with the most beautiful skin
he ever saw, and he could have it for ten shillings.
The swaggie lifted the bag and untied the string
that was around it and tipped the dead snake out
on to the counter; but a real live tiger-snake fell
out with the dead one and stood up on its tail,


very savage, and looked as if it was going to fight
everybody in the place at once. Two men got
delirious tremblings; another threw a bottle at the
snake but missed it and smashed some bottles of
liquor instead, and the hotel man went mad with
an axe and chopped both snakes to bits. The
swaggie said it was a lucky thing for the hotel
man that he hit the live snake first, and it was
lucky for the swaggie that he got away and out
of the hotel before the crowd got over the excite-
ment.”
We sat awhile without talking, but just thinking
about snakes, and listening to bush sounds. Then
Bob asked me if I had ever been bitten by a snake.
“No, I haven’t Bob,” I said, “though one
attacked me once. I was walking along a path on
the side of a hill; the path was clear but each side
was rough grass with scrub and stones. A black
snake slid off the path just in front of me and
wriggled along up the hill. I threw a big stone at
it but missed, and the snake turned a back somer-
sault quick as lightning and came straight at me.
But it missed me because I jumped back just in
time, and the snake whizzed past and disappeared
in the scrub. It must have been a very savage
one, because they don’t usually do that.”
“I bet you were scared.”
“I bet I was,” said I. “But I knew a boy who
was really bitten on the tip of his finger. He cut
the tip of his finger off with a tomahawk and then


ran home. His father tied his finger up, then drove
him into town to the doctor. But he needn t
have cut his finger off if he had just cut the bitten
part criss-cross with his knife or tomahawk and
then sucked the poison out and spat it on the
ground.
We talked on awhile longer about snakes, then
about dingoes, and it had grown dark before we
noticed.
But the fire was good company; the smell of the
burning bush wood and some gum-leaves, which
vve put on, was very pleasant, and we felt that we
would like to stay alongside the fire all night.
At length we went to bed in our wurley and said
our prayer, but didn’t go to sleep very soon. We
watched the fire and the shadows, and listened to
bush sounds. Bob snuggled up close to me, so I
knew he was a wee bit frightened, especially when
some possums squeaked near our camp.
“They’re only possums, Bob,” I told him. “I
knew there would be some about; we’ll try to
snare some, and then we can make a possum rug
to keep us warm, as well as have some roast
possum to eat.”
“Listen, Joe! Did you hear some one calling?
There it is again!”
“That’s only a mopoke; it is a kind of owl.
You’ll hear another answer it in a minute!”
Sure enough, away on the hill on the opposite
side of the gully, another mopoke answered the


first one; and they kept on, one answering the
other, over and over again, with just about half a
minute between each call.
“Mo-poke!” from one side of the gully.
“Mo-poke!” from the other side of the gully.
“Mo-poke!” again from the first.
“Mo-poke!” again from the second.
They never said anything else, so far as we could
hear, and never said anything different, and no-
body ever knew what they meant. Some say it’s
“More pork,” but I don’t believe it.
After a time the mopokes put us to sleep; but
Bob didn’t sleep very soundly, because he dreamed
about snakes. He woke me up some time in the
night and said he was too frightened to go to
sleep again, for he was sure that there were snakes
about.
But at length I coaxed him off to sleep; and then
I went to sleep and had my turn at dreaming of
snakes.
Bob said I yelled; I didn’t hear myself yell, but
perhaps anyone would have yelled.
Anyhow, when I felt that cold thing drop on to
my face I just jumped toward the fire, and I sup-
pose anybody else would have done that, too; there
is no time to reason out the best way to act when
a snake drops slap on to your face in the middle of
the night.
Bob reached the fire just as soon as I did.
What’s the matter, Joe?” whispered Bob.


“A snake dropped slap on to my face, Bob.”
“A snake?”
Just then something landed flop on the ground
where the firelight shone on it, and we could see
it was a big frog, after we had both jumped nearly
into the fire. The frog didn’t wait to get warm
but hopped into the darkness.
So we built up the fire and went to bed again,
and Bob said he would have laughed for half an
hour if he hadn’t been so sleepy.
I felt him laughing all the same, but I didn’t say
anything; and by and by we both went to sleep
and dreamed no more that night.


CHAPTER VIII
BUSHED
When we woke in the morning the sun was ris-
ing; we were glad enough to see it because we were
cold, and very hungry.
We attended to the fire first, so as to make it
burn up, then we warmed ourselves till we felt
comfortable.
A lyre-bird on the hill-side commenced his morn-
ing concert with a great burst of his natural call,
then did some mimicking. I imitated some of his
whistling, and by and by he came down quite close,
though hidden by scrub and rocks. But soon he
flew into an open space, in which we could see
him; and he was a beauty, with the biggest tail I
had ever seen —anyhow I thought it was the big-
gest and very likely it was.
Bob was so excited when he saw the lyre-bird
that he pointed towards it and told me to look,
though I had seen it already. Of course the lyre-
bird took fright and soon was out of sight, half
running and half flying.


“Gee!” said Bob, “This place is better than the
Zoo!”
“Listen to that row!” said I, as birds of another
kind came flying over the hill.
“Why that’s fifty lyre-birds all saying the same
thing!” said Bob.
“No, Bob, that’s a flock of black magpies; the
lyre-bird was imitating their call a little while ago,
but there are the black magpies themselves look-
ing for breakfast. They are a noisy crowd!”
They did make a row as they flew about in the
tree-tops. I thought they said: “Kurrawok, kur-
rawok, kurraworra!” which is like blackfellow’s
language; and as they are native birds perhaps I
was right.
But whatever they said they kept saying it for
a long time. Their voices were very loud and
strong, and the place didn’t seem so lonely while
they were about. We were sorry when they flew
away over the hill.
That night we went to bed with hunger-pains all
over our insides; though I pretended that I wasn’t
hungry, Bob didn’t pretend anything, and made
himself feel worse by worrying. We tied hand-
kerchiefs around our waists as tight as we could
to ease the pains.
“I’ll tell you what we’d better do, Bob,” I said,
after we had made up the fire and gone to bunk and
said our prayer. “We’d better go back to the road
again. Then we can buy a rifle and some cart-


ridges, and some flour, and salt, and other things.”
“But what about the police and Mr. Podger and
Billy-can Swaggie?”
“We’ll have to risk it. If we stay here we’ll
starve sure enough, because there isn’t any tucker
around these hills and gullies, excepting that which
we can’t catch. We’d just get weaker and weaker,
day by day, till we got too weak to get back to
the road, if we wanted to; and then it would be
too late. We’d better go at once, else ”
“Else what, Joe?”
“I’ve been thinking all day about that skeleton
which once belonged to the little girl who got lost
in the bush and starved to death.”
“We’d better go!” said Bob, after being silent
awhile.
“Yes, we’ll start early in the morning.”
I couldn’t go to sleep until I heard a willy-wag-
tail chirruping, which was a good time afterwards.
When I heard him calling, “Sweet pretty little
creature,” not far away from our wurley I felt
better.
Next day was not so fine, nor so warm. A lot
of grey thick clouds were blowing quickly across
the sky, so we knew it was very windy, though we
didn’t feel it much in the gully. When the sun
shone now and again, the waving tree-tops up on
the hills sparkled like water on a windy day.
We rolled our rugs into two swags, and I carried
the empty tucker-bag and the billy-can while Bob


carried the tomahawk. I filled the billy with water
before we started in case we became thirsty before
we arrived at another drinking place.
When we reached the top of the gully the wind
was blowing so hard that we had to be careful that
old trees or limbs of trees didn’t blow on to us.
We saw one tree that had been blown down. I
was so busy watching for breaking branches that
I tripped and spilt the water—which was bad luck,
as we felt too weak to go back for more. Soon we
discovered an old timber track which had not been
used for several years, judging by the look of it;
near by were many stumps and heads of trees with
the trunks missing, for those had been cut into
posts and rails for fences, or into sleepers for the
railways.
The timber track was easy enough to follow
for about a hundred yards, then it was hard to see,
for rough grass and scrub had grown all over it,
and there didn’t seem to be any wheel ruts left.
On a sandy and rocky stretch where a bush-fire
had burned everything, we lost sight of the track
and couldn’t find it again. The sky became clouded
all over so that no sunshine came down at all, and
the wind blew harder and felt like rain, and I knew
that rain would make the bush a miserable place;
so I hoped none would come.
“Are you sure we are going right for the road?”
asked Bob.
“You can’t be dead sure about going straight on


a day like this,” I said, “but I think we are right.
Anyhow, we are getting farther from Big Gully,
and when we came in from the road we got closer
and closer to Big Gully.”
We walked for a long time, and it was a rough
walk. There were steep gullies to climb into and
get out of, shallow gullies to cross, stretches of
rocky slopes and patches of scrub to get through,
and big trees were everywhere.
“Supposing we have a rest, Joe?” said Bob, after
a stiff pull up a long hill.
We laid ourselves flat on the ground and looked
up through the trees to the grey sky.
“I’ll be glad when we reach the road, Joe.”
“So will I, Bob. It’s a good job that we have a
few shillings left; we will be able to buy some
tucker at the first house or shop.”
“We ought to get something that won’t need
cooking, first, then some other things that we can
cook.”
“We’ll get some bread and butter and jam and
a drink of milk, first.”
“I’d like that!” said Bob.
We were quiet awhile, thinking about things to
eat; then we made another start for the road. I
walked ahead, and Bob followed me.
“Hooray Bob!” said I. “We are near to the
road now all right. Here are footprints of some
one, quite fresh.”


Bob hurried to me, and saw the tracks, and was
just as pleased as I was.
“It doesn’t feel so lonely now, Joe!’’
“You’re right, Bob. See, here they go, more than
one person, too; boys out shooting I suppose,
though we haven’t heard a dog!”
“Couldn’t they go shooting without a dog?”
“I suppose they could,” I replied.
“Joe!” called Bob, stopping suddenly, “I’ve
stepped over this log before!”
“Which log?” I asked.
“This one. I remember that stump over there.
It looks like a blackfellow going to throw some-
thing. There can’t be two stumps like that, with
a log lying out from it over which you have to
step!”
The stump that Bob meant was what was left
of the burned trunk of a tree, and it was as tall as
a man. The fire had left it just as Bob said —like
a blackfellow going to throw something.
I looked around, and at the tracks again, and
knew that Bob was right. We had rested not a
hundred yards from our old tracks made an hour
before. It was a fearful thought that came to me
—the thought of being lost in the bush and starv-
ing to death.
“What do you think of it, Joe!”
“We’ve just walked in a circle, like new chums
do in the bush, or anyone else who is not careful of
the way he goes. Now that we know what we’ve
done we can start again and go right.”


It wasn’t easy to appear to be so sure of things,
but Bob had to be cheered up somehow.
“Come along, and we’ll keep straight ahead this
time,” said I.
“Why did we turn round and come back? I
thought we were going straight ahead, before!”
“Some persons say that you walk in a circle be-
cause the right leg is stronger or longer than the
left one, so you take a longer stride with it, which
keeps you turning a little to the left; but it might
be your neck, or your eyes, or your brain.”
After another long walk, we reached the middle
of a clearing, where the ground was higher and
the bush more open. We could see back over the
scrubby stretch we had just come through, also
for a good distance in another direction, in which,
not so far away, was a gully. When I saw it, I
felt goose flesh coming, for it was the Big Gully,
sure as eggs.
So we were still bushed; also starving and
thirsty, and tired, and scratched, and sore, and
everything else that wasn’t comfortable.
“You stretch out at the foot of this big iron-
bark, and mind the swags, while I go to the edge
of the rise to see how the scrub looks,” I said
to Bob.
I left him and went towards the gully, for 1
wanted to make dead sure whether it was or wasn’t
Big Gully, And it was!
Bob never knew what I did when I saw how we


had walked about all day for nothing’, but I don t
mind writing it down now because it is part of the
story. I laid down among the hard rocks and cried
just like a little baby, only harder, and when I
stopped crying, I stayed there like a log, because I
felt so helpless.
Suddenly some kookaburras flew over from
somewhere into a big tree near by and laughed as
loud as ever they could. They seemed as if they
were going to burst with laughter, and they kept
it up as if they were having the fun of their lives —
which I wasn’t.
I got on my feet again.
“All right, you silly jackasses,” I said, “if you are
laughing at me just to annoy me, you’d better stop;
but if you are trying to cheer me up and bring
luck, you can go on laughing till your heads fall
off!” '
I spoke quite loudly, and the kookaburras broke
into a fresh burst of laughter. As soon as they
had finished it off with a lot of funny little chuckles
they flew straight away through the bush.
Well, it was funny how much better I felt. I
straightened myself up and made a start for Bob,
but somehow I followed the direction in which the
kookaburras had flown, and by and by I heard
them again, but much farther on.
I went towards the sound of their laughter and
saw them fly from the branches of a big dead tree
that had been killed by bark-strippers; then I lost


sight of them and remembered that my job was
to get back to Bob and take him to the road and
not to chase silly jackasses.
But here I was in another mess, for I had lost
the direction, though Bob certainly couldn’t be far
away. I put my hands to my mouth and coo-eed
several times but no answer came. I coo-eed
again, and again. If Bob had been within a mile
of me he must have heard, but he didn’t reply; I
sat down and wondered what kind of a bushman I
was, and what dad would think of me, if he knew.


CHAPTER IX
THE ROAD AT LAST
I became more and more anxious as I went on, and
got no reply to my coo-ees. To be both lost to-
gether was bad enough, but to be separated and
lost was too dreadful for anything; so when I
came upon Bob asleep on the ground where I had
left him, I was too pleased to be angry.
No wonder I could crack my voice coo-eeing and
coo-eeing without making him hear me; but when
I saw him there sleeping so peacefully, with his
head on my swag, I swallowed my throat; for he
seemed to say, by looks, that he trusted me so
much that he was safe to have a sleep till I re-
turned.
I wakened Bob as gently as I could.
“It’s all right now, Bob,” I said, “I know just
where we are, and we’ll soon be able to make a bee-
line for the road and never get bushed again!”
“Where are we, Joe?” asked Bob, “I hope we
won’t strike any more of that prickly scrub!”
I dodged Bob’s question and turned my back
square to Big Gully.


We got three big trees in a line, as far apart as
we could, then walked to the tree which was in
the middle and blazed it on each side. Before we
walked to the third tree we sighted a fourth in
line with the second and third trees; then we went
to the third tree and blazed it, then sighted a fifth
tree in line, and so on. That’s how we went on
and kept straight, for I had made up my mind to
be dead sure this time.
For nearly an hour we kept on, night seeming to
hang off on purpose to help us. Bob was talking
in a rambling way, which made me anxious.
Soon we saw a lot of new chips and slivers and
log-ends and half-dead branches and all the rest
of it, which showed that timber-getters had been
there not long ago. There was a plain cart-track
that seemed to have been used quite recently.
“We’re found!”
“Listen!” said Bob, as he burst out crying.
“I hear it, Bob; it’s a train I’’ said I, doing the
same as Bob.
Sure as anything, an engine was puffing up a
hill, but it was a good distance away; how far, we
couldn’t guess, but it certainly was in the direction
in which we were going.
“Too far off to reach before dark, Bob,” said I.
“We’d better camp here for the night in case we
get lost again trying to find the road or the rail-
way in the dark.”
“I don’t want to be lost any more,” said Bob.


“Nor do I; Big Gully seemed to be getting in
front of us all day long, no matter what direction
we headed; and the bush seemed to be moving
round, too, doing its best to muddle us.”
We camped by the side of the new timber track
and were too tired even to make a fire or to do
anything but lie on the ground with our rugs over
us, and go to sleep. We didn’t hear even a mo-
poke or a willy-wagtail or a possum during the
night, but slept all the time.
It was lucky for us that no rain came or we
should have been in a nice mess. We got up next
morning at daybreak feeling stiff and sore in some
places, and hungry in another place, and dizzy and
weak all over. Bob’s legs would hardly hold him
up at first.
The new timber-track was so plain and easy to
follow that we didn’t blaze any more trees. As
the country was fairly level the track lay almost
straight, just winding about enough to dodge
clumps of trees, or big logs, or rocky patches, and
the sun shone again as we walked along.
By and by we sighted the main road, and I can’t
tell how we felt w r hen we were actually standing
on the edge of it, looking along it one way and
then the other.
“All we want now is tucker,” said Bob.
“Yes, we want something to eat right away, be-
fore breakfast,” I replied.
We started on our journey along the road, and


soon came to an orchard, but there was only green
fruit on the trees. A house was in the middle at
the back of the orchard, and in a paddock near the
home a man was hitching a big horse to a plough.
When we were close to the house a cattle-dog
ran out and barked at us, but the man made it go
and lie down. He waited for us to speak.
“Good day boss!” I said, just as I’d heard other
swaggies say to dad.
“Good day nipper!” said the man,
“Could we buy some tucker here boss? We’ve
run out.”
“Buy some!” said the man.
“Yes—anything at all,” said I.
“You’d better see the missus—Flo!” he called.
A young woman came to the door of the house.
“What’s up?” she asked.
“These two nippers want to buy something to
eat; fix ’em up will you, old girl?”
“All right, Charley. Come here, you!” she said
to Bob and me, “just sit down on the veranda and
I’ll bring you something.”
So we sat on the edge of the veranda and the
woman went inside the house. The dog came up
to be patted and the man went off among the fruit-
trees with his horse and plough.
We didn’t have to wait long before the woman
came out again with a jug of warm milk and two
glasses, which she filled for us, and put the jug
beside us on the veranda floor.


Bob’s eyes opened wide when he saw the milk,
and his tongue came to his lips. He trembled as
he lifted the glass to his mouth; but he drank
slowly when he saw the woman was watching him,
though he said afterwards that he didn’t know
how he managed it. I wasn’t any better than Bob;
I might have been worse.
“You boys are very hungry, aren’t you?’’ asked
the woman.
"A bit,” said I.
“When did you last have a meal?” she asked.
“We’ve had nothing at all for three days,” said
Bob.
“Thought sol” said the woman. “Take it slowly
as you can.”
She filled our glasses again, for they were now
empty, and told us to wait a minute. We waited
and she brought us a big plate of bread-and-jam,
with butter on as well.
“There you are, kiddies, you’ll feel better after
that; it’s home-made bread and home-made jam,
but eat it slowly 1”
She hoped we’d like itl I didn’t forget to thank
her, and Bob told her that it was just what we had
been wishing for, though we didn’t think of it be-
ing home-made, which made it all the better.
By Gee! it was good! Peach jam, too, with big
lumps of peach in it; and the milk was warm and
fresh.
The woman watched us for a minute then went


into the orchard and spoke to the man. He came
back with her.
“Feel better?” asked Charley.
“Yes, thank you, boss!” said I.
“Had no tucker for three days, eh?”
“No, boss; we were lost.”
“Why didn’t you stick to the road?”
“We went exploring down a gully, but didn’t
take much tucker with us; and we tried to take
a short cut back to the road, and got lost.”
“Where’d you come from?”
“Sydney.”
“What for?”
“To find work.”
He asked more questions, and I had to dodge
some of them; but I told the truth, mainly,
especially about myself. I said that Bob was my
mate and I had to look after him.
“Well, we’d better be going now,” I said. “It
was a jolly good breakfast.”
I took my money from my pocket and asked how
much we owed for the breakfast.
“Are you as rich as all that?” asked the wo-
man.
“We’ve got about eighteen shillings,” said I.
“Well, put it back into your pocket, sonny; you
are welcome to what you’ve had, and if you’ll wait
a minute I’ll pack you something to eat on the road,
for lunch. You’ll be some time reaching the next
town.”


You can bet we waited, and it was worth while.
All we saw of it when she gave it to us was the
paper in which it was wrapped; but when we
opened the packet along the road, just to see what
was in it, we found sandwiches made of nice ham
and the same home-made bread and butter with
a little mustard. We wished it was dinner-time
again. We had half a sandwich each, to see what
they were like; then we tied the packet up again
and felt safe about lunch.
After saying good-bye to Charley and Mrs.
Charley, we continued walking along the road.
More houses were passed after walking a couple of
miles. Soon we arrived at a railway platform near
the road, but we walked on without stopping.
Beyond the railway platform was a long stretch
of road without any houses along the side of it,
but only trees and scrub, and telegraph poles, and
a two-rail fence. We had not gone very far along
this stretch before we came to a water-hole with a
very big tree near it. It was in a clearing which
seemed to push itself into the bush. There were
traces of old camps about, such as fire-places and
beds of leaves.
“Looks to me like the place where we bought
Billy-can Swaggie’s old billy and the piece of
damper,” said Bob.
“I believe you are right, Bob!” said I, looking
around.
“Yes, and there are the kookaburras that made


the swaggie mad,” Bob added, as some kooka-
burras up in the tree gave a few chuckles.
“Well, I didn’t expect to see this place again,”
said I.
Although it wasn’t near dinner-time we decided
to rest there awhile. I started a fire going in one
of the little fire-places while Bob hunted through
our things to see if we had any tea.
After filling the billy at the water-hole, we hung
it over the fire and our tea was soon made in the
best way.
Perhaps we shouldn’t have been hungry then,
but we were; and we were pleased that Mrs.
Charley had given us such a lot of sandwiches. We
sat down with the billy and the sandwiches be-
tween us and made a start.
“Hey, Joe!” said Bob, “I’ve got an egg sand-
wich.”
“Why, half of them are egg sandwiches!” said
I, after I had a look at them all.
“She’d make a nice mother, wouldn’t she Joe?”
“Right, she would, Bob; but I wouldn’t change
mine for her all the same. You wait till we find
my mother!”
“Will we soon find her?”
“Not too soon, because it’s a long way. If we
take another train ride we’ll get there quicker.”
We ate without speaking, enjoying our early
lunch as if we had eaten no breakfast.


“These sandwiches are good,” said Bob, and the
tea too!”
It didn’t take us long to eat our lunch; and that
was lucky, because an old swaggie came along and
asked us for some tucker while he had some of
his own in his tucker-bag.
He came from the direction in which we were
going. As we were sitting with our backs that
way we didn’t see him until he was close to us,
we heard him first. He flopped his swag down
under the big tree about six yards from us and
then came and sat on the log near us and filled his
pipe, then lighted it by our fire.
“Good day mates!” said he, looking at my chin.
“Good day mate!” said I.
“Got any tucker to spare?” he asked, looking at
my ear.
“I’m sorry, mate,” said I, “but we’ve just eaten
the last crumb; we have plenty of tea left.”
He brought a tin mug and gave it to us to fill
for him; then we passed the billy to him with the
rest of the tea in it. From his tucker-bag the
swaggie took some cold meat and damper. He ate
it very slowly and carefully, and had drinks of tea
in between times. Although he sat on a log right
in front of us, he did not look straight at either Bob
or me.
He began to make me feel nervous; from the
time he had come he had not looked either of us
in the eyes. When we thought he was going to


do so he would just miss, and his eyes would
dodge ours and go all around our heads. We got
scared of him because we thought he must be going
mad. I think he was a little bit silly—they get
that way sometimes through always wandering
about by themselves with no mate to talk to.
While he was eating he asked us about the road,
and the homes along it; then talked about things
which we didn’t understand. After he had drunk
all the tea he shouldered his swag and went off.
We were not sorry to be rid of him.
“What’s wrong with his eyes?” asked Bob; “he
gave me the creeps!”
“I don’t know, Bob; he’s just queer, that’s all.
But he gave me the creeps, too, so I’m glad he has
gone. Now I suppose we had better go, too.”


CHAPTER X
MYSTERY OF THE SKELETON IS SOLVED
Old Crooked Eyes hadn’t gone far before we were
on our way up the road, feeling much better for
our rest and luncn.
“If there were no policemen,” said Bob, and no
black-trackers, I wouldn’t mind walking along the
road all the time. We can get proper tucker along
the road, which we can’t in the bush; and it isn t
so lonely, either.”
“That’s the worst of getting into trouble. Bob.
You’ve got to suffer for it, one way or anotner. If
you do nothing wrong, you can go anywhere and
be afraid of nobody.”
“But I didn’t mean to do it, Joe.”
“Anyhow, Bob, don’t you worry; we’ll stick to
the road as much as we can and won’t go far into
the bush again,”
I felt sorry that I had mentioned Bob’s trouble,
so I did my best to cheer him up. There wasn’t
much risk of meeting a policeman so far from a
town, so we were safe enough on the road for a
while.


We passed houses now and again. They were
farmers’ homes or orchards, for each had fruit-
trees and poultry and ploughed paddocks, and
there were pigs in one paddock.
Mile-posts were by the roadside, and we passed
one which said it was five miles to the next town,
so we decided to keep on until we got within a
couple of miles of it.
“Then we’ll make camp in the bush and I’ll walk
into the town after dark and buy tucker,” said I.
“If you buy tucker at a shop, you’ll have to pay
for it,” said Bob; “but if we buy it at a house we
might g et it for nothing, and then our money would
last all the longer.”
“There’s some sense in that,” said I. “We’ll call
at the next house and see what luck we’ll have.”
“More home-made bread and fresh milk is all the
luck I want,” said Bob.
“You might as well put in apple-pie and cream
and a few little things like that, Bob.”
“All right, apple-pie and cream!”
“And brown scones with sultanas In them I”
“I’ve never tasted those, Joe.”
“Mother could make beauties—full of sultanas.*’
Talking away like that, we tramped along till we
came to the next house. It was a new place, just
like a selection, and there was plenty of bush on
each side of the road. Near the house were a few
young fruit-trees and a beautiful flower garden*
also vegetables and some fowls.


Both of us went in through the gateway and
followed a path round to the back of the house. A
woman was sitting on the back veranda in the sun-
shine, peeling potatoes; a baby playing with a rag
doll sat on the floor, and it smiled and made noises
at Bob and me as soon as it saw us.
“Good gracious!” said the woman, “whoever is
this?”
“If you please, could you sell us a little food?”
“Sell you some food? What do you want to buy
food for?”
“To eat.”
“Well, I suppose so; but what do you want to
buy it for? Seems to me you’re two boys just hav-
ing a lark, or running away from home, or some-
thing ?”
I didn’t exactly know what to say, so I told as
near the truth as I could; it’s awkward to be asked
questions like that when you are not expecting
them.
“We are swaggies,” I said.
“Going anywhere in particular?”
“To Widgewong.”
“Widgewong? Lord save us I When do you expect
to get there?”
“I don’t know, but we shall get there if we keep
going.”
“Well, sit down here and I’ll see what I can
find for you. Jim has gone into town, but he
should be back any minute.”


We sat on the edge of the veranda and played
with the baby; it wasn’t much fun, because it
could make only baby noises such as “guh” and
_ 99
“Here you are!” said Mrs. Jim, when she came
out again. “Here’s some bread-and-butter, some
apple-pie, and a jug of milk. Will that do you?”
Bob looked at me and I looked at Bob, and we
both thought that we’d better not say that what
we really wanted was tucker which we could carry
outside us, to eat for our supper when we made
camp for the night.
“Don’t you like apple-pie?” asked Mrs. Jim.
“It was just what we were wishing for, as we
came along the road, and we are wondering if you
heard us wish!”
“Only Joe wished for cream with it,” said Bob.
“Well, I’ll make his wish come true, too. You
see if I don’t!” said Mrs. Jim as she went into the
house again.
“You’d better tell her about the brown scones
with sultanas in them, Bob,” I said.
“I would if I thought she had any,” replied Bob,
who was always cheerful enough when good tucker
was in sight. So was I.
Mrs, Jim returned with a basin of cream which
we shared over the pie. She stood and watched
us.
The baby crawled over for something, so I gave
it a piece of pie-crust, and Bob gave it some bread-


and-butter, which pleased Mrs. Jim. She cut more
bread-and-butter for us; but we wished it had been
more apple-pie, because that was jolly good.
Mrs. Jim talked to us while we were eating, and
she gave us a lot of advice, most of which was too
late.
“Whatever you do,” she said, “don’t go into the
bush; it’s a terrible place if you get lost in it —like
my little May did.”
Mrs. Jim took her dish of potatoes, which she
had finished peeling, into the kitchen; then she
came back with a photograph of a little girl, and
showed it to us.
“That’s my little May, laddies, and just a year
ago the bush got her, and now I sometimes hate
the bush as much as I used to love it. It was
a terrible blow, terrible!”
She talked a good lot to herself, and I thought
she was a bit “touched,” as I’ve heard people say,
through living too much alone in the bush. Tears
came into her eyes, too, and she gave a tremendous
sigh.
Bob gave me a kick and whispered something
about the skeleton and I went cold as ice all over
then hot as fire, for I understood what Bob meant.
“Was the little girl lost in the bush and never
found?” I asked
“Yes, lost and never found,” said Mrs. Jim,
“Playing at the gate one minute and gone the next.
Just wandered into the bush, God only knows


where, and though search parties were out less
than two hours afterward, not a trace of her did
we get. All the neighbours along the road helped,
and the police from the town; some of them stayed
out all night, sleeping where they found them-
selves. We searched for days and then bush-fires
came and burned the scrub all around us and we
gave up. Jim often goes mooching about the
gullies, pretending to be shooting, even now"; but I
know different.”
That is about what Mrs. Jim told us, and she
also said that the police thought that little May
might have been stolen by bad people and taken
right away.
“It’s the uncertainty makes it harder,” said Mrs.
Jim. “It would be better to die in the bush than
be taken away by bad people.”
She looked at the photograph again and then
took it inside. Bob and I felt very sorrowful, for
May was a pretty little girl, and we felt certain
that we had found her skeleton.
“You tell her Bob!” I said.
“No, I’m afraid to, Joe; you tell her!”
“I wonder what she’d do?”
“Don’t know what she’d do. Supposing we wait
till Jim comes home and tell him?”
“Might have to wait too long!”
“We ought to tell her.”
Mrs. Jim came out again and we said “good-
bye” to her and to the baby; but we fooled around


as if we didn’t want to go, though we did, right
enough.
Mrs. Jim asked us if we wanted more tucker,
or anything, so I just let it out because we couldn’t
be hanging around there for ever.
“Your little girl was not taken away by bad men;
she was lost in the bush, and we found her skeleton
down by Big Gully.”
I always thought that women fainted when they
heard any bad news in a sudden way, but Mrs. Jim
didn’t faint; she just flopped down on to a bench,
as if all her bones had gone at once. She looked
at me in a queer way and her face was white as
paper. I was glad she didn’t faint.
“Tell me,” she whispered, and her voice wasn’t
like her voice.
“Well,” I said, “we went down into the bush
from where there is a water-hole and a big tree on
the roadside; we followed a gully which by and by
had a creek in it, and when we got near Big Gully,
we saw a skeleton alongside a big rock. It had
girl’s hair on its head and bits of girl’s dress were
about.”
“Yes?” whispered Mrs. Jim as I stopped.
We thought the little girl might feel happier
about her bones if we covered them comfortably,
so we put a lot of ferns and gum-leaves over them,
with flat stones and flowers on top, and made it
look as nice as we could.
“Thank God, here’s Jim!” said Mrs. Jim, as a


man came around the corner, with a horse and cart
and a dog.
She went to meet Jim, and they talked for a
minute and Mrs, Jim pointed to us. Then Jim un-
loaded his cart as quickly as ever he could and
asked us to get in the cart and go with him to the
gully. We couldn’t refuse to go as Mrs. Jim had
been so kind to us and we were sorry for her.
We had a good ride in that old spring cart,
especially when we turned in off the road near the
big tree and struck an old cart track through the
scrub. I don’t think even dad could have dodged
the stumps and logs and ruts and trees any better
than Jim did, and the bushes swished along the
sides of the cart like anything.
When we got near to the gully Jim drove in
amongst the trees and rocks till the cart wouldn’t
go any farther without accidents and upsets; then
we all got out of the cart. Jim tied the horse to
a sapling while we walked the rest of the way, and
the dog came with us.
Jim didn’t talk much as we came along in the
cart, except to ask about the way; and now he
didn t speak at all, but followed Bob and me down
the gully.
We found Skeleton Rock without any trouble,
because the creek was a good guide. Jim stood
and looked at the grave for a minute with his hat
in his hand, and he seemed to be speaking to him-
self; maybe he was saying a prayer. Then he


. *****
MAYBE HE WAS SAYING A PRAYEI




looked about the bush and picked up some of the
half-rotted dress and an old shoe. He wrapped
them carefully in his handkerchief and put them
into his pocket.
The dog wanted to scratch about near the skele-
ton, but Jim wouldn’t let it do so. It came up to
each of us, especially Bob and Jim, and wagged its
tail and asked to be patted. Bob rubbed its head
and patted it, but even then it didn’t seem satis-
fied.
After Jim had looked at the grave again we went
back to the cart. Before we got in Jim shook
hands with both of us and thanked us, but we were
not quite sure what it was for. We went home
even quicker than we came from there. Jim took
Mrs. Jim inside for a long while, and I know she
cried a good bit; but my mother would have cried
t°°—and so would anybody’s mother.


CHAPTER XI
JIM’S DOG CLAIMS FRIENDSHIP
It was lucky for us that we heard Jim tell Mrs.
Jim that he would ride into town after tea and tell
Constable Spencer about the little girl, so that the
policeman could go with him first thing in the
morning. The policeman should be there, anyhow,
Jim said.
When Mrs. Jim had fed us with all we could eat,
and Jim had gone into town, and she had kissed
us good night, and blessed us, and shown us where
to sleep, we had a talk.
“The policeman is sure to ask questions.
“Yes, that is part of his job.”
“If he finds out all about us he’ll send us back
to Sydney, sure as eggs!”
“That’s what I’m afraid of; we don’t want to
go back there, do we?” I asked.
“I don’t!” said Bob, “and if we stick to the road,
they’ll easily get us.”
“Well, I’ll tell you what,” said I. “We’ll sneak
away to the railway-station and wait for a goods-
train; then we’ll hide in a truck and go a long


way from here before we get out of it. But I’d
like to write a letter to mother, first, because I
mightn’t get a chance again, and I should have
written to her at the beginning.”
“I noticed some ink and a pen and writing-paper
over on that little table,” said Bob.
“Yes, I know it’s there,” said I. “Seeing it
made me remember about writing.”
So I sat down at the little table with the candle
close to me and wrote to mother. I told her that
1 had left Sydney with Bob, because he was in
trouble, and we were on our way to her, and would
stick to the road if we could, and not to worry
about us, because we were getting along very
well.
I found an envelope and addressed it, and sealed
it with the letter inside, but I couldn’t find a
stamp.
“You’ll have to carry the letter with you,” said
Bob, “and buy a stamp at the first town.”
Just then we heard Jim come home, so I blew
the light out and we pretended to be in bed. It
was not long before Jim and Mrs. Jim went to bed
also.
By and by Jim was snoring like anything. We
sneaked out of our room, which was really an end
of the veranda boarded in, and were soon out on
the road.
Ye had trouble with Jim’s dog, because he fol-


lowed us, and we didn’t expect him to do that.
He came sniffing around as we sneaked away from
the house, and we couldn’t hunt him back how-
ever much we tried. He only wagged his tail and
stopped, then came on again.
When a dog makes up his mind that he is going
to be your dog you can’t stop him; but why Jim s
dog decided to leave such a good home to be our
dog I don’t know —unless he knew we had found
some of May and thought we were going to find
the rest of her. Bob thought that was the reason,
but I don’t know what the dog thought.
We soon arrived near the railway-line, but didn’t
go too close to the station, because the station-man
was near a good fire in a room with the door open.
It was dark where we were sitting, because the
lights of the station didn’t reach us; but it wasn’t
too dark to see the dog sitting in front of us wag-
ging his tail now and again.
“At this rate,” I said to Bob, “we won’t get any-
where. I don’t know how many days it is since we
got off at this station, and now here we are back
again.”
“Anyhow, it’s better to be here than lost in the
bush,” said Bob.
The dog wagged his tail hard and came a wee
bit closer as if he knew what Bob had said and
quite agreed with him.
“You are right,” I said to Bob, but I don’t know
what the dog tried to say.


“He’s not a bad old dog, is he, Joe?”
The dog must have known what Bob said this
time, because he went right close to Bob and
wagged his tail like anything.
“I heard Jim call him ‘Ji mtT n n y’ once,” said I,
“which is his name I suppose.”
Now Jimminy came close to me, and wagged his
tail like anything, and seemed to be pleased.
“It isn’t so lonely with him about,” said Bob.
“No, it isn’t. Dogs are all right in the bush; but
the dogs in Sydney are a nuisance, though I’ve
seen ladies nursing them.”
“Dogs weren’t made to be nursed,” said Bob.
“No, Bob,” said I. “Dogs are just dogs, and the
country is the place for them, especially the bush.”
“There isn’t room for a proper dog in Sydney,
Joe.”
“That’s just it; but out in the country a dog can
be a dog without being a nuisance, and a good dog
is a great help in the bush.”
When I said “a good dog” Jimminy wagged his
tail till I thought it might snap and fall off.
“It’s a pity we’ll have to leave Jimminy behind,
isn’t it?”
“It is, Bob, but we’ll have to. He couldn’t keep
up with a goods-train, and we couldn’t put him
in a truck with us, so he’ll have to stay behind
and go back.”
Jimminy was still sitting in front of us with his


head leaning to one side, and I wished it had been
light enough to see the expression on his face. Bob
and I were still sitting on our swags, thinking and
talking, when we heard a goods-train puffing along
the line, though it was still far off.
We stayed there and waited for the train; Jim-
miny got tired of sitting, I suppose, for he came and
crouched at our feet, and only wagged his tail
about once in each minute. Bob and I stopped
talking.
The station-man came along the platform with a
lantern, and though we couldn’t see very well, we
knew he pulled some levers which altered the lights
on the signal-posts along the line, so as to tell the
engine-driver that he could come into the station.
It was good luck for us that the train was com-
ing from the direction of Sydney, and by its slow
puffing we were sure that it was a goods-train.
If it stopped at the station for a while, we would
be all right, and miles and miles away before morn-
ing.
The train did stop at the station, and it was a
goods-train. Better than all, it shunted to a sid-
ing as if to wait for a passenger-train to pass, and
there were dozens of trucks into which we could
easily climb and hide.”
“Hooray, Bob!” said I. “Now is our chance!”
“Good-bye Jimminy!” I said to the dog, and
patted him on the head. “You just go home and


don’t kick up a fuss or try to follow us or you’ll
have us caught.”
“We’d better hurry,” said Bob, without moving.
“Perhaps we could get Jimminy into a truck with
us!”
“Not much hope, Bob; and if we did he’d very
likely make a row and have us discovered.”
“He doesn’t seem to bark much!”
Jimminy whined as if he was trying to tell us
something, and his tail wagged again.
“There you are!” said I. “That’s just as bad
as a bark!”
“Come on then!” said Bob, as he got up and
shouldered his swag. “We’ll have to leave him
behind, sure enough. You go home Jimminy!” he
said to the dog.
“S-s-s-s-s-s !” said I. “Go home!”
Jimminy went round and round Bob’s legs wag-
ging his tail as hard as anything, and we stopped
for a moment.
“We don’t have much luck with trains, do we
Joe?”
“We haven’t had, Bob, but it might change with
this one; there’s the passenger coming; if we don’t
hurry, we’ll lose the chance.”
“Blow trains!” said Bob.
Jimminy sat on his tail and leaned his head to one
side and looked at me. Then I knew what we


would do; we would travel on foot so that Jimminy
could come with us.
“All right, Bob,” said I. “Blow trains. You’re
likely to be put in jail if you are caught in them
without a ticket, anyhow.”
The passenger-train, all lighted up from one end
to the other, dashed past us as if it was in a won-
derful hurry, which I suppose it was; and it dis-
appeared again in a moment, though we could see
its lighted smoke above the dark bush for many
minutes.
The goods-train shunted back on to the main
line, and we let it go without trying to climb into
a truck. It seemed to me as if we had done some-
thing truly wrong, which made me feel very solemn
for some time.
I sat on my swag and Bob sat on his, and Jimminy
sat on his tail in front of us again. Bob and I
wondered why we had been so foolish; what
Jimminy thought I don’t know.
“We’re still here, anyhow!” I said, at length,
just to break the silence.
“If we go back to the road, we’ll have to pass
Jimminy’s place,” said Bob,
“Which might bring us to trouble.”
“There isn’t enough tucker in the bush.”
“Taking to the bush won’t get us to Widgewong,
either.”
“We are in a fix, Joe!”
“Tell you what,” I said, standing up, “we’ll fol-


low the railway awhile, then we can’t get lost.”
“Good idea!” said Bob, getting up too.
“Ripping!” said Jimminy, jumping up and wag-
ging his tail.
So it was settled; and though it was an awk-
ward place to walk in by night we started right
away, keeping alongside the railway, and Jimminy
went ahead of us.


CHAPTER Xli
MORE TROUBLE WITH TRAINS
After walking awhile we got on to a narrow path
which was easy to follow because it looked paler
than the dark ground on each side. We couldn’t
walk on it side by side, so I let Bob follow Jimminy
and I followed Bob.
It feels worse to be last when walking along in
a single file at night, but it really isn’t worse in
the bush, because there is nothing in it that can
hurt you.
But I felt nervous just the same, though I
didn’t know why —especially as nothing had hap-
pened excepting that Jimminy turned around once
and stopped us fiom stepping into a deep trench
which was right across the railway under a kind of
bridge.
The line here was built very high, and we either
had to climb down the embankment or walk across
on the rails in the dark, or jump across. We
climbed down, and up again on the other side, on
to our path, which was now along close to the
railway-sleepers.


After we had walked through cuttings and along
embankments till we were sick of them, because
they would be dangerous places in which to meet
a train, we reached a deep gully among the hills.
A creek was in the bottom of the gully, for we
could see stars reflected by the water.
The line crossed the creek on a high bridge at
the edge of which Jimminy balked, so we knew it
was a dangerous crossing. When we had a look,
we saw that we’d have to tread from one sleeper
to the next or else walk along a narrow board; but
we didn’t do either, because of the darkness.
On our hands and knees we started to crawl
across the bridge, for that was the safer way. The
swags were awkward, but we let them rest high
up on our backs to make them carry better, and we
felt our way very carefully.
Jimminy didn’t like the crossing, for he went
down the embankment into the gully.
We got along pretty well, only my swag
wouldn’t balance right and seemed to do all it
could to hinder me, till at last it slipped off my
shoulders and fell into the gully.
“That’s my swag gone wallop to the bottom of
the gully!” said I.
I heard it,” said Bob, “I think mine will soon
be down there, too, or else I will; I don’t like this
way of travelling.”
“We’d better go back, Bob; we’re not half way
across yet.”


“All right,” said Bob. “Give me time to turn
round else the swag might make me lose my bal-
ance. Railway travelling doesn’t seem to be any
good to us no matter how we do it!”
So there we were, nearly half way across a
railway bridge in a lonely gully on a dark night,
with my swag at the bottom of the gully, and Bob
nearly dropping his. Then all the hair that used
to be on my body when I was a cave-boy or a
tree-boy stood up on end and sent a cold frizzly
feeling all over me. It was a wonder we hadn’t
heard it before, but we heard it now. As sure as
anything a passenger-train was tearing along the
line and would soon reach the bridge!
“Drop your swag and come back for your life,
Bob,” I cried.
Bob’s swag and the billy went to the bottom of
the gully, and we crawled back as quickly as we
dared. Then the train got so close that we had to
take more risk of falling through by going still
quicker. At length we reached the end of the
bridge and tumbled down the embankment —just
too late to be run over by a snorting, puffing,
bloodthirsty passenger-train. Our knees were
bruised and bleeding.
“Golly, Joe!” said Bob, when he got some
breath.
“Gee!” said I, when I got some breath, because
I wasn’t thinking much of talking.
“I wish we were back at Jim’s place,” said Bob.


“Don’t wish that, Bob,” I said, “we’re escaping
in spite of our troubles.”
We scrambled down under the bridge, and
Jimminy came rushing up to us like mad. I suppose
he wanted to know why we had fooled him. He
scared us, at first, because we had forgotten about
him for the moment; but we were pleased to have
him with us again.
Jimminy helped us find our swags and we carried
them from under the bridge because we didn’t like
to camp there. \\ e found a flat rock level with the
ground near the creek, and we thought it would be
safe enough for a camping-place.
Opening out our swags, we rolled ourselves in
them; but the rock was hard, and we didn’t sleep
much that night. It was cold as well. Jimminy lay
near our feet, and it was good to have him there,
though I hoped there were no fleas on him, or
that they d stay on him if there were.
Three or four more trains came along during the
rest of the night, and they woke us up if we hap-
pened to be asleep; but more often I was awake
listening to a willy-wagtail chirruping. Why they
want to chirrup at night when they are not night
birds, I don’t know; but it is good to hear them,
tor they are cheerful—not mournful like mopokes.
“Sweet, pretty little creature!” Willy kept chir-
ruping as if he just couldn’t keep his happiness till
morning.
A mopoke was calling as well, but I couldn’t


hear another answering it; perhaps it was too far
away on the farther side of the first one.
Just before daybreak I heard a bird that I knew.
It was a rooster, and he crowed like anything; but
he was so far away that the sound only just
reached me. I wished I could have him for break-
fast.
We didn’t stay in bed after daybreak because we
were too stiff and cold and sore. As soon as we
could see fairly well we were glad enough to get
up and hunt for wood with which to make a fire.
As the light became stronger, we carried our
swags and wood down the creek a short distance
out of sight of the railway.
Bob managed to find some matches and we soon
had a fire going in an old tree-stump which had
been nearly burned out by bush-fires; and we
roasted ourselves by the fire before we did any-
thing else. Jimminy liked it, too, and he stayed be-
side us for a long time.
The bush is always very lonesome and uncom-
fortable as day breaks; nearly all live things
seem to wander away into nowhere during the
night, and they come back gradually, from no-
where, as the sun rises; and the darkness sneaks
away silently. Where it goes I don’t know. Then as
the sunlight comes it is different; all the birds wake
up and everything seems jolly glad the night is
over.
I was just thinking all that, and got as far as


MORE TROUBLE WITH TRAINS 103
thinking of kookaburras, when we heard some
down the creek, laughing away fit to crack their
necks.
“There you are, Bob,” said I. “The kookas
always come to cheer us up; we’ll be all right, soon,
see if we won’t 1”
Jimminy came close to us and wagged his tail;
then he went a few yards away and sat up, and
held his head on one side, and looked at us for a
minute. We thought he was asking for breakfast.
Which way to travel was the next question. The
near towns would know all about us because of the
skeleton, and the bush was no good to us. If I
had not had Jimminy to think of, as well as Bob, a
goods-train would have been the best thing; but
dogs can’t be expected to know all the things that
are dangerous to boys; and to do everything they
are told to do at once, such as keep quiet, though
Jimminy did seem to have more sense than other
dogs. ,
“Come on, Bob!” said I, at length. “We’ll walk
along the railway and trust to luck.”
When Jimminy saw that we were going, he got in
front of us and kept there most of the time, only
now and again taking a run into the bush.
After the line left the gully it turned around the
corner of the hill, and then a fairly level stretch
of country was on one side of it. We saw the road
again, close to the railway, wdiich we didn’t like,
so we sat down to think it over. A few houses


were in sight, too. Jimminy sat in front of us,
which seemed to be his habit.
We were hardly settled when we saw a police-
man on a horse going along the road. But the
policeman didn’t see us, which was lucky, and we
hid among the bushes till he was out of sight.
“Very likely that is the policeman that Jim went
to see,” said Bob.
“I expect he is,” said I, “and I suppose that Mrs.
Jim told him all about us and they are all wonder-
ing where we are.”
We looked for a shady place beneath the
branches of a big gum-tree because the sun was
now warm and we wanted a rest.
We had brought a billy of water with us from
the creek, which was lucky, because there was no
water close to our camp. We had water for dinner.
Bob said it was good water but a bad dinner.
We laid ourselves down and tried to go to sleep
after it, but we were too hungry, so I took a chance
and went to one of the houses near the line while
Bob stayed under the tree with Jimminy.
The house I called at was an old one, with old
fruit-trees in the garden. An old cat was asleep
on a stool on the back veranda and an old dog came
around the corner and barked at me; so I wasn’t
surprised when an old woman came to the back
door with an old teapot in her hand.
“Good morning!” said I, “can you sell me a loaf
of bread?”


“A loaf?” said she, “I dunno, little man; half-a-
loaf p’raps. Where’d you come from?”
“Oh,” said I, “we’re camping along the road and
have run short of tucker, and there are no shops
about here.”
“Shops!” she said, “no, me little man; the nearest
shop is six miles away. Well, I’ll see what can be
done.”
“Thank you!” said I.
The little old woman went into her kitchen and
soon came out again.
“I can spare ye half-a-loaf and a few eggs,” said
she, “and if ye haven’t any butter ye can have
some butter too.”
“That’s just what we’d like,” said I.
“If there are two of ye, ye’d better have four
eggs,” said she.
“There are really three of us,” said I, thinking
of Jimminy.
“Then I’ll get six eggs,” said she.
When she brought the things to me, wrapped
in a newspaper, she said: “There ye are, little man;
I won’t charge ye for the bread and butter, but 1
will for the eggs; that’s part of my living, selling
eggs, since the old man went. Six is sixpence.”
I thanked the little old woman and paid her for
the eggs, then got back to Bob as quickly as I
could.
Bob was pleased, and said that he would cook
the eggs and spread the bread with butter. While


he was doing it, I read the newspaper, which was
named the Southern Courier, and we were in it.
W hen I told Bob he forgot about the eggs and
they boiled too hard for us, so we gave them all
to Jimminy. He wanted more.
The newspaper must have been printed that very
morning, or the evening before, and they were very
smart to have us in it so soon. It said that the
skeleton had been found by two stranger boys who
had since disappeared, but that Constable Spencer
was keeping a look out for them.
We ate our bread-and-butter while we thought
about this latest trouble.
“That’s the worst of newspapers,” said Bob.


CHAPTER XIII
TRAMPING AT NIGHT—'TALKING SWAGGIE
We went farther into the bush, but not too far from
the road, and waited there till sunset; then we
crept out closer to the road and hung about till the
daylight had gone.
We started on our tramp along the road by
night, feeling glad that Jimminy was with us, be-
cause, somehow, the road at night seemed worse
than the bush.
Before we reached the first town a six-horse
team passed us, then a horse and sulky, and a man
on horseback. When we heard them we went off
the road each time so as not to be seen; but Jimminy
had to have a few barks with the dogs, though we
tried to keep him with us and stay quiet.
We passed a house here and there; and after a
long walk we came suddenly upon the lights of the
town, but still a couple of miles away. As there were
not many lights we knew it was only a small town;
but it was on the railway, because we saw a pas-
senger-train come out of the darkness over among
some hills.


Walking on, we soon arrived at the first street-
lamp ; the road continued through the middle of
the town, and we went right through without
causing any trouble. Jiraminy kept quiet; for which
we were thankful.
A few shops were open; and a few persons were
about, but nobody said anything to us, though
some of them looked twice, as if not sure who we
were. We were glad when we got as far as the
last street-lamp.
We stopped near a clump of bushes by the road-
side.
“Now, Bob,” said I, “you must wait here with
Jimminy and the swags while I go back and raise
what I can.”
So I went back into the town and didn’t feel so
nervous. A food shop was open and I bought six
oranges and four meat-pies for one shilling, also
two boxes of matches for a penny; then I bought a
stamp, for the little shop sold nearly anything. The
shop woman asked me if she’d make the pies hot
for me, but I said “No.” It was no use staying
there too long. As soon as I had found the post
office and posted my letter, I went back to Bob and
then remembered that I had not got anything for
Jimminy; so we gave him two of the pies.
Bob and I had a pie and two oranges and saved
two oranges for later on. We enjoyed the oranges
better than anything.
We tramped on, and the road soon left the town.


It crossed the railway about a mile from it, and
while we still were near the line a goods-train came
puffing and whuffing along, but we didn’t wait to
talk about getting on it.
As we got farther away, the bushes were closer
to the road on each side, and no houses were seen
for a time. Shadows and stumps and trees all
looked queer by the light of the stars, and we
sometimes thought that they were men. Faint
sounds by the roadside made us think that some
one was sneaking after us, which was all imagina-
tion, but very worrying just the same. We would
have been properly scared but for Jimminy. We
didn’t walk far, for this night we rested a lot.
About daybreak we were at a bridge over a creek
with plenty of bush about and no houses in sight,
though we had passed one about a mile back. We
were so tired that we reckoned we would rest by
the bridge until the day was light enough to let
us find a camping-place. We stretched ourselves
out on a patch of hard ground by the roadside and
felt as if we could never walk another yard.
Jimminy laid himself down by our feet.
“I think we ought to be far enough from the
newspaper town now,” said Bob.
“Far enough for a start,” said I, “but we’ll have
to keep going.”
Bob didn’t say anything to that; I think he was
too tired. I know I was, and getting cold, too,
now that we were not walking.


But although we were cold and lying on the hard
ground, we both fell asleep until the warm sun
awakened us. Then we stood up and stretched the
stiffness out of our limbs and tried to stamp some
warmth into our feet while we looked about to see
where we were. It was a pleasant place.
I decided to go up the creek from the road be-
cause the water would be cleaner there than down
the creek from the road. But we didn’t get far be-
fore we nearly walked over a swaggie asleep on a
bed of gum-leaves, just behind a big tree.
He must have heard Jimminy bark at him, for he
sat up suddenly and looked at us as if he was very
surprised, which I suppose he was.
“Good day, boss!” said the swaggie.
“Good day, mate!” said I.
“Good morning, Mister!” said Bob.
“Wuh!” said Jimminy.
Then we all knew one another.
“Early, aren’t yer!” said the swaggie, looking at
our swags and our billy-can and then at us again.
“Been tramping all night,” said I.
“All night! this weather!” said the swaggie.
“What a blamed silly thing to do! What yer going
to do now?”
“Going to camp about here for the day,” said I.
“Oh!” said swaggie, “you are, are yer? Well, I’m
going to stay here all day, too; but I’m not tramp-
ing at night, not me!”
“We like it!” said I.


TRAMPING AT NIGHT
“It’s all right in a heat-wave,” said the swaggie,
“but not in this weather; no sense at all. Which
way y’goin’?”
“That way,” said I, pointing.
“Same way as meself,” said the swaggie, getting
on to his feet and dropping his blue blankets. “But
I’m goin’ to spell here to-day. Don’t often get
the chance; y’gotta keep goin’ to get tucker. How
d’yer find it?”
“Pretty bad,” said I. “We are right out —
haven’t a bite.”
“That so?” said he, “well, y’d better stay and
share mine to-day. I scored, yesterday. Got
plenty, so I can have a spell. Funniest thing y’
ever heard of!”
Bob and I sat on a log and the swaggie rolled
his blankets up and sat on them and put his boots
on; he had slept in all his other clothes. Then he
gathered some light wood and livened his fire,
which was against the big log, but nearly out. He
talked all the time.
Talking Swaggie was not very tall; he had danc-
ing blue eyes full of twinkles, and a red face full
of wrinkles. His grey beard was cut short; he
ought to have cut his eyebrows as well, because
they were too long.
Taking his billy to the creek. Talking Swaggie
brought it back full of water and hung it over the
fire. I got our billy and filled it and asked him if


we might boil it over his fire. He said we might,
so I hung our billy alongside his.
“Talkin’ about religion,” said Talking Swaggie,
“and things like that, I reckon it don’t matter what
religion you belong to s’long as you do what’s right.
Some coves think that their particular kind of
religion is of more importance than being reason-
able, and doing unto others. I reckon religions
should have no money and no property because
they’re treasures on earth. I reckon it don’t matter
how you pray, or where you pray; it only matters
what you pray for, and you might be as much in
heaven in this life as in the next, and maybe more.
I reckon ”
But Talking Swaggie’s billy began to boil, which
made him knock off reckoning about religion and
attend to making his tea.
“He’s mad!” whispered Bob.
“Maybe just a little,” said I. “Often a swaggie
is a bit funny in one way or another, especially if
they do nothing else, but mostly they are harm-
less enough.”
After making his tea, and ours, while he was at
it, Talking Swaggie got hold of his tucker-bag.
“I wonder what he has for breakfast,” whispered
Bob.
“Just what I am wondering,” I whispered back.
We soon knew, for Talking Swaggie took from
his tucker-bag a damper and a roast of beef ready
cooked.


“How’s that for tucker?” he asked.
“You’re in luck, mate,” said I.
“Luck!” said Talking- Swaggie, “I’m the only
traveller that ever travelled in Australia that it ever
happened to—that’s what!”
“How did it happen?” asked Bob.
“Well, I’ll tell yer. I was cornin’ past the house
back there yesterday and went up to get a billy of
water and to see if there was a chance of tucker,
an’ I found a man standin’ at the back door with
this very roast on a plate an’ lookin’ at it, an’
lookin’ at it, an’ lookin’ at it. He was so busy
lookin’ at it, he didn’t see me till I was close up,
an’ said ‘good day boss’ to him, an’ he looked up
an’ said ‘good day’ to me. I asked ’im if I could
get a billy of water an’ he said I could, an’ wanted
to know if I was a vegetarian an’ I said I wasn’t.”
“Well” says he, “y’can ’ave this roast.”
“Why, wot’s wrong with it?” I asked.
Nothing! says he, “it’s the best roast we’ve
’ad for a long time and I’ve cooked it to a turn
meself because the missus is gone to town. But I
just had a vision, when I took this roast out of
the oven, to be an Abelite, which is the new
religion, which I’ve been thinkin’ an’ prayin’ about
for a long time. It came to me all of a sudden an’
I mustn’t eat meat now; it’s against the religion.
So you can ’ave the roast, if y’ want it, though I
dunno what the missus’ll say when she gets home.


P’raps she’ll get the vision, too; if she don’t, there’ll
be trouble between us, for sure!”
“So I told ’im that it was an ill religion that
brought nobody any tucker and asked ’im if he was
sure there was no tinned stuff about the house. He
remembered there was, so he went an’ got two
tins of corned beef which he gave to me an’ said
he didn’t think it would be against the religion to
give the meat away instead of wastin’ it. He had
t’ get rid of it quickly before the missus came home,
so as to give her a chance to turn, too.
“I told ’im certainly not, and said good day, and
came away with my tucker-bag full.”
Well, after that, I didn’t think Talking Swaggie
was mad, as I thought him before.
He brought the two billies of tea and we sat
down with the tucker in the middle. Talking
Swaggie cut the damper into three pieces and gave
us one each; then he cut a lot of slices of the meat
to which we helped ourselves and gave some to
Jimminy.
“Ha! ha! ha!” laughed Talking Swaggie, while
we were eating, but he didn’t say anything, so I
suppose he was just thinking of the way he got the
meat.
Bob and I ate meat with damper and drank tea
till we were very tight in front. Talking Swaggie
said we had good appetites; but he kept asking us
to have more, which we did until we couldn’t.
“I hope you’ll excuse us mate,” I said, “but we


had no sleep last night and would like to go and
have a snooze now.”
“Correct,” he said.
So Bob and I found a cosy place out of sight of
the road, in the shade of a big tree, because the
sun was now very warm. We spread our rugs
there, and took our boots off, and were soon fast
asleep with Jimminy lying at our feet.


CHAPTER XIV
WORK
I think we could have slept all that day and ah
the next night; but we didn’t, because Talking
Swaggie woke us to have some dinner about mid-
day.
It was a beautiful warm day with the sun shining
from the bluest sky we ever saw as we looked at
it through the tree-tops. A few little birds were
twittering about, and a thrush was hopping around
close to us and singing a beautiful song, though
there was not much of it.
After Talking Swaggie called us to get up we
just waited awhile and looked at the sky and the
tree-tops and listened to the birds.
We went across to Talking Swaggie, who was
busy raking the ashes from a fresh damper that he
must have made and baked while we slept.
The billies had been boiled, and the tea made, so
we had nothing to do but sit down and eat and
drink.
Talking Swaggie cut the damper in halves, then
cut one half into three pieces and put the other
half in his tucker-bag.


WORK
“That’s for supper,” he said. “Can’t be making
damper all day long.”
It s very kind of you to share your tucker with
us, mate,” I said, wondering what we were to have
with the damper.
“Don’t mention it,” said he. “I like your com-
pany. Most of the travellers along this road ain’t
fit t mix with. Now all you’re goin’ to eat with
that damper is beef fat, which is fit fer a king, any-
va;y. One feed o meat at a time is enough for any-
one, isn’t it?”
Talking Swaggie laughed and waved his hand
m the air and started to recite a poem, which was
something about a man from Snowy River.
He stopped to have another laugh and forgot to
finish the poem, but ate his damper instead; Bob
and I ate ours, too, with soft yellow fat of the
roast beef spread on it, and we were quite satisfied
I s’pose you haven’t got a pipe o’ tobacco on
you, have you boss?” asked Talking Swaggie.
“No mate, I haven’t, said I. “We don’t smoke ”
Talking Swaggie had taken his pipe from his
pocket and put it in his mouth, but he couldn’t
smoke because there was no tobacco in it.
“HI have to go down to the road and see if I
can g et a pipe f rom somebody passing,” said he
M e watched Talking Swaggie go slowly down
O the road and seat himself on a log with his empty
Pipe in his mouth to wait there patiently till a man
siould go past who would give him some tobacco.


Bob picked up a bit of the gristly fat of the beef.
It gave me an idea because I looked at my boots
at the same time.
“Rub it on your boots, Bob,” I said.
Our boots were worn white at the toes, and
around the sides. When Bob rubbed his with fat
they looked much better, so I did mine, and then
I got another idea. I scraped the black soot from
the bottom and the sides of the billies and we
rubbed it into the leather, which it blackened, and
then our boots looked much better and cleaner.
“Fat is jolly good for boots, especially in wet
weather,” said I.
“It ought to make them softer, too,” said Bob,
“I was wondering how we’d manage if our boots
wore out before we get to your mother.
We laid ourselves down to have a sleep and
Jimminy went nosing around as soon as he saw
that we were settled.
Kookaburras awakened us about sunset. They
were laughing like fun in the branches of the big
tree, right above us; one suddenly stopped, put
his head on one side and looked at us, then said
something to the others, who stopped laughing too,
and they all gurgled “haw-haw” right down in their
throats. One pushed another off his perch so he
had to fly back again or he would have fallen on us.
We both had a good laugh at that. The kooka-
burras flew away along the creek, and we heard
them in the distance laughing again.


WORK
That means good luck is coming for sure!” I
said to Bob,
We went around to Talking Swaggie’s camp and
found him there boiling the billies and getting tea
ready. Jimminy sat near by so that he shouldn’t
be forgotten when scraps were about.
Ha! ha! ha! laughed Talking Swaggie as soon
as he saw us. “I never saw such sleepers as you
are; dyer ever do anything else but sleep?”
“Did you get your tobacco?” asked Bob.
(i T\v° pipes, that s all,” said Talking Swaggie,
but it 11 do me till I get to town to-morrow. One
for to-night and one for morning.”
“We haven’t learned to smoke yet,” said I.
“Well, if yer take my advice y’won’t,” said Talk-
ing Swaggie. There s too many smokers, anyhow.
If there wasn’t so many smokers there’d be more
tobacco about, an’ it’d be cheaper.”
“I know it’s bad for boys,” said I, “but I might
learn when I’m properly grown up-say, when I’m
thirty.”
“Oh well, I might be dead then,” said Talking
Swaggie.
The billies boiled, and Talking Swaggie made
the tea and brought the roast from his tucker-bag.
Took me all my time to keep it away from the
blowflies, and now the ants are making for it.”
“I hope it isn’t blown!” said I,
“I’ve had to eat blown meat before to-day,” said


Talking Swaggie. “You’ve got to pick ’em out,
that’s all. But this is all right, me boys.”
We sat down to cold roast beef, and damper, and
billy tea, and thought that no other tucker could
ever be so good. Jimminy got his share too, and
he might have thought about it the same as we did.
Talking Swaggie talked about all kinds of things,
most of which didn’t interest us much, while we
were eating. When he had finished his tea, he
stood up and recited a poem and stroked his beard
and laughed. After he had done enough reciting
he lighted his pipe and sat down by the fire and
just smoked away as if nothing in the world
troubled him at all, and I don’t suppose it did.
The stars came out more and more each minute,
and the shadows grew darker, and the red coals
in the fire looked brighter, and Talking Swaggie
just seemed to melt into it all as if he naturally be
longed to it. Bob and I sat there very quiet, too,
and all the world seemed thousands of miles away.
A willy-wagtail sang “You’re a sweet pretty
creature,” down by the roadside. As we listened
to it, we heard something coming through the bush
towards the road, with a thump-thump-thump.
“Hear that?” I whispered to Bob, “it’s a wallaby
coming up to the roadside to feed!
My whisper broke the quietness that had come
over us and roused Jimminy, and we all heard
another wallaby. Jimminy rushed, barking, into


the bush, and several wallabies hopped for their
lives.
Talking Swaggie said he was going to turn in,
so Bob and I went to our camp and sat against the
trunk of the big tree. Jimminy came back and
laid himself down near to us.
We sat quiet awhile and I decided we would
shoulder our swags after Talking Swaggie went to
sleep so that we’d get through the next town that
night. We should be pretty safe then and could
travel by daylight if we wanted to.
“If you’re not too tired, Bob, we’ll walk all night,
again,” said I.
“I’m not tired, Joe,” said Bob. “I was dead tired
this morning, but now I’m right.”
I sneaked over to Talking Swaggie’s camp, and
I could tell that he was sound asleep by his breath-
ing.
We ought to have had our swags rolled up ready,
because it wasn’t so easy to do them by starlight
and not miss anything. But we managed it and
were soon sneaking out on to the road with Jimminy
nosing around in front of us.
A town was passed before morning. We got
through the town without any trouble, but didn’t
raise any tucker, so by daybreak we were as hungry
as we had ever been.
When we were close to a kind of farm, we de-
cided to stop, for the day was coming very quickly.
Going off the road into the bush a short distance,


we laid ourselves down on the ground to wait there
till sunrise, for we were dog-tired; and so was
Jimminy.
We went to sleep and didn’t wake till long after
sunrise when I felt Jimminy nosing my face, which
made me dream there was a snake crawling o\ er
me. When I sat up, Jimminy sat back on his tail
and put his head on one side and looked at me as
much as to say —
“Well, what about breakfast?”
“Jimminy,” I said, “you’ll have to catch some-
thing.”
“Wow!” said Jimminy, but I don’t know what
he meant.
“What’s up?” asked Bob, who was now awake.
Jimminy thought that Bob understood him, so
he went across to Bob and wagged his tail.
“Jimminy w r ants his breakfast, Bob.”
“So do I, Joe,” said Bob.
“Well,” said I, “if you try down at that place
along the road you might get some. But I think
that I had better go.”
The house was not far away and smoke was
coming from its chimney. When nearer, I could
see a fine orchard behind the house.
A man was weeding a strawberry bed, and I saw
ripe strawberries.
“Good day boss!” said Ito the man.
“Hullo boy!” said he, “where’d you spring
from ?”


“Down the road,” said I. “We’re travelling and
I came to see if I could buy some tucker.”
“That so?” said he, “well, just go round the back
and ask the missus.”
I went round to the back door and a woman was
there. The man called to her to tell her to see
what she could do for me.
“What is it you want?” asked the woman.
“I want to get a billy of water and to buy some-
thing to eat.”
“Why, where’d you come from?” she asked.
“My mate and I are travelling through,” said I,
“and we’ve run out of tucker, and can’t have any
breakfast till w r e get something.”
“Travellin’?” said she. “How?”
“Tramping.”
“Why, you’re only a boy!”
“Yes,” I admitted, “but we thought we’d like to
walk along the road instead of going by train be-
cause it would be more interesting. And mother
said we could,” I added.
It’s a funny thing how a lie will pop out some-
times, especially when you’ve started telling them.
I might have told another one only the man came
around and the woman told him all I had told her.
“Have you got enough money to buy tucker?”
he asked.
“I’ve a few shillings left,” I said, “we’ve been
spending more than we should have.”
“How much farther have you to go?” he asked.


“To Widgewong.”
“Never heard of it,” said he. “It must be a long
way from here. Would you like a few days’ work?
I’ll pay you for it and feed you well.”
“I’ll go and see what my mate says,” I replied,
after thinking for a minute.
“All right,” said he, “and bring him back with
you and we’ll give you some breakfast, anyhow.”
So I returned to Bob and told him all about it
and he wanted to know what kind of work it was.
“I don’t know,” I replied, “but I’m not afraid of
a bit of work, Bob; and if we earn some money we
might be able to pay our fare by passenger-train.”
“And if we don’t do that we’ll have more money
to buy tucker with.”
We shouldered our swags and called Jimminy
to come; he would have to be fed, too, or we
wouldn’t stay.
When we arrived at the house and told the man
that we were willing to do some work for tucker
and wages he showed us to a little room built
alongside a shed and told us to put our things in
it.
Then the missus gave us each a big basin of
bread-and-milk with brown sugar in it, and we
didn’t stop to take breath till we had finished it all.
A big bone was given to Jimminy which he took
under a tree and worried at it most of the morning.
After we had finished our bread-and-milk the
man gave us a handful of strawberries each and


then started us at work. We were so sleepy
we nearly fell asleep more than once before we
knocked off for dinner; but we stuck to the job
till then, when we really did fall asleep, for we
were dog-tired. The man woke us when he called
us in to dinner, but he didn’t say anything.
We felt a little better after dinner for we had
some strong tea. Still it was a struggle to get
through the afternoon, and as soon as tea was over
we tumbled on to our bunks.


CHAPTER XV
QUEER SWAGGIES AND AMUSING BIRDS
For several days we worked here; though the work
was hard we didn’t mind, because the man let us
rest when we wanted to. He gave us strawberries
each day, also fresh milk and plenty of good
tucker.
The missus was good to us as well. She mended
our clothes one night after we had gone to bed,
and one day, being Sunday, she made us lie in
bed while our shirts and socks were washed and
dried.
Jimminy also had plenty to eat. But there was
no fighting, because the man didn’t keep a dog.
There was only a cat and a pink-and-grey parrot
—of the kind which are called galahs—at their
place.
On the Sunday afternoon when our shirts were
washed and dried, another man came from some-
where to get his hair cut, and to cut Mr. Barton’s
hair. We asked the man to cut ours, for I could
see that Bob’s was very long, and Bob could see
that mine was very long.


While we were having a spell one day, a willy-
wagtail flew into the yard and he made us have a
longer spell than usual, because of his tricks. He
was the funniest wagtail I had ever seen, and
lively as any. After doing all sorts of capers in
the air while catching insects, he suddenly flew
straight up as high as a tree, then came straight
down again like a stone; but when near the ground
he stopped dead for a wink, then up into the air
again as if he was climbing a rope at top speed;
then down again, as if he was sliding down a
greasy rope you couldn’t see.
Willy repeated this trick four or five times,
while Bob and I watched with our mouths open.
Then he just glided down to the woodheap and
sat there with his head on one side, looking at the
cat, which was crouched on the ground twirling
his tail very slowly and licking his chops as if he
intended to catch Willy and have him for break-
fast.
The cat was ready to rush, but Willy surprised
it by flipping closer and alighting on the ground
quite near. Quick as lightning puss sprang at
Willy. But Willy was up on the clothes-line
laughing like anything. I bet he was, though no-
body could hear him. Anyone must have laughed
at the way that cat pretended he wasn’t ashamed
of himself.
“Oho!” said Willy, “try to catch a poor little
bird, would you?”


The cat said nothing. He crouched down again,
slowly waggling the end of his tail.
“Sweet, pretty little creature!” said Willy, as he
hopped across to the fence; from where he flopped
down and pretended he was going to light on the
cat’s head.
Puss gave a twist, and a spring, and a quick
slap with a front paw just as Willy settled within
reach but Willy wasn’t within reach.
“Aha!” said Willy, on the fence. “You’re
smart cat, you are!”
But the cat said nothing. He just looked silly
and crouched low, wiggling the end of his tail.
Now Willy darted backward and forward over
the cat several times, and at length snapped his
beak about an inch above puss’s nose, then he was
up on the clothes-line before the cat knew whether
it had been pecked or not.
“Gee,” said W illy. “I’d like you to come and play
with Mrs. Willy’s babies—l’m sure you wouldn’t
hurt them !”
The cat said nothing, but crouched again and
waited, twiddling the end of his tail, and twitch-
ing his lips.
Willy sailed over him very slowly, and all around
him, then sat on a stone a few yards away, pre-
tending to take no notice.
Puss crouched closer to the ground and began
to sneak, and sneak, a little way at a time, and kept
on sneaking till he was within a spring of Willy.


Then he did spring, so sudden and swift that any
bird must have been caught—except Willy.
The wagtail slipped sideways and tumbled up
into the air and fell on to the fence and laughed
like fun, only no one could hear him laugh.
“What a slow old cat,” said Willy; “and what
a wicked old cat —trying to catch and eat a poor
little bird that never did anybody any harm!”
But the cat said nothing. He crouched along-
side the stone, licking his chops, and twirling the
end of his tail, and blinking at Willy.
“Sweet, pretty little creature!” said Willy, as he
watched the cat.
Willy flipped himself up, did a war-dance in the
air, then darted backward and forward above the
cat, snapping his beak like fun.
Puss kept changing about, trying to find a way
to catch the wagtail, and to keep his nose from
being pecked.
Now Willy sat on the fence and whistled his
“Sweet, pretty little creature!” half a dozen times.
The cat crouched low and wiggled the end of his
tail and said nothing.
Willy flipped himself from the fence to the wood-
heap. Then he tumbled up into the air, and slid
down again on to the cat’s back, or so close that
it didn’t matter; but he sat back at the instant of
touching, and slipped up on to the clothes-line.
‘Oho,” said Willy, “I nearly had you that time,
poor Old Whiskers!”—l’ll bet that’s what Willy
said.


But the cat said nothing; crouching low, he
waggled the end of his tail and shivered his chops.
“Sweet, pretty creature!” said Willy, as he fell
sideways off the clothes-line and darted down,
snapping his beak in the cat’s face.
Now Willy darted backward and forward, up
and down, sideway and crossway, snapping his
beak close to the cat and going like lightning. Then
he gave a whoop (I know he did) and sailed away
as if he’d suddenly remembered something very
important.
Puss stopped licking his chops and twiddling the
end of his tail. He looked into the air awhile, then
went over by the stable where he could catch a
mouse.
Another funny thing we saw at this place was a
quarrel between the galah and two kookaburras.
The galah was tame enough, but had one wing
cut, so it could not fly away. It wandered about
the yard as it liked.
One morning it was on the ground when two
kookaburras came along. What the kookaburras
thought of the galah I don’t know, but they flew
down at him as if they were going to pull all his
feathers out and scatter them over the paddocks.
Or maybe they were just on for a friendly game.
The galah raised his comb and screeched like
mad. The kookaburras tried to jostle him, but he
frightened them off, and at length one kookaburra
flew away into a tree while the other alighted on
the fence near the galah.


Now the galah spread his comb as far as it would
go, and bobbed his head, and stamped one foot on
the ground, and called the kookaburra all the
wickedest swearing names he could think of, which
were a great many.
He screeched and swore, and chattered furiously,
just as if he was mad with temper. And though
what he said was all in parrot language, it was
easy to understand that his opinion of kookaburras,
especially the one on the fence, was worse than
anything. And all the time he was chattering and
swearing he was bobbing his head and stamping
his foot on the ground, just as a human being
might do.
The kookaburra listened to it all with his head
first on one side, then on the other, as if trying his
best to understand what the galah was saying. At
length he flew away to his mate without answer-
ing a word. The galah stopped stamping and bob-
bing, and screeching and cursing. He folded his
comb and smoothed his feathers, and once more be-
came the peaceful little bird that he was usually.
But as I think of the way that galah talked, and
stamped, and bobbed, I reckon it wasn’t a gentle-
man galah at all, but a lady galah. It made me
think of Mrs. Jenkins, who lived near Mrs. Jones.
Mrs. Jones said she could beat all the street with
her tongue.
One of the swaggies who called was a mad cook.
He was a fussy lanky man with a yellow mous-


tache, and I happened to be near the kitchen door
when he asked Mrs. Barton for the things.
“Ah! Good morning ma’am!” said he, in a quick
whispering voice. “Could you spare me a little
perishin’ essence,” (when I asked Mrs. Barton
afterwards, she said the Mad Cook wanted “Paris-
ian” essence) “I’ve got a new recipe—something
extremely—ah —dainty. Yes, Lady Duff herself
gave it to me —something—ah—quite different; but
I’m right out of perishin’ essence.”
“No, Charley,” said Mrs. Barton, “I haven’t any;
you’ll have to try another place.”
“Ah! how unfortunate, how extremely unfortun-
ate. Perhaps, then, you could spare me a little
candied angelica —I have a beautiful little dish —
Lady Carrington told me of it —but it would be
utterly spoiled without a little angelica.”
“Sorry, Charley, I haven’t a bit in the place.”
“Dear! dear!” said the Mad Cook. “Well, then,
ma’am, perhaps you could lend me a little tea and
sugar, and maybe a scrap of bread and meat?”
Mrs. Barton got these things for him, and he
thanked her and went away.
“He calls here about the same time each year,”
said Mrs. Barton. “He always wants some fancy
stuff for a choice recipe that a lady has given him —
but he gets away with the tea and sugar just the
same.”
Another morning, as we were having dinner
while Mr, Barton was away, a miserable old


sw a ggie called and asked for something to help
him along the road. This swaggie seemed to have
hair all over his face, excepting his eyes and nose.
He said that he was tramping through to Albury
to \ isit his mother s grave, because he was too
poor to pay train fare.
“Oh, are you?” said Mrs. Barton. “The last
time } ou were along this way your mother’s grave
was in Wagga.”
The old swaggie looked silly for a moment, then
he blew his nose with a red pocket-handkerchief,
and also wiped his eyes on it.
er yes, mum. But her poor body had to
be shifted to Albury, mum—it took me last penny.
Now I’m trying to raise enough for a small head-
stone, mum. If you can assist me ”
The old swaggie mumbled away for several
minutes. Mrs. Barton got him some tucker, and
e him sixpence as well, so he went away satis-
fied.
“Why did they have to shift his mother’s body
from Albury to Wagga?” I asked Mrs. Barton.
“All a make-up,” said Mrs. Barton, “I’m pretty
sure she was buried in Bourke the year before last,
when he was here. He must have a bad memory, or
maybe he gets tired of telling the same yarn ’al-
ways.”


CHAPTER XVI
KING BILLY OF BURRAWONDILLY
After about a week I said that we had better be
going on, or my mother would be feeling anxious
about us.
So Mr. Barton paid us a pound, and the missus
filled our tucker-bag for us, and we left the place the
next morning after a good breakfast.
“I think we’ll be pretty safe if we travel by day-
light, now, Bob,” said I, after we had got out on to
the road. “They treated us well, didn’t they ?”
“They just did.”
“The missus was just as kind as a mother
nearly.”
“Not all mothers,” said Bob
“I was thinking of mine, Bob. And the man was
just like dad—only a bit older. I hope they have
good luck with their orchard.”
We walked along, talking sometimes, with
Jimminy running about everywhere as if he was
pleased to be on the road again. By and by it
seemed like dinner-time, though perhaps it wasn t.
Anyhow we waited until we arrived at a com-


KING BILLY OF BURRAWONDILLY 135
fortable place for camping. A little creek crossed
the road under a wooden bridge. The water in it
looked very clear and pleasant. Wattle-trees and
gum-trees were fixed along its banks, with clear
grassy places in between. There were no houses
in sight, but another swaggie was there, which we
didn’t mind.
He was sitting on his heels lighting a fire ready
to boil his billy, though it wasn’t really a billy, but
only a treacle-tin with wire for a handle.
We thought it would be all right to ask him for
his fire-place when he was finished, so we went
close to him.
“Good day, mate,” said I.
The swaggie looked up, then he stood up and
spoke.
“Good day,” said he. “Can yer lend us a pipe
0’ terbacca?”
“We don’t smoke,” said I.
“Huh!” said he, and went on fixing his fire.
May we boil our billy over your fire when you
have finished?” I asked.
“Huh!” said he.
We supposed that he meant “yes,” so we sat
down close by and called Jimminy to us, and he
laid himself down at our feet.
The swaggie was only pretending to take no
notice of us, for we could see him watching us
sideways. Bob whispered something to me, and I
whispered something to Bob, for we had made a


discovery which we didn’t like. The swaggie
seemed to make a discovery, too, for he picked up
our billy and looked at it all over.
“Where’d y’get this billy?” he asked very
quickly.
“Why, that’s our billy,” I answered.
“Liar!” he shouted, “this is my billy, stolen from
me while I slept. Think I don’t know my billy?”
Billy-can Swaggie stood there with the billy in
one hand, pointing to marks on the lugs of it with
the other, and bending his body towards us and
looking very fierce.
“Think I dunno me own brands?” he asked.
“Why, you’re worse’n kidnappers —t’ steal my billy
while I was asleep!”
I w'as getting scared, and so was Bob. Jimminy
stood up and bristled his hair and growled, which
made Billy-can Swaggie a bit quieter.
“Well,” said I, “it might be your billy, but we
didn’t steal it. We wouldn’t steal another swag-
gie’s billy.”
“Then how’d you get it?” he demanded.
“Just wait, and I’ll tell you, and then you can
decide if it is your billy.”
Billy-can Swaggie bit a lump of tobacco off a
cake and chewed hard at it, while I told him a
make-up.
“Away back down the road,” said I, “we were
trying to boil our billy about daybreak one morn-
ing. It was only a little jam-tin billy, and some


kookaburras sat on a tree and laughed at us trying
to make it rest on two stones.”
“What!” said Billy-can Swaggie, “Jackasses?”
“Yes,” said I. “So I said to the kookaburras,
‘all right, you can laugh, but if you’d help us we’d
like you better!’ They flew away, still laughing.
By and by that billy-can, which you say is yours,
was dropped right into our fire from the sky. We
looked up, and saw two of the kookaburras in the
tree above our heads. As soon as we looked they
laughed as loud as ever they could and then flew
away.”
Billy-can Swaggie spluttered and sputtered with
his mouth, and did a kind of slow dance with his
legs, and his eyes stuck out from his face and his
beard waggled up and down.
I didn’t know what the swaggie might be going
to do, so I got up quickly and stepped back. Bob
was already out on the road. I heard Jimminy say
something, and I looked at him. He had stopped
bristling, and actually seemed to be laughing.
Then, to make things worse, some kookaburras
came flying along the creek. They stopped in a
big tree near to us and laughed like fun. Then
Billy-can Swaggie fell loose again.
“I knoo it! I knoo!” he said in a sorrowful voice.
“Listen to ’em now—just listen to ’em!”
“If it was your billy that the kookaburras took
and gave to us you’re quite welcome to have it back
again.”


“Thank yer, boss!” said Billy-can Swaggie, very
quietly.
He took his billy to the creek and brought it back
full of water, and seemed as if he couldn’t leave off
handling it. But at last he put it over his fire and
gave his treacle-tin billy to me, and we were jolly
glad to be out of the trouble.
After Billy-can Swaggie had boiled his billy we
put ours on his fire to boil; and while he eat his
dinner he told us of his troubles with kookaburras.
“The blinkin’ blamed things,” said he, “they
won’t leave me alone, never —alwus up ter some-
thing. One day they dropped a live snake fair atop
o’ me ’ead. An’ many a night they’ve thieved me
tucker, fer which I useter blame the possums. But
it warn’t possums, it were jackasses. An’ then
they ’ad the imperdence ter ’ang around till day-
light an’ laugh their ’eads off at me. I know ’em!”
He told us a lot more about the kookaburras and
what they did to him, but as it all couldn’t be true,
it’s no use writing it down.
“Well, why don’t you get a gun and shoot
them?” asked Bob, though I knew he wouldn’t
really like to see kookaburras shot.
“What?” said Billy-can Swaggie, “shoot jack-
asses? Shoot ’em? Shoot ’em? By the holy jumpin’
blinkin’ blazes, if I catch yer shootin’ jackasses or
throwin’ stones at ’em—l’ll—l’ll—l’ll ”
Billy-can Swaggie danced his slow dance again,
and spluttered and sputtered in his beard till he


KING BILLY OF BURRAWONDILLY 139
forgot what he would do to us if we tried to harm
kookaburras.
Then he went on eating his tucker and mumbling
now and again about jackasses and billy-cans.
We commenced our dinner, and found that the
missus had looked after us well. There was a
little tin of salt in the tucker-bag, and a bigger one
of sugar, and a tin with tea in it. Also a junk of
corned beef, a loaf of bread, some scones, some
jam, matches, and two spoons and two forks.
As Billy-can Swaggie seemed to have only stale
bread to eat, we gave him some corned beef. He
was pleased to have it, and asked me again if I
could spare a pipe of tobacco, though he must have
known that we knew he had some.
“Well, so-long mate!” I said, when we were
ready to go on again.
“Good day, boss!” he said, then added, “could
yer spare a pipe o’ bacca before y’go?”
“Haven’t got a bit. So-long!”
“Good-bye, mister!” said Bob. “I hope the
kookaburras won’t steal your billy again.”
Billy-can Swaggie grabbed his billy with one
hand and shook his fist in the air and sputtered
some words into his beard. But we couldn’t under-
stand them, so we went out to the road and were
soon on our way again.
We walked till near sundown and then found a
camping-place for the night near a water-hole close
to the road.


We had plenty of tucker for our tea; but
Jimminy had to have corned beef, which he didn’t
like, so we promised to buy him some dog s-meat
at the next town.
As night drew near, the air became cold and we
decided we’d have a good camp-fire so as to keep
ourselves warm all night. We spent half an hour
gathering big chunks of wood and cutting some
thick logs, which we carried to our camp, ready
for putting on the fire.
It was the jolliest fire we had sat by for a long
time, and because of it we were not in a hurry to
go to bed. We just sat and talked about bush-
rangers, and then about black-trackers, and then
about blackfellows. While we were talking about
blackfellows Jimminy sat up and looked into the
bush and said “W uh! ’ which made Bob and me
sit up.
A blackfellow came out of the blackness and
stood in the light of the fire. Though he was civil-
ized into clothes, he scared us properly. When two
other blackfellows came into the firelight, and all
three stood there and opened their mouths at us,
we felt that we’d never again run away into the
bush.
“Good day, boss!” said the first blackfellow.
“Good day, mate!” said I, as well as I could for
my fright.
“Gib it pipe o’ bacca, boss?” he asked.
“I’m sorry,” said I, “but we don’t smoke.”


“Bad luck, I been t’ink it!” said he, then he sat
down close to the fire and took an old pipe and a
cake of tobacco and a knife from his pockets.
The two other blackfellows sat down as well,
and found their pipes. Soon they were all smoking
just as if they belonged to our camp.
Jimminy didn’t take any notice of them, which
just shows what a funny dog he was. You’d expect
any ordinary dog to go mad at three blackfellows
for sneaking on to us like that.
The first blackfellow was an old man with grey
whiskers, but the others were younger and had no
whiskers. They wore coats and trousers and
shirts. The younger ones had boots on, but the
old man’s feet were bare. He had two boomerangs
and a red handkerchief tied together by the corners
so as to make a bag.
“Where you travellin’?” asked the old black-
fellow when his pipe was going well.
“To Widgewong, near Murragubba.”
“I know him. Long way from here.”
“Where you travelling?” I asked, just to show
that I was just as friendly as the blackfellows.
“Oh, just round about the towns to throw-him
boomerang.”
“Where you come from?” asked Bob, just to
show that he wasn’t really scared, I suppose.
“Burrawondilly, been live; big-feller camp
there.”
The blackfellows smoked aw r ay, and I wondered


if they were going to stay in our camp all night.
Somehow, I didn’t feel so scared of them as I was
at first sight. But they might steal all our things
even if they didn’t harm us. By and by the old
blackfellow spoke again.
“What-feller your name?” he asked me.
“My name is ‘Joe,’ and my mate’s is ‘Bob.’ What
is your name?”
“Oh I been King Billy, by cripes!”
“Everybody call him ‘Old Marvellous,’ ” said one
of the other blackfellows.
“My word, yes! ‘Old Marvellous’ my best name!”
said the old blackfellow. “An’ that been Charley,
an’ that been Jacky,” he continued, pointing his
pipe at each of the others in turn.
We were quiet again, the blackfellows just sit-
ting and smoking and rolling their eyes about.
Bob and I and Jimminy sat watching them. By
and by I put some more wood on the fire and
shoved the burning pieces together with a long
stick.
“Good fire!” said King Billy, “I been t’lnk-it we
camp here!”
“My word, yes!” said one of the others. “Any
tucker you hab young feller?”
“We have some left, and we’ll make you some
tea if you’ll go and get a billy of water.”
“You been get-it water, Jacky,” said King Billy.
King Billy had some tucker in his handkerchief,
as we saw when he opened it. I gave him some


meat and bread so that each blackfellow had
enough to eat to keep him from going to bed
hungry.
When they had finished eating and drinking tea
they each had another smoke. Then they settled
themselves down to go to sleep with their feet to
the fire. Bob and I and Jimminy sat and watched
them. What Jimminy thought we don’t know, but
Bob and I wondered if it would be safe for us to
go to sleep.
At last we decided to take the risk. We made
our bunks on the opposite side of the fire to that
on which the blackfellows lay, but we didn’t go
to sleep for a long time. We whispered to each
other about our adventures, and then listened to
two jVvilly-wagtails chirruping, “You’re a sweet,
pretty creature!” It was the first time I had heard
one answering another at night, just as two mo-
pokes would do. One of the willy-wagtails was
in a tree close to our camp, and the other was about
a hundred yards or more farther in the bush. We
listened to them chirruping “You’re a sweet, pretty
creature,” over and over again till we fell asleep.


CHAPTER XVII
TRAMPING WITH BLACKFELLOWS
When I awoke in the morning the blackfellows
had disappeared. Bob was still asleep, but I woke
him, as the sun was just rising. He remembered
the blackfellows as soon as his eyes were open.
“Where are they, Joe?” he asked.
“Don’t ask me, Bob, I was just wondering if I
had only dreamt about them, but you couldn’t
dream exactly the same things.”
“I mean the three blackfellows.”
“Yes, there were three blackfellows here last
night, sure as life; but they’ve gone just as quietly
as they came.”
While we talked about the blackfellows we
livened the fire and put the billy on to boil. A
few scones were left in our tucker-bag, also some
jam. We had scones and jam for breakfast, and
then decided to continue along the road.
About an hour after sunrise we made a start,
keeping a sharp look out for the blackfellows. We
saw Jimminy stand still and look back along the
road, and heard him give a grunt at the same time.


TRAMPING WITH BLACKFELLOWS 145
When we turned around we saw King Billy and
Charley and Jacky coming towards us.
“Hullo, young-feller Bob, young-feller Joe!” said
King Billy.
“Good day, King Billy I”
“I been travel you way.”
“I thought you’d cleared out and left us.”
“No fear! we go longa you. Catch big mob tick-
pence next town.”
Jacky walked to the side of the road as we went
along and plucked some gum-leaves, which he
brought with him and gave a couple to Charley.
They each bit one in two, and Jacky put his to his
lips and we heard a violin being played. Then
Charley put his gum-leaf to his lips and another
violin was being played.
At anyrate, you would have thought violins were
being played, but they were only gum-leaves. How
they did it I don’t know, for I’ve tried over and
over again since that time, but have never been
able to make violin-music with gum-leaves.
Jacky and Charley soon commenced a marching
tune, and we marched to it quite easily.
“Marvellous, you been t’ink-it?” asked King
Billy.
“Wonderful!” said I.
“I never knew that blackfellows could play
music!” said Bob.
“And violin-music on gum-leaves beats the lot!”
said I.


They changed the tune to “Men of Harlech,”
which Bob and I knew quite well, because it was
a school song. We sang with the gum-leaf music
after a time. King Billy opened his mouth as if
he was going to sing, or have a big laugh, but he
did neither.
“Marvellous!” said King Billy, when we paused.
“You young-feller swaggies better been go longa
us and make-it song, and we pay you good share.”
“I been t’ink-it, same as that!” said Charley.
“What you t’ink, eh?” said King Billy.
“I don’t know,” said I, though it was hard not
to agree, because it seemed good fun.
“Oh, you been come all right,” said King Billy.
“Play-him another one, Jacky.”
They played “Old John Brown,” which we also
knew and sang.
King Billy seemed very pleased, and said that
he’d take the School of Arts at the next town and
charge five bob to go in and make a “big mob
money” in no time.
“How you throw-him boomerang in School of
Arts?” asked Jacky,
“Oh, I been throw him all right. I throw him
in pub if you like,” said King Billy.
“You been break-it all bottles in one go,” said
Jacky. “Make it one big-feller smash-up and get
run in.”
“By cripes, you been yabber like Mary at the
pub and tell-it big lie,” said King Billy.


“That feller Jacky tell-him true,” said Charley.
“My word, you close-up big fool,” said King
Billy.'
Bob and I wished that the blackfellows would
keep on teasing each other all the time, because
they were so funny, and spoke so softly, and said
such curious things. But they soon gave it up,
and just walked along with us without speaking.
Soon I felt as if I’d been walking along with black-
fellows for years and years.
About midday we arrived at a camping-place
near a house, and a town could be seen in the dis-
tance.
“Got any tucker, young-feller Joe?” asked King
Billy.
“Only some bread, Billy,” said I, for that was
all we had left of the tucker which the missus had
given us.
“Bread all right,” said Charley, “Tea too?”
“Plenty of tea.”
“Well, we boil-him billy—l been thirsty,” said
King Billy.
“All right,” said I. “But I’ll have to go up to
the house for some water.”
“Missus Lawson gib-it some water,” said King
Billy.
W hen I returned with the water Bob had a fire
going, and King Billy asked me what tucker Mrs.
Lawson had given me.
“None,” said I, “I didn’t ask for any.”


“By Jimminy, you fine feller swaggie!” said
King Billy. “Jacky, you been go tell-him Missus
Lawson, King Billy want-him big mob tucker;
plenty meat-pie, plum cake, bread-and-jam and jolly
well everything!”
Jacky went and soon returned with a small loaf
of bread and a half-used leg of mutton, which he
said was all Mrs. Lawson had for King Billy this
time.
“By cripes!” said King Billy. “I been hab to
see Missus Lawson about this.”
“But I find these,” said Jacky, taking a bottle of
pickles from his pocket.
“Oh you find him!” said King Billy. “You been
take him while Missus Lawson not look, I bet; you
hab all us blackfellows in jail, I been t’ink-it,”
“I better take-him back then,” said Jacky, grin-
ning like anything.
“You gib-it alonga me an’ don’t be a fool—what
else you been find?”
“Nothing. But when I got alonga gate Missus
Lawson run out and say: ‘All right, you black
thief, you steal-him my pickles next time I been
sool dog at you —tell King Billy that!’”
“Now you make-it troubles! Now I been have
to go and ’pologize to Missus Lawson.”
King Billy tilted the bottle and plenty of pickles
fell out into his hand, but the juice ran off to the
ground.


“I been try this blue feller,” said he as he took
a chillie in his fingers.
“That’s a red one —not blue,” I told him.
“Oh, red you call him? All right, him red.”
King Billy put the chillie into his mouth with
some of the other pickles, and chewed for all he
was worth. Then he spat and spluttered.
“That blue feller sting like blazes,” said King
Billy, trying to wipe the chillie out of his mouth
with a corner of his coat. “We been light the fire
with that feller next time I been t’ink-it!”
We made the tea and sat around our dinner of
bread and mutton and pickles; and though the rest
of us ate pickles, King Billy wouldn’t have any-
thing more to do with the pickle-bottle.
“You eat him, one been sting you by and by,”
said he.
But we finished the pickles and the bread and
the meat. We gave the bone to Jimminy, though
we should have given him some of the meat as
well.
The three blackfellows sat around in the sun-
shine. Bob and I went into the bush a little way.
Bob asked me if any of the blackfellows was a
tracker.
“Well, I suppose they all could do tracking, but
they are not regular police-trackers, because police-
trackers wear a kind of uniform. But you needn’t
be scared now, Bob.”
“They are funny, aren’t they?”


“They are, all right. I wouldn’t mind travelling
with them all the time.”
“And they are harmless enough, aren’t they
Joe?”
“Just as harmless as we are. I suppose we'll see
them boomerang-throwing in the next town, and
hear King Billy preaching.”
“I wonder if Old Marvellous is really a king?”
said Bob.
“Most likely he is,” said I.
“He doesn’t look like one.”
“Well, he doesn’t; but suppose King George
was planked down in the middle of Australia right
among blackfellows who’d never seen a white man
before, the blackfellows wouldn’t think he was a
king, either.”
“Not even if he were all dressed up in his crown
and things?”
“Not even then,” said I; “and I bet some of them
would eat him if they got the chance.”
“Gee!” said Bob, “I’m glad our blacks are not
cannibals!”
When we returned to our camp the blackfellows
were prepared to start, so we hastened to get
ready. But we couldn’t find the tomahawk, though
Bob had left it stuck under the strap that was
around his swag.
“Marvellous where my tomahawk has got to,”
said Bob as he looked about.
When Bob said “Marvellous,” it made me look


at King Billy, and I saw him trying to hide the
tomahawk under his coat by sticking the handle
down his trousers. I didn’t want to lose the toma-
hawk, because it was so useful, so I told King
Billy that he’d better give the tomahawk back to
Bob, because his father was a policeman, which I
didn’t know was true at the time—nor did Bob.
“My word,” said King Billy. “This close-up like
a tomahawk I been lose once. I been t’ink-it you
find him!”
“No fear!” said I. “This tomahawk came all the
way from Sydney.”
“That’s where I been lose him,” said King Billy.
W e got our tomahawk and went on our way
again. King Billy didn’t call on Mrs. Lawson to
apologize about the pickles.
We soon arrived at the town. King Billy seemed
to be well known, for men greeted him as if pleased
to see him.
“Hullo, Marvellous, where you leave Mary?”
asked one man.
“She been stay longa piccaninny this time!”
“\\ here’d you find the boys?” asked another.
“Oh, they been come longa me to sing concert
and get big mob money close-up tickpence.”
Bob and I didn’t feel very comfortable in the
town with the blackfellows at first. But we soon
felt much better and enjoyed the fun, though we
kept away from them as much as possible.
Jacky and Charley stood in the middle of the


street between an hotel and a store, and played
their gum-leaves. Then King Billy made a speech
which, as near as I can remember, was like this
“Lady and gentlemen fellers, men and women
fellers —you been hear the wonderful gum-leaf
band play. Now you been hear King Billy tell the
truth about Australia. This fine country all be-
longa me and my people. You white fellers come
here and take our country from us all our land
and all our gold, worth millions and millions of
pounds —t’ousands of pounds. And you been kill
all my possum, all my kangaroo and wallaby, all
my emu, and send a big-mob sheep, and say the
blackfellow mustn’t kill him; and we close-up
starve to death. Lubras say no more can find
tucker, and dilly-bags empty all time. Now you
fellers, ladies and gentlemen, we been play you a
fine concert and throw boomerang to catch-him a
few tickpence so we soon hab money to buy our
country back.”
Jacky and Charley played the gum-leaves again
and King Billy put his old hat on the ground.
“Now you fellers, you fill-him King Billy’s old
hat with big-feller white money, and then I throw
the boomerang 1”
The men and women standing around clapped
their hands and called out jokes and threw pennies
into King Billy’s old hat, or near to it, while he
dodged about and opened his mouth in his big


silent laugh, and told the people to throw more
money.
“Marvellous where the money comes from!
That’s the way, ladies and gen’lemen, keep him
going; we been want big-mob collection this time.
Marvellous where the money comes from I”
“Old Marvellous can coax the pennies all right,”
said a man standing near me.
“He’s a character!” said another.
While the blackfellows w'ere busy collecting
money, Bob and I had a look around the shops, and
a quiet talk. We decided to dodge the blackfellows
and get away as soon as we could.
We went into a store and bought two packets
of flour with which to make damper, for we had
seen that more tucker could be carried as flour than
as bread. We bought also some raisins, figs, but-
ter, jam, and salt; then called at the butcher’s and
got some corned beef and a big junk of dog’s-meat,
and some buns and bananas at another shop.
The storekeeper asked us if we were going camp-
ing, and I said we were.


CHAPTER XVIII
BAD SWAGGIE STEALS THE RIFLE
We sneaked out of the town. In no time we were
well into the bush again. We passed a few houses
and then saw a big mob of sheep coming along the
road, with drovers and dogs looking after them.
Jimminy was more excited about the sheep than
about anything he’d seen before. He soon made
the front ones scatter and jump about, though some
of them just stood and looked at him.
The sheep-dogs tried to get the frightened sheep
together again. Jimminy went to help and made
a regular mess of the job.
A tall drover with red hair came galloping along
the side of the mob; and I couldn’t write down here
the words he said, because they were proper swear-
ing that would shock anybody who was not used
to them. But he did swear, and we managed to
get hold of Jimminy and keep him aside.
I held him by the scruff of his neck, and Bob
held on to his tail until all the sheep had passed
and the red-headed drover came over to us.
“What sort of a dog d’you call that?’’ he asked.


“I don’t know,” said I. “I think he’s a good
mixed dog.”
“A good mixed dog!” said he. “How much do
you want for him?”
“We don’t want to sell him.”
“I’ll give you five pounds for him.”
“Don’t you, Joe!” whispered Bob.
“No, mate,” said I. “We can’t sell him, but if
you were going the other way we’d lend him to
you.”
“Well, I’m blinkin’ blamed blithered!” said he,
and laughed like anything. “And you won’t sell
him ?”
“No,” said I.
“Oh well, so-long kids!” said he as he turned
his horse sharply, and galloped after his sheep.
We watched him pull up behind the mob, and
he turned and waved his hand to us, and we waved
in return.
“Five pounds is a lot of money,” said I.
“It is, Joe; but five pounds won’t keep us from
being lonely in the bush.”
“You’re right, Bob; five pounds won’t wag its
tail and look pleased to be about! And, anyhow,
that drover might have been joking.”
A short distance farther on, we came to a creek
where the drovers had eaten their dinner. A fire
was still burning beside a big stone, and there were
a couple of empty tins lying near it, and all the
ground was dusty and covered with sheep tracks.


!S6 the road to widgewong
While we rested and ate our dinner a flock of
green-and-red parrots flew along the creek, making
a sudden noise, which just as suddenly ceased when
they had passed.
When we reached the next town, which was only
a few miles from the creek, we were surprised to
see Old Trombone there. We heard his trombone
first, playing “The Harp that Once.”
He was standing in the middle of the road,
opposite a pub, on the veranda of which a few men
sat, or stood and listened to the noise.
On the other side of the street were shops, and
men and women were standing there. Some
children came and stood close to Old Trombone.
He stopped playing, right in the middle of the
piece, just as if a spring had suddenly stopped.
Then he laughed his funny “Ha! ha! ha! ha!”
Waving his trombone in the air, he recited his
great poem about the Royal Procession.
’Ere they are, no they ain’t!
Keep off me corns you guy;
The royal percession’s coming—
It now is passin’ by.
No they ain’t—yes they are!
Keep yer elber outa me eye,
The kings and dukes and duchesses,
Are now a-coming nigh!
That was not all of Old Trombone’s poem, but it
was mostly like that. And he played more, then
took up a collection in his hat, and saw us.
“Hey, you young rascals!” he said, trying to
look fierce, “What do you mean by clearin’ out?”


BAD SWAGGIE STEALS THE RIFLE 157
“Oh, we didn’t like to be eating all your tucker,
mate,” said I.
“Rubbish,” said he, “why I’ll never starve, not
me! You must stay along with me.”
As men standing around were looking at us, I
thought we’d better humour Old Trombone.
“All right, mate, we will,” said I.
Old Trombone was satisfied, and played another
tune. Bob and I sat on the edge of the pub
veranda and wondered what we had better do.
As soon as the tune was finished Old Trombone
thanked the people. Then he came across to us and
stood looking at us for a minute as if he were
studying something.
“Come an’ have a beer, you boys?’ he asked.
“No thanks mate,” said I.
“You better,” said he. “No pubs along the road
till the next town.”
“We don’t drink beer.”
"Only ginger-beer that you buy in the lolly
shops,” said Bob.
“Well, I’m blowed!” said Old Trombone. “Come
on then!”
We left our swags with his on the pub veranda
and he took us across the street to a lolly and
fruit shop. He ordered “Three ginger-beers,”
which the young lady soon got for us.
Bob and I enjoyed our drinks; Old Trombone
spat his first mouthful out and spluttered in his


beard, and said that he’d be back directly. Then
he left us and went across to the pub.
“Well, he’s a queer one!” said the young lady.
“He’s been very kind to us, but he’s funny all
right,” said I.
We left the lolly shop feeling much better for
our drink of ginger-beer, because it was a change
for us. We walked along by the big shop, in which
we saw a lot of interesting things that we wished
we could have.
In one window were axes and tomahawks and
all kinds of tools; also guns and rifles and hunting-
knives and everything. We stood in front of that
window for a long time, and forgot our swags;
but Jimminy was minding them, so they were safe
enough.
“Just what we want, eh Bob?” said I, without
naming anything.
“You’re right, Joe!” agreed Bob, without asking
w r hat I meant.
I was just going to tell Bob what I would buy,
when the policeman came along behind us.
“Hullo you boys!” said he.
“Good day!” said we.
“Are you the boy-swaggies travelling with Old
Trombone?” he asked.
“Yes.”
“How far are you going?”
“To Goulburn,” said I, because I had heard Old
Trombone speak of Goulburn.


“What’s your name?” he asked.
“Henry Brown and Tom Brown,” replied I,
which was a lie, but it wasn’t one to hurt anybody.
“Live in Goulburn, I suppose?”
“No. Just goings there.”
At that moment a big woman in an old sulky,
in which was a big horse, drove up and stopped
near us.
“Hey! Sergeant!” she called.
“Hullo missus!” said the policeman. “What’s up
this time?”
“He’s gone clean, stark, stone, starin’ mad—
that’s what is up.”
“I’ll see you later, you boys,” said the policeman
to us. “If you go along to the police-station
directly the wife’ll give you some tucker.”
“Thanks,” said I.
As soon as the policeman went over to the wo-
man I took Bob’s arm and pulled him into the
shop. I decided what we should do, and there was
no time to lose.
We spent nearly all our money in the store. We
bought a rifle and a lot of cartridges; some flour
and brown sugar; a bag of wheatmeal and a bigger
billy-can; salt and matches; a lump of bacon, then
some dog’s-meat at the butcher’s for Jimminy.
The policeman and the big woman had dis-
appeared when we stepped into the street again.
We didn’t go to the police-station, but to our
swags.


“What! On the move again?” asked a man as
Bob and I shouldered our swags.
“Oh we’re only going to make our camp for
the night,” said I.
We got away without being seen by Old Trom-
bone, and set out along the road at a good pace
until we reached a camping-place. Before we be-
gan to prepare tea we had a good look at the rifle,
because we didn’t have time to do so in the shop.
I wished that a wallaby would come hopping along
at that very moment, but it didn’t, so I could only
sight it at dead things to get used to the feel of
it.
“Let me have a go,” asked Bob. “Is it loaded?”
“Not yet, Bob,” said I. “I’ll teach you later on.
Rifles and guns are always loaded and always
cocked. That’s what dad taught me, and he
wouldn’t let me have a gun till I had learned it.
He used to load his gun and then take the cart-
ridges out of it, before my very eyes, and ask me
if the gun was loaded. I’d tell him it was noi
loaded. Then he’d say that a gun is always loaded
and always cocked. And as soon as I learned that
thoroughly he’d teach me to shoot.”
“Silly, wasn’t he?” asked Bob.
“No fear, Bob,” said I. “My dad wasn’t silly
about anything. Most accidents with guns happen
because people think they are not loaded when
they are. And when a gun goes off and shoots
somebody dead, the shooter says, T didn’t know it


was loaded!’ Or else a loaded gun is carried point-
ing any way, and the trigger gets a jolt, and the
gun goes off and shoots somebody, and the shooter
says, ‘I didn’t know it was cocked!’ So dad taught
me four things about guns, and he wouldn’t let me
touch a gun till I had learned them.
(1) Guns are very dangerous, because they are made on
purpose to kill with very easily.
(2) Guns are always loaded, even though you have just
taken the cartridges out with your own hands_
(3) Guns are always full cock and ready to go off on
the least excuse, even though you ve just let the
hammer down yourself.
(4) Guns should be always carried or placed so they
point down to the ground, or up in the air. or into
something solid like a tree trunk.
When I learned all that, he taught me to shoot.
Now you see that this rifle is loaded and cocked,
and I place it on the ground very carefully with
the muzzle against the middle of this big stump.
It’s safe enough there.” #>
“Well, I suppose you can’t be too careful, Joe.
“No, you can’t be careful enough, Bob.”
While we were making damper Bad Swaggie
came along the road and camped about fifty yards
from us. By and by he came across and asked us
for cigarettes.
“We haven’t any cigarettes,” I said.
“Going to camp here to-night? he asked.
“Yes.”
“Anybody with yer?”
“No.”


“Can yer spare a bloke a bit of tucker? I’m right
out!” said he, using swear words as well.
“We’ll give you a little,” said I. When the
damper was cooked we gave him some, and he
went away grumbling.
“I don’t like him,” said Bob.
“He isn’t a real swaggie,” said I, “or he’d know
how to behave.”
“Do you think we’d better go on, Joe, and not
camp here to-night?” asked Bob.
“Oh, I don’t think he is dangerous, Bob—and
we’ve got Jimminy and the rifle anyhow.”
“That’s quite right!” said Jimminy, with his tail
and his ears.
As the weather was now warm, we had no need
for a big fire during the night, but the one we made
kept bright for a long time.
We had just rolled ourselves in our rugs on the
grass near the fire when Bad Swaggie came poking
around again, and he gave Jimminy a piece of
raw meat.
“Didn’t know I ’ad it,” said he, “and it wouldn’t
keep till mawnin’.”
“Well, don’t you give him any more.” said I, “or
you’ll make him savage. It’s a wonder he doesn’t
go for you now.”
“Don’t you believe him,” said Jimminy, with his
tail; “I’m the friendliest dog that ever was!”
I saw Bad Swaggie look at the rifle, which was
alongside my head, then he went away.


“Jimminy’s got no sense,” I said to Bob.
“What we want is a savage dog,” Bob replied.
Anyhow, I made Jimminy lie down alongside our
feet. After a time we went to sleep, for tramping
makes anyone very sleepy. When we woke up
next morning, our rifle and cartridges were gone;
so was Jimminy.
But Jimminy returned from wherever he had
been just as we started towards Bad Swaggie’s
camp; he limped with one leg as soon as he saw
us and whined.
Bad Swaggie was not at his camp, nor anywhere
in sight.
We were very unhappy while we boiled the billy
and ate a few scraps of damper for breakfast. We
didn’t talk much, either.


CHAPTER XIX
KING BILLY TO THE RESCUE
Taking to the road again, we walked as quickly as
we could, following Bad Swaggie’s tracks along
the soft path of the roadside. Soon the tracks dis-
appeared, and we couldn’t find them again. Bad
Swaggie must have walked along the grassy edge,
or on the metal, for a change.
By and by we reached the first creek for the day.
As the time was about noon, we stopped for tucker.
“If we catch him what will we do?” asked Bob.
“I don’t know, Bob; we’ll have to wait and trust
to luck.”
Now a funny thing happened. We hadn’t heard
a kookaburra for several days, but as soon as I
spoke about trusting to luck three of them flew
across from the bushy side of the road into a tree
near our camp and started to laugh like fun.
“Good old kookas,” I shouted, “now our luck
will change!”
“They sound good,” said Bob.
“The best old birds in the bush.”


“I like willy-wagtails, too, Joe.”
“Mother used to like thrushes and robins—but
dad was fond of willy-wagtails.”
“And the lyre-birds for a concert!” said Bob.
“Bell-birds were favourites of dad’s, too.”
“Do they ring bells?”
“Well, you’ve nearly guessed it. A bell-bird
makes a tink-tink kind of a noise like a little bell
would make. It usually is very shy, so you don’t
see one often.”
The kookaburras gave another laughing chorus.
Just as they slowed down on to that funny little
chuckle, which they end with sometimes, we heard
a rifle-shot along the creek. The kookas flew for
their lives.
“Bad Swaggie!” whispered Bob, and he was
scared.
“I believe it is!” said Jimminy, sitting up and
cocking his ears as he looked along the creek.
Before I could think of what we might do, Bad
Swaggie came out of the bush, walking towards
us. He had a dead thrush in one hand and our
rifle in the other. He stopped not far from us be-
side a big tree, by the trunk of which was his swag;
we hadn’t seen it before.
Although Bad Swaggie must have seen us, he
didn’t take any notice. He built a fire to boil his
billy and cook his bird just as if we were not any-
where near.
Jimminy turned his head around and looked at


Bob and me as if he wanted to ask what we were
going to do.
“Jimminy!” said I. “That Bad Swaggie stole
our rifle and cartridges, and you let him; now
you’ve got to help us get them back.”
The dog whined, and wagged his tail. Then he
turned towards Bad Swaggie and gave a bark as
if to let us know that he understood.
I seemed to get angrier each minute, which is a
bad thing to do, because you should always keep
calm when there is trouble ahead.
“You wait here, Bob. Come on, Jimminy!” said
I.
Jimminy came with me to Bad Swaggie’s camp.
“Good day!” said I. “I want my rifle and cart-
ridges.”
“Your what?” he asked.
“My rifle and cartridges, which you stole from
us last night.”
“You’re making a mistake, ain’t yer?”
“No, I’m not.”
“I says you are. Don’t you try any of them
tricks on me or I’ll bash yer ’ead in for yer!”
“That’s my rifle there, and you know it is!”
“I know it isn’t —it’s my (swear) rifle. You
better clear out o’ this before I (swear) shoot yer
with it!”
But I stayed, hoping to get a chance to take the
rifle, though he swore at me again and said he’d
kill me if I didn’t clear out. He was a bad man,


all right, and looked very strong, so I suppose I
was foolish to stay and argue with him—but he
had my rifle.
When he stooped over the billy to put the tea
into the boiling water I rushed in and grabbed the
rifle. Jimminy dashed forward too, and barked,
and got in my way.
Bad Swaggie, turning quickly, upset the billy
of tea over his feet. It was jolly lucky for me that
he did, or I’d have been bashed over the head with
a thick stick he had in his hand.
Swearing like anything he hopped around like
hop-scotch till he sat down. He took his boot off
as quickly as he could, and nursed his foot, and
cursed and groaned.
I hurried back to Bob —so did Jimminy. I made
haste to see if there were cartridges in the rifle.
There were seven, which was lucky.
“We’d better clear for our lives now, Bob!”
“Couldn’t we get our cartridges back?” asked
Bob.
“I’d like to,” said I, “his foot must be pretty
bad!”
“Well you aim the rifle at him and tell him
you’ll shoot him if he moves, and I’ll find the cart-
ridges. Then we’ll go for our lives!”
“By cripes, you be careful!” said King Billy,
It was King Billy, sure enough, close behind us.
And Charley and Jacky were out on the road with
Jimminy.


168 THE ROAD TO WIDGEWONG
Bad Swaggie must have seen the blackfellows
coming, for he had quietened down.
“My word, King Billy,” I said, “I am pleased to
see you!”
“You fine fellers, make-it bush and leave poor
old blackfeller in town!”
“Didn’t know you’d want us,” I said, trying to
excuse myself and Bob.
“Well, I been make-it friends this time, by
cripes! What been happen here?”
“Bad Swaggie stole our rifle, and we just got
it back, and now we’re after all the cartridges he
stole, too.”
“Oh! a t’ief, eh? I been know him; pretty fine-
feller him.”
“Shut your ugly mouth!” said Bad Swaggie.
“Yes, I been shut my ugly mouth sometime. I
know a policeman looking for you!”
Bad Swaggie looked scared and started moaning
and groaning and nursing his foot.
“What’s up with the t’ief?” asked King Billy.
“He upset his billy of tea over his foot!”
“Hurt him pretty bad, I been t’ink it.”
I was wondering what might make Bad Swag-
gie’s foot a little better, and thought of flour, which
is very cooling to the skin. I offered some to him,
and he took it and rubbed it gently around the
scalded parts.
“Now you been give young-feller Joe his cart-
ridges, or I been tell policeman,” said King Billy.


—‘ 'B^ r - #•'%*& j ■
-itil i • -- . • *
HE HOPPED AROUND LIKE HOP-SCOTCH




KING BILLY TO THE RESCUE 169
“Take them!” said Bad Swaggie, swearing; “I’ll
meet you young beggars again, see if I won’t.”
We didn’t take much notice of his curses and
his threats, for we were pleased to have rifle and
cartridges back.
“Him close-up big scoundrel, that feller!” said
King Billy.
“Steal anything—worse than Jacky!” said
Charley.
“Oh Jacky!” snorted King Billy, “him only steal
Missus Lawson’s red-hot pickles to poison his
mates with!”
“Did you make a lot of money, King Billy?” I
asked.
“Been make t’ousands of pounds this trip. Next
week I been see the governor and buy Australia
back!”
“Close-up thirty bob we make last week,” said
Jacky.
“Marvellous where the money comes from!” said
King Billy, at which we all laughed.
“Where you boys goin’ now?” asked Charley.
“Right along the road to Widgewong,” I re-
plied.
“You been get there some day,” said King Billy.
“I been come too, only my missus waiting down
along Burrawondilly.”
We were very pleased to have the blackfellows
with us again. As we walked along, Bob said that
we must look funny, all tramping together, and I


guess he was right. A man and a woman in a
sulky passed. They both had a good look at us,
and then turned around to have another look.
We stopped at the first water-hole along the road
to boil the billy and have some tucker, for Bob and
I had not eaten any breakfast. There was not
nearly enough food for all of us, so Jacky and
Charley went farther on to a house by the road to
borrow some. King Billy told them to ask the
missus to lend King Billy a good feed. They
brought bread and meat back.
The afternoon was so warm that we didn’t start
again right after dinner, but sat about in the shade
for a couple of hours.
While we were there a swaggie with a per-
ambulator passed along the road, wheeling his
swag instead of carrying it. Just before we left
the water-hole a man swaggie and a woman
swaggie came along and made camp near us. The
man asked us if we had any tucker to spare, or a
pipe of baccy.
Although the next town was not far away, we
didn’t reach it till near sunset. Bob and I reckoned
that we would chance going through, but we stayed
there instead, and had good fun and plenty of
tucker.
When we arrived near the public-house, which
had a stone veranda about as high as your knee
above the road, King Billy noticed a lot of bullock
bells on the edge of the veranda.


KING BILLY TO THE RESCUE
“By cripesl” said he, “that feller bell-ringer been
here!’'
“Oh well," said Charley, “we better catch five
bob before he been come out of the pub.”
The blackfellows went into the middle of the
street, while Bob and I sat on the pub veranda. A
few men and children came and stood around while
King Billy made a short speech. Then Jacky and
Charley began playing their gum-leaves. Soon a
small crowd stood about, and a few pennies were
thrown into the hat that King Billy placed on the
ground.
“Marvellous where the money comes from!” cried
the old blackfellow. “Come on, you fellers, I been
only want five bob more to buy Australia back. I
been see the governor next week. That’s the way
you fellers, throw ’em in!”
A man came out of the pub and began to ring
the bullock-bells so as to play a tune. The music
of them was good enough for anything,. Charley
and Jacky played louder, and quicker, and King
Billy talked harder, Down the road marched Old
Trombone with his whiskers blowing out in the
wind and his eyes twinkling like anything, as we
could see when he came close.
Old Trombone soon commenced playing his
trombone, and all the music didn’t mix properly.
The crowd grew bigger, and everybody was
laughing, when up the street came the funniest
swaggie of the lot, with an old tin whistle which


he played for all he was worth as soon as he
reached the pub.
Old Trombone stopped playing for a minute to
give his recitation. But he couldn’t make enough
noise at that, so he played his trombone again.
If a policeman hadn’t stopped them when they
were going their hardest, I think all the people
for miles around would have run into town to find
out what the noise was about.
“We win that time, I been t’ink-it!” said King
Billy, as he counted the pennies in his hat.
“One, two, t’ree, four, six, nine, seven-t’ousand
fifteen, pretty near five bob!”
And he opened his mouth in a big laugh that
had hardly any noise in it.


CHAPTER XX
A GATHERING OF MUSICIANS
We sat on the pub veranda after most of the crowd
and the policeman had gone away. Some one
started an argument about the bells, the trombone,
and the gum-leaves, as to which was the hardest to
play. ....
The bell-man said there was nothing in playing
a gum-leaf, because you only hummed a tune
against it. And there was nothing in playing a
slide trombone, because you had only to blow
through it.
Old Trombone laughed in his funny way, and
waved his trombone in the air, then went into the
pub. Tin-whistle Swaggie said nothing, for he was
a very silent man; but King Billy was different.
“You been t’ink-it you can play a gum-leaf?”
“Easy!” said the bell-man.
“Bet you close-up t’ousand pounds, you can’t
play a gum-leaf!” said King Billy.
“Done!” said the bell-man, “put your money up.”
“Oh that been all right!” said King Billy, “I been
gib-it you a cheque if you win!”


‘ Have a go, you been like to,” said Jacky, taking
a clean gum-leaf out of his pocket and giving it to
the bell-man.
The bell-man put the leaf to his lips and
hummed, and blew, and spluttered, and grunted,
but the gum-leaf wouldn’t sing for him.
“Now we been make close-up five bob in no
time!” said King Billy,
Oh well,” said the bell-man, giving up, “you
can t play the bells, anyhow.”
By cripes! said King Billy, “you been listen
me!”
The old blackfellow picked up one bell and rang
it, then he picked up another and rang it, and he
kept on till he had rung every one.
ou don t call that a tune, do you?” asked the
bell-man.
“Well, you been t’ink-it this a tune,” said King
Billy as he tried again.
He took the bells in each hand as quickly as he
could and rang them till it seemed as if a whole
lot of bullocks with bells on were racing like mad.
Every one laughed. Then they tried to stop
King Billy, and in time they did.
Charley sorted the bells out till they ran like a
piano, with the low notes at the end, and the high
notes at the other. Then he played them up and
down and soon started a tune, just as good as any
of the bell-man’s.
“Now, then, you fellers,” cried King Billy, put-


ting his hat on the ground, “gib-it a good collec-
tion.”
Some of the people threw pennies at the old hat
King Billy laughed his silent laugh, and told the
people to keep at it.
“Well, that beats the band!” said the bell-man.
“You can’t beat Old Marvellous,” said a young
fellow who had just come along. He wore no hat,
and grinned as if he enjoyed the fun. He took a
gum-leaf from his pocket.
“By gum!” said the bell-man, “you might as well
try to get music out of a brick as out of that.”
The young fellow only grinned.
“My word, Missa Newton make the gum-leaf
sing all right!” said King Billy, “I been know
Missa Newton.”
Mr. Newton cut around one edge of the gum-leaf
with his knife. Then he put the leaf against his lips
and played just as good as any blackfellow. Jacky
joined in with his gum-leaf, while Charley kept on
with the bells. Tin-whistle Swaggie came out of
the pub and joined in. Then Old Trombone came
out and made an awful noise with his slide-trom-
bone and spoiled it all.
The musicians stopped playing, and the bell-man
began to pick up his bells.
“Tell you what,” said Mr. Newton, “we’ll get
the hall to-morrow night and have a real concert,
and charge a bob admission.”


“How I been throw-him boomerang in the hall?”
asked King Billy.
“Oh we’ll fix that,” said Mr. Newton. “What do
you say Bells?”
“What will I get out of it?” asked Bells.
“Equal shares all round,” Mr. Newton said.
“Well, I’m willing,” said Bells. “It’s funny how
we all struck this blinkin’ town at the same time.”
“Marvellous where we all come from!” said King
Billy.
Mr. Newton spoke to Tin-whistle Swaggie, and
to Old Trombone, and the end of it was a concert
arranged for the next night.
Men and women and children were still waiting,
so Mr. Newton stood on the edge of the veranda
and spoke to them.
“Ladies and gentlemen,” said he, “There will be
no more music here to-night as it has been decided
to hold a grand concert in the hall to-morrow
evening, when I hope that all of you will be present.
It is seldom that such a number of talented
musicians and aboriginal variety artists meet in a
town. It is so unusual that it might never occur
again, so we should not let the opportunity pass
of hearing them in comfort and accord, instead of
discomfort and discord.”
That is just about what Mr. Newton said, and
the people clapped and one of them said:
“Good boy! good boy! good boy Newton!”
“ Cow-bell Swaggie and Tin-whistle Swaggie


stayed at the pub that night. Old Trombone and
the blackfellows went to the edge of the town near
the bush, and made camp near a big water-hole.
Bob and I and Jimminy went with them, because
we thought we might as well.
Next morning Mr. Newton brought a fresh news-
paper to us, and in it we saw all about the swag-
gies’ concert that was to be held m the hall that
night, at 8 o’clock sharp. Admission one shilling,
reserved seats a shilling extra, and children half-
The concert was in aid of King Billy of Burra-
wondilly (otherwise known as Old Marvellous), to
help him in raising near a thousand pounds to buy
Australia back for his tribe. The assisting artists
were of high class, and included Tm-whistle
Swaggie; Cow-bell Swaggie; Old Trombone;
Jacky and Charley the Gum-leaf Champions; and
the Boy Swaggies.
Bob and I went up to Mr, Newton’s place later
on, because he made us. Mrs. Newton asked us if
we could sing any songs, and we told her the names
of the songs we knew. She played some of them
on the piano for us a few times, and we sang them,
and she said we’d do splendidly. She was the
nicest lady I ever knew, excepting my mother,
and when we finished our singing lesson she gave
us cakes and milk and fruit, and we didn’t get back
to camp till near dinner-time.
Charley and Jacky went up to town to buy some


things for our dinner, and we had the billy boil-
ing when they returned. We ate our dinner and
had a lazy time lying about in the shade of the
gum-trees.
By and by Mr. Newton came along.
“Good day, boys!” said he.
“Good day, boss, or mister, or Mr. Newton,” said
all of us.
“How many boomerangs you got Marvellous?”
asked Mr. Newton.
“One-feller!” said Old Marvellous, “I been sell
them all the rest for tickpence.”
You silly old man,” said Mr. Newton, “I sup-
pose you kept the best one?”
“You bet, I been t’ink-it!” said King Billy.
“Well, you’d better stick to it,” said Mr. New-
ton. Ive got a better one here, which you must
use at our concert.”
Mr. Newton pulled a boomerang from under his
coat and handed it to King Billy. It had black and
white stripes around it.
No good, this one; been smash up in no time;
my word, you one big fool, Mr. Newton!”
“Well, if you were in the hall do you think you
could throw this boomerang through a window?”
I been throw a boomerang anywhere. But I
been throw this corroboree boomerang in the fire,
my word,” said King Billy handing the striped
boomerang back to Mr. Newton.


“I bet you sixpence you can’t throw a corrob-
oree boomerang through the window.”
“I been t’ink-it you pull my leg!”
“Well, you come along with me, and I’ll show
you how to catch-him five bob in no time,” said
Mr. Newton.
So King Billy went with Mr. Newton, and we
waited till they came back. But only King Billy
returned carrying the corroboree boomerang, and
laughing his big silent laugh.
“My word,” he said, “young feller Newton, he
been the boy!”
“Did he make that boomerang?” I asked.
“He been get a man to make a t’ousand
boomerangs,” he replied. “You been see them to-
night !”
Before we had time to find out any more about
the boomerangs the young fellow came along with
another swaggie, who had a concertina in a flour-
bag.
“Here you are, boys!” said Mr. Newton, “here’s
another artist for our concert—Concertina Swag-
gie !”
Concertina Swaggie said “How do, mates?” and
put his swag and billy and concertina on the
ground, and started to fill his pipe.
“How do?” or “Good day mate!” we all said.
“Just caught him,” said Mr. Newton. “I never


saw so many swaggie artists at one time before.
I’ll be back to see you by and by.”
Mr. Newton went away again as if he were in
a big hurry.
“He’s a hard case, he is,” said Concertina
Swaggie. “Just landed in town and started to tune
up, when he came running from his office and told
me to hold on. So I held on, and he told me all
about this concert.”
Concertina Swaggie was a good one to talk. He
told us that it was just two years since he was
through this way, and the young fellow knew him
at once.
We passed the afternoon away yarning, and the
others smoked their pipes as well. After tea the
young fellow came and took us all up to his house.
We put our swags in a shed, and left Jimminy to
mind them, then we went up to the hall.
In the street, walking from one end of it to the
other, was an old man with a bell, which he rang
when he wasn’t speaking. When he was speaking
he was telling the people to “Roll-up, roll-up to the
Great Swaggies’ Concert in the hall to-night, to-
night, at eight o’clock sharp, admission one shil-
ling, and children half-price—roll-up, roll-up !”
There was a crowd of people outside the hall,
and many more inside. But we didn’t go in by the
front door; we went in by a side door to the back
of the stage, then on to the stage, which had a


big curtain in front of it, so people in the hall
couldn’t see us.
But the way the stage was dressed up made it
look more like a swaggie’s camp than a stage. On
the floor was a thick green carpet of cut-grass and
loose gum-leaves. Little bush shrubs were stuck
here and there. At the sides and back of the stage
were bigger bushes and saplings. There were
imitations of big tree-trunks with boughs cut from
gum-trees hanging down from the roof. A big
imitation log lay across the stage with a couple
of stumps. A make-believe fire, with a billy hang-
ing above it, was in the middle. Against one wall
a sheet was hung in a way that made it look like
a tent, and we all had to sit about as if the place
were really and truly our camp.
Mrs. Newton was sitting at the piano, smiling
and looking very jolly. Cow-bell Swaggie came in
with his bells, and stood them all on the ground.
Mr. Newton was telling us what to do, and saying
jokes; he told us that the mayor would sit at the
little table, which was on one side of the stage at
the front, and call us as we were wanted to per-
form our items. We soon understood all that we
had to do, even to Old Trombone, but King Billy
wanted to be in front all the time so as to collect
the money, which wasn’t allowed.
“The door-keeper is collecting all the money,”
said Mr. Newton.
“My word, that feller a big t’ief!” said King
Billy.


CHAPTER XXI
THE SWAGGIES’ CONCERT
Now I must tell all about the swaggies’ concert, as
near as I can remember, which is pretty good.
And I’ve still got the newspaper in which the
account of it was printed.
We all were loafing about on the stage, smoking
and yarning, with the mayor sitting at his little
table, with nothing on it but a bottle of water and
a glass and a sheet of paper. Before the curtain
was raised, the crowd were whistling and clapping
and calling and stamping till Mrs. Newton played
the piano.
Ladies and gentlemen,” said the mayor When
the curtain went up, “I have the honour to pre-
side to-night at this here concert, which is given
by roving artists, assisted by well-known local
talent, in aid of the aboriginals of Australia, parti-
cularly those of a tribe, or remnant of a tribe, I
should say, living not far from here. The king of
this nearly extinct tribe is well known hereabouts
as ‘Old Marvellous,’ for he and some of his sub-
jects occasionally visit us. It is very gratifying to


see the hall so well filled, and I can see by the
expectant look on all faces that you are all eager
for this here concert to begin. Therefore I shall
say no more, for a long speech is not necessary.
Before announcing the first item, however, I should
like to say one thing ”
Then the mayor talked, and talked, and talked,
till everybody got tired of him and started clapping
so you couldn’t hear him speak. And he got tired
of trying and sat down announcing the
first item. But it made no difference, because Mrs.
Newton began to play and everybody was quiet in
a moment.
Mr. Newton had blackened his face and hands,
and put a wig on his head, so that he looked like
a blackfellow. He loafed about our camp and
helped us when he could. I heard him tell Cow-
bell swaggie to be quick, and Mrs. Newton
stopped playing and Concertina Swaggie stood up
and said:
“Well mates, what about a little tune on the
bells?”
The people clapped as the mayor said something,
and Cow-bell Swaggie played on his bells. They
made him play again—and that’s the way the con-
cert went all through.
After Tin-whistle Swaggie had a go, it was our
turn. We stood close to Mrs. Newton so that she
could help us by singing herself in a low voice, and


after a time we were all right. We sang with all
our lungs, and the crowd clapped us so much we
had to sing the chorus all over again.
Old Trombone’s recitation about the Royal Pro-
cession made the crowd laugh a lot, because he
pranced around as if people were treading on his
corns and poking their elbows in his eye. Mr.
Newton had to pull him back into camp, because
he didn’t know when he had finished.
Concertina Swaggie’s music was wonderful. He
made the concertina ring like church bells, and
played hymns at the same time, and everybody
sang out for more when he had finished.
Jacky and Charley sang, and they were good
enough for anything; then Cow-bell Swaggie
played again.
The Gum-leaf Band was next, and Mr. Newton
was one of them. Before they commenced to play,
King Billy wanted to make a speech, but the others
wouldn’t let him.
The Gum-leaf Band was first-class music, with
the piano playing too, and they had to play twice.
As soon as they stopped, King Billy said: “Now
then you fellers, I want-it five bob in no time —”
but Mr. Newton pushed him back into camp, and
told him to be good or he’d get no money at all,
and the crowd laughed and clapped.
Mr. Newton played a cornet while Concertina
Swaggie played his concertina and Mrs. Newton
the piano, and that was good music. Then a man


came in from the back of the stage and sang a
comic song. Cow-bell Swaggie played again, and
the concert was half over.
The second part of the concert was much like
the first part, except for a speech and boomerang-
throwing by King Billy. No one could stop him
this time, because Mr. Newton had gone behind
the stage.
King Billy looked very funny on the stage, be-
cause all he wore was a pair of trousers and a
shirt. He opened his mouth wide in one of his
silent laughs before he started to speak.
“Now then, all you lady and gentlemen fellers, I
been show you how to throw the boomerang! I
been throw him through that-feller window and he
been come back through the door behind there,
and you been know him by corroboree stripes all
round like a goanna!”
He held his striped boomerang up and pretended
to throw it down the hall; some ladies squealed,
and men ducked behind chairs.
“This boomerang will come back to me if I been
throw it anywhere. My word, when I been throw
it out of the window and it come back to me
through the door, then I been ask you for five
bob!”
Everybody clapped and cheered at this. King
Billy stood right on the edge of the stage and threw
his boomerang through an open window close to


himself, up in the side of the hall, which was
good shot, anyhow. The people clapped again.
“Hold on!” said King Billy, holding up his hand,
“you been wait a second and you been make a
noise bigger.”
He turned round, and the boomerang came in
through the open door at the side of the stage. He
caught it before it had time to fall to the floor.
The people clapped and yelled, and Mrs. Newton
played the piano so that it seemed to be clapping
and shouting too. King Billy threw the boomerang
through the window again, and again several times
over, while the people made a great fuss each time.
Then he put his hat down on the front of the stage
and made a speech, and several pennies were
thrown at the hat; some fell into it.
“Now then, you lady and gentlemen fellers,” said
King Billy, “what about that five bob? I been
think-it you hard up, eh?”
A few more coins were thrown on to the stage,
and he gathered them up and counted them.
“One, two, three, four, six, nine, eight—marvel-
lous where the money comes from!”
Perhaps King Billy wouldn’t have stopped try-
ing to collect money that night if Mr. Newton
hadn’t made him do so.
After “God Save the King,” the people went
away, and all the swaggies and the mayor went
to Mr. Newton’s house for supper. A nice lady
with blue eyes and grey hair had a big can of coffee


ready with plates of bread-and-butter and cakes,
which we all enjoyed, and nothing was left. So we
went back to our real camp feeling quite happy.
Next morning Bob and I decided to move on as
soon as possible. Now the concert was over, we
began to be afraid of being found out. Hundreds
of people had seen us, to say nothing of the two
policemen who stood by the entrance door, though
we didn’t mind them at the time.
The blackfellows and Old Trombone and the
Concertina Swaggie talked about the concert, and
then said they would go up to town to see the other
swaggies.
We shouldered our swags and cut through the
bush to the road. Jimminy seemed pleased about
it.
When we reached the road, well away from the
town, we kept to the side of it, and dodged into the
bush when we saw anyone coming. But we
couldn’t manage to dodge everybody, because it
was not all bush, but houses and clear paddocks
here and there. A man in a sulky overtook us
where there was no hiding-place near, and pulled
up to speak to us.
“Hello, you boys!” said he, “what are you leav-
ing your mates for ?”
“Oh, we have to get on,” I said.
“It’s just as well you’re not with them, because
they are nearly all drunk, said the man.
“We don’t drink public-house drinks ”


“Well, mind you never start,” said he, “Would
you like a lift?”
No thank you!” said I. “We are going to camp
soon.”
‘Well, so-long!” said he, sending his pony into
a trot again.
“So-long!” we replied.
“Tell you what, Bob, I don’t feel safe along this
road now.”
“Won’t we soon be in Widgewong?” asked Bob.
I don t know, Bob, I’m a bit mixed up through
the way we’ve been hopping about from the road
to the bush and back again.”
At this moment we saw Poor Swaggie making
camp for dinner, and I said we’d ask him where we
were. He seemed very poor, for his clothes wer?
patches of all sizes and shapes, and his swag was
mostly old bags.
We stopped and made our dinner-camp near
Poor Swaggie, but he didn’t take any notice of us.
We didn t take any notice of him, excepting to look
at what he was doing, which was making damper.
He took his dirty patched old coat off, and laid
it on the ground inside up. We saw that one side
of the inside was crusted with dry dough, for it
was on this part of his coat that Poor Swaggie
mixed the dough for his damper.
By and by, while his damper was cooking, Poor
Swaggie walked across to us and stood looking
at the sky, all round.


“Rain cornin’,” said Poor Swaggie, and though
you couldn’t tell that he had spoken to us, we took
it that way.
“Yes, mate,” said I, “looks like it.”
■“S’pose yer haven’t got a pipe o’ baccy, have
yer?” he asked.
This time we could tell that he did speak to us.
“No, we don’t smoke,” I replied.
“Huh!” said he, as if he didn’t understand.
“We haven’t learned to smoke yet,” I said, ‘ and
perhaps we never will.”
“Could you spare a bit o’ tea and sugar?” he
asked.
“We’ll give you some tea, but we have no sugar.”
Poor Swaggie took the tea, and went back to his
fire and lifted his damper from the ashes. Then
he put his billy on to boil, and sat down and
smoked his pipe while he waited. So he must have
had tobacco though he asked us for some.
I went across to Poor Swaggie as soon as we had
eaten our dinner and asked him if he knew how far
it was to Widgewong or Murragubba. He said
that he didn’t know. We shouldered our swags
again and went on, leaving Poor Swaggie to him-
self.
Rain began to fall before we had gone very far,
and we thought ourselves very lucky when we
came to a good bridge across a deep creek which
had only a little water in the bottom of it. There
was plenty of dry ground beneath the bridge,


though water dripped through when the rain fell
faster.
We stayed under the bridge all the afternoon.
The water kept rising until we had hardly enough
room in which to camp. It was just as miserable
as anything, and even Jimminy grumbled.
As night seemed to be coming on we heard a
horse and cart along the road. I peeped out to see
it. Then I looked the other way, and saw some-
thing else, which was a policeman, coming from
the direction of the town we had left. I was soon
under the bridge again, telling Bob and Jimminy
to keep quiet for their lives.
The man with the horse and cart and the police-
man got on to the bridge at the same time. It
was a good job for us, though we were well scared
when they pulled up to speak.
“Hello there!” said one.
“G’day, sergeant!” said the other. “Pretty damp
to be out ridin’, isn’t it?”
“You’re right, me boy!” said the one.
“Do good though,” said the other.
“Right again,” said the one, “have you seen any-
thing of two boys tramping along the road?”
“Two boys? No, I can’t say as I have; might
have passed me, though, while I was in Mitchell’s.”
“How long ago?”
“ ’Bout an hour since.”
“I expect you’re right. I might as well go back


and wire Brown to pick them up when they reach
there.”
“Bad eggs, are they?”
“No, not exactly. But we’ve been asked to look
out for them and hold them up—only got word
this morning.”
“Oh! What ”
We could hear no more of what was said, be-
cause both went away together.
Bob and I looked at each other.


CHAPTER XXII
A NIGHT UNDER A BRIDGE—AND AFTER
We had a miserable night under the bridge, be-
cause the storm became worse and it rained like a
flood.
The water rose so much that there was not
enough dry ground to spread our rugs and lie
down. It was so dark we could hardly see pne
another but we didn’t get washed away.
As we sat huddled together I felt water coming
around where I was sitting. Bob began to shiver,
and Jimminy began to whimper. I wondered if
we’d be more comfortable out in the teeming rain.
Before night had come I had noticed a big log
that jutted out from the others at the side of the
bridge and about two or three feet from the ground.
I thought Bob and I and Jimminy might stick on
that if we could get there, and we did.
Jimminy seemed pleased, as well as Bob, to get
farther from the water. We sat on that log all
the rest of the night, with our rugs wrapped around
us, afraid to go to sleep for fear of falling off. But
we did sleep now and again, and I always woke


A NIGHT UNDER A BRIDGE—AND AFTER 193
with a jump, and Bob said he did the same. The
log kept getting harder, and harder, and harder till
it was a thousand times harder than the hardest
rock, and the water swished along just below us
all the time.
When day broke we were more tired and stiff,
and sore, and cold, and miserable than ever we’d
been before in our lives.
The rain had stopped, and the water was lower.
When the sun rose, birds sang and whistled, gum-
leaves glistened, and the sky became as blue as
anything. To cap all, several kookaburras flew
into a big gum-tree near the bridge and laughed
like fun.
“Change of luck, Bob!” said I.
“Good job, too!” said Bob.
“Whuh!” said Jimminy.
We shouldered our swags and followed the
creek.
When we were a good distance from the road
we stopped for breakfast, though we had only a
few scraps of bread. Jimminy had nothing.
We were tired and sleepy, because of the bad
night we had spent under the bridge. The sun
was warm and the place pleasant, so we decided
to have a rest. But we all went to sleep, and I
didn’t wake till near midday.
Bob was still sound asleep; he looked so com-
fortable lying on his rug on the grass that I didn’t
wake him, though I knew we ought to be moving


on. I thought I’d try to find something to eat
before Bob awoke, so I went along the creek with
Jimminy.
“What we want now, Jimminy, is tucker,” I said.
And plenty of it,” said the dog in sign language.
“But where shall we get tucker?” I asked.
“Everywhere all round about anywhere!” said
Jimminy, in sign language again, for he jumped
about in all directions and wagged his tail like
fun.
“If you’d only use your nose, Jimminy, you might
smell us out a possum or something like that,” I
said.
“And if you don’t look out,” said Jimminy,
“you’ll fall into the water.”
That is what Jimminy might have said, because
I stepped back into a water-hole and was sopping-
wet up to my waist at once. I’ll bet anybody any-
thing that Jimminy stood there on four legs and
laughed, though it was a blackfellow’s laugh, being
all look and no noise.
I went back to Bob, and Jimminy came with me.
Slipped! I said to Bob, “you needn’t laugh!”
Bob helped me light a fire between two rocks.
I took off my trousers and boots and socks so as
to dry them, and I took off my coat so as to give
the bottom of my shirt a chance to dry.
“We might as well stay here for dinner,” said I.
“If we had some!” said Bob.
“Well, you watch my clothes and I’ll g0 and


A NIGHT UNDER A BRIDGE AND AFTER 19S
shoot something—there ought to be some big
goannas along this creek, if there’s nothing e se.
I took the rifle and went along the creek with
Jimminy, because I couldn’t make him stay with
There were thrushes in the bushes, and wood-
peckers looking for grubs up and down the trunks
of trees. But I wouldn’t shoot birds like those un-
less I was really and truly starving. A couple of
crows and some pee-witts were the only other big
birds I saw. Nobody but a blackfellow would eat
a crow, and I didn’t like to shoot the pee-witts.
I saw wombat tracks and soon came to a big
burrow. But I knew I’d have about as much
chance of shooting a wombat as I would of shoot-
ing a crow, so I didn’t waste time waiting about.
A few wallaby tracks were in some sand by the
edge of the creek, and I wished like anything that
I could see a wallaby sitting up about fifty yards
away. Then I thought of Jimminy, and felt sorry
that I had brought him with me, because a dog
is good only when you ve a shot-gun.
I was feeling very sad about things when we
came across tracks that looked like rabbit tracks.
When Bob and I were swaggies, rabbits had only
just begun to come into that part of the country,
so I was lucky to find tracks, if nothing else.
Jimminy became excited about the rabbits. But
something else got to be excited about me and
Jimminy. That was a magpie which whirred


through the air and made a dash at my neck, mak-
ing his beak smack as he nearly snapped my ear
off. Then up into a big tree he went again, then
back at me as quick as lightning. He kept darting
at me until I was a good distance past his tree, then
he sat high up in it, and dared me to go back.
I could have shot that magpie. But I didn’t, be-
cause I knew he must have a mate with a nest in
the trees. And maybe the young ones were
hatched, and they would have to be fed like babies,
or starve to death; and no one would feed them
only the father magpie and the mother magpie.
For a time I stood still wondering if there really
was any tucker in that bush. As I looked along a
grassy stretch, where no scrub grew, and big gum-
trees were far apart, I thought I saw a hare sitting
up. It was a rabbit, I found out afterwards.
Jimminy almost spoiled my chance of a shot, but
I just fired before he rushed ahead. The rabbit
ran away, but it was wounded, and dragged its
hind-legs on the ground.
It was lucky for me that the rabbit was a long
way from its burrow, for Jimminy was able to
catch it before it got there. But it was unlucky
for me that the rabbit ran the way it did. As
Jimminy and I chased it for all we were worth, it
ran around a fallen tree and a couple of big
boulders into a clearing. Jimminy was close be-
hind it, and I dose to Jimminy— and a picnic-party
was in front of us.


When I noticed the picnickers, I propped like a
horse at a fence that he thinks he can’t jump. Only
I propped near a big log and a hollow stump as I
suddenly remembered that I had nothing on but a
shirt.
The picnickers were looking towards me, so I
didn’t like to run back across the clearing. I got
behind the hollow stump and waited, and Jimminy
waited, and the rabbit waited, for it was dead.
Boys are not supposed to be without their
trousers when girls or ladies are about, so when
some of the picnickers came toward us to see the
dead rabbit I climbed into the hollow stump, which
was nearly waist deep, for that was the best I
could do. I couldn’t be blamed for not knowing
there was a picnic-party fooling around in the bush
when I went shooting with no trousers on.
“Oh the poor thing!” said one girl, meaning the
rabbit, but she might just as well have meant me
had she known.
“Is it dead?” asked another.
“Dead as anything,” said Jimminy, with his tail
and his teeth.
“Did you shoot the poor thing?” asked the first
girl, looking at me.
“Yes, I shot it,” I said.
One of the men picked up the rabbit and said
that it was dead. He pretended to frighten a young
lady with it, and she pretended to be frightened as


anything, and squealed. Some one said to give
the rabbit to the boy and not be a goat. The girls
laughed, and I began to go mad.
I felt one on my leg, first, and goose-flesh came
all over me. Then I began to sweat like a young
horse breaking-in. When I felt some more on my
other leg I bet I yelled.
Bob had been trying to track me after he heard
my shot, and he said he heard my yell half a mile
away. I must say that Bob wasn’t a good judge
of miles.
The lady picnickers were scared pretty badly
when I yelled, for they thought I was mad—but I
was only beginning to go mad. They nearly had
fits when I yelled the next time.
“What’s up, nipper?” asked a man
“Ow!” said I, “this stump is full of bulldogs,
and I’ve got no trousers on!”
Well, I wasn’t to blame for what happened next.
The man lifted me out of that stump as quick as
anything and ran me down to the creek and sat
me in the water. The ants drowned and the pain
stopped.
Bob came along, so I sent him back for my
trousers. Perhaps it wasn’t the pain of the bites
that upset me so much, because I’m pretty good at
bearing pain. But it was the thought of having to
stand on a nest of bulldog ants for minutes, or
hours, and let them eat me alive.


I wouldn’t do it again. As I sat in the water I
told myself that the next time I was caught like
that I’d be out of the stump and away for my life
on the first nip. Cold water is good for ant bites, I
soon told the men that I was better, and that my
mate would be back with my trousers in no time.
I explained that I had got them sopping-wet
through falling into the creek, and took them off
to dry them, and never expected to run into a
picnic-party.


CHAPTER XXIII
LOCKED UP FOR EATING LAMB
It was such a hard job to decide what to do that
we didn’t do anything that day but hang about the
creek. We camped there for the night.
Although it was a warm evening, we kept a little
fire going just for company. Bob and I sat by it,
and talked, and listened to the bush noises.
Soon we got tired of talking, so we just watched
the fire, which is something nobody can help doing,
especially when it’s a camp-fire with black bush ah
round.
Watching a camp-fire makes you think of all
sorts of things, and makes you drowsy and dreamy,
and still not wanting to go to sleep. That is just
how we were when we got the worst scare we ever
had.
“Bidgeree-budgee-widgee-wudgeree \” or some-
thing like that said a voice quite near to us.
It was King Billy, sure enough, and soon as we
recognized his voice we were not so scared. Then
Jacky and Charley appeared.


“You make it good fire, I been t’ink it, said King
Billy, as he came right up to our fire.
We didn’t know whether we were pleased to see
the blackfellows or not. We didn t know what to
say, though Bob said good night to them, and
Jimminy said “Wuh!”
We made the fire up with some thick junks of
wood, and they camped with us.
Bob and I camped as far from them as we could.
We didn’t go to sleep for a long time, but when
we did we didn’t wake till morning. The black-
fellows were nowhere in sight.
“Gone!” said Bob.
“Sure enough,” said I.
“Do you think they went back to the town to
tell where we are?”
“No, Bob; I’m sure they wouldn’t tell on us.”
“Perhaps it’s all the better that they have gone.”
“I don’t know about that, Bob. If we stick to
the bush for a time, a good blackfellow could be a
lot of use.”
“Yes; I bet a blackfellow wouldn’t starve or get
lost!” said Bob.
We built up the fire, though the chill was off the
morning; then we were lucky enough to find some
flour that had got lost among all the things in our
tucker-bag. We mixed it for a damper.
The damper was just cooked when King Billy
came back with a big dead snake. Charley and
Jacky had nothing.


“Are you going to eat that snake for breakfast?”
asked Bob.
“My word!” said King Billy.
The blackfellows did eat the snake. They
wanted Bob and me to have some, but we felt that
damper would do us more good.
“You no good for bush,” said King Billy. “You
been starve in quick time.”
“You catch a big fat goanna and we’ll help you
eat it.”
"Oh, you eat goanna? Snake no diff’ence!”
“Or a nice fat eel,” said Bob.
"Which way you been go now?” asked King
Billy.
The shortest way to Widgewong; which way
you been go?”
"Oh, we been go that way too!”
We rolled up our swags and soon made a start,
with the blackfellows and Jimminy ahead of us.
\\ e hadn t gone far before three kookaburras sat
on a tree and laughed at us, so we expected some
good luck.
Going still farther into the bush we climbed
hills and gullies till about midday. Then we saw
a settler s place all by itself in the midst of thick
bush and rocky hills and steep gullies. It was a
wonder how he had ever found the place, and how
he got backward and forward between it and a
town.
It was a pretty big place with fair-sized paddocks


and a slab house with an iron roof, and sheds round
about. We could see cattle and sheep and an
orchard, so it seemed to be a mixed-farm.
“There!" said King Billy, "the good luck been
come; we have plenty tucker now for close-up a
long time/’
“If we go there and ask for tucker, they 11 want
to know all about us.
“I been take-it tucker,” said King Billy.
“You mean you steal-him tucker?” said Bob.
“No fear! All belonga me —this fine-feller place.
“What! Is this where Mary is?”
“By cripes no! Mary longa camp close-up twenty
miles.” , .
“All this country belonga me now I buy him
back. Soon as I see the governor I fix it.
We didn’t know whether King Billy was joking
or not, but I asked him how much money he had.
“Close-up five pounds; the governor make-it a
lot of money out of me! Got all this beautiful
country for nothing, and sell it for five pounds.
“But this country is worth millions and millions
and millions of pounds!”
“Oh well, I got close-up that much, and I gib-it
the governor Mary as well, and he make a bar-
gain.” .
“What will you do without a missus.
“I been find-it another missus; Mary too cranky,
my word, and smoke-it all my bacca!


204 the road to widgewong
Well, we didn’t know what to make of Billy,
though he seemed to be in earnest.
We started talking about tucker again, for we
were very hungry. We were always hungry.
King Billy stood for a few minutes looking at
the farm. Then he looked well about us. We were
on a high ridge with the farm at our right. From
our left the ridge slid down into a deep gully, which
zigzagged in and out amongst the hills for as far
as we could see. Beyond, everything melted into
blue haze.
“You been lend-it tomahawk,” said King Billy,
“and go longa that feller gully; I soon bring-it
tucker.”
All right, Billy, said I, giving the tomahawk
to him.
I been t ink-it I could eat a sheep, my word!”
said Billy.
Billy and his mates left us. Bob and I and
Jimminy went down the gully. We found a good
pool of clear water, of which we each had a drink.
The sun was so hot that we were glad to lie in
the shade of a big gum-tree. Everything was very
still and quiet and drowsy, and a big blowfly
buzzed me to sleep. Bob awakened me when he
saw King Billy coming with a dead lamb on his
shoulder, and a big laugh on his face. Jacky and
Charley followed him.
“Now we been hab-it a feed, my word!” said he.


“Gee!” said Bob, “now you been get put in gaol
for stealing sheep, mine t’ink-it.”
“You shouldn’t have done that, Billy,’ said i,
but I know I wasn’t in earnest because of being
so hungry.
“You t’ink it I been starve when plenty tucker
come about? That feller kill all my possums, all
my kangaroo, all my snake, everything; so I been
take-it lamb.”
“But the governor gives you plenty tucker down
at your camp doesn’t he Billy ?”
“I not been down the camp, this feller time, re-
plied King Billy.
“A good job for us!” said Bob.
Well, the lamb was skinned, and cleaned, and
cooked’in bits till half of it was eaten, when Bob
and I and Jimminy had eaten enough. Then
Jimminy went to sleep while Bob and I watched
the blackfellows eating. We tried to find a way to
be comfortable.
As it grew dark we covered ourselves with our
rugs. The blackfellows were still eating. We
listened to the mopokes and said our prayer until
we fell asleep.
Next morning Bob and I didn t wake up till the
sun was an hour high, for we hadn’t slept well
during the first part of the night. When we looked
about for the blackfellows and Jimminy we could
not see them, nor any lamb either, except bones
and skin and scraps of fat.


\\ e were making a fire when we struck another
heap of trouble.
A strange man, with a gun resting across one
arm, walked towards our camp. He came quite
close and stood still and silent. We waited for
him to speak, because it was too late to run away.
“So you’ve been stealing my lambs, have you?’*
“No, we haven’t,” said I.
“What?”
“That’s right, mister,” said Bob, “we haven’t
stolen any lambs.”
“Well, of all the barefaced liars!”
"It’s the truth,” I said.
What about that skin, and those bones?” he
asked. It s plain as daylight that you’ve stolen
a lamb and have eaten it.”
“We did eat some lamb, but we didn’t steal it,”
I said.
“Oh! I suppose you just took it?”
“No, we accepted it,” said Bob.
( “Well, you can explain that to a policeman,
I’m going to lock you up, now, and send for a
policeman straightaway. Pick up your things.”
“But we didn’t steal any lamb, mister,” said Bob.
Hurry up! I can’t stand here all day arguing
with you.”
We could see that he was determined, so we
got our swags and shouldered them. He took ouf
rifle from us, then marched us through the bush to
the paddocks, and through the paddocks to the


house, and locked us in a shed, which was built of
heavy slabs and had no window.
“Now you can stay there till to-morrow, when
I’ll take you into town and hand you over to the
policeman.” said the man as he shut the door of
the shed.
“We’re done for now, Joe,” said Bob.
“A bit of bad luck, Bob. But it’s no use worry-
ing over it, because worry fuddles your brain, and
then you can’t get over troubles. Dad always said
so.”
I could see that Bob was very much upset this
time, which was no wonder, perhaps. But worry-
ing wouldn’t do either of us any good.
“What I can’t make out is, what has happened
to the blackfellows and Jimminy,” said Bob.
“It is queer how they disappeared, sure enough.
But Jimminy is a funny dog, and blackfellows do
strange things that white men can’t understand.”


CHAPTER XXIV
ESCAPE
As we couldn’t help ourselves by talking, we
examined the inside of our prison in the hope that
we’d find a way to get out. The slab walls were
too thick, and the iron roof screwed down too
tight; the floor was made of hard boards; there
were no tools of any kind in the place. The thick
door was kept closed by a heavy rail across the
outside, as we had noticed when the man was
putting us into the shed.
A stack of empty bags was in one corner. A set
of harness hung from the wall, and a couple of
bags of chaff and one of corn stood on the floor.
“We’ll never get out of here,” said Bob.
“Oh yes, we will,” I replied.
“How ?”
Don t know, yet; but we’ll get out, sure as eggs.
The best we can do now is have a good rest, and we
might think of a way before night comes.”
About midday the man opened the door and
gave to each of u s a plate of corned beef and boiled


potatoes and bread, also a billy of tea. He
that he supposed we were hungry a though we had
eaten a whole lamb in the last couple of days
We were hungry. The tucker was a good
change for us, so we tackled it as soon as we
thanked the man, who sat on a block of wood and
watched us. M
“You’ve good appetites, anyway, said he.
“You see we had no breakfast,” said I, and we
didn’t really ” ,
I stopped myself just in time, or I d have said
something that would have made the man go an
hunt up the blackfellows and Jimnnny. And
didn’t want them to get into trouble as well as
Bob and me. When we had finished the man sai
we could walk about as long as we kept within the
house-yard. We promised him that we would do
so. .
The man went on with the work of fixing a cow-
bail while Bob and I wandered around and found
the woodheap.
A good axe was on the woodheap. I saw that
it had lately been sharpened, so I couldn’t help try-
ing it on some logs. After a time I let Bob have
a go till he was puffed, and then I had another turn,
and we chopped a good lot of wood.
After about an hour the man came along and
said that we’d better get back into our shed, be-
cause he had to go somewhere else and he wasn’t
going to risk us running away. And he said we


couldn’t be lazy, anyhow, to tackle a woodheap
on such a hot day.
So we were locked up again.
Utter- in the afternoon we heard a horse trotting
We peeped through a chink in the wall to see all
about It, if we could, and the chink was just in the
nght place.
A big horse pulling a spring-cart trotted into
the yard and stopped near the stable. An old man
and a woman were in the cart.
They got out and the young man came along and
helped them unload a few bags of flour, and parcels,
and other things, and unharness the horse. A
cattle-dog was with them, and it seemed pleased
to be home.
While they were talking the young man pointed
over toward the hill where we had camped, and
then toward our prison, so it was plain that he was
telling the old man and the woman all about us.
When the woman walked into the house with her
arms full of parcels the men came across to our
prison and opened the door. The dog barked and
seemed as if he’d like to bite us. but they made him
be quiet.
“50 these are the young sheep-stealers, eh?” said
wfdlt™.;^ ,ook as if they ’ d
Janywayr " fr ° m> “ d Where are y ° U


“We’re just tramping through to Widgewong
.1..
off the road for?” .
“Thought it would be easier to get tucker in
bush. , « . p>»
“Well I’m darned! Are you sure you re not lost.
Considering the young man had found us, we
were not lost, though we might have been lost be-
fore. And considering that the blackfellows were
with us before, we were not lost even then, bo
I said we were not lost.
“Well, where are you?” asked the old man.
“Here,” I replied.
The old man looked at me without speaking and
started chewing tobacco and thinking.
“Well, you can stay there till tea’s ready, said
he. and he locked us in the shed again.
They took us into the house at tea-time, and we
sat at the table with the woman and the two men,
just as if we were home—the tucker was good.
But we didn’t like the woman. She talked about
bad boys who stole sheep, and said that men used
to be hanged for stealing sheep. And she hoped
when the policeman locked us up it would be a
lesson to us.
She didn’t seem to be even a little bit sorry that
we were in trouble, so I bet I wouldn’t have liked
her for a mother, even if she could have been.
The men let us walk around with them after tea ;


and the young man said he had better be going
across to Roger’s. He saddled a horse and
whistled the cattle-dog, and away he went, leaving
the old man to lock us up for the night. This he
soon did, after asking us how we’d like to work on
a farm.
“I’d like it,” said I.
“So would I,” said Bob.
“Well, we’ll see in the morning,” said the old
man. It s a hot night, so you’ll be comfortable in
here.”
For a long time we stayed awake wondering how
we could escape, but we couldn’t think of any way,
so I said that we’d just have to trust to luck.
Bob fell asleep first, then I fell asleep, then I
woke up. That’s just how it seemed, anyhow. But
I didn’t wake because I wanted to, but because a
real li\ e blackfellow had hold of my arm, and was
whispering:
“I say, young-feller Joe!”
I heard it like that, several times, before I
understood, for I thought I was dreaming. When
I was quite awake, and sure that King Billy had
come to rescue us, I aroused Bob. We had our
swags rolled up in a jiffy.
“Now you been keep quiet and come quick-feller
or that feller be back with the dog!” said Billy.
We did keep quiet, and go quick-feller, and were
soon acioss the paddocks, following Billy through
the bush. It was a good job for us that we had a


blackfellow to guide us, or we might have had
a lot of trouble in finding camp, and perhaps been
lost again. . ,
When we did reach camp we found Jimminy tiea
to a sapling with strips of sheepskin. He didn’t
seem to like it, either, and was very pleased to
have us back again, and to be set free. He wagged
his tail, and bent his body sideways, and got
amongst our legs until he was over his excitement.
Billy kept us tramping all night, with a short
spell now and again. When daylight came we
were dog-tired, and said we couldn’t walk any
farther, but he coaxed us to keep on. We came
to a creek just as the sun rose.
A fire was soon made, and the billy boiled. We
each had a good drink of hot tea, which took away
some of the tiredness. But Bob and I laid our-
selves down on the ground and were asleep in no
time. Billy woke us up and said we’d have to be
going because bush-fires were about.
We had now had a good run of hot weather
without rain, except for the one night we were
under the bridge. The ground rubbish was dry as
dead beetles’ wings, and the bush air like a heat-
wave; so we didn’t feel like moving on again.
“Supposing we stay here all day and lie in the
water like Jimminy is doing, said Bob.
“My word, the big-feller fire catch you, I been
t’ink-it!” said Billy.
“Well, which way are we to go now,” I asked.


“I been go back to Mary,” said Billy. “She a
good-feller cook, and find it plenty tucker, my
word!”
"Can’t you come with us to Widgewong?” Bob
asked.
“Yes, Billy, you come all right,” I coaxed.
“No fear!” said Billy, “I been go back to Mary.*
\\ e tried to make Billy change his mind, but we
couldn’t, for which I was sorry, because I was
getting anxious. Our boots were worn through,
and the young man had our rifle and cartridges, and
we were afraid to travel along the road again.
“Well, Billy,” said I, “take us to within sight of
the nearest railway-station, or the road. We are
bushed now, and mightn’t ever get out by our-
selves.”
“I been take you fellers to Mary!” said Billy.
But we don t want to go to Mary, We want
to get to Widgewong as soon as ever we can, be-
cause my mother is waiting for us there.”
“Mary make-it your mother, and I close-up been
your father,” said Billy.
We laughed at Billy for saying that, though he
seemed quite serious. While we laughed we pre-
pared to go on, for we meant to stick to Billy until
we reached the road or the railway, so as to make
sure of not being left alone in the bush.
“Big fire coming soon,” said Billy, after we had
walked a little way.
“Are you sure it is coming, Billy?” I asked.


“My word, yes I" said Billy. "All bush burn up
in no time. You come alonga me I show you close-
up directly.”
Bob and I and Jimminy followed Billy to the top
of a ridge. He didn’t have any need to show us
where the fire was. Across a run of shallow gullies
smoke was hanging thick above the trees, and
though the fire must have been miles away, a
strong breeze and a hot day would bring it to us in
no time. „ ,
I felt like clearing for my life, and so did Bob,
though he had never seen a big bush-fire. But
Billy made us wait for Charley and Jacky, and the
fire didn’t seem to worry him.
“Plenty budgeree tucker soon,” said he, with a
big silent laugh. “Big-feller fire cook him no
trouble.”
“Where did Charley and Jacky go?” I asked.
“Just walk-about,” replied Billy. And that was
all he would tell us.


CHAPTER XXV
THE BUSH-FIRE
I didn’t see why we couldn’t go on and let Charley
and Jacky follow us. But Billy wouldn’t move,
and I reckoned it was better to stay where he
stayed.
“If we’ve got to stay here, Billy,” said I, as we
rested under the big tree, “we’d better light another
fire so as to burn a patch to keep us safe.”
“When Charley and Jacky come we been do that
all right, said Billy. “We burn all round this
creek.”
After the sun had set, like a big red orange, we
climbed to the top of the ridge again to see if the
fire was any worse.
“We been safe to-night,” said Billy. “The wind
take a spell now and the fire take a spell too!”
The hot wind that had been blowing lightly most
of the day had now died away, so I thought that
Billy might be right.
We stayed on the ridge till it was dark enough
to see the twinkle of fires in the distance, and the


warm glow in the sky. As we watched, they e-
came less, for which we were thankful.
The bush was more silent and solemn that night
than we’d ever known it before. Not even a mo-
poke croaked its miserable song. It felt as if God
had said, “Hush” in a thick flat voice that pressed
on to everything and had no sound that you could
hear.
By and by we heard footsteps approaching; soon
Charley and Jacky appeared.
Jacky gave to Billy a lump of tobacco, while
Charley opened his tucker-bag and took out of it
a lot of cold meat and bread. When we all had
finished our supper not a scrap was left, excepting
for a bone which Jimminy was trying to crunch.
Bob and I could plainly see that we would have
starved this time if it had not been for the black-
fellows. Then we settled ourselves for the night,
and soon were asleep, for we were very tired.
Next morning, I woke before sunrise. Charley
and Jacky went to the top of the ridge to have a
look at the fire, and Bob was awake by the time
they returned.
“That big-feller fire coming too soon?” said
Jacky.
“Yes* my word!” said Charley, “we better be
quick.”
“I been t’ink-it we stay here,” said Billy, “might
catch-it a lot of tucker soon.”
For a time we were all silent, excepting Jimminy,


and he didn’t say much. He looked at the red sun
and barked one little bark, then sat on his tail and
looked at us. But we didn’t take much notice of
him, because the bush-fire was troubling us.
Thick smoke was now blowing towards us, and
the wind grew stronger all at once, and hot, too;
many birds flew overhead as if afraid of the fire!
and up on the ridge we saw several wallabies going
for their lives. * S
We hurried to get a fighting-fire lighted on each
81 0 biggest pool, but we had no matches.
t , °uve got all our matches, Billy,” I said.
“I not been have the matches,” said Billy.
Well how did you light your pipe?” I asked.
wh those matches all gone!” said Billy. “You
better been gib-it me another box.”
“There isn’t another box—there isn’t another
one, I said.
Make-it a stick, quick-feller!” said Jacky, “we
been get a fire that way.”
But just then a dingo and two wallabies passed
us, as hard as they could go, and the dingo was
not hunting the wallabies. More birds came flying
over our heads in a way they do not usually fly.
second we stood still as death.
The blackfellows started to run through the
bush. Bob and I, and Jimminy followed, leaving
everything behind us, excepting what was in our
pockets, for we were more scared than we’d ever
been in our lives before.


We headed for a low hill. Jacky and Char ey
reached the top of it first and watted there for the
rest of us. We could now see the fire It was not
so far away, and was burning like mad. ow
again birds flew past as hard as they could go, and
more wallabies came crashing throng t e sc: .
Tacky caught hold of my hand, and Charley too
Bob’s hand; then we all hurried on again for our
lives.
We saw two more dingoes pass; also a orse
lathered in sweat, and it looked more frightened
than anything I had ever seen.
The fire was getting closer to us each minute;
the smoke from it had already reached us, and the
heat of it came to us with the wind. We struggled
on, sweating and panting, till Bob and I oc * e
up. Then Jacky put me on his back, and Charley
put Bob on his back, and they raced on again, with
Bob and I holding on as well as we could.
I wondered if my skeleton would be left if I
were burned up in a bush-fire. But I reckoned
that it wouldn’t —not in the fire that was chasing
us, anyhow. Burning cinders were now falling
about us and blowing past; the roar and crackling
grew louder each minute, and there didn’t seem
any chance of escaping until I saw water ahead of
us.
We were lucky enough to reach a big pool before
the fire overtook us. The blackfellows just tumbled
into the water, and Charley and Jacky let Bob


and me drop into it, so that we got a ducking; but
we didn’t mind that, not a little bit. We were
saved from a terrible death, and wouldn’t have
minded a million duckings.
Jimminy also flopped into the water, and we all
lay there until our breaths came back and our
hearts slowed down. Only Billy spoke.
“Lost my pipe,” he said.
The pool was deep in the middle, but we got as
far in as we could—dose to five wallabies and two
dingoes. And I wondered how the animals knew
that water wouldn’t bum. But I knew they were
more afraid of the fire than they were of us. The
flames were now coming down both sides of the
grully, closer and closer, and we had to keep
ducking our heads under the water to escape from
the heat.
The roar of the fire, the crackle of burning scrub
and trees, and the crash of falling branches were
enough to frighten anyone. Cinders sizzled in the
water all around us, and the smoke blinded and
nearly choked us. But we stayed there. So did
t e wallabies and the dingoes and the bandicoots
and goannas.
Once when Jacky ducked he came up again with
a big snake on the back of his neck. But the
snake slid off and went for its life, and we didn’t
see it again. This was lucky for us, though Billy
said that Jacky should have caught the snake and
kept it for tucker.


When the flames were roaring and
„ nr nool and were all round us, we had to keep
ourselves under the water for as long a Ume as we
could. The thought of snakes being
dl< By and P by the worst of the fire
we knew that we were saved, so we padd e
shallow edge of the pool again.
Jimminy went out of the water but he did g
far because there were too many hot coal*i about.
“You fellers better catch-him wallaby for tucker,
I been t’ink-it,’ said Billy.
The blackfellows went slowly along t e poo
down to where the wallabies were sitting m e
water, and they crouched low so that only their
heads were to be seen. The dingoes swam away
as the blackfellows drew close, but the walla ies
seemed too stupid to move. Very soon each black-
fellow grabbed a wallaby by the tail, after creeping
a fair distance with their heads right under the
water, so that the wallabies couldn’t see them.
Then there was some fun for us, though not or
the wallabies.
As soon as they were grabbed, the wallabies tried
to escape. But the two blackfellows stood upright
and pulled for all they were worth, which was a
good bit, for the two wallabies were soon dragged
right out of the water. The others cleared for
their lives to the other side.
“Whoa-up!” said Billy, as the wallabies jumped


into the air. “Where’s my nulla-nulla; or my
waddy; or my spear or something to kill-it this
feller? Where your tomahawk, young-feller Joe?”
I m afraid it’s burned up with all our other
things, Billy,” said I.
Jimminy was trying to help by barking. He
helped Charley’s wallaby to escape by getting
mixed up with Charley’s legs, which made Charley
let go his wallaby’s tail. The wallaby scooted for
its life along the edge of the creek, with Jimminy
after it.
When we stopped laughing, Bob remembered his
mfe. Billy was still calling for a waddy or some-
thing.
“What about my big knife, Billy?”
“Gib-it quick-feller,” said Billy.
“It’s a good job I kept it well sharpened,” said
Bob, as the wallabies kicked their last kicks.
By and by the animals were skinned and cleaned,
and I reckoned we would have enough tucker for a
couple of days, though there was no knowing how
much the blackfellows would eat in one meal.
Not.far from us was a big stump that was still
burning; it was hollow, with one side burned
away The inside was all red-hot coals. Jacky’s
wallaby was slung on a big pole, which was placed
across the stump so that the wallaby hung down
ln wn’i an r d fed C ° als Were nearl y aII ar °und it.
de Jacky’s wallaby was being cooked we took
° ° Ur clothes 30 as to dry them by some burning


logs. The blackfellows took all their clothes off.
but Bob and I kept our shirts on, so as not to get
sunburned, for a bad sunburn is terribly painful.
By and by Billy said the wallaby was cooked.
So they lifted it across to the edge of the water,
because it was cooler there, and we all sat around
it.
“Budgeree!” said King Billy as he tasted the first
“By cripes!” said Charley.
Jacky’s mouth was too full to say anything that
anyone could understand, but I suppose he meant
what the others said.
Jimminy said “budgeree,” in dog language,
which was mostly snuffles in his nose; Bob and I
said that roast wallaby was jolly good.


CHAPTER XXVI
STICKING TO THE BLACKFELLOWS
I thought the blackfellows would have a good
meal of roasted wallaby and then hurry on througn
the burned country \ but they didn’t hurry. They
ate as much as they could and then laid themselves
down near the water and went to sleep while the
sun was still high in the sky. Jimminy curled
himself up beside them and went to sleep too.
While the blackfellows and Jimminy slept, Bob
and I attended to the drying of our clothes, also
the blackfellows’ trousers. When we had done all
we could, we thought that we might as well have
a sleep. But we ended by sharpening Bob’s knife,
especially the little blade, on a river-stone. Then
we cut our toe-nails, for we had noticed that they
were very long. We cut our finger-nails, and Bob
Raid it was a pity we couldn’t cut our hair as well.
We sat there and talked till we got to be so
serious that we stopped talking, and just sat draw-
ing patterns on the ground with sticks. Soon I
seemed to melt into a bush dream, and Bob must


have been the same way, so we got a real fright
when Billy called to us.
"Heyl you fellers, where you been pu y
tr 'WeTumped up quickly and looked around; Billy
was near to where his clothes had been drying, so
we went over to him. TsrWv’s
“There’s Charley’s trousers, an J y
tr °V S :r ; ; !e o en them all right,” said Billy
Part of the stick on which I had hung Billy s
trousers was lying against t e ig og . Bin ,
looked to the other side of the log I saw hat Billy
trousers had been burned to ashes though the as es
still kept the shape of portion of the legs.
“YoiFre a fine blackfellow, Billy, not to be able
to see your trousers, said I.
“Plurry-cum-burragum-woolanoo-budgeree-gum-
gerie-bongerie-nullabil-waddywong-boolabin- yarra-
g Tnyway, Billy said something like that when I
showed him the ashes of his trousers and poked
them with a stick. . ,
“You yabber plenty,” said Charley, coming o -
ward with Jacky. „
“All right, I been yabber more. said Bi y, y
been gib-it me your trousers-mine all burned up!
“No fear!” said Charley, grabbing his pants
“King Billy been take them close-up quick! said
Billy.


I don t know if King Billy really would have
taken Charley’s pants for himself. Thinking that
he would look very nice in a wallaby-skin costume,
I told him to wait.
“Wait awhile, King Billy,” I said, “You'd look
better in something else than Charley’s trousers!”
Well, I been take-it Jacky’s trousers,” said
Billy.
“No, King Billy,” said I. “You would look tip-
top in wallaby-skin trousers.”
The idea seemed to suit Billy for he looked
pleased.
“That been a good job I been t’ink-it, I been
save those skins for Mister Parker to buy—worth
close-up five bob I bet!”
“Well, we won’t spoil them, Billy.”
The two wallaby skins had been spread out on
he ground near the water, with the fur-side down,
and stones placed on them to keep them flat,
Jacky and Charley put their trousers on, though
hey were not quite dry. Bob and I put ours on,
too, for they were dry enough.
The blackfellows got a lot of ashes from where
th; fl I 3Way - They rubbed the °n
the„ fl S fl de the skins — with ‘heir hands first,
then with flat bits of sandstone. Then they pulled
about T k*' ght 1° S * retCh * hem ’ and worked them
about to keep them soft.
so B we a n d n by the day began t0 chan B' e in ‘o night,
so we had more tucker and made camp. As our


rugs had been burned up, like Billy’s trousers we
just laid ourselves down near a burning log. ®
ground was warm, and the fires still burning all
around kept the air from being chilly.
The blackfellows were soon asleep. Bob was
quiet awhile, so I thought he was thinking of
serious things, but soon he laughed.
“What’s the matter, Bob?”
“I was just thinking.”
“What about?”
“If we could burn Jacky’s trousers and Charley s
trousers and dress them in wallaby skins too, and
paint stripes all over them with pipe-clay and get
them to do a big corroboree.”
I laughed, too. We went to sleep giggling about
our blackfellows, which might have been a mean
thing to do, because they had saved us from being
burned alive, and from starvation, and from being
lost.
It was a good job there was not any wind during
the night, for some big sparks might have blown
along and burned us. But nothing like that hap-
pened, so we slept well and awoke at sunrise.
The 'blackfellows and Jimminy were still asleep,
so Bob and I lay there looking at a big bird flying
around in the sky right above us.
“I wish it was a kookaburra,” said Bob.
“I’ll tell you what that is, Bob, it’s an eagle.”
“What does it fly round and round and round
for?”


“Thinks it sees something to pounce on.”
“You can’t see its wings move,” said Bob, as the
eagle circled lower and lower.
“By jove, it’s a whopper!” I said.
I’d hardly finished telling Bob that the eagle was
a whopper when it came down like a stone, straight
for us, and we could plainly see that it was a
whopper. We gave ourselves up for lost at the
same time. Hair seemed to rise all over my body,
and I yelled, and Bob yelled, and Jimminy woke up
and barked.
The blackfellows jumped up just in time to see
the big eagle swoop around above our heads. Then
it flew away into the sky again.
Bulla -bul -loobaloo -yarrabin -burrabong -murry
bung-bindygee!” (or something like that) said
Billy.
“Close-up been lose Jimminy, anyhow!” said
Jacky.
“My word, I thought it had me, for sure!” said
Bob.
“Me too!” said I.
We better go and look-it for more tucker,” said
Charley.
“Make-it my trousers I been t’ink-it,” said King
Billy.
I say, Billy! said Bob. “When you put your
wallaby skins on we’d like to see you do a cor-
roboree-dance.”
And paint yourself over in patterns like you


did before you were civilized,” I added.
Billy shook his head slowly as if the thought of
it made him feel sad.
“Yes, I been civilized a fine gentleman now,
said he.
But Billy’s face soon changed into one of his big
laughs without any noise of laughing, but only of
wheezing.
“My word, we been have a corroboree up town
and charge five bob!”
“Three blackfellows no good to make-it cor-
roboree!” said Charley.
“Well, we been paint-it young-feller Bob and
young-feller Joe for more blackfellow,” said Billy.
They thought it would be a good joke to do so.
and Bob and I laughed. Then Jacky suggested
that they’d send for all the camp to come along so
as to have a real big-feller corroboree.
“By cripes, yes, I been t’ink-it we will! said
Billy.
We got the wallaby skins and set about fixing
them for Billy. Bob invented the way in which it
was done.
We split each tail right down. We hung one
wallaby skin in front of Billy, by tying the tail
around his body, and the other skin behind him in
the same way. We tied the sides of the skins
together with narrow strips cut from the edges.
Then Billy looked like a blackfellow Scotchman in
fur kilts and we all laughed at him.


“Sergeant Brown go close-up mad when I go
into town like this!” said Billy.
“I been t’ink-it he will!” said Charley.
“Your Mary go close-up mad when you been go
back with no trousers, I bet!” said Jacky.
After we had made enough fun of King Billy in
his fur kilts we prepared to go. Bob’s boots and
my boots were so hard and uncomfortable, through
having dried them quickly by the fire, that we had
to stand in the water till they became soft. Then
we made a start, after a breakfast of water.
We had to go very carefully across the burned
country. There were many heaps of hot ashes
about, and still danger from trees that were burn-
ing and might crash down at any moment.
In about an hour we arrived at <jn old timber
track along which it was easier to walk, as there
had been less on it to burn. The blackfellows were
all the time looking for tucker, and they found
some ready cooked. Perhaps Jimminy found it,
for he stood and sniffed a second before King Billy
stood and sniffed. Perhaps Jacky found it because
he saw two ..crows fly into the air just before
Jimminy sniffed. Anyhow, about half a mile
farther on was a bullock that had been overtaken
by the fire ne&r a log and roasted to death. But it
was .luck for us, because we had no tucker. The
bullock was good, clean meat, though most of it
was burned black, and some of it was nearly raw.
Charley discovered that one of the bullock’s front


legs was broken, which was the cause of its being
caught by the fire.
It didn’t take us long to find a smouldering log.
We cut off some junks of undercooked meat and
finished roasting them, then we had a feed. In
five minutes I thought Jimminy would burst.
“Budgeree!” said Billy. “We been stay here for
Chris’mas.”
“We been stay for a good feed,” said Charley.
“G-r-r-r-r-r-r!” said Jimminy, as he gave a big
chunk one chew and then swallowed it.
Jimminy finished first, because he didn t chew
any more than was necessary to make each piece
easy enough to swallow.
Bob and I soon had eaten all we could, but the
blackfellows were still eating when night came. So
we found a warm, dry bed of soft earth close to the
fire, and went to sleep. We woke up very cold
early next morning.
After a breakfast of roasted ribs we made
another start for the road, taking a good supply of
meat with us. As we were leaving, blowflies
arrived, so we knew it was not far to the edge of
the burned bush. And the two crows came back
with some mates.
Our l)oots were better, because we had rubbed
a lot of beef fat into them while we warmed them
by the fire. But we were pretty rough and dirty,
as I could plainly see when I looked at Bob. Jacky
and Charley were dressed all right for civilized


blackfellows, but King Billy appeared uncivilized
in his fur kilt. We wondered what the people
would say when they saw him. Soon we came to
a wide stretch of swampy ground across which the
fire had not gone, and it was good to see green
bush again.
We reached the main road before midday. No
houses were in sight, but we soon struck a creek
of clear water, for which we were thankful. It
didn t take us long to He down by the side of the
creek and put our lips to the cool water and drink.
“Best drink I’ve ever had,” said Bob, who had
dipped his nose into the water as well as his lips.
“Make-it camp here and have big feller feed,”
said King Billy.
“But we want the railway-line or we’ll never get
to Widgewong,” I said.
No, you fellers came alonga my camp and see
corroboree, big-feller corroboree, close-up all
night,” said King Billy.
“My word, I’d like to!” said Bob.
I would, too, Bob; but we can’t spare the time.
Mother must be getting anxious.”
“Plenty time, I been t’ink-it,” said King Billy.
Well, we might stay and have dinner with you,”
I said.
“We’d better!” said Bob.
By cripes, you young-feller swaggies always
hungry!” said Jacky.
“We are not so very hungry now, Jacky,” said


I, “but we mightn’t have anything more to eat
until we get to Widgewong.”
About a hundred yards along the creek from t e
road was a good camping-place. Sally-bushes
grew thickly on the far side of the grassy space,
and a couple of big gum-trees made a shade right
across it. The birds also must have thought it was
good, for there were plenty of them about.
“Where you matches, young-feller Joe?” asked
King Billy, after the blackfellows had gathered
some dry sticks and bark.
“No matches, Billy,” said I.
“I bet I bring Mary next time,” said Billy, save
a lot of trouble I been t’ink-it.”


CHAPTER XXVII
A POLICEMAN VISITS CAMP
Although Billy grumbled, he looked for the right
sticks to use, and soon found them. With Bob’s
knife he dug a little hole in a piece of wood, then
made a point on a stick and twirled the stick in
the hole. He squatted on his heels as he worked,
and he looked like a real wild blackfellow.
In a short time smoke appeared at the point of
the stick. Jacky got some very fine and soft
tousled bark and put it around the stick, then blew
very gently while Billy still twirled as hard as he
could go. Soon there was a little fire which was
gradually made bigger.
“Where did the fire come from?” asked Bob.
“Oh the rubbed wood got hotter and hotter and
hotter, till it just had to burn!”
“But it’s wonderful where the fire comes from,
all the same,” said Bob.
As soon as a good fire was made, we toasted bits
of meat and ate them. Although Bob and I were
not hungry we thought we’d follow the black-


fellow's plan and eat as much as we could while
we had food. So we ate until we were very uncom-
fortable. I think a blackfellow s st ° ma< * j
to stretching, but ours was not. n
making tracks for the railway-line as soon as
had finished eating, we had to lie abo
Shade and wish we hadn't eaten so much though
we didn't do it iron, greediness. J.mm.ny was just
aS The d 'blackfellows laughed at us as we lay there,
and Billy said we’d soon be ready or t e cor
fo “Have a big fine-feller corroboree!” said he.
It really did seem a good place to have a cor-
roboree, or anything like that, though we had only
seen it by day, in hot sunlight.
Bob dozed off, and I couldn't blame him, be-
cause 1 felt sleepy too. The yellow sunshine
sneaked down through the thick foliage of the
gums and made golden patches on the ground,
among purple shadows. Little birds twittered in
the sally-bushes, and the creek water tinkled over
smooth’stones, and insects buzzed m a sleepy kind
of way The blacks talked with soft voices in their
own language, which they did not speak often.
I felt as if I could lie there for ever, or just melt
into the sunshiny air—which shows how lazy and
drowsy I was. and why I didn’t trouble much about
finding the railway and getting to Widgewong.


236 THE ROAD TO WIDGEWONG
Well, I supposed that I had been asleep all the
afternoon, for it was now dark. The blackfellows
had made a big camp-fire, and had built a wurley.
as if they were really going to stay there for a
week. Other blackfellows came with lubras and
gins and piccaninnies, all very excited.
It was a corroboree, sure as anything, for the
men were marked all over with white stripes, and
had spears and boomerangs and everything, except-
ing clothes, r and the women were just as bad, only
not painted.
The blackfellows marched, and pranced, and
crawled, and imitated kangaroos hopping. They
danced while the women and old men sang and
clapped and beat time. Soon the dancers mobbed
up m front of the heap of dead bushes (which was
a wurley) and looked about as if they were afraid
of wild animals coming. But all that came were
two more blackfellows, sneaking along, and sneak-
ing along, as if they were going to attack the mob
of dancers, and the women and old men became
very excited.
Soon the two blackfellows were right in the light
of the fire, crouching low and peering about The
one in front held a shield out as if trying to hide
t e two of them, but it wasn’t much use. The
other blackfellow was decorated all over with
feathers— soft fluffy ones; they were stuck over
his face and neck, and on his chest. Tufts of long


feathers were on his head and around his ankles,
and he was the wildest, fiercest blackfellow I ever
saw. He had a long spear in each hand, an
rushed at the mob as if he were going to spear
them all at once. But the dancers kept sliding
backwards and forwards, and the wild blackfellow
kept charging, until everybody was ye ling an
waving their arms and prancing about like mad.
Then King Billy came out of the crowd and set
fire to the wurley. The dancers opened out and let
the wild blackfellow go between them, where he
danced round and round as if he were madder than
all the others, who danced in a line behind him
whichever way he turned. Now the lubras and
piccaninnies and old men got really scared and
went for their lives into the darkness. The dancers
clashed their boomerangs together and yelled and
ran to the burning wurley, and jumped into and
through the flames and kicked up a rousing blaze.
Soon the night was like day. In the midst of this
rumpus Old Trombone came suddenly into view
and blew an awful noise through his trombone, and
slid the slide in and out to make it worse. This
caused all the blackfellows to jump so that they
went up and up into the sky with the sparks from
the fire —all excepting King Billy and Charley and
Jacky.
Then I really did wake up, with the sun shining
in my eyes, and the camp-fire burning bright. The


blackfellows were there; and Old Trombone had
just arrived; and Bob was sitting- in the shade of
a tree, waving his hat to Old Trombone, and half
a dozen kookaburras in the branches were laugh-
ing like mad. So it was no wonder that I couldn’t
sort things out for a few seconds.
Old Trombone stuck one leg out in front of the
other, held his trombone at arm’s length, put one
hand on his hip, shoved his head back and waggled
his whiskers till these words came out of them;
The king is come
I see him nigh!
Get off me foot!
You clumsy guy!
Ha! ha! he! he!
That feller no fool, he always been tell-it a king,
all right!” said King Billy.
“Good day, Mr. Trombone!” said Bob.
“Where you been travel now?” asked Jacky.
“Ha! ha! ha!—just here, that’s all,” said Old
Trombone.
“Plenty good-feller tucker, anyhow.” said Billy,
So Old Trombone put his swag and his trombone
down and made himself at home in our camp.
The rest of the afternoon was spent in yarning
and smoking, and Bob and I and Jimminy didn’t
get any farther toward Widgewong.
I told them of my dream, and Billy said it was


A POLICEMAN VISITS
a true dream. Jacky and Charley also said it w
a true dream. Bob wanted to know how I could
dream of a true corroboree when I’d never seen
one So I told him that Old Bill had often
described corroborees to me, which he had SCe ”’
and I supposed I remembered them when I was
dreaming. Dreams are funny, anyhow
After walking about and looking at the sky, Old
Trombone cut some poles and unrolled his swag.
He soon had a tent pitched between two saplings
“Good-feller that,” said Billy. Walla walla
tumble down close-up directly, I been t ink-.t,
“Maybe a storm in the night, ha! ha! ha. said
Old Trombone. .
“Don’t know how we’ll all fit in that ten i a
storm does come,” said Bob.
There really didn’t seem much sign of ram. But
the air was sweltering hot, and big clouds were
rising into the sky, like giant loaves of bread, or
damper with too much baking-powder in it. bo
perhaps Old Trombone was wise in pitching his
tent while the sun still shone.
The kookaburras had flown away after they had
laughed at Old Trombone’s music. We didn’t see
or hear them again till sundown, when they came
from across the road, and lighted in a big tree near
our camp. There they set up the rowdiest laugh-
ing ever heard.
“Budgeree old-feller kookaburra!” said Billy.


240 THE ROAD TO WIDGEWONG
“Budgeree-feller luck coming,” said Bob.
“Ha! ha! ha!” said Old Trombone; and he blew
through his trombone as hard as he could, which
didn’t scare the kookaburras this time. It made
them laugh all the harder, and they kept it up till
daylight had nearly gone.
“Well, if we don’t get some good luck after that,
Bob, I’ll never believe in kookaburras again,” I
said.
Old Trombone had plenty of tobacco, and a
spare pipe that he gave to Billy. After tea he and
the blackfellows sat around the camp-fire, and
smoked, and said a word or two now and again.
Bob and I and Jimminy sat alongside watching the
light of the fire and the darkness beyond it and the
company.
It was one of those times when you feel that you
are part of the darkness and of the brightness; of
the stars and the ground; of the night noises and
the night quietness, of the trees, and everything.
A horse and sulky came along the road. We
could just see it by the light of the stars as it passed
opposite to our camp.
“That horse go lame, I been t’ink-it,” said Jacky.
“One shoe off,” said Charley.
“Front foot,” said Billy.
“Off-side,” said I, for a joke.
How you been tell-it off-side, young-feller Toe?”
asked Billy. J '


A POLICEMAN VISITS CAMP
“Because the shoe must be off the side from
which it is off, mustn’t it?” said I.
But Billy couldn’t see the joke, though B •
So did Old Trombone, for he laughed his favourite
laugh. . ~
“There’s another horse coming, said BoD.
We all listened. The horse was coming rom
the direction which the horse and sulky had gone,
and its gait seemed to be a quick wa .
“That horse belonga Sergeant Brown, I bet.
said Billy.
“You been right,” said Charley.
When Billy mentioned Sergeant Brown, Bob
and I looked at each other. The horse drew close
and was halted for a moment then left the roa
and came towards the camp. We just crept bac
into the bush shadows as quietly as we could.
Sure enough, a mounted policeman rode into the
light of the camp-fire, and he looked a fine picture
as he sat on his beautiful horse.
“Hullo, Marvellous!” said he. ‘‘What the
dickens are you doing in that rig-out?”
“Gib-it bacca boss?” asked Billy.
“You darned old humbug,” said the policeman,
“you’re smoking away as hard as you can now!
“This bad tobacco, sergeant,” said Billy.
“Huh!” said Old Trombone, jumping up.
“Mister Trombone, too,” said the sergeant,
“what are you all doing here, anyhow? And where’s


your trousers, Marvellous? You know where you’ll
go if you get about like that!”
“Bush-fire been make us,” said Billy. “But I
been go back to Mary close-up to-morrow, true
as blazes!”
“Well, mind you do,” said the sergeant. “Now
listen! Have you seen anything of those two boys
who helped you give a concert with Mr. Newton?”
Bob gave a jump, but I caught his arm and told
him to keep still, though I was almost afraid to
whisper.
“You been talk-it about the young-feller swag-
gies?” asked King Billy.
“Quite right; when did you see them last?” asked
the sergeant.
Oh, close-up a long time—two weeks I bet!”
said Billy, puffing hard at his pipe.
“By cripes, yes; two weeks!” said Charley.
“More, I bet!” said Jacky.
What about you—have you seen them since
Trombone?”
“Ha! ha! ha! Gone, long ago, to Wantaman-
bidgeree,” said Old Trombone.
“Is that so!” said the sergeant. “Well, I’ll smoke
a pipe and have some supper with you.”
The sergeant got off his horse. Bob and I crept
hke blackfellows through the bush, with Jimminy
sneaking along beside us. When we reached the
road we hurried along for a mile before we spoke.


“By gee, Bob, what do you think of it?” I asked.
“What do you think of the blackfellows and Old
Trombone not giving us away?’ asked Bo .
“That’s the narrowest escape we’ve had all the
time!” I said. ,
"Yes narrower than the bridge!” Bob agreed.
For a long time we walked along the road, hop-
ing to come to a town and a railway-station.
We heard a train puffing away in the distance.
It seemed to tell us to hurry up, hurry up. hurry
up . As the road lay in that direction we were
pleased about it. But the air was too sweltering
hot to hurry.
A very near clap of thunder made us jump.
Lightning began to zigzag across the sky, and big
drops of rain fell plop all around us. Some fell on
US
“We’ll be wet through in no time, Bob. There s
no shelter anywhere.”
“Unless we find a bridge,” said Bob.
“No hope,” said I. “We’re on top of a long hill.”
When the lightning flashed, the night was hs
bright as day. Between flashes it was so black
that you felt as if you could cut the darkness with
a tomahawk.
In one flash we saw a big tree along by the road-
side, and Bob said to run for it. But I thought
there would be too much danger under a tree.


“Well, we might chance it,” said I, as the rain
began to fall in earnest.
\\ e hesitated for a moment, and in that instant
a crackling, sizzling flash of lightning burst the tree
into bits and knocked Bob and me flat on the
ground. Jimminy gave one yelp and cleared for
his life in every direction, and then got between
my legs as I stood myself up again.
None of us were hurt, and we were very thank-
ful for our escape. But we learned the lesson well
about the danger of going under trees during
thunderstorms.


CHAPTER XXVIII
SICK, LOST, AND STARVING
The thunderstorm was soon over. But we walked
along till daybreak so as to keep ourselves warm.
We had heard a couple of trains during the night,
though far away. As soon as daylight came we
pushed into the bush, towards where the line
should be, and kept going till sunrise, when we
stopped to have a good look at ourselves.
“How do you feel now, Bob?” I asked.
“Tired, wet, hungry, and sleepy,” said Bob.
“I’m all those, and foot-sore too,” I said.
“What about me?” asked Jimminy, with his tail
and his ears.
“Well, if you’re a good dog, Jimminy,” said I,
“you’ll soon be with us in Widgewong.”
“Thank you!” said Jimminy, with his tail.
Jimminy was a polite dog sometimes.
“We ought to dry our clothes before we start
railway travelling again,” said Bob; “and clean our
boots and brush our hair in case we meet Mr,
Podger.”
“Yes, we should dry our clothes,” I admitted,


"but perhaps they’ll dry on us as we walk along,
especially now the sun is so warm. And I bet
we won’t meet any Mr. Podger this time,”
"We can take our coats off and hang them on a
stick, anyhow,” said Bob.
So we slung our coats on a long stick by push-
ing it through the arms. We carried it between
us.
The way was rough with rocks and scrub. At
length we struck a creek in a deep gully, and were
glad enough to have a spell and a drink of water,
for the sun was scorching hot.
Big rocks rested along the sides of the gully, with
prickly scrub between, and tall gum-trees. We
sat on a flat rock, near a pool of water, and
Jimminy crouched in front of us and wagged his
ears.
Neither of us seemed anxious to make a move,
though we should have been going for our lives.
“This is no good, Bob,” said I, “we must get to
the railway.”
“That’s right,” said Bob; “all I want is to be in
a train bound for Widgewong.”
Even then we didn’t move. Something seemed
to be making us stupid. I felt sorry that we had
left the blackfellows and Old Trombone, for they
were company, and helped us to get tucker. But
I wished, with Bob, that I was in a train bound for
Widgewong.
After a time we fell asleep. When I woke up it


was after midday. Bob was still asleep and
mumbling as if dreaming. Jimmmy was not m
sight, so very likely he had gone looking for tucker.
1 hoped he would find some, even if we didn t.
Bob’s cheeks were splotched with two red
patches, and he continued to mumble, which made
me think he might be having very bad dreams,
tried to awaken him. When he opened his eyes I
saw that he looked queer, but he said that he felt
all right. Anyhow, when he got up and started
to walk he flopped down again. _
It turned out that Bob was really sick. He lay
down in the shade and commenced mumbling
again, then asked for a drink of water, which was
a hard thing to get, because we had nothing to
hold it.
That was the worst luck we ever had. I just
stood and wondered what I should do, but I
couldn’t decide because I didn’t know what the
matter was, or how long Bob would be sick.
Jimminy returned wagging his tail like fun, but
that was no help, so I told him to lie down and
be quiet.
Bob asked again for a drink of water, so that was
the first thing to think of. I thought I’d try to
carry some up in the hollows of my hands. Then
I saw a knot on the trunk of a messmate tree which
gave me an idea.
3 The knot was as big round as a saucer, but
deeper. I cut around it with my knife, till the bark


was cut through. Then I hammered the knot with
a stone so as to loosen the bark from the wood,
and the piece of bark which covered the knot came
off without a crack in it anywhere.
When I had peeled the rough bark from the out-
side, I had a good cup, and soon gave Bob a drink,
which made him feel better. I had a drink from
the bark cup, too, just to try it, then sat in the
shade and watched B,ob.
On the other side of the creek was an over-
hanging rock, which formed the roof of a small
cave. I made up my mind to get Bob into that
cave on a thick bed of fern, and to leave him there
with Jimminy while I walked back to the road to
get tucker and matches at one of the farms or
roadside houses. I reckoned I would be able to
do it before darkness came if I hurried.
Going across to the cave I cleared the bits of
rubbish away which were on the floor. Then I cut
a lot of fern with which to make a soft bed. When
that was done, I helped Bob across and laid him
done on his ferny bed. Jimminy curled himself up
at Bob’s feet.
Although I had made up my mind to go back to
the road as soon as Bob was fixed, I didn’t get
there. I started, all right, and as I walked I won-
dered what was the matter with Bob. It might
have been sunstroke, because the days had been
scorching hot. It might have been bad tucker, or
not enough tucker, or too much bullock.


SICK, LOST, AND STARVING 249
That was a very bad night for me. I walked and
rested, and stumbled around and rested. It was
the longest night I ever knew, and two mopokes
reminded me of the time Bob and I were lost.
Now and again I heard a train, but sometimes
it was behind and sometimes in front of me. So
1 must have been wandering in all directions.
About daybreak I laid myself down on a heap of
dead leaves and went to sleep, because I couldn’t
help myself, and I might have slept all day only
for something saying “Wuhl” close to my face.
I woke to find Jimminy wagging his tail in front
of me, and looking very pleased with himself. I
called him a good dog.
When I looked around I saw that I was on top
of the ridge overlooking the gully in which was
our cave. But I was too tired to wonder why I
was so close to the cave, when I should have been
away near the road.
Soon I was back with Bob, who was half asleep,
but still didn’t seem to be able to wake up properly.
I decided to have a short rest, and then make a
bee-line for the road.
Bob seemed to awaken just for a moment, and
he asked me for a drink of water, which was what
I wanted pretty badly too. I took our bark cup
and got some from the creek for Bob, just having a
drink there myself. Then I lay down beside Bob
and went to sleep, feeling pleased that our cave
faced the north, because the warm sunshine came


right in to us as we lay on our ferny bed. I seemed
to forget all about wanting to find the road, for I
didn’t try again.
We might have been in that cave two days, or
three days, or even a week. I don’t know how long
because I lost track of the time, and I didn’t think
to ask King Billy.
But I do remember that Jimminy often left us
and at last stayed away. So I supposed that he
had been looking for tucker and found it.
Also I remember a pair of rock birds that had a
nest hanging from the roof of the cave, near the
back, and they became quite used to us being there.
And there were little flies not as big as mosquitoes
which stung us a good bit. I tried to make a fire
the blackfellow’s way, so as to smoke the flies out
and to keep us warm at night, but I had no luck.
One afternoon I seemed to awaken from a dream
to hear King Billy speak and see him laughing one
of his big silent laughs.
“By cripes, young-feller Joe, what you been up
to? I been t’ink-it you close up dead, my word 1”
I was sure it was King Billy. Bob turned his
head and stared too.
And young-feller Bob, he been close-up a dead
one, I been t’ink-it.”
Well, it was silly to want to cry, but that was
how I felt. Sometimes persons cry because they
are pleased, so I suppose that was why I wanted


to, for I was very pleased to see King Billy. It
was he, sure as life. . .
“Bob has been sick, Billy;” said I, but he is
getting better now.”
Charley and Jacky slid into sight.
“Don’t you take us back to the policeman Billy
don’t you Billy!” said Bob.
“You let us get away that night, and just like
a good mate, you’ll help us get to Widgewong now.
won’t you?”
“Oh you been all right, good fellers now, and
no trouble,” said King Billy. “Sergeant Brown
want-it me find you, but I been tell him dose-up
big mob lies.”
I heard Bob tell Billy he was a good mate, and
no mistake. .
“Then missus come along and yabber till I tell-it
true,” continued King Billy.
“The missus?” I asked.
“Big feller walla walla make-it spoil tracks, but
I catch them again. I t’ink-it you been chase a
lot of bandicoots one time!” said Billy.
I wanted to ask Billy a lot more questions, but
somehow I got very tired again and felt more like
having another sleep. Bob tried to get up but he
flopped to the ground.
“By cripes! you Charley and Jacky, you been
have to carry young-feller Bob and Joe up to
Missus Thompson’s.”
They picked us up in their arms, and marched


252 THE ROAD TO WIDGEWONG
off with us. We were too weak to do anything.
Leave us here, Billy,” said I. “Sergeant Brown
will put us in jail.”
No fear! said Billy, “Sergeant Brown a good-
feller, he been close-up a gentleman when he been
wear his Sunday clothes!”
“But we must get to Widgewong, Jacky,” I said.
The blackfellows took no notice of what we said.
They walked along through the bush with us, and
I really think we were half asleep most of the
way.
Billy was again dressed in shirt and trousers,
and I kept wondering where he had got them.


CHAPTER XXIX
KING BILLY IS THE HERO
About sundown we struck the main road near a
house, and the blackfellows carried us right through
the gateway to the veranda. Two dogs rushed
around barking; one was Jimminy, and he seemed
as pleased to see us as if he had never left us in
the bush by ourselves.
A man came around the corner, and Billy laughed
his silent laugh at him while Jacky and Charley
still held Bob and me in their arms.
“Hullo Marvellous! What’s all this?” said the
man.
“Young-feller boys been lost —no tucker near
close-up a long time,” said Billy.
“Bring them in then,” said the man. “Hey
Sue!” he called.
“What, are those pests here again?” she asked.
“The two boys have been lost ”
But Mrs. Thompson had now seen Bob and me
and she didn’t give the man time to finish. She
hurried Charley and Jacky into the house with us,


and Bob was laid down on a couch while I was
sat in a big, low chair.
The blackfellows and Mr. Thompson talked
about us, while Mrs. Thompson went into the
kitchen. She soon came back with a jug and two
cups.
“We’ll have to put something in this milk, Bill,”
she said.
“Just what I was thinking, Sue,” said Mr.
Thompson.
“This is still warm from the cow, and you
couldn’t have anything better,” said Mrs. Thomp-
son, as she put a big spoonful of something out
of a bottle into each cup of milk. “And this medi-
cine is just what you need now.”
While she was talking, Mrs. Thompson gave
Bob sips of milk with a spoon. Mr. Thompson
gave a cupful to me, telling me to drink it very
slowly, which I did, though I trembled to pour
buckets full of it down my throat.
“By cripes, that been made me feel big-feller
sick, said King Billy. “I t’ink-it I been close-up
dead in no time!”
Well, we had little drinks of milk and medicine,
u ith rests in between, for half an hour and longer,
and both Bob and I felt very much better.
King Billy wanted a drink of the medicine, which
was brandy, but they wouldn’t give him any, so he
joined the other blackfellows in the yard.


“We been wait for Sergeant Brown,” said King
Billy as he went out.
“Are you sure he’ll be here soon, Billy? asked
Mrs. Thompson. ~ ,
“He soon ought to be here now,” said Billy pok-
ing his head through the doorway.
Mrs. Thompson went into another part of the
house after she had made Bob and me comfortable.
Mr. Thompson lighted his pipe and stood outside
with the blackfellows.
Mrs. Thompson came in again with more milk
and bread-and-butter, which she set down on a
little table in front of us.
“Now eat that slowly,” said she, “and you 11 soon
be right as rain, then you can tell me all about it.
King Billy is an old humbug and tells too many
lies.”
While we sat on the couch eating bread-and-
butter, and sipping milk, Mrs. Thompson set the
big table with tea things. Bob and I couldn’t talk
much, because she was in the room most of the
time. When we got a chance we tried to decide
which was the better way to go so as to escape
again. But we couldn’t, because we had nothing
to guide us except the road.
Then a noise outside the house made us sit up
and listen.
The dog barked, a horse cantered up, and a man’s
voice asked a question.
“Hullo, Marvellous, did you find them?”


“You bet! They been inside drinking like mad I”
said King Billy.
“It’s all up now, Bob,” I said.
Sergeant Brown and Mr. Thompson came in,
and I wondered what would happen to Bob and me,
now that a policeman had really found us. I
guessed that he knew everything. King Billy and
Charley and Jacky stood at the doorway while
the policeman asked us what we meant by giving
him such a chase.
“Please don’t be hard on Bob,” said I, “because
he had a pretty bad time with Old Bones.”
“Don’t you worry,” said Sergeant Brown, “Bob
has nothing to be afraid of—and neither have you.”
“My word!” said King Billy. “I been tell-it you
Sergeant Brown a gentleman 1”
“You said ‘close-up’ a gentleman when he had
on his Sunday clothes!” said Bob, who was now
smiling.
“By cripes!” said King Billy, “he been a gentle-
man suppose he hab no clothes on!”
While we talked a horse and sulky came up to
the house. The horse was trotting quickly, and
was pulled up smartly.
“Now you’d better look out,” said Sergeant
Brown smiling.
King Billy had one of the biggest silent laughs
on his face that I had ever seen. Mrs. Thompson
pushed him aside and came into the room in a


terrible hurry. But it wasn’t Mrs. Thompson at
a ll—it was mother I
After everybody was over the excitement a bit.
Mrs. Thompson said she could give mot er »
Bob and me a shake-down for the night
was glad to accept, because she ha
down the road from Widgewong ever since she
received my letter, hoping to meet us.
Then Sergeant Brown asked me a ou
and about Bob. I told him that Bob didn t real y
kill Old Bones, because Old Bones was tying
catch him to give him a thrashing and ell down
the steps because he was drunk. So it wasn Bob
fault that Old Bones cracked his head open on
“‘You thought he was killed?” asked the police-
m ”He looked dead enough.” said Bob, “with blood
all over his face.”
“Don’t you worry,” said the policeman, I bet
he is all right and waiting for you with a good
Bob told me afterwards that when Serge.ant
Brown said this he made up his mind to get King
Billy to run away with him.
Well, I had to tell the policeman all about the
£6O, just as it happened.
“Phew!” said the policeman, “that’s worse than
I thought; I reckoned you had lost the money and


were afraid to face Mr. Fallow. I’ll have to take
you back to Sydney, in any case.”
Mother was very upset, and put her arms around
me, as if she wouldn’t let me go.
(< “Don’t you worry, Mrs. Hill,” said the sergeant,
"Joe will be all right. We’ll get him out of it
somehow or other.”
I 11 pay Mr. Fallow the £60,” said mother.
Don t be foolish, Mrs. Hill. I know Joe will
not do wrong again, so we’ll fix things up easily.
You leave it to me.”
"There!” said King Billy, "I been t’ink-it Ser-
geant Brown a gentleman close-up directly!”
King Billy made us all laugh. In a few minutes
every one, except Bob, was in a better humour.
Mother decided she would come to Sydney by
tram, too. Mrs. Thompson said she could leave
the horse and sulky there.
We II have to take Bob back, as well, I sup-
pose,” said Sergeant Brown, "and give him back
to the people he ran away from.”
I been t ink-it Sergeant Brown a bad-feller
father!” said King Billy.
What’s that?” asked Sergeant Brown.
"Young Bob your own boy been take-it away by
your missus when she been clear out close-up a
long time ago!”
"Billy, what fool idea is this you’ve got hold of?”
asked Sergeant Brown.


“My word! I tell-it true as blazes. I know-him
young-feller Bob, I been t ink-it 1
“How do you know him?” asked the pohceman,
though he was looking hard at Bob instead of at
King Billy, while everybody else was looking at
the three of them.
“By cripes,” said King Billy, “how I been know
anything? By looking, I been t ink-it!
By this time Sergeant Brown was asking Bob all
kinds of questions as hard as he could go. Bob
answered a good many of them. Then Bob
emptied his pockets till he found a little leather
case, covering a photo, which he gave to the ser-
geant.
The next moment Sergeant Brown had Bob in
his arms, mumbling over him and kissing him.
Boys might never think a policeman can cry, but I
saw it then, true as life.
“Well, you are marvellous, King Billy,” said
the sergeant directly, as he shook the blackfellow s
hand.
“Yes, that my best name, I been t’ink-it,” said
King Billy, with one of his big, silent laughs.
Everybody was more excited than ever over the
strange way things had happened.
And that was the end of our adventures.


Eagle Free* Limited, Allen Street, Waterloo












NATIONAL
LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA
Date Due
1 7 JAN ?mfi
A3-55/J3 12


If
lie
mi mu mll I
3 1508 01830178 3


