

Jd ft
OrXRIDOI Pwntino Co., Bbibbahi, Quiinilasd.


PERMANENT residents in Queensland wishing to obtain passages
for their friends or relatives in the United Kingdom or the
Continent of Europe may do so under the provisions of the
Immigration Aet, by making payments to the Immigration Agent
in Brisbane or the Assistant Immigration Agents Maryborough, Bundaberg,
Rockhampton, Mackay or Townsville, or to the Clerks of Petty Sessions
at any other town in the Colony upon the following Scale:
Nominated Passengers.
Life on Board Ship
Males between one and twelve years, £2 ; between
twelve and forty, £\; over forty and under fifty-
five, £B.
Females between one and twelve, £ i; between twelve
and forty, £2 ; over forty and under fifty-five, £&.
Males or Females —fifty-five and upwards, the full
passage money, £l3 13s.
Assisted Passengers.
The Agent-General for Queensland (whose address is Westminster
Chambers, No. 1 Victoria Street, London, S.W.), will entertain applications
for some assistance towards the total cost of passage from small Capitalist
Farmers, Market Gardeners, Dairymen and Orchardists—especially in the
case of those having families. Full particulars as to the occupations of
the head and the members of the family, their available Capital and
intentions as to pursuit on landing, etc., should be forwarded with the
application and each case will be considered on its merits.
Whatever money contributions it may be decided to grant towards
the cost of passage, may apply to the case of persons wishing to proceed
to the Colony either as second-class or as steerage passengers.
(Continued on back cover page).


Walkers
Iron and Brass Founders | W TVT
Boilermakers, Coppersmiths, Ship Builders M A M. f
Bridge Builders, Etc., Etc.
ENGINES AND BOILERS (Land and Marine)
PUMPS AND PUMPING MACHINERY
LOCOMOTIVES AND RAILWAY ROLLING STOCK
SUGAR MILLS (Modern)
MEAT WORKS MACHINERY.
Manufacturers
MINING AND GOLD-SAVING MACHINERY
SHIP BUILDING AND BOILER YARDS: MARYBOROUGH
KENT STREET (Riverside).
MAIN WORKS
BOWEN STREET.
QUEENSLAND.


McLennan & 00.,
ALICE and ALBERT STREETS,
. . . QUEENSLAND AGENTS FOR
WORTHINGTON
-^BRISBANE.
uplex Steam Pumps
For every service. Supplied to every Mining
Field in the world.
• • •
TRUSTY OIL ENGINES
STOCKPORT GAS ENGINES
• •••
MARSHALL, SONS & CO., LIMITED, GAINSBOROUGH,
Portable and Fixed Engines and Boilers,
HIGH-CLASS VERTICAL AND HORI-
ZONTAL ENGINES FOR ELECTRIC
LIGHTING, AND ALL PURPOSES.
• • •
VERTICAL CROSS TUBE BOILERS,
OF All SIZES
HAULING GEAR, &c.
LARGE STOCKS OF:
Engineers’ and Blacksmiths’
Tools, Shafting, Pulleys,
Belting, Rubber, Engine Pac-
king, Oils, Lloyd & Lloyd’s
Tubes and Fittings, Br ss-
ware, Bar Iron, Steel, Cop-
per, Tin, Lead, &c.
MINING -m
REQUISITES
Of every description, including
CYANIDE AND ASSAYING APPLIANCES
SHOVELS, PICKS
STEEL, HAMMERS.
• • •
W. B. BROWN & CO.’S
SPECIAL QUALITY
STEEL WIRE ROPES.


THE
I HIGHEST PRICES PAID FOR
9 I £Jk£.Jt II I II I I AURIFEROUS CONCEN-
IwIUI 1U TRATES AND PYRITES.
Smelting 60.,
LIMITED,
Buyers anb Smelters of
Also of .. . Gold, Silver, Lead
CYANIDE SLAGS. /x fl > |
Copper and other ©res
SPECIAL RATES GIVEN FOR ARGENTIFEROUS LEAD ORES
IN QUANTITIES.
SAMPLING AND PURCHASING DEPOTS AND AGENCIES AT MEL-
BOURNE, ZEEHAN, AND EMU BAY, TASMANIA,
UNDER COMPETENT ASSAYERS.
@O @ ©
Works: Aldershot, Queensland.
For Tariffs and Full Particulars, apply at the Works, Al’ershot, Maryborough, QI.L,
and all Agencies. MELBOURNE AGENCY: 52 Market Street.
Registered Head Office: W - H - CLARK, Local Secretary.
OLD BROAD STREET, LONDON, E.C T. J. DYASON, Manager.
-S'". C ... 1 ■ : __




Fried. Krupp Grusonwerk,
MAGDEBURG-BUCKAU
(GERMANY!,
COMPLETE PLANTS FOR TREATING GOLD
COPPER, LEAD, TIN, ZING ORES, ETC.
SPECIALITY:
Of which we supplied 27 _,__ _ , _ . , , , -
Gold Mhlh 1 t g N c°o rgan PATENT BALL MILLS
(FOR DRY CRUSHING).
KRUPP STEEL SHOES AND DIES.
Sole Agents: HQYER,TIEGS & Co.,Elizabeth St., Brisbane
JOHN W. JAFFRAY,
on application. Engineer and Machinery Merchant.
ALL LATEST INVENTIONS IN MINING and
GOLD SAVING MACHINERY
ENGLISH and
Rock Drills and Air Compressors, Hoists, Pumps, Crush-
ing, Sizing and Concentrating, Stamp, Chlorination, and
AMERICAN L SAW MILL and Cyanide Mills, Furnaces, Etc
WOOD WORKING • t
• • •
MACHINERY. ENGINES, ANY SIZE, OF FINEST TYPES, ENGLISH
• •••
.laffray’s ——\
AND AMERICAN.
“Machinery Register.”
Sole Agent:
The most Popular Medium in Australia for every
description of New and Second-hand Machinery.
Penman & Co , Glasgow, New Patent Water Tube
Steam Boilers
The “TRIUMPH” Alluvial Ruddier, Concentrator,
and Gold Winner. Treats 10 tons per hour, and
saves 95 per cent, of the gold.
Established Twelve Years.
Cundall’s Patent Oil Engine. All sizes ; the simplest,
most reliable, and cheapest.
• •••
HEAD
Petrie’s Famous Wool Scouring Machinery.
OFFICE :
EQUITABLE BUILDINGS, 330 GEORGE ST., SYDNEY


BULLIVANTS’
STEEL
Specially Selected Quality
for . . .
SHAFT WINDING, HAULING
TRAMWAYS, ETC.
ONE UNIFORM QUALITY!
BEST WORKING RESULTS!
URGE STOCKS!
PROMPT DESPATCH!
Agents in every Mining
Centre.
WIRE ROPES
Head Depot:
331 KENT ST., SYDNEY.
VICTORIA (Melbourne): N. GUTHRIDGE.
Q’LAND. (Brisbane): J. W. HENDERSON.
WES TINGHOUSE
FOR LIGHTING, TRACTION, m —? m m m
™ ELECTRICAL
Westinghouse
'lngin.s ! MACHINERY 1
Callentfer Cables!
Mannesmann Tubes!
AGENTS FOR:
WESTINGHOUSE ELECTRIC AND MANUFACTURING CO.
FRIED. KRUPP, ESSEN.
Cyanide of
g 8 ioo% Potassium!
CALLENDER’S CABLE AND CONSTRUCTION CO., ETC.
Noyes Brothers,
Telegraphic Address:
31 O’CONNELL STREET, SYDNEY
17 QUEEN ST., MELBOURNE.
“NOYES,” Sydney.


Zhc (solbfielbs of (Slueenslanb.
THE
SMALLER FIELDS
OF THE COLONY.
The Warwick, Gladstone, Russell and Mulgrave Districts, and the
Goldfields of Ravenswood, Eidsvold, Coen, Palmer,
Cloncurry, Etc., Etc.
With a Sketch of the Department of Mines and the Geological Department.
By Wm. LEES,
AUTHOR OF “ PICTURESQUE QUEENSLAND,” ETC.
Mitb fPaps anb plans.
QUEENSLAND:
OUTRIDGE PRINTING COMPANY, LTD., QUEEN ST., BRISBANE.
1899


“Palmer” Sinking Pump.
KNOWLES’
CATALOGUES FREE ON APPLICATION
Frue Vanner
&c., &c.
Agents for:
(All Sizes)
Parke Lacv Co.
LIMITED,
SYDNEY, N.S.W.,
ing Machinery, Engines
and Boilers.
Sole Licensees for the Manufacture and Sale of
THE ROPP STRAIGHT-LINE FURNACE ( For Roasting,
HOLTOFF-WETHEY FURNACE, with Cooling Hearth -i
WETHEY MULTIPLE DECK CALCINING FURNACE i isin S ° res
IMPROVED HUNTINGTON CENTRIFUGAL QUARTZ MILL.
PATENTEES OF:
The Roger Roll Dodge Rockbreaker
“James” Ore Feeder
Challenge Ore Feeder
New Bartlett Concentrator
Californian Feed Water Heater
INGERSOLL SERGEANT ROCK DRILLS AND AIR
COMPRESSORS
Knowles’ Patent Pumps
(Pumps of all kinds in stock)
GATES ROCKBREAKERS WESTINGHOUSE ENGINES
“GARDNER”GOVERNORS “OSTER” STOCKS and DIES
BAKER BLOWERS CONNERSVILLE BLOWERS
BUFFALO BLOWERS and EXHAUST FANS
“PROSPECTOR” BATTERIES
HORIZONTAL and VERTICAL ENGINES and BOILERS
HORSE WHIMS, ORE CARS, SKIPS, BUCKETS, ELECTRO-
PLATES, RETORTS, MOULDS, &c.
ALL KINDS OF ENGINEER’S TOOLS AND FITTINGS.


mZISS/fu^o z.
PREFACE
The undeveloped, or, as they are here termed, the Smaller Fields of Queensland, are
many in number and great in extent, and though they have always received more or
less attention since the first discovery of gold in the colony, no large amount of capital
has been expended upon them, with the exception of Ravenswood, to further test the
ground. Pot-holing or shafts worked by whip or whim are the chief methods of
mining, and no great depth has been sunk, and although many of the reefs have proved
rich at shallow depths, the stone has perhaps become poorer, or may be water came in
to such an extent that without proper pumping appliances it would be impossible to
cope with. Oftentimes the rich stone has simply been “ragged out,” and the money
obtained squandered, so that when a blank came in no capital was available for
developmental work, and scores of good mines in the colony are lying idle from this
reason. Upon other fields the ore is so complex that special treatment is required,
and in this regard the reefs on the smaller fields of Queensland offer special
inducements to metallurgical engineers.
It has been impossible to deal in this small work with but the fringe of the
opportunities that are offering to mining men in Queensland, but we trust that it
sufficiently indicates the possibilities that lie open in this vast area.
We have to thank the officers of the Department of Mines for the aid they have
rendered in the compilation of the matter, and would specially mention Mr. D. Jones,
the Warden over the rich vast area known as the Gladstone Fields; to Mr. R. S.
Hurd, the Warden of the Eidsvold Goldfield, which field, after a long depression,
has shown rich developments; to Mr, F. J. Cherry, the Acting Warden of the
Coen district, which is rapidly gaining attention owing to its rich belts of stone.
The photographs that embellish these pages are from many hands, to whom we
render our many thanks—Mr. Rutherford, Eidsvold; Mr. Cherry, Coen; Mr, Lyne-
Brown, Cairns; Mr. A. O. Jackson, Hughenden, and many others.
That the work will meet with favour, and the progress of mining in the colony be
aided, is the earnest wish of
THE PUBLISHERS.


HII I B I I * 0 I We are SOLE A.GENTS for Messrs
Machine Be It m 2!
O jdgiF '"PIONEER ~1
RAW HIDE BELTING AND LACES
IMPORTERS OF HAIR, RUBBER, COTTON AND
BALATA BELTING AND FASTENERS OF
EVERY DESCRIPTION.
at short notice.
We have full stocks of all the above lines always on hand.
Full PRICE LISTS mailed to any address. Letters and Telegrams promptly attended to.
I <iLu!n«i!uu AM. We are Sole Agents for Messrs. W. P. FULLER
II n I*l PQTI nll lIMC & CO., of San Francisco and New York, and
LIIUI lUmIIIIU UNO are proprietors of the Registered Trade Mark
“Star Brand” Lubricating Oils.
a These oils are recognised to be of a standard and uniform quality, and we shall be pleased
<0 to mail samples and quotations FREE to any address.
v• • •
IMPORTERS of Tuck’s Packings, Core and Asbestos of every description, I.R. Valves,
I.R. Insertion, Hose, Asbestos, Millboards, Cotton Waste, Oil Cans, Gauge Glasses, and
all Machinery requisites; also House’s Steam Jointing Cement, Flange and Joint Packing,
Boiler Fluid, Boiler and Pipe Covering Composition, and many other lines.
Note. — Special Belts made to order
when required, any length, any width.
■lpphaniral I pathpnc
111 U UII (111 IU Al Luulllul 0 Engineers’leathers made to order
Send to us for Catalogues and Price Lists
PHILIP FRAHKEL 8 GO., EDWARD STREET, DRISBANE.
G. HORSBURGH & GO. Limited,
Importers
Merchants,
f Ironmongery, Hardware, Oils, Varnishes, Stoves, Cutlery’
Guns, Ammunition, Sportsmen’s Goods of every descrip-
tion, Galvanised Roofing Iron, Steel Plate, Bar Iron, Black
and Galvanised Pipes and Fittings, Sheet Lead, Lead
Pipe, Agricultural Implements, Pumps, Baths, Locks and Hinges, Nails, Screws,
Brass Foundry, Electroplate, Enamelled Ware, Brushware, Lampware, Glass-
ware; Galvanised, Barbed, Plain and Black Fencing Wire; Wire Netting; Pitch.
Oakum, Rope, Iron Chain, Ship Chandlery generally.
Water Tanks, Spouting, Pipes, Ridge Capping, Brackets.
Household Ironmongers, Plumbers and Galvanised Ironworkers.
G. HORSBURGH & CO. Ltd.,
Maryborough, Queensland.
Massey-Harris & Co.’s Implements.
Estimates Given.


PAGE
PAGE
Town Hall, Warwick
i
Empress Mine, Eidsvold
17
Prospectors at Work, Pikedale Goldfield ..
2
Herbert Street, Bowen
18
Mining at Talgai
2
Post and Telegraph Office, Mackay
18
Miners’ Camp, Thane’s Creek ..
3
The Bluff, Mount Britten
19
Glasshouse Mountains
3
Hadleigh Castle Mill and Dam, Ravenswood
20
Yabba Falls
4
Underlie Shaft, Hadleigh Castle Mine
20
Kent Street, Maryborough
4
1 South New England
21
Paradise Goldfield
5
Hadleigh Castle Mine
21
Prospecting Shaft, Paradise Goldfield
6
John Bull Mine
22
Near Gaeta Goldfield, Mount Perry District
6
Geraldton, Johnstone River
23
Old Copper Smelting Works, Mount Perry
7
On the Mulgrave River
24
Mount Perry, from the Old Copper Mine ..
7
Cloncurry
25
Main Street, Gladstone
8
Outcrop of Copper Ore, Cloncurry
26
On the Callide River
9
Mailman ..
26
Alluvial Gold Mining, Gladstone
IO
Cattle Station, near Mareeba
26
Manganese Mine, Calliope River
I I
Ground Sluicing, Russell River ,.
27
Waterfall, near Cania
12
Maytown, Palmer Goldfield]
28
Post and Telegraph Office, Raglan
12
Mining by Dredge, Cooktown ..
29
The Iron Gates, Lewis Falls
13
Miners’ Bark Hut, North Queensland
29
Prospecting
13
Whim and Shaft, Great Northern Mine
31
Tunnelling Claim. Normanby
14
Main Street, Horn Island
31
Post and Telegraph Office, Mount Britten ..
14
Main Street, Coen
32
Lady Normanby Crushing Mill .,
14
it Cooktown, from Grassy Hill
32
Old Welcome Mine, Normanby ..
15
Treasury Buildings, Brisbane
37
Mount Rose and Stockman Junction
17
CONTENTS.
The Warwick Goldfields .. i
Cloncurry District
Paradise ~ .. •• 5
The Woolgar Goldfield
The Tate River Goldfield
Merodian ~ .. ..6
Glastonbury ~ .. ..6
The Palmer and Starke Goldfields
The Coen Goldfield ..
Gladstone District .. .. .. 8
Eidsvold Goldfield .. .. 16
Rocky River, Coen
Mackay and Bowen Goldfields .. 18
Aldershot Smelting Works
The Ravenswood District .. .. ig
Queensland Department of Mines
Geological Department
Mulgrave, Russell and Jordan Goldfields .. 23
The Mareeba Goldfield .. 24
List of Illustrations.


%dney, Melbourne, and London.
OIL MERCHANTS AND ENGINEERS' FURNISHERS
Lubricating Oils, Asbestos Goods, India=
EAGLE ST., BRISBANE.
Rubber Goods, Boiler and Pipe Coverings,
Engine Packings, “Hercules” Leather
Belting and Balata Belting, Lubricators,
Valves, Cocks, Boiler Fluids, Cotton




o
H
O
<
Pi
W
O
Q
£
<
in
Z
pi
<
o
Pi
<
w
£
in
Q
W
X
a
o
o
w
a
H
£
o
m
£
w
>


ROM the rugged McPherson
Range, w hich divides the colony
of Queensland from its neigh-
bour, New South Wales, to the sea-washed
isles of Torres Straits, the precious metal
has been found in varying quantities in
almost all the thousand streams and gullies
of Queensland that come from the rugged
mountain ranges. Nearly all the rivers,
with their tributaries,
that flow through Queens-
land have given their quota
towards the forty-five
million pounds’ worth of
gold that has been pro-
duced from the colony
since the first discovery at
Rockhampton almost fifty
years ago. Some of the
fields are yearly increasing
in importance; whilst
others, lacking the atten-
tion of their sister fields,
but equal in possible rich-
ness, are awaiting the
mining investor to open
up their rich treasures.
TOWN HALL, WARWICK
There are altogether 65 proclaimed gold-
fields in Queensland, with a total area of
about 18,400,000 acres. There are also 12
districts, termed mining districts, in which
mining for minerals other than gold is
carried on, and which are subject to special
law. These twelve districts have a total
area of about 26,100,000 acres, making
Smaller Fields B
he Smaller fields of Queensland
the area specially proclaimed for mining
purposes a total of 44,500,000 acres. As
this constitutes more than a tenth part of
the colony, it is easily seen how much the
welfare of Queensland is bound up with
the mining industry, and the possibilities
it holds out for mining men are almost
limitless.
Commencing with the south of Queens
land, the mining centres
near Warwick, situated
on the western boundary
of the magnificent stretch
of wheat lands known as
the Darling Downs, claim
pur first attention.
THE WARWICK
GOLDFIELDS
consist of Talgai, Thane’s
Creek, Canal Creek, Pal-
grave, and Lucky Valley,
all within a comparatively
short distance of War-
wick, a centre of the
famous Darling Downs.
The height above sea level
is about 1,400 feet and
the climate is one of the most favourable
in Queensland.
The Queensland Reef at Pikedale was
opened by F. Meyerberg and two others,
and with the Hector Mine, Rockhampton,
divides the honour of being one of the
first reefs opened in Queensland.
About 20 miles WNW. of Warwick,


between the Condamine River and Thane’s
Creek, lies the goldfield of Talgai, gener-
ally termed “ Darkey Flat,” which has
returned annually since its discovery in
1863 a fair amount of alluvial gold, with
PROSPECTORS AT WORK, PIKEDALE GOLDFIELD,
nuggets varying from 1 oz. to 16 ozs. in
weight, one of 65 ozs. being found in 1895.
There are a number of very promising
reefs in the locality which have yielded as
high as two ounces of gold to the ton.
The St, Patrick is the only one now at
work. Seven mines, however, lie aban-
doned, all with good records in gold pro-
duction, and are worth taking up by men
experienced in mining, for the lodes are for
the most part permanent, although the ore
is a little complex.
From the New Chum Hill, Queensland,
Monte Christo Big Reef, and Big Hill
Reefs, the Warwick Argus records show a
return of 1,926 ozs. of gold from 941 tons
of stone between 1866-97. The Sultan
and Taylor Mine opened its first year’s
crushings in 1864 with stone as high as
10 ozs. per ton ; while, in 1892, Mr. R. L.
Jack, GovernmentJGeologist, reported that
some hundreds of tons are said to have
been crushed from the reef for a yield
varying from 11 to 22 ounces per ton.
The St. Patrick Mine is about a mile
SW. of Pratten, and has a short history.
Several years ago, a stockman
brought to Mr. Clare, Talgai, some
small pieces of quartz showing
gold, which he had picked up near
Saw Gully, and offered to take him
to the spot. Unfortunately, the
stockman died suddenly that night,
and it was not until after many
years’ searching and trenching that
the reef was discovered. It is now
the only mine working.
Thane’s Creek is situated on the
creek of the same name, a short
distance west of Talgai, and was
opened in 1868 by the discovery of
alluvial gold in the creek. The
first reef was discovered in 1879 by Parfitt
and Adams, and was named the “Just in
Time,” as the discoverers had decided
upon leaving the field. This was followed
by the Queen Reef and the King, 10 tons
of this latter going 24 dwts. per ton.


From the available returns from Thane’s
Creek and Talgai, the average from about
900 tons of stone crushed is over i| ozs.
to the ton.
The Palgrave Goldfield is situated at
the head of Thane’s Creek, about 16 miles
WSW. of Warwick. Here true quartz
reefs occur, some of which are rich in gold,
though the only mine
at present at work j S
I %
isthe Mountain Maid |
-—whose record is |c wSEB.
fTrIM m /
extremely good so far
as gold is concerned
but which has
suffered like so many
other mines from "'‘ ' 1
miners’ camp,
past mismanagement.
Now, however, there opens out a very
hopeful future. The Government gave
assistance toward further prospecting the
8 dwts. per ton on
official assay.
Mountain Maid, and one or two other
lines of reef were discovered, notably
the Madam Ross, which appear to pro-
mise payable results.
The Leyburn Goldfield is practically a
continuation of the northern part of
Thane’s Creek Field. Several mines have
been opened here, but the Lady Caroline
is the only one that has been continuously
worked for several years. Rich stone has
been obtained from the Von Moltke Mine,
picked samples of which, taken by Mr.
Skertchly, went from
6 dwts. to 5 ozs.
Some 14 or 15 miles
south from the Pal-
grave is the Pike-
dale Goldfield. The
district is one of
thane’s creek.
slate and grey wacke,
seamed with auriferous quartz reefs, many
of which have been opened upon, and
most have payable gold —notably the
Kaffir Chief, Arise and Shine, and P. and
O. reefs—but all have been closed down
for want of capital and enterprise. Of
these may be mentioned the Kaffir Chief
Mine, which raised tons of stone
yielding 210 ozs. of smelted gold. The
reef is from 6 to 14 inches in thickness.
Twelve miles SW. of Warwick is the
Lucky Valley Goldfield which, so far as
known, has produced only alluvial gold, no
reef having been found.


About 63 miles from the cattle township
of Esk, the terminus of the Brisbane
Valley Railway line, and on the Burnett
River fall of the Brisbane or Cooyar
YABBA FALL?
Range, is the township of Nanango,
ated amidst excellent pastoral and far
country. In the ridges about a mile
of the township, alluvial gold has
mined for for many years —at one
time upwards of 600 men being upon
Ihe field. Prospecting work is still
being carried on, and though no big
discoveries are made, a little alluvial
is still produced. Some very rich
copper lodes exist in the district, but
are not at present worked.
farming
been
At the head waters of the Mary
River, and in several of the tribu-
taries which take their rise in the
precipitous ranges near by, gold has
been obtained for upwards of thirty
years. Yabba Creek and Jimna
have been the two principal centres, and
have added their mite to the colony’s
annual gold production. Alluvial gold in
small quantities is to be obtained, and
several reefs of possible value exist in the
locality.
The Enoggera district, a few miles from
Brisbane, the capital of the colony, lying
in the D’Aguilar Range, is also gold-
bearing, and mining has been carried on
for upwards of forty years, but with only
occasional good results. At Kingston, on
the South Coast Railway line, gold-bearing
country exists, as also in several other
parts adjacent to the capital; but such are
worked only in a desultory manner, the
mining centres proper lying much further
afield.
The discoveries of the rich deposits of
minerals on the Mary and Burnett rivers
which from time to time have been made,
and which have brought this district into
the list of rich mineral areas of Queens-
land, is due almost entirely to the ener-
getic prospecting work which is supported
by Maryborough men ; and, although the
gold and mineral exports credited to this
KENT STREET, MARYBOROUGH.


town are comparatively small, there is an
extensive area of mineral lands lying to the
westward claiming Maryborough as their
centre ; while the splendid metallurgical
works of the Queensland Smelting Com-
pany at Aldershot, some six miles along
the Bundaberg Railway line has made it
still further a centre of mining interest.
The list of small mining centres that claim
Maryborough as their port is a long one,
and the mines have been occasionally very
remunerative. The Mount Shamrock, a
short distance from the Mungar Railway
line, yielded some rich stone, and some
of Mount Shamrock, has yielded some
fair gold from the gullies and ridges at the
head of Chowey Creek. Paradise, EidS-
vold, St. John’s Creek, etc., lie further
west ; while Kilkivan, Merodian, etc., are
to the south-west.
PARADISE GOLDFIELD.
On the western bank of the Burnett
River lies the Paradise Goldfield, about 60
miles westward from Maryborough, and
reached from Woowonga Railway station,
the terminus of the Maryborough-Mungar
line. Gold was discovered here by Allen
and party about June, 1889, and quickly
PARADISE GOLDFIELD.
very interesting and uncommon minerals.
Stanton Harcourt Diggings, one of the
oldest in Queensland, lies about 14 miles
away, but is now almost deserted.
Mount Biggenden Mine is about 6 miles
SSE. of Degilbo head station, not far from
the Mungar Railway line, and in addition
to gold has produced native carbonate and
sulphide of bismuth; specimens of ery-
thrine ; a hydrated arsenide of cobalt has
also been found—the only occurrence
known in Queensland. There are reefs at
Gebangle, about 6 miles NWN. of Mount
Shamrock. Mount Stedman, a little west
attracted a considerable population, the
crushings in the first year of its discovery
being very good. On the surface the reefs
are generally small, but increase in size
with depth, and the stone is equally rich
as in the narrower portion of the reef. Mr.
W. H. Rands, Assistant Government
Geologist, reports that 552 tons gave
1,067 ozs * °f gold from the Paradise Pro-
tection Areas, Nos. 261 and 250, Lady
Margaret, Lady Jane, Berrie Pattison, etc.
In 1897, from these and other claims, 799
tons yielded 1,040025. of gold. The field
well deserves the attention of mining men,


the want of progress being due entirely to situated the township of Kilkivan. Sur-
the absence of capital. The reefs, rich rounding this area is the mineral district
and permanent, are- there, and have been of Kilkivan, where have been found in
SHAFT, PARADISE GOLDFIELD.
varying quantities the leading minerals
known to science—gold, alluvial and
lode cinnabar (quicksilver ore), chal-
copyrite, chrome ore, bismuth, copper,
cobalt, silver lead, tin [ore, etc., etc.
This district is now having fresh atten-
tion paid to its rich mineral resources,
and various prospecting parties and
syndicates are developing different
properties in which they have become
interested. Gold mining is being ener-
getically carried on at Devil’s Moun-
tain, near Munna Creek, while lodes of
chrome ore are being opened up at the
Black Snake.
developed to such an extent as to guarantee
their permanence, and offer every induce-
ment for investors to take up the mines and
work them upon a larger scale with the
latest gold-saving appliances. There are
upwards of twenty quartz reefs known to
be auriferous, the gold being valued at
about £3 7s. 6d. per ounce. Last year
(1898) 844 ozs. of gold were produced from
640 tons of stone.
MERODIAN GOLDFIELD
lies to the north of the mineral district of
Kilkivan, and has an area of 24 square
miles on Running Creek, a tributary of
Munna Creek. Many claims are prospect-
ing the several reefs thereabouts.
West from the Gympie-Maryborough
Railway, at the terminus of the Kil-
kivan Branch line, is the goldfield,
Mining District, and town of Kilkivan,
a rich mineral centre, which for a
large number of years has supported a
number of miners. Opened early in
rB6B, the rich alluvial on the Wide Bay
Creek and tributary waters attracted a
large population, which quickly spreading
over the adjoining country, found rich
deposits of various ores among the
ridges and mountainous country that lies
to the west. The goldfield has an area of
17,920 acres, in the centre of which is
GLASTONBURY GOLDFIELD
lies to the west of Gympie, a distance of
NEAR GAETA GOLDFIELD, MX. PERRY DISTRICT.
about 14 miles. It has an area of 3,030
acres, the boundaries being the Glastonbury


and Widgee creeks, tributaries of the
Mary River, The Glastonbury Creek
OLD COPPER SMELTING WORKS, MT. PERRY
yielded some good alluvial gold in 1886,
and good prospects can be obtained in all
the adjacent ridges. The Glastonbury
United Mine is the only one doing system-
atic prospecting work, Government assist-
ance having been granted for the purpose.
At Gooranjam, about 40 miles from
Gympie, at the head of the Brisbane
watershed, gold, silver and copper lodes
exist, and some rich alluvial was obtained
about twenty-five years ago. An influen-
tial Gympie company is now opening up
a rich copper lode in the vicinity, and has
MOUNT PERRY (FROM THE OLD COPPER MINE).
three shafts down on the lode, proving it
to a considerable length.
About 66 miles W. from the important
sugar centre of Bundaberg, lies the gold-
field of Boolbunda, the mineral district of
Tenningering (or Mount Perry), with its
one-time famous copper mine, and a few
miles' further on the Reid’s Creek Gold-
field ; with the Gaeta Goldfield some r 6
miles to the north, at the head waters of
Talkilberan Creek, a tributary of the
Kolan River in the eastern spurs of the
Burnett Range. Boolbunda is but a short
distance from the station of the same name
on the Bundaberg-Mount Perry Railway
line, and though but little mining is now being
done for gold, it holds within its ridges
many rich veins of copper and silver ore
which efforts are being made to unearth.
Reid’s Creek Goldfield has an area of
12,000 acres on the creek of the same
name, a tributary of the Burnett River,
the district lying but a short distance
westward from the picturesque copper
centre of Mount Perry. Eidsvold Gold-
field lies 55 miles westward.


■-*©4-
N the head waters of the Calliope
and Boyne rivers, among the
creeks which go to swell the
waters of the Don and Dawson rivers,
tributaries of the Fitzroy River, in among
the gorges and
ridges of the Mt.
Larcombe, Callide,
and Daw'es ranges,
are a number of
small goldfields and
mineral areas which
have from time to
time been the centre
mr, d. jones, of considerable min-
Warden, Gladstone District. • •. r'i j
’ mg activity. Glad-
stone, the port and centre of all these fields,
is one of the most favourably situated towns
on the Queensland coast, on beautiful
slopes with high wooded ridges to the west,
and the island-dotted Port Curtis to the
east —with a land-locked harbour, superior
in its facilities for shipping to any harbour
on the Queens- -
land coast,
equalling Cairns
500 miles fur- Hp|P*f ai | f
tlier north. It fc. ! .SU'iH;
is the terminus f|j|&
of the North - v
Coast Railway 1 ■■ *7**'.-' „
line, and north ,
from Brisbane
354 miles, and MAIN street
has all commercial, social, and religious
advantages. Two newspapers are pub-
lished in the town; the Gladstone Advocate
The Gladstone District
and the Gladstone Observer , both of which
have a large circulation among the mining
centres of the district. These centres are
under the wardenship of Mr. David M.
Jones, one of the foremost Wardens in the
colony’s service.
About 15 miles SW. of Gladstone, on
the creeks that come down from the north
and south sides of the Boyne Range, lies
the old Calliope Goldfield, discovered by a
Mr. Brennan, who picked up a3oz. nugget
on Sheep Station Hill, above Brennan’s
Hill, in 1863, and attracted a large popula-
tion, who obtained a great quantity of
alluvial gold in the tributaries of the Boyne
River. The John Bull, Alexandria, Char-
teris, Nuggety Gully, Perseverance, and
several other reefs are worth further
attention and were only abandoned owing
to the want of machinery to cope with the
water. A considerable population is
centred on the field, the majority being the
families of miners who are working on the
neig h bouring
goldfields. The
township of Cal-
liope contains
two general
stores, three
hotels, State
school, post
office, etc. Mr.
W. H. Rands,
Gladstone, Assistant Gov-
ernment Geologist, in his able report on
this and the adjacent fields gives some very
interesting particulars relating to their






mineral wealth and geological formation. Creek. Between this field and Mt. Alma,
About 26 miles NW. from Calliope is what on Cattle Creek and its tributaries, several
is known as Sneaker’s Creek. Among, the small patches of alluvial gold have been
broken scrub-covered ranges that come found at various times. Gold has been
down from Mount Larcombe several reefs reported by several parties in every gully
have been opened up, which for a time they have tried between Raglan and Mt.
gave satisfactory returns. Only one at Alma, and the probability is that payable
present is being worked, known as the leaders and reefs are to be found, if the
Golden Fleece. The Creek has supported country is systematically trenched. Pay-
from 20 to 30 men, until lately working able alluvial gold has been found in the
alluvial. past on different parts of Mount Alma
About 10 miles from this field, at the Run, one man finding a flat piece as large
head of what is known as Boat Creek, as a dinner plate, but unfortunately for the
which empties into the Narrows, are several finder it was very thin. To the east of
extensive manganese workings. Eastward Mount Alma, on a grazing farm adjoining
from Sneaker’s Creek Wycheproof, a gully
Diggings, about 14 named Tin Can was
miles direct, lies the ■' lately worked, and from
Spring Hill Goldfield, ‘ this some good patches
among rough broken *-• IslPPili °f alluvial gold were
ranges. Northward ‘ taken. I o the west of
about 14 miles is the •' fe. i WM this, under Mount Red-
Langmorn or Raglan JP shirt, two quartz reefs
Goldfield, on the waters have been opened,
of the Raglan Creek, named respectively the
a tributary of the Fitz- ON THE CAL P DF -< KIV . ER - Gladstone Fig Tree and the Plum
DISTRICT. . .
roy River. It wasdis- Tree, the former giving
covered in 1871 by two prospectors, Geo. a return of over 2 ozs. to the ton
Williams and Chas. Lett. Mining is now To the south of Mount Redshirt, under
chiefly confined to the alluvial deposits of Mount Buckland, on the southern slopes
Fire Creek and the Nine Mile. Only one of the Callide Creek 10 miles away, lies the
reef is being worked at present, known as Mount Rainbow Goldfield. This field was
the Raglan Lass, opened up about 12 first opened about 8 years ago by a party
months ago. Some very good crushings known as the Goldsmith Company, who
were obtained from the reefs in the vicinity, did not meet with the success they
especially from the Port Alma and Duke of deserved ; a few of the Maxwelton miners,
Brrttdny reefs. The crushings to Decern- later on, commenced to develop its re-
ber, 1884, gave 7,883 ozs. from 2,766 tons, sources. Several of the old reefs were
equal to 2 ozs. 7 dwts. per ton. The com- again taken up and new reefs opened, and
munity are principally of the farming class, a battery erected upon the field by Mr.
cultivating the rich soil on the flats and the Fitton, of Monal.
scrub lands on the banks of the Raglan Following the opening of the reefs,


several payable alluvial deposits were
found near the summit of the surrounding
range known now as the Basalt. This
patch could be worked similarly to other
alluvial deposits in the matter of extract-
ing the gold but for the cemented nature of
the basalt contiguous to the wash, and in
consequence the whole is sent to the mill,
excepting the water-worn boulders. One
party, anxious to get all the gold, sent all
the boulders with the wash, and to their
surprise the returns were less than one half
of the previous crushing. The average
crushings from
the Basalt is
about 2 ozs. per
ton. The wash
varies from six
inches to 6 feet,
studded with
water-worn flint
and quartz. The
bottom is of a soft
granite formation,
whilst the strata
over the wash
generally termed
basalt appears to be a layer of volcanic mud
moderately tight until exposed to the
atmosphere, when it cracks and breaks
away. This class of country extends
for fully thirty miles in the direction of
Kroombit, and yet little if any prospecting
is being done outside the limits of this gold-
field. The population numbers between
60 and 70. If mountains are an index to
the auriferous nature of a country this part
should be very rich.
The old Maxwelton Goldfield lies about
ten miles east from here, over as rough a
bit of country as any in the district. This
field is now deserted, though about four
ALLUVIAL GOLD MINING, GLADSTONE
(From an old photo by Richard Daintree, F.R.S., Govt. Geologist).
years ago it was very lively. It has fifteen
defined reefs, the Mount Alice being the
principal one. The ore in this line is of
such a refractory nature that it could not
be treated on the ground with any success.
The first crushing, of 300 tons, was sent to
Aldershot and gave a return of 2 ozs. to the
ton. The average crushings on the field
were 18 dwts.; the Mount Alice Reef runs
from 6 ins. to 2 feet ; the Caledonian, Mount
Croker, and Eileen are all well defined
reefs, and have been but imperfectly pros-
pected. A good dray road extends from
this field to the
Banana road.
About sixteen
miles across the
mountains in a
southerly direc-
tion, or sixty
miles by the road
is the tableland
township of the
BarmundooGold-
field on the head
waters of Butter’s
Creek, a tributary
of the Don River, and the creeks running
eastward into the Calliope River. The
quality of the road to this field from Glad-
stone can be guessed by the fact that it
crosses Butter’s Creek over forty times.
The Barmundoo Goldfield embraces
Tableland, Bittle Tableland, Solitary
Crow’s Creek, and Moxham Gully, and has
an area of 100,000 acres. It is 7 called
Tableland on account of there being a few
acres of level country between the town-
ship and Cattle Creek, locally known as
Digger’s Creek, the rest of the field being
made up of crags and peaks. Most of the
reefs are located on this mountain and the


quartz is conveyed by means of a shoot,
sledge, and dray to the battery. The Sea
View line of reef has given the highest
output and yield since opened, 310 tons
yielding 930 ozs. In proximity to this line
are the Mountain Chief, Mountain Rise,
Florence, Georgiana, Orient, Mountain
Maid, and several other lines, most of which
are being worked. As a rule they are
small, running from three to six inches,
and the general average of the field has
MANGANESE MINE, CALLIOPE RIVER.
been a trifle over 2 ozs. per ton. A return
by Mr. E. F. Bunkin, several years ago,
of the Georgiana Extended Claim, working
on the Orient Reef here about 7 inches
thick, and of the Georgiana reefs, about 12
inches, showed very well, being a total of
345 tons 5 cwt. for 851 ozs. 14 dwt., one
crushing of 46 tons giving 202 ozs. With
proper appliances, and more of them, this
field would come rapidly to the front as a
gold producer, and it is one of the best in
the Gladstone district for mining men to
visit.
As a rule the lode below 50 feet carries
refractory ore, necessitating the blanket-
ings being consigned to Aldershot Smelting
Works, Maryborough, for treatment. None
of the reefs have been tried at any depth as
they are generally worked from tunnel, and
if payable are worked upwards to the
surface. On Crow’s Creek the Mabel line
gave the highest yield, viz., 16 tons crushed
for 198 ozs. Besides this line the Alexia,
Good Hope, and others are now abandoned
on account of the refractory nature of the
lode. At present a few miners, are working
the alluvial in Crow’s Creek. Mosman’s
Creek was opened by Mr. John Carmichael
and proved fairly payable.
SW. from Mt. Butters Hut, an elevation
in the centre of the broken country which
constitutes the Barmundoo Goldfield, lies
the Cania and Kroombit Goldfield, situa-
ted on the north and south sides of the
Dawes Range ; the area is 32,000 acres.
Kroombit was discovered by a prospector
with the euphonious name of Greasy Peter
in February, 1870, and Cania in March of
the same year; the country is wild and
picturesque. Immense sandstone cliff's,
called Castle Mountains, rise up in two
long lofty lines on each side of the Three
Moon Creek. At Cania Diggings they are
some 6 miles apart, but toward Cania
Cattle Station approach each other and
form a canyon, through which the creek
flows ; in times of drought as a narrow
brook but at flood times a swift flowing
torrent, fed from the great escarpments
rising hundreds of feet above them. Large
caverns have been found in the face of
these cliffs but have scarcely been explored.
The township of Cania is situated on both
sides of the Three Moon Creek and is very
scattered. It supports two stores, hotel,
and butcher’s shop. The post office, a
State school, and police residence, with a
few bark humpies, complete the list of
buildings. The mining population, num-
bering about 70 persons, are scattered over
an area of about 12 square miles, and but
for the horse bells and . bleating goats, the


visitor might think he had struck a deserted
camp. The soil for miles around is a rich
loam and the country is well watered.
The principal workings are confinedTo the
WATERFALLS, NEAR CANIA.
alluvial, and payable gold is said to be in
the deep ground, which is very wet. A
considerable area has been taken up by a
syndicate owning several dredging plants
in New Zealand and New South Wales,
and this ground will shortly be tested.
Creek, a tributary of the Burnett River,
the reefs lying high up on the western side
of the Dawes Range. This field at one
time supported a population of nearly 500.
The principal lines are the Lady Griffiths,
Mount Forrest, United Rise, Great
Eastern and Irident, whilst several others
are interspersed over the field. The town-
ship is situated on the creek from which
the field takes its name. Two batteries,
each of ten stamps, supply the present
reefers’ requirements for crushing purposes.
The prospects of the field at the present
time are fairly good, but it is the old cry —
the mine owners wiant the means to
develop. Most of the claims are too deep
to be worked profitably with the whip or
whim, and unless many of those on the
lines of reef unite and work from one shaft
by the aid of steam power, instead of from
5 or 6 shafts, as at present by ordinary
appliances, they will not make wages. The
population at present numbers about 150,
of which about 60 are miners. The total
output from this field, from 1892 to 30th
September, 1898, has been 14,681 tons for
a yield of 15,380 ozs., valued at £3 10s.
per oz. The mail runs once a week from
Gladstone to this field, and if sufficient
inducement offers a coach is procurable.
Between Monal and Cania lies Broad
and Spring creeks. Several reefs were
opened on the former about 1894, but as
they either ran out or were too poor at a
depth, the field was abandoned. Spring
Creek was opened as an alluvial rush and
a few men are working there at present,
but no rich find has been reported. Very
little prospecting has been
The Milton Goldfield lies about 40 miles
to the south of Monal and on the east of
done in the 22 miles be-
tween Cania and Monal,
and’as the country is of an
auriferous nature it is pro-
bable more gold areas will
be discovered.
the Many Peak Range,
between that range and the
Boyne River, which here
flows northward, and after
many wanderings, de-
bouches into the Pacific a
Monal Goldfield lies be- post and telegraph office,
tween the Milton and Cania
short distance below Glad-
stone. The area of the
field is 16,480 acres. The
Goldfield at the head waters of the Monal principal mines are centred at the township


of Norton, once the scene of great activity.
Some of the shafts on “ Conrans ” are over
300 feet in depth, and it is said on account
THE IRON GATES —LEWIS FALLS,
BOOLBUNDA, MOUNT PERRY.
of the refractory nature of the ore and
because of not having steam power for
hauling, they were abandoned as unprofit-
able. A few of the reefs are held and being
prospected above the water level, but sys-
tematic mining is a thing of the past.
Until a company, having the necessary
capital to work on, develops one of the
lines of reef on this field, there is very little
hope of its being developed by the primi-
tive method of windlass or whim.
Eastern Boyne, about 8 miles from Nor-
ton, is worked both for its reefs and alluvial.
Some of the reefs have paid good wages in
the past, though the majority are now
abandoned ; there is a three stamp bat-
tery on the field. The Golden Spur line of
reef is by some considered the best paying
property at present. The True Blue line
of reef should also prove a profitable invest-
ment in the hands of experienced miners
who have the capital to carry out what
they start to do.
South from the Milton Goldfield about 12
miles, in a position similar to that field
between the Many Peak Range and the
eastern bank of the Boyne River, and about
30 miles due east from Bustard Bay, lies
Bompa Goldfield or Mt. Jacob, which has
an area of 7,680 acres. It can be reached by
road, 15 miles from Miriam Vale Station,
on the Brisbane-Gladstone Railway line.
It has proved one of the richest fields in the
district, if the yield and output are con-
sidered. It was first opened by an old
recluse named Jacob Speer, who lived in a
bark hut near his claim. It is said that at
one time he had such an abhorrence of
meeting his fellow man that it would be
often six months before he would show
himself near civilization to procure the
necessaries of life. A party of gentlemen
pegged out an area of 1,600 feet by 400
feet, which included Jacob’s claim, hut, and
garden, and sold it to a syndicate ; there-
upon Jacob cleared for fresh pastures.
PROSPECTING.
The claim was afterwards registered as
Jacob’s Garden, but though it yielded
large returns for about three years, proved


a heavy loss to the shareholders who several other lines of reef on this field, bnt
eventually transferred it to Jacob, -who whether from the poverty of the ground or
returned meanwhile before removing their incompetent management or some other
cause, they have not turned out successful.
The country about is very mountainous,
and its wild and secluded appearance is not
tempting to the average prospector. Added
to this there is no store on the field, the
nearest supplies being procurable at Miriam
Vale, many miles away. Theodore Bro-
thers have a ten stamper battery on their
claim, and a battery worked by a water
wTeel is also on the field. There is also a
TUNNELLING CLAIM. NORMANBY. BOWEN. CyBSUfo P ° Wlled ty Mr ’ C ol^'
Further over, on the northern side of
plant. \\ hilst Jacob was working like a Callide Creek, lies an immense carbonifer-
hermit he was in the habit of crushing ous formation in which has been discovered
picked stone from his __ great seams of high
reef by means of a fiat ' quality coal, likely to
stone and boulder. i . eclipse anything ever
After his death, which *1 q., - before discovered in
occurred about 16 . « Queensland. At Glass-
Queensland. At Glass-
months ago, some | ford Creek rich copper
friends to whom he had lodes exist, and have
sold the claim sent - * .. been traced for a num-
through the Warden ber of miles> There
the identical boulder POST AND TELEGRAPH office, mount j s - n tbe ore a
BRITTEN GOLDFIELD.
and stone to the Ex- crushing of 563 tons
hibition as a memento of the indomitable giving 166 ozs. of gold. Besides the man-
will of a man left to his own resources.
The claim, known as Jacob’s Garden, was
a lode of from 2 to 14 feet in width and If
averaged between 9 and 10 dwts. The VGfiL, |
present holders only take to the mill what HaßlllwKr T f
they test as payable, and though they have MHpJB ’
had much smaller crushings the yield has
been 198 tons for 458 ozs. The Stanby
was also owned by the Company that
originally held the Garden, and was aban-
LADY NORMANBY CRUSHING MILL, NORMANBY
doned as not payable. It has returned goldfield.
1,187 ozs - fr° m 347 tons since it was taken ganese (psilomelane) workings on Boat
up by I heodore Brothers. There are Creek and other places adjacent to


Gladstone, there are what are termed the
Auckland Hill Manganese Mines which
are adjacent to the wharf at the entrance
to Gladstone Harbour at the foot of the
main street, and have been worked for
many years.
OLD WELCOME MINE, NORMANBY GOLDFIELD
The Gladstone mining district is un-
doubtedly one of the most extensive in
Australia, and promises to be the home of
many thousands of miners when its mineral
wealth becomes developed. It contains
twenty-four distinct mining centres, most
of which give employment to miners at the
present time, and all await the advent of
experienced mining capitalists to sys-
tematically explore the many reefs which
have been opened up. In 1898 2,982 tons of
quartz were crushed and 4,567 ozs. of gold
were raised ; of this 687 ozs, were alluvial,
the latter employing 140 miners, the quartz
employing 174. Upwards of 151 aurifer-
ous reefs have been discovered in the
district, and fully /"i 2,400 worth of
machinery is erected upon the various
claims.


MINERS WORKING FROM A WINZE UNDERGROUND
EIDSVOLD GOLDFIELD
lies to the north of the Burnett River, 55
miles WSW. from Mount Perry Railway
station, the terminus of the Bundaberg
Railway line, and about 47 miles from
Gayndah, which is one of the oldest
pastoral townships in Queensland. Gold
was first found here in the early fifties on
Swindle Hill by a shepherd named Lodden
Bill, but no work was done until 1862,
when Mr. John Faulkner sent a trial lot of
stone of tons to Sydney for treatment,
and yielded 8-g ounces per ton. The pre-
judice, however, to mining that existed in
the locality owing to the fear of the squat-
ters that their runs would be invaded and
the stock disturbed, and other circum-
stances, led to the abandonment of the
mine, and though other mines were opened
in the district but little was done until Mr.
Fred. Achilles registered a protection area
I
at the Warden’s office, Gayndah, on April
26th, 1887, when he exhibited some rich
specimens of stone, found near Mr. Faulk-
ner’s old workings, and about ounces of
gold. Mr. Carter, of Gympie, next pegged
out the Golden Spur, and rapidly the town
of Eidsvold rose up as the influx of popu-
lation increased and the many reefs in the
locality were opened ; Maryborough and
Bundaberg men being especially prominent
in the development of the mines. As is
usual with new mining fields large numbers
of leases were taken up at the outset on the
chance of a neighbour proving itself pay-
able gold-bearing, and many of these were
afterwards abandoned. It was this whole-
sale abandonment, more than anything else,
which won for the field, though only for a
time, an undeserved evil reputation. St.
John’s Creek, early in June, 1890, a short
distance from Eidsvold, was opened, and
acted as a spur for further development at
the larger field ; from that time the district
has progressed.
Eidsvold is prettily situated on the side
of a steep ridge with the chief mines nestled
in the adjacent surrounding hills. The
old workings extend from the junction of
Boundary Creek with the Burnett, some 7
miles below Eidsvold head station, to
about g miles above on both sides of the






River Burnett. Thejhesemblance of the “ Craven ” 25 acre lease has just been
3 formation of the field to Charters Towers taken up again by a new company
is very marked, the greatepportion consist- This latter reef, in the years 1888-1894,
ing of medium grained . gave some rich crushings,
granite formed almost the old P.C. giving 1,171
entirely of quartz and * . ,01 ,M, ounces from 795 tons of
.... / m*... J • ‘ £3 M
feldspar with dionte m w stone, and the No. 1
occasional large masses, :yr. ■ North 3,655 ounces from
which sends out dykes . ,|. tons of stone, as
into the surrounding also the Lady Rose, a2O
granite. In the Mt. Rose acre block off the Stock-
and Stockman Junction man Junction. In addi-
Lease there is a feldsite tion there are several
MT. ROSE AND STOCKMAN JUNCTION.
dyke, which is also very other claims working old
similar in appearance to those which are so ground, such as the Empress, Minerva
common on Charters Towers. Underlay, Pallas Minerva, Minerva Gem,
Upon the field are the Mount Rose and East Minerva, etc. The field is in coach
Stockman Junction, which has an excellent communication via Gayndah township and
crushing battery. The Minerva Mine the Degilbo Railway station on the Mary-
adjoining, which paid in 1898 borough-Mungar line, and from Mt. Perry
equal to ss. 6d. per share ; the South- Railway station on the Bundaberg Railway
west Minerva, working a acre lease; a line. The Warden, Police Magistrate, and
further lease of 12$- acres is also owned by C.P.S. is Mr. Reg. S. Hurd, one of the most
this company and is situated a short respected and courteous officers of the ser-
distance away ; the New Heights of Alma vice. During 1898, 3,574 tons of stone was
Lease, of 25 acres ; the Maid of Erin, and raised on this field, yielding 13,431 ozs. The
the Alma. yield from June to Dec.,
The Lady Augusta 1898, from the leading
Claim cut the reef of w ’ 3 claims on Eidsvold, are
the same name, formerly JP j worth noting:—
called the Stockman Ton ®- 1 ozs -
ruS Minerva 1,246$ 4,396
Reef, in the 96ft. level SAV. Minerva 606 679 J
, ,• „ Mt. Rose and
and the co-operati\c * i||j| Stock. Junct. 374 411
party of miners who Brai JL,JC3 Lady Augusta,
. stjohn’sCk. 108 259$
worked it obtaine some -• H Perseverance
handsome returns; the 36 I§
EMPRESS MINE, EIDSVOLD. Young RrOS.,
lease is 15 acres. The McKonkey’sCk. 132 96;
Smaller Fields C


♦
Jp,
1
“Si M
M w
■
HERBERT STREET, BOWEN
JVIackay and Bocuen fields.
-*►©*-
from Mackay, a distance
the Little Wanderer and Lady Mary, but
illllll
of about 65 miles, lies the
were abandoned after expending a consider-
Nebo Goldfield, with Nebo
able amount of money in prospecting.
and Mount Britten, about
27 miles apart,
Some nice specimens of rich gold-studded
as the centres. Nebo is reached from Eton
quartz were unearthed in the Lady Mary
Railway station, a terminus of the Mackay
Claim. As this district is of a highly
line, by coach, a distance of 45 miles. The
mineralised character, and various other
area of the field is 121,600 acres, at the
minerals, including silver and copper, have
head of Fort Cooper and Moonlight creeks,
been discovered, it is worth attention.
two of the hundred head
waters of the
Fitzroy River, rising among the rugged
South from here is the Yatton Goldfield,
Main Coast and Suttor
which has
an area of
ranges, it
was openeu
32,072 acres, ana issuu-
in March,
1881, and in
ated at the junction of
a few weeks upwards of
the Isaac and Connor
300 men were on the
rivers, on the west side
field. Early in May a
of Broadsound Range,
large number of nug-
about 25 miles in a direct
gets were found, gener-
line from
the port of
ally round or oblong
St. Lawrence. Scarcely
flat pieces of gold. This
■ 1 mi'll 111
any mining is at pre-
caused a rush ; by June
POST AND TELEGRAPH OFFICES, MACKAY,
sent being carried on.
upwards of 1500 men
From the Pioneer River.
North from Mount
were on the field, and
Britten, about 20 miles,
by the end of the year 4,808 ounces of gold,
is the Eungella field, which
at one time
valued at £ 17,550, were unearthed. Various
promised good returns, but at which but
reefs were
subsequently opened, notably
little mining is
now carried on.


Twenty-five miles south of Mackay lies
the Grass-tree Diggings, a little to the
north of Sarina Inlet.
It has an area of 1,328
acres, and is reached by
vessel and coach from
Mackay. The Zelma
Gold Mining Co. is the
chief claim working.
The Normanby Gold
field was opened first
1 ~ j- r J MR. FRED. W. MYLES,
by the discovery of good
Warden , Bowen.
alluvial, at a shallow
Broken River, on the west side of the
Coast Range (here called the Normanby
Range), and about 40 miles in a direct line
SW. of Bowen. Following this, upwards
of 25 reefs were opened, but with varying
success, owing chiefly to the insufficiency
of capital for erecting the proper machinery
for treating the ore. Machinery .to a value
of £2,800, however, is now upon the field,
the results last year, 1898, being 256 ozs.
of gold from 152 tons. In addition there
were upwards of 280 ozs. of alluvial
obtained from the Normanby, and the
adjoining Happy Valley alluvial field.
depth; on the head waters of Emu,
East and Grant creeks, tributaries of the
The Hatfensaiood District
—•*©*—
g||||^AVENS\\ T OOD, rich in gold, anan, and Crane, at Middle Camp, and in
silver, copper, and antimony the first ten years of its opening produced
gores, lies SSE. from Charters upwards of worth of gold.
Towers, at the terminus of the Ravenswood The town is upon Elphinstone Creek, a
branch of the Northern Railway, and 77 tributary of the Burdekin River. It was
miles from Townsville. here that rich alluvial
As a field for the invest- gold was obtained, and
ment of capital, the the town from that small
district is one of the first / i beginning of canvas tent
in Queensland, and the [ 4 ifllj and bark hut, 30 years
mines will give good C a £°> has g rown into a
returns if the expendi- cen t re of importance to
ture of the capital in- the surrounding mining
vested is in the hands ‘ 1 district. It is well sup-
of able men, and honest- M Ipliefi with stores, and
ly dealt with. Gold 1 \*Si l l *7. houses of accommoda-
was first discovered in tion. Ihe Church of
1868, by Jessop, Buch- the bluff, mount britten. England,Wesleyan and


Roman Catholic denominations have
ministers resident in the town. A well
MINING ON THE FIELD.
The quartz gold averages about £3 ss.
appointed hospital, under the charge of Dr. per ounce, while the alluvial is £■s 15s. A
HADLEXGH CASTLE MILL AND DAM.
Thackwell, School of Arts, and Library,
while the various clubs and lodges are well
supported. The newspaper of the district
is the Ravenswood Mining Journal , under the
able editorship of Mr. A. Gross. The
goldfield has an area of 682,240 acres, and
stretches from the „ ■ —■—■—
UNDERLIE SHAFT—HADLEIGH CASTLE MINE.
considerable amount of
alluvial mining is car-
ried on in the district,
» > > ££*s• upwards of 1330 ounces
... ,
» w having been registered
in 1898, but which is
only a portion obtained,
as a considerable quan-
tity is unearthed by
Chinamen miners and
n'ot recorded. The chief
industry, however, is
quartz mining, at which
upwards of 439 miners
are stated to have been
employed last year,
raising 18,683 tons °f
stone, yielding 14,664 ounces, valued at
The total yield, with cyanide
and alluvial, of the field, was 27,673 ounces,
of a total value of The cost of
crushing is 15s. ton. It is estimated there
is worth of machinery on the field.
Leichhardt Range jj£.
on the east, to the
Seventy - mile
Range on the west,
and southward to
the confluence of
the Suttor River
with the Burdekin.
This immense area
is under the control
of Mr. W. G. Kelly
Cusack, Warden and Police Magistrate,
who has added lustre to the list of Queens-
land mining officers by his ability in ad-
ministration.
The reefs of Ravenswood are almost
invariably large, and with systematic and
economical methods of treatment, are un-
doubtedly payable in a high degree. The


country rock is a grey syenitic granite.
There are two systems of reef, the one
running north and south, and underlying
I SOUTH NEW ENGLAND WITH BAGGED ORE FOR?ALDERSHOT WORKS.
east, and the other west and east, and
underlying south. In the early days of the
field, very large returns were obtained from
the oxidized stone at the surface, down to
the depth to which it has been exposed to
atmospheric influence. Below that depth
complete sulphuric ores of a very refractory
nature were met with, and the greatest
difficulty has been experienced in their
treatment. The ore contains copper and
iron pyrites, arsenical pyrites, zinc-blende,
galena, etc., and a
great deal of gold
was lost by the or-
dinary amalgamat-
ing appliances, and
offers a full scope
for a metallurgist
for a process that
would extract the
gold in an economi-
cal manner.
HADLEIGH CASTLE MINE.
Hill showing the Outcrop of the Commodore Reef.
Warden W r . G. Kelly Cusack, in his
report upon the field, has these hopeful
remarks upon the district under his'con-
trol : —“ The spirit that moves the mining
men here is one of advancement. Gold-
mining leases are being taken up in all
directions, and new works being erected
for ore treatment,
and the good results
to the tributors in the
Grant and Black
Jack, and also in the
Donnybrook, the
Eight-mile, and
other centres, has
given greater confi-
dence in all direc-
tions. As a conse-
quence of this, con-
siderable attention is
being paid to the field by Charters Towers
mining men, and nearly all the abandoned
lines of reef that gave decent crushings in
the ‘ brown ’ stone, and that were abandoned
when the mundic stone was reached, have
been eagerly looked for.”
Undoubtedly Ravenswood is progressing
to the prosperity the rich mineral district
deserves, and as the years go on, the
improvements in its yields during the last
few years will continue, and a much larger
population be upon the field than in any
time in its previous history. This improve-
ment is well exemplified in the gold returns
contained in the following tables ;


To 1877
... 201,400
ozs.
1878
... 13,252
) ?
1879
••• x 5>744
5 )
1880
... 13,444
>5
1881
... 10,195
? 5
1882
8,711
„
00
00
OJ
.. 13,000
? ?
t)-
00
00 '
... 14,192
5 ?
1885
... 17,641
? ?
1886
9,245
) 5
1887
... 10,390
? J
1888
10,666
5 ?
1889
... 15,719
55
1890
... 16,053
55
1891
... 13,427
55
1892
... 11,893
5?
1893
9,288
5 5
1894
... 16,631
5?
1895
... 14,019
1896
... 14,965
5 5
1897
20,176
55
1898
... 27,673
RAVENSWOOD GOLD RETURNS.
Total .. 497,725 ozs.
Sixty-seven miles from Charters Towers,
and 148 miles from Townsville, along the
Northern Railway line, passing over the
interesting rich pas-
toral lands that for
hundreds of miles
stretch westward
towards the sky
line, we reach Pent-
land, the township
of the Cape River
Goldfield, which
river is here crossed
by the railway line.
The line for twenty
miles is the south
JOHN BULL MINE.
boundary of the field. Payable alluvial gold
occurs in the neighbourhood of Mounts
Davenport and Remarkable, the Lower and
Upper Cape, and over the Dividing Range,
on Oxley Creek, on the Flinders Fall.
Several deep leads have been worked, with
splendid returns of gold. The principal
lead is one running south from the Lower
Cape for about two miles in length. The
lead became wider and deeper towards the
south. Leads of very similar character occur
on the opposite side of the Cape River at the
Lower Cape, and also up Sandy Creek.
The Canton and Pot Hole leads, at the
Upper Cape, have also given handsome
returns.
Quartz reefs have been worked for gold
in many parts of the field, notably in the
neighbourhood of Mounts Remarkable and
Davenport, Pentland, and the Upper Cape.
Speaking generally, the reefs have been
very rich in “shoots” near the surface, but
on being followed down they became poorer.
Further developmental work is necessary be-
fore the true value of these reefs can be known.
The townsnip of Pentland is the centre of
this field, and also of the surrounding rich
pastoral lands. The total area of the field
is 197, 120 acres, and is under the jurisdiction
of the Charters Towers Warden.


—*©4-
OME twenty miles south of
Cairns, and about 16 miles
from the east coast, on the
head waters and main stream of the Mul-
grave, Russell and Johnstone rivers, in
among the great mass of ranges and broken
country between the Bellenden-Ker and
Main Coast ranges, there lies an extensive
and rich belt of gold-bearing country
scarcely prospected, and ripe with the
most valuable possibilities of rich gold
discovery. The area is divided into the
GERALDTON, JOHNSTONE RIVER (PORT FOR THE
JORDAN GOLDFIELD).
Mulgrave, Russell, and Jordan goldfields,
each adjacent, and the whole of the country
within these limits has been proved to be
highly auriferous, the belt of rich alluvial
terraces offering every inducement to men
experienced in hydraulic mining. The
area of the Russell Goldfield is 133,070
acres, of the Mulgrave 192,000 acres, and
Mulgrave, Russell and Jordan Soldfields.
of the new Jordan field 40,960 acres. The
fields can be reached from Cairns, and from
Geraldton, a rising township on the John-
stone River, To each of these places
steamers trade regularly from Townsville.
The “Terrace Workings” at Russell,
on the Russell River, about six miles from
Towalla, and upon the Mulgrave River,
have attracted attention for the last ten
years, though the operations have not been
extensive. The “Terraces” occur at an
elevation of about 2,100 feet above the sea-
level. They are on the edges of a
basaltic table-land, which is deeply
cut into by streams, so as to expose
the underlying slaty rocks. The
basaltic flows extend over an
immense area, and apparently
wherever there is wash-dirt be-
neath the basalt there is gold and
generally tin. The wash is richer
per load than the average of
similar wash in Victoria. This
field is beyond conception a won-
derful formation, which will cer-
tainly produce vast stores of gold, and
afford employment to numbers of miners
on the miles of alluvial auriferous terraces.
But to do this a good deal of money must
be expended in bringing permanent water
to them. The known extent of auriferous
ground is such that 1,000 miles of races
would scarcely be noticed in the dense


scrubs. Hydraulic mining is eminently the Upper Camp and Goldsborough, about
suitable for this class of mining. All the 30 miles from Cairns. Considerable alluvial
trial shafts have bottomed on good wash, gold was obtained here some years ago
A powerful company mining on an exten- in the gullies and terraces adjoining the
sive scale would here find a splendid scope Russell River. The reefs resemble those
for its capital and energy. The terraces on the Hodgkinson, but few have been
in the vicinity of Lake Eacham are also tested.
equally auriferous as those in the Russell. THE MAREEBA GOLDFIELD
In 1898 upwards of 1,900 ozs. of gold were lies between the west bank of the Glohesy
won from the allu- River, a tributary
vial on the Russell of the Barron
field. To walla has River, and the
been worked since .JlSipr iam&J latter river, with
1892, and has \jl an area of 125,440
proved a veritable acres. The town-
“poor man’s field.” H&, ;; ship of Mareeba
The rock is very ,-A * * * • ' s ie terminus of
soft, and the reefs, * h the Cairns Railway
though thin, are «JOHBk mm JgjiKmwM line and the start-
rich, averaging ing point of the
2 ozs, 15 dwts. per Chillagoe line.
ton, but the deve- '. -v*. Good alluvial gold
lopments have not is being obtained
been extensive. in the Clohesy
The field is difficult ■jjgg’ K'i -.. . .md the na-
of access, being JSj?: tureof the country,
situated in the | which is very bro-
midst of a dense ken, points to the
scrub at an eleva- HKL probability of good
lion of 2,300 feet IsreaiiK^iAflW& 1 auriferous lodes
above the sea-level. being discovered.
From the Russell The Queen Con-
T\T • ON THE MULGRAVE RIVER. . ,/r-
Extended Mines stance Mine at
in 1898, 120 tons of stone yielded 303 ozs. Mareeba gave excellent returns and divi
of gold. The Balcooma Field adjoining dends, but owing to unfavourable develop-
proved rich in alluvial, notably Golden ments it has not progressed.
Gully. The reefs in the district are
very strong, specks of gold being easily Jordan Goldfield is the latest
seen in those which have been opened. In addition to the long list of Queensland
1898 49 tons yielded 78 ozs. of gold. £ old minin g centres, and is on the head
waters of the Johnstone River. In 1898
The Mulgrave Goldfield is composed of it yielded 1,809 ozs. of alluvial gold, and






offers with the Russell and Mulgrave, some
of the best inducements for alluvial miners
to work. A little reefing is being done, but
the distance from a reducing plant is so
great that only the richest of stone can be
profitably mined for.
CLONCURRY
The rich mineral district of Cloncurry
is situated on the Cloncurry River, a
tributary of the Flinders, about 200 miles
S. of Normanton, and 280 miles W. of
Hughenden, the terminus of the Northern
feldspar, of the beautiful iridescent variety
used in jewellery, and rubies, have been
found. On the left bank of the Cloncurry
River, opposite the township, rises Mount
Leviathan, a mass of the purest possible
iron ore, 200 feet high, and a quarter of a
mile in diameter at its base, the greater
part of it being massive or granular
specular iron ore. Half a-mile south of
the township is a smaller hill of specular
ironstone equally pure. The Great Aus-
tralian Copper Mine lies between the last-
mentioned ironstone hill and the township.
CLONCURRY.
Railway line from Townsville. It is the
centre of magnificent pastoral country,
but its chief interest lies in the extensive
copper lodes adjacent to the town. The
mineral wealth in this district now lying
dormant, awaiting the advent of railway
communication, is something enormous.
The whole of the Mackinlay Ranges are
more or less metalliferous, and contain
gold, silver, copper, lead, bismuth," mangan-
ese (psilomelane) and tin ore. Magnificent
opals have also been discovered in the
adjacent sandstone country, of a size and
beauty scarcely equalled in Queensland;
while some fine almandine garnets, Labrador
It may almost be described as a mountain
of copper. The numerous trenches and
shafts lead to the conclusion that there is
no end to it. About a quarter of a mile
to the SW. is another large deposit of
copper, known as the “ Contra Lode,” and
is traceable for about 400 yards. Other
copper lodes in the vicinity are equally
rich, the sulphides and carbonates of
copper showing beautifully .- against the
rocks '; the lodes occur on the western side
of the Boulia road, in a belt of country
extending from Slaty Creek southward to
the Malbon, a distance of about 13 miles.
None of these rich deposits, however, are of


COPPER ORE OUTCROP, CLONCURRY
much value when the cost of carriage or
mining requisites and fluxes is so great.
Thus the wealth known to exist there
requisites, and the distance over rough
country to the centres, the progress of
mining in the district is not great. In
1898 the total gold production was 653 ozs.,
of which 580 ozs. was alluvial.
MAILMAN.
On the road from the Woolgar.
THE WOOLGAR GOLDFIELD
since the early seventies—half a lifetime—
will be comparatively untouched for many
years to come, unless this is altered and a
railway constructed. Gold occurs in many
parts of the district, and rich alluvial has
been worked for many years, the chief
centres being : —Agate Downs, 70 miles
from Cloncurry ; Soldier’s Cap, 40 miles
SW. of Cloncurry ; the Bower Bird, 70
miles NW. of Cloncurry; Top Camp,
Pumpkin Gully, the Leichhardt, and
others. Upwards of thirty reefs have
been opened upon and several rich patches
worked, but owing to the excessive cost of
is situated on the head waters of the Wool-
gar River, a main tributary of the Flinders,
about 180 miles NW. of Hughenden, the
terminus of the Northern Railway from
the port of Townsville; and about 150
miles south of Georgetown, the chief centre
of the Etheridge Goldfield. The area is
CATTLE STATION NEAR MAREEBA.
727,680 acres. The field stretches north-
ward from Merton Ponds to the southern
edge of the great Desert Sandstone table-


land (a part of the Gregory Range), and
across the tableland for a distance of twenty
miles to the watershed of the Percy and
Gilbert rivers. The sides of this desert
tableland, at the head of the Woolgar, rise
up in cliffs and capes similar to a rugged
sea coast, with great pillars of white quartz
glistening in the sun, standing isolated at
intervals, towering up to the level of the
distant Gregory Ranges and giving the
landscape an aspect of desolate grandeur.
There are permanent waterholes on the
GROUND SLUICING ON THE RUSSELL RIVER.
tableland, and innumerable springs at the
base on both sides furnish permanent
streams to the Woolgar and Gilbert rivers.
These waterholes and streams occasionally
increase in volume, especially in the dry
seasons, particularly at night, receding in
the daytime to the normal level. The
same phenomenon is exhibited at the hot
springs at Mt. Little and at Fort Brown
on the Flinders River. The lightly tim-
bered flats upon each side of the river and
on the banks of the creeks that come down
from the rugged tableland have for many
years yielded some rich alluvial gold, from
that of a fine nature to nuggets up to 20
and 30 ozs. in weight ; and it is the opinion
held by many who have visited and worked
upon the field that eventually a deep lead
will be opened up when once the true
gutter is discovered. The sides of the
gullies and ranges are covered with thou-
sands of loads of surface alluvial wash that
prospect over 5 dwt. to the load. There is
no shadow of doubt that a scheme for ground
sluicing on a large scale with skill and
capital will give big profits.
The reefs in this district commenced to
be worked upon about 1882, upwards of
50 reefs being worked between that year
and 1893. The Warden’s reports give
19,468 ozs. from 19,974 tons °f stone, but
the returns from several of the mills have
been lost. Owing to the distance from
port the district has been very much neg-
lected during the last few years. At the
present time the following are the only
reefs being worked : Blue Jacket, Hammer
and Gad, Soap Spar, Roman Crown, and
Eulo Queen—the returns last year being
342 tons for 292 ozs. The total population
is 64, of these 25 are miners.
THE TATE RIVER GOLDFIELD.
West from the Hodgkinson Goldfield,
between the Walsh and Lynd rivers, not
far from their junction with the Mitchell
River, is the Tate Goldfield, with an
area of 121,600 acres. In the ridges,
gullies, and rough mountainous country
that abound in this large area, many locali-
ties are worth thoroughly prospecting.
The construction of the Chillagoe Railway
extension will bring this district, as also the
Hodgkinson, into greater prominence.


MAYTOWN —PALMER GOLDFIELD.
The Palmer and Starke Goldfields
AMO US as the head waters and
Morgan, and the New Placer Mine in New
Mexico, the Palmer River gold brought
chief tributaries of the Mitchell
River are for minerals, the Pal-
the highest price in the world :
mer River undoubtedly holds its own in
superiority as a gold producer far and away
above its more southern confreres , the main
Mitchell River, and its tributary streams,
the Hodgkinson, Walsh, and Tate rivers.
It can well be termed the greatest alluvial
gold producing district ever
Mount Morgan .. .. 4s. Bd. per oz.
New Placer, Mexico .. £4 3s. 4c!
Palmer River .. .. 2s. 6d
discovered in Queensland.
The known auriferous belt
exceeds 2000 square miles ;
payable alluvial gold has
been found in the bed of the
Palmer River for a distance
of 100 miles. At Maytown,
and its vicinity, nuggets of
gold have been found up to
100 ounces in weight, gener-
ally with adherent particles
of quartz, showing the prox-
imity of the quartz veins
Gold was first discovered by Hann,
surveyor and explorer, in the Palmer River,
20 miles below Maytown, and a party was
MR. ST. G. PEGUS,
Warden, Palmer Goldfield.
fitted out by Mr. J. V. Mul-
ligan, who discovered rich
gold higher up the river, in
October, 1873. In a short
time upwards of 20,000
people were upon the field,
and in five and a-half years,
to March, 1879, upwards of
worth of gold
passed through the Customs
at Cooktown, Large, how-
ever, as that quantity of
gold is, it does not include
the whole of what was ob-
with which the gold was associated. With tained on the Palmer, as not more than
the exception of gold obtained from Mount two-thirds produced was entered at the


Customs, and it is computed that in these
years under review gold to the value of
was unearthed, equal to about
MINING BY DREDGE
On the Annan River, Cooktown.
53 tons weight. The reports of the rich
finds of alluvial gold in the Palmer River
attracted men from all parts of the colonies,
and the silent river, where Captain Cook
beached his vessel, the Endeavour , scarcely
one hundred years before (Sunday, June
10th, 1770), was quickly alive with shipping,
and representatives of all nations could be
seen camped on the ridges rising up from
the riverside; and Cooktown rose
by magic. The distance to the field
from this port is about 121 miles,
of which 67 miles is by rail, to the
terminus of the Cooktown Railway
line, and the remainder by coach,
to Maytown, the centre of the
field, 54 miles, a two days’ journey.
At the present time the Palmer
field is occupied by less than 200
miners, chiefly Chinese, who are
making the barest wage. The
opinion is held that extensive deep
leads of concentrated auriferous
wash may yet be found beneath the Desert
Sandstone, as alluvial gold has been fre-
quently found in localities where it could
not have come from local reefs. Reefing
commenced in 1876, when 15,000 ounces
were obtained from 4,766 tons, but this
industry has not yet had a fair trial. In
the early days the cost of transport, timber
and provisions was very great. While the
alluvial was rich and plentiful, miners could
endure this, but such conditions were
unsuitable for successful reefing. In those
days flour sold at 2s. 6d. per lb., and horse-
shoe nails sometimes brought their weight
in gold. Now, however, the railway runs
from Cooktown to the Laura, to within 50
miles of the centre of the field, with the
result that carriage has been reduced
immensely, and the abandoned mines now
offer every inducement to capital for develop-
ment, The Ida Mine, worked to a depth
of 250 ft., yielded 13,264 ounces, or nearly
at the rate of 2 ozs. to the ton. The Queen
raised 7,082 tons, which yielded 15,168
ounces of gold. The Comet, worked to a
depth of 257 ft., yielded 5,446 ounces, or
over 2 ozs. to the ton. These are fair
specimens of the kind of reef abandoned.
MINERS’ BARK HUT, NORTHERN QUEENSLAND.
The Anglo-Saxon, discovered 12 years ago,
has crushed 17,904 tons, for 28,076 ounces,
while there are others which, though
almost equally rich, were abandoned when


the water level and refractory ore were
reached, owing to want of proper appliances
and capital to work the mine.
During the year 1898 several good crush-
ings came from the Palmer reefs, the
following being of merit:—Alexander, 122
tons for i6itt ounces ; Alexander Syndicate,
40 tons for 88 ounces; Scotia Extended,
23 tons for si|- ounces ; Reuben P.C., 36
tons for 59 ounces ; Annie Young, tons
for 18 ounces ; and a number of other small
crushings, giving a very satisfactory average.
The Starke and Starke No. 2 Goldfield
is about 75 miles north of Cooktown, and
MR. B. H. OGILVIE,
Warden, Cooktown.
about 20 miles from the coast. This field
yielded 1754 ounces of gold in 1898, of
which 841 ounces were alluvial. About 47
men are at work on the reefs, and last year
187 tons were crushed from the dozen reefs
that have proved auriferous.
THE COEN GOLDFIELD.
The Coen Goldfield is situated on the
Mcllwraith Range, and the head waters of
the South Coen and Stewart rivers. The
Cape York Telegraph line passes through
the field, and a Post and Telegraph Office
is stationed here. The area of the field is
119,680 acres. It is reached from Cook-
town by vessel to the Stewart River, and
then overland
about 45 miles, or
from the terminus
of the Cooktown
Railway line, at
Laura. Owing to
the rich returns
from this district,
the Coen is rapidly
gaining the atten-
hon. john douglas, tion of mining men,
Government Resident and Warden, i , i • , , •
Torres Straits. and the rich dIS-
coveries that during the past two years
have been made by prospectors in the
adjacent country, is adding considerably to
its name as one of the wealthiest spots in
North Queensland.
The leading mine of the field is the Great
Northern, yielding, in 1897, 965 ounces of
gold from 824 tons of stone. The Victoria
P.C. gave 358 ounces from 207 tons; the
Abdallah, 138 tons for 551 ounces (all from
the same reefs) ; the Long Tunnel P.C.,
552 tons for 702 ounces ; the Daisy, 89 tons
for 214 ounces; Eureka (Llankelly reef),
31 tons for 112
ounces; Trafalgar,
94 tons for 328
ounces; and sev-
eral claims on the
I New Year line of
tfdjpi v - reefs produced to-
" 1 rp'dier >i/ tons.
u ' nt ' l > i (.’ldl’d J 47
ounces. A well-
MR. CHERRY,
Acting Warden and Police equipped Cyanide
Magistrate, Coen. plant i s upo n the
field. Splendid timber abounds in the
locality—pine, cedar, silky oak, etc. The
Coen district is under the control of Mr. F,


I. Cherry, Acting Warden and Police
Magistrate, who is spoken very highly of
by the miners on the field.
The total gold produced from the Coen
and Rocky fields, in 1897 was 5,386 ounces,
from 3,401 tons.
WHIM AND SHAFT GREAT NORTHERN MINE
On the Coen Goldfield, from June to
December, 1898, the following were the
most important crushings, which fully bear
out the oft reported richness of the field :
Great Northern ... 275 tons 643 ozs.
Victoria ... ... 240 ~ 285 ~
Abdallah... ... 168 ~ 184^
Stewart ... ... 48 ~ 113
Telegraph Leader ,, ,,
Lady Mary ... 16 ~ 48 ~
Everitt ... ... 10 ~ 48 ~
Springfield P.C.... 5 ~ 93
6 Nth. Springfield 6 ~ 70
5 Nth. Springfield ~ 14
Rocky River.
1 Nth. Claude Lakeland, 8£ tons for 75^
ounces.
MAIN STREET, HORN ISLAND.
The Rocky River, or Neville Creek,
Diggings is under the Coen Goldfield
Warden’s jurisdiction, and is surrounded by
thick scrub. It is situated on the east side
of the Mcllwraith Range, between that
range and the coast, on Rocky and Chester
rivers, and Neville Creek, at an altitude of
2000 feet, with a delightful climate. The
field has an area of 89,600 acres. A great
deal of prospecting is going on in this
almost unknown corner of the world, and
the belt of rich auriferous country worked
upon further south may at any time be
found to extend through the whole of the


Cape York Peninsula. In 1897, 9° tons this claim gave a return of 466 ounces of
of stone —brought for the most part by pack gold from 68 tons of stone. Splendid
horse over the intervening ranges to Coen timber abounds, chiefly pine and cedar.
for crushing
yielded 766 ounces
of gold; one lot,
from Messrs.
Brown & Slattery's
claim, of tons,
yielded 365 ounces
of gold. The prin-
cipal claims are the
Claude Lakeland
P.C. (Wm. Lake-
land), No. 1 South
Lakeland (Brown
MAIN STREET, COEN
Good alluvial gold has been found on
Sefton Creek, at the head of the Batavia
and Slattery), 1 North Lakeland (Wallace),
2 North Lakeland (Betteridge & Waters),
COOKTOWN FROM GRASSY HILL.
and 3 North Lakeland (Keating & Party).
A turbine crushing mill, driven with water
power, is upon Mr. Lakeland’s lease, and
River, in the ridges and gullies coming
from the gorge-scarred, peculiar shaped, and
very prominent Mount Carter. The


country is very rough, and there is extreme
difficulty in obtaining provisions, rendering
prospecting work very hard.
THE TRACK TO ROCKY RIVER FROM COEN.
A new alluvial diggings was discovered
in December, 1898, by three prospectors,
Cody, Harris, and Evenett, about 20 miles
south of Coen, and a mile and a-half below
Smaller Fields
SURFACE WORKS, WILSON’S REEF, COEN
reefs, and the forma-
tion of the country in
which the gold is
found, going to show
that they are a con-
tinuation of the lodes
mined along the east-
the junction of the Little and Big Stewart
rivers. Here a number of men are making
excellent returns now that water is avail-
able.
Gold has been worked for a number of
years upon the islands in the Torres Straits,
the bearing of the
ern seaboard of the MR - w - GRACE MORAN -
Mining Registrar,
Colony, and cl SUD- Torres Straits.
marine prolongation of the great mountain
chain of the east coast of Australasia.
The principal mining centre is Horn
Island (Maroopa), 16 miles north of Cape
York. Gold reefs have been proved to
exist on Hammond Island and Possession
Island, and also upon Friday Island, where
Mr. J. T. Embley has a battery,


The Queensland Smelting Company, Ltd., Aldershot,
PORT MARYBOROUGH, QUEENSLAND.
THE Smelting Works of the Queensland Smelt-
ing Company, Limited are situated six miles
from the town of Maryborough (Queensland)
on the Bundaberg extension of the North Coast
Railway line, and is connected by rail with the
wharves at Maryborough. Aldershot has a rail-
way. telegraph and post office, and is centrally
situated as regards supply of fuel and fluxes. Local
boats give return freights and ore is carried cheaper
to Aldershot than to any other Australian smelting
works. All the smelting ores, gold, silver, copper,
lead, etc., are bought by assay, the ores being
sampled at the works. Sellers can attend sampling
and see their samples drawn, and take away dupli-
The success of the smelting treatment of gold
ores, that are either not amenable to amalgamation
or cause heavy losses of gold and quicksilver,
from the presence of base metal sulphides in the
ores, is such, that in many instances it pays the
mines better to simply pick out this heavy mineral
stone, bag and ship it to the Works for the pur-
chase by assay in the usual way, instead of attempt-
ing to treat it by the battery.
For test lots by amalgamation the Company has
a Huntingdon Mill, whose success in amalgamation
is well known, provided with Frue-vanners, for
concentrating any minerals that may be present.
ALDERSHOT SMELTING WORKS, MARYBOROUGH.
cate samples to be assayed by their own assayer.
Results are then exchanged by post or wire, and
any differences greater than 2 dwt. of gold, 2 ozs.
of silver, 2 per cent, of lead, and 1 per cent, of cop-
per per ton, is settled by sending a sample to a
referee, the Company paying on a middle assay of
the three samples.
These concentrates are purchased by the Company
on the usual terms.
Thomas J. Dyson is the metallurgist and W. H.
Clark the local secretary of the Company at the
Works, Aldershot. The office of A. Kift, the London
secretary, is at the Registered Head Office, 53 Old
Broad Street, London, E.C. ; the register of share-
holders being in London only.
The chief business of the Company is the smelt-
ing of gold, silver, lead, and copper ores, for which
it possesses smelting and calcining blast, &c., and
plant of a sufficient capacity to treat 1,500 tons of
ore per month, and a complete refining plant for
the separation of the gold and silver from the lead.
Besides the Works, the Company has branches in
all the southern colonies, and usual agencies at all
ports in Queensland.
The Company’s soft market lead, from the care
exercised in refining, is second to no soft lead
produced in Australia, and is specially suitable for
being made into pipes, sheet lead, etc.
The Works, as stated, are splendidly situated and
should have a great future before them in the large
mining developments which are taking place in
Queensland.


with the com-
paratively small amount of
50,000 ounces unearthed at
Canoona 40 years ago, which ushered
Queensland into the list of gold-producing
countries of the world, the colony has so
rapidly ad-
vanced in gold
swelled to the
hon. robt. phicp, enormous
Ministcr for Mines. , r
amount ot
12,924,934 ounces, which, valued at £3 10s.
per ounce, totals while the
mineral deposits, such as silver, tin, cop-
per, etc., amount to many millions in value.
The necessity for special legislation for
mining in the colony was early apparent,
and with the growth of the industry special
Acts, dealing with mining, have from time
to time been passed. During the last
session of the Queensland Parliament these
Acts were consolidated and brought into
one Act, termed “ The Mining Act of
1898,” which came into force on March
Ist, 1899.
for Townsville.
The following
sketch of his Ja
life, for which 5,;
we are indebted
to Pugh's Al-
manac, will be
of interest :
The Hon.
Robert Philp
is a native of
QUEENSLAND DEPARTMENT OF MINES.
The Department of Mines, which ad-
ministers this Act and the Regulations, was
originally in conjunction with the Depart-
ment 'of Works, then known as the
Department of Works and Mines. There
was also a branch of the Lands Depart-
ment, which administered the Mineral
Lands Act of 1872, then under the control
of Mr. W. Finucane. In 1874 Mr. G. L.
Lukin, Police Magistrate at Roma, was
appointed Inspector of Mines, and upon
the formation of the Department of Mines
into a separate branch of the Service he
became first Under Secretary.
At the head of this department is a
member of the Cabinet, termed the Minis-
ter for Mines, who administers the Mining
Act. The present Minister for Mines is
the Hon. Robt. Philp, the senior member
of Parliament
MR. P. F. SELLHEIM,
Scotland, com- Under Secretary f or Mines -
ing to Queensland at an early age.
After attending the Normal School he


joined the firm of Bright Bros. & Co.,
an old Queensland mercantile house;
after being with them a number of years
Mr. Philp established, in conjunction with
Mr. James Burns, the
present extensive firm
of Burns, Philp & Co.,
which has now busi-
ness premises right
round the coast ”bf
Australia, and has
also several important
MR. HY. MARSHALL, branche S in NeW
Chief Clerk, Dept, of Mines.
Guinea. Mr. Philp was
fected for Musgrave in 1886, and Towns-
ville in 1888, of which latter electorate he is
senior member. In 1893 he was appointed
a member of the Cabinet as Minister for
Mines and Secretary for Public Works.
He now holds the portfolios of Treasurer
and also Minister for Mines.
With the Minister is associated the
Under Secretary for Mines, who can well
be termed the supervising and consulting
officer in the administration of the Mines
Act. The present Under Secretary is Mr.
P. F. Sellheim, a gentleman long con-
nected with the colony’s progress ; first as
a pioneer squatter, when L "AyT TpST"
the greater part of the
colony was an unknown
territory, then as a high-
ly respected and able
Warden upon the lead-
ing goldfields.
Philip Frederic Sell
n ■ • i • -o • 1 MR. ALBERT N. NIXSON.
heimarrivedm Brisbane
Chief Draftsman,
in l 18550 n his wayltothe Department of Mines.
Dawson River, where he had arranged to
acquire colonial experience. In 1859, in con ‘
junction with the late George Elphinstone
Dalrymple, he formed a party for the ex-
ploration of what is now known as the
Kennedy district, and was the first to ac-
quire pastoral leases in this locality. In
1874 h® joined the Government service and
was appointed Warden of the then newly
discovered Palmer Goldfield. In 1880 he
was transferred to the
charge of the Charters
charge oi me Charters
Towers Goldfield, where
he remained for eight
years, until a similar
appointment was con-
ferred on him at Gympie.
In 1892 he accepted the
position as Under Sec-
MR. W. T. BAYNES, W
MR. W. T. BAYNES, for
Correspondence Clerk,
Dept, of Mines. The Chief Clerk and
Accountant to the De-
partment is Mr. Henry Marshall, for
over 25 years an officer of the Department;
Mr. W. T. Baynes is correspondence
clerk, Mr. Sheldon register clerk, and Mr.
Gamble record clerk, with other subordi-
nate officers. The chief draftsman of the
Department is Mr. A. N. Nixon, who,
after a long experience in the Fiji Islands,
in 1874 took charge of this branch. With
him are associated other draftsmen.
Originally the administration of the
mineral fields was in the hands of officers
appointed by the Gov-
ernment, termed gold
commissioners, who
held judicial powers '
on the various fields,
and were gentlemen
of the highest social
standing. Following
standing. i onowing mr. wm. fryar,
the C O m.ni iS S i O n ers Inspector of Mines , Southern
District of Queensland
came the wardens,
under whose charge the various fields are
now administered. They are also usually




police magistrates and have practically
supreme control on the fields. Their
decision is final, with the exception of an
appeal to the Supreme Court or District
Court. With regard, however, to the
forfeiture of leases or
exemptions for a longer
period than one month,
or any matters per-
taining thereto, the
applications are made
to the Warden, who
refers then to the
Minister for decision.
The Warden issues
miners’ rights, business
capt. bennett, licenses on the field,
Inspector of Mines, ■ ..
Central District. receives applications,
and deals absolutely
with prospecting, machine and other areas,
claims, etc., and he may grant exemption
from work for a period of six months ;
he is also the authority to whom all
miners can appeal. The Wardens upon
the various goldfields are as follows :
Charters Towers and disirict - A. R. Macdonald
Croydon ~ - L. E D. Towner
L. E. D. Towner
Clermont ~ * - H. M. Chester
Cloncurry ~ - J. C. Lined ale
Coen ~ (acting) F. J. Cherry
Cooktown ~ - B. H. Ogilvie
Etheridge ~ - - T. H. Boddington
Eidsvold ~ - R. S. Hurd
Gympie ~ - F. P. Parkinson
Gladstone ~ - D. M. Jones
Hodgkinson ~ (acting) J. Williams
Horn Island ~ - Hon. J. Douglas
Herberton ~ - A. C. Haldane
Jordan Field ~ - Peter Macarthur
Mackay „ - W. R. O. Hill
Mount Morgan ~ - F. Millican
Normanby ~ - F. W. Myles
Palmei ~ (acting) S G. Pegus
Paradise
E. Morey
Ravenswood and district - W. G. K Cusack
Rockhampton ~ - P. W. Pears
Tenningering (Mt. Perrry) - T Mowbray
Warwick and district - Major R. A. ft
Major R. A. Moore
A Warden has usually associated with
him an officer, termed Mining Registrar,
who has power to deal with certain defined
matters in the absence of the Warden.
His special duties are to issue the Miners’
Rights, take notes in the Warden’s Court,
keep the registers, and generally assist
the Warden in the duties of the office.
Surveyors, acting under
the authority of the
Mines Department, are
usually resident upon
the different fields, and
execute mining survey
work above and below
the ground, for the pay-
ment of which fees are
prescribed by the Regu-
lations under the Mining
MR. Shakespeare, Act. Under the provi-
inspector of Mims, sions of the Act are
Northern District. '
four officers, termed In-
spectors of Mines, who have ample powers
to examine the different mines of the
colony and see that they are worked in as
safe a manner as possible. •
To facilitate a thorough
supervision the colony is
divided into four sections :
the Southern district,
under charge of Mr.
Fryar ; Central, under
Captain Bennett; North- MR ' R- G - M ‘ LEAN -
Inspector of Mines,
ern, Mr. Shakespeare , F*ir Northern district.
and the Far Northern, under Mr. Mc-
Lean.


THE GEOLOGICAL
DEPART-
arduous and dangerous expedition in
MENT.
1879-80 was from Cooktown, through the
Due to the able work of the officers of
Cape York Peninsula
to Somerset, a
the Geological
Department
—a branch of
journey upwards of 500 miles through an
the Depart-
exceedingly rough country, with the natives
ment of Mines
of a hostile character
the whole way.
f
—the colony
What with attacks from the natives,
■
m m
A
of Queensland
' !
continuous rain,
has been ex-
y/m ' \
and starvation
rm
■
amined and
/ \
rations, the jour-
mapped geo-
/ n \
ney was of ex-
logically, in
f t “ M
ceptional hard-
I / i
*
many parts in
1 *
j ship. Mr. Jack
detail, and
I A IfmdjM
to this day car-
every informa-
ries the mark of
MR. R, L. JACK, F.
G.S., F.R.G.S.
tion descrip-
s <4 Jgklf |Wp'
a spear which
Government Geologist.
tive of the beds
pierced through
in the different localities is available at this
his neck just
in the different localities is available at this
department. The first Government Geolo-
gist was Mr. Richard Daintree, an old
Queensland squatter, who had been in the
Geological Survey of Victoria, and who
was afterwards Agent-General for Queens-
land. The present Government Geologist
and head of this department is Mr. R. L.
Jack, F.G.S., F.R.G.S., etc., an officer whose
self and opinions are held in high esteem
MR. W. H, RANDS F G.S., A.R. S.M. above the sllOul-
Assistant Government Geologist. . • .
der, one night
while camped on the mainland opposite
to Hannibal (I think it should be termed
Cannibal) Island. With Mr. Jack is asso-
ciated Mr. W. H. Rands, the senior
assistant geologist, who has also had a
long geological experience in the colony,
and has furnished many able reports upon
the various jr“ _ i
GEOLOGICAL DEPARTMENT AND MUSEUM,
BRISBANE.
fields, notably
Charters Tow-
ers, Gympie
and Croydon.
There are also
Mr. Cameron,
and Mr. Dun-
stan, assistant
geologists, the
latter an au-
MR. CAMERON, 8.A., CAMB.,
thonty upon Assistant Government Geologist.
by the scientific world, and who has led
varions expeditions to examine different
parts of the colony. One especially
palaeontology, and Mr. L. C. Green.
The offices of the Mines Department
are upon the second floor of the Treasury


The
mineral
yield of the Colony for
twenty years, up to December 31st, 1898,
is shown by the following table.
The totals for 1877 include those of the
previous sixteen years.
Value.
Coal.
Value.
Tin Ore.
Value.
£
Tons.
£
Tons.
£
1,762,850
508, 7!5
283,139
24.837
1,499,630
35.126
52,580
21,272
2,849
86,366
34.791
55-012
22.759
2.877
120,391
20,137
58,052
24.573
2,847
\ 142,977
19.637
65,612
29,033
3.456
\ 193,699
14,982
74.436
33,592
4,261
269,904
21,080
104,750
52,894
3.346.
187.292
30.872
120,727
60,025
3.383
130,4130
18,920
209,698
87,228
3.253
*5*.871
7,000
228,656
95 243
3.*53
162,124
7,600
238,813
97.460
3.279
217.389
9,248
3”.4 12
127,947
3,586
200,019
12,000
265,507
121,118
3.033
156,406
3,000
338.344
157,071
2,970
154.963
865
271,603
128,198
2,236
116,387
2,461
265,086
123,308
2,389
123,098
3,822
264,403
125.340
2,434
106,953
9,582
270,705
114.593
2,871
102,277
13.097
323.068
132,530
2,114
68,133
21,042
37*.390
154.987
1-554
49,018
12,645
358,407
139.889
1,203
37.509
2,166
407.934
150.493
1,025
36,502
2,022,927
5,164,910
22,282,692
86,291
4,448,800
Id output to 1898 is £44,499,955.
als, -£107,945, Gems. /S.937-
Bismuth, 536 tons;
.7. Manganese, 1,259 tons; value, Lead,
Buildings, and overlook the magnificent
Victoria Bridge and a long reach of the
Brisbane River.
The Geological
Department is
at present on
the corner of
Queen and
George streets,
and has in con-
nection with it
a museum con- J \
taming a mag-
nificent codec- I m
firm nf minprak '
taining a mag-
nificent collec-
tion of minerals,
mineral-bear-
mineral-Dear- mr. dunstan,
in o- rocks and Assistant Government Geologist.
geological data. Geological reports and
*
Year. | -Gold. %>’“ Value. Copp„
Ozs. Tons. £ Tons.
To 1877 1 2,646.916 x 60 45.470
1878 310,247 .. .. 574
1879 [ 288,556 12 285 567
1880 I 267,136 xi 2 2,459 326
1881 270,945 383 13.494 33i
1882 i 224,893 2 140 i . 7
1883 I 212,783 5.263 66,192 1,800
1884 307,804 4,386 35.327 1.653
1885 310,941 3,787 63,711 1,340
1886 ; 340,998 1,631 52,797 900
1887 I 425,923 2,183 80,092 1,010
1888 | 481,643 1,190 44.015 1,126
1889 j 739,103 1,104 61.500 1.079
1890 | 610,587 1,913 56.639 185
1891 ! 57 6 -439 875 21,879 98
Ozs.
1892 1 615,558 224,810 36,436 81
1893 I 616,940 339,267 42,408 297
1894 679,511 183,158 22,077 4 x 5
1895 631,682 225,019 30,042 434
1896 640,385 279,284 32,162 580
1897 807,928 234,065 25,118 288
1898 920,048 104,021 10,588 62
12,924,934 697,4x8 60,340
total value of
the gold
Antimony, 3,024 tons; value,
value, £5,836. Wolfram, 224 tons ;
2,065 tons; value,
£35,258. . Opals,
value, £4,047.
maps dealing with any part of the colony
can be procured at this office at a
moderate cost.
The estimated area of Queensland,
exclusive of the adjacent islands, is
669,520 square miles, or 428,492,800
acres, being about twelve times larger
than England and Wales. The area of
the goldfields under the jurisdiction of
the Department of Mines is 18,638,010
acres, and the proclaimed Mining Districts
33,168,616 acres.


'LEMENT to “THE GOLDFIELDS OF QUEENSLAND
Outridoe Printing
Company, Brisbane, Queensland.




CO
o
Q, 5
15 o
s=l Q
.§ -J
>: <
——
£ >
»—s
Qj —I
-c: <r
* <
<b y>
La-
UJ
UJ
oc
Cb
§
9
l-
UJ
Li.
O
o
o
I
o
fie




Outridoe Printing Company, Brisbane Queensland
Supplement to "THE GOLDFIELDS OF QUEENSLAND."




>o fplem rui TO THE GOLDFIELDS OF QUEENSLAND
Outriogc Printing Company, Brisbane, Queensland












Supplement to “THE GOLDFIELDS OF QUEENSLAND.'’


~3'A+'tP
&16U0
fll* s 2_
H t&f-j
3 1 5 08 01296683 9


Dn Any person whose application for an assisted
rUH = paying Kassengers. pa / sa^e cannot be entertained may, as
heretofore, avail himself of the third-class
passenger rate, namely, 13s. (including “ ship kit”) granted by the British-India
Company’s direct line of Steamers from London to Queensland.
P„pp n„ CC p|- frPfC Female Domestic Servants and Farm Labourers will be granted Free
rFCC Passages to Queensland upon the approval of the Agent-General
q for Queensland in London (whose address is Westminster
Chambers, No. 1 Victoria Street, London, S.W.), and forms of appli-
cation setting forth the terms and conditions upon which such passages
will be granted may be obtained by communication with the office of the Agent-General,
who must be thoroughly satisfied with the character and bona fides of each applicant.
The only outlay to be incurred by the Emigrant will be the cost of transit from his place
of residence to the port of embarkation, and also the charge for “ ship kit,” viz.: £l.
In All Emigrants, as enumerated above, will be
IyCLCpiIUII 111 LIIC VUlUilj . accommodated, Free of all Expense, at the
Immigration Depot at the port of arrival for 14
days, or such period as may enable them to complete their arrangements, and they
will further be entitled to receive a Free Pass to any part of the Colony where a railway
line exists.
Queensland as a Home.
The Climate is healthy and entirely free from rigorous extremes. The Soil in many parts is
Rich and Productive and equal to anything to be found in the world. A Splendid System of National
Education prevails throughout the Colony which is absolutely free to all classes, freehold barms of
from 160 acres to 640 acres, accord-
ing to quality of soil and distance
from market, can be bought at
the rate of 2s. 6d. per acre, the pur-
chase money being payable in yearly
instalments of 3d. per acre, and ex-
tending over a period of Ten Years.
Wages.
Farm Servants command from £35 to £5O
per annum.
Married Couples command up to £BO per
annum.
•Female Domestic Servants (including Cooks,
Housemaids, General Servants and
Dairymaids), from Bs. to 255. per week.
(In all above cases “ Board and Lodging” is
found).
J. O N. BRENAN,
Immigration Agent
Immigration Office,
6th March, 1899.
Immigration Office and Depot, Brisbane.


