

THE DISRUPTION CONFLICT AND ITS
PRESENT COMMEMORATORS;
BEING
Moderator’s Opening Address at Annual Meeting of Synod
of Free Presbyterian Church of Victoria, at Geelong,
* on Wednesday, 3rd May, 1893.
REVISED AND EXTENDED, WITH PREFACE.
BY
REV. J. J. STEW ART,
Giendonald, Durham Lead, and Meredith.
PRICE SIXPENCE.




THE DISRUPTION CONFLICT AND ITS
PRESENT COMMEMORATORS;
BEING
Moderator’s Opening Address at Annual Meeting of Synod
of Free Presbyterian Church of Victoria, at Geelong,
on Wednesday, 3rd May, 1893.
REVISED AND EXTENDED, WITH PREFACE.
BT
12-E'V. J. J. STEWART, IMI.AA.,
Olendonald, Durham Lead, and Meredith.
PRICE SIXPENCE.




PREFACE.
Advantage has been taken of the re-delivery of this address, and of its publication
in three successive numbers of the Free Church Quarterly , to revise and extend it
considerably. Notwithstanding this, the author must call attention to the circum-
stance that it is not a treatise, but only an address or lecture which is now offered to the
public in pamphlet form. Therefore no thorough and exhaustive discussion of the
past and present condition of the Free Church of Scotland alongside of our Victorian
Free Church has been, or could be, attempted. Many topics, attractive and
germane to the subject, have been almost or altogether passed by. For instance,
the jubilee Free Church Secession in the home land, which is a startling commentary
on the blowing of trumpets in the Free Church Assembly Hall and elsewhere, has
naturally excited the keenest interest throughout our colonial Free Church, seeing
that the little band of secessionists are fighting for the same principles as we are,
and are encountering similar difficulties. But the address was originally delivered
before the threatened secession had become a reality, and hence for that reason
alone a note must suffice, even had there been space for more. Another theme
inviting discussion and closely bound up with the subject-matter of the lecture, is
the forcible, practical argument for a national testimony to religion in the form of
a National Church, which is afforded by the rampant unscriptural methods adopted
to obtain funds in the Voluntary Churches —and in the Established Churches like-
wise, where these have had to augment the inadequate State support given them.
Bazaars with their raffles and lotteries and other evils, sports, tea-meetings, and
such-like devices for raising money for the cause of God, are not only a public
scandal, but also a manifest proof of spiritual death in all Churches which use them,
and a further proof that Voluntaryism does not help to purify the Church, as its
advocates boastingly proclaim. Singular, too, is their inconsistency, as they seek by
carnal allurements to draw money from the pockets of the members of other
denominations and of secularists of all sorts, while they object to extract that
money by the straightforward and honourable method of a tax. But this subject
cannot be further alluded to. Again, the importance of the nation being urged to
join itself to the Lord in a solemn league and covenant, and the benefits to be
derived from this, might most profitably have been enlarged upon, however far we
may seem to be from the prospect of its realisation.
Especially attractive to the lecturer is the question of how the faithful Church
of Christ, proclaiming the one and only Way of life, and with the complete Bible
in her hand containing eternal truth clothed in oriental dress and illustrated by its
application to oriental life and customs, should seek to apply that unchanging truth
to the ever changing life and customs of the empire on which the sun never sets,
and in its own missionary enterprise, as the Bible has done to the tribes of
ancient days and eastern lands. Every minister, indeed, has to solve this problem,
at least in his own personal work as preacher and pastor, if he is to be a success,
and not a failure. Unhappily, the faithful Churches have miserably failed in their
duty here, and have been mainly defensive only in their operations, allowing impure
Churches to act agressively, and in consequence to advance rapidly in outward
prosperity. Or they have timidly and unwarrantably copied the impure.
But these and such-like matters could not be discussed adequately. And the
author has, therefore, limited himself to dealing with the themes immediately
suggested to him by the ecclesiastical events taking place in the home land and in
this colony. But the aim of the address being mainly to stimulate to thought and
rouse to action, his purpose has been sufficiently served, should it please the
Almighty to vouchsafe His Spirit to carry home the principles and truths inculcated,
as far as they are in- accordance with His mind and will.
One typographical error which might mislead has been noticed, viz., on page
23, line 38, where the phrase existence and countenance ought to be existence and
continuance. The reader is here asked to be kind enough to make the necessary
correction.
Creswick, December, 1893. J. J. S.




THE DISRUPTION CONFLICT AND ITS
PRESENT COMMEMORATORS. *
Br Rev. J. J. Stewart, MA.
Although the fewness of our ministerial members causes the choice
of a moderator to be practically a routine one, yet it would not become
me to accept office without thanking my brethren for this honour.
There is always a negative value at least to be attached to the decision
of the Synod regarding the moderatorship, in that it indicates that the
occupier is looked upon as not unfit for it, otherwise his brethren
would, or ought to, pass him over. But on this occasion there are two
positive elements of special dignity connected with the moderatorship.
Both of these, however, have for me a painful aspect associated with
them. The one is, that this year our Church has thought fit to recall
the Disruption Conflict of the Scottish National Church, and seeks to
testify specially her adherence to the principles then successfully con-
tended for by the party which became the Free Church of Scotland.
This recalls to me unpleasantly my own former connection with the
Scottish Free Church. And the second is, that, in view of this
momentous occasion, the claims of one of our ministers for the
moderator’s chair are so pre-eminent that they could not possibly be
overlooked. I refer to the minister of Geelong (Rev. John Sinclair).
No man has done more for the furtherance of the Redeemer’s cause
amongst us, and for the extension of the Church he loves so well.
But, unhappily, no one of the brethren is at all able in present
circumstances to fill the place of clerk for a year, and discharge the
duties which he discharges most conscientiously and successfully.
This is at once an exhibition of the feebleness of our Church, and a
cause of sorrow to him who now steps forward into the more honour-
able, but less laborious sphere of moderator. It would be folly in me
to pretend that lam worthy of this position. Unworthy as I feel
myself of both ministry and moderatorship, I am only here because a
sense of the need of labourers, of the call of God, and of the infinite
power and mercy of Him who calls, has been stronger than the sense
of my own insufficiency. Yet it is not altogether inappropriate that
the speaker should be the occupant of the chair now. The Free
Church of Scotland is this year celebrating her own jubilee. And not
unfitting is it that one whom her persecution has driven from his
native shores because of his faithfulness to the principles which gave
her birth and vigour and prosperity, should now be welcomed thus by
* Moderator’s Opening Address at annual meeting of Synod of Free
Presbyterian Church of Victoria, at Geelong, on Wednesday, 3rd May, 1893.


a Church which steadfastly adheres to these same glorious truths for
which it was his privilege to suffer at the hands of those who hated
and betrayed them, and who this year are celebrating their own
shame.
RELUCTANCE TO SPEAK.
The fact, however, that such is one great cause of my presence in
this colony and Church makes it difficult for me on this occasion to
speak freely regarding the great event, and the truths fought for,
which we desire now to recall. For this of necessity implies a
reference to the body which still calls itself the Free Church of
Scotland because it claims to be descended from the Free Church of
Scotland formed at the Disruption. That claim is utterly false. But
the characterisation and exposure of it as it deserves to be characterised
and exposed might, by the malicious who judge everything according
to their own evil nature, be described as spiteful, should it come from
the present speaker. In this way Satan often succeeds in shutting
the mouth of a loyal servant of Jesus Christ, or in counteracting and
annulling his testimony, should he give it. It is just for this reason,
viz., the danger of my being misunderstood and misrepresented, that,
after having, with reluctance, lectured on the subject some eighteen
months ago, I have remained altogether silent in public concerning the
position of the present so-called Free Church of Scotland. But truth
is ever dearer to me, I trust, than any truce, however peaceful and
pleasant the latter may be; and now that occasion imperatively calls
for speech, in the interests of the Kingdom of God I dare not shrink
from my duty.
My duty in pointing out, on the one hand the principles contended
for by the faithful party in the Church of Scotland before 1843, and
afterwards by that party as the Free Church during the early years of
her history, and on the other hand how the present so-called Free
Church of Scotland is destitute of all claim to the title, is an easy one
to discharge. The admirable documents drawn up during the Dis-
ruption Conflict and during the years immediately succeeding it, by
the Church, perform the one part of the task ; the persistent attitude
of the present Free Church towards the Established Church of
Scotland, and towards all attempts to carry out her own professed
principles in regard to the civil establishment of religion, amply prove
the charge which it is the second part of my duty to bring home.
THE TWO GREAT DISRUPTION PRINCIPLES.
The Disruption, which took place on the 18th May, 1843, was due
to the unflinching contendings of the faithful in the National Church—
that is, in the Church recognised, established, and endowed by the
nation —for the two great principles of Christ’s Headship over the
nations and Christ’s Headship over the church. More exactly still, it
might be said that these contendings were for the harmony of these
two principles, and their continued embodiment in the National
Church. The one principle demands the national recognition of
religion by the State, in obedience to the claims of Jehovah to be King
of kings and Lord of lords; the other demands the complete freedom


THE DISRUPTION CONFLICE AND ITS PRESENT COMMEMORATORS.
of the church from State control in all matters spiritual and ecclesi-
astical, while she renders complete obedience to the State in all matters
civil and temporal. • The constitution of the Church of Scotland, em-
bodying these principles, was legally recognised and ratified as
iuviolable by the Treaty of Union between the two kingdoms of
Scotland and England in 1707, but was villainously invaded by un-
scrupulous legislators in 1712, only five years after the Union, when,
in the reign of Queen Anne, patronage was restored. The great
breach made in the constitution of the Church of Scotland thus took
the form of the civil power endeavouring to prevent the people
choosing their own ministers, and vesting the right of such a choice in
itself or in other individuals, whether connected with the Church or not.
THE TEN YEARS’ CONFLICT.
After many struggles by the faithful, the crisis was reached in
the Disruption contest, known memorably as The Xen \ears
Conflict,” which terminated in 1843 by the formation of the Dree
Church of Scotland. This whole conflict was due to the revival of
religion in Scotland, causing the souls of the people of God to be at
last touched to the quick, when they found themselves both prevented
from choosing those who were to minister to them in holy things and
dispense the bread of their spiritual life, and also forced to accept the
unacceptable presentees of their civil masters, the patrons of the
Church. In their contendings for their Scriptural rights in this
matter, which is only one aspect of the great principle of Qhrist s
Headship over the church—the principle that from Christ alone, and
not from the Civil Magistrate, the church receives her existence,
ordinances, knowledge, influence, and authority, the last-named
element including laws and office-bearers (iree Church Catechism,
Quest. 28.) —men suffered such privation and persecution in many a
district of Scotland, as entitle them to bear the name and attain the
rank of martyrs for the truth. And the Church herself, as represented
by the majority in the National Church, rather than submit to the
encroachments of the Civil Courts, which became increasingly per-
sistent and iniquitous, gave up her worldly all, resigning her connection
with the State, and came forth from the conflict spiritually and
ecclesiastically triumphant as The Church of Scotland Free.
MEANING OF TITLE —“ THE FREE CHURCH OF SCOTLAND.
But she came out holding as firmly as ever the principle of a
nationally established Church as a recognition by the State of the King
of kings, and as a manifestation of Christ’s Headship over the nations.
Otherwise her title, “ The Free Church of Scotland,” was not only
meaningless, but also an insult to the already existing Churches in
Scotland which were separate from the State. These others were as
free as the Free Church of Scotland now was in regard to spiritual and
ecclesiastical affairs. And for her to adopt the title of. The Free
Church of Scotland,” as if she were the only free Church in that sense
merely, would have been a piece of impertinence unsurpassed in
history, as well as a public lie. But these other Churches did not. all
hold the principle of national religion ; and none of them could profess


to be the National Church of Scotland Free, as the Free Church
could. And this was the significance, therefore, of the title. The
title, in fact, had no meaning in the circumstances, unless it were the
title of a Church maintaining the principle of a nationally established
Church free from State control in spiritual affairs, although forced to
give up practically her established connection for the time being.
CLAIM OF EIGHT AND COMMISSIONERS’ PROTEST.
The documents drawn up by the Free Church before and after her
separation from the Establishment, amply prove this. In 1842, the year
before the Disruption, the Governing Courtof the National Church—the
General Assembly—adopted the celebrated “ Claim of Eight ” against
the encroachments of the Court of Session. This claim was a “ Claim,
Declaration, and Protest ” that the nationally established Church was
entitled to freedom in her spiritual and ecclesiastical actions without
coercion from the Civil Courts. And this “Claim of Eight” was
adopted by the Free Church as her own, she practically proclaiming
her first Assembly as the rightful successor of the Assembly of 1842,
i.e., the rightful General Assembly of the National Church of Scot-
land. She denied the right of the section of the National Church
remaining in connection with the State, and meeting in Assembly in
1843 after the Free Church had gone, to he regarded as a “free
Assembly of the Church of Scotland, or a lawful Assembly of the said
Church, according to the true and original constitution thereof” {Act
of Reparation; so also Protest of Commissioners ). The well-known
Protest by the Commissioners {i.e., ministers and elders,) —members
of the General Assembly of 1843, who withdrew and formed them-
selves immediately thereafter into the Free Church, concludes with
the following, which abundantly demonstrates all that has just
been said:—
“And finally, while firmly asserting the right and duty of the civil
magistrate to maintain and support an establishment of religion in
accordance with God’s Word, and reserving to ourselves and our
successors to strive by all lawful means, as opportunity shall in God’s
good providence he offered, to secure the performance of this duty
agreeably to the Scriptures, and in implement of the statutes of the
kingdom of Scotland, and the obligations of the Treaty of Union as
understood by us and our ancestors, but acknowledging that we do not
hold ourselves at liberty to retain the benefits of the Establishment
while we cannot comply with the conditions now' to be deemed thereto
attached—
WE PROTEST,
that, in the circumstances in which we are placed, it is and shall be
lawful for us, and such other Commissioners chosen to the Assembly
appointed to have been this day holden as may concur with us, to with-
draw to a separate place of meeting, for the purpose of taking steps
for ourselves and all who adhere to us —maintaining with us the
Confession of Faith and Standards of the Church of Scotland, as
heretofore understood —for separating in an orderly way from the
Establishment; and thereupon adopting such measures as may be


competent to us in humble dependence on God’s grace and the aid of
the Holy Spirit, for the advancement of His glory, the extension of the
gospel of our Lord and Saviour, and the administration of the affairs
of Christ’s house, according to His holy Word; and we do now, for the
purpose foresaid, withdraw accordingly, humbly and solemnly acknow-
ledging the hand of the Lord in the things which have come upon us,
because of our manifold sins, and the sins of this Church and nation ;
but at the same time, with an assured conviction, that we are not
responsible for any consequences that may follow from this our
enforced separation from an Establishment which we loved and prized
—through interference with conscience, the dishonour done to Christ’s
crown, and the rejection of His sole and supreme authority as King in
His Church.”
Every minister and office-bearer of the Eree Church* at their
ordination are required to solemnly declare their adherence to “the
general principles embodied in” the Claim of Eight of 1842, and the
Protest of the Commissioners in 1843. And it may be here asked,
why was it needful thus solemnly to protest that it would be lawful
for these Commissioners to withdraw and separate themselves in an
orderly way from the Establishment, if they were merely to set up
another Church? They were quite at liberty to do this without such
formalities, as other Churches not in connection with the State, but
whose originators had been, had done in their day. All this protesting
and similar documentary testimony, with the proceedings clustering
around it, would have been mere bombast and parade, if the
Commissioners were merely setting up another Church. But if they-
were claiming, as they certainly were, that it was lawful for them
to meet in a separate Assembly as the representatives of the National
Church of Scotland, forced, for the time being, out of connection with
the State, then the Protest and all such documents and proceedings
connected therewith became full of significance, and vitally necessary
for the public vindication of the momentous step they took.
CLAIMS OF PRESENT FREE CHURCH FALSE.
The Tree Church of Scotland thus was founded, rejecting alike
the error of Erastianism, or State control by the King usurping the
Headship of the Church; and Voluntaryism, or non-recognition of
religion by the State, i.e. national atheism. She held the doctrine of
a national establishment of religion free from State control in spiritual
and ecclesiastical affairs, and hence her name —“The Tree Church of
Scotland”—distinctive among all the Churches of the land. But that
doctrine she has now thrown to the winds. She has for many years
sought the disestablishment of the present Established Church of
Scotland, not to promote the establishment of a pure national church
in its place, but because of the outward success of that Establishment,
and her own comparative decline. She herself has persistently sought
union with the United Presbyterian Church of Scotland, which holds
the principle of Voluntaryism. She has likewise persistently refused
* Note.—Since 1884 deacons are no longer required to give such an
explicit avowal of their adherence to these principles.


to even countenance, far less promote, any efforts that have been made—
and they have been made —by legislators to give effect to the principles
for which the Free Church contended at the Disruption. Nor has the
abolition of patronage in the Established Church in 1874 changed her
attitude in the least, but only embittered her the more against that
Church. Within her own borders she has continuously tried, and
tried successfully, to crush, as well as prevent the increase of,
ministers and students who still remain faithful to Disruption
principles. The extinction, by death or otherwise, of ministers holding
such views in the Free Church is now only a matter of time, while all
faithful probationers are prevented by intrigue or other means from
obtaining charge of a congregation. Only in the Graelic-speaking
congregations in the Highlands is it yet possible for an honest Free
Church probationer to be settled as pastor in a Free Church. Else-
where, none but Voluntaries need apply.* And if she tries at all to
vindicate her title, “The Free Church of Scotland,” it is on the
ground merely of spiritual freedom, such as is claimed and possessed
by other Churches in existence in Scotland long before the Free
Church appeared. In this she condemns herself, and disproves her
own claim to be the descendant of that noble army which fought the
Ten Tears’ Conflict, and marched forth spiritually victorious under
the banner of the two-fold principle: —Christ the King of the nations,
and Christ the King of the church.
FURTHER DOWN-MARCH OF FREE CHURCH.
What has now been proved in short compass regarding the
fundamental principles of the Free Church of Scotland as a Church
holding the Establishment principle, but separated from the State, is a
familiar matter to all intelligent Free Churchmen everywhere ; and the
proofs are, as is well known, far more abundant than has been here
indicated, were details to be fully gone into. The public utterances of
her leaders, for example, at the beginning of her history are emphatic
on this subject. One of them —Dr. Chalmers himself —declared in
most precise terms that they were quitting a vitiated Establishment,
but would rejoice in returning to a pure one. And many such
* Note. —Since the introduction of uninspired hymns, and later of
instrumental music into the Free Church, this species of intolerance on the
part of the majority is far more easily carried out. Every honest Free Church
probationer or unplaced minister is necessarily excluded from becoming
minister of any congregation which adopts the hymn or the ox-gan. That is,
he is driven practically out of the most of the Free Chixrch, while that Church
hypocritically keeps his name on the list of her ministers and pi'obationers.
Yet the agitations for the sanction of hymns and organs were characterised
by this —by the agitators seeking to be regarded as the party aiming at
o-reater tolerance within the Church, the defenders of the faith being
stigmatised as bigoted and intolerant. The “liberty,” however, claimed by
the innovators, and now obtained, was liberty to crush their opponents. But
in the carrying out of this process, the prosecuting party are only proving, if
their own former interpretation of “tolerance ” and their denunciation of their
opponents’ “ intolerance ” were correct, that they themselves are the very
personification of intolerance, and are the rightful kinsmen of the woman
depicted in Holy Writ as “drunken with the blood of the saints, and with the
blood of the martyrs of Jesus.” (Rev. xvii, 6).


testimonies could be given. It has been unhappily necessary to
indicate the proof once more, because of the denials of the truth by
the many traitors who now compose the majority of the Free Church
of Scotland. But as if that Church wished to make it plain to all,
beyond the possibility of gainsaying, that she is not the descendant of
the Church of the Disruption, she has, in the latter half of her fifty
years’ life, been busy tearing to shreds the robes which then adorned
her, and arraying herself in altogether different garments. Her
releasing of her deacons from the bondage of adherence to the truth
is only one of the many ways in which she has been seeking the liberty
which Satan gives.
PURITY OF WORSHIP.
She came out in the enjoyment of purity of worship, using only
the words of inspiration as the material of praise, * and the human
voice as the instrument for rendering the same. Every office-bearer
solemnly vowed before God and man at his ordination “to observe
uniformity of worship and of the administration of all public
ordinances, within this Church, as the same are at present performed
and allowed. ( Questions , No. 5). Every minister also at ordination
solemnly vowecl before God and man that he ‘to the utmost of his
power ’ would “ assert, maintain, and defend the purity of
worship as presently practised in this Church.” ( Questions , No. 2).
The above quotations form part of the questions put to office-bearers
and to ministers at ordination, as adopted by the Eree Church General
Assembly of 1846. And yet, contrary to the Confession of Eaith
(chapter xxi, 5), where only “ Psalms” are mentioned as the material
of praise, and “ singing with grace in the heart ” as the manner of
rendering it, X and in direct violation of these sacred ordination en-
gagements, the Free Church has introduced uninspired hymns and
instrumental music into her sanctuary services.
* Note. —The Church of Scotland from the Reformation onwards never
formally and fully authorised the use of any compositions in praise save the
Psalms. The Reformers distinctly confined themselves to the Psalms in the
church service they instituted. At times, times of decay, her practice was
more loose than at others ; and not unfrequently, had the advocates of impure
worship sought it determinedly, they could doubtless have got the sanction
for their acts which they desired. But the Church seems to have ever shrunk
from giving this, although in an informal way she permitted the use of
“ Paraphrases,” which were viewed as portions of Scripture, other than the
Psalms, rendered into verse. These, however, were mostly unused, or used
very sparingly, while he would be a bold minister who would dare to use any
of the few “ Hymns ” bound up with them at the end of our Bibles. Such
was the condition of things at the Disruption, and for long afterwards, there
being a lack of a precise and formal definition of “ purity of worship,” but no
lack of a clear understanding that it comprised the singing of inspired com-
positions only as praise, the Psalms alone being regarded as properly and
strictly constituting the Praise Manual.
X Note. —The Confession lays down the principle of the method of accept,
able worship when it says that “ the acceptable way of worshipping the true
God is instituted by Himself,” and declares that He cannot be worshipped in
“ any other way not prescribed in Holy Scriptures” (Chapter xxi, 1). On this
principle of interpretation, the Confession itself, by prescribing only the sing-
ing of Psalms, excludes all other materials and methods.


PURITY OF DOCTRINE.
Further, the same ordination engagements included a profession
of belief in “ the whole doctrine contained in the Confession of
Faith,” ( Ministers' Questions , No. 2) ; and ministers are specially
required to declare that they disown “all Popish, Arian, Socinian,
Arminian, Erastian, and other doctrines, tenets, and opinions whatso-
ever, contrary to, and inconsistent with, the foresaid Confession of
Faith,” ( Questions , No. 3 ). But now ministers who encourage or
hold these very errors (save the one of Erastianism) are welcomed in
the Church, and placed in the highest positions of trust and honour
which she can bestow ; while a Declaratory Act has just been passed
to shelter these and foster the increase of them, as far as possible at
present. I say “as far as possible at present.” For, by the
majority, traitorous and tyrannical as it is, regard has to be paid to
some extent to the presence of a few faithful men still in the Church,
and to the possibility of the majority losing its hold upon the Church
property, should it be plain and outspoken in its language and doings.
Accordingly, from the time of the first departure from the faith,
onwards and downwards, the majority’s leaders have called in, and that
increasingly to an enormous extent, all the arts of Jesuistry, in order to
cloak over their doings and designs, and thereby retain their position
and emoluments as ministers and office-bearers of the Free Church of
Scotland. Worst of all, however, the ordination engagement which
consists in a declaration by the office-bearer or minister that he
believes “ the Scriptures of the Old and Hew Testament to be the
Word of God,” is by this time also cast overboard. The so-called
Free Church of Scotland has now ministers and professors who have
reduced in their teaching and writings the Word of God to the level
of the word of man —a book with mistakes and with immoralities
commended or even commanded. The present Free Church of Scotland,
so far as represented by these men, has no Bible.
PROSPERITY AND PUNISHMENT.
Tet outwardly she has prospered- She has prophesied success-
fully, too, in the name of Christ; in His name has she cast out devils
throughout her congregations ; and in His name has she done many
wonderful works at home and abroad. She has good men —men
whom I love in spite of their errors, and whose back-sliding I view
with much grief —who are zealous for the truth, so far as consistent
with their time-serving policy, whereby they retain their position and
obtain toleration at the hands of the governing party; and she has
good men who have sunk deeper into sin, and whose hands are
themselves unclean by their fostering and taking to their bosom the
serpents of error whose origin and destiny is the pit. But she is work-
ing out for herself the punishment of her transgressions and fearful
betrayal of the Lord’s priceless heritage of truth ; and unless His
Word is a lie, as some of her ministers maintain, when her great day
of judgment comes, the Judge will say unto her —a Church of
apostates : —“ I never knew you ; depart from me, ye that work
iniquity,” (Matth. vii, 23).


PROSPECTS OF REFORMATION IN FREE CHURCH.
The prospects of a reformation in the Free Church of Scotland as now
constituted, have been often discussed by men of God in this colony.
To such let me say that, while it is not for mortal man uninspired to
predict what his Maker will do, nor even for the servant of Christ to
declare with the absolute certainty of full divine illumination what the
future will be, yet my prayerful study of God’s Word, depending on His
Spirit, together with my knowledge of the men and material composing
the present Free Church of Scotland, brings me to this human forecast
that the prospects of reformation are none at all for some time to come.
The Highlanders at home are even less able and willing than they are
here to build up a pure Church, for the same great human reason that
keeps our own Church down-trodden, namely, poverty. Had they not
been so poor at home, a reformation would have come long ago. And
their piety and faith, though great, are not great enough to accomplish
the task in face of the odds arrayed against them.
AN OPPORTUNITY LOST.
There is also a divine reason why no reformation will just now
occur. They and the remnant of the faithful Free Church party in
the Lowlands have lost their opportunity. That opportunity came at
the close of the union negotiations with the United Presbyterian Church,
after a lesser Ten Years’ Conflict which ended in 1873. Just as at the
Disruption it was the civil courts that forcibly interfered and determined
which party was to be the Established Church of Scotland, causing the
faithful men of God to renounce all for Christ’s sake, so in 1873 these
same courts were almost called upon to determine to whom within the
Free Church the name and property of the Free Church should belong.
This time, however, the faithful men of God seemed likely to obtain
justice where justice was denied before. And it was the knowledge of
this likelihood, together with the possibility of another Disruption—
the Constitutionalist party going forth and claimingto betheFree Church
as the Church of 1843 did —that caused the majority to abandon the
union negotiations, and content themselves with a ministerial Mutual
Eligibility Act instead of complete union, an Act which has happily
proved fruitless. For, the legal opinion of counsel then obtained was
favourable to the Constitutionalist party being civilly recognised as the
rightful representative of the Free Church. And that party had at
that time men and material, if it had possessed sufficient faith, to
re-build the shattered Free Church, and make it once more worthy of
the name. Their faith failed. A compromise with error was effected.
And since then the traitorous party, already at that time in a vast
majority—a majority of three to one —has succeeded in breaking the
bundle of sticks individually which it could not have even bent
collectively.


PUNISHMENT OF THE CONSTITUTIONALIST PARTY.
For that failure, too, constant punishment has descended upon the
increasingly feeble party until now. Not only have its members and
ability decreased, but also its efforts at resistance to growing defections
in the Church, and at the promulgation of the pure principles of truth,
have resulted in utter failure. Its adversaries all the while have
measured accurately its power of resistance, and the standard by
which the actions of the Constitutionalists are to be estimated. It is a
money standard. The purse-proud Lowlanders despise the poor
Highlanders accordingly. And the majority in the Free Church has
long regarded, and that with a great deal of truth, all the wild
declamations of the faithful men of God in church court and public
meeting as mere bluster and froth, which must come to the surface,
but which will soon pass away, leaving spiritless, dead agitation behind.
Thus it is they conclude, and conclude rightly, that the present agitation
will not succeed, nor come to any practical issue.* In addition, men as
well as material are now more than ever awanting for the contest.
ITS DECLINE IN ABILITY.
Indeed a survey of the ability of the men in the opposing camps
now, compared with the state of things in 1878, is startling. In 1873
there were theologians in the Constitutionalist party of whom itis scarcely
too much to say that they were capable of holding their own with any
theologians in the Christian world. Now, there is not one. I speak
* Note. —While these sentences are being written out for the press, a home
paper brings news of a rumoured separation from the Free Church by a few
ministers with some office-bearers and members, if not congregations, should
the Jubilee Assembly not repeal the Dclaratory Act. This is quite possible.
Some secession, indeed, will almost inevitably take place sooner or later.
Just as in the pre-Disruption history of the Church, so in her post-Disruption
career, secessions of congregations or portions of congregations have been
going on—-now in the post-Disruption period for a generation —as apostacy
has been growing. The cases of Uig and Dunbar may be cited as specimens.
The former secessionists —a Highland congregation and minister- —joined
the Established Church after the passing of her Patronage Abolition Act,
as a protest against voluntaryism in the Free Church. The latter —a
portion of a Lowland congregation—joined the Original Secession Church as a
protest against Free Church rationalism. But however needful and valuable,
and even successful, these testimonies to truth may be, no such isolated
separations will ever work out the Reformation of the Free Church.
Later news confirms the above rumour. The Jubilee Assembly has, of
course, emphatically declined to repeal the Act which was passed to relieve the
“consciences” of so many of its dishonest members. Accordingly, a secession
from the Free Church has begun, which, though at present small and displaying
little wisdom in the steps taken, we should fain see successful as a testimony to
truth. But the bulk of the leaders and their followers of the Constitutionalist
party refuse to join the movement, and still remain timidly or snugly within
the folds of an increasingly corrupt Church. They are ready with the plea
that to secede plays into the hands of their opponents, who wish them out of
the Church in order to be unhampered in their movement downwards. And
they are even ready to denounce the seceders as schismatics. But if this secession
be a schism, the Disruption was a far greater one, for the corruptions of the
Church now are far greater than they were then; and the corruptions are now
growing, whereas then they were diminishing. As to the other plea, the
Constitutionalists are only playing into their opponents’ hands by remaining


of public reputation apart from the question of private latent ability.
And the consequences of this are more disastrous than at first sight
appear. For, every Beformation has been accomplished by the
instrumentality of men of sanctified learning and constructive genius.
The New Testament Church itself was consolidated and constructed in
doctrine and government mainly by the inspired genius and learning
of the Apostle Paul. The Reformation in the sixteenth century,
which had for its aim the two-fold task of demolishing the errors ot
Rome, and of placing a citadel of truth over against these, had its
Luther, its Zwingli, its Calvin, its John Knox —all theologians and
men of learning second to none in that age. So, too, had the
Disruption Conflict, which, it is true, developed more the genius for
ecclesiastical purging and organisation than for theological. But
alongside of that great contest for the right government and discipline
of the Church, theology flourished, and learning was bold for God.
In 1873 likewise, names could be given, were it necessary, to show the
ability of the Constitutionalist party. But now, none can be named
of the first rank of theologians. Yet never were men of the first
rank more needed.
DOCTRINAL REFORMATION NEEDED.
For, it is not enough for the defenders of the faith to show how
inconsistent with Scripture and the Confession of Faith are the errors
of false Free Churchmen, hut over against the great ramifications of
error, which have been spreading throughout, and gripping hold of, all
society for many years, and which must be rooted out by the Word of
God as the instrument of the Spirit, there requires to be built up a
constructive display of truth, which shall preserve the old and develope
it on new and Scriptural lines. Thus it was that Luther and Calvin
and John Knox acted. They beat down the fortresses of error; and,
basing all upon the Word of God, they built up fresh systems of
truth, using therein the materials and systems handed down by their
forefathers, but developing these farther than their forefathers had
done, as required by the new developments of error. Even the Bible it-
self was translated and re-translated by reformers, until—in Britain —our
Authorised Version was made, which presented the Word of God to
English readers in the purest form yet obtained. Thus it was also that
I)r. Chalmers and the other Disruption leaders behaved in the de-
partment of church government and organisation. Their efforts were
not directed merely to abolish patronage, but also to develope new and
better rules whereby the Scriptural rights of the people to complete
within the Church; for they are merely giving these opponents abundant
opportunity to corrupt the Constitutionalist leaders themselves and their
followers, or to crush those who will not be corrupted—a two-fold process
which has been going on successfully for a generation, and which will, humanly
speaking, soon result in the complete extinction of the Constitutionalist party.
I say this will soon take place, because, after all the dire threats and dread
prophecies by Constitutionalists as to what would happen if the Declaratory
Act became law and was unrepealed, now that, so far as they are concerned,
nothing of consequence happens, the Constitutionalist party has ceased to
exercise influence, or even to command respect from friend or foe.


spiritual freedom should be exercised. But the present Constitution-
alist party can do nothing except resist error, and that ineffectually.
They cannot carry the Avar into the enemy’s camp.
ECCLESIASTICAL REFORMATION NEEDED.
Nor is the department of theology the only one to be considered.
Church courts have become scenes of injustice and intrigue when the
interests of the majority require faithful ministers to be put down,
new-school ministers to be encouraged, and heretics to be sheltered.
There is need for a sweeping away of this abuse of Church laws, and
the formation of a system which will prevent it, as far as any human
system can. But the ability for this is only conspicuous by its absence.
And in face of the dexterous and shameless manipulation of the Church
courts by the majority, the minority are completely paralysed.
WORSHIP REFORMATION NEEDED.
Still further, the question of worship, as well as that of doctrine,
of discipline, and of church government, has long demanded attention.
In the Scottish Reformation of the 16th century from popery, and the
later Reformation from prelacy, not only were neAV creeds formed and
new books of discipline brought forth; but also, while the corrupt
worship that prevailed was abolished, the details of the pure worship
Avhich was to take its place were re-arranged, and the worship re-modelled
and re-constituted. Directories of public and private worship were
drawn up; the old versions of the Psalms were disposed of, and the
present improved version—improved upon what then existed —Avas
adopted. All this retained the great principles which the forefathers
of the Reformers had handed doAvn, but developed these principles in
the right directions to suit the circumstances then existing. But Avhere
has there been the slightest advance made by the Constitutionalist
party in the Free Church towards grappling with improvement of
worship on Scriptural lines; as opposed to its corruption on carnal
lines, which is practised by the innovators and destroyers?
BEHAVIOUR OF CONSTITUTIONALIST PARTY.
Not only so, but so great is tbe blindness of that party and its
leaders, and such is their feeling of helplessness, that they will refuse
to touch the subject at all, when urged ; and when anything is proposed,
they meet it with apathy or with a growl, as if it were a dangerous
thing to try, whereas it is a thing most needed. Thus has Satan
enchained their efforts and contendings for truth, while he blocks their
progress and builds a Avail around them. And should any individual
member of that party try to advance, if he does so in the right spirit
and on the right lines, he is resisted by others of his own party who are
short-sighted, and cannot see beyond Satan’s wall; or he advances in
the wrong direction, merely copying timidly the downward advances
of the worldly party, as he follows at a distance in their Avake, and
thus causing genuine and Avell-founded alarm amongst the faithful men
of God. He follows, for instance, the worldly ministers of amusement
in promoting bazaars, tea meetings, secular societies and such like —all
on the type adopted by the worldly ministers —instead of striking out a
Scriptural pathway of progress and purity for himself, as our forefathers


would have done. But the mass of the party merely stand still. They
fight desperately and hopelessly against the opposing foe. Each man
falls at his post, his place only to be taken by—one of the enemy,
while the diminishing band instinctively draws its ranks closer together.
Assuredly these be brave men, but they are not warriors.
DESPISED AND TAUNTED BY THE ENEMY.
This lack of men as well as material, and this dearth of constructive
and aggressive genius, has caused the Constitutionalist party to be
despised by its opponents, and just for that reason. They taunt the
faithful with their deficiency in scholarship, with their old-fashioned
ways, and especially do they sneer at the poverty of the Highlanders,
calling it greed, with unhappily just enough of truth in the sneer to
cause the mud to stick. They declare that the Highlanders will talk
about Scripture, and about Scriptural principles, but will not open
their purses to further the truth. In fact, the Highlands, which
is the present stronghold of orthodoxy, is looked upon as a mere drag
and encumbrance upon the Lowlands in its progress.*
The enemy also points to the half-empty churches in the South,
where the faithful men of God minister, and where their congregations
are dwindling away because of the lack of modern worldly attractions.
And he asks triumphantly and contemptuously —where is the power of
the truth to attract the people, as the faithful are so fond of proclaiming?
Thus the Constitutionalists are becoming fewer and fewer, having got
a bad name, and being practically hanged already in consequence.
And thus it is that they feel their own helplessness to cope with the
odds against them, and to accomplish the Reformation required of them.
Their faith and piety are great, I repeat; and their ability certainly is
not small. This is evidenced by the brilliant stand they have ever
made against overwhelming numbers and difficulties. But their faith
and piety and ability are utterly inadequate for the task which is
needed to be performed.
A PRACTICAL TEST OF REFORMATION PROSPECTS.
As regards the impossibility, humanly speaking, of present
reformation of the -Free Church of Scotland, itself, and the helplessness
of the Constitutionalists in the matter, there is, indeed, a practical test
which may be applied to confirm what has been said. It is this.
Are there, or are there not, any serious efforts being made at present to
determine who has the legal right to the title and possessions of the
Free Church of Scotland P This is the simple first step to be taken
towards a practical and successful termination of the present conflict
which the Declaratory Act has specially provoked. If the Free Church
title and possessions are to belong to the present majority, then the
* Note. —lncluding both communicants and adherents as members in each
case, a typical Highland congregation only contributes to the cause of God
about a third per member of the sum contributed per member by a typical
Lowland congregation. And the Highland contributions to the Ministers’
Sustentation Fund are miserably inadequate, this making them largely
dependent on the Lowlands. The Highlands are certainly poorer, but in spite
of this explanation the comparison remains a painful one.


Free Church constitution is not worth the paper upon which it is
written; and at any moment she might become, as she is becoming in
fact, a Unitarian Church —or any Church rather than a Church of
Christ. In such case, the Constitutionalists must give her up, and seek
to begin anew outside. If, on the other hand, the name and possessions
belong to the honest Free Churchmen, then the way is dear for a
purification and renewal of the life of the Disruption Church, which
must be engaged in promptly and thoroughly. But so weak is the
faithful Free Church party, and so much weakened further by internal
disunion and by admission to its ranks at present of those who are not
out and out Free Churchmen, that no effectual steps have been taken,
nor will they be taken, to determine which party is legally as well as
rightfully the Free Church, and to act accordingly.
WHEN REFORMATION WILL COME.
Again, it has been already shown how the Disruption conflict
touched the people of God to the quick, just because it appealed, to
them practically. They were debarred from having the power of electing
their own ministers. The present conflict, however, does not as yet
touch them sore, though it will by-and-.by do so. For, there is still
in the so-called Free Church “ a form of godliness” with the power
lacking (n Timothy iii, 5). There is an effervescing spirit of
evangelicalism, whose real force is becoming continually less. But in
the descent of the church, the bottom has still to be reached, and will
be reached. What it is has been already hinted at. The Disruption
conflict brought the people face to face with losing their ministers ;
the next conflict, which will include not only the Free Church, but all
the Churches, and which will be far more desperate and decisive, will
bring the people face to face with losing their Bible and their God. A
Book that has mistakes and immoralities, and whose writers or
compilers perpetrated pious frauds—according to the modern school
which is now increasing in the Churches everywhere—is not a book
from G-od; and the God of such a book cannot be the Supreme Being
of purity and power, who made heaven and earth, and who cannot lie.
Not until that issue is reached, and the heart of Christians and
Christendom wounded to the core, will there be an uprising of the
faithful, compelled to fight for very life—the life of faith. The Free
Church of Scotland must wait and sink until this last fearful stage of
corruption has been arrived at.
POSITION AND PROSPECTS OF FREE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH OP VICTORIA.
I have not referred to the spiritual decline and fall of the Free
Church of Scotland merely for the purpose of mourning oyer glory
departed (i Samuel iv, 21), while worldly tinsel has taken its place,
but for a purpose whose subject is ourselves, so far as we seek the
glory of God in the salvation of souls. For, the Free Presbyterian
Church of Victoria has this in common with the Free Church of
Scotland at the Disruption, that she holds every one of the principles
and doctrines, and glories in them, for which that noble band of
confessors and martyrs then contended. Because of this we are
disowned by the present so-called Free Church of Scotland; our


existence is ignored and concealed from her people, and the people of
Scotland generally; while she has aided and still aids exclusively our
sister Church in this colony, which like herself is in an advanced
condition of spiritual decay. Fain would both see us blotted out of
existence, and unable any longer to act as a living conscience, accusing
them of their faithlessness. And, like the chief priests and scribes and
elders of old, who brought our Lord to the cross, and then mocked him
because He came not down from the position in which their cruel hands
had placed Him (Matthew xxvii, 41-43), so are our nearest and
treacherous sister Churches ready to sneer at our poverty and paucity,
our weakness in homework, and absence from the foreign mission
field, of which they themselves by their betrayal of truth are mainly
the cause. Yet, though we are on the cross of our sufferings now, as
our Redeemer rose on the third day, we too, if we be faithful to Him,
will experience His resurrection power after the darkness of death is
past, and in the gloom Satan has been overthrown. And it is in order
that, during our trial and during our future course, whatever it be, we
may be preserved and made increasingly pure and true to our Redeemer
—Head, that I have spoken in these terms. It is to expose the policy
of Satan in bringing about, not only the downfall of the Iree Church
of Scotland, but the similar decay of the two other great Presbyterian
Churches in the home land, that I desire still to spend a little time,
and exercise not a little anxious thought.
CAUSES AND METHODS OF PRESBYTERIAN DECLENSION.
In the Established Church, the Free Church, and the United
Presbyterian Church of Scotland, there is much good work for Grod.
carried on, alongside of and mixed with much evil. Why has the evil
arisen? Because Satan could not overthrow a pure Church by fighting
against it from without. No weapon formed against the loyal Church
of Christ shall prosper (Isaiah liv, 17). Therefore Satan must enter
and corrupt her within. But how has the evil arisen? So far as it has
arisen by good men giving way to temptation, it has arisen because
Grod’s methods of winning souls and furthering His Church’s work
generally seemed to fail, and therefore other methods must apparently
be tried. Just as Saul forced himself to assume priestly functions,
although not commissioned by God, because Samuel was long in coming,
while he and the people were almost overpowered by the Philistines
(i Samuel xiii), so men of God in our day have infringed the same
great principle which regulates all acceptable approach to God, and
have allowed or encouraged in worship that which God has not
commanded, in order to gain success when the enemy seemed at their
doors, and their faith became weak. To give an illustration ot the kind
of evil to which I refer, I need only mention the great argument for
every novelty of worship in our day —that it will attract the young.
Similar observations apply to the treatment by professed believers of
the doctrines of faith when the enemy draws near. But just as,
because of Saul’s disobedience then and afterwards, the Spirit of God
departed from him, and an evil spirit troubled him (i Samuel xvi, 14),
so the Spirit of God has been withdrawing Himself more and more from


the corrupt Churches, and the Evil Spirit more and more taking
possession of them. The addition of novelities unauthorised by the
Word of God has not resulted in an increase of piety among the young,
nor in making the Word of God more palatable to them. The very
opposite result has taken place. But instead of the Churches beholding
their error and forsaking it, they have only plunged deeper and deeper
into the mire of corruption to retain the growing carnality of their
worshippers —who would otherwise seek more congenial attractions
elsewhere. All this is simply because the Spirit of God is leaving
these Churches, and the Evil Spirit is increasingly blinding their eyes.
In this down-march of the Churches, the Evil One has developed at
least three different, but interlacing, lines of policy along which he is
leading his victims astray, according as their dispositions and desires
suit the one or the other pathway. There is
(1) RITUALISM,
by which I mean the multiplication of rites and ceremonies regarded as
symbolical and as in themselves more or less possessing the power of
conferring grace. This is the pathway to Eome. Along it are seen
marching those who seek holy living in themselves and others by
outward methods instead of by the working of the Spirit of God, and
who seek to make up for the increased withdrawal of that Spirit by the
increased multiplication of the outward symbols of His presence, as
devised by themselves. The “Church Service Society” in the
Established Church, and the recently formed High Church Society,
calling itself “The Scottish Church Society,” as a more pronounced
type of the same, are examples of travellers on this line of down-march.
The spreading of the same leaven in the Eree and United Presbyterian
Churches has been manifested by the formation of societies of a rather
less pronounced High Church character than those of the Established
Church*
There is
(2) RATIONALISM.
by which I mean the maintaining of the human reason or understanding
as the ultimate court of appeal in religion, so that only what reason can
discover or comprehend is accepted by man, the supernatural being of
necessity denied. This is the pathway to atheism, man becoming a god
to himself. Under the working of this force the Bible becomes an
ordinary, merely human book, with mistakes and immoralities; the
miraculous is expunged from it; and Jesus Christ of course is a mere
man, so that there is no atonement. This is to suit those in whom the
sense of sin is lacking, or w r ho wish to banish it aside; who hate the
idea of a sinless substitute for sinners being needed, and the prospect of
humbling themselves to receive the blood of the great sacrifice.
Hitualism suits those in whom conscience is powerful, and the sense
* Note. —The “Church Service Society” of the Established Church
was formed in 1865; the “Devotional Service Association” of the United
Presbyterian Church, in 1882; and the “Public Worship Association” of the
Free Church, in 1891. The “ Scottish Church Society” was formed in 1892, a
still more deadly Established Church parasite.


of sin strong, but who will not pass through repentance and faith to
the mercy seat, and will rather pass through ceremonial, symbolic
channels instead, thereby magnifying the church, and making the priest
a god. Thus, while rationalism leads ultimately to atheism, ritualism
leads ultimately to idolatry, men and material things being worshipped
for the saving efficacy supposed to reside in them.
SABBATH CONCERTS.
It is a form of rationalism which we find in the musical “ services,”
Sabbath concerts, and such like entertainments, which now abound.
A common error in speech is to talk of all church concerts or “services”
of a musical kind as forms of ritualism. This is not the case. Where
these “services” are only for amusement or worldly gratification, and
are not viewed as having priestly efficacy connected with them, they
are only forms of rationalism. Eor, rationalism has for its essence the
pleasing of man as he is by nature—the gratification of his tastes,
whether intellectual or aesthetic, or sensual. This rationalism multiplies
musical “ services ” which have no symbolic meaning nor priestly efficacy,
merely to gratify the carnal desires of the multitudes, however much
its votaries may profess to do or receive good thereby. These concerts,
and the sanctuary services, also are used as a convenient opportunity
for the young of both sexes meeting, and beginning that form of
sensualism for which our colony is becoming famous, or rather infamous.
ROBBERY.
The third line of policy adopted by the Evil One is (3) Robbery.
We must remember, in order to our understanding of this, that the
Church would be, humanly speaking, secure from both ritualism and
rationalism, so long as she remained pure within. And in such a case
she would for ever be impregnable, if G-od’s Word is true. No weapon
against a pure Church shall prosper (Isaiah liv, 17). How then shall
Satan get within to introduce error and corrupt? By robbery, we
answer. His servants take upon themselves the most solemn vows, and
make the most solemn professions of being true to Christ and the
principles of His Church as set forth in the creed to which they declare
adherence. They are thus admitted to positions in their particular
Church, as if they were angels of light, whereas they are emissaries of
darkness. They steal the rank and office and emoluments which are
not their’s by right. They enter as secret robbers of Churches
under the guise of friends of Christ. Once within, they show
themselves masters of dissimulation. The language by which
they begin insidiously to spread their real opinions, which
are very different from their professed ones, is always capable
of more than one meaning, according as a faithful servant of G-od attacks
it, or a carnal worldly worshipper hears it. They slip dexterously out
of the bands of those who seek, moved with holy indignation, to purge
the temple. They skilfully evade the whip of small cords (John ii,
15) ; and they renew their infamous practices the moment the outburst
of zeal has died down—if they discontinue them at all. And they
wait until their number within the Church has increased so that they
are in the majority. Then they come forward to propose changes in


the creed and formulas of the Church, in order to make over to them-
selves securely the continued possession of that which they have stolen.
Their plea is that thereby the creed will be brought more into harmony
with “the living faith of the Church.” Living faith of the Church,
forsooth! “Lyingthieves of the Church” would be the correct phrase.
It is as if a robber entered a man’s house, and, forcing himself upon
the family in the first place, proceeded further to compel the rightful
owner to give him legal possession of the house, the rightful owner to
be possibly allowed to occupy a small portion of the mansion until his
death, provided he did not disturb the intruder, or else to be uncermon-
iously turned out into the street. Meanwhile, any of the family who
ventured to utter remonstrances find themselves bundled out, and the
door locked to prevent their possible re-entrance. Such is the process
which has been at work in the three largest Presbyterian Churches of
Scotland, as well as in many other Churches for many years, and which
in the Established Church and Free Church has proved almost com-
pletely successful. They have been transformed into robber Churches,
while no one dare lift his little finger against the successful depredators.
AN IMMORAL POLICY EXPOSED.
What I say of these men, I say of them in regard to their public
ecclesiastical policy. Their private characters may or may not be es-
timable ; with these I have nothing to do, although such an immoral
policy as their’s cannot fail to contaminate their private life. It is, how-
ever with their public official actions that I concern myself. And regard-
ing these I have to say that, were anything wanting to prove both ration-
alism and ritualism in all their forms thoroughly wrong and rotten,
nothing could more effectually do it than the methods which their
advocates have chosen of spreading their principles and moulding
the minds of men into harmony therewith. Even their favourite plea
of progress, and of a Church becoming more enlightened by experience,
will not avail them. Such a plea cannot clear them from the guilt of
the sin now laid to their charge. They have vowed one set of opinions
as their’s; they hold a different and contrary set. If this be so, no
jesuistry can extricate them from the guilt of being ecclesiastically liars
and robbers in the sight of God and man. They have seized upon
offices and emoluments which were offered them only on condition of
their maintaining and promoting the very doctrines which they really hate
and which they are busy undermining. Besides, their plea is not
justifiable: it is not honest and straight-forward. All the world knows
the robbers only use it to blind their dupes and possibly to soothe their
own consciences, so that they may get possession of that which is not
their own and to which they have no right. And the plea they urge is
on the very surface false. Eor, they assume the very thing which
needs to be proved, viz:—that their movements are movements of
progress, enlightenment, purity. But there are movements of progress
which are not towards enlightenment and purity. There is such a thing
as progress in mischief. The sinner, continuing in sin, is ever making
progress towards hell. A thief becomes wiser and more cunning in his
craft by experience.


DESTRUCTION VERSUS DEVELOPMENT.
Dropping illustrations and figures, however, we perceive more
clearly still the fallacy in the logic of the robbers regardingthe matters
and methods in dispute. They declaim against a Church standing still;
and they point out that to every reformation in the past there has been
resistance offered, even by good men. But again, we point out that this
is assuming the very thing to be proved, viz:—that their proposals are
those of reformation, and that their aims are upward. As a matter of
fact, what they mean by reformation or improvement is destruction of
the old as distinguished from its development. Scripture displays
to us a continual development of the truth—an expansion of the
wonderful germ of the gospel given in the garden of Eden after the
Eall, when a Deliverer was promised of the seed of the woman to bruise
the head of the serpent. All the Bible is a development of this, not
a destruction. But the proposals of the robbers are a destruction of
the principles to which they have vowed their adherence, not a develop-
ment. The advance of the Church is certainly necessary for her life; but
that advance will ever retain the old, and expand it on logically
necessary lines as demanded by the practical requirements of every age.
How little faith the robbers have in the principles they endeavour
sinfully to introduce into the Church where they have no right to be
is shown by their trying every plan rather than the honest and straight-
forward one of starting a Church or Churches of their own. They are
free to do this—to start a Church of their own. They are urged, indeed,
by the faithful men of God to do this, these faithful followers of
Christ being thus at the opposite extreme from the persecuting intoler-
ance of Rome. But the errorists decline as far as they can. They do not
believe in the power of what they call the truth. Accordingly they have
little hope of overpowering the pure Church of Christ by outside
attack, and therefore they know they must first get within. But in
doing so they have used tactics which rouse the moral indignation and
excite the abhorrence and disgust of every honest man who knows them,
and the repudiation from the heart, with an Anathema Maranatha, of
every leal-hearted man of God.
OUR PRINCIPLES AND PROGRESS—A WARNING.
The application of this to our Church is now plain. We hare
nothing to fear, if we be true to our Head and King in principles and
in progress. And our greatest, though not exclusive attention, in
order to prevent danger from error in the way of infringement of our
principles, should be directed to the door whereby Satan has entered
other Churches, viz:—the door of the robbers. Not second in import-
ance also is the need of our earnestly and prayerfully seeking methods
of advancement and constructive progress, according to the Word of
God. We should scarcely dread anything so much as standing still,
and merely resisting the evil which presses in upon us from all sides.
We must advance from strength to strength (Psalm lxxxiv, 7). The
history of God’s ancient people presents us with two most significant
warning examples of this. There are no sadder epochs in Church History
than the one which was ushered in by Israel’s exile, when the infatuated
nation had persistently abandoned Jehovah’s pure worship; and the


one which was commenced—and which still continues as the epoch of
Israel’s isolation among the nations and severance from God—when the
again infatuated people rejected Jehovah incarnate Himself. In the
former case, Israel, in spite of repeated warnings by prophet and
preliminary forebodings by judgment, and in spite of every encourage-
ment by heaven-sent prosperity in times of faithfulness, introduced with
increasing profusion the symbols and ceremonies of heathen worship
into the pure worship of a jealous God. Hence He gave up His
ancient people into the hands of the very enemies whose gods that
people were so ready to worship while professing to improve the
worship of Jehovah thereby. Israel became a captive, and ceased to
be a nation. Seventy years passed away. A remnant of the nation,
now cured of what God called idolatry, what the people had imagined
to be an improved worship, returned to the old home land. And from
that day till now idolatry in the worship of Jehovah has not dared to
to rear its foul head in Israel. But, unhappily, that species of idolatry
passed away only to give place to another. After the return from
captivity good men arose in Israel, whose very piety became a snare
to the people. Paradoxical though it seems, it is yet true that after
all it is good men who do most mischief in the Church, and not bad
men. Satan always uses the most effective instruments he can get for
his work. Bad men are soon found out. Good men are shielded in their
errors by their piety, and their influence is great in consequence. So
it was of old, and so it is ever. These rabbis interpreted Scripture and
applied it, making mistakes as all uninspired men do. And, because of
their very goodness, their mistakes were followed even more stringently
than their accuracies, as their disciples endeavoured to emulate each
other in walking in the footsteps of these saintly men. By the time of
Christ’s appearance the evil had wrought out its deadly effects. The
people worshipped their forefathers rather than their God, and actually
looked upon “the tradition of the elders” in regard to ceremonial
customs and doctrinal tenets as of greater value than the pure word of
God itself. Hence the frequent collision between Jesus on the one
hand and the scribes and pharisees on the other (See e.g. M atth. xv* 1-20).
Our Lord gave deadly offence to these uninspired religious guides of the
people, and they in due season accomplished His betrayal and death.
Their triumph culminated in the terrible cry of the people rejecting a
heaven-sent Redeemer —“Away with Him! away with Him! crucify
Him” (John xix, 15). Thereupon God once more rejected His ancient
people. He has shut them out from the stream of truth as it has flowed
down the ages. He has made them again a byword everywhere. And
they have been almost or altogether without influence on the religious
history of the world all these eighteen centuries.
MODERN IDOLATROUS WORSHIP.
We are to-day looking out upon a scene resembling God’s former
rejection of His professed people. The professed Churches of Christ
are falling back at a fearful rate into the darkness of idolatrous worship.
Their imagined improvements are only examples of will-worship, and
are therefore abominations in God’s sight. “ Who hath required this at


your hand?” is still a question asked at the nominal worshippers of the
Pure One, as pointedly as it was of old (Isaiah i, 12). And we see God
giving over the mass of the so-called Churches of Christ into the power
of the enemy. The world has invaded these Churches long ere now with
disastrous results. It has entered by means of the worldly methods
adopted to draw the multitudes into the house of the God they hate,
and to retain them there. But these Churches have heeded not the
preliminary forebodings of coming evil. And the world is now trampling
them under foot, preparatory to their final overthrow. They are ceas-
ing to be Churches of Christ, and are becoming mere places of carnal
recreation and amusement. They, like Israel of old, will have their
time of exile and their period of bondage under the very foe whom, as
Churches of Christ, they were called upon to encounter and subdue.
But when their period of captivity has ended —if it ends in purification,
and if a remnant returns to the purity of former days, shall we as a
Church, be found in the promised land ready to welcome our once
backsliding brethren back to the fold of the Good Shepherd? Yes, if
we are not given over to the second great error into which Israel fell—
the worship of our forefathers.
PROTEST ANT WORSHIP OF SAINTS.
Our fathers’ memory ought to be revered. Their writings ought
to be studied. Their example ought to stimulate us. They were, we
believe, kept to a wonderful extent free from error in their zeal for the
Redeemer’s kingdom. And it will be an evil day when this reverence
for them as God’s instruments ceases, and when their works in the
cause of God are not found in us, and in us do not follow them onward
and upwards to the land of rest (Rey. xiv, 13). But beyond that
honour for them as far as they honoured God and God honoured them,
we dare not go: and yet beyond that some in our Church, unhappily, are
going. It is deemed by some to be a sufficient reason for introducing
or maintaining—or resisting —any practice or custom, that the thing
was done —or not done —by godly men of old. Even then their
teaching is often misunderstood. It is assumed, however, that they
must have acted in every case in accordance with the Word of God,
and that every detail of their conduct was suited for all time—in
short, that they were infallible. Now, we abhor popery. But, if
such a spirit is to rule, we shall be in danger of falling into a
worse popery than that which owes its existence and Goustenanee iOht
to the Antichrist on the seven hills. Eor, that Antichrist and
his blasphemous system have this to be said in favour of them,
compared with the system just alluded to —that the pope is a living
being, and his system is the continued living expression of his desires
and determination, he sitting in the .temple of God, and shewing himself
that he is God (2 Thess. ii, 41. But our saintly forefathers are dead.
And more, the worship of them as popes would have been utterly
detested by them were they alive. They themselves would have been
the first, as their writings and conduct show, to point their blind would-
be followers away from the word, of uninspired men “to the law
and to the testimony” (Isaiah viii, 20), and to disclaim for themselves
the position which these followers would assign them. How much


of their labours they believed to be for all time they have themselves
clearly indicated by handing down the abiding results in the form of
creeds, confessions, and such documents. In these, too, they carefully
give in each case their reasons drawn from the Scripture for the doctrines
laid down and the practices enjoined; these are to be retained, and how-
ever much they may require to be developed to meet and overthrow
developing error, they are not to be destroyed. And these we shall
maintain and defend to the last, God helping us.
CAUSE AND CUBE OF PROTESTANT POPERY.
It may seem strange that such idolatry should be found in our
Church. But its origin and power are easily understood. It is the
extreme of reaction and revolt against the prevailing corruptions of to-
day. It was a similar revolt by the Jews, as they loathed the corrupt
heathen worship once lusted after, which gave the rabbis of old who
headed all movements for purity, and the Pharisees and others, who
were their unworthy successors, such great power over the people.
Our fathers in like manner were staunch in their adherence to sound
doctrine and pure worship, and it is a great relief to turn to their writings
and to reflect on their labours, compared with the literature and the
doings of the men of our day who profess to honour God. Hence the
reverence for our fathers’ memory—which ought to be revered—has
passed in some cases into superstitious and idolatrous worship. And
if this spirit were to prevail, we as a Church, like, ancient Israel, shall be
cut off from the living stream of God’s Word and Spirit, and shall lose
whatever influence God has already given us in the religious life of the
community and the world. God may preserve us, as He has wondrously
preserved the scattered Jewish nation, but it will be as a kind of fossil
-—without life. If, however, such a spirit can be driven and kept out
of us by the Spirit of truth and the power of God’s Word, then shall
our Church be no longer hidden from the eyes of perishing sinners, no
longer trodden down by the foes of God, and no longer a mere byword
and reproach among the nations where it is known at all. Then shall we
be emboldened and encouraged to appeal to our Redeemer—Head, and
to give Him no rest till He establish, and till He make His Jerusalem a
praise on the earth (Isaiah lxii, 7).
OUR DUTY WITHIN AND WITHOUT THE CHURCH.
Our duty then is clear. Let no false teacher appear within the
fold of the Good Shepherd alongside of us; or, if he be discovered to
have entered, that moment let him be put outside. If once he be
allowed to enter and remain, our day of purity and progress, of power
and prosperity in the sight of God is gone. But we have also a duty
in regard to rationalism and ritualism outside. While watching,
standing fast in the faith, quitting ourselves like men, being strong
— (1 Cob. xvi, 13) ; strong in the Lord and in the power of His might
—(Ephes. vi, 10), we have to remember that, just as the Bible which
endures for ever was given for all time in a form specially suited to
the country and the age in which each successive portion of it was
given, so must we show its suitability and applicability to the present
circumstances of this land, and to this period of our nation’s history.
If we retain the form in which our forefathers reared their structure


on the everlasting foundations, without enquiring if such be appropriate
to the needs and legitimate desires of the present day, we are not
fulfilling our duty; nor are we following in the footsteps of our
fathers, who, following the example of Scripture, adapted by their
preaching and practices, the unchanging Word of God to the changing
wants and circumstances of the age in which they lived. We are
to-day face to face with certain forms of rationalism and ritualism and
other errors. These are tendencies of the human mind carried to an
evil excess and in an evil direction. But is there anything in these
tendencies to be purified rather than destroyed? Are they entirely to
be disowned? No, Satan is too cunning to present us ever with
undiluted error and evil. He always mixes it with something of truth,
as he did in the temptations of our Lord, and as he does in all
temptations. Hence the difficulty of the task before us, and the need
of a constant cry to our Divine Head for help.
PROBLEMS FACING US.
This Church must face serious and pressing questions on the wide
field of Biblical criticism and of theology generally, as well as of
worship and devotion; and on the outer domain of amusement, social
affairs, literature, and such like. She is not to be a provider of
amusement, a political parliament, a philanthrophic institution, or a
caterer for anything or everything that the popular taste seeks. But
she must point out the dividing line between the evil and the good in
all such tendencies and movements, as did the prophets of old. And
she must take advantage of the good, as far as God’s Spirit has been
stirring with men, and develope it by the grace of that Spirit, in the
direction in which Scripture authorises her to go, and which the Spirit
of God may be therefore expected to bless. In doing so, she will
imitate the example of Jesus and His apostles in the midst of the
beliefs and customs wherever they went (See e.q. Luke x, 1-20.) If
she merely cleaves to the old as handed down by our ancestors, without
distinguishing between the form and the foundation, then she will die,
and deserve to die, becoming as a mere fossil, pressed between the
great forces of evil and with the life gone out of her.
A LONGED-FOR PROSPECT.
But if she will rise above the old in spirit and letter, advancing
and growing according to G-od’s Word in its adaptability to every age,
she will become a living plant, drawing nourishment from the fulness
of the living Word; and, watered by the dews of God’s grace, she will
rear her beautiful form far above the very rocks of death that would
otherwise have crushed her. And, with every faithful Church in other
lands she will expand into a great and flourishing tree, under whose
spreading branches the inhabitants of the earth will seek spiritual
shelter and find safe dwelling (See Hosea xiv, 5-9). Kings and
queens shall become the nursing fathers and mothers of the Church
(Isaiah xlix, 23); and there shall yet be a national coming and joining
of the people unto Jehovah in a perpetual covenant never to be
forgotten (Jer. i, 5). Even now, there are not lacking tokens that
the pure Church of Christ may soon find the good men of more than


one impure Church turning to her, and many an anxious eye looking to
her for light (Is. ii, 3). There are not a few signs of a revolt against the
errors that have long prevailed, now that these errors, by extending
and deepening, are revealing more fully their deadly nature and destiny.
In science and theology alike, in worship and life, many a one in secret
and some even in public are longing for a change and a return unto
God. They are sick of the evils that abound. Conversation discloses
such persons. The public press has chronicled the utterances and
yearnings of the bolder ones. Will they find our Church ready and
able to receive them ? I cannot tell. I would that we recognised
these streaks of an approaching dawn, and gave not up ourselves to
despair, but, in the strength of the Lord, gird up our loins to be ready
for His coming, mighty to save. If we do remain faithful, and prayer-
fully hope unto the end, we shall find that the pure Church of Christ
everywhere will yet prove worthy of her Lord, and with an increasing
and enduring freshness and vigour like that of the rising king of day,
and manifesting his power over all the powers of darkness, she will be
one that “looketh forth as the morning, fair as the moon, clear as the
sun, and terrible as an army with banners” (Song op Sol., vi, 10).
[The address, as originally delivered, concluded thus: —]
PRESENT NATIONAL CRISES.
Long as I have kept you, I cannot close altogether without a
reference to the national crises through which our colony is passing.
Disaster after disaster of varied kind has befallen us, culminating in a
series of portentous bank failures. The magnitude of the evils is only
equalled or surpassed by that of the impending national crisis at home,
should other evils be crowned by civil war breaking out on the passing
of a seditious measure in parliament which betrays Queen and country,
as well as God and His cause, into the hands of the Queen’s enemies
and the Man of Sin. But our own calamities are closer still. A panic-
stricken nation has no one in whom it can trust. It has forsaken its
God; it cannot find a man or an institution to take His place in the
hour of peril. Yet there is no national recognition of the judgment
of God thus descending, and of His wrath being thus poured forth.
Punishment is hardening the hearts of the inhabitants of our land. Is
final doom to come? It may not be. It is thoroughly deserved. And
whether it be averted or not, that which alone can exalt our nation is
righteousness (Prov. xiv, 34) and that which alone can bring permanent
rejoicing is the fear of God (Psalm ii, 11;. We have experienced the
whirlwind, the earthquake, and the fire; but the “still small voice” of
the Spirit of God has yet to be heard (1 Kin as xix, 12). Until this is
so, however much we may find “men’s hearts failing them for fear,”
(Luke xxi, 26) that fear is not the fear of God. But when this is so,
if ever it happen, the nation will repent and be converted: its sins will
be blotted out; and we shall know and experience the fulfilment of the
glad promise that “times of refreshing shall come from the presence of
the Lord.” (Acts iii, 19).




