

THE NATION
UNDER ORDERS
“ Some impressions
“burnt into my soul
“by a month at the
“Front____for the
“days are critical.”
A LETTER ADDRESSED TO
The Times
BY MICHAEL FURSE,
BISHOP OF PRETORIA.
3d.
Receipts from the sale of this Pamphlet to be donated
to the Australia Day Fund.




Reprinted from
Cl i| e ® x xxt c a
Tuesday, TVS ay 25, 1915.
The Nation Under Orders.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE TIMES :
Sir, —I have just returned from tire
front, where I have spent the last
month in giving what help I could to
our chaplains and troops in Northern
France and Flanders. It was the most
glorious month I have ever spent, and
I want, if I can, to pass on to others
a few of the impressions which were
burnt into my soul during that time —for
the days are critical.
I had never doubted that the spirit of
our troops was as fine as men told us it
was, but I never realized how fine it was
until I had lived in it and with it. It beggars
description; it is amazing. It is all the
more so when you realize, as you do when
you are up at the front, that this spirit is
there in spite of the fact that the men who
show it feel it in their bones that somehow
the nation is not backing them as the nation
could and should. That, I am convinced,
is the feeling right through the Army in
France and Flanders; and the reason for
it is not far to seek.
AT THE FRONT.
After fighting desperately day and
night for days and weeks, with frightful
losses, the men who are left are dog
tired and need a rest. When they are
“pulled out” to get this rest, and after
three days are sent back into the firing
line again, the only conclusion they can
draw is that there are not enough troops
available to take their places. When
battalion after battalion of infantry—
and, as was recently the case in the
Ypres salient, regiment after regiment
of cavalry, too have to sit in trenches
day after day and night after night,
being pounded by high explosives from
enemy guns, with no guns behind them
capable of keeping down the enemy’s
fire, then the conclusion they draw is
obvious namely, that the nation has
failed to provide sufficient guns or
ammunition to meet those of the enemy.
When, night after night and day after
day, the men in the trenches know that
for every one hand grenade or rifle
grenade or trench mortar bomb which
they throw at the enemy they will get
back in answer anything from five to
ten, then the conclusion they draw is
also obvious namely, that the nation
does not somehow realize the situation,
or, if it does, has not made it its business
to supply what is necessary. Man for man
they know that they have nothing to fear
either from German infantry or cavalry;


they have proved it again and again. Bnt
they know also that it is little short of mur-
der for a nation to ask men, however full
of the right spirit, to face an enemy amply
equipped with big guns and the right kind
of ammunition, unless they are at least
equipped with equally effective munitions
of war. d'lijlJl
There can he only one impression left
on the minds of men in such a case, and
that is, that somehow or other the nation
does not know tire truth, does not under-
stand, and is not hacking them, for, know-
ing the old country as they do, they have
no douht that if Germany can produce
these things we can, if w T e .will. And yet,
in spite of it all, they carry on, they keep
cheery, they do their best, they die gaily.
The fact is that as a nation we are just
gambling on this spirit. We know it to be
there; we recognize it as the finest thing
in the world; we believe it s unconquer-
able, whatever happens. So it is; but it
will not win the war alone. It is this spirit,
backed by guns and high explosives—legi-
timate munitions of war —which is going
to smash this enemy of ours, and nothing
else. Let no one think that we are going
to do it by descending to the level of the
German Imperial Staff and using any sort
of gas. This talk of reprisals by gas (per-
haps next we shall hear of reprisals by
poisoning water supplies!) is simply an-
other method of chloroforming the nation
and blinding its eyes to the real issue—
the adequate supply of big guns and high
explosive shells and other legitimate muni-
tions of war.
THE SOLDIER’S QUESTION.
And these munitions of war have to be
made, not by the men at the front who are
doing the fighting, bnt here in the British
Isles. The men at the front know this;
they know that the making of munitions
of war, the making of clothes and equip-
ment, the provision of food and of the
thousand and one other things necessary
to an army in the field —all these are just
as much an integral part of the business as
theirs is. And then they ask (I have heard
them myself—wounded men in hospitals
and whole men on the field), “Why should
I, who enlisted under a voluntary system,
because my part of the job is to loose off
the ammunition my next-door neighbour at
home has made, be compelled to do so
under the extreme penalty of death for
disobedience to orders or desertion from
my job, while my neighbour at home is
allowed to chuck his job with impunity
whenever he wants to? Why should I be
punished for refusing to go into the
trenches because my pay is not raised a
penny an hour, and the other fellow be
allowed to striae and then be cajoled into
going back to work by the special visit of
a Cabinet Minister and the promise of
extra pay? Why should I have to stick it
out, night after night and day after day,
in water and mud up to my knees, when
the other fellow (who is only doing .an-
other part of the same job) can make his
own conditions as to hours of work?”
Why, indeed? Why should any one of
ns who claims citizenship in the Empire,
when the Empire is fighting for its very
existence, be free to do what we like at
such a time? That is the question I asked
myself as I came away one evening from
visiting a private soldier who had fought
through the first three or four months of
the war and had then deserted (his excuse
was drink) and was to be shot, and was
shot, and rightly too, at 5.30 the next
morning. Why, indeed? That is what
the men at the front are asking.
The news which they will have read
these last few days will have put fresh


heart into them all. For nine solid months
they have been wondering why on earth
the nation has not done what it has at last
been decided to do—viz., to form a
National Government. And now what ? Is
tliis National Government going to be the
real thing or not? Is it going to be merely
a combination of representatives of exist-
ing political parties on some sort of basis
of numbers in the House of Commons? Is
the cloven hoof of party politics still going
to be found in it, or is it going to be a
Government composed of the very best
men whom the nation can produce, irres-
pective altogether of politics and parties?
Is it still going to keep half an eye on votes,
or is it going to get on with the one and
only thing which matters now —the smash-
ing of the enemy in the shortest time pos-
sible, for that is the object of war? Is
this new Government going to tackle tins
business on the same ridiculous principles
of voluntary service as heretofore, or in
the only way in which it can be tackled
with any certain hope of ultimate success?
Is it going to tell the nation at once that
we can’t win this war, and shall uselessly
sacrifice thousands of lives, unless the
Government has the power given to it to
call upon the services of every single man,
woman, and child, if need be, for whatever
each individual is most capable of doing
directly or indirectly for the accomplish-
ment of the one object before us the
smashing of the enemy? The men at the
front are waiting for the answer, amt so
are thousands of men and women here at
home.
THE ONLY WAY.
/ say “the only way,” and for the fol-
lowing reasons : —
1. If the men at the front know that they
have got the nation at their back, there
need be no fear lest they will ever lose
one iota of the glorious spirit which, in
spite of lack of guns, has so far kept the
enemy from our gate. They will wait, and
wait gladly, for what they so sorely need,
if only they know that at last this business
is being taken seriously in hand.
2. It is the only way, for only so can
our Commanders-in-Chief at sea and in the
held lay their plans of campaign with any
certainty that they will be able to carry
them out. As it is now, it is simply a mat-
ter of fighting as best you can from hand
to mouth. When the Government know
that they can call on all the resources of
men and material, then, and then only, can
they lay their plans for certain production
at definite times. Only so can they be able
to tell the Commanders-in-Chief what they
can expect, and when.
3. It is the only way, because it is the
height of impudent folly to imagine that
we are as a nation so miraculously en-
dowed by the Almighty that we, and we
alone of all nations in the world, can pro-
secute such a war as we are engaged in to
a successful issue without calling on the
whole resources of the nation. At present
we are treating it as a sort of “side show”
to the real business of life, which must be
kept going “as usual.” Besides, it is not
playing the game by our Allies. They are
keeping nothing back; we are.
I. It is the only way, because only so
will the nation get the greatest efficiency
out of its individual members. As it is,
many men are now serving at the front
who ought to be serving at home, and vice
versa. The present method of “go or not
as you please” is utterly haphazard and
unbusinesslike, and therefore hopelessly
inadequate.
5. It is the only way, because an essential
factor in the successful prosecution of the
war is that the right spirit should animate
not only the men at the front, but the


nation at their back. It is only the right
spirit which will be able to bear the strain
and see this thing through to a finish.
To-day the right spirit is lacking because
the conscience of the nation is uneasy. As
individuals we do not know whether we
are doing the right thing or not —-whether
we should go on with our ordinary work or
offer to go and fight. We are afraid of
indulging in wholly innocent amusement.
We are afraid even of having a really
healthy laugh—somehow we feel it would
not be right. People are getting gloomy
and depressed, not because they have any
fear as to the ultimate end of the war
(they do not know enough about the real
situation for that), not because they are
not ready to face, and face gallantly, the
sacrifices which war has laid upon them to
make, but because their consciences are
not at rest. You cannot have the right
spirit if your conscience is uneasy.
A NATION UNDER ORDERS.
That is why the men at the front have
the right spirit. They are so gloriously
cheery because their consciences are at
rest. They know they have done and are
doing the right thing. They have made
the great surrender. They have burnt
their boats behind them and put themselves
under orders. Nothing matters except to
“do their bit” when they are told to. When
they are not wanted they have no silly
scruples about enjoying themselves the
best they can. When the whole nation
knows itself to be under orders, and knows
that it is doing the right thing, we shall see
the same spirit of gay surrender at home;
and this spirit is essential. All we want
is a lead, and a strong and fearless lead.
But will the nation stand it? Politics
again! Well, if it won’t, it will have to
stand something infinitely more distasteful
before very long. But, of course, the
nation will stand it. The nation will wel-
come it with both hands, once it is given
a lead, once all are treated alike, once it is
told the truth —not half-truths, which are
worse than lies, but the real truth —that
though we are holding the enemy through
the indomitable spirit and the reckless
self-sacrifice of our troops, we cannot and
never shall he able to crush them until we
provide our fighting men with a preponder-
ance of munitions of war over and above
the apparently ample and undiminished
supply of the enemy. Advancing a few
yards, or retiring a few miles, or merely
holding the enemy —this is not going to
win the war. It may produce a peace in
the long run; but it will he a peace made
in Germany and not of British manufacture
The nation will welcome national service
because the temper of the nation is differ-
ent from what it was. Recent events have
clearly shown., e- on to tin* most phlegmatic,
that we are in a perfectly real sense up
against the Devil incarnate. What else is
it when we are fighting against an enemy
who will stop at nothing, however mean
and cruel and disgusting—an enemy who
will use gas, sink Lusitanias, put arsenic
in running streams, and sow disease?
Mere abuse won’t tame this Devil or drive
him out, but a nation serving will.
National service will be welcomed once the
nation learns the truth that thousands of
the finest and most gallant lives that the
Empire has ever produced are being
thrown away because the nation has not
yet realized that it is at war.
There is only one way to make the
nation realize this fact, and that is by
bringing every member of it under the
direct orders of the State for one purpose,
and one purpose only. Nothing else mat-
ters to-day. Yours faithfully,
MICHAEL FURSE,
May 21. Bishop of Pretoria.


A POSTCRIPT.
Since addressing my letter to The
Times T have realized that many people
misunderstand what is meant hy National
Service, or “Mobilizing the Nation.” For
my own part, what I mean is briefly this :
That the nation, and not merely the man at
the front, is at war; that as a fact the
base is not in France, but in England. At
the front there are hundreds of men who
are not, and probably never will be,
actually in the firing line, but are employed
at the local base and on the lines of commu-
nication, in transport work, in horse man-
agement, as cooks, shoeing-smiths, bomb-
makers, hospital orderlies, and in a hun-
dred other ways; but —and this is the point
—all are “under orders.” In the same
way I hold that every single member of
the nation should he “under orders” to
render that service at the direct order of
the State which he or she is most capable
of rendering. For many it would no doubt
mean that they would have to carry on
their ordinary business as they are doing
now; but they would be doing it with far
greater efficiency, because they would
know that it was “under orders,” and that
their present work was what was wanted
from them. But the people who to-day are
employed in businesses which, in the
opinion of the Government, could for the
time be dispensed with as not directly, or
even indirectly, vital to the successful pro-
secution of the war would obviously be
turned on to doing something else. In
short, the two principles of what I mean by
National Service are: —(1) That every
man, woman, and child should be under the
direct orders, and at the disposal, of the
State during the duration of the war; and
(2) that all citizens should be treated alike.
May 27.


R -printed by Smith vx Pane, Printers,
15 Bridge Street, Sydney.


* •
Cx 7l w •*• '- *
'2t«~ f~*y* ac6^W>MC^r
/?X~€~* S' -- / Jk*4juC~
~ ’ ~ ’, c..
. 7yC-i?. C Si*vx4<v I" j


J. a. Ferguson.
