

THE GOLDEN
SOUTH




THE GOLDEN SOUTH




THE
GOLDEN SOUTH
MEMORIES OF AUSTRALIAN HOME LIFE
FROM 1843 TO 1888
BY
‘LYTH’
Such is the patriot’s beast, where’er we roam,
His first, best country ever is at home.’
LONDON
WARD AND DOWNEY
1890




INTRODUCTION
As I stood on the deck of One of the largest of the
Peninsular and Oriental Company’s steamers, that now
almost annihilate distance between England and her col-
onial possessions, taking a last look at the land where I had
left youth, womanhood, kindred, friends, and the dust of
parents, I thought, “Is there anything I can do in return
for all God has done for me here—anything to prove
my gratitude to the many true friends lam leaving: the
Australians, young and old, who have thronged around us
to bid us farewell 1 ” Nearly half a century has passed
since the good ship Euphrates came to anchor in this, one
of the grandest harbours of the world, and I stood, as I
am now standing, looking at the beautiful shores of
Sydney Harbour. But what a change ! Then few signs
of habitation were to be seen, and now one sees stately
mansions, countless and beautiful, surrounded by foliage
almost to the water’s edge, silent witnesses of God’s good-
ness and man’s perseverance. One stately house there
was, with battlements and tower, set in terraced grounds,
with beautiful trees, shrubs, and flowers that only bloom
B


under glass in colder climes; and over all a sky blue and
transparent beyond description. In this house there dwell
the descendants of two who stood near me when first I saw
this lovely land. They are now in a still safer and more
beautiful haven, having lived a good life here, and left
their children the priceless inheritance of a stainless name.
Two of that family have just left us; I need not say, “Go
and do likewise,” for already they have laid up treasures
in heaven.
Why do I wish to write of Australia, more especially
of New South Wales, when such men as Froude, Trollope,
and Forbes have done so 1 Firstly, I promised, and
secondly, because travellers like those mentioned are
merely birds of passage for a few months or weeks, staying
amongst us, feted by a few men in power or position,
travelling by special trains through the country, or on
mere pleasure excursions, seeing what is to be seen under
the most favourable conditions, and listening to interested
or interesting descriptions of places and people that they
have not had time to investigate. They leave without
having the slightest idea of the real homes, lives, intellects,
and capabilities of either country or people; and of
the best families, scattered over her vast territory, they
know little or nothing. The descendants of military and
naval men, doctors, lawyers, clergymen, and merchants of
the old days, too often not the richest or most powerful
men now. Therefore travellers in these days come and
go, either disparaging or fulsomely praising, just as some


do who have visited England, and give a bad impression
of our people and homes. I cannot help alluding to this,
as I have heard many stories of colonists’ behaviour when
in England during the Colonial Exhibition in London.
These may be, and no doubt were, in many instances
true, still, if we were to judge the English people, or
indeed any nationality, by those who have visited our
shores since the “gold mania,” I am afraid our ex-
perience would be equally unfortunate. No! let us not
be too hasty in judging the many by the few; to my
readers in both countries I say it. This record of a woman’s
life and experience does not pretend to any literary talent;
it is written with the hope of bringing the people of both
homes nearer together, especially the young. Let the
older country have patience with the younger, and lead
them by patience and experience, as well as timely advice,
to serve their God, Queen, and country.
To the younger I dedicate “The Golden South.”


CHAPTER I
On a cold dull March morning we left our home in
London for the Waterloo Station, to go by the London
and South-Western line to Southampton, from thence to
Portsmouth to join our ship. After dining at the Ship
Hotel, we went on board the vessel which was to be
our abode for four months and a fortnight. Now,
though nearly fifty years have passed, I see the place and
recall the strangeness of it all. The ship was an old
East Indiaman with only four large cabins opening into
the saloon or “cuddy,” as it was then generally called.
Our family had two of these, so we were very well off for
room and comfort. We left on 25 th March, and were
tossing about the famed Bay of Biscay until 10th April.
As I am not writing a diary of our voyage, I will merely
mention its chief incidents. On the 12th of May, when
south of the equator, we sighted a French vessel bound to
Buenos Ayres, that diverged from her course with the view
of “ speaking ”to us. They invited us to dinner ; but on
our refusal, accepted an invitation instead to dine with
us. The captain and two passengers were to be our


guests, our boat going for them. They were most de-
lightful people, and Frenchmen-like, full of compliments
to our cook. As some of our passengers spoke their
language fluently, the result was a very pleasant change
in the usual monotony of a long voyage. Just imagine
such a thing being done in these days of steam and quick
passages : the passengers from one vessel dining on board
another, spending a few hours, then returning, and being
near enough to hear the music played on board of each
vessel, the Frenchmen vainly trying to give us “God
save the Queen.” We were able to give them the
“ Marseillaise ” splendidly, having some good musicians on
board. On 30th May we encountered a terrible gale,
carrying away part of our bulwarks on the lee side: during
this dreadful weather what was left of our live stock died.
This weather continued till Bth June when off Table Bay,
and we had to lay-to all night. No one thought of sleep.
Tales of phantom ships and wrecks recurred to the
nervous. However, about 9 A.M. of the 9th June we
anchored safely in the bay. We were unable to land for
some hours, but at last went on shore and took rooms at
the George Hotel. What a rest from the unceasing noise
of a ship and all its miseries to the landsmen! Cape
Town was lovely, at least I thought so, —very different
from England, the deep red-clay of the roads, numbers of
natives, strange waggons drawn by bullocks, the mountains
for a background, and now (while off it) the beautiful sea
in front The bazaar-like shops, strange carriages and


horses, the hotel so different from anything I had ever seen
—all come hack as a picture, as I write.
We remained at the Cape until the 19th June, and had
many drives. In carriages drawn by six small horses we
started for Upper Constantia, Van E ’s vineyard and
wine estate, where there is a well-constructed house of
modern style, elegantly furnished. In the garden there was
a Kaffir’s hut, with clay figures life-size, orange trees, sub-
tropical fruit trees, and flowers everywhere around. We
were conducted through the cellars, and tasted the wine,
which has so great a reputation. We went also to Lower
Constantia, where the vineyard of Yan C is situated.
This was quite a different style of place, close to the
mountains, with the house, garden, and people of the old
Dutch type. In the cool garden violets, primroses, and
other English flowers were blooming, the last I saw for
many a day, and those dearest to me never saw again.
We were delighted with the wildflowers, my father mak-
ing a collection for his herbarium, geraniums, phlox,
and many others.
While at the Cape there was a ball given at Govern-
ment House, to which some of our passengers went, my
father and mother among the number, and in that out-of-
the-way place the former met an old schoolfellow ; so even
in those early days, when steam was almost in its infancy,
the smallness of the world was exemplified.
We left on the 19th June, and had very favourable
weather, only having two gales, in one of which we lost a


man overboard—the carpenter. We had three families of
returning colonists, the Attorney - General, Archdeacon
C , with his wife and two children, and another lady
and gentleman, with one child. Divine service was held
every Sunday, and though the archdeacon was seventy-five
years of age, he was a good preacher and very active. He
had gone home blind from cataract, but Alexander, the
famous oculist, restored his sight.
As we neared the end of our voyage, it became very
monotonous to some, as we were growing tired of one
another; and to those who were going to an unknown
country and who had heard a great deal more about that
country than they had known prior to leaving, there was
a dread of “ what the future might hold in store for us ” ;
and in my own family especially this thought would
intrude. “We had better have remained in England; ” but
it was too late now.
We were sailing through Bass Straits, passing islands,
and with the Tasmanian land to the south of us, in a
few days expected to see the land of “ The Golden South.”
We passed Sydney Heads late, and until the anchor was
let go did not know that we had at last reached our
destination. A resounding knock at our Venetians made
me wake up. “ K , ” said my mother, “we are in
fairyland; look out of the port.” I did, and my eyes were
dazzled by the brilliant sunrise of an Australian August
morning, the long white beaches fringed by heights wooded
down to the rippling bay. I was very soon on deck, and


even now can almost feel the thrill of delight at the view
then presented before me. Many have seen this and written
of its loveliness since, in these days of travel; but not as
I saw it then, as to a certain extent man’s improvements
(save the mark !) have marred some of the Master’s works.
Few houses were to be seen, only a few cleared spaces
surrounded with trees of the most luxuriant foliage. We
waited till the health officer came on board and pronounced
“All wellthen the pilot took charge of the ship, and we
were soon gliding towards the anchorage, from which we
could see Sydney and the north shore with its few houses
buried in foliage. Soon the deck was crowded.
Our archdeacon’s eldest son, I think, was the first on
board to greet the parent so loved and respected. “ I can
see you now,” were the old man’s words of greeting. We
were soon standing on the quay, a. small affair then, and
entered the hired close carriages brought by my father’s
partner to take us to his house. We drove along George
Street, past the Gaol and Barracks, then into Pitt Street.
“Well! what do you think of it, K ?” asked my mother,
I suppose from seeing the blank look on my face; I was so
dreadfully disappointed. “It is like E , where we stayed
last summer, not a bit like a foreign country; Cape Town is
much prettier.” “Ah! Miss K , you will find it
foreign enough by and by,” remarked our host. My
mother was delighted at what troubled me. “ I can fancy
myself at home sometimes,” she murmured. She was a
true child of the city. London had always been her home,


and though, for her children’s sake, she left it every summer
for the country, she only endured the change, and like
Charles Lamb, saw nothing in it. “ London suits me best,
and humanity is more satisfying than mountains, trees, or
flowers.” Poor mother! I remembered afterwards our
host looked pityingly at her beautiful face when she said
this.


CHAPTER II
George, Pitt, King, and Hunter Streets were those alone
worthy of the name, and they were disfigured by irregular
buildings, very small and meandooking shops and private
houses, and by broken patches of vacant land. The foot-
paths were miserably bad and the roads ill kept. There
were no omnibuses or cabs, only old private carriages for
hire from the livery stables. This to a woman like my
mother, who had never walked two miles consecutively,
was indeed misery; however, when we found a house of
our own in Elizabeth Street, she brightened for a time.
Such a house to her fresh from one in a London Square !
Our Sydney house contained six bare rooms, a kitchen
outside, and servants’ room over it, without fixtures or
cupboards of any kind, no water but what was bought or
brought from the city taps by our servants at certain
hours of the day; and for this house and small paved
yard the rent was f 100 per annum. I, being young,
could not realise the discomfort of such a home, and found
Sydney and its suburbs quite foreign enough for me.
When we had quite settled in our first Australian home,


to find the nearest Church of England was a consideration.
To find our parish (St. Laurence’s) church was a disused
brewery was another terrible shock to my mother’s idea
of the fitness of things. However, when the incumbent
proved to be a clever Oxford M.A. and fine preacher, her
troubles in this respect ended. To me it was the greatest
gain to become one of his children; he was so kind, loving,
and genial, and had that great gift of leading young men
and women to see in religion the love and pity of God.
Out of that one parish, extending then over many miles,
there are now at least ten made, each with a church and
congregation much larger than those of the old mother
parish.
It was a pleasant walk across the racecourse, now called
Hyde Park, to the Domain and Botanic Gardens. In
another direction miles of sandhills; in another, towards
Wooloomooloo, there were lovely walks by the waters of
the harbour. For six months I practically lived out of
doors, the clear fresh air was so exhilarating, except when
a strong southerly wind was blowing; then it became
anything but pleasant, as the sand from the hills, mixed
with the pulverised clay of the roads, formed a dust which
covered and penetrated everything and everywhere. This
was generally known as a “ Brickfielder.”
My father had letters of introduction to many residents
in Sydney, Elizabeth Bay, Darling Point, and Rose Bay;
and visiting at these places, we soon found that New South
Wales was not wanting in cultured gentlemen and families.


The reason for stating this is that I find, since returning
to England, it is thought by some “ that people in those
early days of Australia lived almost like savages,” and
“that colonial society was composed only of very low
people.” How different was the reality, for in many
houses we enjoyed the society of educated and scientific
men, and of accomplished and gentle women, surrounded
by all the comforts and refinements of life.
The schools in the colony were few and far between.
The chief were the Sydney Grammar School, Normal
Institution in Sydney, and the King’s School, Parramatta ;
the latter being a boarding-school for boys, where most of
the young Australians were educated. Dr. Forrest, one
of the early principals of the school, from all I have heard,
was a second Arnold. One of his pupils in later days
filled his former master’s place worthily and efficiently,
after working some years in a country parish. He only
resigned his position a few years ago, when a master from
England was appointed, but since I left Australia last
year another change has been made, and a new master
has just arrived there. Only one ladies’ school of note
had been established at this time.
The schools certainly were of the best, and conducted by
men and women who understood their duties, and I have
often questioned whether the advantages of the present sys-
tem of education in the colonies is an improvement on the
past. Everything is now made so easy, books of all kinds and
on all subjects doing away with any necessity for thought,


and therefore any special talent or genius in the pupil
may wither or die for want of the stimulant to exertion,
and this generation, I am afraid, like our Australian parrot,
will only repeat the words of others.
Our family were to a certain extent for a time inde-
pendent of schools, as both our parents were above the
average in intellect and knowledge of books. My father
was a great reader, especially on all subjects connected
with natural history, a great lover of the stage, and an
enthusiastic entomologist, having a splendid collection of
English specimens in two cabinets he brought to Australia.
My mother was also a great reader, well informed in history,
biography, and all the writers of the day. Shakespeare
was a household word, and most of his plays I have heard
read by both, each taking part. All the chief poets’ works
were well known to them. We had Byron, Scott, Words-
worth, Campbell, Rogers, Shelley, Pope, and Moore as our
guests of an evening: Bulwer, Thackeray, and Dickens,
the latter personally known to my father; in fact, all the
best writers of the day were our teachers. I have always
been a quick and insatiable reader as long as I can re-
member, and having a good library to gratify my desires,
I only required some one to direct me and talk over
the books I read to finish an education begun early in
England. My mother soon found a French lady to teach
us French, music, and singing, so for the first year we
only attended her classes.
Sydney and its suburbs to-day are, I need scarcely say,


very different from what they were when my mother thought
“ Redfern out in the country and a dreadful place.” When
we were at Liverpool she drove out to Redfern one day,
and it was unfortunately after a bush fire, so that for some
miles nothing but dark charred trees were to be seen. It
was her first and last visit beyond Parramatta, which could
be reached by water; she never would go into the country
again. Since those days I have often sat by her grave, on
the highest part of the Church of England Cemetery in
Elizabeth Street, and thought, as I looked on the panorama
spread before me on every side, “ What would she think of
the city of the Golden South now % ” What has been done
in only forty years since we left her there is marvellous;
then there was only just a fringe of civilisation and progress
on its coasts. No railways, few churches; the interior of
the country almost uninhabited, reached only through mere
tracks or roads, nearly impassable, only traversed by that
band of pioneers, the squatters, —a terribly maligned people
—who had explored and made the country. Only those
who have lived amongst them on far-away stations can ever
realise what the squatters had to endure before “the
desert blossomed like the rose,” —losses by fire, drought,
floods, and the raids of the Blacks and bushrangers; roads
impassable, drays with supplies kept weeks on the roads,
while anxiously looked for. Famine sometimes stared
them in the face, for delicate women and children could
not exist upon meat alone. Just before our arrival things
were in a terrible state; my father could have bought


thousands of sheep at sixpence a head, and this price
included homestead, improvements, horses, and lease of
land. I have sometimes heard later colonists say: “The
squatters want it all their own way.” If they do, surely
they have a right to a large share of the cake they certainly
made under most trying conditions.
I have often ridden through townships, the nucleus of
which was the homestead of some early settler; or in later
days whirled in the train in a few hours to what once
took weeks to reach, for sometimes drays would be delayed
for months through the rivers being up. Then even
though money was made, consider the isolated life of the
squatter. Once a year a visit to Sydney to sell their
wool and purchase supplies. It was my good fortune to
meet many of these squatters, and certainly, I must say,
better informed, more intellectual, and often accomplished
men, I have never met. Certainly some were quiet in
manner, owing, no doubt, to the nature of the lives they
were leading away from mixed society. Many were from
the old country, and sons of military and naval men. I
need scarcely say, though they were unused to the society
of ladies, their behaviour was always gentlemanly. I have
heard at times in town “they were a little wild”; but
who can wonder, after months of solitude, without
any softening and refining influence, that the old Adam
should become master ! Well, well, the noble, hospitable,
single-minded, real squatters will soon die out, but their
children, in their native country, or settled in other lands,


should never be ashamed to own their fathers or country.
I fancy I hear some say, “But how about the first colonists ;
who were they 1 ” To this I will answer in the words of
Him who was the truest and holiest teacher, “He that is
without sin, let him cast the first stone.” How many men
and women were there in the days I write of amongst all
classes, and in every station, who were as guilty and sin-
stained as those referred to, but were not found out 1 In
my long sojourn in Australia I have met with some of
them, and many of their descendants, but, with very few
exceptions, have found them kind, generous, and clever,
like other folk—in fact, better than many who have
emigrated. Above all, fond and proud of their native land—
the land that gave freedom to their ancestors, and in most
instances an independence which they could scarcely have
attained to in the old country. No wonder an Australian
is proud of his country, which appears to me the most
wonderful example of the determined energy of the Anglo-
Saxon race. When I used to wander through the Exhibi-
tion of 1880, this was always present in my mind, “Less
than one hundred years ago this country was untrodden by
the white man. Where this beautiful building now stands,
there were only the Gunyahs or homes of the poor savages.
That glorious stretch of ocean unknown, and now hut
words of mine can ill express the change. But, my fair
Australian maidens and stalwart sons, remember, though
your fathers helped to make this change through determin-
ation and energy, and the lessons learned in the older and


more experienced land of their birth, the danger of thinking,
“We can do without England,” I cannot advise you too
strongly to guard against, as it is both unwise and un-
grateful. Your country is a very beautiful one, but not
faultless; it has one feature to prevent it from becoming
quickly populated—want of rivers that are permanently
navigable. In this it is so different from America, where
water carriage is generally practicable and cheap. But
the children, like the country, are young, and youth is
always a little unreasonable. With this warning I will
finish this chapter, only adding, be strong to write, each
one a page of your life’s history, to improve the present,
and adorn the future annals of your country.
c


CHAPTER III
My eldest brother, visiting Sydney from the station,
thought we had better go to school for a year. Fortu-
nately one was found where there were only eight
boarders. The lady principal was the daughter of an
English clergyman, and her brother, also a clergyman,
had charge of the parish in which she resided, about
forty miles from Sydney. She was a highly educated
woman and a true Christian. We were treated as her own
daughters, guarded from everything that could possibly
sully the pages of our dawning womanhood. I have often
thought what a wise thing it was that my brother suggested
our going there. No poetry or novel reading now; more
solid food for the mind helped to leaven what might have
proved dangerous. My chief amusements were music and
singing, and even in “ The Golden South ” I remember
getting up in frosty weather to practise by candlelight
with mittened hands and chilblained fingers. These
schooldays were very happy. The large brick house with
verandahs and balconies all round: the garden only
divided from the river-bank by a thick hedge of aloes, and


on the other side the high wall of the recreation ground of
the Liverpool Asylum: this wall was the only one I ever
saw fruit trees growing against as in England. Liverpool
was certainly just the place then for a school, as we might
walk from one end of the township to the other without
seeing a single individual; but unfortunately for Madame’s
peace of mind there were two residents who had large
families of boys; however, as they were always absent from
home during the week, and we never went out on Sundays
except to church, she felt relieved. Our dear Madame
never thought that her girls occasionally found boyish
epistles written on aloe leaves. On Saturdays we were never
allowed out of the grounds, so on these mornings attended
to our wardrobes, and in the afternoon had a delightful
time in an old weatherboard cottage in the garden roast-
ing cashew nuts, of which delicacy Madame had a large
quantity brought from the West Indies by a friend. We
used to make presents of these, when properly prepared, to
our friends.
One Sunday evening a great event for us happened.
As usual we went to church, but being a cold dark night,
no one was religiously inclined,' so the Rev. Mr. Duffus,
I suppose, thought “ his sister and her schoolgirls were
not sufficient congregation,” and adjourned to his house
opposite. We with Madame followed, and I for one
thought it a very good idea, as we with his children spent
the evening before a splendid log-fire in their nursery.
This and going there on Her Majesty’s birthday were the


only occasions I remember anything like amusement away
from the school. Being an exceedingly loyal people, the
birthday was kept up by a huge bonfire in the paddock
after a girls’ picnic in the Bush, on which occasion I saw a
snake for the first time in Australia. Bessie D and
I having gone at my suggestion to wander about in
couples to see “ who could find the most curious thing,”
came upon an enormous carpet snake, decidedly the most
curious find. We ran away screaming; but Madame soon
came to the rescue and killed the dreadful creature. Only
two of that band of girls are now left; one in her native
land, and the other writing this near a small village in
Hampshire, with a bitter north-easterly wind blowing.
That year at L was truly a resting-place for me
before the real battle of life began, and it was well spent,
for it drew together the threads, a little tangled, of a
rather exceptional education. The dear Madame, who
joined warp and woof so gently yet firmly, I can never
cease to love. She has gone where her work will follow
her; loved by many here, and in “ the world beyond the
stars” may have met some of her children again who
have lived to call her blessed. This is a digression; but
having finished my education and lived the greater portion
of my life in the colony so many people despise and
throw stones at, I feel bound to let my readers know that
such things were more than forty years ago. Yet I cannot
help adding that Sydney in the forties was in many
respects not a comfortable place to live in, especially to


those who had only been accustomed to all the luxuries of
London life. Tradesmen were not over civil, domestics
were scarce, and what there were, very incompetent. The
older colonists were in this respect far better off. I knew
a family who had a splendid estate about sixty miles from
Sydney. The owner was a retired major who had at least
forty servants, many living in huts near the house, among
them a carpenter, blacksmith, and shoemaker, and also a
large store on the property. One of the men, an Italian,
taught his sons and daughters music, the flute, violin, cornet,
and piano; he also formed a band of musicians from the men
on the “ Height.” There was also a theatre and billiard-
room ; in fact, this place fifty years ago was like a large
manor-house with every arrangement for comfort and
amusement. The owner once had the whole of one side
of George Street south offered to him for a few hundred
pounds, which he refused, as he wanted to add to the
“Height.”
His eldest son and two daughters were amongst the
dearest friends of my youth, the two eldest most accom-
plished musicians on piano and flute; I have often spent
hours listening to them playing together. As was the case
with many others of the early colonists, not a rood of land
ever came into the possession of their descendants. In this
case part of the estate was sold for a trifle to a friend of
mine, who was having it put into partial repair when, by a
strange fatality, it was burned down on the same night that
the major’s eldest son died many miles distant. Some years


after the youngest son bought back a piece of the old
estate, intending to build a cottage residence on it: the
plans were completed and all arrangements made when he
died from a neglected cold. They are all gone now. The
sons never married, so the name has died out, except that
the estate and one street in Sydney still bear it.
When my school life ended, I returned to my home,
which was now a pretty cottage, surrounded by a garden
full of lovely flowers and shrubs, enclosed by a high white
paling fence. The house had a verandah in front covered
with white jasmine, roses, and honeysuckle. The entrance
led at once into the drawing-room, from thence into
another we called the music-room, and farther on into a
back hall, from which you entered the dining and bed
rooms. At the back a flight of stone steps led to kitchen,
servants’ room, and laundry; at the other side a well-room
and larder; at the end of the front verandah was a room
we used as a study, and at the side a door leading to
another flight of steps to a stone passage between our
house and the next. It was the prettiest and coolest
house I ever lived in in Sydney. While there my mother
seemed to rally from a severe illness she had had and
became her bright self again, with all her children around
her once more ; and having two very good servants, affairs
were a little more cheery. My father nearly losing his
life brought back again all her dislike to the colony. He
had gone over to the north shore by the ferry collecting


for his Australian cabinet of insects, when about four miles
inland, going through the scrub, he felt something sting
his leg; on looking down he saw one of the most deadly
snakes gliding away. His first thought was, “If I have not
a knife lam a dead man.” He had one fortunately, so
sitting down on a fallen tree he cut the piece of flesh out
round the bitten part, then tore his handkerchief in half,
and tied the pieces tightly above and below the wound.
It was an intensely hot January day, so that his four-
mile walk through the scrub and sand was dreadful.
When he reached the ferry the boat was on the other side ;
but a boatman near saw that something was the matter,
and running towards him, asked, “ What is wrong, sir 1 ”
My father was just able to answer, “ Met with an accident;
take me to the nearest doctor in Lower George Street,”
when he fainted from loss of blood and over-exertion.
The doctor knew my father, and when he had given him
some brandy and restored him to his senses, asked him
to relate what had happened. When we returned home
from church the house was in commotion. My father was
being walked up and down between two men, who were not
to allow him to sleep on any account He often said after-
wards he remembered little about it, as he believed the
brandy the doctor had given him made him intoxicated,
he being a very temperate man, and never taking spirits
at any time. The snake, as he thought, was one of the
most deadly kind, and the doctor said the long walk
after the bite had caused some small portion of the virus


to mix with the blood. It was one of the few cases of
recovery from that reptile’s poison ever heard of, and for
some weeks the wound was most painful. This made me
always most nervous in regard to snakes, and often spoiled
my enjoyment of country walks. On two occasions I was
only just saved from treading on them by the merest
chance. Once sitting on the verandah of a friend’s house
at Double Bay on a Sunday morning, I heard the words,
“ Don’t move ; there is a snake round the leg of the chair
you are on.” I obeyed, but the creature, disturbed by the
voice, moved off the verandah and disappeared. That
same day we were sitting at dinner when the report of
the gun was heard, which at that time used to be fired by
the mail steamers on arrival in Sydney Harbour; and my
friend went out to see the steamer pass, when there was
monsieur snake on the door-mat basking in the sun.
This time nothing was done to disturb him till means
were procured for his destruction, and he was killed. On
the other occasion I was walking across Balmain with a
friend. When passing through a rocky part we came to
some water, James said, “Let me go first.” Just as he did so,
I saw a large “whip snake” lying on the path. In an instant
his foot was on it. Being a heavy man he crushed the head:
if it had been my lighter weight it would only have disturbed
the creature. I nearly fainted ; but my friend began to
scold and then laugh at my fears.


CHAPTER IV
We had some congenial visitors at this time in two officers
and the artist belonging to H.M.S. Fly and Bramble,
which were visiting Sydney occasionally, being on an explor-
ing and surveying cruise among the islands in the Pacific.
The explorer Leichhardt also spent some evenings at our
house, my father taking so great an interest in the same
pursuits. It was very pleasant listening to their conversa-
tion on such subjects. We also had men in the colony
then worth listening to. Eesponsible government had not
yet been granted, and for the real welfare of the country
it would have been better if it had been withheld another
twenty years at least. Such men as Wentworth, Darvall,
Cowper, Windeyer, Lowe, and others, were fit to hold the
reins, and knew how to legislate, and would not sell its best
interests as long as they remained in power, as our later
legislators have done.
We had two daily papers—the Sydney Morning Herald
and the Empire. The latter became the political stepping-
stone of the man whom some consider the chief cause of the
large liabilities of New South Wales. In fact, nearly the


whole of the Australian colonies have suffered through
their legislators being needy men without any knowledge
of financial matters, —men who were unable to finance
their own small affaire, and have only existed on polities
while in place, and borrowing while out.
What would the children of the present day think of
there being only one toy-shop in Sydney—Reeves’s in
Elizabeth Street, —where the lowest priced doll was five
shillings, a common box of toys half a crown ? There was an-
other shop in Hunter Street where better class things could
be purchased, principally in wood and ivory. I have often
been in both, and since have seen the owner of the latter
the companion of princes. Fortune plays extraordinary
pranks sometimes, and certainly in a new country shows
her usual fickleness more frequently than in older ones.
Impudence, assurance, egotism, and a supreme belief in
one’s own ability goes a long way with some people, and
the everlasting I is believed in, and pushes its way to the
front.
Nothing could be more beautiful than the views from
our friend’s verandah at Darling Point, the clear intensely
blue sky and the small islands covered with foliage dotted
about the harbour. We used to sit there for hours after
dinner watching the beautiful effects of light and shade on
the sea. The mosquitoes were not so troublesome as in
Sydney. Such a splendid garden and orchard full of
novelty to us Londoners, —apricot, peach, nectarine, and
bananas in blossom or fruit; Norfolk Island pines,


eucalyptus, cedars, camphor laurels, and numbers of others
I forget the names of. Beneath the gardens, on the rocks,
we could gather oysters ad libitum, taking a hammer to
dislodge them, and some bread and butter with porter
for the elders. In this way we had many a delicious im-
promptu lunch, and then started for a long walk to Double
and Kose Bays. There were no people’s grounds to tres-
pass on until we reached Point Piper, but green swards
and trees, almost to the water’s edge. Now there are
gardens, terraced and flat, bathing-houses, and jetties, where
lie yachts and pleasure boats. Picnics were the chief out-
door amusement (croquet and lawn-tennis were not known
then): I really think I have been to all the available spots
for these sometimes rather trying amusements, as with the
thermometer at 90 to 100 degrees in the shade you had
mosquitoes and flies innumerable, and what with ants of
various sizes, and the horror of snakes, I often felt that
“ I would rather remain at home and keep the skin on my
nose.” Nevertheless when there, I danced and sang with
the rest. My brother started on a fishing excursion with
a friend one Saturday afternoon, intending to return by
moonlight. A southerly wind set in suddenly. They
managed to get under the lee of an island, and then made
for Middle Harbour; but their boat when near shelter
capsized, and they with it were dashed against the rocks.
Both escaped without injury, excepting the boat. They soon
found an overhanging rock to shelter them, lighted a fire,
and determined to remain the night, taking off their clothes


by degrees to dry them, and then sat down to tea, damper,
a smoke, and yarn. Presently a bright light roused them.
On looking round they saw their clothes were on fire, —
fortunately coats and hats only. The next morning they
started early to walk to the nearest ferry so as to arrive in
Sydney during church time. Such a disreputable pair made
their appearance, footsore and weary! I said, “You will
not go fishing again in a hurry, H ; " but he did, the
next Saturday afternoon. Amusements were not plentiful
in Sydney,—only one theatre, and that too poor in every
respect for a family who had so recently seen the best in
London. Concerts were occasionally held in the large room
of the Eoyal Hotel, and lectures at the School of Arts.
There were also some good private players and singers.
The flower shows were a great treat, held in a large
marquee in the Domain. The display of flowers, fruit, and
vegetables was most interesting to us, consisting as it did of
so much we had been accustomed to consider rare or un-
common, —peaches, nectarines, loquats, and passion fruit.
Then the flowers, — camellias, Daphnes, Bouganvilliers,
Hoyas, Tecomas, and others I had never seen before. How
we revelled in them. My mother even acknowledged, “We
could not obtain such in London.” At this time she would
hardly allow that, as owing to the present system of railways,
flowers like these are brought from Italy and the south of
France in great quantities.
The Queen’s birthday was a great day for Sydney, a
close holiday. Levie in the morning, a grand review in


the afternoon, and the evening for the ball at Government
House, with a grand display of bonfires and fireworks for
the people. Can you imagine George Street closely packed
with people, with squibs, rockets, and crackers being let off
from one side of the street to the other, Catharine-wheels
fastened to pieces of wood and held aloft ? I saw this from
a window between Market Street and the Royal Hotel in
184—. Saturday too for some years in the same locality
presented a great contrast to its present quiet. The only
market was very small, so carts, barrows, and baskets lined
the street, filled with everything the poorer class could want,
—second-hand clothes, boots, books, dairy produce, fruit,
vegetables, poultry—in fact a regular Olla podrida, as is at
present displayed in the stalls at “ Paddy’s Market,” which
was then only a hay market. A few months ago, to my
great astonishment, in going from one part of the west end
to another in London I was reminded of this ■ but the
English street market was in the daytime. We have
nothing of the kind in Sydney, neither is the pavement of
our principal streets taken up by itinerant dealers displaying
mechanical toys, or taking in the unwary by selling them
wonderful bargains. Government House hospitalities were
far more exclusive than now, only a certain class had the
entrie; but on the Queen’s birthday the members of both
Houses of Parliament, professional men, civil servants, and
merchants were invited. Shopkeepers were excluded.
What a change now! Ministers of the Government are
hotel-keepers, and members of Parliament keep shops or


stores; but this is gaining ground all over the world.
Money makes the man, and if impecunious peers and
peeresses in England take to trade, surely our colonists of
every degree may try to legislate if they have education,
talent, and means. It is the needy, self-seeking politician
who will say and do anything to keep his place and pay,
I object to. I hope for the wellbeing of the country I
love that in the future there will be Australians who will
legislate for the good of their country and not for their
own selfish interests. Now, alas, though there are some
few, disgusted with the present state of things, they cannot
stem the power of the majority created by manhood suffrage,
giving every loafer an equal voting power with the intel-
ligent and honourable man.
I have been present at several birthday balls in the far-
away days, and could relate many amusing episodes, but
will not, to raise a laugh at the ignorance or gaucherie of
kindly people. Lady G ’s guests were from all classes :
some from the lonely “ Bush ” living in country style, and
only visiting Sydney once a year, who, if they were a little
awkward, or talked about dairies, poultry, and their
children, thought finger-glasses were “ tumblers ” and
bonbons “ fireworks,” were warm-hearted, hospitable, and
generous. “ Being from the old country ” was a pass-
port to admit the stranger to their hearths and homes.
And I have no doubt at this time in England there are
many living in country places the iron-horse has not
yet reached just as unsophisticated, for even now in


this village, only one hour’s train ride from London, there
is a woman who never heard of false teeth, but thought
“ dentists could make teeth grow.”
Boating and cricket were the principal recreations of the
young men. My father had belonged to one of the best
cricket clubs in London, and I had seen matches played at
Lord’s ; but he did not join in anything in Sydney, devoting
the whole of his spare time to entomology and botany.
My brother H belonged to both cricket and boat clubs.
They used to play on the racecourse in Elizabeth Street
every evening. The new racecourse at Homebush was a
centre of attraction to many; but we were not a racing
family, so we never went. My parents were not fitted for
colonial life, having been always accustomed to London
comforts and amusements. My mother had no idea of
housekeeping even there, keeping the same experienced and
faithful servants for years. Even if fortune had proved
kinder, she would never have liked the colony, and her five
years there, spent wearily and sadly, I am certain helped
to kill her. One of the few amusements then was the
Military Band which played once a week in the Barrack
Square, and afterwards in the Domain, attracting all the
elite and idlers of Sydney. Dress was displayed and
criticism indulged in. The drive in the Domain was the
antipodean “ Kotten Eow.” The baths in the Domain were
owned and managed by one of our fellow-passengers who
had been home to see his friends in England. All through
the summer at some time in the day we went to have a


delightful bathe ; most of the Australian women could
swim.
The 26th of January, being the anniversary of the
colony, was considered young Australia’s. The Regatta was
the event of the year. Races on land were all very well;
but the colonial “ Vikings ” revelled in their beautiful har-
bour, almost living in it. And, alas, sometimes dying in it!
One incident at this time made a deep impression on
me. Two young men, sons of one of our first Australian
friends, with two others, were in treaty for a boat, and being
in Government offices, could only arrange to go out on
Sunday morning with the owner to try it, my friend
calling to his sister as he left, “ I will be back in time to
take you and mother to church.” The others had been to
early service, and were to meet at Wooloomooloo Bay.
When they left, it was a most lovely summer’s morning, with
very little wind. At the time I was staying at Darling
Point, and having dressed for church, was waiting in the
verandah for my friends, when one said, “ Look, Miss L ,
there is the ‘ White Squall ’ you sing about.” In an instant
the wind rose and the harbour was covered with waves; we
watched some boats hastening for shelter to one or other
of the numerous islands, and in less than an hour all was
calm again. The next morning the news came that my
friends had not returned. Hour by hour their anxious
mother hoped on, but no tidings came, and never did, nor
will until “ the sea gives up her dead.” A very sad circum-
stance intensified my friend’s grief. Her eldest son had


been in the constant habit of boating on Sunday mornings
until about two years before, when his youngest sister, a
schoolfellow of mine, died after a long illness of consump-
tion. She was a true Christian, and when dying fretted
at her brother’s Sunday boating', and as a last effort made
him promise never to go out boating on Sunday again,
which promise he had kept until the morning he was lost.
Sunday was the only day he could go out, and no doubt he
was not so well able to manage a boat as heretofore.
It was supposed they had gone outside the “ Heads ” and
were suddenly caught in the squall, as not a vestige of the
boat or its occupants was ever found. My poor old friend
was left with only one daughter, and she too ’died young.
As I had been dancing only a few nights before the
accident with the two others of the boating party, it was
years before I could look on the water without fear, and
never went in a sailing-boat again. One walk I shall never
forget. We had waited for a friend who was finishing her
drawing lesson in Liverpool Street, near the corner of
Elizabeth Street; on turning down College Street I sug-
gested going along the South Head Road, now Oxford
Street, and taking a short cut through where they were
quarrying stone for the new court-house, as I had passed
this way a few days previous on my way, to Darling Point.
As all were agreeable, we soon entered the quarries ; but
what to see! A gang of men chained together, with armed
warders on either side guarding them. I stood aghast!
To my companions such sights were but too familiar ; to me,
D


for many a day, it cast a shadow over all that once had
appeared beautiful. The face of one of the prisoners
remained in my memory for years —a weak, though hand-
some face. We shrank back as he raised his dark eyes,
and for a second when they met ours, the blush of shame
could be seen through his tanned skin. Who and what
was he ? I have often thought since that he did not be-
long to the class of roughs that were his companions in the
gang. I was young and sensitive, and shall never forget
this, my first glimpse of the punishment of crime. That
was the only time I saw a gang of prisoners outside the
prison walls. Since then I became acquainted with the
kindly family of the Governor of Darlinghurst Gaol, and
have spent many hours in his house, listening to his
daughters playing, or conversing with his amiable wife; but
I could not feel really happy, not being able to banish
from my mind the proximity to so much misery and crime.


CHAPTER V
Circumstances at this period made me decide upon
leaving home. I went to Newtown and spent nearly three
happy years with a family there. My pupils were a boy
and girl, the elder son riding to his school at Wooloomooloo
every day. I was treated more as a daughter than governess.
Mr. and Mrs. Johnson were English gentlefolks, and Mr.
Johnson was one of the leading solicitors in Sydney. I
had access to an excellent library, and also mixed in the
best society as well as with the best musical talent of
the colony. Our drives were picturesque and delightful.
Sometimes we strolled across the paddocks to Eedfern
without meeting more than half a dozen people.
Newtown was very sparsely populated at this time, there
being only a few houses on the main road. Away from
the road there were several large houses surrounded by
beautiful and well-kept grounds, such as “Enmore,” “The
Pines,” “ Linthorpe,” “ The Grange,” and towards Cook’s
Eiver “Bella Eetiro,” “ Tempe,” and others. I knew these
places well, and visited them with my friends. The
nearest church, St. Stephen’s, was at Camperdown, where


the third cemetery near Sydney was formed. The first, I
think, was in George Street, in which stood St. Andrew’s
Church, now the cathedral; the second, the one I have
alluded to before, in Elizabeth Street. I am not quite
certain about Cook’s Eiver Church, but think it was built
about this time, and had its churchyard round it.
All these places which I remember so well have been
formed into streets and filled with houses. I used to
walk across the sandhills to Pitt Street, Eedfern, passing
Henderson’s Nursery and Calder House, with its gardens
and paddocks ; round it to Woolcott’s Cottages, and so on,
to my father’s house without meeting a single person.
Then on the other side, now called Kingston, Petersham,
Stanmore, Norwood, Marrickville, only some half-dozen
houses, and these surrounded by gardens and paddocks.
Now the railway passes through the gardens of most, if not
of all of these places, and some of the houses have gone
also ; but my home is still left, though built in at the back,
and the garden ending at the railway fence. I became
thoroughly acquainted with this portion of Sydney, quite
unknown to me till I went to live at “ The Grange.” My
relatives lived in another direction, and had never been to
this part before. My friends, being young, possessing
means, and wishing to make me happy and contented, we
had many delightful excursions, picnics, and pleasant days
at Botany, Kissing Point, and Cook’s Eiver. Botany was
most interesting to me, as being the first spot trodden by
my countrymen. La Perouse’s monument is quite a relic of


the olden time. Botany Bay was a bleak unpicturesque
place compared with Sydney Harbour, and the drive to it,
through the Waterloo Estate, sandy and barren. I had
some knowledge of this district before, having been intro-
duced to a family that had a wool-washing establishment at
Botany. A few years after I visited the Water-works,
just finished, for supplying Sydney with water from the
Botany Swamps, and I have been twice since to the Sir
Joseph Banks Hotel; but there had been little improvement
on the road. Waterloo has now become the Whitechapel
of Sydney, the abode of questionable white humanity and
Chinese.
We had nowa larger influx of emigrants, and consequently
domestic matters were carried on more smoothly. We
knew many bright and agreeable fresh arrivals from home,
bringing with them new books, music, fashions, dances,
and ideas. How well I remember Mr. Hamlyn, his two
pretty daughters in the first Irish jaunting car I had ever
seen drive up: their teaching me the polka after dinner
one evening, and then singing some of Moore’s melodies.
Then the Mayor’s Fancy Ball held in the Victoria Theatre,
a very grand affair, dances at Enmore, our own house, and
many others near.
Sydney was always a musical place. The members of
the Choral Society and others were indefatigable, and by
this time we had some good teachers wending their way
to our distant shores. There was only one good music
shop when we first arrived; but by this time others were


established. The family I lived with were of great
assistance in this respect. One member was the organist
at St. James’s Church, another at Christ Church; so my
musical education was not neglected.
I have often thought since my duties were very light,
and how kind everybody was to me. A governess’s life
at the Antipodes in 184- was an ideal one; but all were
not so fortunate as myself. I have since heard of some
who were in very different homes, and were treated as
upper servants, slighted and neglected; but fortunately I
never experienced such treatment then or at any future
period. Leaving home was entirely my own act, as my
mother felt that I was too young for such responsibility;
afterwards she acknowledged the wisdom of the step, as it
took me away from cares that might have crushed my
spirit. And I was near enough to see her often and to be
with her at the last when, weary and worn, she went to
rest, her last hours soothed by my dear friend and pastor,
the Eev. W. H. Walsh. My sister went to the country
with my brother, the two younger children to school, and
so for a time the home was broken up.
After the loss of my mother I returned home and lived
in a pretty cottage on the Glebe Eoad, owned by the grand-
father of a man whose marriage I saw announced in a
society paper a few days since to a daughter of one of
our old Scotch families. Australia is not by any means
a bad place for daughters of good families to visit, as they
often find desirable partis with plenty of means, houses,


and lands. Some of the sterner sex have found Australia
by no means an undesirable country to seek a wife, as
gentlemen from the naval and military services can attest.
They have shown their good sense and taste in doing so ;
for without being partial, our Australian girls are fair,
fascinating, accomplished, and more useful than their
English sisters. I have seen two generations of girls, so
may give an opinion.
The cottage at The Glebe was surrounded by a perfect
bower of flowers, and opposite the then church glebe land,
now covered with numerous streets and houses. The house
we lived in has now a shop front added to it in the dear
old garden, and all the old associations are vulgarised.
We had a fuchsia growing at the side of an outbuilding
nearly twenty feet high. Where the shop counters are now,
arches of roses stood. Well, I suppose it is one of the signs
of progress. Change brings change, and perhaps if the
property had been mine, £ s. d. would have proved a
panacea, as it has done to many who have seen the homes
of their fathers pass into the hands of strangers. So many
changes have taken place in Sydney and its suburbs that
at times it is difficult to realise them. Very few of the
old landmarks are left. One still remains that is dear
to me—the resting-place of my mother in God’s Acre at the
top of Elizabeth Street; but every year I expect to learn
that it too has disappeared. Had “The Golden South”
been more generous to me with her wealth, it would have
been devoted to the building of a church there, as it is


a splended site. One of our wealthy merchants, whose
family rested there, suggested removing “ Christ Church to
the spot,” and as it was the parish church for some years
it would have been most appropriate, and to myself and all
whose dead are lying there would have been a source of
consolation. Christ Church for so many years had been
my sanctuary in times of trial and disappointment. I taught
in her Sunday Schools the lessons learnt from the two
most earnest Christians in every sense I ever knew. The
elder was the beloved teacher and guide of the younger,
of whom his father once said, “My eldest son is, like
Nathaniel, without guileand in truth he was. His
church was built in part of the parent parish nearly forty
years ago, where he lived, laboured, and died, deeply
regretted and beloved by all.
My class in the school, its members’ dwellings scattered
over many miles, and our pastor wishing us to visit our
scholars in their homes, necessitated my taking many walks
from the Glebe to Baptist Gardens in one direction, in an-
other to Darling Harbour. In those days Sunday School
teaching was not easy work; sometimes I had as many
as thirty scholars in my class. We also did our best to assist
in visiting the sick and sorrowing. The Benevolent Asylum
being in our parish, we undertook the visiting there. I
could relate many a tale of loneliness, sorrow, and sin heard
in those days, of waifs and strays drifted to these shores,
in which “Truth is indeed stranger than fiction.”
We were at this period looking forward to the com


mencement of railways in New South Wales, anaylCwas
present at the turning of the first sod by the Hon.
Keith Stewart, daughter of Sir Charles Fitzroy, the 1
Governor; she having taken up the duties of her lamented
mother, Lady Mary Fitzroy, who was accidentally killed in
the Parramatta Domain. Her death was a great loss to the
colony, as she was a kind and noble woman, interested in
every good work for the benefit of the colony. What a
day it was for the commencement of our railways, the rain
pouring down in torrents ! Such a sea of umbrellas every-
where, excepting under the marquee, where the invited
guests adjourned for luncheon and speeches, naturally
called forth on such an eventful ceremony, and where for
the time the weather was forgotten ! It was a great day
in the annals of the colony when every one looked forward
with hope to the future opening up of the country;
but no one could have fully anticipated the rapid
strides the colony was about to make, or the position
these colonies were to arrive at in the world’s history.
Now people too often forget when writing or speaking of
“ The Golden South,” the great distance from Europe, or
that a hundred years ago it was only inhabited by almost
the lowest type of humanity, who had little idea beyond
satisfying the cravings of nature. Poor things ! they are
nearly driven out by the white settlers, who have shown
little thought for their wellbeing. Our boasted civilisation
has culminated in the weaker going to the wall, or rather in
their extermination. The first white settlers did not tend


to make what was then known as Botany Bay a desirable
place for the better class to select for a home when
crowded out of England. So the first half-century of the
Australian colonies was spent in a struggle for a better
reputation, and the last half-century paved the way for
results, such as the Exhibition in Melbourne last year.


CHAPTER VI
It would be a difficult task to picture the excitement at
the time of the gold discovery. Most people seemed to
have gone mad with the gold fever. My brother (who
was living in Bathurst at the time), in the midst of it all,
was one of the first to go to Ophir or Sofala, I forget
which.
The first discovery was made by a man who had been
in California, and on seeing the geological formation of
the Bathurst district, he at once set to work to seek the
precious metal. I have heard my brother say, “ That with
few exceptions there were only old men, women, and
children left in Bathurst when the fever set in. Men
of all ranks, professional or otherwise, flocked to the
‘ Diggings.’ Stores were set up rapidly, and every week
fresh finds and fields were discovered and rushed to.” In
Sydney the fever for gold was nearly as bad. I have often
gone to the Parramatta Road, standing on the high banks
on either side, and watched the different parties wending
their way to the new El Dorado. Some in comfortable
vehicles and well-laden drays, others—more humble diggers


—in carts, and parties of men on foot carrying their
“swags” or leading a pack-horse. All were full of life,
hope, and energy. How few reaped the golden harvest,
and to how many who had broken up their homes, giving up
their comforts and family ties, did this bring misery and
ruin, almost, as Tom Hood wrote, “To the very verge of
the churchyard mould.” The greed for gold leads poor
humanity to almost every extreme. From my own ex-
perience in this instance it certainly did, for in going
about amongst the working classes as I did, the accounts
related to me were of the most painful character. The
tradesmen leaving their business, taking with them the
earnings of years to sink in outfit and expenses; the
mechanics their trades, leaving their poor wives to earn a
living for themselves and children anyway they could.
Little homes sold or mortgaged, all for the mere chance of
making “a pile.” All female labour became cheaper, and
laundresses in Sydney were plentiful; female servants
could be had for very low wages. Occasionally men
would send for their wives and children “to join them on
the ‘ Diggings ’; ” and after the first rush the wife could
make more money by washing than the man could by dig-
ging, and many other ways than actual digging cropped up
to lead to fortune.
The news soon reached England, and steamers came out
crowded with passengers who were going to “ make a for-
tune.” Such people too ! Men who had never been used
to hard work, and had never handled spade or pick, except


perhaps in the soft prepared ground of a little villa garden,
men who had never soiled their white hands with any kind
of work, men delicate in health and used only to refined
society. Here is one instance which came to my notice. A
young man with a pretty wife left a most comfortable home
and large circle of friends to go out to the “ Diggings.” He
took a cottage for his wife close to us. Then he joined a
party, and took with him tents, tools—in fact, everything
requisite for a “gentleman digger;” promising his wife “that
when the summer set in she should j oin him.” I used to listen
sadly to this pretty creature’s anticipations of how soon her
husband would make his fortune and return with her to her
father. In what part of England they would purchase an
estate. Every letter she expected to learn “that her husband
and party had ‘struck gold,’ and were getting it by the pound
at least.” Then a week passed without a letter from her
husband, and she became almost frantic. We took every
means to find out the cause, and at last the news arrived.
“He was ill,” so the pretty brave wife decided at once to
go to her husband. My father saw her safely into the
wretched vehicle called “ the mail coach,” and we watched
her leave, taking charge of her house during her absence.
On her arrival at the “ Diggings ” she found her husband
recovering from a severe attack of inflammation of the
lungs. She remained with him until he was convalescent,
then returned home, having obtained his consent to let
part of their cottage furnished. We were aware that their
funds were getting low, so, though we thought it a great


risk for her to take strangers into her house, we did not like
to dissuade her. I used to go in to see her every day, and
about a week after her return as usual called after dinner,
when she met me beaming with smiles, saying: “Miss L ,
I have let my rooms to such nice people,—a young married
couple just from home. The gentleman called this morn-
ing and arranged everything. Such a very distinguished
and aristocratic-looking man ! He offered such high terms;
and lam to engage a nurse-girl for their baby.” “I am
exceedingly glad,” I said; “but, Dora, have you had
good references 1 ” Her face clouded, “He never offered
any.” “Did you ask for them?” “Yes; but he continued
talking, and made me quite forget all about it; still, Miss
L ,I am sure it is all right.” I looked at her innocent
face and thought, “You are indeed a Dora after Dickens’s
model.” However the mischief, if any, was done, and it
would not avail to say more about it. I was very glad at
the idea that they might become useful and intimate
friends to her, as we were soon to leave for my brother’s
at Wellington, two hundred miles from Sydney, and her
only friends in the colony were made through our intro-
duction. Well, the next day her lodgers came, and
certainly they were both handsome, the man aristocratic-
looking. Everything appeared favourable enough; Dora
was charmed, though a week passed without her having
said more than “ Good-morning ” to Mrs. Fyling, who
she thought was fretting. “But I never saw greater
devotion than his to his wife; she is very fond of the


baby; but whenever he is at home, she sends it away at
once. I think, dear, he must be of a very jealous dis-
position, and does not care to see even his own child
caressed.” “ Perhaps so.” “I am sure, dear, they are good
people,” went on Dora; “ they inquired about the nearest
church, and have a Bible and Prayer-book on their dressing-
table.” “Yes,” I answered vaguely; somehow I did not
feel at ease about these people, my father having remarked,
“ He did not think all was right with them.”
The next morning I was leaving our gate when a
gentleman stopped me and asked “ If I knew which was
Mr. ’s cottage.” I pointed it out to him. “Do you
know whether he is at home 1” “No;he is at Ophir, but
his wife is there.” “Alone?” “No; she has a gentleman
and lady living there.” “ Thank you,” and raising his hat
passed me. He did not go towards the house, but towards
the town. How long that morning appeared, and when I
started on my daily walk back from Eedfern to the Glebe, it
seemed twice its usual distance. I ran into my own home
and said, “I will take lunch with Mrs. ,” which I
did. We had just finished, and were waiting until the
maid had removed the things from the next room, when a
knock and ring at the hall door startled us. I looked
out, and standing there was the man I had seen that
morning and another gentleman with him. The girl
opened the door. On his asking for my friend, she went
towards him. At that moment Mrs. Pyling crossed the
hall. I shall never forget the yell of the other man or the


scream from Mrs. Fyling. He rushed to her and drew
her into her room, asking, “ Where is my child and that
man ? ” Shall I ever forget this scene of agony, reproach,
and violence? The cause of all this had just arrived
from town and entered the cottage by the French window
of their sitting-room. The husband left his wretched wife
and rushed at him; but fortunately his friend prevented
further violence, and begged him “ to consider the terrified
owner of the house,” at the same time reminding him
that his faithless wife was not worth his passion or
regrets. “ You can have your child, and you promised me
you would let those miserable creatures go, as their sin
will soon bring about its own punishment.” “ Hers will,”
said her husband, looking down on her as she was lying
on the floor. “Only two years since you married me,
your father’s trusted friend. Did I ever refuse you any-
thing or pain you by an angry word 1 Did I not leave
you with every luxury while I was toiling for your
comfort ? Oh, God! it is such frail creatures make
men brutes.” “Forgive me,” she cried. “Never!” was
the stern reply. We left the room and went into my
friend’s apartment, as the nurse had not yet returned from
her walk with the child. When he saw his child, he
snatched it from the nurse’s arms and wept over it in
bitter tears.
His friend told Mrs. S “He had only returned
from England a few days before,” to find his wife and child
gone, and a letter from Mr. Fyling awaiting him, stating


“ they had started for Tasmania,” but he did not believe
this, as from his servants he heard that they were still in
Sydney. “I had heard where they were, and fearing that if
he should meet them together unexpectedly something very
serious might be the result, I determined to bring him
here. I need not say, Mrs. S , how sorry lam : this
was inevitable.” “Never mind,” sobbed myfriend; “it can-
not be helped; but how could she be so wicked, and with a
child of her own to love and tend 2 ” After a little while
poor Captain and his friend, with the child in his
arms, left the house. During the afternoon the noise of
packing in the lodgers’ rooms made me aware they were
preparing for departure, and about five o’clock the nurse-
girl brought Mrs. S a note to state “they were leaving,”
enclosing a quarter’s rent for the rooms. A carriage was
driven up soon afterwards, Mr. Fyling carrying his un-
fortunate companion to it, and thus they passed out of
our lives. After this my poor young friend let her house
furnished, and went to live with her husband on the
Ophir diggings.
E


CHAPTER VII
My stay in Sydney was to end for a time, as my brother
had gone to Wellington, a small township in the western
district, and wished us to join him. My sisters and I left
on a fine February morning in the mail coach for Bathurst;
this coach, not unlike a large baker’s cart, holding eight
inside and two on the box seat. The joltings and creakings
must have been most trying to the elderly passengers.
We were young, and merely felt the heat, which was com-
pensated for by the novelty and the idea of seeing the
country. We went as far as Penrith the first day, arriving
late in the evening, and leaving again at four o’clock the
next morning. It was lovely and fresh crossing the
Nepean River in the ferry, thence through Emu Plains and
the valley of the Grose; and looking back from Lapstone
Hill the view was very charming. Then came into view the
scenery of the Blue Mountains, which we had plenty of time
to admire. As the weary horses had to be considered on the
steep inclines, male passengers would get out and walk, and
sometimes the females preferred to do so, becoming much
cramped by sitting in the shaky vehicle. At that time


there were not any fences on the roads, so at times we
appeared on the verge of being precipitated over the rocks
into the valley below, the bottom of which we could not see.
When the horses had been changed at some wayside inn
and were somewhat fresh, we held our breath with the fear
of going over the precipices. We had glimpses of deep
ravines and gullies, a mass of foliage, the sides and hollows
green with ferns of various kinds. At times the clouds
seemed beneath us. Having had some heavy rains, there
were grave doubts as to whether we should be able to cross
the river lying between us and Bathurst. On arriving at
the river, and while fording it, we experienced a decidedly
creepy feeling, expecting every second that the water would
reach us in the coach ; however on this journey such a mis-
adventure, we were thankful, was averted. Soon after
crossing the river the Bathurst Plains were in view, and then
we had the curious sensation of travelling on a sea-like stretch
of land, not a tree to be seen for miles, —nothing save grass,
land, and sky, with an occasional flock of sheep in the dis-
tance. At last we arrived at the yard of the principal hotel
in Bathurst, where we were to remain till my brother should
meet us, and our escort gave us over to the care of the land-
lady. We were not to remain there long, as an old friend of
ours, learning of our visit, came the next day and took us
over to his pretty cottage on the outskirt of the town. We
were glad to rest, as only half our journey was accomplished.
In a week we were again on our way to our new home,
passing through Orange and Molong, busy little places,


owing to the gold-fields surrounding them. We were
constantly meeting parties of diggers on the road, some-
times a few, returning cityward, looking already depressed;
they had evidently found gold was hard to get. Our
first landmark of nearing home was Wellington Valley,
and it was certainly a cheery one, with its mountainous
background, its few farms, and peaceful aspect. The town-
ship of Montefiores is on the farther side of the Eiver
Macquarie, and the driver stated “ that he had heard the
river was ‘ a banker.’ ” “If so,” my brother remarked, “we
shall have to wait until it lowers; ” but we managed to
get over safely with only a little water in the bottom of
the coach, and soon drove up to my first Bush home, a
comfortable brick cottage, with a nice garden at the back,
and my brother’s place of business at the side. We were
all very tired, so after a refreshing bath and some tea we
retired to beds made on the floor, as our furniture was on
the road. It being a bachelor’s home, there was very little
furniture on our arrival, and it was nearly a month before
our belongings reached us by the lumbering drays. Harry
had an excellent cook there, and a young woman in the
township came to help. Shortly after a great misfortune
befell us. My brother’s cook—an old man —died, and then
indeed my troubles began. No servants could be got except
Chinamen, and these at fearful wages; for being so near the
gold-fields, men would not undertake domestic work, and
if women were hired in Sydney they might come, remain
a month or two, and then leave for the nearest diggings.


As there were three of us, I determined to try and do
without them except for laundry and rough work. But
what trials and mistakes attended us in starting ! Bread-
making was a terrible experience, and certainly after the
utter failures and waste of flour for days, who could blame
my brother for saying, “When I marry, it shall be a
country girl,”—which of course he did not, as his chosen
wife had never been beyond Parramatta. We had at last
to fall back on “ damper ” until I learned the art of bread-
making. The yeast gave the most trouble; it was either
flat, or else so lively as to cause a cannonade by the bottles
bursting. However at last we succeeded, and were famous
bread-makers; though we always had to knead each loaf
separately, as neither of us were of the muscular type of
female. All our water had to be drawn from a deep well
by a windlass. This work I could never accomplish ; but
my youngest sister (a girl of fourteen) became very expert,
though I was constantly expecting to hear that she had
gone in search of Truth. Fortunately we had an excellent
American cooking stove, as well as an immense open fire-
place, in which three of us could stand, and a baker’s
oven large enough to hake for a dozen families. We soon
became very good managers, and were able to attend
church every Sunday morning and have an excellent hot
dinner as well. It was a very happy home, three girls
and the head of the house not thirty years of age. All
our friends were young: the manager of the largest station
near, with a young wife ; the clerk of petty sessions, his


young wife and her sister —in fact, except the doctor, an old
bachelor, and clergyman and his wife, all were under thirty.
I undertook the education of my youngest sister, and
many an afternoon we would walk a mile or two, choose a
shady spot, and hear her lessons, or prepare others for the
following day, while we worked. Life for a time was like
one long summer day. Pianos were scarce in the district,
only one in Montefiores, until we had one from Bathurst.
I managed, without the aid of a master, to play the flutina
for accompaniments and dance music. The manager of the
station could play the guitar, and one of his superintendents
the flute. What pleasant days and evenings we spent there,
dining at seven, dressing for dinner of course, and waited
on by the Chinese butler and his assistants in costume!
All the indoor servants at the station were Chinese, the
outdoor aboriginals. I shall never forget a terrible night
we spent there. It was at the election time; Mr. Dunlop
and all the gentlemen were at the election dinner in
Montefiores, Mrs. Dunlop, ourselves, and two other ladies
were in the house alone. It was a long low house with
small rooms opening one into the other; most of the windows
were French windows, opening on to verandahs. We
were chatting in the drawing-room when we heard fear-
ful shrieks proceeding from the barn and wool-shed about
three hundred feet from the back of the house. “ What’s
that 1 ” I inquired. Mrs. Dunlop listened for a while, and
answered, “Some of the blacks beating their ‘gins’—wives,
I mean.” But soon we heard men’s voices in the verandah,


and my young friend jumped up and ran to see if the
shutters were fastened, and then said, “We will go into my
room, where the windows are higher from the ground and
the shutters are closer than these.” Putting out all the
lights here, the five of us went quietly into her room, and
sat there listening. The noise increased, coming nearer
and nearer, when Mrs. Dunlop said, “ I am afraid the
Chinese and the blacks are fighting; if so, they will kill one
another. I know Yang-See and Ah-Sing were in the town-
ship all day; I am afraid they have brought drink home.”
Imagine our horror at hearing this; we might all be killed
before the gentlemen returned. At that moment a violent
knocking at the door of the room made us all think
“What next?” when a woman’s voice said, “Let me in,
Missy; they will kill me. Missy Dunlop, let me in.” “I will
call your master,” was the answer; “ you go to Mr. Brinsley’s
room.” The woman ran across the verandah to an outer
room; at the end we heard her rush in and lock the door.
More voices were heard in the verandah, so Mrs. Dunlop
said very loudly, “David, have you your revolver loaded?”
“Here it is,” turning the handle of the door. In an
instant we heard the pat, pat of naked feet running past
the windows, and knew her ruse had succeeded. The men
thought their master had come home, and knowing from
experience that he would not hesitate to use his revolver,
went hack to their huts and camp. How thankful we were
when about two hours after the sound of horses’ feet told
us our friends had returned ! They were astonished to see


us all up; but at our urgent request did not go down
to the camp or shed. The next morning when I opened
my window I saw Jenny, the “ gin,” cleaning the verandah
with her head bound up; but otherwise she appeared
nothing the worse for her husband’s little corrections of the
previous night. When I asked her what it was all about,
“Too much rum, Missy, ba’al budgery drink.” “Did he
hurt you very much 1 ” She showed me a terrible gash in her
head. “Nullah, nullah, ba’al budgery, Missy,’’said poor Jenny.
“ They were all drunk, Missy, like gentlemen; but my Missy
did wise.” “Did they go to Mr. Brinsley’s room?”
“No, no; me yabber, yabber to him,” and then she laughed
like a child, showing her white teeth. “ Stupids tink him in
there; me know him in Montefiores. ” “ Did you go to the
camp when he came home 1 ” “ No, no; master put me in
stable. Chinamen no good, Missy,” she said with conviction.
I thought, better than your people. The two races never did
agree, and were always quarrelling; but they had to be
borne with, as near the gold-fields a white man could not
be kept for any time. Mr. Dunlop liked the celestials; they
were steady, methodical workers, never forgot an order, cost
little to keep, and only occasionally became troublesome,
when they managed to get opium and have a smoking
feast. Our cook nearly died after one of these opium feasts.
He asked my brother if he might go to Nanima one Sunday.
Of course he was allowed to do so. Monday morning came,
but Boney did not put in an appearance; Tuesday he was
still absent, so my brother rode over to Nanima to see if he


was there. Mr. Dunlop said, “No; I sent him off the
place this morning. He will be useless for a week; my
men are in a terrible state, like so many logs ; look at them.”
The Chinamen were lying about in a large tent looking
like corpses. Mr. Dunlop turned one over with his foot, and
a shocking countenance was disclosed. “ What will you do
with them 1 ” “ Let them sleep some of it off, see that they
have not hidden any, and then have some good strong soup
made for them.” My brother came home and found Boney
lying on the floor of his room, outside the house. He
was a very difficult patient; he “no wantee livee,” —he
wanted to be left alone—“ no chin chin master; Joss wants
Boney; me die.” But he was far too valuable to be allowed
to die without an effort to save him. My brother insisted
on his taking food, threatening him with all manner of
punishment, and standing by to see him take sufficient
nourishment; but it was several days before he could
attend to. any duties. He was an excellent cook, exceed-
ingly clean, and afforded us much amusement watching
his ways. Before he did any cooking he would wash his
hands and arms ; this was done very often, a dozen times in
a day. He did not consider himself bound to obey any one
but “the master;” “Missee no good.” When I told him
that “ I was the mistress of the house,” he said, “No, Missee
not master’s wife.” He was also very much surprised to
see us engaged in any household work. “ Ladies no work
in my country.” Boney was an invaluable servant, most
economical and quiet; then as a gardener he was most


useful. Until his advent I had taken the flowers under
my care; but it was hard work, as there was nearly a quarter
of an acre to attend to. We had brought many of our old
favourites from Violet Cottage at The Glebe, and soon
obtained some plants from our friends. We were the first
to introduce violets into the district, where they grew
luxuriantly; most of the dear old English flowers flourish
there. At the present time my brother has many to
remind him of the old country, but at the time I write
of I only remember the violets. The climate, though per-
haps better than Sydney, is drier, and frosts in winter and
spring severe. Geraniums, heliotrope, and all tropical plants
have to be housed. Peaches, nectarines, apricots, figs, and the
vine flourish. Nearly every fruit will grow there; but owing
to the frosts oranges only in a few sheltered spots. Acacias,
cedars, mimosa, and many other trees grow very freely. At
the entrance gate of Gobolion there were two magnificent
almond trees, and when in blossom were very lovely. In
travelling it was not uncommon to come across a peach
tree flowering in mountain gorges or gullies, sprung up
from peach stones thrown down by travellers.
We found our Sundays terribly long when we first went
to Montefiores; the river being up, the Eev. Mr. Watson
was unable to cross, and we were without service for nearly
two months. That river, or rather the two rivers, as
Montefiores was at the junction of the Bell and Macquarie
rivers, were my lete noir; no one could cross except by
swimming their horses. The Eev. Mr. Watson had been


one of the early missionary clergymen sent out to the
Blacks, and had settled on the Wellington side of the
river, where he lived surrounded by a small colony of them.
He and his wife were now growing old, and all their
interest was centred in the poor natives, whom they
taught to read, write, and sing. They had sweet voices,
and they were the only singers in the choir. The church
was a most primitive building of wooden slabs, the imper-
fect joints in places admitting the daylight, wind, and dust.
The seats or forms were rough, the unpolished pulpit and
chancel low, constructed for Mr. Watson, who was a little
man. The only music was human voices, and the church
bell was hung in a tree at the side; but what mattered
it when a temple not made by hands could be seen
from the open door and windows. Such a beautiful view of
Mount Arthur, and above such a dome of glorious blue, to
make us feel how near we were to Him who fashioned it
all. How well I remember our first going to church for
morning service ! We had been informed “that half-past
ten was the time for service to commence; ” but as Mr.
Watson’s time and that of Montefiores differed very con-
siderably, the warning bell continued its ringing till he
made his appearance. Those who rode or drove to church
left their horses in the open ground outside, as there was
no enclosing fence. This morning Mr. Watson was early,
so we were really in church by a little after ten; service
commenced at once, and was finished before twelve. It
was a delicious morning in April, so we decided to take a


long walk before returning home, and started off by the
river. We walked for some distance without meeting any
one, everything fresh and delightful. After a time we
sat down by the river, and I heard my youngest sister
her Collect and Catechism, then talked over the great
desire I had to establish a Sunday School as soon as Mr.
Watson could be consulted as to the best means of doing
so ; when Louisa reminded me that Mrs. Richard had said,
“ He will not consent, as he does not care about the white
children when he has the black ones round him.” “ I will
try at any rate,” concluded our conversation. “Now we had
better go home.” We started to return, but it was not so
easy to accomplish, as we had unthinkingly wandered from the
river, and found ourselves surrounded by hills, nothing ex-
cept sheep tracks to guide us. We tried first one, then
the other, without success; all seemed to lead to the hills.
Tired, faint, and frightened we sat down to rest. “We had
better go towards the sun,” suggested Bell quietly. She was
so delicate I began to dread the effect of this terrible time
on her; but she was the quietest and calmest of the three.
At last I began to get so bewildered, nervously anticipating
the horrors of being “lost in the Bush,” I could go no
farther, but sat down and wept bitterly. I was again aroused
by my sister’s gentle faith ; “ Harry will know we have
lost our way, and he will soon find us.” I did not tell her
I knew my brother would not be home until the evening.
Vainly we proceeded, only to get nearer the hills, when
Susan said, “ Look, there are some broken branches; let us


take that track, and follow it up.” We did so, and in about
an hour came in sight of a shepherd’s hut we had passed
when we had first left the river; and saw in the distance
Mount Arthur, at the foot of which nestled the township,
and in a short time we could see the smoke rising from
the houses, and we were not long in reaching home. My
brother said we had been walking in a circle for hours.
Gobolion, a homestead near us, was almost a ruin; it
adjoined the doctor’s property on the bank of the river.
His house was a small weatherboard building, but quite
commodious enough for the bachelor medico, a tall gentle-
manly old man, whose garden and pets were his “Lares
and Penates.” On my first visit there I could not under-
stand his reason for allowing several large mounds to
remain in the front of his house; they were not very sightly,
though an attempt had been made at ornamentation by
planting flowering runners on them one was nearly
covered with the small scarlet verbena. He told me the
reason afterwards why he had not had the mounds levelled.
When he purchased the land some years before, this spot
was the burying-place of one of the principal tribes, whose
custom it was to inter their dead in an upright position,
and the mounds were heaped up over the bodies. He
had ordered several of the mounds to be removed, when he
was told “ That he would bring down terrible vengeance on
himself, as the aboriginals were tenacious on the subject
of the last resting-place of their people, and had been
known to travel hundreds of miles to bury their dead.”


So the doctor at once prevented more being done, and
for several years allowed them to bring any of their tribe
to the old ground. I have since thought, when looking at
the neglected state of the cemetery in Elizabeth Street,
Sydney, the poor despised blacks had more feeling in this
respect than their white brethren. I felt pity for them
then, and more still now, for they have nearly all
disappeared before the white race’s rule. The Australian
blacks have not found many advocates, I am aware, but
they could have been taught to be useful. I know this from
experience to be the case. A friend of mine had a woman,
Emma, an excellent laundress; her husband, Harry, was
groom and handyman, and Fanny was nurse to my friend’s
first child; these came from the Mission, and could all read
and write. One great drawback was that they never would
rest contentedly in a house; so my friends allowed them a
tent in the paddock. There was a very clever black called
Darby who was frequently in the township, and while we
were there was twice converted, first by the Eoman
Catholic bishop and then by our bishop. Darby told
some one, “He would be converted every weekto get money.”
He could read, write, and play cards —in fact, he was quick in
learning. Once at a sale he was making a noise, when
the auctioneer threatened him with a spade. “ Oh, Mr., do
you want to make me the knave of spades ?” was Darby’s
comment. Drink was the ruin of the natives; they could
never refuse it, and it not only debased them, but caused
them to die young from pulmonary complaints.


I was horrified on hearing them quote Scripture and
hymns glibly. One man, Raymond, when intoxicated would
go up and down the road shouting out the most sacred
words from our service, and only ceased when placed in
the lock-up. This poor creature died in his gunyah of rapid
consumption. The blacks were like children, having no
forethought, little if any reason, hut affectionate, and easily
pleased. They certainly believe in a future state, hence
the idea of burying their dead in a standing position—“ To
jump up quick.” They are also afraid of an evil spirit
doing harm to them. We had one black as outdoor
help, who was exceptionally wild and excitable; but my
youngest sister could manage him splendidly, not having
the slightest fear of him; but he too was fond of rum, and
she often teased him about this weakness. He always
called my sister by her name, refusing to add Miss.
One great objection to him as a servant was his dislike to
clothing; hut this was insisted on, so shirt and trousers
were at last his everyday costume. At Christmas we gave
him a full suit, with hat, hoots, and large white collar,
sending him down with a note to Mrs. Richard. He was
very pleased at first, but the next day he returned minus
all excepting his shirt and trousers, having bartered them
away for drinks and tobacco. Soon after this he informed
us he must go back to his tribe. “Too hot for houses now,
Louisa; come hack winter.” And he did so, taking up his
work as though he had never left it. He remained on
until summer returned and then disappeared again. He


was a simple creature; the only thing that roused the
savage in him was to inquire, “ Have you ever been to
Sydney, Franky 1 ” Louisa had been told to do this with-
out knowing why. The result, Franky glared at her,
saying, “ No, Louisa; Franky will go away and never come
back.” Louisa made him understand “ she meant no
harm” by the inquiry. We were told afterwards he
had been to Sydney, sent to gaol there for killing another
black, and when let out started for Wellington, travelling
night and day, with scarcely any food or rest, till he had
completed two hundred miles. He arrived nearly dead
from exhaustion, and then took to the “Bush,” While in
prison he had forgotten all the English he had ever learned.
Poor creature! it is easy to realise how this child of
nature suffered, caged up in stone walls, under prison
discipline; and no wonder to us now that he disliked
staying in the kitchen to take his meals, and would merely
come to the door for them.


CHAPTER VIII
Living in this Bush township afforded me an excellent
opportunity of seeing the manner of life led by the
people in the far-away districts. The houses were nearly
all built of weatherboard or slabs, roofs of thatch or
shingle, our own house and the two inns alone being built
of brick. They were whitewashed outside and inside, and
generally consisted of two front rooms and two skillion
rooms at the back; halls were unknown, except in brick
houses. The Crown commissioner’s cottage, with the
doctor’s and clerk of petty sessions were all of the “ Bush ”
type of architecture, not possessing any special beauty,
though tolerably comfortable within. When the wife of
our clerk of petty sessions made up her mind “to give a
dance,” her husband demurred, “No room large enough.”
“ Oh, but, John, you and the black servant can soon put one
up; and most likely some of our friends in the neighbour-
hood will assist; now the shearing is over, they have very
little to do.” She was right; everybody was ready to
assist. Thus a large room was soon added to the cottage,
and many dances were held therein. In those days
F


colonial girls were not particular about having waxed
floors as they now are. Cinderella dances would have
been scoffed at, as in the “ Bush ” people gladly ride thirty
or forty miles for a dance, which always lasted until day-
light. Then dresses changed for riding habits, breakfast,
and a lovely ride home. Montefiores being surrounded by
gold-fields, the sterner sex preponderated. The gold
commissioners, in their uniforms, formed a lively contrast
to the general civilian dress. In many instances costumes
were worn that could not be considered quite en rhgle, as
travellers did not always carry dress suits in their valise.
Gloves too often were not the best fitting; but these
drawbacks mattered little when youth and health led the
way. Ladies were better off, as white muslin and ribbons
could always be purchased at the stores. We were rather
troubled about shoes and gloves, having small hands and
feet. lam almost afraid to state how many times our
satin shoes were re-covered and our gloves cleaned. We
could always fall back on mittens, being the two youngest
ladies out in the district. It goes without saying such
dances were very delightful, and we received numbers of
bouquets. My brother did not look forward to these
dissipations with the same anticipation of delight as we
did. “ Oh, those merry days when we were young! ”
How fresh they come back to my memory as I am
writing this, with a white world of snow outside our
windows ! Where are those many dancers 1 So many, so
many are “at rest.” A few only left, with children and


grandchildren around them. Strange to say, though the
oldest amongst us was under thirty, not half a dozen are
living; most of them died in the prime of life. This will
appear singular to people in England, where, judging from
the obituary notices in the daily papers, greater average
of life is attained. We sometimes saw the gold escort
pass through the township, with the mounted troopers
guarding the precious freight. Bushranging was not
uncommon then, therefore we were ready to anticipate the
escort being “stuck up.” What accounts of hairbreadth
escapes from capture were related! On one occasion, after
the capture of a gang of bushrangers, the owner of some
stores was told by one of the gang how nearly his stores
were to being “ stuck up ” and robbed by them. He
asked the storekeeper, “Do you remember one evening,
just as your store was closing, three men coming in to look
at some saddles ? Several were brought for us to choose
from, and as you came in from the back store it was
arranged that one of us should ask you to show us
some straps that were hanging above your head. When
you reached up to do so we were to pinion your arms,
knowing when you were overpowered we should have
little trouble with the others. While you were free we
knew it would not be a safe game. Well, you did not
do as we expected, but just passed through and entered
the house; so our little game was put a stop to, as we
suspected you had recognised us, and we made a hasty
move, leaving the store, mounted, and rode off. It was


hard lines, as we knew you had been buying gold heavily
that week. We consoled ourselves, as we might be able
to stick up the escort, and have your gold with the rest.”
Accounts of bushrangers “ sticking up ” stations, travellers,
and banks were very frequent, and it was very difficult to
follow them to their haunts and hiding - places amongst
the gullies and mountain gorges only known to them-
selves, as they were wonderful bushmen, and only by the
aid of black trackers could they be followed. There
was the greatest difficulty in cutting off their retreat.
The Australian women in many instances displayed great
courage and coolness when brought in contact with bush-
rangers. Mrs. K near Bathurst was much praised; she
was a young and beautiful woman, and when their place
was “ stuck up ” rode into town to obtain the money the
bushrangers insisted upon receiving before they would
release her husband and others. On another occasion,
when they “ stuck up ” a station and secured all the men,
they made the ladies of the family provide dinner, then
play the piano, and dance with them; however, they did
not maltreat the women, and behaved themselves tolerably
well, considering the character of their visit.
A young man (who was a terrible boaster) was placed
in a very ludicrous position. He had been boasting in
public of his courage, often saying what he would do if those
fellows the bushrangers dared to attack him. “ I always
carry arms and my revolver handy when travelling, always
remembering that at any moment I may be called upon to


‘stand’ and throw up my arms.” “Would you fire at
them!” “Of course I would, if there were a dozen of them.”
This occurred in the billiard-room of an hotel in one of the
towns in the western district. A few weeks after this
boastful young Englishman was riding along a lonely bush
road at about 10 A.M. when suddenly the word “Stand”
electrified him, and in an instant a man seized his bridle ;
but, curious to relate, the revolver was not brought into
requisition, and it is questionable whether he had presence
of mind to think of it. He was mounted on a valuable
horse lately purchased; this, with his watch, revolver, and a
few pounds, were worth taking. His captor told him to
“ get off the horse, as he wanted it,” then led him away
from the road, covering him with his own revolver; then
said, “ Give me your coat and hat; you can have mine
instead.” When he had got all that was worth having,
the bushranger coolly said, “I am old enough to be your
father, so take my advice. Never boast what you will do
until you’ve tried it. You see that one man is more
than a match for you, no need for a dozen. Now sit
upon that stump while I ‘ bail you up ’ ” (which he very
quickly did, with some rope he took from the “ swag ” he
carried). “ Mind you sit here quietly until sunset; then you
can make as much noise as you like. I have some one to
let me know if you move. Now remember, if you play
any tricks,” and then placed his revolver too close to the
young man’s ear to be pleasant. The poor fellow remained
there all day long, becoming more and more enraged at his


ignominious position, thinking of the cool, impudent rascal,
and determining to get away to give an alarm if possible.
While trying to free himself he heard a rustle near, and a
piece of wood thrown at him, to warn him that he was
being watched. At last he fell asleep, and was awakened
by a voice calling out, “ Why, mate, what’s up 1 ” and saw
two rough-looking men by his side. They soon released
him when he told them his story, and found they were
two station hands returning home from the town. They
had left the road to light a fire for their tea, which was
soon made, and the hungry, weary young fellow declared
that “ quart pot tea ” and damper were enjoyed by him
with greater relish than the best meal he had ever sat
down to. He said as little as possible about his captor,
and described him very incorrectly, as he was not without
some misgivings that it might be a trap of the bushranger.
He sat with them till the sun set, and then started for the
town, thanking them for releasing him, and the tea. It
was a lesson not to be forgotten, and he always in after years
told the story whenever he heard “ new chums ” saying
what they would do if this or that were to happen to
them.
It is to be regretted that too many young men, when
they go out from England, have an idea their mission is to
teach colonials, and to show feelings of contempt for them;
but this mistake has been lessened considerably of late
years, since communication with the mother country has
become more frequent and rapid, and the false ideas or


impressions of colonial people are being dispelled. For all
this, only a few weeks since I read an article in a daily
paper teeming with false notions and very unfair remarks
upon the colonies and colonials. Even at this present time
young men leave England thinking “ they can teach the
Australians a thing or two,” and when they find how mis-
taken they have been, return disgusted with their want of
success, besides lacking the moral courage to acknowledge
they have met their equals, and in many instances their
superiors; so in the worst spirit possible set about to malign
them. This class of traveller is well known, and their
accounts are certainly unreliable. Such men are unfitted
for the life of a new colony, or perhaps for any country.
There is great want of good taste and common sense, which
has been instrumental in producing a far from friendly
feeling in the Australian youths; and is it to be wondered
at when such unfounded remarks are made on all that is
dear to them ? Is there not very much that the Australian
may well be proud of, and may we not commend them for
a spice of “ blow ” 1 It should be borne in mind that these
colonies have reached their present position in a century
only, and the majority of colonists would not disgrace
any society in England.


CHAPTER IX
I HAD been a long time at Montefiores before I succeeded
in establishing a Sunday School, but being without any
service there for over two months, determined on another
effort. At this time a newly appointed Crown commissioner
and his wife came to reside here; the lady was a very
delightful person, who had travelled a great deal in India
and elsewhere. It struck me that it would be a great
advantage to the cause to gain her influence. I mentioned
the subject to her, when she very kindly undertook to call
the clergyman’s attention to the advantage of establishing
a Sunday School for the welfare of the young people of
the district. She explained to him that permission was
desired to hold the school in the church, and to have charge
of the key on those Sundays when service was not held
there; also that I did not expect or desire any assistance
from him, which was the real cause of his not acceding to
my request in the first instance ; in fact he did not wish to
devote any of his time to it. Thus, through the kindly aid
of this lady, the object was gained, after vainly trying for
it so long. He told her “ that he was sure I should not


be able to get half a dozen children together,” as there were
so many Roman Catholics; however, he was mistaken, as I
commenced with eleven, and often had thirty. It was a
source of much comfort to have our Sundays spent in doing
some good work, and with a proper feeling that it was not
kept as any other day. We divided our children into three
classes. When the clergyman held service in the morning,
I had the school in the afternoon, and vice versa; or when
the rivers were up, swollen by rains, always in the after-
noon, and often devoted two or three hours to the classes.
After the usual church lessons were finished, I would read
them an interesting child’s book, sometimes telling an
Australian country story; and so the time passed quickly by.
There were times when we found country life a little
monotonous, as there was not any girls’ society in the
immediate neighbourhood, and the intercourse with Sydney
so difficult. Mails only twice a week, no telegrams, little
news, and not very many new books. Nanima was our
“oasis”; there we always found something to amuse, either
the family music, or a reading by one of the gentle-
men. We spent many a hot afternoon or evening at Black
House, listening to Esther Summerson’s unselfish life, poor
Ricks beginning to save, Mr. Jarndyce’s east wind, and
Lady Dedlock’s punishment. David Copperfield, Vanity
Fair, and Pendennis I first heard of there. As our friends
were intellectual people, the conversation after on the
works that had been read brought the characters to our
minds as realities.


This station was equal in extent to some German
duchies, covering many thousand acres. It was the place
of the district at that time. The manager was the brother-
in-law of the owner. I have met there several members of
very old English families; young men who had drifted to
the colony, younger sons and ne’er-do-wells, were sent out
to “ gain colonial experience,” or in too many cases to die
in the “ Bush ” while holding some very subordinate posi-
tion. One, the Hon. Mr. T , was a storekeeper on
a station; another, a countess’s brother, was a hut-keeper
on our friend’s station; and Sir F. P was a trooper in the
gold escort; but all were received and treated as gentle-
men, which they still were, however poor. Mrs. Dunlop
was the daughter of a retired naval officer, and her husband,
the manager, came of a good old Scotch family. One of his
superintendents was an admiral’s son, and relative of one of
our great wits and authors. This made our visits there very
agreeable, and this is not a single instance; there were
many such homes in the Australian colonies thirty-six
years ago, and no doubt long before.
The first break in our little circle was the removal of
Mr. Richard and family to a town near Sydney, where he
had a much better appointment, and was also near some
relatives. Two ladies leaving the district was a terrible
loss, especially as their cottage was only a few minutes’ walk
from us. We had a dull time too, as several gentlemen
were away from the two nearest stations “ over landing,”
i.e. taking sheep, cattle, and flour to Melbourne; but we


had plenty of resources in our household duties, needle-
work, music, and reading. Still it was good news to learn
that “ all were back again, and Bishop Barker was to pay
his first pastoral visit, and hold a confirmation.” We had
heard our new bishop was a very tall man, so doubts arose as
to his being able to stand upright in either pulpit or church.
One of the tallest of our congregation found he could not,
so the flooring of the pulpit was removed, but the altar
could not be lowered, so the poor bishop had to stand with
his head bent downward all the time he was there. He
was accompanied by his wife, who by her graceful, kindly
manner won all hearts, as did also the bishop. A picnic,
of course, was organised to visit the Wellington caves, when
all the gentlefolks of the surrounding country met We
had been to the caves before with a private party, but this
visit was quite a public affair, and the caves were lighted
up by numbers of torches, making the masses of stalactites
and stalagmites glisten like jewels, embedded in snow as
white as the country now lying before me. The caves are
difficult of access, but once within them they are very
beautiful and repay the trouble ; however, they will not
bear comparison with the caves at Jenolan, much nearer
to Sydney.
In the largest of the Wellington caves, which is of great
height, and named the cathedra], there is no difficulty in
imagining a pulpit, and at the side an opening leading to
vestry, which it was necessary to creep into. The bishop sug-
gested, “ You may explore that, being small. I should never


get out again.” I did go in, and was well repaid by the
lovely sight. Before leaving we all assembled in the centre
cave and sang the Old Hundredth Psalm. I never witnessed
a more impressive scene, or heard the grand old hymn
to greater advantage than in this strange place, some hun-
dreds of feet under the earth’s crust, where pre-Adamite
creation once sported, as gigantic bones of animals have
been found there. This, the first visit of the bishop,
afforded me special pleasure. Our commissioner’s wife told
him of my Sunday School, for which he gave me earnest
words of commendation and encouragement. I replied,
“It is the outcome of the early influence of my beloved
pastor.”
On the bishop’s return to Sydney, at a public breakfast,
he mentioned amongst other matters connected with his
country visits, his gratification at witnessing of so much
being done in the lonely “ Bush ” by the energy and kind-
ness of private ladies, not only teaching but establishing
Sunday Schools. Mrs. Barker accompanied the bishop
for many years on all his journeys, which extended over
many thousands of miles, when travelling was attended by
much hard work and discomfort. At this time Mrs.
Barker travelled in a buggy driven by their servant, while
the bishop, a good horseman, preferred riding.
At that time the diocese consisted of the whole of New
South Wales; since it has been divided into five bishoprics
—Sydney, Newcastle, Goulburn, Armidale, and Bathurst.
We have also a Synod, composed of clerical and lay members;


but I do not think it has improved the working of Church
affairs, the clergymen being dependent for their stipends
on voluntary aid and assistance from the Church Society,
an arrangement which often placed them in a false position.
In the far-away, sparsely populated districts, in bad
seasons, the poor clergy have great difficulty in paying
their way. But the time I am now writing about, away
from townships, if they saw a clergyman twice or thrice a
a year, it was as much as they could expect. On these
occasions numbers came in from down the river, bringing
children to be christened, confirmed, and others to be
married. Montefiores was quite gay for a few days, in fact
it was some weeks before we were restored to our usual
quiet, for after the bishop’s departure there was plenty to
talk over. Our blacksmith’s forge was a great meeting-
place for the men folks, and the blacksmith was a character
.with the bad habit of swearing terribly. He had seen and
talked to the bishop, whom he admired as being a good horse-
man more than anything else, and in repeating his conversa-
tion with him, used his usual strong language, and gave the
bishop credit for doing likewise. My brother said, “ Now,
Jack, you know his lordship never said that.” “By he
did, and you are a to doubt me.” —“ What! do
you mean to tell us, Jack,” drawled a haw-haw gentleman,
“ that the head of the Church swore as you do.” “ Oh, well,
Mr. , you know what I mean.” Returning one afternoon
from our usual walk, we saw several people standing about
surrounded by groups of children. “ What is the matter,


I wonder ] ” queried Louisa, when a well - known sound
reached my ear. Could it possibly be! Yes, it was
the well-remembered voices of Punch and Judy. Our
brother met us at the door, laughing heartily. “ Such an
excitement, girls ! A show from the ‘ Diggings ’to hold an
indefinite number of performances in the old shed there,”
pointing to one close to our garden fence. “May we
go, Harry 1” “I thiuk not; the place will be crowded; no
seats; you would not like it.” But he took Louisa in
to witness the first performance of the well-known drama
so familiar to London children, and children of larger
growth. We were much amused, watching great bearded
men going in and out all the evening, and the shouts
of laughter were infectious. One very old man told me
next day, “ It made me feel a boy again, Miss, though I held
my grandson in my arms.” The next excitement was the
news of the charge of the Gallant Six Hundred at Bala-
klava, then the fall of Sevastopol. Everything that would
bear the explosion of powder was put into requisition, and
a perfect cannonade from guns, revolvers, and ancient
pistols was kept up until the store of ammunition
was exhausted, while the smoke from bonfires covered the
township.
From what I have written my readers can only form
an idea of the scenery around Montefiores, which is really
beautiful Mountains, river, cleared lands, forests of native
apple, eucalypti, shee baks, kurragong, cedar, and wattle
trees of great height; acacias too were very plentiful.


Wild flowers were numerous, a cream clematis when in seed
hanging with threads like silver; several species of orchid,
violets, purple and white with purple spots, like their English
sisters in form, but scentless. The fringed violet peculiar
to Australia, with ferns of many kinds, made the “Bush” “ a
thing of beauty.” I have forgotten to mention the quan-
dong, a shrub bearing a fruit the size and colour of cherries.
The fruit is not unpleasant in flavour, but there is scarcely
any of it, the stone being very large in proportion and
merely thinly covered with fruit. The stones are valued,
as they make up into pretty ornaments, such as bracelets,
necklets, chains, or the heads of scarf-pins.
I knew an Englishman who said one of the pleasures
of life is to be in a country where there is “ plenty to kill,”
so may quote him as an authority that Australia is very
satisfying in this respect. And he certainly ought to have
lived where I did thirty-five years ago, as in a couple of
hours’ ride he could have shot kangaroo, wallabi, opossum,
native dogs, and bagged wood and black duck, wild
turkeys, pigeons, and rabbits. The doctor had quantities
of the latter on his ground, only ten minutes’ walk from
our house, so when fresh meat was not to be had—which
was very often the case in the summer—Harry would take his
gun, and in about an hour would bring back three or four.
Then the river gave sport the angler loved, as there were
plenty of fish, especially the fresh-water cod, some nearly
three feet in length. Shrimps and small crayfish could
be caught with nets. The men had plenty to kill, and for


exercise and excitement, what could compare with a
kangaroo drive or mustering and branding of cattle ?
Drafting sheep was very wearisome; the poor timid
things were so tiresome; only the shepherds and their dogs
had any patience with them. I have watched flocks of
them crossing the river when it was quite low, and yet in
their fright many would be in danger of drowning. Cattle
were more easily managed; but, oh! the language of the
bullock-drivers. I heard a story of a clergyman reproving
them for using such fearful language. “They won’t go
without, your reverence.” “Try them in as loud a tone
without oaths.” But no, they would not move. “ You see,
sir, they understand that I mean them to go when I say
liked to watch the bullock teams, both in Sydney and the
country, going slowly along with their immense loads of
wool bales, taking the golden fleece to the port; but until
I went to Montefiores had no idea of the labour, hardship,
and risk often run to life and limb ere they reached their
destination. I have in summer crossed the Macquarie
River on stepping-stones without wetting my feet, and in
a few weeks it would be “ a banker,” and no one could
cross it; then teams had to camp until it was down
again.
I determined to pay Sydney a visit whenever a suitable
escort presented itself. Hearing of one soon, I left my
brother’s house, to return to it only as a visitor for the
future, as he married in six months after, so that I became a


wanderer once more. This journey to Sydney was a most
disagreeable one, for I made it in the hottest season in one
of the dreadful coaches, full of passengers of all grades. Two
Chinamen from Wellington, one with his “Joss” carried
carefully in his arms, which, as the wretched vehicle gave
a lurch, struck my shoulder. My escort remonstrated,
but the “ Heathen Chinee,” “No savee.” We congratu-
lated ourselves when the celestial left us at Bathurst, but
it was premature, as a constable taking a prisoner to
Sydney occupied the seats vacated by the Chinamen.
Travellers certainly did in those early days prove the old
adage, for when we drove up to the miserable inn, we
found only one apartment to shelter us during a terrible
storm. So two ladies, a member of Parliament, constable,
prisoner, and others had to keep company in it. As soon
as the rough meal was over I returned to a verandah
room, to take a few hours’ rest on my rug. Again, on our
way before daylight, watching the sun rise on those
mountain roads compensated somewhat for the discomfort.
The mountains emerged from a golden mist, infinitely
grand. The sun seemed to hang for a few minutes over
some distant peak, and the valleys to remain full of night’s
veil of purple and gray, the birds welcoming the advent
of another day, and above all, the deep blue of an
Australian cloudless sky made one feel, “ It is good to be
here.”
G


CHAPTER X
Though only away from Sydney three years, on my
journey down I saw many improvements, and in Sydney felt,
like “Rip Van Winkle,” surely I had been at least twenty
years asleep. Such numbers of new buildings, streets
formed, the shores of the harbour cultivated, new wharves,
and numerous houses and stores in course of construction;
the harbour alive with steamers, and ships coming and
going. Numbers of shops in the main streets, where
formerly there were only a few. Surrey Hills, where I
first stayed, had become an extensive suburb, and the
South Head Road, now Oxford Street, was full of shops.
Service for that parish was held in Darlinghurst court-
house. The barracks at Paddington were finished, and
Wooloomooloo much altered. It was evident that Sydney
was becoming the most important city in the Southern
hemisphere, though now she must share the laurels with
Melbourne, the latter being laid out with system, and wide
thoroughfares with a view to the future. When Sydney
was laid out no one could have anticipated her present posi-
tion, and the consequence was a total disregard of anything


like good main thoroughfares or proper alignment of the
buildings. A hundred years ago such matters were not so
much looked after as they are now. Nature, however, has
been lavish in her bounty, and the early colonists were wise
enough to make choice of the best site possible for the first
Australian city. One who has travelled much says, “It
ought to be one of the healthiest, cleanest, and best drained
cities of the world, and the harbour will always give it
the pre-eminence and proud title of the ‘ Queen City of the
South.’ ”
Spending nearly four idle months in Sydney gave me
many opportunities of marking the great progress made
in and around it. The Museum, Grammar School, and
St. Mary’s Cathedral were being enlarged or rebuilt;
churches and schools rising in the suburbs, Balmain and
Pyrmont were becoming populous places; the Botanic
Gardens were enlarged.
I went to a garden party with my future sister at
Graycliff, a pretty place near Watson’s Bay, where there
is a beautiful view of the harbour; but it was very
difficult to get at by land. It was a lovely day, and the
hostess being an intimate friend of Soph’s, I was able to
ramble about con amore, walking to Yaucluse and taking
mental sketches of its many beauties.
After my brother’s marriage I went to Penrith for a
few weeks’ stay at “ Sara Cottage ” situated in the one
street of that very quiet town, like an English village with
its general store, an inn or two, a church, a doctor’s house,


and several cottages. No Bank or School of Arts then, the
bridge not finished, and very few well-to-do residents in
the town, Mr. Richard’s property being one of the best,
and comparing favourably in every respect with his wife’s
first home at Montefiores. It gave me great pleasure to
share her delight in its beauty and comfort. While there
I had an invitation to spend a few days at Dunheved, a
real old-fashioned Australian cottage, with its verandahs
kept from falling by a wisteria with branches as thick as
my arm. It was a mass of blossoms in every shade of
lavender, and the sweet perfume pervaded the atmosphere.
What a picture it all was, as we drove up, the mistress
of the house and her two fair daughters standing under
the graceful canopy to welcome me ! She was an admiral’s
daughter, and her husband, a naval man, had settled some
years before in this district; I think their eldest son still
owns the property. It was through his visiting Montefiores
just before I left that I had now the pleasure of meeting
his family. Afterwards his mother wrote to me occasion-
ally, but gradually the correspondence ceased, and place
as well as people are now only a memory.
I then went again to Sydney to stay with an old friend
at Surrey Hills, a native of the colony, well educated, refined
and intellectual. Her father was in the commissariat de-
partment, and during the Peninsular War married a Spanish
lady. Kate inherited some of her mother’s national char-
acter, being proud and passionate; but she was a devoted
daughter, and sacrificed her prospects in life to her one


brother. She was another of the Rev. Horatio’s children
who blessed his teaching, and bore her cross willingly. At
this time she had just lost her widowed mother. I was glad
to be free to visit her, and remained until Mr. Horatio found
another home for me at The Glebe, strange to say, only a
few minutes’ walk from my father’s old home. Hereford
House was a very different abode, being quite a mansion.
The grounds surrounding it were extensive, and kept in
exquisite order by a scientific gardener and assistants. The
rosary was perfect, with walls and arches of climbers, beds of
standard roses of every hue, a shrubbery of camellias, datura,
durante, dentzia, stephanotis, gardenia, tecoma, more the size
of trees than shrubs; oleanders, pepper trees, and other
tropical plants. Then the conservatory, with tea, coffee,
and spices in flower, as well as a magnificent specimen of
the pitcher plant. I had never seen such a garden in
Australia; thirty-two years ago there were few to equal it.
There was a fine garden at Toxteth Park full of flowers,
but being larger, was not so well kept or so varied. The
Glebe was famous for its floral treasures; being well
sheltered from the sea air, they flourished better than in
many other situations near Sydney.
All the arrangements of Hereford House were in good
taste; the owner, an Englishman, and his pretty gentle
wife, an Australian, treated their children’s governess as a
trusted friend. We had a pretty ante-room, with French
windows opening on to the garden, for study, —not with
bare walls and uncarpeted floor, too often considered good


enough for a schoolroom, but pictures, bookcase, and
covered desks. As my eldest pupil was nearly sixteen,
teaching under such auspices was delightful indeed.
Amongst many visitors there, I met two young people
with whom I formed a friendship, to end only by the
“ Great Reaper’s scythe.” They had been in the colony
a year or two, when they met our mutual friends travelling
in the interior. James was an engineer of no mean ability,
having been appointed before he had reached his twenty-
first birthday to superintend some important engineering
work in Spain. And at the time the gold fever was at its
height, he resigned an excellent appointment in London
to accompany a friend to Sydney in one of the large
steamers so frequently leaving for the New El Dorado,
where he met a young Irish lady travelling with some
friends, hoping to meet a brother in Melbourne, if not, to
return to her family by the same steamer; but “ Don
Cupid ” stepped in, and there was no going back for Maria,
as before they arrived in Sydney she was James’s promised
wife. Like two foolish young people, they married at once,
and might have realised the proverb “ Marry in haste ”
had not James’s very excellent testimonials and letters of
introduction soon procured him a Government appointment.
His first work was the superintendence of the construction
of engineers’ workshops and a dry dock at an island in
Sydney Harbour, where they were residing in a pretty
cottage when I met them at Hereford House. When I
used to complain of the miserable accommodation of Bush


inns, Maria would remind me it was through, that they
met Mr. and Mrs. Woolley, who, travelling with an
invalid child, arrived at the best inn at Mittagong, to find
the only private sitting-room occupied by James and
Maria, he having been inspecting some iron-mines in the
district. Of course they offered the room, and from that
time had become their intimate friends, always welcome at
Hereford House as long as his duties would permit them
to stay. They were an acquisition to our circle, he a fine
handsome fellow, who had seen a good deal of the world,
and she as fascinating and bright as young Irishwomen
generally are.
How sorry we were when our friends left for a long
sojourn in England, the beautiful home broken up, the
house and lovely garden left to strangers! I felt more
lonely than ever, after being nearly a year with such a
family, the mother like an elder sister, the children so
companionable. James and Maria made me pay them a
visit at their island home, which brightened me consider-
ably. It was impossible to be low-spirited there, for he was
full of fun, and her housekeeping was a constant source of
amusement to us all. When anything was lost, she would
say, “ Have you looked on the floor?” On one occasion,
when some friend sent them a basket of small aloes for
the garden, she thought they were Australian arti-
chokes, and told their convict servant to prepare them for
dinner. She was a great favourite with every one, kind-
hearted and generous. James used to say “ inconveniently


generous sometimes.” I remember an occasion when this
was the case. A lady she knew, who had seen better
days, called on her in great distress ; she had been promised
an appointment, and had been given several articles of
clothing, requisite to make her presentable to her employer
in a respectable manner, but, sad to say, her boots were
terribly worn. “ Why, Mrs. , mine will fit you, so you
need not cry about that.” At once a pair was sent for,
and that little difficulty arranged, forgetting she was going
out that afternoon with James and me. What a walk we
had! He kept asking, “ Why she allowed her dress to
sweep the roads 1 Look at Miss L , she holds hers up,
why don’t you 1 ” “ You know, James, it tires me.”
“ Well, I will hold it up for you.” “ How absurd that will
look!” “Well, I shall go on first, for the dust is covering
all of us.” I whispered, “Tell him.” “I dare not; he
will be so vexed; he has not forgotten about the coat.”
The coat meant that he had, at her urgent request, con-
sented to his wife’s giving away some worn clothes of his
to one of her numerous pensioners, and she in her impul-
sive way had given away a nearly new coat. We arrived
at our destination without discovery, but unfortunately
when leaving, one of our friend’s daughters remarked,
“You have forgotten to change your shoes, Mrs. ”
He looked, and we were no sooner outside the house than
I told him. He was such a kind-hearted man, so did not
say much, but suggested that “ she should always keep a
pair in reserve,” and telling me “he would never be


surprised to find his wardrobe consisted only of the
clothes he had on.”
One evening James and I were sitting in the verandah
enjoying the cool sea breeze after a fearful hot wind all
day. Maria was playing and singing in the drawing-room,
when between one of her songs we heard the sound of
screaming from the opposite shore; we listened, but it
ceased, so Maria continued her music. As it was growing
late and the moon setting, we thought of retiring, when
the sound of a boat approaching the island—a very un-
usual and dangerous proceeding at that hour—roused
James, and seeing only a woman in the boat, he left us
and went down to the wharf near his cottage. The
constable had seen the boat, and was speaking to the
occupant, warning her not to come nearer. “ What do you
want at this hour of the night ? ” asked my friend. “ Oh,
sir,” answered a girlish voice, “do, for God’s sake, come
with me to the other side, or murder will be done.” Here
sobs stopped her utterance. Addressing the girl, my
friend asked, “Was it you I heard screaming some time
ago 1” “Yes.” Turning to the constable, “Blake, it’s
all right; I will go.” “Thank you, sir,” said the girl.
He ran back and told us he would not be back for an hour
or two, that Maria and I need not be uneasy. The girl
was evidently well accustomed to the use of the sculls,
and made rapid way to the opposite shore. By the time
they landed the moon had set, and heavy clouds rising
from the south rendered the night dark and gloomy. He


followed the girl through the scrub, her light frock being
the only guide. At last they came to a small slab build-
ing, and a young man met the girl. “Where have you
been, Sarah?” “To Cockatoo Island for assistance.” “No
need for that; what a fool! ” “ But you told me to go.”
“Did I?” James here advanced, asking, “What does all
this mean ? what dark work has been going on here ? ”
“No dark work, sir, only a man in a fit.” “That’s all
nonsense; girls don’t risk a shot for that. Well, I am
here, and intend going into the house and seeing for my-
self, so lead the way at once.” After a few whispered
words with the girl, the young fellow said, “Go in, Sarah,
and see how he is now.” In a few minutes she returned,
saying, “ I think he is asleep.” James followed his young
guide into a room, where, lying on a rough bush bedstead,
was a man half dressed. He stood looking down on the
recumbent figure, and heard some whispering in another
room. Touching the man, he inquired, “ Are you awake ?”
“ Who are you ? You have come too late,” and a pair of
keen gray eyes were raised to his face. “ Oh! lam a doctor.”
“Are you? what do you want here? ” “ I heard that some
one was ill.” “Did you?” with a frown, and looking towards
the girl. “ That’s what you say, is it ? then lam well now
and out of danger.” The girl and young man stood like
sentinels, watching. “ Can I help you in any way ?” asked
my friend abruptly. “ I suppose I have been brought out
at this hour for a purpose.” “Yes, we three agreed it
would be better to have a witness, but it is all settled


without. They have got all they wanted, so will let me
rest in peace,” with a heavy sigh, turning round, as if to
intimate all was over. As the man evidently did not wish
him to remain, James followed the girl and young man
out of the room, and when outside said, “ I am not at all
satisfied with your conduct; who are the others in the
hut ?” “ There is no one.” “ That is false; I heard voices.
Have you been bought since your sister left ? Is that man
your father?” “No, brother.” “Why, he is years older
than either of you.” Here the girl, who James saw was
much cowed and frightened, said, “ He is our stepbrother.”
James stood considering for a minute, then said, “Well,
take me back to the island.” He was about to utter a
warning as to the steps he intended to take, but decided
it would be imprudent and put them on their guard. The
young man said, “ I will row you over, sir; Sarah is too
done up.” “I am quite agreeable, as long as I get back
to Cockatoo Island quickly.” He tried in vain to get the
young man into conversation on the way, but a laconic
“Yes” or “No” was the extent of his answers. The
mystery of that night was never cleared up. My friend
tried to find the slab building, but it seemed to have dis-
appeared. The night had been so dark, and the bush so
dense, as to preclude any certainty as to the direction
taken after leaving the boat. Even if he had succeeded
in finding the place, an investigation thirty years ago, with
such evidence, would have been difficult to carry through,
when the principal in the affair had evidently given in.


Sir William Denison was Governor of New South Wales
at this time, and taking great interest in my friend’s work
at the island, often visited it. The officers of Her Majesty’s
ships found the cottage very pleasant to spend the evenings
at, for Maria, like many of her countrywomen, was fasci-
nating, full of life, and fond of society. She could sing
and play with expression, and was never put out if half
a dozen came in when three were only prepared for; she
somehow so managed that you would suppose her resources
were inexhaustible. I really think this is a peculiarity of
the Irish, as I have known many with the same gift of
making the best of everything. It was a strange life for
Maria on this island, as there was only one other family
to visit there.


CHAPTER XI
My next home was a perfect one in all respects, a comfort-
able new house at Double Bay, the grounds extending to
the beach, and the windows of the principal rooms looking
towards the harbour. Again my “ lines were cast in
pleasant places.” Mr. and Mrs. Frederick had not been
long from home ; the children were much younger than my
former pupils, but, dear little things, the youngest so very
quick and affectionate. There were very few houses near
us, and we could, and did, wander about the rocks, and
spent many hours on the beach at the bottom of the
garden. We used to take long walks to gather wild-
flowers on Belle Yue Hill, at the back of Sir Daniel
Cooper’s estate, and as far as Tivoli. There were now
many beautiful places at Darling Point, Greenoaks, Mona,
Mount Adelaide, and others. Mr. Mort had at Greenoaks
a small gallery of charming water-colour pictures. There
was also a picture gallery at Mona, chiefly copies in oil
from the old masters, which I had the bad taste not to
admire, preferring the pictures we had at Hurst. I have
always felt what a privilege it was to have Mrs. Frederick


as a friend. She was so well read, conscientious, true, and
gentle. She had a beautiful voice and excellent taste in
music, and having been partially educated on the Continent,
could converse on many subjects I had only read of. Un-
fortunately, being delicate, she was unable to enjoy the sur-
roundings of her beautiful home.
I had a very pretty schoolroom, abundance of books,
and quantities of toys amusing and instructive for my
children. We occasionally spent Sunday afternoon on the
beach, where I taught them simple hymns or composed
various tales for their amusement. These children are
mothers now, and have reminded me of many of the tales
which I had forgotten long ago. I have had many solitary
hours since those days; but few sad ones, for memory
calls back so much to brighten the present when youth
is past. The love and trust of children is a priceless
treasure time can never dim or take away. Holidays
were a relaxation, and having so many friends, I enjoyed
them; but was always glad to return, and agreed with
my children in “being pleased when they were over.”
They always met me with caresses, declaring “ They never
wanted any more long holidays without I stayed at home.”
While at Hurst I had an invitation from an old friend to
a large picnic given by her brother and another squatter
visiting Sydney. It was a very grand affair. As it was
held at Yaucluse, Mrs. du Moulin called for me en route.
Her brother knowing many gentlemen now in Sydney from
their stations, there would be no lack of gentlemen.


The then Australian Gunter had carte blanche for
providing a reehercM luncheon. A German band was
engaged, boats provided for those who liked the water,
cricket for others, and dancing for all. It was a lovely
day in October, and I am certain never out of “ Arcadia ”
did nearly a hundred young people enjoy themselves
more. The pretty girls and handsome men made delightful
partners, and time passed too quickly.
I had danced until even I was tired, so with my
partner rested for a while, when he told me the following
story of the discovery of one of the principal Victorian
gold-fields. “We had been travelling overland with cattle,
and had camped earlier than usual, the heat being intense ;
the stockmen were resting at a little distance, waiting until
the cook had the evening meal ready. My brother and I
were lying on the grass talking over the probabilities of
making a good sale of our cattle when we reached our
destination, both a little down-hearted, as a few days
before we had heard several mobs of cattle had been seen
on the road bound for the same market.
“We were both smoking, and I with note-book and
pencil jotting down probable results of our hoped-for
sales, while Donald pulled up tufts of grass. Presently an
exclamation made me look at him. The expression of his
face alarmed me. I thought he was ill; his pipe had fallen
from his fingers, and he held a tuft of grass in his hand.
‘ Look, A ,at this.’ l At what ? ’ I was for a second
almost as astonished as he had been. ‘ Why, it is gold ! ’


‘Yes, hush, keep quiet until after supper, when the men
are in their tent; we will examine the place.’ Which we did,
and found it was one of the richest fields yet discovered.
We at once decided for one of us to ride to the nearest
town and take out licenses for the party. In less than a
month there were thousands of people on the field. We
never took a beast away, but sold them all for a very large
sum on the spot. Kept our claim, and each man made
a small fortune. We invested ours in a large station
property, not caring for a gold-digger’s life. Often has it
occurred to me since what a little matter gives the turn
to fortune’s wheel, for it was the merest chance took us
in that direction, as it was only the breaking away of
five of our best cattle, and their taking the left instead of
the right and shortest road to the place we were bound
for.” “I suppose you were much excited by this dis-
covery 1 ” “Yes, but, Miss L , almost the first feeling
that arose in my mind, ‘ls it for good or evil?’ One
thing comforted me; I could now give my mother a home
suited to her, and whatever happens to me, she will be
well provided for.” The band commencing a delightful
waltz, we left our shady seat and were soon dancing with
the rest. I went into town with my friend and spent a
delightful musical evening at her house. Some time after
this some friends of Mrs. Woolley’s of Hereford House, who
knew me there, invited me to a ball at their house in
Wooloomooloo. Mrs. Frederick said, “You must go; I
will send you in the carriage, and as Mrs. Joseph has offered


you a bed, we will call for you in the morning,
having told the coachman to drive to a house in Willuhit
Street. When we arrived at this place it was very quiet
and dark. I jumped out, saying, “ This is the place.” But
the coachman, having his doubts, suggested waiting till I
was in. When the servant opened the door I began to
•think I had mistaken the date of the invitation, for there
was no sign of a party. A door opened and a gentleman
came forward. “I fear I have made a mistake; is this
Mrs. Joseph’s!” “No; she lives in Victoria Street.”
“ They have a ball there to-night! ” “ Yes; my son has
just left for it.” How I blessed the coachman’s fore-
thought in waiting, and how my friends laughed at my
blunder when I met them at Victoria Street! The next
morning poor Richard, the coachman, could not find the
cottage in Rushcutter Bay, where I had spent the night,
and had been over an hour in finding me, so it was a
chapter of accidents altogether. I met on that occasion our
present Agent-General and the beautiful girl he married;
and only a few mails ago saw in a paper the death of the
lady at whose house the ball took place. Her sister, at
whose house I stayed the night, has since become one of
our leading women in Sydney society; an Australian,
clever, fascinating, and agreeable.
A sad catastrophe occurred at this time which cast a
terrible shadow over the beauty of our surroundings and
our walks and visits to our beach.
The wreck of the Dunbar at the “Gap,” near the
H


South Head, was a terrible calamity. It was an awful night,
when, with her living freight, she went down outside the
haven; the passengers thought they were entering to meet
their dear ones in a few short hours. The terrible wind
and rain prevented sleep at Hurst. I got up and read the
greater part of the night, for the house at times rocked with
the force of the tempest. In the morning the sun shone fit-
fully and the wind had decreased, the white-crested waves
I could see from my windows were the only evidence of
the fury of the storm now past. We had just gone into
the breakfast-room when some gentlemen called upon Mr.
Frederick to inform him there had been a terrible wreck
at the South Head, and as some cases with his firm’s
brand had been seen, could he tell him the names of vessels
he expected consignments by 1 They feared it might be
an emigrant vessel just due. He was able to settle that
question, as they never shipped by emigrant ships, and
mentioned the names of three vessels they had cargo in,
the Dunbar being one; and in a few hours all doubt was
at an end, and it was then known to be that ill-fated ship
full of passengers, amongst them many colonists returning
after a visit to their Fatherland.
Only one man (a sailor) was saved, washed up by the
waves between the rocks, and lodged there. It was a
most dangerous exploit to attempt the rescue of that one
poor creature from his perilous position ; but many brave
fellows volunteered, and one was lowered by a rope to the
rocks beneath, where cruel breakers roared and dashed over


both. At last they were hauled safely up, and when able
the rescued man told all he knew of that most terrible
night’s work. He was asleep at the time the vessel struck;
it must all have happened in a few moments from the time
of striking till she sank fathoms deep. But from what he
related there can be little doubt the captain had mistaken
the South Head light for one inside the harbour, and
steered right onto the rocks beneath. Most of the passengers
were no doubt asleep, and many were crushed in their berths.
The lighthouse keeper reported that he heard the bark of
a dog above the roar of the tempest at the hour that they
supposed so many poor souls had gone to their last home.
This dog had been picked up either at Inkerman or Balaklava,
and had been given to a lady on board. So many people had
friends or relatives on board, that it caused universal sorrow.
An emigrant vessel was wrecked inside the harbour before
our arrival in the colony. Soon after the loss of the Dunbar,
the Catherine Adamson was wrecked on, I think, Bradley’s
Head, but not with so great a loss of life. For weeks
after both wrecks the beaches were strewed with flotsam,
and it was heartrending to see many of the things cast
ashore, such as needlework half finished, with needles and
crochet hooks stuck in reels of cotton, most likely in use
a few hours previously; combs from some loved one’s hair;
writing from another’s hand, all still now —not even the
poor consolation of seeing the loved form again or its last
resting-place. Many bodies recovered were so terribly
disfigured by the rocks as to be beyond the possibility of


identification. A young person at Hurst was to have been
married to the second officer of the Dunbar, and used to
go to the morgue to identify her lover day after day, but
in vain. She would shake her head and say, “ No, Miss, it
was not Jim; but some other woman’s loss I saw to-day.”
She had to leave us as her mind was evidently giving way.
The constant sound of the waves prevented her resting, so
I advised her going into the country. Strange to say, the
one seaman rescued from the Dunbar was appointed to the
lifeboat at Newcastle, and was instrumental in saving the
one man from the steamer Cawarra, wrecked there.


CHAPTER XII
In December 185- we left Sydney to spend four months
in Tasmania. I had not been outside Sydney Heads since
our arrival in 184-, and being a good sailor enjoyed the
short voyage. At this time Tasmania was the principal
health resort for the Australian colonies. Our New South
Wales railway was only completed as far as Penrith, so
Mount Victoria, Blackheath, and Katoomba on the western
line ; Bowral, Moss Yale, and Sutton Forest on the
southern line, were not thought of for that purpose.
Hobart Town, therefore, in the season was filled with
wealthy tourists from New South Wales and Victoria.
Those who were not blessed with too large a proportion of
this world’s goods had to be content without change, or be
satisfied with Mauly Beach, Botany, and Coogee, all very
primitive as to hotels and lodging-houses then. And
really, as is the case with many other luxuries, we were just
as well without this, now considered a necessity. Never-
theless I was delighted at an opportunity of visiting another
colony. I heard a gentleman say, who had travelled over
most of the civilised portions of the globe, “ that Tasmania


bore the palm for salubrity; its climate being neither too
hot nor too cold ; its scenery charming, with splendid trees
and ferns —in fact, an earthly paradise.” It really appeared
so to me, with the English fruits and flowers. Its magnificent
trees, hawthorn hedges, and general appearance of cultivation
reminded me of the land of my birth, which I so longed to
see again. The indigenous trees of Tasmania are finer and
more luxuriant in foliage than most of those on the
Australian continent; the huon pine is of immense height
and girth; so is the Eucalyptus globulus —Tasmanian blue
gum —and many others.
Hobart Town is situated on the Eiver Derwent; and
with Mount Wellington for a background is most pictur-
esque, and certainly at that time struck me as being
beautifully clean.
The beaches, with one exception, being shingly, there
was an absence of that terrible sand and dust we were
accustomed to in Sydney. The traffic was considerably
less also. There I saw a mail-coach of the old English
type leave for Launceston; and the roads are much better,
while the air is more delightful and exhilarating than in
New South Wales or Victoria. There were many pretty
girls with fresh complexions, and the children looked the
picture of health. It struck one as being like a quiet sea-
side town in England, and Mrs. Frederick and I enjoyed
the change very much.
The Domain and gardens were smaller than ours, but
the Government House, not quite finished at that time,


appeared larger; we called there, as also at the bishop’s at
New Town, and left cards. We also attended the opening
of the Legislative Assembly; but as Mrs. Frederick was
not equal to much visiting, we merely went out during the
daytime. As there had been a terrible accident to one of
a party attending a picnic on Mount Wellington but
recently, I did not accept an invitation “to ascend it.”
On the mountain there is a place called “The Ploughed
Field,” consisting of masses of rock scattered over the sur-
face as though by an earthquake : to stray alone in this
place is most dangerous. On the occasion I have referred
to, a young man left the party, his friends thinking
“he had returned to Hobart Town by another route.”
They “coo-eed” vigorously for a time, and receiving no
reply, wended their way home; however, finding he had
not returned, they went in search of him, but in vain.
Some considerable time after the body was found, with
the legs fixed between the rocks, not very far from
where a search party had rested a few days after he
was lost.
As the house Mr. Frederick had taken had but a small
garden, he arranged for us to gather any fruit we required
from an orchard near, where there were quantities of red,
white, and black currants, strawberries, and cherries ; later
on plums of all kinds, apples and pears. In one garden at
New Town we often spent an afternoon.
We had numberless drives to many pretty spots, and
along the Sandy Bay road. I also went for a few days’


visit to a pretty place on the other side of the river, the
name of which has slipped my memory; it was the residence
of Captain Forster, a retired naval officer, and his wife, such
a dear old lady. We sometimes went fishing; but were
far from successful in this, though there were quan-
tities of fine fish in the Derwent, and scarcely a day passed
while at Hobart without having some. New Norfolk
about this time was becoming famous for its salmon ponds,
as well as the surrounding scenery, which was indeed
lovely. The ferns were very beautiful, and in great variety;
but I do not think the native flowers were equal to those of
New South Wales; perhaps it was past the season, or I
may have sought them in the wrong localities. One fact
struck me, after thunderstorms and rain the air became
deliciously cool and refreshing—so different from New
South Wales, where in the summer after rain it is
generally steamy, close, and sultry, especially near Sydney
—and lam inclined to think that Tasmania will again
rival many of the health resorts the extended railway
service has made accessible in New South Wales, now
that the sea voyage is so short between Melbourne and
Launceston.
My dear old friend, the Eev. W. H. Walsh, was on a
visit at Bishop Bromby’s, so we had the pleasure of seeing
him occasionally; also Mrs. Augustus of Graycliff, who was
staying at Hobart Town for change, as she had been
seriously ill since I was at her garden party a few years
back ; but she was still very beautiful. She and her sister


were the two handsomest women I ever met, tall, elegant
in figure, and perfect in face. The wife of one of our
governors had an album of Australian beauties, amongst
them Mrs. Augustus and her sister, two nieces of my Here-
ford House friends, and many others I had seen. I have
photos of many of the young people of the present day quite
equal to any I have met in England in face or figure, and
without partiality, displaying more expression and decidedly
more winning manners. Certainly my means of judging
may have been limited, still I have been to many places of
amusement—to theatres, the Handel Festival, the Royal
Academy, and other exhibitions—walking and riding; but
could not help remarking that the one prevailing expression
in the faces I have seen was supercilious, and never once
have I noticed the courtesy to elderly people I have been
accustomed to see in Australia. There appears to me in
England a dread of being natural for fear of “ what people
will think.”
Hobart Town was very quiet, though it was the height
of the season; but as the girls remarked, “ What was the
use of thinking of dances, picnics, or any other amusement
when there were neither partners nor escorts!” there being
so many ladies, and so very few of the sterner sex. The
arrival of the steamer from Sydney was an event which
caused half the population at least to wend their way to
the wharf. The arrival of the mail was another source
of great excitement; we seemed to be so far removed
from Sydney then—almost as far away as England is


from Australia at the present time, when there is a
weekly mail, and when we can read a cablegram in this
morning’s newspaper of the doings in the colonies not a
day ago.
We were to leave in the beginning of May, and by that
time the weather was really cold. Mount Wellington had
already a little snow on its summit, and furs were in
requisition.
Our friend Mr. W. H. Walsh returned to Sydney with
us, and when we arrived at Twofold Bay, Maria and James
came on board in the custom-house officer’s boat to see
me. They were out on horseback when the steamer was
signalled, and had only just time to ride down to the boat
before she pulled off from the shore. We were delighted
to meet again ; they both thought Tasmania had benefited
us considerably. They told me, had they known in time
when we were in the Bay before, I could have gone to
their cottage at Eden. “Yes,” said Maria, “ and you would
not have thought it ugly then.” It was hard to say “ Good-
bye ”; but we all felt it would not be for long, as they
hoped to be in Sydney again soon.
We had enjoyed our four months’ stay; but how delight-
ful it was to be once more at “ Hurst,” in our own rooms
and with our own surroundings. The feeling of being at
home is enhanced by these changes, however well conducted
the lodging-house may be. We often laughed over our
Hobart Town experiences and at Mrs. Mills, the owner of
the house where we stayed, who would shut all the


windows immediately we were out of the house, which
it was my mission to open immediately we returned.
When her cooking had not been quite satisfactory, and we
had ordered things from the pastry-cook’s, our dear old
friend W. H. Walsh, desiring to please her, praised
some dish which it was high treason to have ordered
from outside. All these little matters we could now
laugh at, being once more at home, where life had charms
not to be compassed elsewhere. Our old pursuits gained
value by the change, and the old walks and drives in
interest. The winter in New South Wales is very enjoy-
able from May until November, and life is indeed worth
living, after the heat, dust, and mosquitoes, which are
most trying.
Now after a year in England, without clear skies, much
rain, fog, and snow, I am bound to agree with many
who say, “If I were once again in Australia I would
never return to this miserable climate.” I shake my
head, and call to mind the many discomforts of a hot, dry
climate.
My old friends were about to return to the colony and
I had promised to go to them again, so my stay at Hurst
was drawing to a close. It was a wrench to leave the
children I had learned to love ; but they were so young
compared with others I had taught, and felt I was losing
ground in many branches; besides, I had promised. Un-
fortunately Mrs. Woolley had decided on living in
Sydney, so after remaining with them a few months,


I had to leave, as my health completely gave way, and
an attack of congestion of the lungs rendered me an
idle woman for many months. This gave me time to
realise what had been accomplished during eighteen
years.


CHAPTER XIII
Sydney had now the University, with Dr. Woolley, a
scholar of reputation, at its head. There were also many
private schools for young men destined for the Church,
with men like Mr. Baly, an Oxford man, and Dr. Forrest
of the King School, Parramatta, and Moore College at
Liverpool, to prepare them for it. Ladies’ schools were
numerous; the Misses Moore, Flower, Thompson and
Cooksey were doing good work, preparing young
Australian women for their duties. The national school
system for the masses had not yet been introduced, which,
I regret to say, provides only a strictly secular education.
A system which entirely puts religion aside can only end
in the repudiation of that responsibility which raises man-
kind above the lower order of animal creation. The first
lesson to inculcate in every child is obedience to God and
His laws; obedience to man and his laws then becomes a
part of the child’s nature. Another grave objection to
the national system is, that it is not for the poorer class
exclusively. Men with large incomes send their children
to the State schools, paying merely the same rates as the


poor man. Only imagine men with incomes of £BOO a
year sending their children to these schools! Those
whose incomes are sufficiently large to enable them to
be responsible for the cost of their children’s educa-
tion should not rely on State aid. These children
are taught not only reading, writing, and arithmetic, but
languages, mathematics, algebra, drawing, music, and drill,
for a few pence per week. Some of the parents may
give their children a year or two at a private school to
finish them; but we venture to say the national school
system has bent the “ twig ” in such a way as to preclude
almost any hope of straightening it, except in very rare
instances. Teachers too are fallible, and are liable to show
more interest in the well-to-do man’s child than in that
of the poor man. The Government schools have been
the means of lifting from the shoulders of thriving and
even rich men the responsibility of looking after the
education of their children, and the poor man’s child is
educated in such a way that in nine cases out of ten he
despises his parents, and has gained the notion that
honest labour is beneath him. Where the parents are
in good circumstances and pay proper attention to the
religious training of their children at home, they may not
be injured by the lack of it at school; but in the majority
of cases the good accomplished at home is neutralised at
school. This applies to the poor as well as the rich, only
as the poor are often too wearied after their day’s labour
to give much attention to the religious education of their


children, how much more necessary is it in their case that
it should be attended to in school.
That there have always been different grades in society,
that it is necessary to the wellbeing of all that it should
be so, and that these grades should bear a numerical pro-
portion to each other which can be tolerably well fixed,
history bears out. Does the system of education in the
national schools tend to keep up this healthy proportion,
or does it upset the social economy, in which large com-
munities can only exist with safety to the majority ? Is
it a healthy state when Jack considers himself as good as
his master, if not better ? Yet this is the effect produced
by public school teaching—a system of levelling. By all
means let the State provide a sound, plain education for
the children of those whose means are too small to allow
of their defraying the expense of it. A certain period of
attendance should be compulsory, and religious instruction
should not be neglected.
When every church had its day school, it was easy to
get domestics, male and female, plainly educated and well
trained, or youths desirous of learning a business. I know
many homes in the colony now where the heads of
families were so educated, who are an example and blessing
to all around them, holding good positions and training
their children wisely and well.
The Roman Catholic Church is far wiser than the
Protestant Church, as in every town and country parish
where a church is built there is a school also. They know


how necessary it is to sow the seed of religious belief with
their daily lessons. To my fellow-Protestants in New
South Wales or elsewhere I say, keep your church
schools in every parish, and to what nobler or better use
could the wealthy devote a portion of their riches than by
the endowment of church schools 1 There cannot be a
doubt that good training in the early life of a people
minimises the necessity for asylums and gaols.
Many will consider my views on the national school
question narrow, and ask, Why should the poor children
who are clever be deprived of opportunities for cultivating
their talents 1 My answer is, If there is talent, it will, as
it always has done, make a way for itself, and did long
before this system was thought of. Difficulties are to the
talented boy or girl incentives to the exertion necessary to
overcome them, and help to form the character. It would
be well, after these qualities of talent have developed, that
the State should give aid in the way of scholarships or
otherwise.
After all, the knowledge acquired at such schools is very
superficial; too much is attempted, and the results prove
without doubt, “A little knowledge is a dangerous thing.”
We had several clever and eloquent men in the
Sydney churches from Great Britain and some educated in
the colony—men who not only performed their Sunday
duties, but worked throughout the week without inter-
mission. Parishes then covered very much larger areas
than they do at present.


The Roman Catholic clergy, under their great and good
head, Archbishop Folding, had worked wonders for their
flock. St. Mary’s Cathedral was at this time a fine
building, St. Patrick’s and others were commenced. Pres-
byterian, Congregational, and Wesleyans, all had large and
well-filled chapels. The University was now finished, and
the affiliated colleges in prospect. Many new and exten-
sive buildings in the principal streets sprang up like magic ;
but the impetus given to advancement was more especi-
ally noticeable in the suburbs. Eandwick was now formed
into streets ; the Destitute Children’s Asylum, founded
by Dr. Cuthill, was finished ; the racecourse formed ; Woo-
loomooloo nearly covered with houses ; William Street,
where but a short time since there were only private
houses, was now being converted into a thoroughfare of
shops; Waverley and Surrey Hills were fast becoming
populous neighbourhoods. Cleveland House, which I
remember surrounded by gardens and shrubberies, and
standing in its many acres of paddock, was being rapidly
cut up ; the Eedfern Railway Station and station yard
were formed on a portion of it; the Silent City close by
still holds its silent warnings in the midst of man’s pro-
gress, “ Thus far shalt thou go, and no farther.”
We had occasional visits from celebrities, such as
Anna Bishop, Catherine Hayes, G. W. Brooke, and others.
Madame Bushelle, Carandini, and Sara Flower were our
own; the latter having been with us since 1852. What a
voice she had, and what a splendid teacher! I met her at
I


her brother’s a few weeks after her arrival in Australia,
before she had made her cUhut before a Sydney audience.
Poor thing ! what a sad end was hers; but through years
of work and privation she never lost her voice. We had
an excellent opera company which she joined—in which
were Squires, Madame Escott, Earquharson, Beaumont,
with many others, as my contemporaries will remember.
Lovers of music had a great treat about this time in a series
of concerts conducted byLavenu,and held in the grand hall of
our University. The oratorios of the “ Messiah,” “ Creation,”
“Moses in Egypt,’’and otherworks of the best composerswere
rendered in a masterly manner. The choirs of the Sydney
churches which joined with the musical societies of Sydney,
both vocal and instrumental, were most efficient. The opera
company supplied the leading solos, Sara Flower being
a host in herself —Mendelssohn’s music being her speciality,
as she made her first appearance in it at the Exeter Hall
concerts. Her grand contralto voice filled the hall, and
many musical critics remarked that no one ever had sung or
ever could sing such music better. This bringing together
all the musical talent of Sydney was of inestimable benefit
to our young Australians, giving fresh impetus to their
decided taste for it.
The fine arts at this period had not made much head-
way ; still, scattered over the country, were many pictures of
merit by colonial artists. Architects were not numerous,
but now there are several of great ability. In criticising
their works, people are apt to forget the difficulties they


have had to contend with, the absence of works of
renowned men, and the distance from the countries where
the finest models and examples are to be seen and studied.
Some who have designed works here have never had these
advantages, never having been away from their native land.
Again I was with my old friends, James and Maria, close to
my father’s old home at Eedfern ; this visit was most
thoroughly enjoyed. One day we made a trip to Parra-
matta by train. I recalled my girlhood as I saw the familiar
streets and houses of this old town, with its old-fashioned
buildings without verandahs, —similar to those I pass on the
road in this Hampshire village,—the trim little gardens full
of flowers, the bricked kitchens, and old-world appearances.
Parramatta is, next to Sydney, the oldest town in Australia,
and even now retains many of its primitive features; the
Domain or Park with its avenue of oaks ; its old-fashioned
Government House; and its factory buildings still left.
There is some charming country round it, well cultivated,
with orchards, vineyards, and the splendid orangeries, with
their golden fruit. My title does not appear such a mis-
nomer, taking into account the many golden-hued flowers,
rivers with beds of golden sand, nuggets of gold and
golden quartz —in fact, every touch of His, from glow-
ing sunrise to sunset, proclaims it such. We spent
several afternoons on board an American ship, which the
captain and his young wife made their home. Trade with
America was now becoming extensive. This vessel only
carried cargo; but the saloon and cabins were fitted like a


yacht’s. When on board, I could see from her deck what a
marvellous change had taken place—the increase of wharves,
the accommodation at the circular quay much enlarged,
and the greater number of ships. Balmain, Pyrmont, and
Wooloomooloo from the harbour appeared one mass of
habitations; North Shore still was country, and the wooded
heights of Darling Point, Edgecliff Eoad, and Woollahra
remained partially free from vulgar bricks and mortar.
How well I remember a dance we attended in Campbell
Street, near the Haymarket. Though there were cabs at
this time, they were few in number, but omnibuses plied
through most of the principal suburbs. That week, having
been to a ball at Government House, Maria and I suggested,
as that had entailed considerable expense, we would go by
the omnibus and walk home by the railway works; so
we started. Just as we entered our friend’s hall, the Eev.
Mr. Hose, acting warden of the University, met us,
reminding Maria she had promised him the first quadrille.
“So I did; take my cloak, Kate.” I did so; and being en-
gaged for the same dance as their vis-a-vis, hurried down just
in time. The first figure ended, and when Maria advanced
for L’6U, I saw my partner laughing. I looked down, and
there was Maria’s white satin boots with her goloshes over
them; I waited till she had finished the figure and then
told her. No one but an Irishwoman could have been so
unconcerned. She stooped, took them off, handed them to
her partner, saying, “ You see the consequence of having a
careful husband.” I felt it was a blessing the said husband


was at the other end of the room. We danced until
nearly daylight, then with the Rev. Mr. Hose we passed
the Haymarket, just as the hay carts were arriving.
Nearly thirty years have passed since then, and Sydney has
now its “ season ” for fashionable people. Conventionality
prevents many social gatherings. Mrs. Grundy has found
her way to the Antipodes, interfering, as she always does,
with that which is natural and innocent by her verdict,
“It is not considered good form.” Yet I trust our kind,
generous, and hearty Australian hospitality will never give
in to her, and become as fearful of her “ What will people
think or say ” as they are in England.


CHAPTER XIV
Another warning from the doctor determined me in
leaving Sydney for a visit to my brother. Tired of waiting
for an escort, I started without; James taking me to
Parramatta by train, where I found the coaches now much
improved. A friend had promised to send a telegram
to some friends of my brother’s to meet me at Green
Swamps, and take me to their homestead at Macquarie
Plains, where Mr. Henry, being in the neighbourhood,
would be my escort to Wellington. I was very glad of
this opportunity of rest, and breaking the coach journey.
Crossing Bathurst Plains in winter would be bitterly cold
under most circumstances, and especially so after being in
the coach all day, yet the first part of the journey from
Parramatta was very pleasant. The winter in Australia
is delightful for travelling; my journeys hitherto had been
during the hottest time of the year, so I thoroughly enjoyed
this one, free from flies, dust, and heat. We had the
advantage of a full moon, and were able to enjoy the
scenery. The Blue Mountains appeared more beautiful
than ever, so quiet and majestic, like another world, where


toil and turmoil are unknown. Then, when starting in the
early morning, every tree was jewelled with hoar-frost, till
the warm rays of the sun turned them into dripping
fountains; but I was not sorry to learn we were approach-
ing the inn where I expected to meet Mr. East; but,
alas ! only to meet disappointment instead, and I had to
arrive in Bathurst alone, with a very vague idea of where
I should go for the nighty thinking if I can only get to
the Eoyal Hotel, I must send a message to the Plains ; but
seven years had changed Bathurst, which was now a busy
place on a Saturday night. After delivering our mails at
the post-office, the coach was driven into the yard of a
public-house full of busy men. All alighted, and I stood
by the side of another female passenger wondering what
I should do, when a gentleman addressed me, “I hear
you expected friends from Macquarie Plains to meet you;
I am driving past their house, and will take you there
with pleasure.” Hesitating as to what answer to give to
this offer from a perfect stranger, I heard a familiar voice,
turned and saw an old acquaintance; so thanking the
unknown gentleman, hastened after Mr. F , who was
much astonished at seeing me there. My troubles were
now over, as he looked after my luggage and took me to
a quiet hotel near, engaged a private room, and left me to
the rest Iso much needed. Thoroughly worn out in mind
and body, I had a good cry before retiring for the night,
and wondered whether telegrams were an improvement
on the old-fashioned method of communication by letter.


The next morning Mr. Henry arrived, he having called at
Macquarie Plains as arranged, and heard that Mr. Hall
had sent word where I was to be found. I was glad
when we left for Frederick’s Valley, where I remained for
a week with Mr. Henry’s sister, and had many pleasant
drives in the neighbourhood; one to a deserted gold-field,
where a large quartz crushing machine was lying idle.
This ugly mass of iron had a peculiar fascination for my
friend, who, kindly wishing to share his pleasure with me,
explained the use of various cranks and wheels. I fear, in
saying Yes, where it ought to have been No, I showed my
stupidity. He proposed my going to another part of the
field, where there was a pretty view of the valley, and
where one might pick up some specimens from amongst
those heaps of quartz. The valley was pretty, with a num-
ber of farms under cultivation; but English farmers would
have been surprised at the rough and ready style adopted,
and the Australian want of system; still crops were good,
the virgin soil no doubt making up for careless husbandry.
The fields were divided by open rails or cockatoo fences, i.e.
branches and logs of trees laid on the ground one across
the other, with posts and slip rails in lieu of gates. The
cultivated land, not being divided by close hedges as at
home, appeared more extensive. I enjoyed this journey;
and having been over the ground before, could mark the
progress that had been made. Orange was becoming a
large town, but Molong was still in a very primitive state.
We passed through Ironbarks diggings. What a place! Full


of activity, few decent houses, tents and huts predominating,
though there were several inns,but not comfortable for ladies.
We stayed at one for an hour or two, and found the grilled
chicken, ham, eggs, bread, and tea were not to be despised,
though served on common delf plates placed on a deal table
guiltless of a cloth. What a life for men accustomed to
the luxuries and comforts of an English home I thought as
I watched the groups of diggers. Great heaps of quartz
were scattered over the field, and the roads are terribly
dusty in dry weather and miry in wet.
Mr. Henry left me to speak with two rough-looking
men standing by one of the heaps of quartz, so I walked
slowly on, musing on the phantasmagoria we call life.
When he overtook me, he said, “ One of those men is an
earl’s son I met in Melbourne last summer. You would
scarcely think so, Kate?” “Yes; for I met a duke’s son
in far worse plight a few years ago.”
' At one time I had occasion to cross Cleveland Paddocks
twice or thrice a week about one o’clock, and several times
saw a young man leave the yard of a cordial manufacturer
at Eedfern, where he washed bottles. It was found out
afterwards he was Lord F , son of a duke. I should
not have noticed him; but one morning I dropped my
handkerchief, which he saw and, lifting his hat, returned it
to me. Some time after, at the band in the Domain, a
friend introduced the same young man to me, whom I did
not recognise until he remarked: “ I have met Miss L
before.” “Have you?” “Yes; one morning in Cleveland


Paddocks.” He had drifted, like many other human
wrecks, to the golden shores of Australia to fill a neglected
grave. He received a regular allowance from home, which
was soon gambled away. While it lasted he lived with
gentlemen; when penniless, earned enough to keep body
and soul together, anyhow, anywhere. Poor young man !
he was one of many I heard of then and since who
thought Australia a veritable “ Tom Tiddler’s ground,”
where picking up gold and silver only required the exer-
tion of stooping for it. It certainly was picked up; but
it required stalwart arms and steady perseverance to wield
the “picks,” and bear other hard work as well as hard
fare.
We had fine weather, so my second view of Wellington
was under favourable auspices; the township already
showed signs of progress—stores, an inn, court-house, and
several pretty cottages were now on that side the river.
Montefiores was just the same, being on part of the original
Nanima estate, and still private property. My brother
had purchased the hotel there and converted it into large
stores, with a very convenient private house adjoining,
fine garden, and orchard. The former owner had planted
the best fruit trees procurable in Sydney; better peaches,
figs, and nectarines I have never seen. The fences round
were covered with climbing roses of various kinds; there
was a large bed of violets and daisies just coming into
flower. The vegetable garden was most prolific—cauli-
flowers so large as to require a boiler to cook them in;


asparagus in great quantity, lettuces, onions, and in fact all
vegetables in profusion. Harry supplied half the town-
ship if they would merely go for it; the same with fruit,
and yet quantities were wasted. Many changes had taken
place during my absence. The Eev. Mr. Watson had been
advised to retire on his pension, and another clergyman
appointed; a young man, with his wife, now carried on
the work most zealously still in the old church, temporarily
improved, as when the court-house was finished in
Wellington, it was intended that service should be held
there. My friends had left Nanima station, and now
owned a steam mill property near the river, and close to a
pretty little place recently built by Mr. Anthony, the
clerk of petty sessions. Dr. Curtis had almost given up
practice, and a young M.D. and his wife, just from Eng-
land, lived in his cottage. Kind, genial Mr. Silva was the
Crown commissioner at Mount Arthur. The late owner
of my brother’s property had built a very nice house
at the junction of the two rivers, appropriately called
the “Meeting of the Waters”; unfortunately he did not
live long to enjoy its many beauties. Gobolion was unin-
habited, but the ground was being cultivated by a wealthy
squatter who had purchased another place a few miles from
Montefiores. During my visit we spent a day at the
Holms, and also went to a dance there, which, as an
illustration of what young people went through in those
early times to attend such amusements, I will describe.
We were to leave my brother’s house at about six o’clock in


the evening, to arrive at our destination in time to dress.
One carriage contained three ladies, nurse, and infant, Mr.
Henry driving; a gig and single buggy contained others,
and several gentlemen were on horseback. All went on well
for several miles, when flashes of lightning and distant
thunder warned us of an approaching storm, which at that
time of the year was very alarming. To make matters
worse, we had to turn into a bush road, with dense under-
wood, and trees meeting overhead. A terrific peal of
thunder and heavy rain frightened the horses, then dark-
ness fell like a dense cloud over us, and we had to stop
till the thunder became more distant, when some of the
gentlemen dismounted and led the horses, guided only by
the lightning, along the track. We could hear the
“ coo-ee ”of the others who had taken a better road. After
nearly two hours we found ourselves at the house, wet
and half-dead with fright. We were the last to arrive, as
the carriage, being large and heavy, could not get through
the bush roads as did those with single horses. Our
friends were almost afraid we had turned back, which my
brother had wished us to do.
Mrs. G suggested that we should take off our
crinolines at once. “ There are only three hanging before
the kitchen fire now, and by the time you have had some
refreshment and dressed so far, they will be ready for
you,” which they were. Not being strong, I felt “Let me
lie here in peace ”; but I was soon refreshed, and a little
after nine o’clock was ready to laugh at our experiences in


“going to a party.” We danced till the first beams of
sunrise fell on a picture hanging on the drawing-room
wall, when some one (I am sure it must have been a man)
drew up the blinds. What a transformation! Pretty
women looked worn and haggard, and the flowers sad,
drooping, or dead. We did not want to see more, but at
once retired to change ball-dresses for more suitable
apparel. In an hour breakfast was ready, and after we
started on a delightful ride home, none the worse for our
dance at the Holms. We had other dances at Mount
Arthur, and before I left also at “ The Meeting of the
Waters.” I paid a visit to “The Mill Cottage” and
nearly finished my career. I went for a ride on Mrs.
Anthony’s horse, a very spirited animal, which threw me.
My companion, Dr. Bohme, a German, living in the
neighbourhood, was terribly alarmed, till my laughing at
the concern he expressed so strangely, in German and
broken English, convinced him I was not seriously hurt.
For some days I was not able to move without dreadful
pain. My friends were greatly troubled, as we were
all going to a dance at “ The Meeting of the Waters,”
where my brother and his family were to meet us. “ What
shall we say about you to your brother 1 I dare not
tell him you went out on ‘Parson,’ as he told me on
no account to let you ride.” “I will go, and should I
be unable to dance, must plead headache.” What tor-
ture I went through to get ready! However, the drive
into Wellington did me good, and when I told


Dr. Costerton “ how stiff I felt,” he advised, “ Have
this dance with me, and you will be all right.” Before
the evening was over all pain had left me, and my
brother did not hear of my unfortunate fall until years
after.
Dubbo, a small township farther down the river, was
increasing in size and population. When we first went to
the district it was not much larger than Montefiores, but
had made great progress, and was fast becoming an
important place. It is not so picturesque as Wellington,
and much hotter.
Before gold was discovered, living in the Dubbo district
must have been very trying. A lady living some distance
below Dubbo told me they had to keep their buggy and
harness in a pit to prevent the extreme heat from cracking
them terribly. Butter could not be made, and meat had
to be cooked soon after the animal was killed. Vegetables
and grass in the dry seasons were not to be had. This
state of things I could easily realise, as one summer, while
in Wellington, butter could not be had. That was an
exceptionally hot year throughout Australia, culminating
in the long-to-be-remembered “Black Thursday,” which
was almost beyond description. People died from the
terrible heat, birds fell from the trees dead, and all vege-
tation was scorched up, while bush fires added to the
misery. With us it ended in an awful thunderstorm,
which cleared the air, and we were able to breathe freely
again.


As the country was opened up by clearing away the
trees and undergrowth, the climate became cooler. During
my residence in Wellington and many wanderings through
dense scrub and bush roads, I never saw a snake, but
lizards and iguanas of all sizes; some were three feet in
length, like young crocodiles. Kangaroos we saw at a
distance; I knew what they were like, having seen some
at the Zoological Gardens in the Eegent’s Park. I had
also seen the dingo—the native dog of Australia—in
England, as my father had a puppy given to him by a
friend from Sydney, which, when full grown, was a
nuisance to the neighbourhood.
The wallaby makes a pretty outdoor pet, and some
people like the opossum and native bear. The birds
are very beautiful, —the Blue Mountain and Lowrie parrots,
Eegent bird, brilliant scarlet and green king parrot, lead-
beater, and snow-white cockatoos. The galahs, with their
delicate gray and rose-pink plumage, are the prettiest
parrots, and become splendid talkers ; the tiny budgeric
gar, sometimes called the shell parrot; honeysuckers,
with yellow eyes, like animated jewels; the butcher bird,
crow, eagle, lyre bird, and the kookaburra, or laugh-
ing jackass, are well known. The last-named are very
useful, as they are destroyers of snakes. A gentleman,
travelling along a lonely mountain road, heard this
bird’s extraordinary Ha ! ha ! ha ! following him for some
distance, until he came close to water and rocky ground,
where he saw a large snake basking in the sun. In


an instant “Jack” swooped down, caught the reptile by
the hack of the head, flew with it to a great height and
dropped it on the rock, then flew down and dashed it against
the stones till it was quite dead. These birds are met
with all over the country, and are still seen close to Sydney.
Flying foxes, a species of bat, are most destructive to fruit,
knocking it off the trees and biting pieces out of the ripest.
Some writers have stated the Australian birds do not sing.
This is a mistake; they have not a continuous song like
many of the English birds, such as the lark and thrush,
but they have some very sweet notes, especially the bell-
bird, young magpies, and many others, and enliven the bush
with their songs. English sparrows are very numerous
everywhere in the colonies, and are surely the greediest,
and most impudent birds. My verandah flowers in Sydney
were nearly ruined by them; they would eat begonias and
fuchsias while I was almost within reach of them.
My stay in the country had quite restored me to health,
and hearing from a friend in Maitland of another appoint-
ment in the Hunter River district, arranged to take it,
and left in the autumn for Morpeth, once more braving
the perils and discomforts of the road to Bathurst by
coach. During a few days’ stay in that town, now quite
an important place, I went with a friend to witness the
ceremony of consecrating the new Roman Catholic Church.
The grand service, with many priests in gorgeous vestments,
girls in bridal-like confirmation dresses, acolytes, incense,
music, and chanted prayers, all reminded me of early


childhood when I went with my maternal grandmother
to her church in Spanish Place, London. After a short
visit to my friends in Cumberland Street, Sydney, and
promising to spend part of my Christmas holidays with
them, I was again on the wing.
K


CHAPTER XV
I had to leave by the steamer from the A. S. N. Company’s
wharf at night, and so missed seeing anything of the route
until we arrived at Newcastle, when I went on deck,
anxious to get a view of the Hunter Eiver. As I ex-
pected, the scenery was totally different in character from
that of the Western district, —flat, but very pretty with
very luxuriant vegetation; many farms with fine pasture
lands and orchards. The vineyards too were a new
feature to me. We stopped at several places to land
passengers, mails, and cargo, then proceeded to Morpeth,
where my journey ended, and in a short time I reached
my future home, which was at the house of Mr. Edward
Close.
The trying ordeal of introducing myself to perfect
strangers, being my first experience of this position,
was anything but pleasant. The house was large,
standing in extensive paddocks, and surrounded by
flower garden, shrubbery, and orchard. The members
of the household were the owner, a retired military
man in his seventieth year, his eldest son, wife, and


their two little girls, Eosie and Susie. Eosie and Susie,
with the daughter of a friend near, were to be my
pupils.
We were close to the Bishop of Newcastle’s residence
and the church; for walks we had no need to go beyond
our own grounds. Morpeth was not pretty, merely one long
street with few buildings of any size; the bishop’s house
and Mr. Edward Close’s were the only two of any import-
ance in the place at the time I write of. The bishop living
so near was a great advantage, as he generally preached at
our church on Sunday evenings. Our clergyman was very
wearying to listen to, and my little pupils were terribly
tried by his long sermons. Strange to say, almost in-
variably the poorest preachers preach the longest ser-
mons. My dear little girls on such occasions showed their
difference in temperament. Susie would whisper very
audibly, “ When will Mr. W stop ? I am so tired; ”
while Eosie with her earnest eyes listened attentively. I
once asked her what the sermon was about. “I don’t
know, Miss L , but thought it must be good, as it is
from the Bible.”
We lived a quiet uneventful life at Morpeth House.
Mr. Edward Close senior was without exception the most
Christian-like man I ever knew; he had lived in the district
for years, and the only fault that could be found in him dur-
ing a long career was, “ He was too good, too lenient to the
faults of others.” At the time I write of he had given up
the management of his estate to his eldest son, spending


his mornings in his flower garden, and after dinner reading
in his study. Mrs. Edward Close junior had been his ward,
knowing no other father, as she once told me, and certainly
she was devotedly attached to him. Her husband was a
fine-looking man and enthusiastic volunteer, looking in
his uniform every inch a soldier. Both husband and wife
were Australians.
Our evenings were spent in a way in every respect con-
genial to my taste ; Mr. Edward Close senior for years had
read aloud to those in the house who wished to listen. Mrs.
Close and I with our work were always willing to pass our
time thus. The other day, in looking over a diary kept in
that year, I found a list of the books he read, amongst them
being Lord Dufferin’s Letters from High Latitudes, Farrar’s
Julian Home, The Tent and the Caravan, The Crescent and
the Cross, Life of Kitto, and Life of the Duke of Wellington, the
last was most interesting, as the reader had been an actor
in many of the scenes described, and in answer to our
questions would place the book aside, and fight his
battles over again; the kind old face would then light up
and the clear eyes flash at the recollection of the days of
his youth. Once I remarked, “ I cannot understand how
you, Mr. Close, could have ever wished to kill, when
even the sport of shooting is distasteful to you.” “ I can-
not understand myself now; but when once the word of
command is given, discipline and duty led us on, and
afterwards excitement made the animal nature forget all
else but the desire to conquer. After the battle to me


was always terrible, and I used to think, ‘I can never
fight again.’ Yet I have always felt I could not have
been an onlooker only. War is a terrible necessity; but
as long as the world lasts inevitable. When I read the
accounts of the Indian Mutiny, and heard from the lips
of those who witnessed them its horrors, I felt it was
indeed so.” This I could understand, remembering one
amongst the many tragedies. A girl I knew married a
young officer visiting Sydney, and soon afterwards left for
India. They were at Meerut with his regiment when the
mutiny broke out, and tried to escape by the river; they
were seen from the shore and pursued. As all hope of
getting away from their pursuers was gone, he whispered
a few words to his young wife, to which she evidently
agreed ; then clasping his wife in his arms, jumped into the
river, and they were saved from the fate of many which
they had witnessed.
When Sir John and Lady Young paid their first visit to
the Hunter River district, they held a reception and a grand
review of the volunteers. We went of course. Maitland
was en fUe with carriages of all description, full of gaily-
dressed ladies, and numbers of equestrians of both sexes.
Flags, triumphal arches, and our military made up quite
an imposing spectacle. Mr. Close sent her ladyship a
basket of fruit, amongst it the largest loquats I ever saw,
so different from the usual specimens to be purchased now;
they were as large as hens’ eggs, with very few seeds.
Of late this fruit has been very much neglected; a great


pity, as when properly cultivated it is very delicious, and
coming at a season when we have so little fruit, is a great
boon. I have never seen it so fine anywhere as at
Morpeth House, and excepting there have not tasted
bananas ripened on the trees, and by comparison those
brought from Queensland and Fiji are not so delicate in
flavour.
Early in the spring I went with my pupils to visit a
friend of the family at Newcastle. It was a very pleasant
change, especially as Morpeth House was being painted,
which had affected my health, and was really the cause of
our going. The kind old gentleman having noticed my
pale face and constant headache, asked Mr. Bolton to take
us for a week or two. It was a contrast to Morpeth—the
town built on a rocky height, and the streets a series of
ascents. We were on one of the highest points, so we had
an excellent view of the glorious ocean with its restless
waves. We often wandered about the beach gathering
shells and seaweed.
One pet at Mr. Bolton’s caused much amusement, an
Australian “native companion,” a species of crane; a
pretty tame bird with shaded gray feathers and graceful
neck. It would run races with the children’s arms round
its neck, up and down the garden paths, standing patiently
by my side when they were tired, and waiting for another
start.
Newcastle was a busy place then. What must it be
after more than a quarter of a century’s progress I can only


gather from the newspapers, never having been there since,
except in passing from the steamer to the railway station.
At Christmas, with Mrs. Close and the children, I went to
Sydney. What a journey ! A crowded steamer with only
one saloon for the ladies and children; and every one
was ill but the stewardess and myself. The children
were crying, and even Mrs. Close was indifferent to her
baby’s wailings. That night’s experience proved that
nothing could make me suffer from mat de mer. How
glad we were to get on terra Jirma once more. Mrs.
Close left me at my friend’s house in Cumberland
Street. What a home it was! The dear, gentle mother
and her kind and pretty daughters always ready to
welcome their friends, especially those without a home.
I have often listened to that mother’s conversation, and
thought how innocent and unworldly she was. She had
married young, and was not a great reader, so that her
mind was purity itself. Until her husband’s death, she had
never had to think for herself, and fortunately her eldest
daughter, a girl of twenty, had to a great extent taken the
husband’s place, sparing her mother business worries. In
her widow’s dress she looked so pretty and placid, sitting
in her usual place by the large dining-room window
looking over the harbour. Always ready to sympathise
with the joys or sorrows of others, she now warmly
welcomed me. Ah me ! that dear old home is now broken
up, that good mother and true friend “beyond the stars.”
Her children have homes of their own, only the eldest


remaining unmarried; she, without the duties of a home,
takes upon herself those of many. Truly good and
charitable, she has been a “ ministering angel ” to many of
those “ we have with us always,” and will be able to meet
her beloved parents some day without a pang of regret.
In town Mrs. Close had asked me to call on her at
Camphell’s wharf, where she was staying with a connection
of her husband’s; so one afternoon I called. She was out,
but Mr. John received me, and, before I could explain the
reason of my visit, began, “Well, young lady, what do
you want a subscription for ? ” I looked astonished, and
he continued, “Do you know you are the third that has
asked me for help to-day.” “ But I don’t want anything.”
“Not want anything ? ” in a surprised tone. “Well, then,
you are very unlike my usual young lady visitors, for they
generally want something for a church, chapel, school,
poor people, or help of some kind. I have neither wife nor
children, so am expected to provide for other men’s.”
When he heard my errand he laughed, and said, “You
are certain you do not want anything?” “Yes, quite
certain, Mr. John.” As I would not wait for Mrs.
Close’s return, he escorted me to the gate. This
gentleman was the eldest of three brothers, old and
wealthy colonists, pillars of the Church of England, and
true philanthropists, highly respected and honourable men.
The one I have alluded to spent a fortune in doing good,
and left a large sum to found a church in one of the
Pacific Islands. He and his brothers assisted in forming a


bishopric in the Southern district. They have all gone
now to reap an eternal reward for good work done here,
leaving an honoured name to their descendants.
Soon after our return to Morpeth, the sad news of our
beloved Queen’s loss, by the death of Prince Albert,
reached us. A sad loss to her, her family, and the nation
of which we were part. Sympathy was sincere, and in
most homes it was felt almost as a family bereavement.
Mr. Edward Close senior was so much affected as to be
almost unable to read the usual daily prayer for the
Eoyal family.
We had incessant rain for some time after our return
to Morpeth, and fears of floods were entertained, the
district lying low, and most of the farms near the banks of
the river. One night, hearing the firing of guns and people
running about, I knew these fears were realised, and in
the morning heard that Mr. Edward Close junior with our
men had been rescuing persons from the roofs of houses
and tree tops. It was dangerous work, as often the boats
would be nearly stove in by striking against the buildings,
fences, and tree stumps, or nearly upset by floating debris.
What a desolate scene it was, as viewed from our higher
ground, now full of stock rescued from the farms ! Only
the chimneys of houses and the tops of high trees to mark
where a few weeks ago stood comfortable homes, orchards,
and gardens. Poor people, what places to return to when
the water subsided ; furniture and clothing soddened with
wet and mud; stock drowned and crops washed away ! I


remarked to Mr. Edward Close senior, “They will never live
in those places again.” “Yes, Miss L ,in a few weeks
you will see them quite comfortable again.” Which was
the case, for in less than two months, owing to the
wonderful power of the Southern sun, fresh crops were
above the ground, the wooden houses fresh whitewashed,
and the soil richer and more productive than ever, owing to
the rich soil deposited. I went for a short visit to Maitland
at this time, and from Government Cottage on the hill saw
more of the effects of the flood than at Morpeth. Dead
stock, produce, furniture, and whole stacks of hay floated
down the stream. Yet Mr. Day said, “Floods in the
Hunter were nothing to those in other districts, where
many lives would be sacrificed ere aid could be obtained.”


CHAPTER XVI
After twelve months’ residence in Morpeth I left for
another visit to Penrith, by this time a much busier place,
as the then railway terminus for the Western district.
The bridge over the Nepean Eiver was finished, so we
could cross without that extremely disagreeable ferry.
We spent a few weeks in the mountains, visiting Govett’s
Leap, the waterfalls, and other well-known spots, while
others we explored on our own account. How lovely
it all was! What complete solitude in the gullies and
mountain paths! The mountains might well be named
“ Blue,” for at times they were intensely so. One sunset
there was most beautiful. We had spent the afternoon
collecting ferns, waratahs, and mountain moss, heedless of
time, when a heavy storm came on. Taking shelter
under some rocks, we watched the sun emerging from the
rain-clouds; in an instant every peak was touched with
golden tints, and every valley filled by innumerable rain-
bows ; gradually golden tints faded into purple, clouds broke
into silver turrets, and along the horizon was a sea of palest
green. My companion whispered, “ Can heaven be more


beautiful?” We could not so conceive it. The beauty
of the scene seemed to make the question “Is there a
God 1 ” impossible. If this cannot reach the poorest soul,
what can 1 We often took a drive to “ St. Mary’s,” quite
an English village in appearance then, with its pretty
church and “ silent dead ” around it. Not silent, for the
inscriptions over these last homes are often “sermons in
stones.” One always attracted me. It was to the mem-
ory of the son of a well-known English house, who,
travelling in search of health, gave up the quest here, and
died suddenly at the little village inn unknown, in this
lonely far-away land. Nurtured in luxury, and favoured
with exceptional advantages, he would seem to some safe
from common dangers. “The Universal Reaper” says no.
This record proves in few words how vain are man’s
efforts. But his mother could not have desired a fairer
resting-place for her child than here, amidst the humbler
graves covered with green turf and shaded by many trees,
and under, at night, the emblem of that son’s salvation,
“The Southern Cross.”
Now we had a bridge over the Nepean, Mrs. Richard
would often suggest drives to various farms on or near
Emu Plains. She delighted in paying visits to the
farmers’ wives, some of whom had known her in childhood,
and would sit and listen with interest to the various
details of “how the brindle cow had another calf,” or
“ when another pig would be killed,” or “ the trouble these
new-fangled fowls were, not being good mothers, you


know,” until we, who were sitting in the waggonette,
felt very tired and hot, wishing the good woman
to stop this no doubt all-important subject to her.
Sometimes our selfish impatience was punished by the
kindly offer of “milk and seedcake,” or “any flowers and
fruit we could gather.”
The main street of Penrith was not much altered; the
railway station not being in it, the post-office was still at
a general shop, but the letters were delivered through a
window at the end of the verandah, which was used only
for that purpose,—a much better plan than that adopted in
this English village where I am now staying, twenty-seven
years later, where they are delivered at a counter covered
with the usual goods of a country store, whence also
telegrams are sent, letters registered, and money orders
issued, so that inquisitive persons standing near can study
their neighbours’ business.
The volunteer movement had fired the ambition of the
young men of this district to become soldiers. The son
of a captain in the army was the head of “ our regiment,”
Mr. Richard the lieutenant. A grand volunteer ball was
to be held in the hall, and several visitors from Sydney were
expected. The stores were very busy, and nothing but the
army ball was talked of. It was a most successful affair;
not over select certainly, the captain’s wife dancing with
one of his men, their butcher’s son, much to her husband’s
amusement, who whispered, “ Look at my wife ; she has
not the vaguest idea who her partner is ; the uniform does


it, you know.” I discovered this later in the evening, when
Captain James introduced a partner to me; the face was
familiar, and during the first figure of the quadrille I
wondered where I had seen it. He did not speak, but
danced solemnly; but while waiting for the next figure,
he called me “Miss,” and appeared to know me, yet his
style of dancing proved he was not accustomed to ladies as
partners, for he would put his arm round my waist instead
of taking hands. At last I discovered who he was, when,
thinking to pay me a compliment, he alluded to my feet.
Yes, he had served me with a pair of shoes a few days
before. Captain James declared he and Mrs. Richard’s
brother knew the instant I found this out by my manner
to the poor young man. They were wrong, for I did my
best to place him at his ease by talking about the district.
It was a very pretty scene; nearly all the men in uniform,
and several very pretty girls. The room was gaily decorated
with flags. An excellent supper was provided by the
ladies of the district, and we left about two o’clock; but
the dancing continued till daylight. Being the first affair
of the kind, it served as a topic of conversation for months,
and the local belles voted picnics and tea-meetings slow
by comparison.
Again I wended my way to Sydney, to live with a
friend who was a great invalid, and undertake the manage-
ment of the house and education of her two children. We
lived at Surrey Hills, close to the principal nursery garden
in Sydney, which was a very extensive property owned by a


man who came to the colony with Captain Wilson, E.A.,
grandfather of my brother’s wife. The land, I think, was
a grant from Government; it was a sandy swamp, but
eminently fitted for the use it was put to ; beautiful flowers
and fine vegetables were grown at little outlay. At the
time of my brother’s marriage the owner of this extensive
property was becoming wealthy, and now it is worth many
thousands. Much of it has been built upon. Another
very wealthy family in Sydney owe their first step to
riches to a similar source, their father having gone to the
colony as secretary to my sister-in-law’s grandfather, and
acquired land. Captain Wilson only left his children an
honourable name ; but as I have previously remarked as
a curious fact, the large grants of land made to, or large
areas purchased for a trifle by the early colonists, especially
military or naval men, are not owned by their descend-
ants. The land, apparently of little value, was sold by
them to more business-like and far-seeing men ; sometimes
almost given away.
Afterwards we left Surrey Hills for a house in town near
to my first home in the colony, and by doing so formed a
close friendship with a family in the neighbourhood ; the
head of that family was a clever professional man, educated
in England, who arrived in the colony when such were few,
and by ability and perseverance attained the position he still
so ably and honourably fills. A true Englishman of the
old school, straight in word and deed, kind and generous—
in fact, an example in every relation of life. If we had such


men in our colonial parliaments, how very differently they
would be conducted, and the country governed; but his
professional and home duties during his early career
occupied the whole of his time, and now the state of
political life is such that good and honourable men often
decline to enter the arena; however, he uses his influence
and talent in other channels for the benefit of his adopted
country.
When the volunteer movement commenced, he became
captain of one of the Sydney corps, entering into the
various duties of the position with his usual energy. To
advance this patriotic movement he sacrificed many precious
evenings that otherwise would have been spent with
his family or in his well-stocked library. Of his wife it is
impossible to speak too highly; the best of mothers, sisters,
and friends, she and her sister are now the only two left
near my own age of the intimate friends of the “ days that
are no more.” Through these friends my life in Elizabeth
Street was passed in much happiness; their home was a
delightful one, well arranged, and as free from care as is
possible; their children were good and beautiful. In their
carriage I had many drives round Botany and Long Bays,
Band wick, Waverley, Five Dock, Burwood, and Homebush,
thus gaining knowledge of the environs of Sydney. Mrs.
Dawson was one who really deserved a carriage; no one
ever saw her out driving alone. It was one of her greatest
pleasures to take those with her who were without such a
luxury, just as it was a pleasure to her husband to lend


books from his library, or to welcome to his home those who
were not so well provided with this world’s goods. When
I hear people complain, “The world is very selfish,” I
think of such as these and others I have known in the
limited sphere of colonial life, and believe Charles
Mackay is right in saying, “The world is what we
make it.”
We went for a change to Manly Beach this summer
staying at the Lagoon, a pretty little place on the ocean
side. Thallie and I did not find fault with the rooms being
small, nor did we feel the want of piano, or books, as we
lived as much as we could out of doors, exploring rocks,
beach, and bush. Here were fairy nooks, silent beaches, all
unknown to the public, for Manly was not, as at present, a
fashionable watering-place, or inhabited by wealthy citizens.
Two steamers were quite sufficient for passenger traffic
except on holidays. Lodging-houses, two or three hotels,
and small shops constituted “ our village.” The view of the
ocean outside of the North Head is very fine. I used to
sit on the beach, watching the white-winged ships “ come
and go,” earnestly wishing I could sail away to my “ain
countrie,” that was hallowed by youthful recollections into
sacred ground, where the great and noble lived and died.
I am in that land now, learning over again that anticipation
is often illusive. Unfortunately we have had an unusually
rainy season; this, with fog, snow, and dull skies, by
comparison with our sunny, clear Australian weather, has
considerably damped my patriotic ardour, and has made me
L


feel sometimes that before another winter I will go, like
the swallows, to a more genial clime. To compare England
with the Golden South would be folly; the two countries
are so utterly unlike. In the cities of one age has darkened,
and progress improved and added to the massive construc-
tions of a wealthy nation’s palaces, churches, and homes.
The country too in summer is like a well-kept farm or garden,
rather too well kept, as where we live nearly every acre is
private property, nothing but the roads that you may
walk on. Only the other day a friend went (into what
we call a paddock) to gather some wildflowers, when she
was ordered off by a man, and the flowers she had picked
by the public roadside taken from her. Thousands of
acres covered with fern, heath, and firs are kept to give
pleasure only to the few. I cannot understand this, as in
Australia, except in grounds immediately surrounding the
houses or in a state of cultivation, few persons object to
sharing the beauties of nature with their kind. This
closing up of all the best features of English country
spoils its charm, beautiful as it is, when one can only view
it by peeping through hedges or barred gates. Who will
wonder if I prefer the country where all who possess
land are willing to share the pleasures of it with others ?
How often have we walked through pleasant grassy slopes
instead of keeping the dusty highway, resting when tired
under the trees’ shade ; if riding or driving, taking down
the slip-rails to avail ourselves of shady spots, and this
through the property of people we did not even know.


One old friend of ours at Burwood allows football and
cricket-matches to be played on his grounds without a
murmur of disapproval. This is another digression for
which I must beg my readers’ pardon—another wandering
from the subject to many years later. Let me see what
event happened at this period. A new cricket ground
was opened on what was only a few years ago sand-
hill and swamp; the roads to it were, and are still,
through that terrible enemy of Sydney housekeepers, red
dust and sand. A visit to the ground (Albert) was a treat
indeed, as the relatives and friends of the knights of the
“ Willow ” could also enjoy their Saturday afternoons and
holidays watching from the grand stand, or seated on the
grassy terraces, the prowess and skill of the players. Not
being a judge of the game, or specially interested in any
of the players, one visit was sufficient for me at that time.
When I saw the place again, shrubs and trees surrounded
it. My English readers know how well our colonial
youths play their favourite game, having witnessed it on
many a well-fought field. In this as well as in all outdoor
sports they are proficient, and as time rolls on, year after
year will bring them more to the front intellectually.
Steam now bridges the ocean. During the few weeks
spent on board our floating hotels on their way to the
centre of the empire and of intellectual culture they become
more cosmopolitan in their views every day. I know this to
be the case, as last year we experienced it on the P. and
0. boat. We had Englishmen returning from a tour in


the colonies, Americans, a judge from India, a Chinese
lieutenant, two governors from English colonies, and some
members of the aristocracy, with a few colonials who had
not been beyond their own land. Before we left the
steamer I could see what an impression had been made
upon our young people.
I will name a few Australians who in earlier days
made their mark with fewer advantages, compared with
those of the present generation—Wentworth, Dailey,
Cowper, Windeyer, Stephen, Kendall, Macarthur, Hamilton,
Hume, and Kemmis; then Martin, Dowling, and others,
who, though not born in, were educated in the colonies,
and this at a time when it took months instead of weeks
to learn what was going on beyond the waves of the broad
Pacific. Every young man who can afford it would
benefit by spending some time in the older parts of the
world before he settles down, that his views may be
enlarged by learning what class of men there are to
compete with. It may be the want of such extended
competition that makes so many rest content in Australia,
where it is comparatively small. Much has been done
during the last twenty years to increase the number of
our good men; and when some of our present political
charlatans, only greedy for place, patronage, and pay, die
out, I hope they will work with voice and pen for the real
benefit of the country. Our girls must not be forgotten ;
but so many have been chosen by Englishmen, and trans-
planted into English homes, that their qualities are better


known. That they are equal in accomplishments, love of
literature, personal appearance, and all that makes woman
the light of home to their English sisters, I can truthfully
state, having seen three generations of them in their
homes.


CHAPTER XVII
Once more I was meditating another flight into the
country. My friend had recovered, and was able to
resume the care of her house and family. Sydney never
agreed with me, and I so much preferred a country life.
Fortunately hearing of an engagement in a family where I
knew I should be happy, I bade my friends farewell, and
thought, “ The world is all before me where to choose; my
peace of rest with Providence my guide.” This Journey
of two hundred miles was begun under better auspices,
travelling by train to Penrith, remaining a night with my
friends there, who saw me the next morning comfortably
seated in a good coach drawn by fine horses, a turn-out for
the road very different from that I had hitherto known.
The roads were in much better condition, and the inn accom-
modation improved ; but before we arrived at Bowenfels,
my anticipation of an uneventful Journey was dispelled, as
our respectable vehicle was changed for a wreck of the
old school, harness tied with rope, horses not well broken
in. The usual tomahawk and pieces of spare rope handed
in, recalled my first Journey’s experiences. As I expected,


at every bit of rising ground the horses jibbed, the driver
requesting the passengers—a lady, a lame man, and myself—
to get out. We did so, and then went on again a few
miles, with the same result, at least the jibbing, as the driver
got down to lead the horses this time. But as the horses
would not move, the driver called to the man on the box,
“ Hit the nearest to you with your crutch.” He obeyed;—
result, it kicked furiously. “ Jump out,” screamed the man,
which we did at once. Men, coach, and horses then dis-
appeared. My companion showing signs of hysterics, I
scolded her, and suggested running down the hill to see what
had happened, dreading to look when we neared the spot
where the coach stood. Fortunately another hill had stopped
the horses, and the man had kept his hold of the reins. The
driver’s left arm was broken and one of the shafts, so we
had to remain while the poor fellow went off the road to a
shepherd’s hut for assistance. Two men came, made a sling
for the driver’s arm, tied the shaft together with some of the
rope, and hammered at the wheels. It was a terribly
anxious time, as the driver asked us to watch the wheels in
case they came off. However, at last we arrived at the stage
two hours behind time ; the shaft was repaired, and another
driver got; but he being a stranger, the disabled man had
to go as far as Bowenfels. How earnestly I wished this
pretty spot had been my destination, being completely
worn out with fatigue and fright. Fresh passengers
started with us—a young couple belonging to a variiti
troupe at Mudgee, whose merry chatter and too loudly


expressed astonishment at Australian travel amused me.
They were only just out from California, and described their
experiences most graphically, as no doubt they would those
of the present trip, as well as that we had just undergone,
for my companion related the whole of it. I was rejoicing
at leaving them ten miles the Sydney side of Mudgee, it
having been arranged for Mr. Charles to send a buggy to
meet me at a little inn near the boundary of his estate.
The mailman, however, said he was afraid our being two
hours late would prevent this; but as we drove into the inn
yard I saw the neat single buggy and man waiting. Now
thankfully I bid my travelling companions farewell, and
sat too worn out to see anything as we drove over grass
and road to Broom. My last experience of coach travelling
in Australia had ended that night, leaving me stiff and
bruised for days. As I write this the sweet face of Mrs.
Charles and her cordial welcome is before me, as, bewildered
by the lighted hall, she took me by the hand and led me
to my room, told me a warm bath was ready, and she
would send me in some tea. “You are tired, I can see.”
“ Yes, and sore ; look at my arm,” which was bruised with
the iron of the mail-coach. However the bath, delicate
meal of chicken, and that panacea for nervous troubles, tea,
with some camphorated eau-de-Cologne, soon soothed me
to sleep, which lasted till late the next morning. When
we had become friends, Mrs. Charles told me I looked
such a frail, delicate creature that night, she felt inclined
to take me in her arms and carry me to my room. In


fact, she had told her husband and three of his brothers
this when she returned to the drawing-room, adding, “ She
is nearly killed with travelling in the horrid coach; her
arms are black with bruises. When will they have good
coaches in Australia, I wonder 1 ”
My new surroundings were quite different from any I had
yet experienced either in town or country. I was now on
a sheep station, managed very different from Nanima, and of
much less extent, cleared and cultivated. The house was
an old one, partly surrounded by the shrubbery of laurus-
tines, lilacs, spiraea, and other flowering shrubs. At one end
of the verandah was a trellis of Isabella grape, covering
many feet to an enclosure at the back. The orchard was
across a paddock in the front, and growing close to the
verandah at the back was a large orange tree, a great rarity
in the district. The hills in front, and the river at their feet,
with lands consisting of farms under cultivation, and so much
land cleared belonging to Broom, reminded me of places
seen in England. We were several miles from Mudgee,
the road to which, through Burra estate, owned by Mr.
Charles’s brother, was a very pretty drive. Much of it
was tenanted by farmers, and at intervals groups of wattle,
kurrajong, willows, native apple, and other trees made
charming vistas, with the hills as background. I never
tired of the drive to church on Sunday or of shopping and
paying visits during the week, particularly as our carriage
and pair of ponies were equal to any in Sydney.
Mudgee twenty-five years ago was a very good town,


with churches, banks, stores, a School of Arts or Mechanics’
Institute, and pretty cottages; I certainly was surprised
on my first visit to it. It was situated two hundred miles
from Sydney, over mountain roads in coaches such as I
have described, and only drays to bring everything from,
and wool and produce to, the city. No doubt, as several
wealthy families had settled and made homes in the im-
mediate neighbourhood, their presence tended to the some-
what rapid progress of this place. One family of three
brothers, each on separate properties, and several members
of the family I was with had properties in the district:
these gentlemen all bearing the same name, I had a diffi-
culty in distinguishing brothers from cousins.
Burra House had been Mr. Charles’s father’s first home-
stead in the district, a very unpretentious bush house, now
to be replaced by the mansion his eldest son was building.
When completed this was the largest private residence near
the town. Here he entertained the governor, the bishop,
and other distinguished visitors. I think his eldest son now
resides there, with the railway nearly “at his gates,” daily
news from Sydney, and friends able to run down for a few
hours. But is it so completely country life there now, with
its characteristic freedom from restraint, dress, and worry ?
When I remember Mudgee, we could dress comfortably,
drive a cart, and ride very rough-looking horses; and
as others did likewise, no unfavourable comments could be
made.
Our household consisted of Mr. Charles, his young wife,


her two children, and two girls from a neighbouring estate
to he educated with Mr. Charles’s elder daughter. We
seldom left Broom for exercise, as the estate consisted of
many acres, the river running through it, on the opposite
side of which were paddocks under cultivation. We had a
rabbit warren near, and many charming spots to visit on
our side of the river; communication with the other, when
I first went there, was too risky for my nerves. A fallen
tree did not represent a bridge to me. Twice I attempted it,
and had ignominiously to sit down in the middle and allow
my pupils to lead me over, so I determined to wait until
a proper crossing-place was made for sheep-washing.
Our favourite walk was to a place I named “ The Fairy
Dell,” where we often sat and watched “ Bunny ” at work
and play. He has worked to some purpose now in
Australia, clearing all before him. How little the man
who first introduced the rodents thought what the result
would be, or how many thousands it would cost the Govern-
ment and squatters to rid the country of such pests ! Not
long after I left Broom, Mr. Charles had his destroyed by
burning them out of their holes. Hares will also become a
nuisance if not got rid of before making their way into the
interior of the country, where they can breed unmolested.
How many acclimatised prolific seed-bearing plants too
have become as bad, if not worse than those indigenous to
the soil. Geraniums are grown as hedges, pelargoniums
grow three or four feet high in a couple of years;
clumps of heliotrope, gardenias, fuchsias, and Daphne thrive


in the open air and become large shrubs with thick stems ;
and such plants as the sweet-briar will soon spread over
uncultivated ground in the same ratio. I have seen acres
covered by it, with roots so embedded that it required a
team of bullocks to drag them out. Some early settler no
doubt rejoiced in having the sweet perfumed briar near his
bush home to remind him of the shady lanes of his native
land. I never passed a hedge of it in Parramatta without
in imagination seeing a village near St. Osyth Priory in
Essex, where we passed many a summer’s day gathering
the crimson berries for necklaces to carry back to our
London home, and felt just as Australians will feel some
day when they see the flowers of their bright land bloom-
ing in hothouses in England. Childhood and youth cast
their glamour over the past. All is bright and fair in
“Wonderland” which the trail of the serpent has not
touched. As I forgot in Parramatta rain, fog, and gray-
leaden skies, so will they forget hot winds and droughts.
Life on such a sheep station as Broom was certainly an
ideal one; we enjoyed all the freedom of the country, with
the advantages of being near such a town as Mudgee and
within reach of congenial society. As usual, I was fortunate
in this respect, meeting with a lady there, the wife of a
bank manager just from England, a delightful clever
woman —musical, well read, and well travelled. Her
conversation was like a fresh breeze from another world,
a perfect revelation to me. At Broom too we had
Mr. Charles’s younger brother staying for months; he


was a cosmopolitan, had studied at Cambridge, and
passed as a barrister in Sydney, but was compelled
through delicate health to live in the country, and assisted
in managing the ouhstation. He was somewhat of a
dilettante, played the cornet a little, painted a little, sang
a little, and read a great deal.- His rooms were in a cot-
tage across the courtyard, and contained a curious collection
of things bought during his travels, amongst them part of
an Egyptian mummy. Whoever the said mummy was in the
flesh, she would have been horrified at being kept in a
large box, in which music, hooks, paints, and numbers of
other articles were stowed away to clear the room. Mrs.
Charles and I often amused ourselves examining these
treasures, and once when the owner was absent, determined
to tidy his two rooms, expecting thanks for the result of
our exercising of our organ of order, in bookcase, boxes,
and drawers presenting so different an aspect. But no ; the
ungrateful man only grumbled, saying, “It will take a
week before I can find anything; I prefer my things
mixed in a drawer or box, for then I am sure to find them.”
He was very fond of pets. One he waited on for a long
time. Out shooting on the mountains he discovered an
eagle’s nest with eggs in it, so calculating the time, went
some weeks after, and watching the parent-bird fly away,
secured an eaglet, which grew to be a splendid bird. Poor
“ Jupiter! ” how we pitied it; chained to a post in the
grounds, he looked terribly melancholy. At last, to our
delight, he broke his chain and flew upwards; but not


having full command of his enormous wings, only went as far
as the roof of the house, and with the assistance of the men
was recaptured. “ Mulla,” my weekly pupils’ home, was
a relic of the past. It was one of the earliest bush houses,
built substantially in the same style as I see on these
Hampshire roads—bare-looking, with high small windows,
narrow doorways, and without verandahs. Mulla had one,
but it was an addition since its building; the garden in
front too resembled those in this neighbourhood. The
owners of the property were natives of the colony, kind and
hospitable; I stayed there sometimes, occupying a quaint
outside room. The elder girls were excellent housekeepers,
good daughters, and sisters, all musical, and fond of reading,
“my two girls ” especially so. The younger has since spent
some time in India, and if the promise of her girlhood is
fulfilled, I am certain she has appreciated the contrast
with her quiet early home.


CHAPTER XVIII
When Christmas drew nigh, my brother drove over from
Wellington to take me back with him for my holidays. We
had a very pleasant journey back through Gulgong, passing
on our way Messrs. Rouse’s properties, Guntawang,Biragam-
bil, and Beaudesert; all fine estates of these early settlers in
the district. Gulgong is now a thriving “ golden township,”
with church, public school, and its own newspaper, and now,
no doubt, a very different hotel from the one we stayed
at on this occasion. It was during an election, and therefore
full of “ free and independents.” My sleeping apartment
was near a general room, and nearly all night one man
would give noisy utterance to his ideas on the capacities of
various candidates, interspersed with allusions to his family
affairs; his remarks were very personal, occasionally touching
upon the private life of the candidate he opposed. At last,
wearied with the incessant talking, I fell asleep, to be
roused by the undertones of others who disagreed with the
chief orator, a man who ought to be in parliament now, as
the talents he possessed resemble those we have so many
of in our present Legislative Assembly. I have never heard


a debate, or rather wrangle there, but have read them, and
had a great many described. As this night’s experience at
G-ulgong, nearly a quarter of a century ago, returns to my
mind, I pity quiet and sensible men who have to listen to
such balderdash.
The town of Wellington was improving; court-house,
hospital, stores, and cottages were in course of erection,
and Montefiores only a suburb.
The Mill Cottage and Bulla I visited, and saw how trees,
vines, and shrubs had grown. The same old friends were
there, but not for long; and my eyes rested on the well-
known spots for the last time, as sixteen years passed ere I
saw the district again, strangers sitting beside the hearths,
and wandering through the bush, where the friends of my
youth had their homes. “ Some had gone to lands far
distant,” others to “ The Silent Land.”
We had a pleasant journey back to Broom through
bush lands, past Mitchell’s Creek, arriving at my home in
time for tea. It was a great drawback my being such a
nervous horsewoman, as I lost many opportunities of seeing
such country as vehicles could not travel through. It was
very tantalising to watch young people starting off for long
rides. Australians of both sexes are veritable centaurs.
Fearless and graceful riders, they do not care for walking,
and will spend an hour in running a horse in, to ride on
an errand they could have gone in less time on foot. Girls
brought up in the country will ride any kind of horse over
the roughest country. When I first went to Wellington I


have watched them leaving the town, their horses covered
with parcels, and often with a child in front of them. One
girl “ down the river ” wanted to take a small shoe trunk
before her. The horses are often only partially broken in,
and back and shy frequently, but these young people stick
on. I suppose our horses are good, as the Indian market
is partly supplied from Australia. They are not equal in
appearance to the English horses ; this struck me when in
the west end of London • even the cab and omnibus horses
look better than ours.
The busy time for our gentlemen was approaching. Yards
for drafting the sheep had to be made, so Mrs. Charles
suggested that we, with some of the girls from Mulla, should
picnic at the place over the river where they were working.
About eleven we started with the provisions for lunch,
which we were to cook at the place of meeting,—chops,
steaks, ham, ingredients for pancakes, with some cold provi-
sions, which Mr. James suggested, as he thought “ we might
burn or otherwise fail in our cooking.” Tea was of course
provided; beer and wine also. What a glorious morning it
was, and how busy we were, —not even a fire lighted for us
when we arrived at the place! Mr. Charles declared we
had undertaken to be gipsies, so should not be assisted.
“As if we want assistance,” was our proud rejoinder.
“ Mary, you collect some light wood, while I select a good
place for the fire.” This was done ; but Mrs. Charles was
afterwards too busy unpacking baskets and case to notice
that Mary was waiting for further orders. At last the
M


terrible truth dawned on us, —we had forgotten the
matches; and therefore, as Kate said, “ must demean
ourselves by asking the gentlemen’s assistance.” Little
Louie suggested, “ The blacks light a fire by rubbing
two pieces of wood together.” “ Takes too long.” Mrs.
Charles had left us and gone towards two station hands
who were felling trees for the yards, returning with her
charming face all aglow. “I have some matches, so
Charlie and Jim need not know we forgot ours.” We
would not eat anything that we had not cooked our-
selves, though the patties, cold ham, and the plum pudding,
made by the French cook at Broom, looked very tempting.
Mr. Charles was very good and ate underdone steak and
burnt pancakes manfully ; but Mr. James cruelly refused,
saying, “ Fried meat was too indigestible, and he did not
care for smoked mutton.” “ Yery well, then, you must not
have tea ; that is sure to be smoky,” said saucy Kate. After
lunch they went back to work, and we scattered about
getting flowers and ferns, but were very glad to find on
our return to the camp that Mr. Charles had told one of the
men to pack up our things,—all but meat, bread, butter, and
cake, and with tea ready to make as soon as we came in
sight. “It was a real picnic,” we all said, “and more enjoy-
able than the usual affairs of the kind.”
Now sheep-washing and shearing were the chief business
at Broom. The gentlemen left at daylight, returning to an
early breakfast. We finished our usual home occupations
as quickly as possible, wishing to spend part of the after


noon watching the process, and a very pretty sight it was.
The home flocks were chiefly bred from imported sheep,
famous for the quality of their wool, which Mr. Charles had
made arrangements for getting up well Yards were put
up on one side of the river for the unwashed sheep, and close
to the bank large tanks filled with hot water were placed, in
which the sheep were first scoured, and then passed on for
two men to dip them several times in the river. A man
stood ready to drive them up the grassy bank into paddocks
on the other side, when in a day or two they looked like balls
of snow, and were ready for the shearing shed. This part
of the work I soon tired of, as occasionally the shears cut
deeper than the wool; still it is wonderful watching
experienced men clip, clip, and then in a few minutes away
the frightened creature runs, shorn of its beautiful coat.
Very young lambs are not pretty I discovered at Broom,
when Mr. Charles brought in a motherless one, which, being
of a valuable breed, he wished to be brought up by hand.
The parlour-maid undertook to feed it from a bottle, and
“ Snow ” consequently became a nuisance, following the girl
everywhere. It grew to be a very pretty creature, —an ideal
“ pet lamb ” which the children delighted to play with; but
unfortunately “ Snow ” grew very quickly, and one evening
Mr. Charles said, “ I must take ‘ Snow ’ to Sam, who has
the care of several others.” A tender farewell ensued, and
a few tears from Lilly, who was consoled by being told,
“We will go and see the pet soon,” which promise was
fulfilled; but, alas, ungrateful “ Snow ” had forgotten us,


and not even biscuit would tempt it to leave its
friends!
When shearing was over, the young people persuaded
Mrs. Charles to give them a dance at Broom, which was
followed by a grand ball at the School of Arts in Mudgee,
given by Mr. George to all classes. It reminded me of
tenants’ balls I had read of in county stories of the old
country; some of the farmers had lived on the property for
years, and many of the servants at Burra and Broom were
of the third generation. One old man at Broom had been
in the family nearly fifty years ; we used often on Sunday
afternoons to visit him at his hut, taking some delicacy for his
evening meal. He had been a tall, powerful man but was
now bent with the “ burden of many years.” I had been
reading to him as usual, when after a long pause he began
talking of “ the old country,” —the only subject he ever
seemed interested in—when he remarked in answer to some
question of mine, “ You see, Miss, I was lagged very
young, so can remember those times well.” “ What, Sam !
were you sent to Australia?” was my shocked question.
“Yes, Miss,” in an apologetical tone; “but not for a very
bad crime ; they called it poaching. You see, this is how it
was. We lived in a grand game country, miles and miles
of heather and bracken alive with wild things, always tempt-
ing us to snare ’em. My mother was dead, and father
married again, so no one cared much about me. One day
a lot of lads said to me, ‘ Sam,’ says they, ‘we are going to
Lord X ’s park to-morrow night; will ’ee come .At


first I said No, minding a promise I made mother when I
was a hit of a boy; but they persuaded me, so at last I
agreed to meet them at the cross roads. Well, I went; two
of the lot were well-known bad uns, I heard later on.
The keepers had heard they were skulking about the village,
so set a trap for them, and we were all caught. They
said, as it was my first offence, I should have been let off
easy; but you see I had a tussle with one of the keepers
and nearly killed him. I could not help knocking him
down, when he called me a thief; so I was sent over the
seas with the lot, and was assigned to this family
after a while, and have been in it ever since. Good
masters, all on ’em, Miss; the old gentleman as well
as his sons, —good to their men, bond or free.” Poor
old Sam was right to be grateful; he was well cared for
to the end of his life, which was a long one—dying in his
hut amidst green pastures and country sounds. After the old
man’s narrative, Louie inquired, “ Don’t you feel lonely,
Sam?” “No, little Miss; I was a shepherd for years, and
often days after days only heard the sheep and my dog’s
voice.”


CHAPTER XIX
The second summer I spent at Broom was hotter than
usual, owing to extensive bush fires. The mountains in
front of the house were a magnificent sight. At night
sometimes we would see the “ fire king ” clearing all before
him stealthily, leaving paths of flame as he went, then
surrounding a mighty tree, creeping from stem to branch,
until amidst a shower of sparks it fell into its “gold and
scarlet grave,”—these, with masses of undergrowth like
beacon fires, making any pyrotechnic display look poor by
comparison.
I spent part of the Christmas holidays with Mrs. Blom-
field at Eurund in a very pretty house on the other side of
Mudgee, visiting Wilber and the Pipeclay diggings while
there. We started early one morning for the latter, well
provided with luncheon baskets. After driving over very
indifferent roads through bush paddocks, we arrived at “the
creek,” where there were several parties of diggers washing
gold on its banks. “The first thing,” suggested one of our
party, “ for us to see is ‘ Long Tom ’ at work,” pointing to
a group of men; “there he is.” I had a dim recollection of


a nautical individual with the lugubrious addition of a
•coffin in some drama, or perhaps one of the characters
belonging to my brother’s pasteboard theatre, and therefore
thought, when we drove up to this group, the man Mr.
Blomfield spoke to was “ Long Tom,” and a tired, untidy-
woman sitting near Mrs. Long Tom. But no, I was wrong,
for going a little farther, we came upon a party consisting
of four men, and the real “ Long Tom ” or cradle, was a
narrow trough filled with earth, into which water flowed
through a kind of funnel; the cradle was rocked, and the
gold washed from the earth fell into a tin dish. While
we stood watching, they got about half an ounce, as it was
very rich on this spot. The men’s clothes were a bright
yellow, and no wonder, for the water of the creek looked,
as Mr. Blomfield said, “ as though the late Mr. Turner, R A.,
had washed his brushes in it after painting a sunset.”
After seeing all that was to be seen here, we went on
to New Pipeclay diggings; an enormous rabbit-warren-
like place, the huts scattered about not very unlike
hutches. Our carriage drew up to the side of a hole
surrounded by logs of wood, on the top of which was a
windlass, where a man stood every now and then answer-
ing some one below, whose voice sounded very sepulchral.
Presently the man above called out, “ Dinner,” and quickly
drew his mate up like he would a bucket of water, very
gruff and pipe-clayey and slightly dazed by the light We
drove through the principal street, the children—all of the
prevailing terra-cotta colour—staring at “ the ladies.” No


doubt dirt-pie-making was their principal amusement,
plenty of material lying about. Margie inquired of her
husband, “ What would Jane think of this dirty place ? the
proverbial peck of dirt must be eaten all at once, for every-
thing is peppered with the dust, and the water yellow with
the clay. How dreadful for clean muslins! ” As there was
not much to see at New Pipeclay, we determined to drive
four or five miles farther to “New Old Pipeclay.” Being in
doubt, we inquired the way of a digger, who, with the usual
delightful vagueness of that wandering class, directed us.
wrong, and we found ourselves driving over a ploughed field.
Start out, English farmer ; as I have said before, crops in
Australia are not petted and protected as with you. The
owner of this, standing at his door, slowly advanced, and
then kindly took us to the nearest slip-rail. Evidently horses,
and vehicles planting their autographs over his fields were
everyday occurrences, as he said nothing about it: he
moved slowly, spoke little, and his appearance generally
gave one the idea that he was a stranger to the order of
the bath. He pointed out the nearest road, and then
rested against his boundary fence watching us, as much as
to say, “What can people like them want to go poking
about diggings for, in this hot weather too 1 ” We found
“New Old Pipeclay” more warren-like than the one we
had seen. Here we left the vehicles and watched four
men working a large claim, the gentlemen of our party
entering into conversation with those above, and then
accepting an invitation to “go below.” We were all in


vited, but Margie and I declined, and amused ourselves by
picking up specimens of quartz and crystals from the heaps
around the claim. When the gentlemen appeared, followed
by more men, they were so delighted at all they had seen
that Margie and I regretted we had not braved the
dangers of windlass and dust; but it was too late now.
As a consolation one of the men gave us some large
crystals, which a few years after caused quite a sensation
amongst my many Sydney friends. After giving the
diggers some money to “wash the pipeclay out of their
throats,” we started for home, driving through the place
just as the men were leaving off work. “We are driving
over gold-mines, Jim,” said one of the gentlemen. “ Yes,
and look at the miserable hovels the people live in who
are bringing it from the under world.” Hovels, indeed!
More than one had only a hole in the roof for a chimney;
a few had casks fixed for the purpose; but there was no
attempt to keep the places neat. Yes, in two or three
were evidences of a woman’s home, in a rough railing
covered with creeping plants, or a show of curtains at
the little windows. A tidy female, watching from the
open door of a hut, attracted one of our friends; he rode
up, asking, “Are we to take the right or left road.” On
her answering, we left him still talking. When he joined
us again, he said, “ That is a countrywoman of yours,
Miss L ; only a few years out from Wales.” She
says the dirt and muck here will drive her mad; but
her man is making a good pile. Digging for gold is


better than digging for iron in the old country; but when
they have enough, they are going back.” Ah, that going
back to the quiet peaceful village life ! how few do return;
and if they do, are they the same innocent, contented
country folk, after living in such pandemoniums, as the
early gold-fields too often were 1 How many homes and
lives were ruined by the lust for gold in those early days
of colonial life, only those who were living there can
know. How many wives and children were deserted the
Destitute Children’s Asylum at Randwick or the asylums
for old men and women could answer.
The next winter was a very severe one in Mudgee,
and I saw a real fall of snow in Australia. A large party
was given by the wealthy owner of Havilah at the School
of Arts ; and Mrs, Robinson had kindly invited a number
of ladies to dress at “ The Bank.” We had commenced
this important business when Mrs. Robinson, calling me,
said, “ Come here, Miss L , and look at the whitest
dress you will see to-night.” I at once went to the
drawing-room window, at which my friend stood, and
saw roads, gardens, and roofs covered with snow. Our
young friends were soon with us admiring the wintry
white ; but the cold drove them back to the warm rooms.
I could not leave the window for some time, the “beauti-
ful snow recalled so much.” “Yes,” whispered my
friend, putting her arm round me; “I can understand and
read your thoughts. This does bring back the dear old
country, which, with all its faults, is the one land to us.”


It was cold that night—bitterly so, as many felt who had
to ride or drive many miles home after the dance was
over. The Agricultural Show was our next amusement.
It was a fine cool autumn, and we had several picnic parties
on the grounds. Viewing sheep, cattle, horses, and wool for
the sterner sex; vegetables, flowers, preserves, butter, etc.
etc., for us ladies to criticise, gave all a “ good time.” These
country meetings there were very pleasant; everybody
knew everybody; friendly greetings from high and low
drew the bonds of kindly, neighbourly feelings closer, as
to a certain extent all were equal. Farmer B ’s cattle
and produce were as good if not better than some of his
wealthier neighbours’. The rich Mrs. Robinson’s butter
was beaten by that of a tenant’s wife. The poorer could
with truth and sincerity say of the richer, “ How kind they
are to help us over any difficulty, or come to see us when
sickness or sorrow entered our humble homes!” Not
many months after this their deep sympathy was evinced
with their richer neighbour, Mr. Charles, by one humble
mother coming forward in the hour of deepest need at
Broom, when the reaper Death claimed the young mother
there.
My life had been full of changes, not untouched by
sorrow and bereavements, and this sudden ending of a
young and energetic life was a terrible experience. The
three little children were left motherless; one was only
just able to ask for mamma: “When will she come home?
I want her.” The other two were unconscious of that


want. How my heart ached for them. After remaining
at Broom until a connection of the family took charge of
the house and my pupils’ education, I left for Mulgoa,
having arranged with Mrs. James to meet her a few
miles from Broom, as they were travelling from their
station. This journey was a very different experience
of Australian travel, for we drove in a comfortable
waggonette, making short stages, and stopping at quiet
inns. We stayed at Bowenfels one day, so I was able to
judge what a pretty place it was, with its two principal
estates and farms. Many English trees flourish there;
indeed, all those I see every day in our garden here grew
well.
I gazed now for the last time on the valleys and fern-
covered slopes of the Blue Mountains before “the iron
horse ” made them to a certain extent lose their novelty.
Yet who would complain, when progress gives pleasure to
thousands, where tens only were able to enjoy it 1


CHAPTER XX
From Lapstone Hill I again saw the valley of the Grose,
with the Nepean River like a silver thread winding between
banks and meadows fair. Emu plains, with its many farms,
nestling amidst the luxuriant autumn foliage, formed a
peaceful panorama. Mr. James kindly rested the horses,
allowing us to feast our eyes until the approach of a train
reminded him of progression, as he immediately remembered
that we had some miles to travel ere we reached Glenmore.
However, the distance appeared less to me, having so much to
think of, past and future. We soon crossed the bridge and
drove through part of Penrith; then along the road to our
destination, which was so familiar to my companions and so
strange to me. One of the greatest trials of my life had
been the inevitable feeling of utter loneliness when first
entering a family as a stranger, where they were all so
familiar, so bound up together by the ties of home affec-
tion. My first impression of Glenmore was, “ This place
should be called Florence, as it was, indeed, the home
of flowers.” Hereford House and others had been rich
with “earth’s stars,” but not to compare with the pro


fusion and richness of bloom before me. The cottage at
the gate was covered with roses, honeysuckle, and the
purple and white maurandria. We drove between haw-
thorn hedges, with arched entrances to orchard, vineyard,
and orangery. The front of the house was literally a
carpet of flowers, as the gravelled sweep was covered
with many coloured portulacas and mignonette, which were
allowed to grow and blossom during the master’s and
mistress’s absence. While the parents greeted their
elder children, I stood looking at the view before me.
In the foreground a large bed with trees and flowering
shrubs, bordered by verbenas and petunias of every hue;
beyond croquet lawn, paddocks enclosed for kangaroo
and deer; then grassy slopes bounded by distant hills,
clothed from base to summit with foliage. The house
was somewhat of the Italian style, commodious, with
large lofty rooms, double halls, and cool passages; a long
verandah covered with climbing plants on one side, into
which my room opened, and immediately in front of my
window the opening into the flower garden, which
was always full of blossom, and showed each season’s
calendar written by Nature’s hand. The finest oak tree I
had seen for many a day was here, surrounded by a low
hedge of laurestines. Beyond this was the orangery, with
the rich green of the leafy trees, the snowy buds and
blossoms then perfuming the air—a veritable garden of
the Hesperides. Fern Hill and Wimborne, the other estates
in “ the valley,” were also in their different styles pleasant


country houses. The first was a modern mansion situated
on rising ground, with well-kept shrubberies, lawns, and
vineyard. Wimborne had many acres of cultivated land,
parklike in extent. The house was large, but more in the
older colonial style of architecture. The owners of the
estates were related, so the picturesque church between
Fern Hill and Glenmore was like a private family chapel,
as the congregation, with few exceptions, consisted of the
households of the three places. We had service—con-
ducted with great simplicity—alternately morning and
afternoon. It was pleasant to observe the family greetings
in the porch on Sundays. Sometimes we left Glenmore
for walks in the neighbourhood. One was an especial
favourite —a deserted burial-place of an aboriginal tribe on
the banks of a creek. It was a very picturesque spot,
thickly wooded, with groups of trees with rude carvings
on their trunks. I was informed that they left their dead
above ground, wrapped in rude hammocks slung between
trees, always selecting places near rivers or creeks.
Another object for long walks was the collecting of gum
by the children; at some seasons it literally poured down
the trees. On seeing this, I could understand the large
deposits of Kauri gum dug out of the ground in New
Zealand, the accumulation of many years. Some morn-
ings we would go on a mushrooming expedition, our
paddocks supplying us in great profusion with these
delicacies, so that our baskets were always well filled.
The arrowroot grew plentifully at Glenmore, so Mrs.


James had nearly a hundredweight made one season. It
was interesting to watch the process of grinding the root
into pulp, the cleansing of the muddy-looking wash with
many waters, until the sediment was a pure white, which
is then spread over calico and laid on the grass to dry.
For indoor amusements we had music, reading, and
work. Mr. James had an excellent library, and for
modern literature a box from Haddock’s (our Australian
Mudie) kept us aufait in the doings of the literary world.
Occasionally we had croquet parties on the lawn at Fern
Hill, with afternoon tea and claret cup. Playing at croquet,
or watching the graceful figures of our girls, and the
elegant, genial hostess moving amongst her guests, made a
very pleasant diversion in the quiet home life. Our house-
hold at Glenmore was a very happy one. Mrs. James, one
of the sweetest-tempered women I ever met, ruled her large
family by love and gentleness, and during three years’
residence under her roof I never saw her angry or in any
way ruffled, which, considering there were eight children,
from one to twenty years of age, at home, with three hoys
at holiday time, was really wonderful. She had her two
elder girls as companions; I, my children, and one dear
girl who rode over from Fern Hill every day to join in
our studies—clever, loving, little Lilly. How we missed her
when God gathered her for His garden of angels, and our
“ happy valley ” knew her only by the quiet grave which
marked her resting-place under the church’s shadow on the
hill!


My long holidays were spent with various friends in
Sydney. During one, Sydney was en file in honour of the
Duke of Edinburgh; this being the first visit paid by a
member of the Royal family to Australian shores. James,
Maria, and I watched the public reception from a stand in
Macquarie Street, and from our friend’s windows in Cum-
berland Street had an excellent view of the naval recep-
tion and harbour illuminations. Afterwards, when staying
with Mrs. Frederick, I saw our Royal guest driving past to
Point Piper, and later on heard his kindly-natured hostess
speak of “ the great interest he evinced in colonial life.”
Does His Royal Highness ever think of his first ex-
periences of life in Australia!—the dances, picnics,
shooting-parties at Nepean Towers and elsewhere ? A
friend related an anecdote of him which proved he was
really fond of animals. On one occasion he returned to
the dining-room to give his dog water instead of “leaving
it to others,” as his host suggested. I heard he had quite
a menagerie on board. A young friend of mine sent him a
parrot, and handsome Mrs. E. K C. an owl, which he named
after the donor. lam certain he has never received a
more heartfelt welcome than he did in his Royal mother’s
“ Golden South,” which welcome was so terribly sullied
by the maniac’s attempt on his life. Australia will never
forget the thrill of horror this caused through the length
and breadth of the land. The fair-faced youth to be shot
in our midst at a time when all classes met to greet him
as a friend and guest! This was my last glimpse of royalty,
N


being an invalid when the Prince of Wales’s sons visited
Sydney, and during my year’s residence in England. Still
I hope ere my return to Australia to see Her Majesty and
members of the Eoyal family again. While at Glenmore I
was present at two weddings —Mr. James’s eldest daughter’s
and her cousin’s at Wim; both were very grand affairs.
At ours there was a very large family party; out of seventy
guests there were only about ten not connected by birth
or marriage. Unfortunately the sun refused to shine
on our bride, so the grounds were not utilised; but the
time passed quickly, and an enjoyable dance finished the
day. Miss Una was more favoured a fortnight after, as
she had a lovely day to bid farewell to her childhood’s
home, the youngest and last to leave. The extensive
grounds at Wim were thoroughly appreciated by cricket
and croquet players on this occasion.
During one of my visits to Sydney, I saw and heard
of the man who afterwards became famous as “the
claimant ” to the Tichborne estate; he had just arrived
from the country and was staying at the same hotel
as my brother. One afternoon, on calling there, in
the hall I met this man face to face. “Do you know
who that is, K 1 ” “ No; who is he?” “Well, he says
he is Sir Eoger Tichborne.” That evening after dinner
at our friend’s the subject was alluded to, and on our host
asking, “What do you think of him, L ?” “ What do I
think? Why, he is no more Sir Eoger Tichborne than
you are. No man, however unused for years to the society


or manners of gentlemen, could ever forget certain usages
of his youth as this man has, who cannot even spell the
simplest words correctly.” “That is nothing.” “Well,
that may he; but if you saw this man often, you would
understand what I mean.” In after years, when I heard
how the impostor was believed in, I thought of this con-
versation. Of course at the time I write of, the infamous
scheme had only commenced, and the man was off his
guard and untutored.
My peaceful life at Glenmore had to cease, owing to bad
health; a long rest was imperative, so once more I had to
avail myself of my friends’ kind offer to pay them a long
visit at Oviedo Cottage, Petersham, where as usual I was
treated as a sister. One family—James’s oldest friends—
had a nice suburban house and grounds near to us. He
had known the owner from boyhood in England, and had
been present at his marriage to a young and very pretty
girl, now the energetic and hospitable mistress of Derry Yale,
with a fine family to brighten their home. This place,
greatly enlarged since my first visit, was our last resting-
place in New South Wales. I also paid several visits to
Parramatta, which always interested me. Parramatta or
Rose Hill, as it was first called, is the oldest inland town
in the colony, and the first harvest ever gathered in New
South Wales, one hundred years ago, was reaped there.
Old Government House still remains in the Inner Domain,
or Parramatta Park. This place, with its avenue of oaks,
is like a scene from the old country. The orchards are


very numerous now, extending over an area of four
thousand acres, varying in size from fifty to a hundred
acres each; the orangeries cluster more thickly around Castle
and Pennant Hills. Here the vine was first planted, and
grows luxuriantly—in fact, the district seems adapted to
every kind of fruit. Apples, pears, and plums from the
northern lands; oranges, grapes, peaches, and other fruits
from the southern lands of Europe flourish equally well.
Alas! Parramatta has one drawback—mosquitoes. These
pests are found in all the districts on the eastern side of the
mountain range, and to some people make night far from
comfortable. I have known many, after living in the
country a quarter of a century, dread on this account the
approach of summer. Besides visiting Parramatta by
steamboat and train, I have been by the well-known road,
scarcely altered since I travelled on it so many years ago.
Paces were still held on the Homebush Course, and
boating parties on the river, now world renowned as the
scene where our Australian scullers have won their laurels.
The trip by the steamer is very agreeable, passing on the
way up the river Five Dock, Hunter’s Hill, Kissing Point
—the latter now called Eyde; others renamed Greenwich,
Mortlake, etc.
I read an article the other day in an English paper on
the fondness Australians have of naming places after
celebrated men; Gladstone was one mentioned. I quite
agree with the writer to a certain extent; still is it not
unwise to sneer at colonials, who wish by so doing to


honour their country by such names as Wellington, Gordon,
Drake, Nelson, and others ? No doubt they have many
absurd as well as commonplace names. But are there
none equally so near home ? In my opinion the natives’
names should have been retained and adopted. What
could be more euphonious than those we have still, —such
as TJlladulla, Illawarra, Wollondilly, Nanima, Eurunderie,
Marulan, Moruya, Murrurundi, Merriwa, and hundreds of
others 1
I had an excellent view from Point Piper of the Flying
Squadron that visited Sydney. It was a fine sight, watch-
ing the ships under canvas gliding on the intensely blue
waters, under an equally blue sky, to Middle Harbour,
We had flower shows in the gardens, cricket-matches
in the Domain, bazaars everywhere now. Our church
school feasts were held in many spots open to the public,
and on the shores of the harbour, which later on, when
the train was available, were deserted for fresher fields.
Australia is certainly well adapted for outdoor amuse-
ments. Cricket and tennis can be played almost all the
year round, and picnics and garden parties are practicable
through about eight months. Holidays are spent in the
open air, as there are few places for day amusements under
cover like the Crystal Palace at Sydenham and others in
England. Trains, omnibuses, trams, and steamers swarm
with well-dressed and happy-looking people, all bent on
enjoyment, while the city and suburbs are almost deserted.
I have often watched them, and thought this is really “ a


land flowing with milk and honey.” No cruel winter,
when men and women, however willing, cannot find work.
There seems to be no real want or poverty. Surely such
a land must become the home of millions ! —this sunny
land, “ a land of promise ” for the overgrown population
of cities of the older world.
A sad bereavement made me leave Sydney for a
time. Maria’s death caused a terrible blank in my life, so
hearing of an engagement to educate a girl of sixteen, I
left in the autumn for Singleton.


CHAPTER XXI
I left by steamer for Newcastle to meet the train by which
I was to travel as far as Singleton, where a carriage was to
meet me. The country we travelled through struck me as
being flat and uninteresting compared with the scenery of
the mountains so well known to me. Singleton was a
well-laid-out town, already possessing several good build-
ings, a church, large store, and public school. My destina-
tion—a large cattle farm some miles out—was very unlike
anything I had hitherto lived at, low and flat ; the house,
however, was very comfortable and nicely furnished. My
own apartments were large, and certainly everything was
suitable for our requirements bookcase and piano for study
or amusement. My pupil, a girl of sixteen, decidedly above
the average in intelligence, promised to be a pleasant
companion. There was originality in her character. Under
judicious and wider training she was likely to develop into
a clever woman; but with present surroundings I used to
think, “She will grow hard, and perhaps sceptical.” Wombo
was a large farm and station for breeding from famous
imported cattle. My pupil, the youngest of the family,


seemed quite an anomaly there. Though her mother was
of good natural ability, a long residence in such an isolated
place had to a certain extent dried up the early impres-
sions of a visit to England and life in Sydney. For the
first time I saw there what splendid servants the Chinese
can be made. They had a cook equal to the best
European I ever met with; his dishes, bread, and butter
the best of their kind; his kitchen a picture of cleanliness,
as he also was in person. A daughter of his, about four-
teen years of age, born on the place, was being trained as
a parlour-maid, and already waited at table quickly and
well. The cook had married a young emigrant girl from
Somersetshire, who had been housemaid at Wombo, and
certainly in this union had the best of it; she being an
ignorant, lazy woman. She lived in what might have been
made a pretty, comfortable home; instead of which it was a
miserable, untidy, dirty hole, with numbers of children
running about like half-caste savages, unkempt, uncared
for. Poor “ Jimmy ” occasionally asked for half a day
from the house, and then had a turn - out of his own.
Several times I tried to get his wife to speak of herself, or
her early home, but she seemed to have sunk into a state
of apathy. She must have been a fine-looking woman;
indeed, her former mistress told me she was, and could have
married a white man. When she told her she was going
to marry the Chinese cook, her mistress had remonstrated
with her, asking, “ What would your mother say to such
a thing as your marrying a Chinese heathen?” “I


dunno; he’s as good as she; same God made ’em both.”
Mrs. Durham now thought Jimmy was the more to be
pitied.
A most agreeable break in our usually monotonous
life occurred soon after my advent at Wombo in a visit
from W. B. Dailey, who was an old and intimate friend of
the family, accompanied by a brother of Mrs. Durham.
They spent several days with us. It was a treat listening
to the conversation of these men at dinner in the evening;
and afterwards Mr. Dailey would come into my sanctum,
have a chat, and read to Sophie and me. He was
certainly a man his country should honour; was, I have to
write, as lately I have heard he has joined the “ great
majority.” A more courteous gentleman could not be;
refined in taste, liberal in views on all subjects, one of
Australia’s most gifted sons. The fire of eloquence had
touched his lips, and his “ silver speech ” added beauty to
the poems he read to us, which would have given delight
to the authors. I had just been reading Longfellow’s
Hyperion, and Bulwer’s Pilgrims of the Ehine to Sophie,
from both of which he quoted long passages; then he read
several of Tennyson’s and Longfellow’s, and with two
extracts from the latter, “his especial favourites” he told
us, I will close this poor tribute to his memory—
“ Thus, 0 Nuremberg, a wanderer from a region far away,
As he paced thy streets and courtyards, sang in thought his
careless lay:
Gathering from the pavement’s crevice, as a floweret of the soil,
The nobility of labour, —the long pedigree of toil.”


“ Honour to those whose words or deeds
Thus help us in our daily needs,
And by their overflow
Raise us from what is low ! ”
My health being still delicate, I found Wombo too bleak,
so after a few months left for Sydney, where I spent
several months visiting friends. Before returning I paid a
visit to Morpeth by train, and found little alteration there;
the same long, quiet, grass-grown streets, the same old
houses. Altogether the northern district struck me as
being far behind the western in every respect, owing no
doubt to the absence of gold-fields in the immediate neigh-
bourhood, as in the western and southern districts. There
were many fine estates, such as Duckenfield and others, in
this district; but East and West Maitland had not altered
since my visit to them nearly ten years before. I heard,
after the mining mania later on, when companies were
formed to work old fields and new ones were started,
business brightened here, as elsewhere in the colony.
On arriving in Sydney, diamonds were much talked about,
owing to some fine stones having been found, and it was
stated one very large stone was in Sydney, an Australian
koh-i-noor. As the Mudgee district was said to be the best
diamond field, I remembered the crystals given to me at
Pipeclay diggings, some of which I had given to a friend.
Staying at Clarendon House in town, where there were so
many visitors, my diamonds caused quite a sensation,
especially as one was as large as a pigeon’s egg.


How earnestly, listening to the opinions for and against
their being diamonds, did the gentle face of Mrs. Woolley
brighten at the idea of my being so fortunate; what hooks
were examined on the subject! At Mrs. Frederick’s too
the same amount of interest was taken in them. One friend
tested a specimen by fire, and several windows suffered
by scratching on them. At last they were submitted to the
best authority in Sydney, whose verdict soon shattered the
airy castles of my friends, and my brief reign of having
“great expectations” was over.
The different bands now played in the Botanic Gardens,
a great improvement on the former custom of playing in the
Domain, as there were so many shady seats for rest in the
former, and flower-scented paths to stroll in. The view from
the gardens,— embracing as it does Government House,
Farm Cove, where H.M. ships and yachts lie at anchor, a
large expanse of the harbour, with the north shore in the dis-
tance—is one that can scarcely be surpassed anywhere. We
do not require glass houses forwinter gardens in“ The Golden
South.” All the year round tropical plants and evergreens
abound, and the sward is brilliantly green, though it is neces-
sary to state that the hot winds in summer are most destruc-
tive to all kinds of vegetation. The camellias flower in the
winter. What beds of anemones, ranunculus, and pansies
have I seen there during the season we term winter, which
is certainly not so cold as spring in England! At times the
long-continued sunshine tired me, and made me long for
grayer skies, especially as the air of Sydney is very relaxing.


The summers are longer there than in the country, where
cooler weather often begins in March and continues until
October. In many parts of the western and southern
districts geraniums, heliotropes, and all tropical shrubs
have to be housed in winter; but even there the weather
is only cool, not cold. Our flower shows used to be looked
forward to as important events ; now the agricultural shows
share the popularity. Only the principal nurserymen and
florists, with a few gardeners of wealthy residents, exhibit
in Sydney, as the suburbs have their local shows. During
this visit to Clarendon House one of my friend’s daughters
was married; later on I saw two others of the same family
stand at the altar of the dear old church so full of memories
of the past. After the wedding was over, I went to my
friends at Humberstone, where I remained an ever welcome
guest, until I heard of an engagement in a family living
near, the home of a widowed lady whose two youngest
girls were my pupils. I was very happy, being near many
friends, and having the society of an elder daughter of the
house, and her young companions—girls of seventeen or
eighteen. Miss Mossman was very bright and sang
charmingly. Since those merry days she has married well,
holds a high position in society, and while in England was
presented at court. “The Grove” was a picturesque
house, only a pleasant walk from Petersham and Marrick-
ville, half an hour’s drive from Sydney or Burwood, and near
two old estates, Annandale and Dobroyd. lam reminded
continually of the first by our avenue of pines here, as the


old trees at Annandale have been a landmark for years, no
doubt to be soon removed by decay or progress. Since the
time I am writing about, one portion of the estate has been
built on, and is now a largely populated suburb, just as
many others have sprung up in a decade or two. The
Warren Estate, Hurstville, and Sutherland are instances
enough of the growth of the suburbs of Sydney in a few
years.
I was glad to be constantly employed, for Death had
been busy with his scythe this year. My kind friends,
Mrs. Frederick and Mrs. du Moulin, left me sorrowing.
Both being in delicate health for years, life was perhaps
wearisome to them, and those who mourned for them
knew that they had through life garnered above the
“ golden grain ”of true charity. Losing three such
friends in two years was a great trial, and certainly the
best palliative for grief is the constant companionship of
children. It would be selfish to cast a shadow from it
over their young lives ; their innocent hopes and con-
fidences should never be darkened by the losses time
invariably brings. Wreathe his brow with flowers for
them ; years will entwine the thorns only too soon. The
dear old home in Cumberland Street, with the kind
hearts there, and the true friends at Humberstone, ever
ready to welcome me, with gentle Marian’s companion-
ship always willing to sympathise and cheer, were still left
to me.
I left the Grove, and after a short visit to Petersham went


to Clarendon House, where I remained until my marriage
in September, the kind, generous friend there treating me
as a daughter, and her children taking as much interest in
my future as though I was one of themselves. Again the
old church was visited, and I stood at the altar, where as a
girl and woman I had so often knelt, and left many a
burden of care and sorrow. Now if it should come, I
should not have to bear it alone. The day was bright, and
our drive to “Sans Souci” very charming; I had not
been in that direction for years, and never beyond Cook’s
Eiver dam. Sans Souci was a favourite spot for the
honeymoon, especially at this season of the year, when
visitors were few. We were the sole visitors, except on
one occasion, when the Eev. Mr. Pendrill (master of one of
the principal private schools in Sydney) brought a party of
young men there for the day. We were much amused at
their evident desire to catch a glimpse of the bride,
thinking very likely she was young and fair. The hotel
being close to the water, we could wander amongst the
rocks in one direction, and in another stroll through the
bush gathering wildflowcrs, which at this season were to be
found in profusion. The hotel was well managed, and our
stay there a peaceful and propitious commencement of a
new life to us both.


CHAPTER XXII
Our first home, being on the North Shore, gave me an
opportunity of seeing that hitherto to me unknown suburb
which from its position made it difficult to visit. After
trying Milsom’s Point and Lavender Bay, we decided on
travelling via Blue’s Point, as being equally near my hus-
band’s office and the dear old house in Cumberland Street,
where I was looked for every week at least, and often on
Sunday. Our home was a very nice cottage near “ Berry’s
Bay,” and from the grounds at the back a beautiful view
of the harbour, Parramatta Eiver, and islands, with the
Blue Mountains in the distance. This I painted and sent to
our brother in England , it now hangs in his wife’s morning
room. This with another sketch of Sans Souci are the
only two left out of many. The North Shore is most
picturesque, but the ascents are very steep, and the means
for locomotion few at this time; we found it very trying.
The views of the harbour, bays, and city from the heights
are exquisite, and now that there are plenty of vehicles
and a tramway, the difficulties of visiting this district are
small. Houses are rising rapidly and soon occupied.


Near the shores of the harbour there are several superior
houses, with grounds extending to the water. The Admiral
of the station lives there, and also several leading men of the
colony. A bridge across the harbour has been promised
by one of our politicians; but this was during an
electioneering contest, so it will be understood that such
promises by such men generally prove to be words, idle
words. When a bridge connects Sydney and the North
Shore, another city will spring up that will rival Sydney ;
but it is to be hoped it will be better laid out, with the
roads and streets of a respectable width, with trees planted
to shade the side walks. The land towards Middle
Harbour and in other directions will become valuable then
as suburban sites. The scenery here, as in other portions
of the harbour, is very beautiful. We engaged a boat at
Pearl Bay and went some distance up the harbour; one of
the party, who had just returned from a tour in Europe,
remarked that it reminded him of parts of the Rhine, only
here there were no ancient castles immortalised by
romantic legends. We did see one solitary and dilapidated
hut and a single figure fishing from a rock. The scenery
on the Hawkesbury River I consider far more like the
Rhine.
As the mistress of a house, the domestic problem had to
be solved; and with one or two exceptions, I have not
found any difficulty in that respect. My maids for
thirteen years were colonials, from the age of fifteen to
twenty-four. Some required training; all were respectable


and well behaved, and are well married. It
emigrants, principally Irish, who give the most trouble to
mistresses. They leave their own country perfectly ignorant
of their duties, with the idea of very high wages and little
to do, or that they will get married shortly after landing.
They soon grow discontented, and what they consider in-
dependent ; change from one place to another, and too
often, poor creatures, drift into the depths of degradation.
.We had but one emigrant; she is a Scotch girl of the
better class, who left “ Bonnie Scotland ” five years ago with
her family, and has been with us ever since her arrival in
the colony, leaving all her family in Australia, to be our
greatest comfort in what to me now is almost a foreign land.
The working classes in Australia are exceedingly well off,
having high wages, generally plenty of work, short hours,
and plenty of time for pleasure. Seventeen years ago wages
were lower, but so were rents, and provisions were cheaper,
—meat at that time being twopence per pound, and fruit
almost given away. I have bought peaches, nectarines,
and apricots at twopence the dozen, while grapes could
be had for a penny the pound. Every year things are be-
coming dearer as the population increases, but still there is
plenty for all. Discontent and strikes have increased the
proportion of those requiring assistance at our doors.
There is a class who emigrate totally unfitted for a new
country, perhaps for any. To the credit of the colonies,
be it said, that whenever distress is made known assistance
is forthcoming.
o
193
THE GOLDEN SOUTH


We have heard a great deal lately of the unemployed
in Sydney, and the Government (I think unwisely) finding
work for them at the public expense. Nearly two years
ago, when a portion of the Southern and Northern Junction
Railway was open, I went with a friend to see the country,
passing through Concord, then over the bridge across
Parramatta River, until we came in sight of what we
thought must be a volunteer encampment, as under the
trees there were several snowy tents pitched and men
clustered about. Presently we stopped at an impromptu
platform, and at once the train was met by several men,
the officials from the trucks throwing out loaves of bread,
and lifting out whole sheep and sides of beef. “ What is it!”
we inquired. “ The week’s rations for the unemployed who
are clearing the bush at Hornsby and other places.” Out
of the crowd there we only noticed two men who looked
really deserving. One poor fellow was quite concerned at
the rough treatment the bread received, and lifted the
loaves carefully, dusting the dirt off with his ragged sleeve ;
at last he remonstrated, saying, “ Don’t throw good food
about like that! Had you known the want of it, as I have
in the old country, you would be more careful of it.”
Up to this time we had not held any intercolonial
exhibition; some public men arranged for the erection of
a spacious building in Prince Alfred Park, Redfern, where
exhibits from the adjoining colonies gave a good idea of
their progress as well as our own. It was well attended,
and brought numbers of people from the country and the


other colonies. In the grounds outside the building an
agricultural show was held, —implements, horses, sheep,
cattle, poultry, dogs, and produce showing to me the
advance made in thirty years. This exhibition building,
the property of the city, has since been used for various
amusements, —concerts, meetings, balls, dinners, fancy
fairs, —and the winter before I left was converted into a
skating rink, open to the public night and day, excepting
when engaged for private parties for skating and after-
noon tea.
The new buildings in Sydney are imposing structures,
and as the value of city property is rapidly increasing, the
old houses are fast disappearing, and others more lofty and
of better design rise in their places. Great expense has
been gone to in the erection of public offices, the University
and its affiliated colleges, offices of companies, banks, and
private firms, mostly of sandstone of excellent quality from
the Pyrmont quarries.
About this time we lost our dear old friend in Cumber-
land Street, and the home was broken up. James left for a
responsible position in Western Australia, and by regular
correspondence kept us fully informed of all that was going
on there. Prom his description I gleaned that society there
was exactly as it had been in Sydney over thirty years ago,
consisting of Government officials, wealthy squatters, and a
few merchants. But the advantages of constant and quick
communication with the mother country and the more
advanced colonies of Australia, with a railway from Free


mantle to Perth—the seat of Government, —made life
more pleasant. Western Australia will assist in absorbing
the surplus of population from older countries; part of it
is well adapted for sheep and cattle. In the north-
western portion there is the Fitzroy River, falling into
King Sound, which is about sixty miles long from the
mouth of the Fitzroy to the islands at its entrance from the
ocean, and about thirty miles wide in the broadest part; the
river is two hundred and forty miles in length, and flows
through large tracts of good pasturage. The timber is
good,—the jarrah, pine, cajeput, cork-bark, acacia, banksia,
and eucalyptus—one variety of the latter peculiar to
Western Australia bearing a beautiful scarlet flower. The
wildflowers are somewhat different from New South
Wales, —the desert pea and everlastings of many colours,
with others whose names are unknown to me.
Perth has a fine Government house, town-hall, and
other public buildings, better than Sydney could boast of
when I first saw it, but from James’s letters everything in
the way of business was flat compared to Sydney. I have
forgotten to mention the pearl fishing industry. We had
some pearls sent to us which were large and of good colour ;
and when mounted, they appear equal to any from other
parts. Gold, lead, and coal have been found there. Though
containing the largest area of land of any of the Australian
colonies, and a climate varying from tropical to temperate,
there is much difficulty in exploring, as water is scarce in
many parts, and this retards settlement. Queensland in


its northern portion is similar in climate to the northern
part of Western Australia, and the former has for many
years been famous for sheep. I have four young friends
settled in Queensland; one on a station a hundred miles
from post or telegraph office, another near a township ; but
the heat is so great, she has to spend the summers with
her mother, near Sydney; another has a luxurious home
near Eockhampton; but even there she soon lost her
youthful bloom. Yet it appears to be a healthy climate
for men, as these ladies’ husbands are all from home and
enjoy good health. Their wives are of the second
generation of Australians ; perhaps this is the reason that
they suffer from the climate more. Another brave girl
friend of mine by this time has gone as a bride to the
borders of South Australia, leaving mother, sisters, and
large circle of friends, to make a home for her husband
there. She is a true Australian girl, an accomplished
musician, a champion tennis player; and better than
all, an excellent housekeeper. No one knows better
than myself how deserving of pity an English girl is
who marries to go into bush life in the northern por-
tions of these colonies; however willing, her training has
unfitted her to rough it or to make the best of everything.
We were now living in Sydney in quite a new neighbour-
hood, at the top of Elizabeth Street, where a Hunter Street
tradesman had purchased the lease of portion of Sir
Daniel Cooper’s Waterloo estate, building thereon rows of
neat cottages and terraces of houses. The soil was sandy


and rather swampy in parts, with a thick layer of decayed
vegetable soil on the surface : this, when dug in and mixed
with the sand, formed a splendid soil for flowers. In less
than a year we had bushes of fuchsias, begonias, and
pelargoniums, and the dividing fences covered with dolichos,
maurandria, and hoya. The street terminated in sand-
hills. On the summit of the highest, “Mount Carmel,”
stands the Eoman Catholic Church, which is built on the
best sites for the purpose in Sydney. At this church I
heard Archbishop Vaughan preach, whose death was
an irreparable loss to his people. The lower part of the
Waterloo estate, towards Botany, was and is the “ east end ”
of Sydney, chiefly occupied by the lower classes ; the vicious,
idle, and worthless congregate there. Of late years the
Chinese have flocked to this neighbourhood, which has not
improved its cleanliness or morality.
Sydney at this time was supplied with water from the
Lachlan and Botany Swamps, considering the area, a
wonderful watershed. Increased population has rendered
it necessary to construct other works, and the Prospect dam
closes in the waters of an enormous catchment area.
A very great mistake has been made in allowing any
portion of the old watershed to be built upon, or otherwise
used till the works at Prospect had received the severest
test. Instead of this precaution (which would strike all
thinking men) being taken, a park has been formed, by
filling in the lower portions with any filth and refuse
brought for the purpose, which will pollute the water


percolating through it to the lower levels, and for years to
come, especially during the extreme heat of summer, will
give off fever germs to the surrounding neighbourhood.
Certainly the Nepean works have not been sufficiently
tested. Already there are dangerous signs of the dam being
faulty, and patching in such works, I am informed, is of
very little use, sometimes hastening the mischief. There
really was no necessity for this park being formed, as
Sydney is rich in parks (perhaps too rich), —Hyde, Moore,
Prince Alfred, Belmore, and Victoria, all of large areas,
with the Domain and Botanical Gardens. These ought
to be sufficient, especially as every suburb is getting a park
of its own. Hyde Park, once the bare, ill-kept racecourse,
is now worthy of its name, with its green sward, fine avenue
of trees, and beds filled with flowers. Moore Park is the
great playground of the people, having a recreation ground.
The Zoological Gardens and Rifle butts are close by. It
is also on the road to Randwick, where the principal race
meetings of the year are held.
Dr. Cuthill little thought the Asylum for Destitute
Children he founded there would so soon have in its vicinity
such attractive residences. Certainly a more healthy or
suitable site could not have been chosen for the little
ones to grow and thrive in. I visited it many times when
Mr. May was superintendent, and the several hundred
children there looked well and happy. The earlier
institutions for children were the Orphan School,
Parramatta, and the School of Industry, Sydney. Now we


have an Infants’ Home, Ashfield, in which a few charitable
ladies take an interest. I went there once with a friend, one
of the committee, and saw forty infants under two years of
age; some in their cots asleep, others toddling about the
rooms. The institution is beautifully kept, so well in-
deed that I thought, “ These poor little mites are far
better off than those reared in many well-to-do homes.”
New South Wales has always been mindful of her sick
and helpless, providing asylums for the aged, blind, deaf,
and dumb. There are hospitals in Sydney and in nearly
every country town. Lately a Sydney merchant left a
large sum for a convalescent home, and another more
recently has given a valuable property at Camden for a
similar purpose. The situations of both will to many
sick and weary be a foretaste of that rest “ that passeth
man’s understanding.”


CHAPTER XXIII
We lived for a time on the heights of Marrickville, our
ground opening on to bush, or what in England would be
termed wood or forest-land, leading to Cooks Eiver, where
there were vistas through which we could’ see houses
“bosomed high in tufted trees;” cleared land, and luxurious
foliage of pittosporum, lily-pilly, and other native trees:
ferns too were very plentiful We were near old friends,
and became intimate with a family residing near us, —an
Englishman, his wife, and five daughters; the parents
arrived in the colony in the early days. The father, a uni-
versity man, was master of a private school at Parramatta,
and the mother was the true type of an Englishwoman, —tall,
handsome, and clever, so it is needless to say the daughters
of such parents were agreeable, and became intimate friends
of ours. Their mother has gone ; but her children live to
show another generation of Australians the results of a brave
unselfish life. A little later we welcomed another family to
our home, as the introduction of a young gentlewoman
who brought letters from my husband’s family ended in a
close friendship with her relatives in Sydney, with whom
she stayed a year.


Our little world in Australia was anticipating a great
event, the opening of the first International Exhibition.
The site chosen for the building was a “happy thought,”
just inside the Domain gates, near the principal streets
of the city, and with a panorama of earth, sea, and sky
from every part of it, which few, if any exhibitions ever
had before. The building could not be said to be original
in design : still many said, “It was an exhibition in itself ; ”
and certainly the site was unique for beauty. When
filled with our own and the products from many lands,
our anticipations of pleasure were fulfilled. The numerous
courts were always crowded day after day. The Italian,
Austrian, and German especially, so much so that we and
others preferred visiting it early in the morning, and having
a quiet view of the sculpture and pictures, including “ St.
Cecilia,” “ Non Angli sed Angeli,” Meissonier’s marvellous
works, and other poetry of the brush; the china, glass,
furniture, jewellery, and silver, which it would be difficult
to give any idea of from mere description. Several
talented musicians visited us, so every day organ and piano-
forte recitals, with concerts, gave pleasure and instruction to
the ear, as so much that was beautiful did to the eye. The
Queensland and island courts showed us much that was
interesting,—pine-apples growing in huge pots, sugar-cane,
native cloth, and many tinted shells; the Chinese and
Japanese courts with their quaint wonders and delicious
tea; India with her rich gems and stuffs, —all not only a
pleasure but an educator. Week after week our people


visited this exhibition and the annexes in the grounds, where
machinery and other useful inventions were shown. Sydney
was crowded with visitors, and the first tramway was
opened to bring many from the railway station. From
this time many improvements were made in our shops, as
numberless things that had been sent from home for the
first time as exhibits became common. At the end of this
year ten years will have passed since it was opened, and
when I left Sydney it was still talked of; nothing now
remains of it except the lovely grounds where it once
stood. Will another ever rise in its place, like a phoenix 1
It was a pity that it was destroyed; still, being built of
perishable materials, it would have been a never-ending
expense to the country to keep it in repair.
The last time I visited the building was to see “ The Old
English Fayre,”—a very pretty sight. The centre was
arranged as a street in the olden time, with shops on either
side with quaint old signs; the wares were sold by ladies
in costumes of the time; and certainly our Australian
beauties looked very fair.
When the Exhibition closed, almost every one felt, “What
shall we do with our afternoons ?” For me this was soon
answered. My husband’s health failing, the doctor ordered
change, and we left for a tour in the Western district. This
was my first journey by train over the Blue Mountains.
I did not enjoy it; in fact, when we wound our devious
way over the wonderful zigzag, I wished we were on the
old road I had last travelled, with all its discomforts


attached to it. When near, terribly near the edge of the
precipices, I held my breath, and looking back on the way
we had come, said, “I wish we were safe at home.” My
husband, to reassure me, remarked, “ The engineer-in-chief
is in the next carriage, so it is all right.” “ What of that!
clever as he is, he cannot prevent accidents. Perhaps there
is something wrong.” Just then we stopped, and not at a
station, “I am sure there is.” “No, nothing of importance,”
as the panting engine went on again. The worst was over
when we reached Hartley Yale, and by the time we reached
Bathurst I was no longer nervous. After dinner we left
our hotel and walked through the town, so altered and im-
proved that I could scarcely recognise it. We inspected
the new block of public buildings, and after trying in vain
to find the cottage residence where I stayed nearly thirty
years ago, returned to the hotel, which we left next morn-
ing and took the train to Orange, remaining there a week
with our old friend Marian. We visited a young friend,
whose husband had the best brewery in the town, and
inspected the shops and numerous buildings erected since
I drove through some years previous. We were present
at a cricket match and at the laying of the foundation
stone of a public school. Several speeches were made, the
best (and that is not saying much in praise) from an
Australian orator, whose voice is bad, and who never
forgets one letter in the alphabet, though often another,
while speaking. We then left for Wellington, where my
brother met us at the railway station. If I had felt


like Eip van Winkle in Sydney after being absent three
years, what did I feel now in Wellington 1 ? Now I
saw a busy little town with churches, banks, shops,
private residences, and hotels; a substantial road bridge
over the Macquarie, and another, an iron bridge, nearly
finished, for the railway. A few brick cottages in Monte-
fiores was the only difference there except at Gobolion,
now a large comfortable cottage with gardens and orchard.
The children I had left were married, with children of
their own. Since our visit many other improvements had
taken place,—handsome bank buildings, a hall, where last
winter they had a skating rink, had been built, and a
volunteer corps and a band founded. The town is now
a municipality, and the Corporation have an idea of
lighting it by electricity. This, for a small town two
hundred miles from Sydney, proves Australian progress.
My niece, who has always taken a great interest in Church
affairs, Sunday school, and choir, and has played the organ
in the church for two years, had been presented with a
gold watch and handsome brooch.


CHAPTER XXIV
Our next excitement was the arrival of H.M.S. Bacchante
with the young princes ; but this I was too ill to join in.
After this, our contingent left for the Soudan, a matter
already sufficiently described.
I had paid several visits to my dearest young friend at
Darling Point, where the child I loved so well was now a
wife and mother, and the mistress of a large household,
fulfilling her life’s duties kindly and well. Two visits with
her and her generous husband to their country house in the
Southern district gave me an opportunity of seeing that part
of the country which is more like England ; the trees are
larger and fuller in foliage, owing to the cooler climate. All
the English trees, fruits, and flowers flourish there. Bowral,
Moss Yale, and Sutton Forest present a cultivated appear-
ance. There are many country houses belonging to Sydney
people, besides those of the permanent residents in the
neighbourhood. Erridge Park is my ideal of a country
home, with its acres of garden, orchard, and meadow
land. My friend had his coursing establishment here, his
pretty cattle and dairy. The interior to the house is in


accordance with the exterior, —ornamental ceilings, dadoes
to walls, artistic furniture, and though in the country,
water laid on from a spring, and gas generated in a build-
ing in the garden.
While at Erridge Park we called on an old resident in the
district, whom we found busy preparing for a large family
party of over seventy; she, being the head, was looking for-
ward to it with natural pleasure. Children, grandchildren,
and great-grandchildren hoped to meet in a few days in their
early home, a large residence with hundreds of acres around it,
once rented for a governor’s country house. In the earlier
days, no doubt, it was the home of a family correspond-
ing with many I knew in the Western district, such as
the families of White, Windcycr, Throsby, Campbell,
Chisholm, Badgery, Gibson, Macarthur, and Manning.
We have now a permanent country residence at Moss
Vale for our governors, where Lord and Lady Carrington
rest from their labours, and escape some of the most trying
weather of Sydney. I say rest, and surely well earned, for
though we have been favoured with some energetic repre-
sentatives of Her Majesty, we have never had one to equal
the present. From the arrival of His Excellency Lord
Carrington to the present time, he has indeed worked hard
in fulfilling his duty to Her Majesty and the colony, in
which he has had the able co-operation of Lady Carrington.
It is not to the Government House receptions and gaieties
that I refer only, but to the interest shown in all public and
social gatherings, their kindly sympathy with the sorrows


and bereavements of all classes, as well as joining in the
pleasures of the humblest, from purchasing a doll at a
bazaar to give to a poor little girl, to visiting the Children’s
Hospital, that they have won a place in the hearts of the
people, and long after they return to their home in their
native land, their names will be “ household words ” in “The
Golden South.”
I have been anticipating, as I should have devoted some
space to a fancy fair held at Government House during
Lady Loftus’s reign. It was in aid of Bishop Selwyn’s
mission, and was highly successful; many ladies held
stalls filled with the work of fair hands. It was a very
gay scene, as most people were pleased to avail themselves
of the opportunity of going to Government House, if only
to a bazaar. I heard that two thousand pounds was the
result, and was very glad, as I had taken great interest
in Bishop Selwyn and his work, begun by his father,
whom I met and heard preach at the dear old church, as
I had also the Bishop of Melanesia,—that martyr who,
while on his Master’s work, was killed by the natives,
and his body sent adrift in a boat on the lonely sea.
Such men as these two and Commodore Goodenough
are fine examples of those devoting their lives to good
work.
A bright idea for raising funds to assist in either
building, paying off the debt of a church, or other good
purpose struck some residents at Manly Beach. It was to
have a show of wildflowers of the colony. This quite


original scheme was carried out with wonderful success,
and took numbers from Sydney to visit this “hall of
flowers.”
I thought most of the varieties of native flowers were
known to me, being a favourite study, but did not think
them well fitted for decorative purposes, owing to the insig-
nificance of their foliage; but this show quite dispelled both
illusions. Here were pillars wreathed with waratahs, Ken-
eydia’s purple bloom, native begonia, lily-pillies entwined
with ferns, at the end of the hall dado formed with native
roses (Boronia serrulata), blandfordia, flannel flower, or
Australian edelweis, epacris longiflora or native fuchsia,
boronia pinnata, and many others. An enormous
group of staghorn ferns and rock-lilies formed into
Prince of Wales’s feathers reached the roof. The stalls
were full of flowers arranged as crosses, anchors, hearts;
baskets of all sizes filled with flowers and ferns, bouquets
and wreaths of every hue; in fact, such a display of
Nature’s handiwork, unaided by cultivation, has never
before been seen in Australia or any other country, as
with us the wildflowers, with few exceptions, bloom at
one season.
My health for some time prevented my visiting the
country, or taking part in the numerous social and public
amusements. An occasional visit to the theatre, where I
heard all Gilbert and Sullivan’s operas; a suburban
concert, an amateur performance, sale of work, enlivened by
tableaux vivants under the electric light, and visits to our
P


nearest friends, was all I could venture on; but my
numerous young friends, married and single, kept me
posted up in all that was going on, so I heard of Leider-
tafel concerts, receptions at Government House, at the
town-hall by the mayoress, tennis parties, at homes, and
garden parties.
I was glad to have the opportunity of accompanying
some friends to “The Woman’s Concert,” held in the
University Hall, entirely conducted by ladies, and organised
by two of the principal music teachers—Miss Woolley
and Miss Pedley; the latter having for some time
instructed a St. Cecilia choir of Sydney ladies, who at
this concert were most efficient and of great assistance
in the rendering of part songs and choruses. Several
ladies played the organ, piano, and violin. The rather
critical audience were satisfied, and pronounced it a suc-
cess. This concert confirmed my opinion that Aus-
tralians have a special talent for music. Already
the general public know this, with such performers as
Lucy Chambers, the Carandinis, Howsons, Fischers, Miss
Sherwin, and Armes Beaumont, with others whose names
I forget.
Several quiet afternoons spent in our art gallery
showed also that in the sister art there will some day
be evidences of no mean ability. I have often sat and
listened to the criticisms, and been astonished at the
quickness of our young people in finding the pictures
which show the most talent, and was very pleased to read


in the account of the Melbourne Exhibition many names
of Australian aspirants to fame.
I must describe an excellent arrangement for suburban
recreation at Strathfield, where ground has been pur-
chased and planted, several tennis courts made in grass
and asphalt, a bowling green, and gymnasium. The latter
is a building with verandahs, and rooms for billiards,
chess, and other games. This is supported by members
living near, and a committee of management elected.
Living near, I was invited to spend many afternoons
watching the players, and meeting friends and taking
afternoon tea there. Occasionally tournaments were
played, and prizes presented by residents of the neigh-
bourhood.
Our last opportunity of meeting friends at Strathfield
was at a garden party on Centennial Day, when a large
party met for tennis, bowls, and afternoon tea in our
friends’ pretty grounds. Often since, we have thought,
how pleasant a farewell it was to a place full of kindly,
grateful memories. It was not indeed the only one, as a
few weeks after we had a similar pleasure ,at Darling
Point, Humberstone, and Derry Yale, the last, on the day
before leaving, being full of old and valued friends to
bid us “Adieu.”
The most terrible ordeal which taxed my fortitude
severely was while standing on the deck of the steamer
next morning, surrounded by old friends and their children,
known from their infancy. The whole week had been a


trying one, as day after day we had to “bid good-bye,”
and this was the end, “ after years of friendship,” for me to
think, “ Good-bye on earth, though not for ever.” Fortu-
nately the officers of my husband’s branch of the service
thronged around us, and when the steamer got under
way, kept pace with us in their steam-launch to the
“ Heads,” cheering us to the last. Gratification for a
time kept me up, and having one beside me all my own,
and our faithful young friend and maid, who was and has
been our greatest comfort, made me determined to try and
follow the advice, “ Look not mournfully into the past;
it comes not hack. Wisely improve the present; it is thine.
Go forth to meet the shadowy future without fear, and a
manly heart.”
At last I saw Melbourne, and was certainly surprised
with its appearance. No wonder the citizens are proud
of it, —the wide streets and splendid buildings, with a
general air of importance. The tramways looked small com-
pared with our steam motors and vehicles, owing perhaps
to the width of the roads, as their buildings look better
for the same reason. Our post-office, for instance, if in
Collins Street would appear to better advantage than as
it is, crowded up between George and Pitt Streets. I was
somewhat disappointed with the various shops we entered,
and the approach through Williamstown is very had.
They have not the natural advantages of Sydney, but
have displayed ingenuity in making the best of the
position.


We left Melbourne for Glenelg, South Australia, but
were not able to visit Adelaide. From photos the city
appears attractive, and vast strides have been made during
half a century. My husband recollects it when first
settled, and Governor Hindmarsh and family were there.
Then it was merely a few straggling wooden buildings,
though the streets were laid out and properly pegged.
Captain Hindmarsh, afterwards Admiral Sir John Hind-
marsh, after leaving South Australia, was appointed
Governor of Heligoland. He was a naval officer in
Nelson’s time, and a very good account of his naval career
is given in James’s Australia.
Our next departure is for Albany, King George Sound,
Western Australia. This is a very important position as
a coaling station, and should be well protected by men
and fortifications, as in time of war it would be open to
attack. Though the township is not large, it is a thriving
place, and the climate is lovely, in fact almost perpetual
spring. The coast scenery passed in reaching the anchor-
age is very picturesque, with the sea dashing in foam upon
the headlands.
The mails being on board, we shall soon take our
farewell of Australia’s shores, when Cape Leeuwin has
been passed, and our course shaped for Colombo. Of our
trip and other places touched at beyond this point there
is no occasion to write, as they have been often and ably
described.
In taking our farewell of “ The Golden South,” hope


still lingers with us that we may yet see it again. If
not —
“ And, when the stream
Which overflowed the soul was passed away,
A consciousness remained that it had left,
Deposited upon the silent shore
Of memory, images and precious thoughts
That shall not die, and cannot be destroyed.”
THE END
Printed by R. & R. Clark, Edinburgh




