

fllii-bl
Ipb Sn&> <§§k> sfe" fs<k) &s&> sstk ■§&& &Ms
b't & *&&}&% .
■€t . *-
■f ™ /y* ►
uUBOURa, -'
•* -® 1 * |
| Uetqniutro OJolleni'. if
|| ||
I . k
I 'Sp ■-■
■I i
■ J& 'fife.
IP ■
4|| Brunswick Street, Fitzroy. ||f
■JI Ik
$ m ll>
t| P.OSPECTUS. g,
Vli
fp
•* 4‘|; fl>cl*»urnes
'/.■■. Spectator Publishing Co. Ltd., 270 Post Office Place.
si ■
■. .
ff' ?f ■’ ; f ? ®f r gg




p R. 8.0 U f?
college.
Brunswick Street, Fitzroy
prospectus.
flDcloournei
Bpectatok Publishing Co. Ltd., 270 Post Office Place.


O.'JtUinOii:; H'l. ,% V'-I .• <.M v, i.|- ■ ■ ;t ■ 0 i K-l 53
vd fc ••>.>!. v u<- ibug lo imw
Jj'-iiioj'-" -oVro r.v, yf‘-»v; RJiioFtn’.ia .:i> unitr.no no l.HiL
. *’ **.•■;•' ' iVi • V '»
NOTICE.
Intending Students are notified that they will be
required to pass a Preliminary Educational Examina-
tion before presenting themselves for the First
Professional Examination in November. Particulars
of Examination may be obtained on application to
the Secretary, Melbourne Veterinary College.
gcii «I main e tu .M»b;v T
«<*£•!; If jutu'.itms.-f<4i a? yjiud» -.1 vu?i *»«wi• v‘ v * ;i $ ,w*fno{o


ilellumnic tlelennarg f ol%e.
I t
The Melbourne Veterinary College was established in
in accordance with the provisions of the Veterinary
Surgeons'Act of Victoria,” for the purpose of affording the
opportunity to the rising generation to qualify as members of the
\eterinary profession —a profession which is destined to become
all-important to the health and wealth of the Australian
colonies; and to enable those intending to follow pastoral'
pursuits to gain a practical knowledge of the principles of
veterinary science, to guide them when, as often happens, pro-
fessional assistance is out of reach.
The College is recognised by the Veterinary Board of
victoria, appointed to administer the Act on behalf of the
Government of Victoria, and is the only institution in the
Australian colonies which is empowered to present students
for examination and qualification as veterinary surgeons by
diploma.
Heretofore no attempt has been made to teach veterinary
science in any of the Australian colonies, and those desirous of
obtaining even a rudimentary knowledge of the subject have had
to go to England or elsewhere for their information. The
urgent want of such an establishment is evidenced by the fact
that on opening six students were at once enrolled, and the
classes have steadily increased since.
The increasing number and value of domestic animals in ths
colonies, their ever-increasing liability to devastating luea?>«a


the important bearing many of these diseases have on the health
of the community, and the difficulty that the various Government
stock departments have in dealing with their prevention and
suppression without extended veterinary aid, give ample scope
for the exercise of veterinary skill either in private practice or
in the Government service. A number of animal diseases are
indigenous to Australia, others vary in character from those
met with in other countries, and there are many modifications
due to climatic and other influences. These, together with the
difficulties in the way of diagnosis and treatment consequent
upon the semi-wild state in which much of the stock is bred and
reared, all point to the desirability of having men trained for the
profession in the country where their services are required, so
that they may be directly initiated into their special professional
routine, a want of knowledge of which militates against the
immediate usefulness of graduates from other countries.
The comparatively few qualified veterinary surgeons in the
Australian colonies are for the most part located in the large
centres of population, consequently the great majority of stock
owners are practically without veterinary assistance, and the
preventible mortality amongst valuable stud and other stock,
even from ordinary ailments and accidents, results in losses to
the country of hundreds of thousands sterling annually, so that
the dearth of veterinary aid throughout the colonies, unimportant
as it may seem, has a very important bearing upon the wealth of
the different colonies.
The opportunities offered for professional and amateur
practical training, and the high appreciation in which the
establishment is held by the public, may be gleaned from the
number of cases treated annually (see Hospital and Practice
Record, p 14), and from the Record of Examinations (p. 22).


fT is somewhat early in the history of the College to
attempt a resume of the effect of its establishment upon
the conservation of the" health of Australian stock, but
the success in private practice and in public appointments of
the graduates of the College, makes manifest the fact that the
veterinary profession offers opportunities lor a successful and
remunerative professional calling, such as are offered by no
other profession in the colonies, and there is no doubt that as
each succeeding class of students graduate and become dis -
persed throughout the colonies this fact will year by year
become accentuated.
Amongst the graduates who hold important appointments
may be mentioned : ,
Mr. H. H. E dwards, G.M.V.C., Government Veterinarian;
Western Australia.
Mr. W. J, Cother, G.M.V.C., Veterinary Surgeon to the
Victorian Stock Department.
Mr E. A. Le Souef, G M.V.C., Director of the Zoological
Gardens, Perth, Western Australia.
Mr. J. B. Lkitch, G.M.V.C., Veterinary Surgeon to, the
Geelong Agricultural Society, and
Lecturer in Veterinary Science to
the Gordon Institute.
Mr. H. S Rudduck, G.M.V C , Lecturer on Materia Medica
and Morbid Anatomy, Melbourne
Veterinary College; Lecturer on
Veterinary Science, Dookie Agricul-
tural College and the Workingmen’s
College; and Veterinary Inspector to
the Brighton Shire Council.
Mr. Stanley Fletcher, G.M.V.C., late Lecturer in Veter-
inary Science, Longerenong College
and Veterinary Inspector to the
Stawell Shire Council.


Mr, A. E
Mr H. S,
Mr S. O
Mr. E. A
Callow, G. M. V.C., Lecturer on Veterinary Science,
School of Mines, Ballarat.
S. Kyle, G.M.V.C., Veterinary Captain, Ballarat
Mounted Rifles, and Veterinary
Surgeon to the Ballarat Agricultural
Society.
Wood, G M.V C, Veterinary Inspector of Boroon-
dara Shire Council, and Veterinary
Syrgeon to the Oaklands Hunt Club.
Kendall, G.M.V.C., Veterinary Captain Victorian
Mounted Rifles, Lecturer on An-
atomy, and Hospital Surgeon, Mel-
bourne Veterinary College.


a i'sr.M
departments.
The CoLLtesk is situated in Rrujnswick-street, Fitzroy, and
comprises a large two-story brick building, occupying a
depth of 800 feet, and containing Lecture Rooms, Chemical
Laboratory, Dissecting Room, Museum, Library, Dis-
pensary, Students' Retiring Room, Hospital,’ Farriery, and
Offices. ~
.■ '1 ■ i W.
The Hospital communicates with the main street by a separate
entrance, and contains accommodation for 60 patients,
being constructed under special sanitary arrangements,
fitted up with baths, slinging apparatus, trevis, and all
modern conveniences and appliances. On one side are
loose boxes, and on the other specially constructed stalls
for surgical cases, the space between forming a large tan-
covered yard for operations and exercising ground, the
whole of which is covered in.
The upper story comprises—
Lecture Rooms, having accomm idation for a large number of
students.
Canine Hospital, consisting of twenty separate large and well-
ventilated kennels.
Museum. —This department is replete with specimens of ossific
disease peculiar to Australian animals, and also contains
numerous pathological, anatomical, and histological speci-
mens. Valuable specimens are continually being added to it
from animals which die in the extensive Zoological Gardens,
and it now contains skeletons of the horse (2), cow. dog,
bear, baboon, ibex, deer, kangaroo, tiger, emu, native cat, &c.
A New Chemical Laboratory has been added. This depart-
ment is fitted up with complete apparatus, and five
sets of re-agents for practical instruction in chemistry and
toxicology.
Dissecting Room. —A commodious, airy, and well-ventilated
room, fitted with all requisite appliances for complete
dissection of subjects, including crane and tackle for
suspending the subject in the upright position during
dissection.


special ©rpartmmt*
PATHOLOGICAL.
The examination of all diseased specimens (blood, lungs, liver,
kidneys, spleen, tumours, &c., &c.) is conducted micro-
scopically, and a written report furnished as to the causes,
nature, treatment and prevention of the disease. It is
requested that in outbreaks of obscure animal diseases
the above tissues and organs should be forwarded im-
mediately after death. Diseased specimens should be
placed in bottles and jars with methylated or other spirit,
and sealed.
FEES.
Twenty-five Guineas per annum, to be paid in advance,
with a Special Fee of Three Guineas for Practical Chemistry
or First Year Students.


CURRICULUM.
professional Course
TITHE course of instruction for students intending to qualify
'l* as Veterinary Surgeons extends over a period of four
years, and the sessional year is divided into two terms
of four months each, the first commencing on the first Tuesday
in March, and continuing till the end of June, and the second
on the first Tuesday in August, and continuing till the end of
November.
Students may join at the beginning of any term, but they are
strongly advised to commence their studies at the opening of
the first term (March in each year) as joining at a later date
places them at a great disadvantage on account of the courses-
of lectures having been commenced and proceeded with from
March.
Each candidate for the diploma authorised by the Veterinary
Surgeons’Act must, during his academical course, be subjected
to and pass four examinations in the following order :
The first examination at the end of the first sessional year,
the subjects being Elementary Anatomy, Practical Chemistry
and Elementary Physics. Biology (Elementary Zoology
Botany).
The second examination at the end of the second sessional
year, Anatomy of the Domesticated Animals, Physiology and
Histology, Veterinary Hygiene, Sanitary Science, Dietetics,
and Stable Management.
The third examination at the end of the third sessional year,
MorbH Anatomy, Pathology and Bacteriology, Materia
Medica. Therapeutics and Toxicology, and the Principles and
Practice of Shoeing.
The fourth and final examination provided the student has
passed all the others, is held at the end of the fourth year, the
subjects being the Principles and Practice of Veterinary


Medicine, Principles and Practice of Veterinary Surgery, the
Examination of Horses and Cattle as to health and soundness,
and on Meat Inspection.
Vacations. —Tne Midwinter Vacation takes place during
the month of July, and the Summer Vacation commences
immediately after the annual examinations in November, and
extends until March. Students may attend for hospital
practice, clinical instruction, and dispensing during the
vacations.
for jurist year's Subjects.
(Examination A.)
Chemistry
Inorganic Chemistry. —Mixtures—Compounds—Elements
—Laws of Combination by Weight and Volume—Atomic
Theory—Use of Symbols and Equations—Chemical Classifi-
cations upon Chemical and Physical Data.
Practical Chemistry. —This course includes chemical
manipulations and the study of the chemical re-actions of the
principal metals, acids, and their combinations ; together with
the general principles of qualitative analysis, the detection of
metallic and vegetable poisons, and the practical examination
of milk, urine, and other animal fluids. Each student is pro-
vided with a working bench, apparatus, and re-agents suitable
to the class of work being pursued.
Elementary Physics.
Weight—Electricity and Pressure—Levers —Pulleys
Metric System of Weights and Measures—Specific Gravity—
Air Pump—Barometer—Diffusion of Gases and Liquids—
Heat —Expansion—Change of State—Freezing—Boiling—
Evaporation—Specific Heat —Radiant Heat.


Biology
Elementary Zoology
i. Notions of General Clarification ; s/iAio,
Orders, Species, Haces.
2. Invertebrates; Characters, Classes
3. Protozoa ; Amoeba, Gregarines.
4. Echinoderms ; Characteristics.
5. Worms ; Flukes, Tapeworms, &c.
6. Mollusca ; Characteristics.
7, insecta; Characteristics, Metamorphosis. Examoles of
useful and deleterious insect'.
8 Vertebrates; Organisation, Skeleton, &c.
g. Amphibia ; Characteristics, Metamorphosis.
10 Fishes ; Characteristics.
11. Reptiles; Characteristics.
12 Birds ; Characteristics.
13. Mammals; Characteristics. Elementary notions of order.
Botany
1 Vegetable Kingdom—Difference from Animal Kingdom.
2 Elementary Ideas about Organs and their Functions.
3 Flowering and Non-flowering Plants.
4 Organs of Nutrition —Roots, stem, leaves. Organs of
Reproduction—The flower (calyx, corolla). Androecium
and Gyncecium—Examples chosen from common or
useful plants—The fruit, seed, germination.
5. Non-Flowering Plants—Elementary Ideas about Algae
and Fungi.
6. Classification (Principles) of Plants—Natural Orders,
Sub-Orders, Classes, Species, &c.
7. Characters of the following Natural Orders of Plants of
importance to the Veterinary Profession ;—Angiosper-
miae, Papaverae, Cruciferae, Leguminosae, Rosaceae,
Umbeliferae, Compositae, Solanaceae. Scrophularaceas.
Monocotyledons
Liliaceae, Cyperaceae, Gramineffe.
GYMNOSPERMEiE.
Coni ferae.
Elementary Anatomy.
Bones, Ligaments, Joints.


3tconb gear’s Subjects.
(Examination B.)
Histology
The Recognition and Description of all Animal Tissue*
Fluids : —Blood —Lymph—Epithelial Tissue— Connective Tis-
sue —Muscular Tissue—Nervous Tissue. The Arrangement
of Tissues in Special Organs, or the Microscopical Structuxw
of Parts, Simple Histological Methods.
Physiology.
Structure and Physical Properties of Organisms—Chemical
Composition of the Animal Body—Vital Characters of the
Animal Body—Pood—the Blood Digestion—Absorption—
Circulation Respiration Secretion —Excretion —Nutrition
—Animal Heat —Muscular Action —Locomotion—The Ner-
vous System—Special Senses—Reproduction, including Lac-
tation— Development.
Anatomy of Domesticated Animals
1. Descriptive. —This course, extending over two terms
(to be attended by First and Second Year Students), includes
a series of lectures given daily on equine and comparative
anatomy, which are fully illustrated by prepared dissections
and diagrams, special reference being made to regional and
surgical anatomy throughout the course.
2. Practical. —This course is carried on daily throughout
the winter months in the dissecting room, under the super-
vision of the demonstrator. Second Year Students are
required to dissect every part of the horse thoroughly, and also
to make a special dissection of the fore and hind limbs for
vessels and nerves before receiving their certificates of
eligibility for the second examination (see Dissecting Room
Regulations, p. 21) Demonstrations and examinations on the
parts dissected by the students are held daily by the lecturer.
Veterinary Hygiene, Sanitary Science, and Stable
Management
Hygiene.— Water—quality quantity. Food—grasses, roots,
cereals, &c. Stables, Cow Sheds, Kennels, Piggeries, Sheep


Pens—construction, aspect, ventilation, drainage, fittings.
Feeding—general principles, quantities, varieties of foods, pre-
paration and mixing food. Milking Cows. Washing. Sheep
and Dogs. Dipping, General Principles of Breeding. Care
of Animals during Gestation.
Sanitary Science. —Suppression of Epizootics. Disinfect-
ing animals, stables, cow sheds, railway trucks, ships, &c.
Stable Management. —Approaching animals, securing,
handling, grooming. Tools and implements. Clothing, ban-
daging, clipping, singeing. Halters, pillar reins. Adjusting,
saddles, collars, bridles, &c.
Morbid Anatomy and Pathology
The causes of disease, predisposing and exciting.—-Atrophy,
simple and numerical. Hypertrophy. The degenerations
(metamorphoses and infiltrations), including fatty, calcareous,
pigmentary, mucoid, and lardaceous. Necrosis (gangrene).
Tumoutrs —their development, clinical course, changes, and
characers (malignant, benign, recurrent, non-current) including
the following—fibromata, lipomata, chondromata, osteoifiata
lymphomata, papillomata, sarcomata, and carcinomata. Con-
gestion (hyperaemia). Anaemia. Thrombosis. Embolism.
Inflammation—its varieties, causes, course, and terminations
Inflammation of th edifferent tissues and organs; Specific
inflammation, including tuberculosis, actinomykosis, glander ;
and farcy. Scrofula. Septicaemia (septic infection and septic
intoxication). Pyaemia (pyaemic metastasis).
In addition to this there are demonstrations of microscopic,
sections of morbid tissues, and fequent excursions are made to
the public abbattoirs, knackeries, and Zoclogical Gardens for
the performance of post-mortem examinations, and the demon-
stration of diseased organs by the students under the super-
vision of the lecturer.


Mat aria. Medlca
~.v' it r-.. r '-‘rDi.- ’.
Forms in which Medicines are used. Methods of Adminis-
tration or Application. Actions and Uses of Medicines.
Classification of Medicines. Specific Agents—their action,
doses, derivation, preparation, &c. Incompatibles. Impurities.
Writing add Reading Prescriptions. Poisons—rain’eral, vege-
table, and animal. Symptoms of Poisoning. Antidotes.
Chemical and Physiological Tests, &c.
Principles and Practice of Shoeing
General and special (surgical) shoeing, with daily practical
demonstrations in the hospital forge.
Bacteriology
The lectures will deal with the classification of bacteria and
the principles of their generation, life, mode of growth, and
agency in the pioduction of disease ; together with the prin-
ciples of artificial attenuation and preventive inoculation.
Equine Medicine and Surgery
The Principal’s lectures (to be attended by Final and Inter-
mediate Students), extend over four terms, and are divided
into two courses, viz.:—
r. Veterinary Medicine—including the principles and
practice of veterinary medicine ; the causes, diagnosis, course,
and treatment of the internal diseases of the horse ; the nature,
causes and diagnosis of contagions and infectious diseases and
epizootics, and the principles which guide their treatment or
prevention ; hereditary and constitutional diseases, veterinary
sanitary science, hygiene, dietetics, &c.
2. Veterinary Surgery—including surgical diagnosis and
pathology, operative surgery, the principles and practice of


pathological shoeing, veterinary obstetrics, the pathology and
treatment of skin diseases, &c.
During these lectures special attention is paid to diseases
peculiar to Australia, and to climatic and local modifications
of disease generally.
Bovine Medicine and Surgery, and Diseases of the
Dog, Sheep, and Pig
This course (to be attended by Final and Intermediate
Students) extends over four terms, and embraces lectures on
the origin, course, symptoms, and treatment of diseases of
cattle (large and small ruminants, dog and pig), including
contagious and infectious diseases, epizootics, hereditary and
constitutional diseases, &c.
Parasites and Parasitic Diseases
During thD course (to be attended by Final Students) the
lectures will be illustrated by specimens of the parasites of the
domestic animals and man, and will embrace the classification-,
life history, habitats, and metamorphoses of those parasites
connected with disease, including those common to animals
and man, with special reference to the principles which guide
the treatment or prevention of parasitic diseases, and the
suppression of parasitic invasion of the animal body.


EXAMINATIONS.
The professional examinations are conducted by a Court of
Examiners appointed by the Veterinary Board of Victoria.
No student will be admitted to any professional examination
xcept on the lodgment with the Board of a certificate of
ligibility for such examination from the Principal of the
College (see Rules and Regulations).
By the Regulations (34 to 43), under the “ Veterinary Sur-
geons’ Act, Victoria,” it is provided that.—
34. Students to pass four examinations. —Students shall be
required to pass four examinations, and shall be required to
pass in all the subjects at each examination hereinafter
mentioned before being eligible for the next succeeding exam-
ination.
35. When examinations shall be held. —Two examinations shall
be held during each year, i.e., in June and November, and
students shall be examined in the written before the oral and
practical portion.
Examination A.
36, Subjects for first examination.- —At the first examination a
student shall be examined in—(1) Elementary Anatomy ; (2)
Practical Chemistry and Elementary Physics; (3) Biology
(Elementary Zoology and Botany).
Examination B.
37. Subjects for second examination. —At the second examina-
tion a student shall be examined in — ( l ) Anatomy of Domesticat ed
Animals ; (2) Physiology and Histology; (3) Veterinary Hy-
giene, Sanitary Science, Dietetics, and Stable Management.
Examination C.
38. Subjects for third examination.—Pst the third examination
a student shall be examined in—(l) Morbid Anatomy, Path-
ology, and Bacteriology; (2) Materia Medica. Pharmacy,
Therapeutics, and Toxicology ; and (3) Principles and Practice
of Shoeing (practical and oral examination only).


Examination D.
39. Subjects fay fourth examination. —At the fourth and final
examination a student shall be examined in— (1) Principles and
Practice of Veterinary Medicine ; (2) Principles and Practice of
Veterinary Surgery; (3) On the examination of horses and
cattle as to health and soundness and on meat inspection.
(Practical and oral examination only.)
40. In each subject prescribed for examination (except when
hereinbefore otherwise specified) a written examination shall be
held and an oral or practical examination may be ordered by
the Board ; the written examination to extend over not less than
one (1) hour, and the oral or practical over not less than fifteen
(15) minutes.
41. Terms to be used by examiners, —The terms to be used by
the examiners in their certificate or record of examination are
44 Very Good,” “ Good,” “ Sufficient,” and “ Fail.”
42. The value of terms used. —A student awarded a 4 Very
Good ” in each of the three subjects at each examination shall
be passed with 44 First Honours ” ; a student awarded a 44 Good ”
in each of the three subjects at each examination, or terms of
greater value, and below three 44 Very Goods,” shall be passed
with 44 Second Honours ” ; a student awarded a 44 Sufficient,” in
each of the three subjects at each examination, or terms of
greater value, but including either one or two 44 Sufficients,” shall
be passed. A student awarded a 44 Fail ”in any of the subjects
at any examination shall fail in such examination.
43. President to attend examination. —The president, or senior
member of the Board deputed by him will be expected to attend
and superintend the examinations once at least in the year.
txzutz


TEXT BOOKS.
First
Botany : Oliver, Dendy & Lucas.
Physics : Palmer’s.
Second
Histology ; Klein’s.
Third
Bacteriology ; Crookshank's.
Fourth
Meat Inspection : Walley’s.
Obstetrics ; Fleming.
Animal Parasites; Neumann.
Year.— Chemistry : Dittmar’s “Analytical Chemis-
try,” Roscoe.
Junior Anatomy: Bradley’s “Outlines of
Anatomy.”
Zoology : Introductory Zoology, Nicholson’s.
Year. — Anatomy: Strangeway’s, Chauveau's.
Physiology : F. Smith’s “ Veterinary Physio-
logy,” Meade Smith’s “ Physiology of the
Domesticated Animals.’’
Veterinary Hygiene ; F. Smith’s “ Veterinary
Hygiene. ’
Year. — Morbid Anatomy : Green, Hamilton.
Pathology and Therapeutics : Freidberger and
Frohner.
Materia Medicaand Therapeutics : Finlay Dun,
Wallis Hoare, Gresswell’s “ Pharma-
copoea.”
Principles of Shoeing ; Fleming, Hunting.
Year. — Veterinary Surgery : Williams, Moller (Dollar).
Veterinary Medicine: Williams, Robertson,
Steel.


Iftst of (jammers.
(Who have been appointed by tjie Veterpiary.Board of Victoria.)
v -CA U .: -L- !i / . i
Baron Ferdinand Von Mueller, K.C.M.G., M.D., &c.
(Botany).
J. Cosmo Newbery, Esq., C.M.G., F.C.S., &c. (Chemistry).
D. Astley Gresswell, Esq., M.A., M.D. (Oxon.), &c.
(Morbid Anatomy and Pathology, Physiology).
W. L. Mullen, Esq., M.D., LL.D. (Morbid Anatomy
and Pathology).
]. W. Springthorpe, Esq., M.A., M.D. (Morbid Anatomy
and Pathology).
J. Dunbar Tweedale, Esq., M.R.C.S., &c. (Physiology).
Charles Marson, Esq., M.R.C.V.S. (Equine Medicine
and Surgery).
W. D. Rogerson, Esq., M.R.C.V.S. (Medicine and Sur-
gery, Cattle, &c., Anatomy—Comparative).
R. E. Weir, Esq., M.R C.V.S. (Medicine and Surgery,
Cattle, &c., Materia Medica, Anatomy of the Horse).
E. A. Hollingham. Esq., M.R.C.V.S. (Materia Medica).-
F. W. Melhuish, Esq., M.R.C.V.S. (Equine Medicine
and Surgery).
W. D. Snowball Esq., M.R.C.V.S. (Materia Medica).
W. I. Cother, Esq , G.M.V.C. (Equine Medicine and
Surgery).
A. Goule, Esq , M.R.C.V.S. (Equine Medicine and Sur-
gery, Anatomy of the Domesticated Animals, Materia Medica)
Henry Wragge, Esq ,• M.R.C.V.Si (Bovine Medicine and.
Surgery,. &c. *rr?stLW •.
Professor Guerin (Botany).
C. R. Blackett, ESQ^^^.C.Sv^hemistVy).
• »rr ..
S. S. Cameron, Esq., M?W. t C. Medicine and
Surgery, Anatomy of the Horse, &c.') ' ;


RULES AND REGULATIONS
RELATING TO STUDENTS.
I. ATTENDANCE AT CLASSES.
The time of the attendance of pupils at the College is from
nine in the morning till five in the evening, subject to special
exemption by the Principal. An accurate record of their
attendance is kept, and for this purpose their names will be
called over at the close of each lecture or demonstration. They
are also required to take their seats in the lecture-room before
the time specified for the commencement of each lecture or
demonstration, and to observe strict propriety of conduct.
11. ABSENTING FROM CLASSES.
Any pupil wilfully absenting himself from the classes may
be disqualified from obtaining his certificate at the end of his
term of study, and any serious misconduct renders a pupil liable
to suspension or dismissal.
HI. CLASS EXAMINATIONS.
Periodical examinations will be held in order to test the
progress made by pupils, and certificates, according to the
different degrees of merit attained by the pupils at the end of
their term of study, will be given.
IV. OFFICES TO BE HELD BY STUDENTS,
Pupils will be required to act in rotation, according to
priority of admission, as—
(1.) Clinical Clerks. —Whose duty it is to go round the
Infirmary with the Hospital Sui-geon, and write down a
description of each case admitted for treatment, noting
any variation of symptoms, &c., as pointed out by the
surgeon, and also the prescriptions to be used, and the
dietary scale, &c., for each day.
(2.) Assistant Dispensers. —Who have to assist in dispensing
all medicines and applications for both indoor and out-
door patients, and to keep copies of prescriptions and
directions, fur reference, &o.


(8.) Dressers. —The duty of the Dressers is to obtain from
the Dispenser the medicines and applications required
for the hospital patients, and, under the direction of the
Hospital Surgeon, proceed to administer the medicines,
and use the applications as written down in the Clinical
Clerk’s book.
(4.) Assistant Operators, —Whose duty it is to see that the
instruments and surgical appliances are in their proper
place, and ready for use when required ; to assist in all
serious operations, and to perform minor ones, under the
direction of the officer in charge.
(5.) Visitors. —Who accompany the Visiting Surgeon to
outside cases, and assist at such cases as required.
Y.—DISSECTING ROOM REGULATIONS.
(1.) Students shall attend in the dissecting room during the
period that the dissection course is in progress, at least
four hours daily.
(2.) The subject for dissection shall be dissected in parts by
sets of students according to the following system .
Two students to each lore limb.
Two students to each hind limb.
Four students to the trunk (abdomen and thorax).
Four students to the head and neck.
(3.) Students before being entitled to their certificate of
eligibility to present themselves for the second exami-
nation will be required to dissect at least the head and
neck, trunk, two fore limbs, and two hind limbs, the
second dissection of the limbs being a special dissection
of vessels and nerves.
(4.) The lecturer will be in attendance, and will superintend
the student’s dissection in the following manner:
Demonstrations will be given each day on the part (set of
muscles, viscera, &c.) on which each set of students are
then engaged, and on the following day the students will
be examined on the previous day’s demonstration and
dissection. Providing their knowledge of the part is
satisfactory, they will be allowed to pass and proceed


with their dissection and demonstration. If their
knowledge of the part is insufficient they will be failed,
and will be examined each succeeding day until a satis-
factory knowledge is exhibited.
(5.) A record of the dissection of each student will be kept,
and when the whole subject has been dissected (accord-
ing to the forgoing rules), a certificate to that effect will
be given.
(6.) Students engaged in dissecting will require to keep their
tables and the floors free from any obnoxious viscera,
flesh, &c., and to remove the various parts immediately
the dissection of each part is completed.
YI.—LIBRARY.
Students are entitled to the use of the whole of the books,
&c., in the library, and under proper regulations these are lent
out to students for consultation or home reading.
YII.—PENALTY FOR NON-OBSERYANGE OF RULES.
The Principal reserves the right to withhold the certificate of
eligibility for examination in the case of any student or students
who infringe any of the above rules or regulations, or who
fail to perform the duties specified.




