

Hetherington’s Handbooks for Emigrants, No. 8.
y^H*y
K.
THE IMMGMSTS y^%^\yy^
PROSPECTS
« y¥4y
• • ■ Wr^
V;
-' J y/
t^y
6d.
*yy
y
of information.
* * /
yy*;
yyy^
y<**yU'
w Ar/
\ yy y*£y' Resources,
Advantages, and Attractions.
Soil, Climate, Products, Trade, and Wages.
y
y h y
* * * *
■» * * *
*
# * * # *
NOW READY, PRICE
2s.
6d.,
WC/ff at sea
ft
1
||
i^fis
'SgfgjR
fit)
(
1
Itau
K
STRALIA
1W liMAMi
AUSTRALIAN & NEW ZEALAND
PASSENGER’S GUIDE.
LONDON :
F. W. HETHERINGTON, 334, STRAND,
w.c.


PUBLICATIONS
USEFUL TO INTENDING EMIGRANTS.
MAY BE HAD FROM “ DOMESTIC HELP ” OFFICE,.
334, ST HAND, W.C.
Queensland. —The Immigrant’s Prospects, The Origin of Queensland, Geography, Climate, Character
. of Land and Products, Population, Brisbane, Railways, Institutions, Societies, Revenue and Expenditure,
Manufactures and Industries, Prices of Provisions, Rents, Rates of Wages, Natural History, Pastoral
Pursuits, Agriculture, Sugar, Vines, Wheat, Tobacco, Arrowroot, Maize, Native Timbers, Farming, Land
Regulations, Mining, Gold, Silver, Copper, Coal, Tin, Squatters’ Homesteads, What Immigrants Write
Home, &c. Post free 6d.
Tasmania. —Recent Statistics, Climate, Population, Progress, Provisions, Wages, Land, Prices and:
Terms of Purchase, Free Grants, Railways and Roads, Mining and Minerals, Class of Emigrants Required,
Letters from Settlers, &c., &c. The Latest Work Published on the Colony, with Coloured Map. Post
free, Gd.
South Australia. —Now Ready. The Immigrants’s Prospects. How to get to South Australia,
Outfit, The Assisted System, The Voyage, The Land Orders, The Climate, Character of Land, Chief Towns,
History, Government, Population, Education, Religion, Railways, Institutions, Occupations of the People,
Clothing, House Rent, Board and Lodgings, The Products, Vine Culture, The Native Woods, Mining, Gold,
Pastoral Pursuits, Manufactories, Prices of Provisions, Rates of Wages, Account of a Settler’s Home, a
Letter from South Australia, &c., &c. Post free Gd.
lew Zealand. —The Immigrant’s Prospects in New Zealand.—This is the very latest publication
relating to this Colony, and contains most valuable information useful to intending emigrants : Origin,
Geography, Soil, Climate, Birds, Fish, The Aborigines, The Maori, Dress, Food and Language, Habits and
Customs, The Government, Education, Volunteers, Railways, Post, Telegraphs, Banks, Friendly Societies,
Institutions, Dwelling Houses, Population, Shipping, Revenue, Imports and Exports. Advantages of the
Colony, why it is a good country; Choosing a Farm, Beginning a Farm, Advice to Settlers, The English
Labourer In New Zealand, Sheep, Farming, Squatting, Value of Land, Farm Buildings, Stock, Agriculture,
Products, Manufacturing Industries, Mineral Wealth, Government Bonuses, Fisheries, Silver, Tin, Lead,
Iron, Coal, Limestone and Building, Rates of Wages, Interesting Facts, Society, Amusements, Land Regu-
lations, The Provinces, The Cost of a Home, New Zealand as a Field for Emigration, Newspaper Corres-
pondence Relative to Emigration and Selection of a Colony. What Immigrants write home: Letters from
young women who Emigrated out. A month’s trip on Horseback in New Zealand, &c., &c. Fifty-four
pages, price 1/-, sent post free to any address.
Western Australia.— -A Handbook for intending settlers, Origin of Western Australia, Free Grants
of Land, Advantages, Climate, Products, Wool Trade, Mineral Resources, Social Conditions, Prices of
Provisions, Rates of Wages, Progress, Geographical Features, Land Regulations, Mountains, Rivers,
Products, Animals, Population, Pearl Fishing, Exports, Railways, Timber, Telegraphs, &c., &c. Post
free Gd.
Mew South Wales. —A Handbook for Intending Settlers. Its Origin, Character, of Land,. Soil,
Description of Country, Climate, Natural History, Vegetable Productions, Sydney, Population, Social
Position, Land Regulations, Pastoral and Agricultural Pursuits, Mining, Price of Provisions, Rates of
Wages, &c., &c. Price Gd.
Victoria Handbook.— Area of the Colony, Climate, Formation, Productions, Animals, Population,
Sod, Commerce, Constitution, Education, Prices of Food, Fares for Passage, Gold Mining, Imports, Land
Laws, Stock, Manufactures and Works in Operation, Ostrich Farming, Occupation of the People, Rivers,
Railways, Wool, Rates of Wages, &c., most interesting to intending passengers. Post free Gd.
liife at Sea —and General Description of Australia, reprinted from “ Hetherington’s Universal
Register,” most interesting to intending passengers, full of information respecting who should go; what
outfit is necessary; rates of passage by steam and sailing ships; victualling scale; useful hints ; ship kit,
aud a diary of every day life on board ship, with general description of Australia and its natives. Post free
six stamps.
What America is lake. —Large Folio Edition, with Folding Map, Profusely Illustrated, Coloured
Wrapper; giving a Full and Reliable Description of the various Cities and Important Centres of the
States, Cost of Living, Trade and Wages, &c. Price Gd., by post Bd.
Inuicle Hap and Directory of Mew York City. —Pocket Edition. A very elaborate Street.
Map, with useful hints to Travellers. Cloth cover. Price 1/-
Tourists’ ti<Hide to California.— Splendidly illustrated, and with a tasteful pictorial cover.
Gives full accounts of all the noted summer and winter resorts, the Yosemite Valley, Big Trees, Geysers,
noted seaside resorts, hot and cold springs, mineral springs, &c. Post free 1/6.


• • *
• • * •
«••••<
x&y v
/\* r sU vX
w
44444444444444444444444444444444444444444^
THE IMMIGRANTS
PROSPECTS
/*A
in
.... Vs.
x& VS
6d.
' ®anttoooft
of Information*
* *
W ,-■***/
Resources,
L Advantages, and Attractions.
Soil, Climate, Products, Trade, and Wages.
v>^*>
4.^^^4^.41^.4.^^.^44.444.444.444444.44.4.44.4444444444444411
X*X
* * ♦ *
*****
* *
* * * .
| *4.44.4.4. **********.H.44.444.444444444444444444444444444444444444||
NOW READY, PRICE 2s. 6d.,
LIFE A IT SEA! 3
ks
img
(
.r^5u
&R
STRALIA
SOT IiM=M
1
AUSTRALIAN & NEW ZEALAND
PASSENGER'S GUIDE.
LONDON :
F. W. HETHERINGTON, 334, STRAND,
W.C.


NOTICE.
NOW READY, the following Useful Handbooks,
Price 6d. Each.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA,
VICTORIA,
SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
QUEENSLAND,
TASMANIA,
NEW SOUTH WALES,
And SOUTH AFRICA.
PUBLISHING OFFICE:
334, STRAND, LONDON, W.O.


THE IMMIGRANTS PROSPECTS
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Its Origin.
South Australia is an immense tract of country
running straight across the entire continent, from
North to South. The Colony comprises three great
divisions, namely, South Australia proper, Central
Australia and Northern Territory. It is bounded
on the East by Victoria, New South Wales, and
Queensland; on the West by Western Australia ;
and on the South by the Southern Ocean. It covers
an area of 903,690 square miles, or 578, 361,600 acres.
Peter Nuyt, a Dutch seaman, first discovered
the shores of Australia, he having in 1627 sailed
along the South Coast from the Westward as far as
St Peter’s Island, in Nuyt’s Archipelago. The
groups of islands he discovered were called after
him.
Lieutenant James sighted the South Australian
Coast in 1800, and to the part sighted he gave the
name of Cape Northumberland.
Lieutenant Matthew Flinders first began survey of
the South Australian Coast in 1802, and he may be
considered the practical discoverer of South Austra-
lia. From his cheering reports a company was
formed, with a capital of £50,000, called the South
Australian Land Company; other companies
followed ; large blocks of waste lands were sold to
them, and to private individuals.
South Australia was, however, really colonized in
1834. It differs vastly in its origin from its sister
colonies. While they originally were nearly all
convicts’ depots, South Australia never harboured
a single British exile. It rose into existence as
follows:—Several gentlemen formed themselves into
a body, under the title of the “ South Australian
Association,” and in August, 1834, an Act was
passed by the governing power to persons approved
by the Privy Council, “to frame laws, establish
courts, appoint officers, chaplains, and clergymen of
the Church of England or Scotland, and to levy
duties or taxes.” The three great principles on
which the colony was founded were as follows :
1. That it was never to be a charge on the
mother country.
2. That there was to be no State Church.
3. The transported prisoners from Great Britain
were never to be admitted to its shores.
The land was disposed of in moderately-sized
blocks at a moderate price, and the proceeds were
devoted to the introduction of free emigrant labour.
As fresh arrivals came, more land was demanded,
the Government determined not to let it for less than
£1 per acre, and a body of Commissioners were
appointed by the Colonial Office to work the scheme.
At the present time the rates of purchase in South
Australia are as follows:
Crown lijmd*.
1. Crown lands are classified as town, suburban,
and country lands. All crown lands, except pastoral,
arc sold by auction, after due public notices. Coun-
try lands put up to auction and not sold, may be
disposed of by private contract. The lowest upset
price is £1 per acre; but both town and country
lands can be priced higher if great improvements
have been made. If land is purchased on credit, as
it is in some cases, prepayment of 4 years’ interest on
the purchase-money at 5 per cent, has to be made,
one half at the time of purchase, the other half at
the end of three years.
2. Pasture lands are granted at the rate of 10s.
per square mile—to the first discoverer for 14 years—
other waste lands intended for pastoral purposes in
three claims, the first being fixed at £1 per square
mile, the second at Bs. 6d., and the third at 2s. 6d.
per square mile.
3. Mineral leases are granted for 14 years at a
rent of 10s. per acre, with a right of renewal for two
periods of 14 years each, on payment of a fine of not
less than £1 per acre.
Slow to lilet to Soulli Australia.
How an intending emigrant can leave his home in
the old country and get to the colony, or how avail
himself of the various aids to that end which our
Government gives him, is a matter upon which
further information is required. “ It is surprising,”
says the South Australian Bcgister, “ to find how few
people even in South Australia know practically
anything about the matter; and, as to the classes in
England, whom avo arc most anxious to attract
hither, avc have every Aveek proofs of their most
complete ignorance of everything appertaining to
our geography, our system of emigration, and almost
all besides Avhich we as a colony are desirous that
they should knoAv. We Avish to remedy this to some
extent at least. It is held to be a fact beyond dis-
pute by those whose business it is to knoAv most of
the matter that there Avould be more nominated


emigration if people who have done well here and
want to send for their friends at home, could get
easily the necessary instructions to send to them.
The purpose in this article is to give these instruc-
tions, and give them so clearly that little or nothing
more except observance of the official routine will be
needed. To this end, also, we intend to reprint,
following the labour reports in each mail-summary
number, the leading points of these directions, so
that the information will be easily available to all
who wish to have it.”
The Hind of Emigration.
Generally speaking we have not any free emigra-
tion noAv, though a motion is pending in the House
of Assembly, affirming the necessity of resuming
the system. At present the only immigrants ad-
mitted free are female domestic servants, of whom
there are a great scarcity. The Government hold
that the nominated and land order warrant immi-
gration systems are sufficient for our necessities for
some time, and they have announced their willing-
ness to extend them considerably. Already they
have about 100 applications every month from per-
sons in the colony who wish to nominate friends at
home, for passages, and they think the number may be
greatly increased if information of the plan is more
widely diffused. On the Estimates just passed
£25,000 appears for expenditure in assisted and
nominated emigration, and for the introduction of
servant girls; but it is understood that the Govern-
ment will not confine themselves to that sum if a
larger amount can be judiciously employed.
Systems of Immigration.
There are now three systems under which immi-
gration can be effected - the “ Colonial or nominated
Assisted,” the “United Kingdom Assisted,” the
“ Land Order Warrant ” systems. Under the first
and last in South Australia persons in South Aus-
tralia can introduce their friends to the colony, and
the second and last are available for persons in
Europe who are anxious to come to South Australia.
The “Asslsled” System.
People who have settled in the colony may, by
writing to, or applying personally, at the office of
the Commissioner of Crown Lands and Immigration,
Adelaide, obtain “assisted passage certificates,”
enabling them to procure passages from the United
Kingdom to this colony for their relations and
friends, if they be found eligible, on payment of the
following rates: For males and females under
twelve years of age £3; for males and females over
twelve and under forty years of age £4 ; for males
and females over forty and under fifty £8; infants
under twelve months, free. The classes eligible
under these conditions are agricultural and pick-
and-shovel labourers, artisans, domestic servants,
and navvies, with one or two others. The person in
the colony, obtaining the certificate after he has
paid the sum indicated, has of course to notify
the friend whom he wishes to introduce. The cer-
tificate does not necessarily entitle that friend to a
passage. On receiving the intimation he must com-
municate with Sir Arthur Blyth, the Agent-General
for South Australia, whose address is 8, Victoria
Chambers, Westminster, London, S.W. A formal
application containing a declaration of age, occupa-
tion, and such other information, has to be lodged.
The applicant must previously have been examined
by a medical man, whose certificate must be put in
at the same time. All these have to be approved
by the Agent-General or his representative before a
passage is granted. The applicant has then to
undergo an examination by the Surgeon-Superin-
tendent of the ship, or some other surgeon authorised
to act, before he can embark. This lias been
found to be a necessary safeguard, and a check upon
the first medical certificate, which experience has
proved cannot always be relied on.
Outfit.
Each emigrant must provide himself in the shape
of outfit with at least, for each male over twelve: —
Six shirts, six pairs of stockings, two warm flannel
shirts, two pairs of now shoes or boots, two complete
suits of strong exterior clothing, four towels, and
21bs. of marine soap. And each female over twelve:
—Six shifts, two flannel petticoats, six pairs of
stockings, two pairs of strong boots and shoes, two
strong gowns (one of which must be made of a
warm material), four towels, and 21bs. of marine
soap. Two or three coloured shirts for men, and an
extra supply of flannel for women and children, arc
very desirable.
The quantity of baggage for each person over 12
must not exceed 20 cubit or solid feet, nor half a
ton in weight. It must be closely packed in one oi
more strong boxes or cases, not exceeding fifteen
cubit feet each. Larger packages and extra bag-
gage, if taken at all, must be paid for. Mattresses
and feather beds, firearms, and offensive weapons,
wines, spirits, beer, gunpowder, percussion caps,
lucifer matches, and any dangerous or noxious
articles, cannot be taken by emigrants.
The cost of the outfit is the only expense the
emigrants will have to incur; the bedding, knives
and forks, mugs, and, in fact everything else that
will be required during the voyage, being provided
for them. Of course, they may, if they wish, add to
the stock of wearing apparel actually required by
the regulations, and emigrants would do well to
provide themselves with materials for increasing
their stock. A few extra yard’s of flannel, calico,
and print, with an extra pair or two of shoes or boots,
would be found very useful on the voyage. Where
there are children a number of cheap caps should
be provided, as young people are apt to lose their
head coverings overboard. It is, however, quite
optional with the emigrants whether they provide
these extras or not.
The “United Hing-dom Assisted”
System.
Persons in England wishing to go to South Aus-
tralia should apply, either personally or by writing,
to the Emigration agent, No. 8, Victoria Chambers,
Westminster, London. The applicants must state
their correct ages, occupations, and addresses, and
must produce a medical certificate of health. If
these are satisfactory, and the emigrants are accepted,
they will receive the same instructions as to the
vessel that they are to go by, date of sailing,
personal outfit, &c., as are given to the nominated
emigrant, as stated above.
The same classes are eligible, and the same
amount must be paid, under this system as under
the nominated system, and they will have the same
concession as regards the children of large families
going free of charge.
Female domestic servants, of whom there is a
great scarcity, arc just now taken free, under special
instructions, until the present great demand is


supplied. The “United Kingdom” emigrants hav-
ing reached Plymouth on the appointed day, they
and the nominated emigrants become on precisely
the same footing until they arrive at their destina-
tion. The following remarks will therefore apply to
all alike:—
Kates or Passage.
Those who desire to go by steamer must make
application very early for berths, as they are very
rapidly taken up. The publisher will be happy at
any time to book passengers in any steamer or sail-
ing ship, without charge for booking. Through
means of the Telephone established at 334, Strand,
any information can be instantly obtained by com-
munication with the various ship owners and docks
in London, should any special intelligence be re-
quired. Intending passengers may, if they feel
inclined, speak through the Telephone at this office
to almost any ship owner in London, free of expense,
a proceeding which saves considerable trouble and
time. The Land Order application forms may also
be obtained from this office. The rates of passage
by steamer often vary, as low as £l2 or as much as
1.6 guineas 3rd class fares are being asked for about
the same accomodation. The following may be
considered a fair average price to pay for passage
to Adelaide.
Fares by Steamer.
Saloon 45 guineas to 70 guineas
Second Class - - - - - 35 „
Third Class:—
Two Sharing a Cabin, each adult - 20 „
Four „ „ „ -18 „
Open Berths, for Men only - - 15 „
The average duration of voyage by these steamers,
London to Adelaide, is about forty days.
The Voyage.
The voyage by sailing ships usually occupies be-
tween 80 and 90 days; and there is, no doubt, under the
most favourable circumstances, a good deal that will
demand patience, temper, forbearance, and hopeful-
ness on the part of the emigrants. Inconveniences
they may not have been accustomed to have to be
endured; close quarters, “ ship biscuits,” at times
sloppy decks, and other little annoyances the emi-
grants will experience ; but the best thing they
can do is to make up their minds to bear them
cheerfully. As a rule, the food and accommodation
are good. Emigrants, too, generally enjoy excel-
lent health. They would do well to provide them-
selves with useful and interesting books, especially
school books for their children. Intelligent parents
may lay the foundation of a respectable education
in the minds of their children during the spare hours
of the voyage, A schoolmaster will be appointed,
and lesson books and school materials provided, so
that all the juveniles, and grown-up people too, for
the matter of that, will be able to keep up their
drooling on the way out, and the most deserving
ones will receive prizes on arrival.
List of* Hiames.
Dircctlythe ship has sailed, the Emigration Agent
forwards to the Crown Lands and Immigration
Office, in Adelaide, a list of the names of the
immigrants on board. This list roaches Adelaide
about six weeks after the ship sails, and about the
same time before she will arrive there. The names
are published in the newspapers, and the persons
whose nominated friends are on board will have
advice as to when the ship is expected; those who
have families coming should at once arrange about
house accomodation for them, and if any wish their
friends forwarded to them it will be done.
What to do on Arrival.
The nominated immigrant, upon arriving, has
nothing to do but meet his friend, and of course
make the best of his chances. This friend receives
timely advice when the ship is due, and will either
be at the port to meet the new arrival or will have
arranged with the Crown Lands and Immigration
Department to forward the immigrant on to his
destination when he arrives. This is done free of
charge, so far as the railway lines admit. The
immigrant who has paid his own assisted passage
will want employment on his arrival, but he will
probably find employers come on board the ship in
search of men; but if he should not find a job in that
way, he will be provided for on the ship for a few
days while he looks for work.
The Land-Order System.
Land orders of the value of £2O are granted in turn
ways— to persons paying their own passages who
obtain a land-order warrant from the Agent-General
or his representative before sailing ; and to persons
who, having nominated friends for assisted passages,
pay the balance of the passage money within twelve
months after those friends have arrived in the
colony. Any person, no matter what his occupation
may be—whether ho be a clergyman or chimney-
sweep—who can produce a satisfactory medical
certificate, who has paid his passage in a vessel
going direct to South Australia (not first to Brisbane
Sidney, or Melbourne, and thence hither), who is
approved by the Agent-General or Emigration
Agent, as he is also called, before sailing, and who
gets from that officer the necessary warrant, is
entitled to a land order. A good deal of misconcep-
tion having arisen respecting this system, detailed
instructions have been issued by the Government to
this effect;—
The following is the course to be adopted by
persons, wishing to secure land-order warrants from
the Emigration Agent for South Australia, viz.:—
Any person having decided to proceed to South
Australia and settle there, should, after selecting the
vessel by which to proceed (cither sailing ship or
steamer, provided it is bound direct for Tort
Adelaide), and having paid the passage-money,
forward the receipt of such passage-money to the
Emigration Agent for the colony, whose address is
“No. 8, Victoria Chambers, Westminster, S.W.,
London,” and ask that a land-order warrant may be
issued to him. The Emigration Agent will then
require him to furnish certificates, on a form which
will be supplied for the purpose, to the effect that
his passage-money has been paid in a ship that is to
sail direct to South Australia, and that he has not
previously resided in any of these colonies, also a
medical certificate as to the mental and bodily health
of himself and family. He must then call at the
office of the Emigration Agent with these certificates
for examination and approval, when, if required, a
land-order-warrant will be issued to him, after which
he can proceed on his voyage. Care must be taken
that all these requirements are strictly complied
Avith, as it is absolutely necessary to obtain the
warrant before sailing, otherwise there is no claim
whatever for a land-order. If any person should be
in doubt as to the first step to be taken he should


communicate with the Emigration Agent (whose
address is given above), when all doubts will be
promptly set at rest. This should, of course be
done before the passage-money is paid. Persons are
specially warned to consult the Emigration Agent,
and not the shipping agents (as they are apt to do).
The former is the properly authorised person to
give information on this subject, and a direct
application to him will save disappointment.
They should apply in good time, so as to allow every
thing to be done, and the' warrant issued before the
time appointed for sailing. The Emigration Agent
has no power to grant warrants to persons who are
not proceeding in a vessel bound direct for Port
Adelaide. It does not suffice to book for Adelaide
via Melbourne.
This latter point should be particularly borne in
mind, as it has sometimes happened that a man com-
plying with all the conditions and getting his war-
rant in England, but going to Melbourne before he
comes to the colony, has found the warrant to be not
of the least value to him.
On Arrival.
The holder of the land order warrant should on
arrival call at the Crown Lands and Immigration
Office, King William-street, Adelaide where his
warrant will be immediately exchanged for a land
order. The value of each order is £2O for persons
between twelve and forty-five years of age, and £lO
for each child between the ages of one and twelve
years. That order may bo at once exercised in the
purchase of Crown lands, or any person who does
not wish to use it may transfer it to any other per-
son after remaining in the colony two years, There
are some land agents who will pay up to 5 per cent.,
and sometimes even as high as per cent, of the
full value of the order. But if the recipient of the
order desires to take up the land, he would of course
proceed to the Land Office Department of the same
building, where full information would be given to
him. When he had chosen a block of land, he
might pay the orders as part purchase, and in this
way secure the right to what may probably, by the
exercise of his own industry, become in course of a
few years a valuable freehold. Thus a family con-
sisting of a father, mother, and five children over
the age of one year, would be able to claim orders
worth £9O.
Viand Laws.
This amount would be sufficient to meet the first
payment—one-tenth of the value—upon between 400
and 900 acres of land (which varies from £1 to about
£2, according to quality), upon which there would
not be any further payment till the end of the third
year. Then 5 per cent, of the balance would have
to be paid, and so on till the debt is cleared off, or by
special payment the fee-simple may be obtained in
ten years. In this case the advantage of the land
orders is strongly apparent, as the capital they
represent would leave the money the immigrant
might bring with him free for the purchase of stock,
plant, and so on.
Social Prospects.
The good advice given by Mr. William Harcus in
his “ Handbook for Emigrants ” should find a place
here. He says:—
On their arrival in the colony emigrants will
probably feel somewhat strange. The consciousness
that they are 15,000 miles away from the land of
their birth, and from the friends whom they have
left behind—the conviction that they are amongst
entire strangers, and that they will probably see the
old land no more, may sadden them for a moment.
But, on the other hand, they will find that in many
respects the new country is but little different from
the old. The streets, wharves, railways, telegraph
lines, gas lamps, water fountains, public buildings,
shops, carriages, omnibuses, and cabs, will all
remind them of what they have been accustomed to
at home, If they are careful, industrious, and
respectable, they will soon have some friends, and
find associations which will bring back the scenes of
the past. They will find that our political institu-
tions are most liberal, and very soon after their
arrival they will be able to exercise their voting
power for members of Parliament, and to exercise
some influence on the public affairs of the colony.
With whatever religious body they sympathise they
will find representatives of that body in almost every
part of the colony : the Anglic;n Church, with its
bishop, priests and deacons ; the Roman Catholic
Church, with its handsome edifices, and charitable
institutions; the Presbyterian Church, with its able
and energetic ministers ; the Congregationalists and
Baptists, who have some of the handsomest churches
and most eloquent preachers in the colony ; the
Methodists, as full of fire and zeal as they arc in the
old country ; the sisterhood of denominations who
trace their parentage to the old Methodist stock;
Unitarians, New Church, and Jews are all found in
the colony—so that the stranger, whatever his
religious views may be, is certain to find members
enough of his own body with whom ho can sympa-
thise and hold fellowship. Connected with all these
religious institutions there are well-attended and
well-conducted sunday-schools, with a noble band of
earnest and devoted teachers.
He will want education for his children, and ho
will find day-schools all over the colony, in which a
fair education may be obtained ; or if he aims at
something higher than these, there are many excel-
lent private schools which would do no discredit to
the old country. Erora St. Peter’s Collegiate School
several young men have gone home and taken good
positions in the English Universities, and besides
our own university is in full operation.
Does the newly-arrived immigrant wish to keep
himself acquainted with the literature of the Avorld ?
He will find means of so doing in the local institutes
which are kept well supplied with the best works,
of modern times. Does he wish to know what is
taking place in the colony which he has made his
now home ? He will find it in the morning, evening,
and weekly newspapers published in the city, and
in the journals published in the country.
If he feels an interest in the drama, ho will find a
pretty little theatre, respectably conducted, and in
which, from time to time, actors and actresses of
high respectable standing are found. If he loves
music, he will occasionly get a taste of English
and Italian opera ably rendered, while amateur per-
formances of music are frequent enough. If lie has
a penchant for the turf, for manly sports and pas-
times, he will find racing well encouraged, hunting
during the season, cricket, football, and boating If
he is a freemason, an oddfellow, a forester, or an
ancient druid, he will find lodges, courts, and other
trysting places. If he likes his beer, he will find
respectable inns ; or if he takes kindly to colonial
wine, he will be able to get it almost as cheap as
ale. If he is a teetotaller, rechabite, or good templar,
he will find brothers and co-workers all here before
him. It is really curious to see how soon and how


carefully the people of South Australia have re-
produced the institutions of the mother country. In
cases of accident or misfortune, the hospitals,
asylum, and public charities, as in' the old country,
are easily accessible.
There are three things to be carefully avoided by
the newly arrived emigrant—the immoderate use of
strong drink, which leads to poverty; gambling,
which leads to dishonesty; and idle loafing, which
leads to disgrace. The great thing is to get work
soon, to eat plenty of good food, which is cheap
enough, to cultivate habits of industry and economy,
and so to encourage the pleasant conviction that he
is getting on, and surely working his way to inde-
pendance. That conviction will be one of the
greatest luxuries a working man can enjoy.
The Climate
of South Australia is salubrious and enjoyable.
The spring, winter, and summer are especially
charming. During the summer, the heat from
December to the end of March is very great, 110° in
the shade, but there being no moisture in the air,
no lassitude is felt from the heat. The wet season
is from May to October. Dust storms, accompanied
by hot winds, occur two or three times a year, but
they rarely last more than a day or two. The
climate on the whole is unexceptional, and peculiarly
beneficial to all suffering from lung complaints.
The Rev. Charles Wood, in speaking of the country
and its climate, says: “ There is no country more
interesting in its formations, or more varied in its
mineralogical productions than South Australia,
lofty mountains, extensive plains, sandy deserts, and
inland seas, are all included in its far-stretching
boundaries; with a climate like that of the south of
Spain, it possesses the scenery of the Highlands in
some places, while in others are deserts like those of
Arabia, and vicing with them for bleakness, aridity,
and burning heat. There are chains of salt lakes
which render unprofitable a larger area than Eng-
land ; there are marshes and salt swamps, more
dank and desolate and extensive than any in the
United States, there are rocky precipices, and
chasms, and waterfalls to rival almost the Alps;
there are extinct volcanoes of large dimensions,
almost as numerous as those of Auvergne ; and,
finally, there are caves which exceed in magnitude
the Guacharo caverns of Humboldt, and in stalactites
the Antiparos of the JEgean Sea.”
In Australia, as elsewhere, “ the weather is a fertile
subject for conversation, and people whose avoca-
tions are affected by its changes are never tired of
talking about it—-at one time in terms of praise, at
another in terms of complaint; but what, perhaps,
would most strike a visitor from colder and more
humid climates, would be the fact that people here
never complain of rain ; on the contrary, a wet day
is generally announced by such expressions as
“ splendid rain to-day, I hope it is general“ what
fine rains wo are having, they extend well north
and they only who knew what it is to have consecu-
tive weeks, and in some parts many months of
unclouded sky and hot sun, can appreciate the real
luxury of rain. Our climate, beautiful as it really is,
affording as it does a greater number of pleasant
days on which out-door pursuits can be carried on
with buoyancy of spirits, one must confess is a wee
bit dry, a fact which vegetation on the plains during
our summer season sufficiently attests. The clear-
ness or transparency of the atmosphere is something
wonderful, and owing to its dryness the heat, except
on hot wind days, is seldom oppressive unless one is
lazy.
“ The heaviest rains throughout the year may be
expected with a wind at about north-east, the rain
then commencing to fall gently and the wind light,
both gradually increasing as the latter veers round
to the north, and thence to the north-west, when
the violence of both rain and wind has much in-
creased ; after this the wind may be expected to
draw round to the west with increasing violence, till
the wind has got to the south of west, when the
rain generally ceases, or at least rarely falls, except
in heavy squalls and showers, and the weather
clears up. The time occupied by a continued fall of
rain, as thus described, I'arely exceeds twelve hours.
The wind will, however, frequently hang at about
west, with a few points variation to the south and
north, for some days, during which period rain
occurs in showers if to the south, and more steadily
in proportion to the northing of the wind. The
heaviest rains, assuming a tropical character, may
be expected after a hot north-east wind, drawing
round to the north-west, at which point an inch of
rain and upwards has often fallen within the hour,
accompanied with heavy thunder and lightning ; or,
as in October, 1854, the rain is represented by tre-
mendous hailstorms —the hail assuming the form of
flat pieces of ice.
Character oi' La ml.
South Australia from its immense extent contains
every variety of soil and scenery, vast plains con-
sisting of millions of acres of the finest arable land,
flanked by chains of mountains, extending from
Aldinga in the south, to Mount Remarkable in the
north. Eastward and north-east the country is hilly
and broken, a part consisting of the finest agricultural
lands and tracts of splendid timber. The valley
of the Murray River consists of rich alluvial deposit,
covered in some places with large gum trees. Be-
tween the Murray and the eastern boundary of the
colony, is the rdch and pastoral district of Mount
Gambier, with its harbours of Guichen and Macdon-
nell Bays. The land of South Australia has been
classified as follows: One-third is considered good
open agricultural and pastoral land; one-third
wooded ranges available for pasturage ; and the re-
mainder scrub and rocks. The scrub and rock, which
was, however, considered worthless, turned out to
bo the most coveted - for under its apparent worth-
lessness, lies buried untold fortunes—mines, the
richest and most productive.
Artificial means have been tried to procure a
plentiful supply of water, in which the country fails.
Artesian wells have been sunk successfully, and the
Government in 1881 promised to float a loan to be
applied to boring purposes, so that the country
should have what it lacks —water, so essential for
agricultural pursuits. Drains and reservoirs for the
artificial storage of water are now resorted to, and
which are essentially necessary to the sheep graziers.
Of the entire area of the colony, excluding the
northern Territory, amounting to 243,244,800 acres,
there had been alienated, up to December3lst, 1881,
9,869,301 acres, leaving 223,506,678 acres yet for
disposal. To June 30th, 1881, the area sold and
selected in South Australia proper was 9,139,819
acres, for which the cash payments have been
£7,505,814, the sum owing being £4,584,028, a total
of £12,089,842. Including the northern Territory,
the figures are 10,139,301 acres alienated, 568,222,239
acres unalienated. To June, 1882, the area sold and
selected was 10,115,937 acres, for wjiich £8,005,451


liave bee* paid, and there was due at that date Chief Towns: —Adelaide,
a total of £12,790,704. The land sales th ital of South Australia is only 40 years
for the year were 022,483 acres, for which £637,487 oW> J d containg a population of 38,479. The
ivas paid population, within a ten miles radius of the Post
Mountains. Office, is estimated at 60,000. It was founded in the
rr,, ~ . . . . . . , . . c year 1836 by Colonel Light, who named it after the
The Mountains of Australia consist principally of of Ki ' g William IV. It is as yet in embryo,
three chains of mountains known as the Mount b there is ° every proS pect of its developing into
Lofty, the Fhnders Range and the Hummocks. and mag Vficent city. It is built on the
Ihe highest point is Mount Lofty, 2,334 feet above Ri « er Tq ° few milo / from the fasbi onablc
the sea level, overshadowing Adelaide Ihe highest wateri place ’ of Glenely . T lie total area is 1,042
points of the Flinders Range, which rises on he exclusive of the streets, squares, and park
eastern side of bpcnccrs Gulf is 1,984 feet; the lands which have an area of bout 2 ,610 acres.
Razorback, 2 922 feet; Mount Bryan 3,012 ; Black fph ’ nnual value of rateable property is £384,101 ;
Rock Hi 1 2,750 feet. The Gawler Range, in Port thc street mil is 80 and t f lor ‘ ar ' B>loB houses.
Lincoln Peninsula, is a line of rugged mountains, It ig situated on ° a i arge plain, and the Mount Lofty
extending from the neighbourhood of Port Augustine Mountains wall it in ° t he eastern and southern
towards Streaky Bay, the principal elevation being si(]e3> Fonr terraces bound it known as the north,
about 2,000 feet Ihe highest points are Mount sout , east and west terraceg . The streets are all laid
Manning, Mount Stuart, and Mount Double. The t ft ’ ri ht angles . The city is surround ed by a
Stuart Range is a low range of lulls on the north- { £ d abo b ut half a mil / wide , which is called
west of Lake Torrens The others of note are the Park Lands . There are several squares in the
Mount Gambler Mount Pizgah, Mount Hope, and d th principal one being p i ante d with flowers
Mount Muirhead. „„,V „i fr u o *
The principal Capes are Capo Radstock, Cape a meeting house of the Society of Friends, a Uni-
Finnis, Point Whidbey, Point Avoid, and Cape tarian Church, and a handsome Jewish Synagogue.
Catastrophe ;in Spencer's Gulf, Capo Donnington, There are several charitable institutions, first-class
Cape Bolingbroke, Cape Lowly, Cape Elizabeth, and hotels and various colleges and schools. In fact, in
Corny Point, south of Yorke’s Peninsula ; Cape Adelaide one meets with all the civilization of our
Spencer and Thornbridge Point, on the southern own hemisphere, with perhaps less of its wickedness,
coast; Cape Jervis, Cape Jaffa, Cape Lannes, and Hietmv
Cape Northumberland, Cape Borda (whence the a,U a
mail boats are signalled), Bedout, Marsden and The native animals of South Australia are similar
Willoughby are on Kangaroo Island. On the north to those found in the other colonies, —namely, the
coast are Cape Hothman, Cape Fright, East and West wombat, the dingo or native dog, the wallaby, the
Point at the entrance to Port Darwin, and Charles kangaroo rat, the opossum, the native cat, the flying
Point. squirrel, bandicoot, kraola, or native marsupials.


Amongst tlie birds, the emu is the largest, next the
turkey, the native pheasant, the kingfisher, several
varieties of the parrot, many of them of brilliant
plumage, the honey eater, the bower bird, Curlew,
hawk, eagle, black swan, pigeons, ducks, geese, teal,
plover, quail, pelican, mutton bird, and penguin.
It is calculated that in all there are 700 species of
birds. There are snakes of various kinds, some very
venomous. The Python kind is the most numerous,
and are sometimes found 15 feet long. Crocodiles
abound in the rivers, especially in the Roper and the
Adelaide. The insects are very numerous. In the
old wooden buildings are frequently found centipedes,
big spiders, and scorpions. The white ant is the de-
structive insect of the country; it is essentially a pest.
It is not at all nice in its appetite, wood, tobacco,
soap, books, clothes, are all equally palatable to this
voracious creature ; the only tiling that arrests its
ravages is sheet iron. Another species of ant is very
destructive, called the “ borer.” This creature is
about the size of a large fly. Its head is armed with
a kind of augur, which it drives with great force
against the wood to be attacked. The point of the
augur is inserted while the body performs a series of
revolutions, perhaps a thousand in a minute, and
thus bores a hole into the timber as perfectly as could
be executed by a carpenter's gimlet. On a still
night the noise of this boring operation can be dis-
tinctly heard. In consequence of the destruction
caused to wooden buildings by the ravages of the
white ant, the Government authorities have deter-
mined on erecting all future structures of stone, with
concrete floors faced with Portland cement. Mos-
quitoes and sandflies also abound, especially between
the months of January and April, and mosquito
nets are generally used. Travellers in the bush
usually have an awning nine or ten feet square slung
over their hammocks, which is suspended between two
trees. By the means of this awning, which keeps off
the night dews, they enjoy a healthy and calm
repose.
€<overiiineiit.
The Government of the Colony somewhat
resembles our own. There are not exactly three
Estates, Sovereign, Lords and Commons, but a
representative of the Sovereign, and two Houses of
Parliament—the Legislative Council and the House
of Assembly. Both houses are elective, and can be
dissolved at the will of the Governor. The Legis-
lative Council consists of 18 members, and the latter
of 36. The Parliaments are triennial. The
qualification for a member of the Legislative Council
are that he must have attained the age of 30 years,
and have resided in the colony three years. The
electors of the Council must at least have attained
the age of 21, and have a freehold estate of the value
of £5O, or a leasehold of £2O annual value, having
three years to run, or must occupy a dwelling house
of £25 annual value. The whole colony votes as
one Constituency for the members of the Council
the election taking place every four years. The’
only qualifications for an elector for the House, of
Assembly is that he shall be a British born or
naturalized subject of Her Majesty, and have
attained the age of twenty - one years. The
Executive usually consists of the Governor,
?nd the six responsible Ministers of State, the
Chief Justice, being at present the only person in
the colony not a Minister who occupies a seat in
the Executive Council. Formerly there were only
five Ministers of State—the Chief Secretary, with a
salary of £1,300; the Attorney General, £1,000;
the Treasurer, £1)00; the Commissioner of Crown
Lands and Emigration, and the Commissioner of
Crown Lands, £BOO each. An Act recently passed,
however, increased the number of Ministers to
six, and fixed all the salaries at £l,OOO each. The
Chief Secretary is the official medium of communi-
cation between the Ministry and the Governor on
all departmental matters, and has official precedence
in Executive Council, and in all State ceremonies.
Although in England, the person whom the Queen
sends for to form a Government is almost always
the Premier, it often happens otherwise in South
Australia. The gentleman forming the Ministry
can select what office in the Ministry he thinks
proper, and often elects not to be the head of the
Government; but if a member of the Assembly, he
usually, but not invariably, leads the House and
represents the Government there. It is generally
held that one of the Ministry ought to be a member
of the Legislative Council, whatever office he may
hold in the Government. At the present time the
Chief Secretary is a member of the Council, and
the Commissioner of Crown Lands and Immigration
is the acknowledged leader of the Assembly.
During the last administration the Chief Secretary
was leader in the House of Assembly, and the
Commissioner of Crown Lands and Immigration
represented the Government in the Legislative
Council. The offices at present held by the
Ministers are—Chief Secretary, Attorney-General,
Treasurer, Commissioner of Crown Lands and
Immigration, Commissioner of Public Works, and
Minister of Agriculture and Education. The titles
of the first five are fixed by law, but that of the
sixth Minister depends upon the Governor. At
first the sixth Minister was called Minister of
Justice and Education; at present he is called
Minister of Agricultural and Education.
Each of these Ministers is at the head of a depart-
ment, having a staff of officers under him, with a
confidential Secretary, who is a permanet offincer.
The Chief Secretary has an Under-Secretary, the
Attorney-General a Secretary, the Treasurer an
Under Treasurer, and the Commissioners and
Minister of Agriculture and Education each a
Secretary. In addition to these Secretaries, the
most important officers in the Civil Service are the
Auditor-General and the Postmaster-General,
responsible to the Chief Secretary; the Engineer-in
Chief, responsible to the Commissioner of Public
Works; the Surveyor-General, responsible to the
Commissioner of Crown Lands and Immigration;
the Crown Solicitor, responsible to the Attorney-
General, and the President of the Marine Board,
responsible to the Treasurer. The Agent General in
London is also responsible to the Treasurer.”
Population.
According to the West Australian Handbook the
population of South Australia, inclusive of the north
Territory and shipping, by the census taken on April
3rd, 1881, was estimated at 279,865 souls, of whom
149,530 were males, and 130,335 females, exclusive
of aborigines who numbered 6,346 —males 3,478,
females 2,668. The population of the northern
Territory was 3,451: 3.347 males and 104 females ;
of this population 2,734 were Chineri (male adults).
The total number of dwellings were 56,509, of which
51,103 were inhabited, 4,483 uninhabited, and 563
were in course of erection; of these 32,747 were
stone, 5,439 brick, 4,009 concrete, 1,038 iron, 9,862
wood, and 1,624 canvas, the remainder 1,790 not
being specified.


j The population in South Australia proper, exclusive
of northern territory and the shipping and abori-
gines, is 272,876 —142,908 males, and 129,968 females,
an increase on the census figures of 1876 of 61,880.
The ages of the people, as shown by the census
returns, were as follows:—under one year 8,962; one
year to four 32,722; five years to nine 34,764; ten
years to fourteen 32,275; fifteen years to nineteen
29,792; twenty years to twenty-four 30,175; twenty-
five years to twenty-nine 25,227; thirty years to
thirty-four 18,654; thirty-five years to thirty-nine
16,295; forty years to forty-four 13,389; forty-five
years to forty-nine 10,621; fifty years to fifty-four
8,768; fifty-five years to fifty-nine 6,027; sixty
years to sixty-four 5,020 ; sixty-five years to sixty-
nine 3,013; seventy years to seventy-four 2,066;
seventy-five to seventy-nine 984; eighty years and
upwards 595. The unmarried number 102,785
males, and 80,762 females ; husbands 43,955 ; wives
43,683 ; widowers 2,790; widows 5,860.
On December 31st, 1881, the population was esti-
mated at 206,324, —152,318 males and 134,006
females. During 1881, there were registered 10,708
births—s,s22 males, and 5,186 females.
Of the aboriginal race little can be said further
than their ultimate extinction is a matter of a few
years only, as whatever their numbers were origin-
ally, each successive year has been a rapid diminution,
and the end is not far off. Infanticide, disease, and
more than all, strong drink, have tended to this result.
Some efforts have been made to ameliorate their
condition. In 1876 the number of natives was
computed •at 3,953 of all ages and both sexes.
By the census returns of 1881 they were estimated,
as above stated, at 6,346, 3,478 males, and
2,868 females. This measure, however, is solely
due to an influx of natives from the interior.
These figures do not include the natives in the
northern Territory, of whose numbers it is im-
possible to form an approximate estimate.
Education.
Schools are established wherever there is a certain
number of children at a school age, who can pay a
moderate fee to the teachers, 4d. for children under
seven, and 6d. for older children, per child per week.
The teachers are paid by the Government, through
the council, salaries varying from £lOO to £3OO per
annum. School houses are provided, and the
necessary educational material. According to the
Education Act, grants of public lands will be set
apart every year, and placed under the control of the
Council, the rents from which will be devoted to
secular instruction, previous to which the Bible may
be read without note of explanation: practically,
the instruction will be secular. All children of
school age will not be required to be under instruc-
tion until a certain standard of attainment, to be fixed
by the Council, is reached; so far, the system will be
compulsory. Provision is made for the gratuitous
instruction of children whose parents can show that
they are not able to pay for it; but fees may be
enforced in all cases where inability to pay them has
not been proved. It will thus be seen that the three
great principles of public education, which are now
so much in vogue, are adopted in the Bill with certain
modifications. The education is secular —but not to
the exclusion of the Bible; free to those who cannot
afford to pay a small fee, and compulsory wherever
practicable. Provision is also made for the establish-
ment of model and training schools, of boards of
advice, and for the systematic examination of teachers,
and their classification according to their attain-
ments and proficiency. The Government propose to
borrow for the present erection of school houses, and
has voted a large sum for the payment of teachers’
stipends out of the general revenue. No one claims
anything like perfection for the measure, but it is
the best that could be carried under the present
circumstances of the Colony, and it is a very great
improvement on the system which it is intended to
supplant.
The three great principles of public education in
South Australia are: Ist—That education is secular.
2nd —-Free to those who cannot afford to pay a small
fee. 3rd—Compulsory wherever practicable.
For higher education there are admirable institu-
tions, the principal of which are the St. Peter’s
Collegiate School, belonging to the Church of
England, and Prince Alfred College, belonging to
the Wesleyan Methodists. This latter is a very fine
pile of buildings, the first stone of which was laid by
the Duke of Edinburgh, in 1867. Large grants have
been made for school buildings teachers salaries,
&c. “To foster and encourage higher education
there is an annual grant from the public funds of 5
per cent, on all private contributions, and also an
endowment of 50,000 acres of land. In connection
with the schools, six exhibitions of the annual value of
£5O, tenable for three years, are offered; also five
University scholarships of the annual value of £5O,
tenable for three years, and South Australian
scholarships of the annual value of £2OO, tenable for
four years, the holder being entitled to become a
student at one of the European Universities. This
last is only open to students who have been residents
at least five years in the colony.”
By the census returns of 1881, 200,057 persons
were able to read and write, 15,269 were unable to
write, 64,541 were unable to read. Excluding the
Northern Territory there were 60,582 children,
30,321 boys, and 30,261 girls of school-going age.
Five to thirteen years of these 30,037 were attending
Government schools, 13,404 private schools, 4,315
were under private tuition, 10,175 were not attending
school, and of the remainder no information is given.
The number of schools in operation are 405.
Religion.
In South Australia all the churches are on the same
footing of equality, and none are placed under any
civil disabilities. There is no state church—-although
numerically the Church of England, or the Episcopal
Church, is at the head of the various denominations,
and is a very influential body. Next to the Church
of England, the Koman Catholic Church is the most
important. The Jesuits have a college in the north,
and there is also a sisterhood at Adelaide, under the
management of Dominician nuns, which is devoted
to the education of young ladies.
The Church of England is under the management
of a synod, consistingof the bishop, all licensed clergy-
men, and lay representatives from each congregation.
The Committee that manages the funds is elected
annually by ballot, and comprises the bishop, seven
clergymen, and fourteen laymen. The See of
Adelaide was endowed by the Baroness Burdett-
Coutts. The number of churches and chapels in the
colony in 1881 were 785, with seats for 160,139
persons. The Church of England number 132 places
of worship; Roman Catholic 65; the Wesleyan
Methodists 202; the Congregationalists 41 ; the
Baptists 40; the Presbyterians 20; the Bible
Christian Brethren 113; the German Lutheran Con-
gregation 50; the Society of Friends’ Meeting
Houses 2: the Moravians have 1 Chapel; the


Unitarians 1; the Jews 1 Synagogue; the New
Jerusalem Chapel 1; the Methodist New Connexion 1.
The total number of Sunday schools was 645, with
2,528 male, and 3,111 female teachers, and 20,851
male, and 25,530 female scholars.
Hallways.
The first locomotive railway line in South Australia
was one only 8J miles in length, running between
Adelaide and the Port. The Railways are: the
Port line, 9| miles long ; the North line, 140 miles
long; the Adelaide and G lonely line is 7 miles long;
the Port Pirie and Terowie line, 87| miles; the
Port Wakefield and Blyth line, 42 miles long ; the
Kingston and Maracotte railway, 53 miles in
length; the Mount Gambier and Rivoli Bay railway,
51 miles; the Port Wakefield and Kadina railway,
34| miles; the Great Northern line, miles;
there is also a line from Kadina to Snowtown, 33
miles long.
Telegraphs.
An extensive system of electric telegraphs is in
operation communicating with the leading places in
the other colonies, including now Western Australia.
A well-built line has been carried nearly 2,000 miles
from Adelaide to Port Darwin in the north. The
Western Australia Line is 800 miles long, and the
South Australian portion 971 miles long. The charge
for a message of 10 to 12 words from any two
stations in South Australia is one shilling, and one
penny for any additional word. Press Telegrams—
first 50 words or under, and every additional fifty
words, one shilling. From Adelaide to Port Darwin
is 10/- for first ten words, and 9d. each additional
word is charged, and at the same rate charges are
made for intermediate stations. To Victoria and
New South Wales the charge is 2/- for ten words,
and 2d. for every additional word. To Queensland
3/- for ten words, and 3d. each additional word. To
Tasmania it is 4/- for ten words, and 4d. for every
word extra. To West Australia 2/- for ten words,
and 2d. for every additional word. To New Zealand
10/6 for the first ten words, and 1/- for each extra word.
The total receipts in 1881 were £72,638 17s. 3d.
Post Office.
There are now 488 post offices, of which 128 issue
and pay money orders. The rates of postage are 2d.
the half-ounce for town and inland letters, and 2d.
for every additional half-ounce. Postal cards one
penny. Letters by land or sea to any of the Austra-
lian colonies, 2d. per £ oz. To the United Kingdom,
via Brindisi, Naples, or San Francisco, 6d.per 4 oz.
The newspapers are sent free to all parts of the
country, if posted within seven days of publication,
after that date one half-penny is charged for each
paper via San Francisco. One penny an ounce is
charged on books, packages, &c., permitted to be
sent by post, 2d. for two ounces, and twopence for
every additional two ounces. On money orders,. 6d.
is charged for every £5, and 1/- for £10; Inter-colonial
£5 and under, 1 /-; on Great Britain, India or Cape
of Good Hope, above £2 and not exceeding £5, 2/6';
above £5 and not exceeding £7, 3/6 ; above £7 and
not exceeding £lO, 5/-. Germany and Switzerland
£2 and under, 2/-; £5 and under, 4/-; £7 and under,
6/-; £lO and under, 8/-.
Charitable Institutions.
The various hospitals in the colony are the Ade-
laide, Kooringa, Mount Gambier, Kapunda, Port
Augusta, Port Lincoln, Bluman, and Wallaroo.
There are also lunatic asylums, blind, deaf and dumb
asylums, a convalescent home, an inebriates’ retreat,
reformatories, a home for incurables, and a foundling
hospital, besides numerous other charitable institu-
tions in operation.
Exports ami Imports.
Tue exports, the produce and manufacture of the
col my, amounted to £4,407,757 ; flour, 72,375 tons,
£777,081; bran and pollard, 1,750 tons, £9,341;
wheat, 305,576 tons, £543,408 ; barley, 932 quarters,
£1,143 ; oats, 2,542 quarters, £2,877; meal, 343 tons,
£2,911. Metals and minerals, &c., £420,558, made
up as follows—copper, 76,458 tons, £263,370; copper
ore, 21,638 tons, £154,926; spelter, 190 cwts., £2OO ;
lead ore, 90 tons, £1,182. Provisions, wines, &c.,
£49,733 —the exports of wine being 54,872 gallons,
£12,879; butter, 1,080 cwts., £4,350; jam, 400,073
lbs., £9,304; wool, 436,131,017 lbs., £1,911,927.
The total imports in 1881 amounted to £5,224,063
15s,
Hanking:.
The total average liabilities of the Banking Cor
porations carrying on business in the colony on June
30th, 1882, were £5,766,187 12s. 9d., and total
average assets £9,263,894 2s. Id. In August, 1881,
a new banking company, styled the Town and
Country Bank, was floated with a nominal capital of
£1,000,000 in £200,000 £5 shares, but only 50 shares
were allotted at its initiation.
The Saving’s Bank of South Australia, which is
managed by a board of trustees appointed by the
Governor, has 61 agencies in the principal towns.
In Juno, 1881, the total amount of depositors’
balances being £1,249,467 16s. 3d., the rate of
interest allowed during the year was per cent.
It has since been lowered to 4£ per cent.
Shipping:.
The shipping returns of 1881 were: Arrival of
vessels 1,072 of 640,885 tons, with crews of 30,969
men; departure of vessels were 1,081 vessels of
628,606 tons, carrying 30,646 seamen. During 1881
four vessels of 123 tons were built in the colony.
Cocal 4nov eminent.
Local self-government was established as far back
as 1840, when the Corporation of Adelaide was
constituted. Most beneficial results have followed
from the adoption of the principle. Under it the
people have been taught the lesson of self-reliance,
and have cheerfully taxed themselves for the prose-
cution of public works of general utility, over which
the local authorities, a Board of from five to seven
members elected by and from the ratepayers of the
district, exercise control. Although the State
supplements, pound for pound, all sums raised and
expended on public works in the district, the Local
Council have in their hands the entire management
of such expenditure, and of all municipal affairs.
Twenty-two Corporations and 110 District Coun-
cils have been constituted throughout the settled
districts. The total rateable value of property at the
close of the year 1878 was £1,450,233. The usual
rate declared upon the assessment is one shilling in
the pound sterling. The revenue of these bodies in
1878 was £192,733, and the amount expended on
works of public utility, £118,594.
Distribution of Population.
One of the most important facts brought out by
the census is the way in which the population is dis-
tributed. The returns show that eighty-five per
cent, of the whole number of the people are resident
in the country districts, and employed directly or
indirectly in the cultivation of the soil, or in the
production of mineral or pastoral wealth.


Province; persons in the
learned professions; persons
engaged in literature, fine
arts and sciences
3,988
2,716
1,272
Domestic :—Persons en-
gaged in domestic offices or
duties, and of no specified
occupation; persons engaged
in entertaining and per-
forming personal offices for
man 1
39,GG5
43,128
96,537
Commercial : — Persons
who buy, sell, keep, or lend
money on goods; or engaged
in the conveyance of men
and goods
8,598
8,327
271
There are, in addition to the city of Adelaide
(with a present population, including the suburbs,
of over 65,000), other populous townships. There
arc twenty-one corporate towns, with a total popu-
lation of 70,223, besides numerous villages, with
populations varying from 200 to 700 persons.
Itriiish Population.
The returns showing the birth-places of the
people indicate a steady increase in the number of
South Australian born, and of British birth, as well
as, in a lesser degree, of those from British posses-
sions other than the United Kingdom. The native-
born element forms 60 per cent, of the population,
the next largest class being persons of English birth,
who form upwards of 22 per cent.; Ireland has
contributed 7 percent.; Scotland, 4 per cent.; and
Germany, 3 5 per cent.
atirtliSj Marriages, and Heaths.
The average birth-rate is 38-22 per thousand,
which compares favourably with the birth-rate in
England and Wales, viz., 33 per thousand. There
is an average of 9-47 marriages per thousand of the
population, being almost identical with the rate in
Great Britain. The death-rate, from all causes, is
15 per thousand, as compared with 22 per thousand
in England.
«ccn pat lons or the People.
These returns are practically useful, as showing
in what direction the labour of the Colony is chiefly
employed. The following is a brief summary:—
Persons. Males. Females.
Professional :—Persons
engaged in the General and
Local Government of the
Agricultural : — Per-
sons engaged in farming,
grazing, and about animals 27,265 26,339, 926-
Industrial :—Persons
engaged in working and
dealing in art and mechanic
productions; textile fabrics;
dealing in food and drinks;
working and dealing in ani-
mal and vegetable sub-
stance ; working and dealing
in minerals 22,443 19,623 2,820
Indefinite and Non-
productive 11,312 10,358 954
Total of Population (cen-
sus of 1876) 213,271 110,491 102,780
Thus, it will be seen that agricultural, pastoral,
and horticultural pursuits are those upon which the
labour of the majority of the population is bestowed,
the number of persons actually engaged therein
being 27,265, or upwards of 63 per cent, of those
following specified occupations.
Friendly Societies
flourish. There are thirty masonic lodges, English,
Irish and Scotch institutions, distributed through-
out the colony. The Oddfellows number 11,209
members; there are 4,531 Foresters ; 2,852 Recha-
bites; and 551 Druids, whose united incomes for
the year (1878) amounted to £54,374, and expended
during the same period, inclusive of management,
£44,205. Their total assets are valued at £119,861.
Quality of Wheat.
As evidence of the high quality of the South
Australian grain, it maybe mentioned that the prize
wheat exhibited at the agricultural shows during
the past ten years has averaged 681bs. weight to the
imperial bushel. The highest prize for wheat was
also awarded to South Australia at the Paris Exhi-
bition of 1878; the first prize was awarded it also at
the Sydney Exhibition, just closed.
Within the past ten years the acreage cultivated
under grain—wheat, barley, oats, and peas —has
much more than doubled.
Under other crops —flax, hay, potatoes, orchard,
garden, vineyard, and including fallow land —there
were 240,606 acres in 1868-9, and 656,182 in 1878-9,
or nearly three times the amount of acreage. In
1858, only eighteen years after the foundation of the
province, there were 89,945 acres of land under
wheat culture; in 1868-9 there were 533,035 ; and
in 1879-80, no less than 1,458,096.
In 1878-9 there wero also under cultivation—hay,
218,395 acres; potatoes, 5,398 acres ; orchard, 3,574 ;
garden, 4,677 ; and vineyard, 4,297.
The Wheat Harvest.
Little labour is involved in gathering in the wheat
crops of South Australia, A machine—manufac-
tured in the Colony—called a “ stripper ” is used.
This machine, boxed in with sheet iron, has a row
of iron fingers so shaped and fitted as to catch the
wheat immediately under the ear, and so by the for-
ward motion of the machine, drawn generally by
three horses, the ear is stripped from the straw, and
drawn into the machine, where a drum with beaters
awaits it and thrashes the grain from the ear, throw-
ing it altogether to the back part of the machine;
so that after the machine has gone round the field,
it returns to the corner from whence it started, and,
folding doors being opened behind, it discharges its
cargo of wheat, cut and thrashed, the winnowing
machine only being required to prepare the grain
for the bags into which it is deposited, placed on a
team, and carted it to the nearest port or railway
station, or sold at once to the millers and corn factors
for cash. This explains the dryness of the atmos-
phere, which is so much more endurable than the
humid heat prevailing in some countries.
In a recent speech before the Royal Colonial
Institute, the Hon. C. Burney Young -a resident
for many years in South Australia —said:
“ The reason why we can make it pay to grow
only ten bushels (per acre) or even less is somewhat
evident. In the first place the rent is very small.
The average price of land is only about 28s. or 30s,
per acre. It is not only a very small price, looking
at it in only one particular point of view, because it
is in South Australia, but taking it in any point of
view it is a small price, and an immense boon for any
man to be able to get hold of a thou-and acres of


land at 30/- per acre, on which he may possibly
clear the whole of his purchase money in a single
crop, as has often been the case. Now the reason
why we can grow wheat and sell it profitably when
we only get eight to ten bushels an acre, is that the
whole cost of cultivation docs not exceed about £1
per acre. This seems a small amount, but it is a
positive fact that the whole cultivation, including
the seed, does not materially exceed £1 or a guinea
an acre. The ploughing only costs about 7/- an
acre; the sowing and harrowing 2/ ; the reaping 6/-
—thanks to Ridley’s reaping machine; the winnow-
ing 2/- ; and 4/- for seed at one bushel per acre. If
the farmer gets six bushels an acre, at 5/- per bushel
-30/- an acre, which gives him a profit of 10/- an
acre, even at this very exceptionally low yield of six
bushels. If the people and the farmers of England
only had the slightest idea of the great benefit they
would derive from the land system if they went to
South Australia—could they but realise the advant-
ages—x feel convinced they would flock there in
thousands.”
The advantages to the small capitalist are apparent
in the system of settling up the Crown Lands of
South Australia. It will be seen that there is no
room for middle-men, and companies, and like step-
ping betwixt the Government and the purchaser, who
buys it at first cost. Also, not the least important
feature is the going up into the new country in
numbers, which is necessitated by the laws affecting
the settlement and sale of the land. The Govern-
ment make the main hard road in the now township
which finds employment for the spare time of the
needy settlers; the town lots are purchased and
built upon and tenanted by shopkeepers of all kinds
induced by the flow of settlers ; churches and schools
are built, and m a few months the notion of living
in the black country ”is effaced by all the ameni-
ties of civilization being established in the centre of
a thriving agricultural community. The “ iron
horse ” and electric wire follow in the wake very
speedily, the colony, with a population of only
250,000, possessing already, up to October 1870, 540
miles of railway open for traffic ; in addition to
which there are upwards of 400 miles in construction
There are 1,219 miles of macadamised hard roads ;
2,892 miles defined; and perhaps as many more
miles of district or by-roads and 1,000 miles of tele-
graph were in operation, through which were trans-
mitted some 500,000 messages during the year
1878.
C redit Sales.
The total quantity of land taken up upon the
credit system during the last eight years is 3,568,195
acres, for which £5,039,656 was agreed to be paid.
Of this amount £4,253,800 still remain on credit.
During the last year-1878—for 609,3G3 acres taken
up the amount agreed to be paid was £939,957. Ex-
tensive areas of new lands are now under survey for
the purpose of new settlements.
I’astoral Occupation.
Some conception of the growth of the pastoral
interest may be formed from the fact that whilst in
1851 the total area of land leased from the Crown for
pastoral purposes was 15,000 square miles, at the
present time there are upwards of 200,000 square
miles in occupation. During the same period the
number of horses has increased from 6,500 to
121,550; of horned cattle from 75,000 to 251,800;
and of sheep from 1,000,000 to over 6,377,000, whilst
the exports of wool have increased from 4,000 to
over 140,000 bales.
During the last ten years, the average price of
first-class fat bullocks have averaged £ll 10s.; and
of first-class fat wethers 15s. per head.
The enclosure of the sheep runs, the formation of
dams and reservoirs in which large bodies of water
can be stored, and the sinking of wells are the most
important improvements required, and are those to
which the greatest attention is now being paid. By
those means an immense area of land has been opened
up, and stocked with both sheep and cattle.
Almost limitless tracks of country bordering on
the trans-continental telegraph line, as well as land
laid open by recent explorations, are awaiting pas-
toral occupation.
Mineral Claims.
One shilling per acre is payable when a claim is
taken out, and the rental is two shillings and six-
pence per annum.
Stiver Murray Trade.
South Australian enterprise opened the River
Murray to navigation in 1853, as well as, at a later
period, its great tributaries, the Darling and Mur-
rumbidgee. Since the opening of these rivers the
whole of that immense tract of pastoral country
known as Riverina has been heavily stocked, produc-
ing now about 200,000 bales of wool annually. The
Murray is navigable for a distance of 2,000 miles
from its mouth at Goolwa. The Darling from its
junction at Wentworth is navigable to Fort Bourke,
800 miles, and for a short period, some 300 miles
further into Queensland. The Murrumbidgee, enter-
ing the Murray some 300 miles from Wentworth, is
navigable to Wagga, a distance of 700 miles, to
which town railway communication with Sydney will
shortly be extended.
One hundred and fifty-two steamers and barges
arc occupied in the river trade, about one-half of
which are owned by South Australia.
The breakwater at Victor Harbour is now in course
of construction, and will accommodate vessels of the
largest tonnage, and will, when completed, consider-
ably add to the already increasing traffic on the
Murray, of which South Australia is the natural
outlet.
l*ublic Debt.
. . Rates per
Amount head
£ s. d.
12 3 G
3,028,700
118,700
398,500
212,400
97,800
230,000
0 9 C
1 12 0
0 17 0
0 V 10
0 15 0
4 4 6
1,052,000
185,000
Public Purposes ....
Northern Territory.
0 15 0
21 4 4
5,329,100
Totals
If it be asked what the Colony has to show in the
shape of permanent improvements,it may be answered
that there are 540 miles of railway open, and over
400 miles in course of construction. The City, Port,
and suburbs of Adelaide, with eighty thousand resi-
dents, have an abundant and constant water supply.
Harbours have been deepened and improved, and
navigation rendered easy by an almost perfect system
miles ofmacada-
Eighteen hundred
of lighthouses
Railways
Tramways
Waterworks
Telegraphs
Harbours and Lights
Roads


mised roads are in effective order, and the province
traversed from north to south and from east to west
by telegraphs over five thousand miles in length,
bringing it into instantaneous communication with
the whole world.
It is estimated that the present value of the public
works out of loans is seven millions, and that four
and-a-half millions remain due on lands sold upon
deferred payments.
Clot h in g l .
The cost of clothing may be estimated at about
10 per cent, higher than English prices. As gar-
ments more suitable to the climate can be purchased
in the Colony, it is not generally advisable for emi-
grants to stock themselves undulyin this country.
House Kent.
The rent of a dwelling suitable for an artisan and
his family in Adelaide or the immediate suburbs
varies from Gs. to 15s. per week, but in the country
towns the rate is loss. Large numbers of artisans,
however, reside in their own freehold cottages. The
savings of a few years have, in many instances,
sufficed to enable them to accomplish this. Land is
cheap, and the necessary advances for the erection of
dwellings are readily obtainable from several build-
ing societies. Cottages, with fuel and water, are
provided for ploughmen, shepherds, and other
labourers employed on farms or sheep runs. The
following are quoted rates for house rent, and for
board and lodging;—
Two rooms, 4s. to 65.; three rooms, 6s. to 10s.;
four rooms, Bs. to 155.; free from taxes ; single room
2s. 6d ; ditto furnished 6s. to 9s. per week. Gas is
Bs. to 1.25. per 1,000 cubic feet, and water laid on at
Is. 6d. per 1,000 gallons.
Hoard and liOds-iiig’
per week at Bushman’s Club, 18s.; at private houses
for single men, shopmen, &c., 15s. to 18s.; clerks,
&c., 20s. to 305.; single females 10s. to 155.; private
lodgers at hotels 20s. to £4 4s.
The Products
of South Australia arc almost inexhaustible. The
finest wheat in the world is said to be grown within
a few miles of Adelaide. Eor hundreds of miles
stretch rich plains of agricultural land, so that any
portion of the colony looks like one vast wheat field.
In South Australia proper, the total quantity of land
cropped with wheat (1880) was 1,783,542 acres, and
the total yield of wheat amounted to 8,606,510
bushels —a very low ratio, occasioned by an excep-
tionally bad season. In addition to this, nearly a
million of acres was under other ci’ops than wheat.
In 1971 there has been alienated from the Crown
only 4,621,956 acres. On January Ist, 1881, there
remained in the hands of the Crown 568,791,600
acres—truly a magnificent estate. The areas quoted
above are exclusive of the vast tracts held by pastoral
lessees at low rentals from the Crown, which tracts
amount to about 180,000 square miles. The quantity
of flour exported in 1880 was 75,527 tons, as com-
pared with 46,842 tons in 1871; wheat, 891,387
quarters, as compared with 315,054. The total value
of bread-stuffs exported during the year was
£2,469,720, whilst ten years ago it was only
£1,253,429.
In speaking of the r ar’.ous other products of the
soil, Mr. Harcus says:—“ Apples, pears, almonds,
cherries, strawberries, currants, raspberries, goose-
berries, rhubarb, and filberts have been produced in
,the southern part of the colony. But, in addition to
these, we can grow in abundance those fruits which
are only produced in hothouses in England. Grapes,
peaches, apricots, nectarines, and figs grow in the
open air with a small amount of culture. Oranges
do wonderfully well in the colony, with only a little
care. I have seen whole acres of healthy orange
trees laden to the very ground with the golden fruit.
At the same time may be seen, on the same tree, the
lovely orange blossom, the green fruit, and the
oranges fully ripe. Some of the colonists have gone
to great expense in the cultivation of the orange, and
their labour and enterprise have been amply re-
warded. All these fruits, which are luxuries to tha
poor, and even to a large section of the middle class
in England, are, during the season, the daily fruit of
the poorest in South Australia. When the fruits are
ripe, there are but few tables on which several
pounds of grapes or dozens of peaches and apricots
are not found. A dozen pounds of grapes can be
bought in the market for sixpence, and a dozen
poaches for threepence or fourpence. Another deli-
cious luxury in hot weather is the water-melon,
which grows freely, and is eaten with avidity to any
extent—especially by children —without the slight-
est evil effect. It would do an Englishman’s heart
good to look upon the breakfast-table of a South
Australian of moderate means, groaning under the
weight of the most luscious fruits.”
Vine Culture
is very successful in South Australia, and its climate
is peculiarly adapted to it. There are about 4,000
acres of land planted with the vine, and the annual
produce is said to be about 460,000 gallons. The
slopes of the hills produce wines of full-bodied cha-
racter similar to those of Spain and Portugal, and
those in more elevated districts resemble the lighter
wines of Germany. The wines of South Australia
are of a high character, and they have always been
awarded prizes at the several Great International
Exhibitions. Considerable attention has been paid
to the drying of raisins and this new industry, which
is gradually increasing, will, it is expected, develope
into an export trade.
The Olive,
early introduced into the colony, flourished with
such productiveness that large plantations were
established and stocked with the best continental
varieties. The oil expressed greatly exceeds in
purity and superiority the imported article, and has
invariably gained awards at the Exhibition. The
manufacture of the oil has now become a regular
trade. The land laws provide that one acre of land
planted either with the olive, almond, vine, orange,
fig, or hop is equal to the cultivation of six acres
of cereals.
Vegetables ami Fruits
of South Australia are numerous. Besides the
cereals, which are the finest in the world, plants,
vegetables, and fruits grow luxuriantly. The soil
is splendid for the cultivation of apricots, peaches,
nectarines, oranges, citrons, lemons, and shaddocks,
plums, cherries, figs, almonds, mulberries, olives,
&c., &c., while in the hills and gullies are grown
strawberries, raspberries, currants, walnuts, chest-
nuts, filberts, &c., &c., of the finest quality. The
vegetables that can be raised in great abundance
are the cabbage, turnips, asparagus, artichoke,
leek, onions, beet, carrots, potatoes, endive, lettuce,
radish, celery, and water melon pumpkin, which
grow to a size unheard of in our country.


courage the development of new industries, every
facility, with respect to distillation of perfumes,
should be given, even at the sacrifice of a small
amount of revenue. To show you the value of per-
fumes to the countries adapted for their production
the following table, compiled from the publications
of Piesse and Brande, and the ComhUl Magazine ,
October, 1864, may show why it is so :—
One acre of jasmin plants, 80,000, will £
produce 5,000 lbs. of flowers, value Is. 250
One acre rose trees, 10,000, will produce
2,000 lbs. of flowers, value 9d 75
Flax
thrives in South Australia. Flax-growing is form-
ing a new and remunerative industry. The hemp
plant also grows without much trouble, and will grow
in any soil and brings in remunerative returns.
Beetroot
could be made a very profitable source of industry,
as the climate is admirably adapted for its growth.
It is reported, says Mr. Harcus, that there are at
present 1,184 beet sugar works on the continent of
Europe, and the total produce of these is about four
and a half million hundredweights of sugar annually;
upon an average about 4,0001b5. is obtained from
500 cwt. of beet, and this quantity is the yield of
about two-and-a-half acres. The refuse, after the
sugar is extracted, forms an excellent article of food
for cattle, and is considered even better than any
specially cultivated for tliat purpose ; a good quan-
tity of paper is also made from it. The molasses
is also used up for fodder, not being fit for sweeten-
ing on account of the mineral salt it contains. As
mentioned before, there is no doubt that the beet
will grow in many districts in the colony ; and if
we can produce the beet sugar for the same price as
cane sugar imported, it will become a flourishing
industry; and then we must consider the fact that
with a beet sugar manufactory the fattening of
cattle must be connected, which will also produce a
fair return. But this is not all—the farmers, by
beet-growing, will have the advantage of a rotation
crop, the want of which is severely felt in South
Australia. In Prussia, where beet sugar manufac-
tories are established, no cereal fields are observable
for miles around—the eye only meets beet fields,
they paving the farmer better than cereals.
Tobacco
at one time was grown with much success, but it
became almost entirely neglected when the high
prices of wheat ruled the market, It appears that it
is almost as fine as that of South America and the
West Indies. Local tobacco and cigar factories have
been established, but depend at present on imported
leaf tobacco for their supply, which seems a pity
when the neighbourhood of Adelade, Hope Valley,
Mount Barker, Gumeracha, Blumberg, Lyndoch
Valley, and several places are equally suited for the
cultivation of this plant. It is to be regretted that
the colony which can produce this plant so luxuri-
antly should not keep the money itself which is now
spent on imported tobacco.
Currants and Kaisius.
The Zante currants produced in the colony and
sent to Melbourne were pronounced far superior in
quality and size to any of the imported ones. The
raisins were equally fine, and as it appears that
£120,000 of dried fruit are annually imported, it is
to bo deplored that more attention is not given to
this branch of industry, which in time, instead of
being an import, might be an export.
Besides the foregoing the culture of the castor-oil
plant, the rape and mustard, canary seed, lentils,
capers, chicory, lignorne, osier, broom millet, opium,
cochineal, would all prove scources of profitable
industry, the soil is suitable for all, and it only wants
the industrious hand of man to turn them to account.
Perfumes.
Mr. S. Davenport, in his pamphlet on this subject
and dilating on it as an enormous source of profitable
industry, says: “If we consider that British India
and Europe consume 150,000 gallons of handkerchief
perfume yearly, and that the English revenue for
Eau de Cologne alone is about £B,OOO a year, and
that the total revenue for imported perfumes is
estimated at about £40,000, and that one great
perfume distillery at Cannes, in France, uses
annually about one hundred and forty thousand
pounds of orange blossoms, twenty thousand pounds
of acacia flowers (Acacia Farnesiana), one hundred
and forty thousand pounds of rose flower leaves,
thirty two thousand pounds of jasmin blossoms,
twenty thousand pounds of tuberoses, together with
a great many other sweet herbs, we may judge of
the immense quantity of material used for perfumes.
Most of the flowers which provide the material for
perfumes grow luxuriantly with us, namely, mignon-
ette, verbena, jasmin, rose, lavender, acacia, farnes-
iana, heliotrope, rosemary, peppermints, violets,
wallflowers, laurel, and oranges, from which alone
three different scents are procured. These plants
thrive probably in greater perfection here than in
any part of the world. No doubt South Australia
should be a perfume producing country. We see
flourishing here some of the most valuable scent
plants. We have the wattle, myall wood, and other
native plants, yielding valuable scents. But two
things are needed to encourage the enterprise.
First —Freedom of the still, so as to license dis-
tilling in vessels of less than twenty-five gallons
capacity ; and, secondly, the bona fide advertisement
of a capitalist manufacturer, that he will buy any
quantity of specified flowers, leaves, roots, or plants,
at a marketable price. Then some farmers might
be tempted to plant a few acres of lavender or mint,
another geraniums or rosemary, another aniseed,
whilst plantations in hedgerows, or such like places,
of roses, cassia, together with contributions from
gardens, would lay the foundation for an export
trade. Then it must be also noted, that whatever
the value which the plants yield in flower, fruit
leaves, and stems, it is increased threefold under
manufacture, and this manufacture consumes other
local produce, called into existence by it, such as
olive and other oils, fats, alkalies, wheaten flour,
coloring matter, pottery, and glass ware, which
combine to make the farmers and the manufacturers
contribute largely to the maintenance of population
and the wealth of perfume countries. To advance
this highly remunerative industry, as I have already
mentioned, a modification in the law of licensing
stills should be made to bona fide perfume distillers,
as the present law restricts stills to a range of capa-
city between 25 and 50 gallons. Perfume stills for
the finer perfumes, arc best at about 8 to 10 gallons.
It is therefore to bo hoped that our legislators will
take this into their earnest consideration. To en-
One aero of orange trees, 100, at ten years’
* old, 2,000 lbs. of flowers, value Gd. ... 50
One acre of violets, 1,600, lbs. of flowers,
value 2s ... ... 160
One acre of cassia trees (Acacia Fame-
siana) 302, at 3 years, 900 lbs. of flowers,
value 2s 90


One acre geranium plants, 10,000,40,000 £
lbs. leaves, producing 2 ozs. of distilled
otto per cwt., at ss. per oz. ... ... 200
One acre of lavender, 3,547, giving flower
for distillation, value 30
Further, without knowing the produce per acre, I
add the otto per cwt., which the following plants are
said to yield:—Rosemary, per cwt., will yield 24 oz.
of otto oil ; aniseed, 35 ozs. ; carraways, from 3 lbs.
to 4 lbs. 12 ozs. ; fennel seed, 2 lbs.; pachouli, 28 ozs.
The Agricultural Productions
of the Northern Territory are mostly tropical, and
could be made sources of great revenues. The
colony is yet jmung, and the plants that could be
cultivated to perfection in the Northern Territory of
South Australia, are the sugar cane, cotton, coffee,
tea, rice cassava, arrowroot, indigo, pimento, vanille,
sarsaparilla, cocoa-nut, palm, and several others.
The most valuable of all is the Chinchona or Quinine
tree. As the demand for quinine now almost
exceeds the supply, there is little doubt that the
cultivation of the chinchona tree would be a success-
ful branch of industry. Numerous medical plants
abound, and if cultivated would produce a good
revenue.
Tilt Aative Woods
of the Northern Territory are :
1. —Paper Bark, and adapted for piles, girders,
bedplates for engines and stamping machinery,
ship’s knees, and heavy carpentering.
2. —The iron bark, very dense and durable, and
proof against the white ant.
3. —The Cypress pine, an excellent timber, well
adapted for carpenter’s and joiner’s work.
4. —Blood wood, a very fine sound timber, used
for the construction of bi’idges.
5. —Tecona, a handsome wood for furniture. Its
bark also yields valuable tanning matter for medical
purposes.
6. Milkwood, so called from yielding a fluid
resembling milk, and is used chiefly for many kinds
of cabinet wood
7.—Blackwood, not an inelegant substitute for
walnut, is a useful and durable wood.
B.—The Mangrove.—This most extraordinary tree
forms a dense belt of vegetation along the banks of
the rivers, as well as on the sea coast. It appears to
flourish under tidal influence —its numerous roots
branching from the trunk above ground and appear-
ing as resting on the surface, rather than penetrating
the soil. There are many varieties of tliis timber,
some of which show wood of great beauty in the
variations of color, these being apparently due to
the chemical action of the sea water upon the fibrous
structure of the timber, and not to changes of tint
due to the annular growth of the tree. The bark of
the mangrove is valuable for tanning, and is believed
to be rich in potash. It also yields a good dye. A
sample of the bark is exhibited, to which the atten-
tion of chemists and tanners is particularly invited,
The lancewood, satinwood, prickly ash, fan palm,
cabbage palm, and innumerable others, which can
all be turned to practical purposes.
The bamboo thrives well. It grows to a diameter
of four to five inches, and very pretty cottages have
been built of it.
l*astoral Pursuits.
Next to 'agriculture, pastoral pursuits and mining
are the two great sources of industry and wealth.
The sheep and cattle farmers of South Australia,
known as “ squatters,” have become men of influence
and wealth. When the colony was young, men
invested their little capital in a few hundreds of
sheep or cattle, drove them into the bush, fixed upon
some suitable spot, leased it from the Government at
a nominal rent, built themselves convenient dwelling
places and yards and sheds, and were dubbed by the
name of “ squatters.” It was a hard and enter-
prising life, requiring unceasing activity, industry,
courage, andpatience. A squatter had to resist every
sort of disadvantage. A constant guard had to be
kept against the raids of the blacks, sometimes he
had to suffer serious consequences from droughts,
and sometimes from floods. Although he found the
country well adapted for the growth of wool, the
difficulty of its transport to the nearest settlement
seemed to eat up all the profit—but Anglo-Saxon
energy and pluck carried the day, and from petty
and struggling speculators, the squatters became
immense landed proprietors and wealthy settlers.
As the flocks increased, the squatter had to push
out into another country, and runs were extended
farther and farther inland. Leases of wide stretches
of country, comprehending in some cases hundreds
of square miles, were granted on mere nominal
payment, and many of the squatters grew rich
rapidly. All pastoral leases are held with the con-
dition that whenever the land is required for agri-
cultural purposes, the squatter must turn out on re-
ceiving six months’ notice—he being paid for the
substantial improvment made on his run. The
squatter is therefore the pioneer of the agriculturist.
When the land is wanted for agriculture he has to
retire farther into the interior.
A squatter’s hospitality has become proverbial in
Australia. The best the station affords—accommo-
dation, food, and horses, are freely placed at the
disposal of any one who know how to behave him-
self. There are, of course, exceptions, and a chur-
lish squatter may sometimes be met with, but very
rarely. I have more than once been surprised and
delighted to meet in some far-distant and out-of-
the-way place an elegant and hospitable family—the
sons, manly and intelligent young fellows, and the
daughters possessing the accomplishments of ele-
gant young ladyhood, and a few other accomplish-
ments which are only to be picked up in the bush,
such as catching and saddling a half-wild horse, and
joining in a kangaroo hunt on his back. This is not
often the case, for young ladies’ horses on a station
are generally well broken, as they are well ridden.”
The export of wool increases yearly, and there is
little doubt that the extraordinary progress in its
production will continue. The excellent quality of
the staple and the suitability of the climate, which
causes the sheep to be free of the diseases peculiar
to them in this country, conduces infinitely to the
rapid development of this wealth-producing industry.
The approximate number of sheep in the Austra-
lian colonics, including New Zealand, may be
estimated at 04,000,000. The number of bales of
wool imported into England in 1887 amounted to
824,000 bales, valued at six million, sterling ; and
the production has risen from 32,000,000 pounds in
1845 to 100,000,000 pounds ; and notwithstanding
this rapid increase prices have been maintained, the
average price of unwashed Australian wool being
134 d. during the period ending in 1876, as against
12|d. in 1855. These prices refer only to clothing
wool, which increases more rapidly than combing
and carpet and blanket wools.
It is not uncommon for squatters to own 20,000
sheep, and a few hundred head of cattle, and some-
times even more. They are mostly kept in flocks of


1,200 to 1,500, taken out early in the morning,
brought home at sundown, and secured in hurdles ;
a watchman in a watch-box placed between the two
sets of hurdles looking after them during the night,
Mr. Hodgson says: “ I was not long in making
the discovery that the judicious crossing of sheep for
their wool, of culling them for breeding, and the
management of men were the main considerations ;
and the lambing and shearing the busiest times in
the year. The latter may or may not be a tedious
process, and will depend upon the appliances. Upon
large and well-managed sheep establishments, a
commodious, well-built shed is erected, capable of
housing 2,000 sheep, with a shearing floor which
will accommodate from twenty-four to thirty men,
who will shear easily on an average senenty sheep
per diem, and do them fairly well, but certainly not
nearly as well as they are shorn in England. Each
man has his own pen, and must raddle with his
private mark every sheep he shears. The price for
shearing varies, but at present is 3s. per score, with
rations, flour, meat, tea, and sugar.
The mode of washing the sheep depends upon
circumstances; if the water is soft, the process is
easy and inexpensive, but if it is hard, as on my
property, hot water is used, with machinery for
spouting the sheep, and the application of soda and
soap. Two thousand and upwards can be washed in
one day ; the wages for washers are about 4s. per
day with rations.
“ The sheep are not usually shorn until three days
after being washed, and are carefully tended in the
meantime, to prevent the wool being discolored by
dust or dirt. I need hardly tell you that should the
weather be very warm the yolk rises quickly, and
the shearing may begin on the third day. The wool-
sorter and his assistant are kept very busy handling
and rolling up every fleece, taking off the shirts and
belly wool, and depositing the fleece in large open
bins in a shed, whence after two days it is removed
and carefully packed in bales, averaging 400 lbs.
weight, a screw press imported from England, being
brought into requisition for obtaining such heavy
weights ; but these bales are dumped on board ship,
and compressed into half their size when they leave
the wool shed ; and I have been unable to ascertain
that any damage accrues to the wool from this
process, although I am well aware that some of my
friends entertain a different opinion, and willingly
pay an increased freight for the conveyance of their
bales to England undumped.”
The sheep have many enemies—such as native
dogs, eagle hawks, crows, grass seeds and worms,
and of late kangaroos, and wallabies Droughts are
not uncommon in those latitudes where sheep of the
merino blood thrive the best and cause endless worry
and anxiety.
“The “myall dingo,” or native dog, the only
carnivorous animal in the colony, may be classed as
our second enemy. He has caused me many a
sleepless night. Their numbers are large, and their
depredations among sheep and calves very serious.
They frequently hunt in packs, and I have known
120 sheep out of one flock to be killed by four dogs
in one night. Sheep seldom recover from their bite,
or snap, and they will scatter a flock in every direc-
tion during the day (more especially if the
shepherd in charge should happen to be asleep,
which is too frequently the case when the flock is
attacked). They occupy a position between the
English fox and the prairie wolf, having the brush
of the former and the size of the latter. When
hunted they do not run to earth, but into some hol-
low log of a fallen tree, with which the country
abounds. Great expense has been incurred on many
stations in exterminating this native dog by means of
hunting, trapping, and laying poisoned baits, and
men are frequently employed to do nothing else.
The spear, or feather grass, causes great destruc-
tion among our sheep; it is excellent for early feed,
but soon runs to seed, and if sheep are allowed to go
through it in that stage, the seeds will enter the
wool, penetrate the skin, the liver, and intestines,
and I have seen thousands of these seeds inside a
sheep, producing dreadful pain and death. The
only mode of providing against such losses is the
removal of sheep; mow the paddock where the
feather grass grows, and burn it in heaps as soon as
possible. Worms, so called in Australia, are not of
long standing, and are produced by poverty in the
quality of the new grasses, which have taken the
place of the old and original native nutritious
grasses which have been destroyed by over-stocking.
As a remedy, it is necessary to remove the sheep to
new pastures, or give them plenty of Liverpool and
rock salt, to act as an aperient. These worms
are never found in “ salt bush ” country. I may
here mention that in the squatting districts sheep
are not supplied with any artificial food save salt,
and it may be as well to mention that we have no
lambing sheds, and the covered yards mentioned by
Howman in his valuable paper are at present
unknown.”
Catarrh, scab, and red water are also enemies the
sheep farmers have to fight against.
Mining;
is the third great source of material wealth in South
Australia. Its mineral treasures extend over an
area of thousands of square miles of country. Mr.
Harcus says; “It is difficult to form any trust-
worthy estimate of the amount of capital which has
been invested in mining. It has, however, amounted
to many hundreds of thousands of pounds, a great
portion of which has been hopelessly lost. The
colonists are subject to fits of periodical mania,
which runs like wildfire through the community,
infecting all classes. It is difficult to know how
these fits originate. Something promising is
discovered in some likely locality. Mysterious
hints are whispered on ’Change about a ‘big thing’
being discovered. Curiosity is excited, and mining
brokers are on the qui vice. They who are in the
secret wear an air of mysterious importance Knots
of knowing hands gather on the ‘ flags.’ There are
secret conferences, rushing of brokers to and fro,
handsom cabs are summoned, and one or two of the
smartest brokers drive in haste. All this indicates
that something is up. Keen mining men, undeterred
by past experience are drawn into excitement.
A prospectus (more or lesss truthful) is drawn up,
shares are offered and taken up. After a while the
shares are ‘ bulled ’ or ‘ beared,’ as occasion may
arise. Often the discovery is a genuine one, and
samples are shown to prove its value. Then the
country in the neighbourhood of the discovery is
examined and becomes immediately valuable.
Where the lode is rich in a given locality, it must be
rich all round it. If the original discovery, of
which the value has been proved, is called, say the
‘Nil Desperandum,’ there is soon started the ‘North
Nil Desperandum,’ the ‘West Nil Desperandum,’
and such like. There is then a rush for shares, the
brokers put money into their purses, and in a few
days the excitement is at fever heat. Most of the
contiguous claims prove ‘duffers,’ ‘slucers,’ amj


the unfortunate shareholders having rushed into the
speculation in haste, have opportunity to repent at
leisure.”
The Hapuiida liiiie
■was the first mine discovered in the Colony in 1843,
on Captain Bagshot’s sheep run, fifty miles from
Adelaide. It is a copper mine of great value.
Before the mine was handed over to an English
Company it yielded annually 2,000 tons a year.
The Kapunda Mine was the means of the establish-
ment of one of the principal provincial towns in the
Colony, and which formed the nucleus of a large and
thriving population. Two years after the Kapunda,
The Hurra Wine
was discovered. This is another valuable copper mine
100 miles from Adelaide; 13,000 tons a year was
sent to port, and shipped to England. Eor many
years the carriage of stores, machinery, &c., &c., to
the mine, and the ore to the port was conveyed by
bullock drags. The journey under the most favour-
able circumstances occupied from eight to ten days,
and some idea of the traffic may be imagined when
there was a constant stream of 800 teams on the
road. The Burra Mine for many years Avas the
richest in the Avorld. Eor sixteen years it stood
Avithout a rival till the discovery of the
Wallaroo and Moonfa Hines
in 1861. Great sums of money AA r ere spent in
working these mines, and Avhen failure seemed
imminent rich discoveries of ore Avere made,
ensuring immense profit. Mr. Austin, in his paper
of mines and minerals of South Australia, says Avith
reference to these mines: “In connection with the
Wallaroo Mines, extensive melting Avorks Avere
erected at Wallaroo Bay, and are probably the
largest and most complete in the Southern Hemis-
phere. They comprise thirty-six furnaces, and
tAventy-one calcining kilns, Avhile 210 men are
employed. The same proprietary have another
smelting establishment at the Hunter River, in Noav
South Wales, Avhcrc they have erected twenty-one
furnaces and employ 101 men. By this arrangement
the vessels which bring coal from New South Wales
to Wallaroo, take back copper ore to the Hunter
River smelting Avorks, so that a saving of freight is
effected. During the fifteen years since the opening
of the Wallaroo Mines, the total quantity of ore
raised has been 290,669 tons of 2-cAvt., but the
average of the first five years Avas under 8,000 tons.
The total quantity of copper made at these smelting
Avorks is 58,877 tons up to 1874. This includes a
portion of the produce of the Wallaroo Mines, and
of 197,394 tons purchased from the Moonta and
other mines.”
The country in the neighbourhood of the Wallaroo
Mines being evidently metalliferous, numerous
other claims Avere taken up in the vicinity, and a
great deal of work Avas done Avith the view of finding
payable copper mines. In some instances good
lodes Avere struck, and Avorked for a Icav yards Avith
fair results ; but of all that Avere opened only three
besides the original Wallaroo Mine are being
worked Avith anything like payable returns. These
are the Devon Consols, the Kurilla, and a more
recently discovered mine, the Doora. This last is
the property of Mr. W. W. Hughes, and is yielding
large quantities of payable ore.
About a year after the discovery of the Wallaroo
Mines, a still more valuable find Avas made eleven
miles to the south-Avest, and from the sea-coast.
A quantity of small stones of green carbonate of
copper being found on the surface of the ground
some pits were sunk, and a fine lode of ore was cut
at a small depth. This was the commencement of
the world-renowned Moonta Mines. Several eight-
acre sections were secured by the Messrs. Elder and
Co., and Mr. Hughes, and subsequently the Moonta
Mining Company was formed. The I,GOO acres of
mineral land now held by the Company is the richest
mineral property in the Colony, and not far from
being the richest in the world. Since the first
discovery several very rich and productive lode
have been cut, the most recent being a splendid
course of fine yellow ore, four feet in width, at the
depth of 100 fathoms. This lode alone will give
employment to a large number of persons for many
years to come.
During the first twenty months after the opening
of the Moonla Mine, 8,000 tons of ore, averaging
nearly 25 per cent, of fine copper, Avere raised, and
dividends amounting to £64,000 avctc paid from the
proceeds. During this early period of the mine's
existence—September, 1862—a largo quantity of
ore being required for shipment at Port Wallaroo,
eleA'en miles from Moonta, 1,700 tons were delivered
in nine days by means of bullock drays. On another
occasion, since the construction of the railway
betAveen Moonta and Wallaroo, forty tons of malle-
able or native copper Avere sent aAvay in one train of
ore trucks by rail. There are twenty-seven shafts
on the mine, all in active work; the least in depth
is 27 fathoms, and the deepest is 143 fathoms. The
others vary from about 75 to 115 fathoms, and are
for the most part yielding profitable returns. The
last report from the mine states: “At the 130
fathoms level the lode is turning out seA r en tons of 20
per cent, ore per fathom. In a Avinze below the 115
fathoms level (is another shaft) the A r alue of the lode
is fiA'c tons of 35 per cent, ore per fathom At
the 100 fathoms level the lode has turned out on the
average six tons of 18 per cent, ore per fathom,”
and so on.
The other Principal Clines
are, according to Mr. Austin —the Blinman,
Sliding Rock, Mount Rose, Warrioota, Yocovocana,
Malice Hutt, Mount Emily, &c.; the Mount
Plantaganet district, comprising the Mount Craig,
Kanyaka, WilloAv Creek, Prince Alfred, Matawar-
angala, and other mines; the Western, comprising
the Beltana, Lake Torrens, Mount Deception,
WartaAveena, Mount Lyndhurst, &c.; and the
Northern, including the Yudanamutana, the Daly,
and Stanley mines, &c. &c. That portion of the
country is for the most part ill-adapted to agricul-
tural purposes, on account of the dryness of the
climate, the nature of the soil, and the distance from
a market.’ It is, hoAvever, good pastoral country,
and abounds in A r ast mineral Avealth. Enormous
lodes of the richest iron ore may be seen rising high
aboA r e the surface of the ground. Huge lodes of
copper arc traceable for miles through the country,
and in some places the green ore may be seen for a
considerable distance, though, generally speaking,
the nature of the ore is only discovered on a closer
examination. In certain parts the copper ore lies
scattered in quantities over the ground, like broken
road metal. Occasionally a huge “boil” of rich ore
is found on some elevated part of the lode, as at the
Yudanamutana and the Nuccaleena mines, from the
latter of Avhich 600 tons Avere quarried from near the
surface. Ores of 60 or 70 per cent, are frequently
found cropping out aboA-e ground, consisting of red
oxides, and rich grey, and other ores. Sometimes


green and blue carbonates, green muriates, and
malachites are met with. A common form of copper
ore in the North is a brown liver-coloured ore,
largely mixed with iron, but containing from thirty
to forty per cent, of fine copper. Crystallized red
oxide and ruby copper, also malleable, or virgin
copper, are frequently found.
The extent and richness of the mineral deposits in
the North are almost incredible to those who have
not seen them ; but hitherto the high cost of cartage
and labour has operated very much against their
development. If a grand trunk line of railway were
constructed at least 200 miles north, to near Yudana-
mutana, leaving the mining companies to connect
properties to it by branch lines or wire tramways,
the one great obstacle to the successful working of
the mines would bo removed. Such a railway is in
contemplation by the present Government, and when
carried out, it will probably do more to advance
South Australia than any public work yet under-
taken in the colony.
€moI(1 Mining'.
Although South Australia was the first colony
in which gold was discovered, yet gold mining
made but little progress. Gold was first discovered
in the hills near Adelaide. Then gold was next
discovered at Echunga. A considerable amount of
about £600,000 was obtained. In these Echunga
diggings a valuable deposit of diamonds was
found. One of these gems is a specimen of perfect
crystallization. “ Forty-eight facets may be distinctly
counted by the aid of a magnifying glass as though
they had been cut by a lapidary.” Another gold
field was discovered at Jupiter Creek. An
auriferous batch of country was opened three miles
from the Echunga digging. Some very good finds
were made. In 1869, a gold field was discovered in
the Barossa Ranges, and a fine quartz reef was
opened in the neighbourhood where the Lady Alice
Gold Mine is still worked.
“ A singular feature in this mine, is that a rich
lode of copper ore was cut within 100 ft. from the
surface, and the gold is frequently seen sticking in
the copper. It was thought that the copper would
‘kill the gold,’ but to the present time both metals
appear to have improved, as a greater depth has
been reached.”
A very rich deposit of gold was found near Mount
Pleasant, thirty-one miles from Adelaide. This
was known as “ Scott’s Gold Mine,” and one stone
alone was found half the size of a man’s head.
The best and richest gold reef ever yet found in
the colony is the Wankaringa, 200 miles from
Adelaide. Three good mines were opened. There
are several other localities rich in gold, and would
pay for the working if judicious operations were put
in force. So many undertakings have been failures
owing to the ignorance or design of persons engaged
in mining, and the sums expended in the working on
them would have produced greater profit had they
been more judiciously applied.
Silver lead mines have been found from the
earliest days of colonization.
Iron Ore
is found also in large quantities. The deposits of
iron are of great richness, but owing to the absence
of coal and the high price of labour, they have been
little worked. The Government has offered a bonus
of £lO,OOO for the discovery of a payable coal mine.
Native iron has been found so pure that on being
welded to a piece of manufactured iron, had stood
well.
T|ie Precious Slones
found in South Australia are amethyst, agate, beryl,
bloodstone, cornelian, garnet, lapis lazuli, onyx,
opal, spinel ruby, and sapphire, sardonyx, and
topaz.
Other mineral productions found in South Aus-
tralia are :—antimony, asbestos, baryta, bitumen,
cobalt, calespar, dolomite, fireclay, fluorspar, fuller's
earth, gypsum, kaoline clay, lignite, marble, mag-
nesia, magnesian, limestone, mica mercury, nickel,
ochre, platinum both roofing and paving soapstone,
native sulphur, salt, schorl (very fine), tellurium,
tourmaline, wolfram, &c.
There is a remarkable substance found on the sur-
face, and occurs in tough thin cakes, and from its
india-rubber like appearance is called mineral caout-
clteuc, a very brilliant kerosine oil _is obtained by
distillation.
M » mi fa cl o rlos.
The manufactures of South Australia are as yet
in their infancy. The most important is the manu-
facture of leather, which has become a very extensive
industry. There are 60 tanneries and fellmongeries,
and several large wool-washing works are distributed
throughout the country, also soap and candle
factories, bone dust mills, and glue and size works.
Boot and shoe manufactories are largely increasing,
employing a large number of people. There are
about thirty-one steam saw mills, twenty-seven
foundries, eighty-six agricultural and implement
works, and twenty-nine coach and waggon builders’
shops in active work.
The other principal manufactories consist of
tweed and clothing factories, hat and brush manu-
factories, and dye works.
There are about twenty-nine breweries, thirty
sodawater and cordial factories, one hundred and
two wine-making establishments, ten biscuit
bakeries, ten jam and preserves, and seven con-
fectionery manufactories; six dried fruits and three
olive oil factories, and one ice-works.
Among other miscellaneous local productions and
manufactories, arc the following :—Barilla, billiard
table, baking powder, blacking, cayenne popper,
cement, cigars, fibre, glass bottles, plaster of Paris,
washing machines, sauces and pickles, salt, safety-
fuze, gas stoves, iron safes, bedsteads, galvanized
iron, and tinware.
l ß rlces of Provisions.
Flour, Grain, &c. (Wholesale).— Barley, per
bushel of 50 lbs., without bags, 3/4; Bran, per bushel
of 201b5., at the Port, bags included, Is. 2£d ; flour,
fine silk-dressed, per ton of 2,000 lbs. at the Port,
bags included (town brands), £l2 to £l2 155.; ditto,
ditto (country brands), £ll to £l2 155.; hay, best
wheaten, £4 ss. to £4 10s. per ton; ditto, mixed,
£4 to £4 ss. per ton; ditto, Cape oaten, £4 to £4 ss.
per ton; ditto, wild oaten, £3 10s. to £3 15s. per ton;
maize, per bushel of 601b5., without bags, 3s. 9d.;
oats, per bushel of 491b5., without bags, 35.; pollard,
per bushel of 201b5., Is. 4d.; wheat, per bushel of 60
lbs., large lots, at the Port, ss. Od. to ss. 7d.
Break and Flour. —Bread 3d. to 4d. per 21b.
loaf ; flour, l)d. to 2d. per lb.
Dairy and Farm Produce. —Bacon, 6d to lOd.
per lb.; butter, fresh, Bd. to 9d. per lb.; cheese,
colonial, 4d. to 7d. per lb.; English ditto, Is. 4d. per
lb.; dairy pork, 6d. to Bd. per lb.; ducks, 4s. to ss.
per pair; eggs Bd. to 9d. per dozen ; fowls, 2s. 6d. to
4s. per pair; geese, 4s. to ss. each; hams, lOd. to
Is. Id. per lb.; honey, 4d. to 6d. per lb.; lard, Bd. to
9d. per lb.; milk, 4d. to 6d. per quart; onions, 16s.


to 19s. per. CAvt.; ditto, green, Gd. to Is. per dozen
bunches; peas, 6s. to 9s. per bushel; pigeons, Is. to
Is. Gd. per pair; rabbits, Is. 3d. to Is. Gd. per pair;
turkeys, 3s. to 6s. each.
Groceries. —Coffee, Is. Gd. per lb.; rice, 3d. to
sd. per lb.; salt, Id. per lb.; soap, 3d, to 4d. per
lb.; tea, Is. 3d. to 2s. Gd. per lb.; tobacco, 4s. to 4s.
Gd. per lb.
Vegetables.—Asparagus, 4s. per 100; beetroot,
2s. to 2s. Gd. per dozen; broccoli, Is. to ss. per dozen;
cabbages, Is. to ss. per dozen; ditto savoy, 2s. to 3s.
per dozen; ditto plants, Is. Gd. per 100; capsicum,
lOd. to Is. per i's.; carrots, 2s. to 3s. per dozen
bunches; caulifloAvers, Is. to 9s. per dozen; celery,
2s. to ss. per dozen heads; chilies, 9d. to Is. per lb.;
garlic, 4d. to Gd. per lb.; horseradish, Gd. to Bd. per
lb.: leeks, 2s. to 2s. Gd. per dozen ; lettuces, Bd. to Is.
per dozen; marjoram, Bd. to 9d. per dozen bunches ;
mint, Gd. to Bd. per dozen bunches; parsnips, 2s. to
2s. Gd. per dozen bunches; peas, 3s. Gd. to 4s. per
bushel; potatoes, ss. to 10s. per CAvt.; neAV ditto, 12s.
to 13s. per CAvt.; radishes, Cd. to Bd. per dozen
bunches ; rhubarb, 3s. to 6s. per dozen lbs.; sage, Gd.
to Bd. per dozen bunches ; shalots, 3d. to Gd. per lb.;
thyme, Gd. to Bd. per dozen bunches; trombones, 4d.
to sd. each ; turnips, Is. to 2s. Cd. per dozen bunches;
A r egetable marroAvs, 3d. to Gd. each; Avatercress, Gd.
per dozen bunches.
Fruit. —Almonds, hard shell, 3d. to 4d. per lb.;
ditto, soft shell, Gd. to 7d. per lb.; ditto, cracked, Bd.
to lOd. per lb.; apples, 6s. to 10s. per bushel; barce-
lona nuts, 7s. to 7s. Gd. per dozen lbs.; citrons, 12s.
to 14s. per civt.; cocoanuts, 2s. Gd. to 3s. per dozen;
dried figs, Is. per lb.; filberts, 9d. to lOd. per lb.;
gooseberries, 3s. to 3s. Gd. per gallon ; lemons, Gd.
to Is. 3d. per dozen ; loquats, Id. to 9d. per lb.;
oranges, Gd. to Is. Gd. per dozen; pears, 4s. to ss. per
bushel; raisins, 7d. per lb.; Avalnuts Bd. to lOd.
per lb.
Butchers’ Meat.— Beef, 2£d. to 7d. per lb.; salt
ditto, 2d to 4d. per lb.; calves’ heads. Is. Gd. to 2s.
each ; ditto feet. Is. per set; lamb, forequarter, 2s.
to 2s. Gd. each; ditto, hindquarter, 2s. Gd. to 3s. each;
mutton, forequarter, 24d. to 3d. per lb.; ditto, hind-
quarter, 3|d. to 4d. per lb.; sausages, 4d. to Gd. per lb.
Fish. —Herrings, 3d. per lb.; schnapper, 2d. to 4d.
per lb.; Avhiting, 3d. to 4d. per lb.
Miscellaneous. — BeesAA r ax, 9d. to lOd. per lb.;
colonial jam, Gd to Bd. per lb.; floAvers 2d. to Gd. per
bunch.
filaies of Wages.
LABOUR MARKET.— September 18th, 1883.
Mr. J. Kemp Penny reports that the past month
has been a very active one in the labour market in
supplying the various sheds Avith shearers and shed
hands. Reports from the sheds speak highly of the
men fonvarded. There is also a demand for plough-
men for falloAV land. Good married couples, Avithout
encumbrance, are inquired for; also smart lads,
plumbers’ and ironworkers. Altogether it seems
likely that the spring will open out Avell this year.
Bootmakers.— PieceAvork is the rule in the
principal factories, although there are several men
on dayAvork, who earn from 40s. to 50s. per Aveek,
Avhile expert hands receive as much as £3.—The
present prices at pieccAvork are Men’s E.S.,
making, Is. Gd. to 25., finishing, Is. to Is. 4d.; strong
lace, making, Is. lOd. to 25., finishing, Bd.; bluchers,
making, Is. to Is. 10d., finishing, Bd.; Avomen’s E.S.,
making, Is. 2d. to Is. Gd., finishing, 7d. to Is.; strong
lace, making, Is. 2d. to Is. 4d., finishing, Cd. to 7d.;
slippers, making, 4d., finishing, 3d.; girl’s E.S.
(10-13), making, lOd. to lid., finishing, 7d.; lace
making, 9d. to 10d., finishing, sd. to Gd. per pair.
Female machinists receive from 20s. to 275, Cd. per
week, and fitters are in good demand at from 12s. to
21s. Most of the Avork is noAv daywork, clickers
(good sharp hands) are in fair demand, and earn
from 355. to 455. First-class men command 475. Gd.
The trade is fairly supplied Avith good Avorkmen,
but some good hands in all classes, both men and
women, could readily find employment at first-class
Avages. Trade is generally brisk.
Builders.—ln this trade firms have adopted the
eight hours system. The prices ruling are;—For
stonemasons and Avallers, 9s. to 10s. per lay ; stone-
cutters, 10s.; plasterers, 10s. to 125.; bricklayers, 9s.
to 9s. Gd.; slaters, a shade higher; carpenters, 9s. to
10s.; bench hands, 9s. to 9s. Gd.; labourers, Gs. to 75.;
eight and nine hours. Trade very active, constant
Avork.
Bakers.— Foremen are receiving from £1 15s. to
£3 per Aveek, and second hands from 20s. to £2, Avith
board and lodging, skilled confectioners proportion-
ally higher.
Brickmakers.—l3s. per 1,000 on the hack.
Bookbinders.—Forwarders, 455.; finishers, 455. to
COs.
Brassfounders.—£2 10s. to £3 per Aveek ; brass
finishers, £2 10s. to £3. Full handed.
Butchers. —Engagements are made by the Aveek.
The present rates are—For shopmen, 355. to 505.;
youths, 15s. to £1; slaughtermen, 30s. to £2 10s.;
and small-goods men from 30s. Avith board.
Cabinetmakers. - Engagements are chiefly made
by piecework, but Avhen by time the folkming are
the customary rates per day of eight and a half
hours—First-class Avorkmen, 9s. to 10s.; second
ditto, 7s. Gd. to Bs. Gd.; upholsterers, 9s. to 10s.;
makers of deal tables, meat safes, &c., from 7s. Gd.
to 9s.
Carters. —20s. to 80s. per Aveek, Avith board.
Clerks. —A sin to send them out.
Coachbuilders,—The Avages per AA r eek vary
according to the folloAving scale: —Smiths, from £3
to £3 10s.; bodymakers, from £2 14s. to £3 35.;
wheelers, £2 10s. to £3; painters, £2 14s. to £3;
trimmers, do.; viccmen, £1 10s. to £2.
Coopers.—Work is chiefly done by the piece;
Avhen otherwise, hoAvev'er, the day is understood to
consist of eight hours, for Avhich the remuneration
varies from Bs. to 10s. per day. Coopers on piece as
folloAvs: —Wine casks, 225. Gd. per tun ; tierces,
4s. Gd. (ncAv) each ; hogsheads, Gs. each ; ten-gallon
kegs, 3s. 2d. to 3s. 4d. each; five do. do., 2s. Gd.
each; tAvo do. do., Is. Gd. each; talloAV casks, 13s. Gd.
to 15s. per tun ; do. 7s. Gd. per half tun.
Coppersmiths.—9s. to 12s. per day. Very little of
this work done in this province.
Drapers’ Assistants.—2os. to GOs. and board per
week.
Farm Hands.—Ploughmen 18s. to 20s. per Aveek;
general farm servants, 16s. to 18s. per Aveek; married
couples (man only to Avork), 265. to 80s., Avith house,
Avood, and Avater; females to cook, &c., 20s. to 30s.
per Aveek ; harvesters, 255. to 30s. per AAreek; boys
from 10s. to 155.; youngsters tailing cattle and
sheep, ss. to 7s. per AAreek; teamsters, 20s. to 305.;
hay harvesters, 255. (all Avith board and lodging);
sheaf binders, Bs. to 10s. acre.
Farriers. —Firemen, per day of ten hours, Bs. Gd.
to 95.; lloormen, from £2 2s. to £2 10s. per Aveek ;
inferior hands. 30s. to 3Gs.
Female Domestics. —Per week, Avith board and
lodging—General Servants, Bs. to 12s. and 145.;


cooks, 10s. to 205.; housemaids, Bs. to 125.; kitchen-
maids, Bs. to 10s.; housekeepers, 14s. to £1; laun-
dresses, 10s. to IGs.; nursemaids, Bs. to 125.; nurse
girls, 4s. to 75.; charwomen, 4s. per diem. A great
scarcity of useful female domestic servants.
Gasfitters.—ln regular employment the wages
vary from £2 to £3 per week; when employed by
the day they receive from Bs. to 10s. Full handed.
Galvanized Iron and Zinc Workers.—Daywork,
from Bs. to 95.; week of 50 hours, £2 2s. to £2 145.;
boys, from Bs. to 20s.
Gardening.—Gardeners, Gs. to 7s. per day; dig-
ging, Gd. (sandy soil) to Is. per rod (ordinary
garden); trenching, by contract; pruning, Ss. Gd.
to 4s. per 100 vines, from Gs. to 7s. daywork. Full
handed.
Hairdressers.—£2 10s. to £2 15s.
Ironworkers.—Boilermakers, per day of 8 hours,
get from 10s. to 11s. and 125.; fitters and turners, Bs.
to 12s. per day; smiths, ditto; moulders, ditto;
labourers, from Gs., 75., and Bs. Full handed.
Iron Trade. - General smiths, 9s. to 10s. per day;
first-class smiths, 12s. per day; fitters, 9s. to 10s. Gd.
per day; wheelwrights, Bs. to 10s.per day; moulders
(first-class), 9s. to 10s. Gd. per day; engine drivers,
6s. to 9s. per day; sawyers, 7s. to Bs. per day ; car-
penters, Bs. Gd. to 10s. per day; turners, Bs. to 10s.,
per day; foundry labourers, Gs. to 7s. per day; fur-
nace men, 7s. per day; iron turners, 9s to 10s. Gd.
per day; strikers, Gs. to 7s. per day.
Jewellers. —Fifty hours per week. Ordinary work-
men, £2 10s. to £3 15s. per week, and more skilled
workmen, engravers, &c., £3 to £4.
Locksmiths and Bellhangers.—Work eight hours,
9s. to 10s. per day.
Millers.—sos, to 00s. per week.
Mattressmakers.—Piecework, 3s. Gd. to 4s. Gd.per
pair.
Plumbers. —Very good hands obtain from 10s. to
12s. per day of eight hours. Men accustomed to
w.c., hot and cold baths, &c., earn 15s. per diem.
Plumbers arc now wanted in this colony.
Painters and Paperhangers. These tradesmen
generally receive Bs. to 9s. per day of eight hours.
Grainers and writers, 10s. to 12s. per day, or Is. 3d.
per hour; very good writers and grainers, 11s, to
15s. per day. Plenty hands for requirements.
Printers.—Compositors, morning paper, Is. Id. per
1,000; jobbing hands, £2 15s. per week; pressmen,
£2 15s. Supply and demand fairly equal.
Reaping by machine, from 4s. to Gs. per acre; two
horses.
Station Hands. —Drovers, £1 to £1 10s. per week,
or 10s. per day and find themselves; boundary
riders, 17s. to 255. per week ; shepherds, 15s. to 20s.
per week ; married couples per annum, £52 to £75;
bullock-drivers, 20s. to 255. per. week; knockabouts,
20s. perweek; bush-carpenters and bush-blacksmiths,
30s. per week ; cooks, 20s. to 255. per week, 40s. to
50s. during shearing ; water drawers, 18s. to 20. per
week. New arrivals, £4O per annum; ditto married
couples, £5O to £GO per annum. All the above are
with rations and expenses paid up to station.
Saddlers.—Most of the work done in this trade is
by daywork. The following are the rates :—First-
class harncssmakers, 7s. Gd. to Bs. Gd. per day of nine
hours all the year around; second-class or jobbing, Gs.
to 7s. per day ; first-class saddle hands, £3 to £3 15s.
per week. Trade full except saddle hands.
Saihnakcrs. —Is, 2d to Is. 3d. per hour, eight
hours per diem.
Sawyers.—Logs at pit, 13 per 100.
Seamen’s wages per month arc —Ordinary, coasting
£1 to £3; able-bodied, stationary, £4 10s.; foreign,
£1 to £3 10s.'; able-bodied, eastward, £4 10s.;
homeward, £5 10s. Full handed.
Stonebreakers.- 2% guage, 2s. 9d. to 3s. per yard.
Storemen.—3os. to 50s. per week.
Shearers.—2os. per 100. Shearing hands—Cooks,
405.; cooks’-mates, 15s. to 205.; butchers, 20s. to
255.; woolrollers, 155.; pickers (boys), Bs.; knock-
abouts, 15s. to 205.; yarders, 15s. to 205.; hut-
keepers 12s. to 155.; bullock drivers, 255.; all with
board and lodging and fares paid to stations,
Tontraakers.—Gs. Gd. to 10s. per diem.
Tailors.—Wages lOd. per hour piecework, or Is.
per hour daywork. Good workmen arc now earning
£3 10s. to £4s. 10s. per week.
Tanners and Curriers.—The working day is ten
hours. Beamsmcn in the limeyard get from £2 to
£2 10s. per week; strikers and finishers, from 30s. to
405.; tanners, from 30s. to 365.; curriers’ work is
all done by the piece and on agreed conditions ;
average £2 to £3. Supply about equal to demand.
Tinplate Workers. —The majority are employed
at piecework. Day workmen receive from 9d. to Is.
per hour.
Wheelwrights.—ls. to Is. 3d. per hour. Trade
busy.
Wheat-cleaners at winnowing machine, l|d., 2d.,
and 3d. per bushel, bagged and sewn.
Watchmakers work 8 hours, wages from £3 to £5
per week. Full handed.
Miscellaneous.—Cabman 20s. to 30s. per week,
with board and lodging; bushmen 355. to 40s. per
week, with board and lodging; ostlers, 20s. to 255.
per week, with board and lodging.
An Australian §eltlcr‘s Home.
We annex the following account of an Australian
settler’s home, known as the Hill River Estate,
writien by one of the staff of the Leader, a well
known and influential Melbourne journal. It may
be an encouragement to those possessing capital and
enterprise, who are about to emigrate to the continent
of the southern seas—what one man can do, others
can do also. It may be an encouragement to those
who have but little capital and much enterprise
and courage, by which they can accomplish the pur-
pose for which they leave their native land. They
cannot all be farm princes and possess Hill River
Estates, but they also in proportion can attain com-
fortable homesteads, goodly acres, an honest inde-
pendence, and a prosperous future.
The Hill River Estate.
The Hill River Estate, the property of Mr. C. B.
Fisher, is situated in the County of Stanley, two
miles eastward of Clare, the furthest agricultural
township to the north previous to the opening up of
the new areas. The total distance of Hill River
from Adelaide is 88 miles, and railway communica-
tion is obtained by taking the Burra lino at Farrell’s
Flat, thirteen miles to the cast. The property is
GO,OOO acres in extent, lying north and south in a
valley between two tiers of hills - the eastern tier
being, like the country in that direction, treeless ;
but the western one, together with some of the
undulating land in the valley approaching its base,
is lightly timbered with shcoak and gum. The
valley is on an average about seven miles broad, and
the estate extends about 25 miles in length ; the
Hill River, a permanent creek, which takes its rise
to the south, running along the centre. The valley
is composed of a rich deep chocolate soil washed from
the surrounding high land, which is of slaty con


glomerate formation set on edge, and running in
reefs mixed with quartz north and south, along the
crests of the boundary ridges. The property is
worked as a sheep-breeding establishment and
wheat-growing farm on a large scale, the latter being
carried on with the ultimate end in view of preparing
the soil for the sowing down of lucern and prairie
grass. The station is divided into four different
establishments, viz., the woolshed and drafting
yards, seven miles down the valley to the north; anew
series of farm buildings, two miles to the east, being
prepared for the harvest; another large farming
establishment nearer home; and the homestead, a
stone residence and stabling, surrounded by well
kept grounds, orangery, and orchard, comprising in
all twelve acres. In the kitchen-garden of four
acres every description of vegetable is produced in
abundance, and this portion of the establishment is
found to be very valuable where so many hands are
employed. The drafting yards at the wool-shed are
of a complete kind for the handy working of the
sheep, and are flagged in the race and crush dens
with slate obtained on the property. The number
of sheep shorn is 50,000 —the shearing floor
accomodating 40 shearers. Sheepwashing is not
usual in South Australia, through the scarcity of
water; but the chief drawback on Hill River is its
hardness, being brackish and metallic from the
the mineral nature of the water-sheds. The new
farm buildings are being erected handy to the
cultivated land, which is about midway in the valley,
the furrows running lengthwise. A well and trough
for watering occupy the middle of the square, which
will be built upon further, so as to accommodate
200 horses, the total number at present employed on
the estate. The other buildings consists of men’s
stone buildings, with dining, sleeping and cooking
departments separate, overseer’s residence, large
hay cutting and corn bruising house, and barn 106
feet by 34, and 15 feet walls, with a holding capacity
of 60,000 bushels of wheat, besides compartments
at the rear for two blowers and screens for finishing
the wheat off in a uniform sample after it passes
through the winnowers in the field. The cultivated
land is in large fields, one of which is three miles
long, and contains this year 4,250 acres of wheat,
besides 40 acres of peas grown for horse food, and a
quantity of barley, and 1,800 acres of new land
turned up for fallow. When the wheat is ripe the
strippers are then set to work, emptying on the
roads at each end of the 200 acre blocks. Each
stripper is drawn by four horses, driving and guiding
being managed by one man; and each machine does
from seven to eight acres per day, according to the
weather. Two large dams of water supply the home
station and home farmstead with water, and there
are six others in various parts of the run. Sixteen
acres of trees have been planted in two-acre blocks
in various parts of the run, the kinds found to do
best being the Tasmanian red gum, pinus insignis,
and sterculias. The large quantity of manure made
by such a quantity of stable horses is carefully
looked after, and is to be put on the land along with
the lucern. Figs are profitable kept upon the waste
wheat, and on a small experimental farm ; maize,
millet, and sorgham have been tried with success,
and various kinds of wheats are planted in drills to
try their relative merits. The purple straw so far
has been found best. On one portion of the farm
also experiments to prove the efficiency of subsoil
ploughing and other matters are attended to.
Amongst the improvements to be eventually carried
out, a public reading room and library are to be
added to each homestead, and others measures of an
educative and elevating character are to receive
attention. The hands employed, apart from shearing
and harvest seasons, average about seventy. When
these latter operations are on the number is over
200. Young draught horses are constantly being
brought from the breeding establishment near
Adelaide, and broken by means of waggon, plough,
scoop, or other of the numerous kinds of work con-
stantly going on. The following rules of the establish-
ment are posted in the various buildings:—Working
hours: All hands to rise at five a.m., when the bell rings;
horses to be feed, watered, and cleaned; breakfast
at six; all teams to bo afield at seven; dinner hour
at noon; work to commence again at one p.m., to
continue to six in summer and five in winter; supper
at seven ; horses to be feed and watered at half-past
eight, and the dining-room to be cleared and locked
up at 10 p.m. Wages: First-class men will be paid
at the rate of 20s. per week; second-class at 18s.;
third-class at 16s. Anyone by good and industrious
conduct can raise himself to the highest class.
Wages paid every fourth week, and at no other time.
Anyone in charge of horses neglecting to feed and
tend them properly, or found abusing them, will be
discharged at once, and forfeit all his wages due.
Anyone'willfully disobeying orders or neglecting his
duty will be discharged, and will forfeit two-thirds
of the wages due. Anyone found in a state of
drunkenness will be instantly discharged, and abso-
lutely forfeit all wages due. Anyone bringing in-
toxicating liquors on the premises, as well as those
partaking of them, will forfeit all the wages due,
and be instantly discharged. Anyone found smoking
near the stables or stacks will be at once discharged
add proceeded against under the Bush Fires Act
Each man at the time of hiring is required to sign
the above rules, binding himself to abide by them
in all respects.
lietter from @onth Australia.
A Buckinghamshire farmer lately wrote to the
Rev. Mr. Bickford, Wesleyan Minister, of South
Australia, for information and advice respecting the
advisability of emigrating to the Colony. Mr,
Bickford handed the letter to an old resident there,
who replied as follows :
“ Mongalata, South Australia.
“ Dear Sir, —In response to the Rev. Mr. Bickford’s
request, I purpose giving you some practical counsel
derived from experience gathered from 25 years
residence in this country, where, at present, I hold
some 7,000 acres of land, and 900 in crop last season,
the rest being in pasture for sheep. I mention this
that you may know that I am speaking of matters
of present experience, and for further encourage-
ment observe that I came to Australia 27 years ago
unknown to a single individual; but, by Divine
blessing on my industry, have arrived at my present
position. Having in 1874-5 spent 18 months in
the United States, Canada, England, and France,
I endeavoured to get as much information as possible
on the prospects of these countries, and I affirm,
without fear of contradiction, that to the industrious
labourer and English yeoman none of these countries
can compare with this. Here life and property are
secure; here is no State church, no social caste to
mortify and oppress; here the only distinctions are
personal worth and culture—the child of the poorest
of any church may rise to the very highest positions
in the State; here the best position is made.for
education in State schools up to the University


and where our Wesleyan College takes the lead in
sending students to the University. Here the
climate is so mild in winter that work is not
hindered, and cattle need no housing or special
feeding, thus saving labour and expense—while the
dry air of summer gives such superiority to our
produce, wheat and wool, as in the former to success-
fully compete with the world at every exhibition
from 1851 to Paris last year. Observe, Ido not say
it is the best for the capitalist or the aristocrat, but
for the class you represent, I believe there is no
place like South Australia, where there yet remains
millions of acres of virgin soil waiting to reward
the industrious toiler.
“The question with you is, no doubt, how most
successfully to avail yourself of these advantages.
You have only to state your wishes to Sir Arthur
Blyth, Agent-General, South Australia, 8, Victoria
Chambers, Westminster, and particulars of your
family and of any others who may propose to go
with you, and if you are farmers, or farm labourers,
or domestic servants, you will get for each person
over 12 years a land-warrant for £2O, and half that
amount for every child under 12, which will be
received as cash by the Government in any payments
for land, or, if you like, by keeping them two years
you may get the cash for them.
“ As to the voyage, which is usually delightful, I
would advise the Orient Steamships from London
and Plymouth every fortnight. Second class pas-
sages, very comfortable for £B5, and third class for
£2O, and young men in open berths at £l6. When
a number of friends are coming I would say, save
your money and come third class, and, instead, pro-
cure a feAv dainties, as hams, cheese, tinned fish,
jams, which will give variety 7, while the ship pro-
vides wholesome and substantial diet. Your status
is not affected by the cabin you occupy—the richest
men here came out as immigrants at Government
expense. Be careful not to burden yourselves by
what is called outfit —bedding will be needed, but
anything used at home will do on shipboard, while
you will save money by buying things adapted to
the climate when you may need them here. On
arrival call on the Minister at Port Adelaide, or
elsewhere, who can introduce you to Wesleyan
farmers, who can and would counsel you as to the
best course to pursue in settlement. I would say,
if a man has only one or two hundred pounds, it
will be safer for him to deposit it in the Government
Savings Bank at 6 per cent., and gain experience
and money also for a year, while one with £5OO
would be safe in going on land, provided he could
rely on some friend to consult as to modes of
Colonial procedure. No amount of explanation
would enable you to realize the difference in our
ways arising from our altered circumstances ; but,
though different, they are proved by experience to
be the best for us. So banish the idea of converting
us to English ways, but drop as soon as possible
into the rougher but simpler Colonial methods of
work.
“ If you buy (for Ave do not as a rule rent here, we
all want our OAvn farms here), or select, Avill depend
on your means or your temperament; but if I nar-
rate the method of a brother-in-law Avho came from
Bermuda in the “ Atlantic,” via London, after my
return, and Avho has nine children, the eldest 18, and
only one son 17 years, you Avill understand better
the life of a new settler. Arriving at harvest time,
he took a house and put the family in it, and he
and son took Avork for the harvest, the father at 20s.
and son Bs. (then 13 years') per Aveek and board.
After the season was over I found for him his present
farm of 500 acres, 200 acres of which has neither
stick nor stone, the rest wooded pasture land, and
with Ids land-warrants he paid £5O, the interest
payable for three years in advance. They have no
rates or taxes to pay, but have to fence or build to
the value of 7s. Gd. per acre during the three years,
when he will have to pay £5O more for another three
years. He has to plough and cultivate one-tenth of
the land, or 50 acres the first year, and 100 acres
every year after for the six years, when he will be
able to pay for the fee at the rate of 20s. per acre.
He has no clearing to do, so that by simply plough-
ing, sowing, harrowing in each case, once he lias
reaped as much as 15 bushels per acre.
“This, to an English farmer, is not much ; but the
dryness of our climate, while it limits the quantity,
increases the quality and value, while it enables us
to use machinery unknown in England, which lessens
the labour of tilling and reaping, and saves in in-
terest from the facility of marketing the grain. My
corn season was standing in the field one morning,
and the next evening it was in the mill eighteen
miles away, and the money for it in my pocket, 4s.
Bd. per bushel of GOlbs.
“ Having taken the land and paid the interest of
£5O, he bought three horses for £75, waggon, £25,
double furrow plough, £lB, and a large tarpaulin,
and with his son went to the land, put up a tent, and
laid out the land for ploughing. When the land
got too hard for ploughing, he procured some gal-
vanized iron and wood, and put up a three-roomed
place 15ft. square each, and 7ft. high, to be used by-
and-bye as a barn, got his family out, and then cut
posts, sunk holes, and got ready for fencing, and
after every shower ploughing, the horses when not
used being hobbled on the land to prevent wander-
ing. In this Avay he managed to get fifty acres
ploughed in time for tilling, as on an aA r erage he
ploughed tAvo acres per day. And noAV, by the use
of an American broadcast seed soAver, was able in a
day or tAvo to soav the fifty acres, and after once
harrowing it is left to its fate, no weeding and other
care till harvest, then eA r ery moment Avas employed
in fencing with iron wire to keep off cattle. At
han r est, Avhich here begins about Christmas, a
reaper is required—costs neAv, £6O ; this reaps and
thrashes ten acres per day, and it is winnoAved and
bagged at once, and stacked in the field till after
harvest, when the same horses cart and mill, and
thus he has increased his stock and implements, and
also his tillage, till he his now putting in 200 acres ;
about the house he put up as a makeshift he is in
no hurry to leave, as he finds so many uses for his
money ; and Avhile at home his position would have
suffered from such surrounding, his thrift and self-
denial at once increased his capital aud credit, as the
building of a good house at such an early stage
Avould be deemed umvise and reflect on his judg-
ment. Having a son just home from college, I
resolved to select a block for him, and pursued
exactly the same course, but having more capital
have built myself a good and substantial stone
house.
“ Many persons improve a section and sell it at 20s.
to 40s. per acre premium, Avhen perhaps their im-
provement did not cost them 15s. per acre ; Avhere a
man has no family, or only girls perhaps, it is the
best plan to buy an improved farm, but with a large
family it is the wisest to select and expend the
money yourself, you can secure room for your family
in the future, 640 to 1,000 acres is the usual size of
selections, though you can get them any size. The


agencies of our church are so wfdely diffused that
you can always settle in proximity to our services,
though what is near would receive a different-
answer by us than by you, as a few of our farms
renders a horse and a trap a necessity to enable you
to reach the place of service—often in a farmers’
barn, as in our case here, Mr. Bickford preached in
mine last Sabbath, where regular services are held,
by a local brother and myself every Sunday; we are
18 miles from the circuit town.
“ You will probable realise from this experience a
better idea of our affairs—as it is the common mode
of procedure by which the country has extended to
an unprecedented degree. Of course there are
cheaper methods of stocking, by buying second-hand
implements, &c.
“ I feel sure that though you will feel strange and
uncomfortable at the absence of old faces and asso-
ciations, this will pass away in a few months, and
backed by your judgment, you will learn daily to
thank the Providence which has directed yours steps
to a country where your family may find scope for
improvement in every mental, social, and material
power they possess.
‘‘As regards other occupations, tradesmen in limited
supply find ready employment, especially steady
moral men, especially in the building trades. You
can hardly realise a naked country where every
new comer must have a house built him. Before I
close, I would point out that it is the dryness of our
climate that gives us pre-eminence as a wheat-
growing colony, and the absence of flowing springs
and brooks is a great drawback, but the breaking of
the soil is steadily improving our supply of water,
which now has to be caught in tanks or reservoirs
in winter; this is no real hindrance to settlement,
but is a feature you would not think to take into
your estimate, and I mention it, that, as far as
possible, no difficulty should come suddenly on you.
These reservoirs are excavated by plough and
scoops by horse power, and cost about Bd. per cubic
yard, and do not need cementing, the soil being so
retentive of moisture. I do not know of any material
fact more to put before you, but again enforce the
advice to bring cash, not luggage. Bank interest
hero is 10 per cent. Capitalists get large profits as
well as their customers, and our things are made to
suit our climate, everything iron, as wood perishes
in the dry heat. Living is cheap, and stock also—a
good cow can be had for £o to £(5, and sheep from
ss. to 12s. Flour 21s. to 255. per bag of 200 lbs.
Potatoes, Bs. per cwt. and so on, while clothes are
as cheap as in England, and implements also,
considering the make. Little labour is used here.
My farm here is worked by my son, and a boy for
cattle. You can hardly realise 200 acres cropped
with this labour, but it is a fact, and next year 50
acres more will be put in. This farm is fifty miles
from any large estate, worked by a manager, but
where I seldom go. This is being developed for my
son when lie is old enough to settle—when I shall
retire in his favour. In reading the accounts of
agricultural distress in England I long to tell them
to come; if only with willing hands and thrifty
habits, they can always do better here than there.
But the labouring classes are selfish, and try to
prevent anyone coming, lest wages should be in-
terfered with. Wages for farm labourers are 18s. to*
20s. per week, and house wood, water and food in
abundance. On landing, no one should cast away
his bedding, as these are always useful. Here a
man’s dark blankets are his constant companion;
but boxes of clothes to a single man is a nuisance.
“I hope you may sec fit to change you home. For
any further information you may require you have
only to address, —Yours,
“J. P. STEPHENS, M.D. and J.P.”


PUBLIC A TlOHS.—Continued.
California —the Cornucopia of the W0r1d—43,795,000 acres of Government Lands undertaken ;
full details of the fruit and agricultural productions of the country, with fine illustrations of same. Post
free 1/-
Hontes and Happiness —in the Golden State of California, being descriptions of the empire
State of the Pacific coast, its inducements to native and foreign born emigrants; its productions of soil
and its productions; its vast agricultural resources; its healthfulness of climate and equality of tem-
perature ; and many other facts for the information of the Home-seeker and Tourist. .Illustrated. Post
free 9d.
California. —A guide to the Golden State, by Charles Nordhoff. The route, demand for working men
and women, opportunities for Settlers, Education, Wages, Productions, Climate, Farming, Price of Land,
Land Titles, Advice to men, women, -and girls. Cost of House and outfit, What a labouring man can save,
with general description of California, its climate, soil, productions, and industries. 32 pages, post
free 6d. -
Dakota. —The Land of Promise. —How to go and what to do when you get there. Soil,climate, stock-
raising, production, land, homesteads, timber. A hint to intending Emigrants, letters from settlers. Post
free Gd. • '
Hontana. —.The heart of the Continent, its advantages for Stock Raising, Farming, Mining, and
other Industries, its Climate, Soil, Resources, Inspiring Scenery, Magnificent Mountains, beautiful and
fertile valleys, and opportunities for health and prosperity, with coloured map. Post free Gd.
Oregon. —The Pacific North Western Guide for Settlers and .Travellers in Washington Territory,
with a map and illustrations, Climate, Healthfulness, Productions, Education, Religion, Cities, and
Towns, Commerce, Suggestion to Emigrants, when and how to reach the country, the cost of living,
Ruling Prices, &c., &c. 82 pages, post free Gd.
, The Oreat \or (hern Pacific —with description of the soils and climates traversed by the
Northern Pacific Railroad, as to their adaptability to Agricultural production, for the information of those
seeking new homes and profitable investments, by a member of the Chicago Press, 82 pages, post
free Gd.
What Farmers say of their personal experience' in the Canadian \orth West.— -The
object of this pamphlet -(88 pages) is to place before the public an array of facts in as clear and concise
a manner as possible, to demonstrate the great advantages possessed by the Canadian North West for
intending settlers, with the names and addresses of Farmers, respecting the country. Post free Gd.
Dominion of Canada. —A useful handbook of information, including the provinces of Ontario,
Quebec, Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island, Manitoba, and the North West Territories,
and British Columbia, for the perusal of Capitalists, Agriculturalists, Mechanics, Artisans, and Domestic
Servants. Published with the approval of Her Majesty’s Secretary of State for the Colonies. 128 pages,
with map, Gd. .
The northwest. —Monthly (illustrated), the latest number contains Life and Travels in Oregon,
Western careers for Eastern men, shipping dressed beef, growth of Minneapolis, the timber culture
law, the slaughter of the buffalo, to English farmers, &c., &c. Post free 2d.
The Heart Of the American Continent— illustrated with choice engravings, with historical
and descriptive treatise for business men, Home-seekers and tourists, of the advantages, resources and
scenery of the Great West, stretching from the great lakes to the Rocky Mountains, embracing Illinois,
Missouri, lowa, Kansas, Nebraska, and Colorado. G 4 pages, price Gd., post free.
Landscape Wonders of America. —Hints to European and Pacific Ocean Travellers.
Seven ways ot crossing the American Continent. Farm and Meadow land from Utah into California.
Scenes and incidents of a trip through Mexico. Yellowstone National Park, San Francisco. Wild and
wondrous sights. 62 pages, illustrated with charming engravings. Price Gd., post free.
The Emigrant’s Friend. —Containing information and advice for persons intending to Emigrate
to the United States, with map, cloth cover. 233 pages. Price 1/G.
South Africa. —Handbook of Information of the Resources, Advantages, and Attractions, Soi',
Climate, Products, Trade and Wages. Price Gd.
“Texas Siftings.” —Mailed direct from Austin Texas to the London-Office, 334, Strand. This
is certainly the funniest American paper published, Illustrated with numerous Woodcuts each week. In
addition to the Humourous Articles some splendid productions of high-class American authors on
interesting topics appears in each, issue making it readable throughout. Post free 2d.
•* The Arkansan Traveller.” —A weekly eight page paper, mailed from America to the London
Office, 334, Strand, immediately after publication. Full of Original Humour, Literature, and General
Information* The Fargo (Dakota) Argus says: .“It has become almost impossible to open a paper from
any part of the Continent without encountering a quotation from the’ Arkansaw Traveller. It is the most
widely copied humorous journal in America.” Sufficient evidence of its immense popularity. Price 2d.
Subscription 10s. a year, post free.


£2O LAND ORDERS GIVEN TO
Full Paying Passengers proceeding direct from England to
Adelaide.
Fares from Twelve Guineas.
For Next Dates of Sailings, See this Week’s
“DOMESTIC HEL P,” Id.,
Published at 334, STRAND, LONDON, W.C.
HETHERINGTON’S
HANDBOOKS FOR EMIGRANTS, No. 9.
JUST PUBLISHED.
NEW GUINEA,
MIjE.USTUJI TJEJO,
Price Sixpence, Post Free.
THE ANNEXATION QUESTION.
DISCOVERY OF NEW GUINEA.
ITS INHABITANTS.
CLIMATE. VILLAGES. HOUSES.
CUSTOMS. RELIGION.
CULTIVATION. ANIMALS AND REPTILES.
SOIL. FORESTS.
PAPUANS. NATIVES.
PASTIME. DOMESTIC ARRANGEMENTS.
TRADE. CIVILIZATION.
MISSIONARIES
EXPLORATION OF NEW GUINEA.
Published at
“DOMESTIC HELP” OFFICE,
Ii»\oo\. W.C.
A New Guinea “Masher.”
