

The University of Adelaide.
ADDRESSES,
DELIVERED AT THE
LAYING OF THE FOUNDATION STONE,
8Y
HIS EXCELLENCY
SIR W. F. DRUMMOND JERYOIS, G.C.M.G., C.B.,
Governor of South Australia,
AND
Visitor of the University ;
BY
THE CHANCELLOR,
THE RIGHT REV. AUGUSTUS SHORT, D.D., OXON„
Lord Bishop of Adelaide ;
AND BY
THE MINISTER CONTROLLING EDUCATION,
HON.' THOMAS KING.
JULY 30, 1879.
WITH AN
ACCOUNT or THE CEREMONY AND DESCRIPTION OP THE BUILDING.




The University of Adelaide.
ADDRESSES.
DELIVERED AT THE
LAYING OF THE FOUNDATION STONE,
BY
HIS EXCELLENCY
SIR W. F. DRUMMOND JERVOIS, G.C.M.G., C.B.,
Governor of South Australia,
AND
Visitor op the University ;
BY
THE CHANCELLOR,
THE RIGHT REV. AUGUSTUS SHORT, D.D., OXON.,
Lord Bishop of Adelaide;
AND BY
THE MINISTER CONTROLLING EDUCATION,
HON. THOMAS KING.
CTTJL-Z- 30, 1879.
WITH AN
ACCOUNT OF THECEBEMONY AND DESCRIPTION OF THE BUILDING.


ROBERT KYFFIN THOMAS, PRINTER, GRENFELL STREET, ADELAIDE.


The University of Adelaide.
LAYING THE FOUNDATION STONE,
WEDNESDAY, 30TH JULY, 1879.
THE FOLLOWING WAS THE
PROGRAMME.
The Foundation Stone of the University Building on North
Terrace, Adelaide, will be laid by His Excellency the Governor
(Visitor of the University), on Wednesday, 30th July, 1879, at
3 P.m.
The Band of the Volunteers will play the National Anthem on
the arrival of the Governor, who will be received by the Chancellor,
Vice-Chancellor, Treasurer, Warden of the Senate, and Registrar,
and attended by them to the seats reserved for the Vice-Regal
Party.
The Chancellor will then deliver an Address and request His
Excellency to lay the Foundation Stone. The Contractors,
Messrs. Brown & Thompson, will present a trowel to the Governor,
who will lay the Stone, and deliver an Address.
The Honourable the Minister Controlling Education will then
address the Meeting.
After the conclusion of the Minister’s Address, His Excellency,
accompanied to the entrance by the Chancellor, Vice-Chancellor,
Treasurer, Warden of the Senate, and Registrar, will retire, the
Band playing the National Anthem.
Those who are to receive the Governor are requested to
assemble not later than 2'45 p.m.
All Graduates are requested to wear Academic dress, as
prescribed by the Regulations printed in the Calendar. Members
of the Council, and Professors who are not Graduates, are
requested to wear ordinary Academic robes.
By order of the Committee,
WILLIAM BARLOW,
Registrar.


PROCEEDINGS.
The subjoined account of the proceedings was published in the
South Australian Register of the 31st July: —
“With a degree of pomp and ceremony befitting the im-
portance of the occasion, the foundation-stone of The University
of Adelaide was laid by the Governor of South Australia,
Sir William Jervois, G.C.M.G., C. 8., on the afternoon of
Wednesday, July 30. The building when completed will be
worthy the high purpose to which it is devoted—worthy
also of a place among the many imposing structures that are
now springing up in Adelaide, and which mark the dawn
of a new era in our progress as a people as well as in our street
architecture. The design was prepared by Mr. McMinn, whose
skill and good taste are unquestionable, and over ,£25,000 is to
be spent on the building now to be erected, and which may here-
after be extended if necessary. The site on North-terrace a
little to the east of the new South Australian Institute—is one
admirably adapted to the purpose, being centrally situated, and
well calculated to display the fine proportions of the future halls
of learning.
The most complete arrangements were made for the due carrying
out of the ceremonial which was to mark the laying of the
memorial-stone. His Excellency the Governor had agreed to be
the principal actor on the occasion. Parliament adjourned over
Wednesday in order that its members might be present, and every
effort was made towards rendering the proceedings appropriate to
an event which the Chancellor of the University (the Lord Bishop
of Adelaide) aptly described as “ essentially unique in the history
of the colony.” The weather was beautifully fine, and about
2,000 persons assembled to witness the ceremony, which was fixed
to take place at 3 o’clock. The ground around the foundation-
stone had been fenced in, and a special platform had been erected
for the convenience of the invited guests. This, with the gallery


attached to it, accommodated about 700 ladies and gentlemen
who were arranged according to a plan marked on the invitation
tickets. A carpeted square immediately around the stone was
railed off for the convenience of His Excellency and party and of
those most intimately associated with the establishment of the
University or the building. Here was Sir Thos. Elder, and here
also were the Chancellor (the Bishop of Adelaide), the Vice-
Chancellor (Chief Justice Way), the Treasurer (Hon. SirH. Ayers,
K.C.M.G., M.L.C.), the Warden of the Senate (W. Gosse, Esq.,
M.D.), the Registrar of the University (W. Barlow, Esq., 8.A.), the
Minister Controlling Education (Hon. T. King), the Commissioner
of Police (G. Hamilton, Esq.), the architect (W. McMinn, Esq.),
and the builders (Messrs. Brown & Thompson). His Excellency
the Governor, with Lady Jervois, the Misses Jervois, the Aide-de-
camp (Lieut. Jervois), and the Private Secretary (T. Snow, Esq.,
M.A.), arrived soon after 3 o’clock, their advent being announced
by the Military Band playing the National Anthem. The
Queen’s representative was received by the Chancellor,
the Vice-Chancellor, the Treasurer of the University, the
Warden of the Senate, and the Registrar, and con-
ducted to the dais on which the ceremony of the day was
to take place. The scene at this moment was one rarely wit-
nessed in this colony, and one which is not likely soon to fade
from the memory of those who beheld it. The Governor wore
his Windsor uniform and the insignia of the Orders of the Bath
and St. Michael and St. George. The Chief Justice and many
members of the legal profession were present in their wigs and
gowns; and the foreign consuls, the members of former Govern-
ments, and the chief officers of the Civil Service Departments
were dressed in the elaborate uniforms which they wear on State
occasions. Conspicuous among those who occupied seats in the
gallery were the Colonel-Commandant of the Defence Force
(Colonel Downes) and the Deputy-Assistant Adjutant-General
(Major Godwin,) whose scarlet coats and nodding plumes of snowy
white must have pleased those who have a love for contrasts or
for the military element. The heads of the Police Department


were scarcely less noticeable in their light-blue uniforms and silver
lace. Perhaps the most gratifying feature of the spectacle to
which we are now referring was the very large number of Univer-
sity graduates, who of course donned the gowns and hoods of the
Universities at which their literary or scientific honours were won.
The distinguishing hoods were a source of speculation to the
uninitiated during the hour and a half occupied by the speeches.
Among the many University men who surrounded the Chancellor,
and some of whose robes almost vied with his own, were the Pro-
fessors of the Adelaide University, clergymen and ministers of
several denominations, heads of collegiate institutions, doctors,
lawyers, mayors in their robes, and indeed such an effective
display of what is ironically termed “ man millinery” that mem-
bers of the Legislature were for the time being almost unnoticed,
and even the dresses of the ladies paled ineffectually, and could
by no means be said to be a specialty on the occasion. Standing
outside the enclosure, with bayonets fixed and eyes front, was a
guard of honour, composed of the Norwood and Hindmarsh
Companies of volunteers, under the command of Lieutenant
Waddell; and a detachment of volunteer cavalry under Captain
Hemmingway acted as the Governor’s escort. Waiting on North-
terrace was a long line of carriages, and peering down anxiously
on the crowd around the foundation-stone was a photographer,
with his camera ready to reproduce and perpetuate the picture
then before him. A sense of gratitude forbids our omitting to
mention that the representatives of the Press were most carefully
protected from “outside pressure” by a little enclosure on the
platform specially railed off for their benefit.
The foundation-stone is of marble, and rests on a base of
Sydney freestone. It bears the following words, the letters being
cut out and then filled in with lead“ Governor Sir W. F. D.
Jervois, G.C.M.G., C. 8., laid this stone on the thirtieth day of
July, 1879.” There were placed in a glass jar under the stone
copies of the day’s Register and Advertiser, a University calendar
for the year, certain coins of the realm, and a parchment bearing
the following inscription


"Hapitem June auspiralem
sosuft
Culielmuss Eraser Jirummonif Jcruois
®i ©rbitte Jb. Si. fKtcfjaelis et ffiwrgit
©guru SJuratus
Dfemgue Salnei
Comes
[lProbinciae Juic
Australiae totius Kegtimt australi
Hegnante Victoria
annum XIUHEm
ISI« Halenttas Augustas
anno salutis fJUSCffiCIIXXIX
®iro ISeberenHissimo augnsto Sflort
©pfscopo atelaieusi
©nibersitatis Cancellario.”
When the viceregal party had been conducted to their seats on
the platform,
The Chancellor delivered the following address:—
CHANCELLOR’S ADDRESS.
“ May it please Your Excellency,
“ Honourable Gentlemen of the Legislative Council,
“ Gentlemen of the House of Assembly,
u Members of the Council and Senate of the University.
“ The laying the first stone of the University Buildings on this
central site in the City of Adelaide is an event essentially unique
in the history of the Colony. It marks an epoch in its life,
when its Material Prosperity being assured, its Social organization
completed, and Political System firmly established, the demand
has arisen for higher Mental Cultivation through instruction in
scientific knowledge, and the varied resources of Language and
Literature.
“ -A ll University implies Cyclopedic Learning as well as Teach-
ing- To-day, therefore, in laying the first stone of a portion of
the University Buildings, we must bear in mind that the ever


widening circle of Science, and the increasing stores of a world-
wide Literature, will require a yet larger home ; where Professors
of manifold learning may teach their students, and the Masters
of Technical Art apply its principles for the instruction of the
young. A Library also and a Museum are essential to the
educational efficiency of our University.
“ Your Excellency’s presence to-day as Visitor, and your laying
the Foundation Stone will sufficiently mark the date at which the
University acquired a “ local habitation” in addition to a name.
Nor is this wholly unimportant; for historians have recorded
how in the reign of our Elizabeth a literary warfare sprang up
between those famous Universities Oxford and Cambridge, and
raged lor many years, on the question of priority of existence .
While some friends of Cambridge managed to discover that the
first stone of their University was laid in the 173rd year after the
Flood, the champions of Oxford (of whom the Historian Camden
was the chief) claimed only a more modest antiquity, and referred
to Gildas, the Monk of Bangor, affirming the existence of schools,
and erudite men at Oxford in the fifth and sixth centuries of our
era. The date of Your Excellency’s Government will preclude
any such dispute with respect to the priority of the sister Univer-
sities of Sydney and Melbourne. It is my good fortune as Chan-
cellor, and a Graduate of Oxford, to see around me numerous
representatives of Cambridge as well as of my own University,
together with some from Dublin, Edinburgh, Glasgow, Aberdeen,
and London. Nor are there wanting others from the renowned
seats of learning in the German Empire —Jena, Gottingen, and
Munich; as well as from Toronto in Canada.
“ A brief account of the steps by which we have arrived at this
stage of our University life may not be out of place on this
occasion, and not without value to some future annalist of the
Colony. . ,
“ In the year 1859 our Educational Institutions had attained to
such degree of efficiency and stableness, as to call for some public
recognition of their value. The sons of those by whom the
Colony had been founded, and who had adopted it as their home,
looked beyond the Rudiments of Education to a course of Study
and Instruction, which would enable them to enter into the Pro-
fessions of Law and Medicine. Your predecessor, Sir Richard
Graves Mac Donnell, accordingly thought that by Public Compe-
titive Examinations and the Honours so awarded, a great impetus
would be given to a higher mental cultivation among our colonial
youth. On September 7th, in that year, by Proclamation he
established a Board for that purpose. Of the thirty-one members
composing it, nine only are still resident in the Colony, and three
members of the present Council—myself as Chancellor; Dr.
Gosse, the Warden of the Senate; and Mr. Charles Todd, C.M.G.


“ The first Public Examination was held on Tuesday, March
20th, iB6O, in the subjects which, with more of scientific detail,
now form our University Course of Study and Examination.
The names of the successful competitors, together with the
number of their marks, were published in the Gazette; and thus
the honour due to intellectual self-improvement was awarded
by the highest officers of our State —the Governor himself, the
Chief Judge Sir C. Cooper, and the late Sir R. D. Hanson having
taken part in the Examinations. In 1862 I observe the name
of John Warren Bakewell, now a member of the Council, one of
four boys who at the age of fifteen obtained Second Class
Honours.
“ Here, then, I think we trace the germ of that system of
Education, which has culminated in the University, for which we
are to-day commencing a building suitable for carrying on a more
complete system of teaching and examination.
“ A further step in this direction was taken by the Governors
of the Institute. Under their Act of 1863 they appointed
Examiners for boys of not less than fifteen years of age “in all
the subjects prescribed by the Royal College of Surgeons” in
London for the Examination preliminary to being admitted
Students in the Profession. Certificates that a Boy had passed
this Examination satisfactorily, published in the _ Gazette, were
aceepted in lieu of the above Preliminary Examination.
“ In 1874 the Governors wisely added an Examination for
Honours, the subjects being the Classics, Mathematics, Modem
Languages, Literature, and History, as well as the Natural
Sciences; thus preparing the way for the Examinations of our
University, whether Primary, or for Matriculation, and Honours.
Thus the Institute, with much credit to itself, forwarded the
higher education of our young Colonists.
.Nor ought I to omit the institution of Union College, for the
education of young Ministers, as a link in the chain which binds
the present University with past efforts for a more advanced
Intellectual Culture. The offer of a large endowment for this
College, limited as it was in its range of studies, and closely
connected with one portion only of the Christian community,
seems to have suggested to the friends of the large-hearted donor
the superior advantage to the Colony of founding, with the help
of others and of the State, a University worthy of its “ future.
In 1872 an Association had been formed to further this project,
and a Bill drafted in 1873 was finally assented to November 6,
1874. The Council was immediately appointed, and named a
Committee to prepare a scheme for Professorships, Course of
Studies, Terms, &c. The work was diligently prosecuted, the
Council meeting at short intervals.


“ Meanwhile the noble munificence of Walter Watson Hughes
was emulated by Sir Thomas Elder, whom we welcome to-day as
co-founder with his Scottish compatriot. The Hughes and Elder
Professorships are indeed the backbone of our University, which
for its progressive development awaits only the addition of able
Professors in different lines of knowledge. It would be unjust to
the House of Assembly, the Legislative Council, and to the
Government, if I failed in this connexion to recognize the liberal
spirit in which they met the munificent endowments of Messrs.
Hughes and Elder. A grant of 50,000 acres of land, with an
annual subsidy equal to five per cent, interest on the sum given
by those gentlemen and all other moneys invested in the same
Trusts, marks the public feeling of grateful admiration for these
great private benefactions.
“ Thus endowed and organized, our University under its present
four Professors began its work—not without much difficulty from
the want of suitable Lecture Rooms and repositories for Scientific
Apparatus and Library. In its present apartments it is domiciled
as a Lodger, and earnestly therefore looks for a Home.
“ When the Senate was inaugurated, and ad eundem Degrees
conferred on the graduates of British and Foreign Universities,
the courtesy of the Mayor and Corporation supplied our need of
a Theatre for the purpose by allowing the use of their noble Hall.
That crowded assembly demonstrated the need of a like future
Senate House for the purposes of Examination or conferring
Degrees on our own Students, or that we may so honour distin-
guished strangers. It is then for the commencement of such a
pile of University Buildings that I now in the name of the
Council and Senate request Your Excellency to lay the first stone.
I trust the rising generation will so profit by this Institution, that
there will be no difficulty in carrying on to completion a work so
necessary for the higher interests and character of the Colony.
“ In the Providence of God I was permitted thirty years ago to
lay the Foundation Stone of the Collegiate School of St. Peter.
My life and strength have been prolonged to take part as Chan-
cellor in the inauguration, on this noble site, of the Buildings of
the University of Adelaide.
“ They will long stand, I pray, as a monument of the generous
desire on the part of the Colonists for self-cultivation, of private
munificence, public liberality, and Legislative wisdom. We
hope thus to transmit to future generations the inestimable gifts of
sound Literary and Scientific Culture, which we brought with us
from our Mother Country. These are the bases of Her Imperial
greatness, being the guarantees of Her Political and Religious
Freedom. These are the sources of that enlightened spontaneous
Loyalty which binds the hearts of Englishmen towards the land
and Constitution of their Fathers, and towards each other as free


citizens of a vast confederated Empire. In thankfulness to
Providence for the privileges we thus enjoy, let us invoke the
blessing of the Almighty on the work to which we have now set
our hand by establishing this University; and may Her Gracious
Majesty ere long put the top stone on our design by granting us
all the privileges conferred by Her Royal Charter.”
GOVERNOR’S ADDRESS.
“ Mr. Chancellor,
“ Ladies and Gentlemen,
“ I feel some difficulty in addressing you on the present occasion,
for the subject of University education has been so often dwelt
upon in public by persons far abler and more experienced than
myself, and the ground has been trodden and retrodden in so
many reports and speeches, that it is scarcely possible for me to
open up any fresh matter for observation. I feel this all the more
from having to follow the Chancellor, himself a most distinguished
member of the University of Oxford, who possesses the highest
classical attainments, and who, ever since he has been in this
colony, has taken an enthusiastic interest in the promotion of
education. (Applause.) I might touch upon the history of the
venerable Universities of Europe, but I am warned by the erudite
controversies to which the Chancellor has referred not to enter
upon such debatable ground. Avoiding these disputes, I might
relate how the earlier Universities were to a great extent conducted
for theological purposes and under an ecclesiastical r€%ime, and
how, notwithstanding the changes that occurred during the lapse
of centuries at our own principal seats of learning, it is, compara-
tively speaking, but lately that they have fairly entered the track
indicated by the altered requirements of our country and our
times. I might go on to show how the Universities of the United
Kingdom have sent forth into the world many of their sons as
rulers of mankind, and many more to the learned professions
and other callings requiring for their due exercise the full develop-
ment of the mental faculties. It would be interesting to dwell on
these and a multitude of other matters of a similar character, but
time will not permit of so comprehensive a review, and I believe
that I shall better employ the few minutes at my disposal on the
present occasion by referring to the immediate influence which the
establishment of the University of Adelaide will have upon the
future of South Australia. (Cheers.)
“ The Chancellor, in his eloquent address, has given us a com-
pendious stretch of its origin and of its operations up to the
present time. I heartily share the admiration which he has


expressed for the noble liberality of Mr. Hughes and Sir Thomas
Elder, whom I am glad to see in front of me —the founders of the
University—and for the wise bounty of the Legislature in so
magnificently endowing it. And I congratulate the Council, the
Senate, the Professors, and the Students on the near approach of
the time when the University will have a home of its own, and
will no longer dwell in lodgings. I may say I have carefully
examined the plans of the building, and it appears to me that the
design is excellent, both as regards internal arrangement and
architecture. It is calculated to form part of a larger structure
when the increasing requirements of future years necessitate an
extension of room, and it will be an ornament to the City of
Adelaide. . . . .
« I am aware that some people consider that this University is
a costly luxury, and it is said by them that the progress which has
been made up to the present time is altogether incommensurate
with the outlay which is incurred upon the institution. It would,
however, in my judgment, be a great mistake, at this early stage
of its history, to judge of the advantages to be derived from it
merely by the results obtained up to the present time. (Hear,
hear.) Rome was not built in a day, and the Universities of the
United Kingdom and on the Continent of Europe, which origi-
nated with small beginnings, only gradually grew to their present
grand proportions. In the University of Paris, the mother of
the Universities of the world, although the faculty of Theology
was created in 1257, it was not until fourteen years later that a
faculty of Law was there established, and there was no faculty of
Medicine until 1275. The University of Adelaide has as yet
only been three years in operation, and I have no doubt but
that, when the advantages of ‘higher education’ are more
thoroughly understood, the number of students will be largely
increased
“ But then, it may be said, ‘ Why not send your sons who want
a University education to Europe, or to Sydney, or to Melbourne? ’
I reply that, not to mention that there is a great probability that
in most cases the services of those educated elsewhere would be
lost to this community, it must be a great inconvenience, to say
the least, to the 'majority of people, to send their sons —and, I
would add, their daughters—away from the colony—(Hear, hear)
and those who cannot be so sent would thus be altogether
deprived of the means of higher education. It appears to me
that the colony was bound sooner or later to provide for the wants
of persons wishing for something beyond the range of ordinary
school-teaching—whether in the way of general culture or with a
view to some particular career. Any institution with this object
would be obliged to establish some definite standard for its
students to aim at and to reward attainment of this standard by


conferring a degree. As in other countries and colonies, the
University, by its lectures, its examinations, its_ degrees, and
its certificates, will be the means of giving a higher standard
for education, supply an independent and efficient Board of
Examiners to test the work of schools, and tend to engender
and to develop a taste for literature and learning throughout
the community. It will tell on the whole character of intel-
lectual training in the province and make it self-contained, as it
were, in its educational machinery. Admirable primary schools
have been established by the State; there are many excellent
secondary schools —St. Peter’s Collegiate School, Prince Alfred
College, St. Aloysius’ College ; and many good private schools;
but without the University the means of ‘ higher education ’
would be wanting. There would be no ‘crowning of the educational
edifice.’ We have the prededent of the Melbourne University as
a ground for anticipating a great increase of usefulness, both direct
and indirect, so soon as the institution is brought into working
relations with the professions.
“On every ground, I feel sure that this University will be of
immense advantage, and that not only by raising the standard of
education, but as tending directly to advance the prosperity of the
community. And, doubtless, our material interests must form a
principal object of our attention in this struggling world._ But
beyond the influence of education on our fortunes, there is the
advantage and charm of learning for its own sake.
“ I am reminded of some stanzas written by Macaulay, when,
fresh from the disappointment of his defeat at Edinburgh, he
turned his thoughts from the troubled sea of politics to the peaceful
field of literature. He pictured himself as an infant in his cradle,
before whom passed those fairies whom poets delight to imagine
as pouring on us mortals their varied gifts; so the queens of
wealth, power, fashion, and many others passed him scornfully by,
until at length one came representing the world of thought and
learning, and in tender words, while comforting him for the
neglect of her haughty sisters, addressed him thus :
‘ There are who, while to vulgar eyes they seem
Gf all my bounties largely to partake,
Of me as of some rival’s handmaid deem,
And court me but for gain’s, power’s, fashion’s sake.
To such, though deep their lore, though wide their fame,
Shall my great mysteries be all unknown ;
But thou, through good and evil, praise and blame,
Wilt not thou love me for myself alone ?
Yes ; thou wilt love me with exceeding love ;
And I will tenfold all that love repay :
Still smiling, though the tender may reprove,
Still faithful, though the trusted may betray.


Thus, when on restless night dawns cheerless morrow,
When weary soul and wasting body pine,
Thine am I still, in danger, sickness, sorrow,
In conflict, obloquy, want, exile, thine.’
“ Perhaps, however, these sentiments may be regarded by many
as scarcely representing a practical view of the object of learning,
and no doubt it is necessary in this sublunary world to remember
that most people are dependent on their education for their main-
tenance and for their success in life. The standard of learning
to be aimed at must be dependent on circumstances personal to
each individual, and the course of study through which he passes
should have reference to the calling of life for which he is likely
to be destined; and it would be idle to deny that modem edu-
cation gives special prominence to the material benefits of study,
and constantly tends to eliminate subjects which seem to have no
direct bearing on the future profession and advancement of the
student. To such utilitarian views is due the enquiry of late
years as to the advantage and disadvantage of retaining several
subjects of school and University education formerly accepted
without question.
“ I feel that I cannot let this occasion pass without touching,
as a plain man may, on the hotly-contested question of the
real bearing and value of the study of classical languages as
a means of education at this'present time. Far from joining
without hesitation in the cry which has of late years become
so loud, ‘What is the good of Latin and Greek?’ I think
it but reasonable to enquire of what educational use they have
been up to a recent epoch, and what are the circumstances
which have reduced them to the position of alternative instead of
necessary elements of culture. It is an old maxim that time is
a shrewd judge ; and another, that common consent is hardly to
be gainsaid j so that when we find the thought of former genera-
tions of Englishmen bowing down without cavil to Latin, if not to
Greek, we may be certain that those Englishmen had reason for
their subservience. And this reason is not far to seek. It is
matter of history that when the civilization of Rome and Gaul,
long since in process of decay, had finally succumbed, as much to
the impracticable nature of barbarian races, languages, and cus-
toms as to the direct influence of barbarian conquest, and when
for these reasons the Latin tongue had ceased for ever to be the
language _ of the common people, certain favoured retreats pre-
served with more or less success the literature which contained all
that the civilized world, now for the time defunct, had known,
and still taught the speech which enshrined the Christian religion
and the civil law. Thus, when the waters had settled, and feudal
kings and counts were driven by the necessities of administration
to provide a State system for which no precedent was offered by


the traditions of their rude and migratory ancestors, it was from
the gates of the convent and from the lips of monks that the new
order came to replace the old, and the precepts they uttered were
couched in the ancient language.
“ Indeed, setting apart all reverence for authority, it was im-
possible amid a babel of tongues all alike destitute of a written
literature that the result should have been otherwise. It was in-
dispensable to political exigencies that some medium of mutual
intelligence between the powers of the time should exist, and Latin
served precisely to fill this place, a strong analogy existing between
its employment in the politics of a former day and the use of
French by the Courts of Europe in modern times. Even more
indispensable to right government at that time was a State religion.
The liturgy and ceremonial of the Church, its Bible, its creeds,
its commentaries—all alike were in the Roman tongue. Nor
could the State exist without some system of law, and the juris-
prudence of those times was comprised in the canon, and latterly
also in the civil law. Both alike were in Latin. As the teachings
of heathen philosophers and the discoveries of heathen science
were again brought to light at the revival of learning, they, too,
were translated or commented on, as their case required, in what
had now become the literary language of Europe. So, taking a
step towards our own times, we find English sages down to Newton
committing their best thoughts to a Latin dress, and queens and
titled ladies communicating freely with their councillors or tutors
in tolerable Latinity.
“ During all the time, notwithstanding, the languages of
modern Europe were fast asserting themselves, and compiling
literatures of their own; the distribution of property and
spread of intelligence combined with the confirmation of civic
rights and duties to render it necessary that the law should run in
the vulgar tongue, and French fairly shouldered its parent out of
its place as the diplomatic language. Thus were the main parts
of its occupation gone; but the Universities fostered it as if it had
not been growing cold in their arms. Still, by degrees, the defen-
ders of the classics have been compelled to change their front, and
to rest their case at the present time mainly on their extraordinary
value as an implement of education, and on the unparalleled
excellence of the literature they contain, rather than on any
immediate benefit to be derived, as erst, from their study.
“ In regard to the latter point I am inclined to believe that there is
justice in the view that, to benefit to the fullest extent by a literature,
it is necessary to know thoroughly the language in which that litera-
ture is contained. I admit, further, that in the field of letters and
criticism of the present day, the author or reviewer who has but little
knowledge of the classical languages will deal but imperfectly with
portions of the wide range of subjects on which he may be called to


enter. But I maintain, as to the former statement —to wit, that there
is a special value of Latin and Greek as an instrument of education
—that the time for such an assertion is past. I conscientiously
believe that two distinct alternatives for the classical course may
at the present day be found in the study of the English language
and literature, and of the three leading tongues of Europe, to say
nothing of the others. Ido not believe that any course of
education which does not include either the classics or
modern literature can claim to be complete. Mathematics,
science, even law, however advanced the student of any of these,
he will suffer throughout his life from the narrowing influence of
a special subject, untempered by knowledge of what the best men
of ancient times or his own have done and written, said and
sung; nay, he will be, as it were, maimed and imperfect, for he
will—if not one of those glorious exceptions who but prove the
rule —lack the gift of fully expressing himself in words and
writing, and the man is twice a man who can do one, or, better,
both. All I wish to point out is, that there are now more means
than one of ensuring this gift to the student, other routes beside
the old classical highway; and that the surest method of
obtaining a community leavened with liberal influences is to offer
alternative courses, from which each man may choose to suit his
own bent, and, in one way or another, combine some degree of
general culture with whatever special subject he makes up his
mind to follow.
“ It must, I think, be admitted that the old Universities of
Oxford and Cambridge, where many of the undergraduates are
independent of a profession, cannot be taken as complete models
for the University of a young country like this, where the success
of students in life must be dependent on their applying all their
energies to their practical work of their callings, whatever those
callings may be. Some may be engineers, some lawyers, some
doctors, some clergymen, some schoolmasters, some commercial
men, some in other lines of life; and Latin and Greek will, no
doubt, be necessary to some of these. (I beg leave, however, to
bargain that they should be taught these languages more in the
manner in which we learn our own language, i.e., through the eye
and ear, and not by a long coui se of grammar and torment —
(laughter)—to which I remember being subjected in my school
days). But the engineer, whether he is to be a railway engineer, a
mining engineer, or a mechanical engineer, whether he learns
classics or not, and in addition to a knowledge of mathe-
matics, must be instructed in the practical engineering
science connected with the branch of the profession which he
intends to follow. I may here remark that the present staff
of the University does not provide for this kind of instruction,
but this deficiency I trust will ere long be supplied. The lawyer


must obviously study law in its various branches, and probably
some provision should be made at no distant date for supplying
in the University a general, as distinguished from the merely
technical, professional training of law students. As regards
gentlemen intended for the medical profession, it is perhaps better
that they should complete their education in the medical schools
and great hospitals of Europe. But there appears to be no
reason why the Adelaide Hospital and this University should
not be utilized for giving, at all events, preliminary training to
medical students. (Hear, hear.)
“ Whilst considering the nature of the education requisite for the
several professions, it appears to me that one of the most pressing
wants, and one that may be easily supplied to a considerable
extent in this University, relates to subjects of practical science
connected with agriculture, which is of such enormous importance
to the material interests of this colony. It should ever be borne
in mind that the chief business of the colonists of South
Australia must be to act in obedience to the command which was
originally given to Adam —to ‘ replenish the earth and subdue it.’
I take it that this command is as binding in South Australia as it
was in the Garden of Eden. But although you are obeying the
second part of the injunction, you are disobeying the first. You
are subduing the earth with a vengeance —(laughter)—but you are
doing nothing to replenish it. In the southern part of this colony
wheat crops have been raised for twenty-five or thirty consecutive
years, and the land so treated refuses to ‘yield her increase.’
“ This practice of taking the fructifying elements out of the
ground and neither giving it rest nor restoring to it the chemical
conditons requisite to render it productive is, I am told, going on
now in other parts of the colony, and if no improvement takes
place in the treatment of the soil, South Australia, instead of
being—as I hold it is capable of being—one of the most fruitful
regions, may be in the course of another generation, comparatively
speaking, deserted. Let me on the other hand point out what
will be the effect of good harvests. Take the prospects of this
season. The number of acres sown with wheat this year is nearly
a million and a half, and taking the yield at ten bushels per acre
—in 1870, in 1872, in 1874, and in 1875 it was nearly twelve
bushels per acre—there would be, after deducting 3,200,000
bushels for food and seed, nearly 12,000,000 bushels, or 300,000
tons, available for export. lam informed that the average price
of wheat has never been so low for nearly a hundred years it
has been for the last twelve months in England. Taking the price
this year at ss. per bushel, not by any means an extravagant estimate
—especially if we take into account recent news respecting the
failure of the French harvest, the badness of the English harvest,
and the indifferent yield in Canada and the United States—the


value of the wheat available for export from South Australia will
be nearly If hereafter, by improved farming, an
addition of only two bushels per acre were obtained, this figure
would be increased by about ,£700,000. Think of the advantages
to the whole of this community if these anticipations be realized.
Every species of labour will be in full demand, merchants and
shopkeepers will obtain an increase of business, additional ships
will be employed, the returns from railways will be greatly
enhanced, and every interest will be thriving in consequence of
the large yield of wheat. But then, it may be remarked, that this
may be an exceptional year, and so perhaps it may be. I know
that this country is to a great extent dependent on rains for its
fruitful seasons, but the fact that the rainfall sometimes fails is all
the greater reason why the agriculturalist should avail himself of
all the information that science can afford to assist him in his
operations, and so render himself independent as far as he
possibly can of the casualties incident to bad seasons.
“ It is often said that in South Australia practical agriculturists
will always be the best farmers, and in this statement, rightly
understood, I for one concur. But the word ‘ practical,’ as
applied to agriculture, does not imply that the pursuit of the
farmer, any more than that of any other profession, can be properly
conducted in a tentative and empirical manner, without reference
to scientific principles. Scientific action in any profession implies
a thorough knowledge of the principles of the profession. Action
without science is action in ignorance of such principles. Many
think that the only practical man is one who works in field or
factory, and that a scientific man is one who only works in a
laboratory. But the man who practises should have a knowledge
of science, and the man of science should have a knowledge of
practice, and the two together form the real ‘ practical' man.
“ A common objection here to scientific instruction in matters
relating to agriculture is, that it demands an outlay in labour
which, in this country, will not pay. But is not this a foregone
and ill-reasoned conclusion ? In unscientific farming much labour
and capital and time are often wasted, because the farmer knows
not whether the soil, the plant, the climate, the labour applied to
the ground, or the treatment of the plant, are what they should
be ; or whether some readily accessible fertilizer might not have
greatly increased the yield; or whether some other cultivation
might not have proved more remunerative ; or whether drainage
or irrigation might not have added to the results obtained.
Besides, and often, a larger expenditure in labour creates a large
proportionate profit.
“ Science, moreover, will directly and surely lead to
the introduction of new cultivations. One cultivation pre-
pares the land for another, and a farmer with an intelligent


knowledge of the ‘ reasons why ’ of his calling will ever be open
to some useful discovery as to how he may benefit by a change of
productions. Thus science learns as well as teaches. This
colony possesses rich and extensive resources of soil and climate,
which, as yet, have not (been turned to account. From all I can
leam South Australia is unsurpassed, if not unequalled, in its
capacity for dry-climate-soil productions. As pointed out
by Mr. Davenport, to whom the colony owes a debt of
gratitude for the interest he takes in agricultural matters,
woody plants, such as the vine, the almond, the olive, the mul-
berry, and the prune, besides many others which need much heat
and but little water to yield their fruits in perfection, are specially
adapted for cultivation in this colony. They are the sources of
wealth to the inhabitants of the South of France, of Spain and
Portugal, of Italy and Greece, of Palestine and Persia, and why
not of South Australia too ?
“ Further, with regard to the application of science
to the wants of this country, a knowledge of geology is of
infinite importance for the finding of water, and thus render-
ing it practicable to turn to good account for pasture and agricul-
ture many parts of the colony which are at present lying waste.
A great portion of the rainfall percolates into the ground, and is
no doubt stored up at various distances below the surface, and an
acquaintance with geology is necessary in order to tap these sources
of supply.
“ I may mention an instance with which I myself had to
deal, and in which a knowledge of the geological strata of a
certain district in England enabled me to obtain a continuous and
ample supply of excellent fresh water from under the bottom of
the sea. Amongst the many works of fortification which I had
the honour of building during the long period of my service in the
War Office are two great forts guarding the entrance to Spithead,
and nearly midway between the coast of Hampshire and the Isle
of Wight, where there is an arm of the sea about five miles broad.
The works are constructed in a depth of about twenty feet of
water. It was out of the question to provide within the forts tanks
large enough to hold sufficient water for their garrisons, and one
plan proposed was to lay down pipes along the bottom of the sea,
through which to furnish a supply of water from the land. But
there were several objections to this plan, and I started the idea
that fresh water might be obtained within the forts by boring.
Accordingly, I obtained ffrom the Geological Department in
London sections showing the strata both on the Hampshire side
and on the Isle of Wight side of Spithead. The lines of strata
thus obtained were produced in about a continuation of their dip,
and thus an approximate geological section was made of the space
under the waters of Spithead. After considering the conditions


of the case, I felt almost sure of procuring fresh water at a depth of
not more than 800 feet. The result was that we obtained an ample
and continuous supply after boring to a depth of about 600 feet. It
was regarded by many almost as a piece of conjuring when we
found ourselves able to pump fresh water out of the sea, the fact
being, however, that—taking the geological strata to be correctly
shown, and providing carefully for keeping watertight the cylinders
and pipes sunk within the works —there was no more difficulty in
obaining fresh water through the sea than there would have been
under similar conditions on dry land. (Applause.)
“ I might go on to show the value of the application of science
in other matters relating to the development of the resources of
the country, but it is time that I should pass on. I believe that this
University may be of incalculable service to the country in the
dissemination of scientific knowledge on such matters as those to
which I have referred. The Government have, lam glad to say,
taken up the question of affording some instruction in agriculture
by establishing experimental farms. Other measures have been
under discussion, and the Agricultural and Horticultural Society
have made some proposals well worthy of consideration. I venture
to think that, apart from any plan the State may adopt with respect
to instruction in the cultivation of the soil, all the lecturing and
indoor experimental and other work might be carried out in the
University, where all the necessary lecture-rooms, laboratories,
and other appliances are already provided for in the building now
commenced. Some additional staff would of course be required
for the purpose, but the expense of this would be a trifle when
compared with that of creating a new institution. (Hear, hear.)
Admirable agricultural colleges exist in England and America, and
we may, no doubt, gain most valuable information by a study of
their proceedings; but it appears to be desirable to utilize the
machinery which is already to hand rather than create a new in-
stitution on however excellent a model. British people, to tell the
truth, are somewhat prone to imitate other countries in certain
kinds of matters, and possibly we may be liable to this national
failing. I recollect that after the French victories over the Aus-
trians in 1859, as the officers of the French staff had their trousers
covered with leather from inside the knee and downwards, the
rriounted officers of the British army were all directed to send
their trousers to their tailors to be similarly treated. (Laughter.)
Well, in 1870, the Germans beat the French, and as the German
cavalry wore boots over their trousers, all the mounted officers
of the British army received an order to cut the leather off their
trousers and tuck them bodily into their boots. (Loud laughter.)
“ We shall do well, then, not to let our admiration for the in-
stitutions of other people lead us to imitate them, without enquir-
ing whether what is most suitable for them is equally suitable for


us, or whether the same necessity exists in our case as did in theirs-
We shall do well to guard ourselves against a tendency—winch 1
know from experience to be very prevalent m England—to create,
whenever any fresh work is required to be done for the public, a
new department at a considerable expense, instead of supplying
the want by a small additional expenditure on an organization a -
ready in existence, and capable, with such addition, of doing the
business thoroughly. But such points as these are, after all, com-
paratively matters of detail, which may be trusted ultimately to
assume the most practicable form. That which weighs most wit
me, and induces me to form the most favourable auguries lor the
future, is the forwardness exhibited by some private individua s,
and by the State itself, in the promotion of such scientific objects
as I have alluded to. (Hear, hear.) I say that that forwardness is
most encouraging, and that no estimate of the objects it has in
view can be too high. When we reflect on the achievements ot
science during the last forty years, we may, I think, be excused tor
being sanguine as to the probable results of well-directed scientific
action on the future of this country. It is to the extraordinary
advances made by science in the art of navigation and ship con-
struction that we owe the ever-increasing facility with which we
can now pass from Australia to the old country and to all parts ot
the world. It was but little more than forty years ago when
Dr Lardner, one of the most eminent authorities of the day,
demonstrated, as he thought, to an attentive and admiring audience
the impossibility of a steamship ever crossing the Atlantic. (Hear
and laughter.) Now you can run across from Liverpool
to New York in less than eight days. In the year 1841
I was exactly 123 days going from the Thames to
Table Bay at the Cape. The voyage is now done in three
weeks. Look at what has been effected m regard to railways and
telegraphs. Look at what you yourselves have done in spanning
this continent with a telegraphic wire. (Hear, hear.) These are
but single instances of the innumerable triumphs of science but
they serve to point the conclusion that the material prosperity of
this country may be immensely advanced by an enlightened regard
to scientific education. , . , Q
“But I would not for a moment be supposed to be
advocating one branch of knowledge to the disparage-
ment or the exclusion of others, or to be desirous that our
University should afford greater advantages to the student ot
natural science than she does to the student of law or of medicine,
or to candidates for other professions. Nor, again, do I wish to
seem unmindful of what I have said already as to the adyisabil ty
of combining a certain degree of general culture with that special
branch of study which each individual makes his own. The love
of literature for its own sake, whether contained in ancient or in


modern languages, or in the unsurpassed treasures of our native
tongue, spreads and intensifies concurrently with educational
progress, and is a true characteristic of an advancing civilization.
So, too, the fine arts in all their departments, and music, to which
time forbids me to make more than this passing reference, are
agents of inestimable value in elevating and refining our daily
life.
“ One cannot too strongly insist on the point, that the State,
while making due provision for the spread of intelligence regard-
ing matters which pertain to the material developement of the
country’s resources, should at the same time keep in view the
increase of that cultivation of the mind which should keep pace
with the aggrandizement of the community and embellish the
acquisition of wealth. The State, as the representative of the
whole community, has a vital interest in the education of every
one of its members, and I rejoice to say that it is undertaking the
task with every prospect of a successful issue. Posterity will be
grateful to the legislators of this period that they have on the one
hand established primary schools, and on the other have so wisely
supplemented the private gifts which led to the foundation of this
institution. (Cheers.) Although I cannot anticipate the realiza-
tion of the idea of a perfect humanity, as shadowed forth in the
Republic of Plato, I can look forward to the day when, the in-
fluence of education having pervaded all classes of the community,
we shall no longer see the artisan quarrel with the manufacturer,
the farmer with the labourer, but capitalists and those who are
paid by them will arrive at a better understanding, and by mutual
forbearance consult each other’s interest, to the common advan-
tage of themselves and the whole community. (Applause.) And,
whilst there is in the old countries an aristocracy in great part
arising from birth or wealth, I can picture to myself, in these new
and far-distant lands, an aristocracy whose genealogy will date
from those who best knew how to avail themselves of their educa-
tional advantages—an aristocracy springing from the cultivation
of the mind.” (Cheers.)
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION’S ADDRESS.
“ May it please Your Excellency,
“Ladies and Gentlemen,
“ It is with feelings of no ordinary pleasure that, as the Minis-
terial head of the Education Department, I take part in the
proceedings connected with the laying of the foundation-stone of
the Adelaide University. This is one of those occasions the full
significance of which can-scarcely be estimated at the present


time. Those here to-day witness one of the initiatory stages of
a movement which cannot fail to have a considerable effect on
the future of the colony, and which we may be quite sure will be
looked back upon as an event or great moment when the extent
and character of its varied influences are clearly seen and fully
appreciated. . .
“ Although the position I occupy might seem to justify the
anticipation that I should enlarge on educational matters, as they
immediately concern my department, I have come to the con-
clusion that to do anything of the sort would be out of place, as
well as be the means of unnecessarily protracting these pro-
ceedings. By the establishment of the University we give the
educational system of the colony a completeness and finish
which it would otherwise lack. As South Australians I think we
may fairly take credit to ourselves for what we have done in the
way of providing education for the people. Expense has not
been spared, and if the child of every man, poor as he may be,
is not instructed, the fault will not rest with the State. It does
all it can, and more perhaps than some may think the State ought
to do; but in a matter so vitally affecting ,the interests of the
country, and upon which so veiy much depends, it is well to err,
if we err at all, on the side of liberality. (Hear, hear.)
“ One of the men who played no mean part in laying the
foundations of the British Empire, with the farsightedness that
often belongs to men engaged in a great work, looked forward to
the time when every free-born youth should ’ abide at his book
till he can well understand English writing.’ The dream of
Alfred the Great —for with his surroundings the expectations of
such a time could scarcely have been regarded as other than the
idea of a visionary—is the fact of to-day, and much more also.
His notion suggested exclusiveness, but our educational system is
all-comprehensiveness. As I have mentioned, its advantages are
open to everybody, to the poor as well as to the rich, and the son
or daughter of the poor man may share its benefits equally with
the child of the well-to-do.
“ Further, we have gone much beyond the famous English king
in our ideas as to the kind of education which the State should
interest itself in imparting to the people. In our opinion educa-
tion is not completed when a youth ‘ can well understand
F.nglkb writing.’ Under special circumstances we carry him very
much indeed beyond that, and hence it is that to-day we have
laid the foundation-stone of a University, in the hope that it will
realize for us all what may fairly be anticipated from such an
institution. The monarch to which I have alluded, when he
founded the University of Oxford, as he is supposed to have done
although I gather from His Excellency and the Chancellor who
preceded me that it is a moot point—could hardly have foreseen,


sagacious as he was, the immense influence for good which that
and other similar seats of learning would exercise on England;
and may it not be in this case, sanguine as we are as to the
benefits likely to accrue, that The University of Adelaide may
promote the colony’s advancement in ways which it is impossible
for us to foresee, or to estimate the importance of? These are
considerations that should lead us to reflect on the step we are
taking, and to consider how closely connected it may be with the
best interests of the country. (Hear, hear.)
“ To-day as a community we may be small and of little moment
in the world, but we have reason for thinking that the time is
coming—somewhat distant it may be, but still coming—when the
lands which we occupy will be the possessions of a great and
powerful nation. (Applause.) Whether as a nation it will do
credit or the reverse to the Anglo-Saxon stock whence it sprung
will depend in a very large measure upon how we, the pioneers,
lay the foundations. If the superstructure is to be solid and
substantial, the foundations must be laid broad and deep; and
this we cannot do better than by the realization of our responsi-
bilities, and appreciating the importance of education—such
education as will, while it develops the mental powers also fit our
people to cope with colonial life in all its varying phases —such
education as ‘ tends to bring out, to nourish, and cultivate the
faculties of the mind,’ and not merely ‘ piles a mass of informa-
tion on them.’ (Hear, hear.)
“It is well in a young country like this that attention should
sometimes be directed to the fact that material things are not the
only nor the best form of wealth, that outside such possessions
there may be riches which are ‘ without price,’ and that it is the
result of such latter riches finding expression in the lives and
public acts of its citizens which constitute the true worth and real
adornments of a community. The wisdom of intellectual culture
becomes apparent when we remember that it is thought which
rules the world. It has been wisely remarked that ‘notions may
be imported from abroad,’ but ‘ that ideas may be grown at home
by thought.’
“ I cannot sum up my feelings in relation to this University
better than by expressing the hope that the intellectual education
which it will be the means of imparting may enable the mind, in
the very beautiful words of Dr. (now Cardinal) Newman, ‘to look
out into the world right forward, steadily, and truly.’ (Hear, hear.)
I have no doubt that the efforts which have been put forth in this
matter will be another illustration—
‘ Of labour, that in lasting fruit outgrows
Far noisier schemes, accomplished in repose,
Too great for haste, too high for rivalry.’”
(Loud applause.)


The Registrar announced that he had received donations of
from the Chancellor towards the building fund ; ;£ 2 s° f rom
the Vice-Chancellor, who promised another ,£250 on the com-
pletion of the building; from Sir Henry Ayers, who had
already contributed the same amount; ;£s°° from Mr - P> D ‘
Prankerd ; from the Hon. H. Scott, M.L.C.; from
D. Murray, Esq.
The proceedings then terminated.
The following is a description of the design : The building
occupies an area having a frontage to North-terrace of 84-ft. 2 in.
by a depth on the western side of 135 ft., and on the eastern side
of 15 1 ft. 6 in. The accommodation on the ground floor com-
prises a central entrance hall 14 ft. 4 in. in width, and opening
from it on the west or left-hand side is the Registrar’s office, with
strong-room attached. West of this is the lady students’ room,
with lavatory. On the east side of the entrance hall is the male
students’ room, and adjoining this eastwards the Professor’s
retiring-room, with lavatory. At the rear of the above rooms is a
transverse corridor, 7 ft. 6 in. wide, from which access is gained
to the Professors’ and students’ rooms. Opening from this by an
arcade of three openings is the staircase hall, 35 ft. x 25 ft., from
the centre of which rises the first flight of the principal staircase,
10 ft. wide to the middle landing, with side flights above. Opening
from the staircase hall and corridor on the west side is a suite of
rooms for the Professor of Natural Science, consisting of a lecture-
room, 35 ft. x 25 ft. and 20 ft. high, with raised seats and plat-
form, and affording accommodation for 150 students. Behind
the lecture-room are the preparing and weighing rooms and the
chemical laboratory, 40 ft. x 25 ft. 6 in. East of the chemical
laboratory is the museum, 33 ft. x 25 ft. On the eastern side of
the building is provided a suite of rooms for the Professor of
Mathematics, comprising lecture-room as above, 35 ft. x 25 ft.;
physical laboratory, 40 ft. x 25 ft. 6 in.; apparatus-room, 25 ft.
6 in- x2O ft.; and optical-room, 26 ft. xls ft. at the rear of the
laboratory. Situated between the two principal corridors are


lavatories for the students. A basement story occupies the spaces
immediately under the laboratories and museum, and is intended
to be used as workshops and storerooms. An electrical room is
placed under the optical-room, and is connected by a special
staircase with the physical laboratory. The above suites of rooms
have jpeen arranged entirely in accordance with the requirements
of the Professors of Natural Science and Mathematics. The first
floor contains the library, extending entirely across the front of
the building, its dimensions being 79 feet 2 inches in length,
30 feet in width, 20 feet in height to the wall-plates, and 36 feet
to the apex of the ceiling. The ceiling is elaborately
panelled in wood, and has moulded and enriched ribs, with
carved figures at the foot. This room will no doubt from its
ample dimensions serve as an examination hall until the require-
ments of the University necessitate something more ambitious.
Behind the library in the centre is the upper part of staircase hall.
This also has an elaborately panelled ceiling. On the western
side of this is the lecture-room for the Professor of English Litera-
ture, 35 x 25 ft., and on the eastern side the lecture hall for the
Professor of Classics, 25 x 24 ft., and Professors’ retiring-room,
16 ft. 9 in. xlO ft. 3 in. The building is designed in the modern
Gothic style. The principal front has an altitude of 46 ft. to the
top of the parapet, and of 66 ft. to the ridge of the roof. The
latter is high-pitched, is covered with slate of two different shades
in alternate bands, and is surmounted by an ornamental iron
cresting. From the centre of the ridge springs a ventilating
turret 25 ft. high.. The upper floor or library front has five large
two-light traceried windows, with columns of red stone, which are
being imported from Dumfries, Scotland. The central portion of
the building projects slightly beyond the general face of the work,
and is carried up an additional story, having a two-light window,
with pannelled spandril above, which will be adorned by carving.
The stonework of the front is finished with a cornice and pierced
parapet above, the angles being marked by octagonal turrets. The
front or ground floor has four two-light windows, with columns of
brown-coloured stone ; and the principal doorway in the centre is


protected by an open stone porch, with clustered pillars of red
stone at the entrance, and rich carved work on the cornice and
elsewhere. The porch projects twelve feet, and forms a balcony
above, opening from the library. The front, or principal portion
of the building, is to be executed in Sydney white stone, having
rubbed surfaces. Bands of dark-tinted stone are introduced in
the height and in the arches of the window openings. Encaustic
tiles also assist in the decoration of the fronts. The dressings
throughout the remainder of the building are to be of Sydney
stone, the general face of the walls being built of pick-dressed
freestone from Tea-tree Gully.
The contract for the erection of the building has been entered
into by Messrs. Brown & Thompson ; the amount of contract is
and the date for the final completion of the building i§
July 1, 1881. A portion of the building, however, is to be com-
piled and ready for occupation by December 1, 1880. The
structure has been designed by Mr, William McMinn, architect,
and is being erected under his superintendence, assisted by the
clerk of the works appointed for the purpose, Mr. G. S. Martin.
R. K. THOMAS, PRINTER, GRENFELL STREET, ADELAIDE.
