

ARAMt-aNS ELECTION
- All
The daily newspapers announce that Heitmann, De Largie, Webster, Spence
and Co. are going to trumpet in the Grampians the cause of the squatter, Jowett.
He now asks you to vote for them and their political trumpeters.
He told the people of England that the high prices charged to the consumers
by the monopolists were the cause of widespread discontent. He said—
Jowett owns up to the possession of some fifty odd pastoral properties, and
whatever his personal good qualities, neither his best friends nor his worst
enemies have ever charged him with a democratic sentiment or a progressive
thought.
“It is the immediate cause of all industrial unrest, and until a solution is
found, industrial unrest must inevitably continue. The present state of
affairs is fast becoming intolerable.’’
Yet Heitmann, De Largie and Go. plead the cause of Jowett. And W. M.
Hughes says, “Vote Jowett.”
He now says, “Vote for the supporters of the profiteers.”
He told “Pearson’s Magazine” that—
This is the proof that those men have not merely separated from the Labor
party, have not only deserted democracy, but have deliberately allied themselves
with the party of monopoly and plunder.
“Industrial unrest exists (1916) in Australia, and is due to monopoly of
land and capital by the few—particularly by those powerful combinations
of capitalists which control the means of production and distribution.”
THE TWO PARTIES.
Now what does he tell you? Where now are the “sycophants and lick-spittles
of wealth?”
There are two parties, and W. M. Hughes put it thus: —
“The two parties are privilege and people. In the first, call it by what
you will, are to be found all those possessing great wealth, enjoying
privileges or monopoly, and all those whom the influence of great wealth
can attach to its side, including all sycophants, lick-spittles, and the other
camp followers of wealth.” —Hobart “Post,” August 6, 1914.
THE PRESS ON THE “WIN-THE-WAR” PARTY.
On May 5 W. M. Hughes and his cohorts won the elections on the “Win-the-
War” cry.
On June 19 the Melbourne “Herald” said—
Put a question to the camp followers. Ask them “Where are now the
sycophants and lick-spittles of wealth of whom Hughes spoke?”
“Nothing has been accomplished but the making of a few speeches—
the utterances of sentiments which are inordinately slow in finding their
way to practical fruition.”
Hughes said that Joseph Cook was
“The leader of those who seek to destroy unionism and the Labor party.”
—August 6, 1914.
On June 23 the “Age” said—
“ Cryptic phrases.”
“Verbal tortuosities.”
“Oratorical exercises.” .
“Well rounded and high sounding.”
“Sentences so shaped that they can be made to mean anything.”
“The public left to pick their way through the dim twilight of the Prime
Minister’s rhetoric.”
Is it not Hughes who has taken the place of Joseph Cook?
Hughes said—
“The members of the Fusion have nothing in common save a common
hatred of the Labor party.” —August 6, 1914
What else have Hughes and Irvine and Webster and Bruce Smith got in
common save a common hatred?
On June 27 the “Age” said^ —
‘“Win the war policy’ of last April represents nothing more than
popular election cry.”
Hughes said —
“The enemies of democracy are all in the Fusion oamp. The Fusion
stands for privilege and wealth. It fights their battles, and GETS IN
RETURN THEIR INFLUENCE AND THEIR MONEY.”
“The people want to know the meaning of this silence. Is there a ‘win-
the-war’ policy, and, if so, what is it?”
“The people still wait anxiously for a word or a sign to indicate when
and how Ministers intend to begin.”
Mr. Hughes knew— HE KNOWS.
“WHY HAVE THE WORDS ‘WIN-THE-WAR’ DISAPPEARED FROM
THE MINISTERIAL VOCABULARY?”
When Hughes was in England last year, he told the Americans, through the
colunms of the New York “Pearson’s Magazine,” that the party of which he is now
the leader —
The “Sydney Morning Herald,” of July 1, said —-
“Stands for reaction. The great vested interests support it, and use
every influence at the disposal of wealth to ensure its success and defeat
the Labor party. It is the political representative of organised capital.”
“Mr. Hughes and his colleagues are like men watching Niagara. They
are helpless.”
On July 6 Melbourne “Punch” said—
This is the party for which Heitmann, De Largie and Co. now stand and
speak. •
“The Prime Minister is going about the country preaching organisation
and efficiency, and talking about our national and Individual destinies, and
so on—and doing nothing.”
In the pamphlet which he caused to be printed a few weeks before he went
to England, Hughes told the people (page 21) of what the party consisted —the
party of which he is now the leader. He said it consisted of —
On July 10 the “Age” said—
“Men who cover their real objectives under the mantle of patriotism.
The only patriotism they understand is that which fills their pockets and
empties those of the people.”
“THIS DARING GOVERNMENT, THE LEADER OF A NATION IN ARMS,
BREATHES OUT THREATENINGS AND SLAUGHTER—ON THE PLAT-
FORM.”
He said—
It said—
“Prompting the Fusion there stands behind every wing of the stage
great vested interest.”
He now asks the men and women of the Grampians to support that Fusion.
“Slackness at the top has not yet disclosed the exact meaning of the
‘Win-the-War’ policy.”
“What is the ‘Win-the-War’ policy?”
He said —
“The Fusion would squeeze the people bloodless.
You are now 1 asked to vote for it.
Three days later, July 13, It said —
“AFTER MORE THAN TWO BRAGGART MONTHS, IN WHICH PUBLIC
EXPECTANCY WAS EXCITED BY A PARADE OF GRIM SINCERITY,
THE GOVERNMENT HAD TO CONFESS TO PARLIAMENT THAT IT
HAD NO BUSINESS TO KEEP MEMBERS EMPLOYED.”
Hughes said —
“We are at w T ar, but the capitalist insists upon his profits, the landlord
upon his rent. Interest has risen; the cost of living has risen.”
“THE ‘WIN-THE-WAR’ POLICY WAS ONLY POLITICAL TRUMPET-
ING.”
He said —
“Always the people pay. Those who are exploitii _ them, who live
luxuriously, who draw fat dividends, say: ‘Do nothing to help yourselves
while the war lasts.’ ”
On July 25 it said —
“The ‘Win-the-War’ cry has been proved to be a hollow sham. Had the
electors but known what they know to-day, it is as certain as day follows
night that the present Government would have been relegated to obscurity.”
He said—
“They conceal their profits by hiding them away in reserve accounts,
and by other ingenious devices.”
“Under cover of war, they are dipping their hands deep into the pockets
of the people. They are making huge profits at the expense of the
community.”
On September 17 the “Age” said —
“The decision of the Coalition Government to adjourn Parliament becomes
less palatable the more it is contemplated. Why should the Federal
Parliament take a protracted holiday at this juncture? It was constituted
only last May, and has done nothing worth mentioning.
He now says, “Vote for them.”
“The Coalition party appealed to the Commonwealth, earnestly promising
the electors that, if elected, it would most vigorously and diligently proceed
to effectuate a bold ‘Win-the-War’ programme.
He said—
“Trusts and combines control the necessaries of life, and charge the
people what they please, and daily their power grows greater. Never has
their power been felt more acutely than during the present war.”
“To study the record of the session up to date is to marvel at the
meagreness of effort and poverty revealed. Virtually nought has been
accomplished.”
He now speaks for them, and asks you to vote for them.
He said —
To-day in the Grampians the Government dare not try to win the election on
the “Win-the-War” cry, although the general elections are not yet six months old.
“The Fusion is the enemy of responsible Government, the enemy of
Democracy, and of the rights of the majority.”
Why have they deserted the “Win-the-War” cry?
He now says, “Vote for it.”
To-day they have only screaming denunciation of everything they previously
supported. . ..
He told the Americans last year through “Pearson’s Magazine”:—
“Price and output of most goods produced and sold in Australia are
determined largely by arrangement of some sort, in which THE WELFARE
OF CONSUMER AND WORKER ARE NEGLIGENT FACTORS . . . .
PRICES AND OUTPUTS ARE DETERMINED BY A HANDFUL OF GREAT
CAPITALISTS.”
To-day, with the bayonets of Capitalism prodding them from behind, they go
forward shouting, “Kamarade! Kamarade! Vote for Jowett, for Jowett the
squattah, for Jowett’s fifty-six stations, Ah! For Jowett, the supportah of progress.
Ah! and Democracy, Ah!”
[F. Anstey, 22 Patrick-street, Melbourne.]
Electors of Grampians: Vote for RUSSELL
The Selected LABOR Candidate
Polling Day: SATURDAY, OCTOBER 27, 1917
Hours of Polling: 8 a.m. to 8 p.m.
Authorised by ARCH. STEWART, Sec. A.L.P. (Victoria)
Trades Hall, Melbourne
LABOR CALL,
22 PATRICK ST., ME LB
