

PeTH-
1 S'tfi
THE PRODUCTS
OF THE
T\T AID AT qpipiD 73 Y
IN w x\> X Xx iji Jtt. X X_3l Xt» Jet, X X li/ Xt. X *
LECT U R E
DELIVERED BEFORE THE SCHOOL OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES
THE
Hon. J. LANGDON PARSONS, M.P
(Late Government Resident.)
1890.
ADELAIDE:
C. E. BRISTOW, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, NORTH-TERRACE.


*
> ' ,
.
(I
■
■■


Tl\e PRODUCTS of NORTHERN TERRITORY.
By HOI. JOHNLANODON PA BOONS, ILale
Government Resident at Palmerston, N.T.J
[Delivered August 22nd, 1890.]
The general idea about a lecture or paper read before a learned
society or a chamber is that it should be solemn, scientific, and
statistical. If Ido not comply with these orthodox conditions, you
will please understand that I am much more anxious to interest you
in the Northern Territory than to impress you with my research.
The ordinary listener, who has come to hear about the products of
the Northern Territory, wishes to carry away a true conception of
what the country is like and what are its natural features, and in a
plain and homely way to he informed of its capacities for industrial
enterprise. The scientific and statistical listener I refer to the
reports and official returns, where he will find the figures and
technicalities he will certainly miss to-night.
THE NORTHERN TERRITORY AREA AND CLIMATE
When I find myself called upon to address an audience about
the Northern Territory, I always deem it advisable to direct
attention to its vast size. The area comprised between the 26th
parallel of south latitude and the Arafura Sea, and between the
129th and 138th meridians of east longitude, is 523,620 square
miles, or 335,116,800 acres. It embraces a region in which the
rainfall varies from an average of 63in. at Port Darwin to 6in. at
Charlotte Waters. It includes a great variety of soils and geo-
logical formations, and its climate varies from sultry tropical heats
and rainfall on the north to the dry atmosphere of the southern
part of Central Australia. Midway between the northern, southern,
eastern and western shores of Australia, about 1,000 miles south of
Port Darwin and north of Port Augusta, are the Macdonnell
Panges, the great central mountain chain of the continent. Another
fact°of great interest is that the Northern Territory touches all
the other colonies except Victoria.


FAUNA AND FLOEA.
You will not, of course, expect me to give you any approach to
a complete list of the animal or bird life, or of the grasses, flowers,
and trees. I shall only mention those which are most common and
noticeable. We have on the north coast a small specimen of the
bounding kangaroo and the wallaby, the dingo, large iguanas, and
lizards of many varieties. On the plains, the bustard, native
companion, and flock pigeons are numerous. The rivers swarm
with game —the black and white goose; whistling, wood, black
and white, railway, and black ducks; teal, and the most delicious
wild fowl known, the pigmy goose, the delight of the epicure.
There are also the jabbaroo, ibis, cranes, black and white cockatoo,
parrots in great variety, and flying foxes, I suppose I may say, in
millions.
The harbors and coast waters swarm with fish, and I much
regret I could not induce the Government to engage the services
of Mr. Saville Kent, the great pisciculturist, to report upon their
economic value, when he was on a visit to Port Darwin. On the
shores, the heche-de-mer, tortoise, turtle, and pearl oyster are found.
For centuries the Malays have been coming, and come still, from
Macassar to gather the spods of the shore, and carry them back in
their proas. Captain Flinders counted over sixty proas on the
coast in 1802. In the year 1888 they sailed away with 250 tons,
of trepang, valued at £lO,OOO, tortoise shell worth £l,OOO, and a
considerable quantity of pearl shell. A large quantity of pearl
shell was taken out of Port Darwin harbor a few years since; but
the tides are high and strong, and the mud swept out from the
mangrove shores made the water so thick that divers were unable
to continue their work.
Of grasses and trees there is this to be said: On the extreme
north coast there is the coarse spear grass (which grows 14ft. high),
kangaroo and sugar grasses, and on the banks of the great tidal
rivers, where our nlantations must be, what is known in Queens-
land as the blady grass grows in rank luxuriance. Further inland
the Mitchell and Flinders grasses are found in certain districts in
great abundance, showing that there sheep are sure to do well.
For the most part, until the alluvial river plains, the table lands,
and the inland plains are reached, the north coast may be described
as open forest country. The timber generally is of little com-
mercial value. There are many varieties of the eucalyptus and
woolly-bat, ironwood, blaokwood, sandalwood, and greviliias,
Leichardt and cypress pines. The cypress pine is very valuable,
as the white ants will not eat it. Its use in building has solved
the difficulty which beset the early settlers, the woodwork of whose
houses were literally eaten down by the ravenous termites.
In the swampy parts the pandanus or screw pine, several sorts of
palms, and the paperbark are found in abundance. Jungles are
found only in patches.


Such, in brief, was the country as the first settlers found it, and
the only animals acclimatised was the swamp-buffalo, which roam
in great herds on the river plains and on Melville Island, and Timor
ponies, which are found about Port Essington. These were both
introduced by the Imperial officers who were in charge of the
three successive settlements at Fort Dundas, Raffles Bay, and Port
Essington.
HORNED CATTLE, HORSES, AND SHEEP.
After the famous explorer, J. McDouall Stuart, returned from
his successful journey through the centre of the continent to Van
Diemen’s Gulf with favorable accounts of the climate, soil, and
herbage of the Northern Territory, enterprising pastoralists under-
took the arduous and costly work of stocking the country.
Cattle. —Cattle were driven from South Australia, which was
then supposed to be the only possible route. It has since been dis-
covered that good stock routes exist from the eastward, and the
mobs overlanded have come chiefly from Queensland. Roughly
estimated, there are at present 250.000 cattle depastured in the
Northern Territory —a very small and most unsatisfactory result
for the immense amount of capital and energy which have been
employed.
You will, of course, understand that, with such long distances to
be droved and with the new and semi-tropical conditions, so far as
the north coast is concerned, to be contended against, loss and dis-
appointment were to be expected ; but there can be no doubt that
these would have been overcome by courage, experiment, and
capital. Unfortunately, however, a mysterious and most fatal
disease, commonly known as red-water, manifested itself on the
main route. Successive mobs of cattle each lost hundreds, in some
cases reaching to half their number. This has operated most dis-
astrously, and has almost stopped the introduction of cattle from
the east. The attention of Government after Government has been
directed to this ruinous disease, only' to be ignored and apparemly
forgotten. At last energetic steps are to be taken to ascertain, if
possible, its origin and cure. Should this be successful vast areas
of pasture lands will be stocked, and cattle breeding and exporting
will certainly prove a profitable investment. We have all the
markets of the east before us, and there can be no reason why meat-
canning should not be carried out on an extensive scale.
Horses , of which there are estimated to be about 10,000, have
thriven and increased well, Here, again, we have the east and far
east for an outlet. But the best prospect for horse-breeders is
the constant and high priced demand for the remount service of
India. A large number of horses are purchased every year by the
Indian Government at an average price of from £4O to £46, and
for certain branches of the service the Australian horse is the
favourite. It is much to be regretted that long ago determined
efforts were not made to secure this valuable trade.


Sheep. —The early attempts to start sheep runs were not success-
ful. Dr. Browne spent large sums of money in sending sheep as
far north as Spring Vale and Delamere Downs, about 200 miles
south of Port Darwin, but after heavy losses he gave up the
attempt. The remnant and offspring of his flocks I have seen at
Spring Vale, and I beg to assure you that they still grow wool, and
show no signs of its gradually turning to hair. The number of
sheep estimated to be in the Northern territory is about 150,000.
These are depastured chiefly on the Herbert River, close by the
western boundary of Queensland, the Northern Territory Pastoral
Company are proposing to place sheep on their country about the
head waters of the Victoria River, where the grasses are reported
to be eminently suitable.
It is impossible for me to close this sketchy and very inadequate
account of the pastoral condition and prospects without referring to
the Transcontinental Railway. If this work be speedily under-
taken and carried through, millions of sheep and cattle will occupy
the wide waste lands of the Crown, and help to bring in the great
epoch of prosperity and settlement, which has been so long hoped
for, and may then be confidently expected.
GOLD AND OTHER MINERALS AND METALS.
Gold. —Gold was first discovered in the Northern Territory by
the party employed in the erection of the Overland Telegraph line.
There were among the construction party some members who had
experience as old diggers. I will not attempt to describe the wild
and disastrous epochs of 1873-4. Those who were here in those
exciting times, and especially those who were interested, will well
remember how furious was the game of speculation, and how
bitterly South Australian investors were bitten by unprincipled
representatives. Of an essentially corrupt time the less that is
said the better.
The known area through which gold is found extends from
Stapleton on the north to Maude Creek on the south (this, of
course, excepts the Macdonnell Range country), and from Mud
Bay, on the western side of the Gulf of Carpentaria, to the Fitz-
maurice River to the westward.
The special fields are the Margaret, the Howley, Grove Hill,
Sandy Creek, at the foot of the Union and Pine Creek reefs, the
Driffield, and Stow Creek. Alluvial gold has been found in the
neighbourhood of each of these. At present the most promising
reef's which are being worked are Mr. Olaf Jensen’s claims at
Piue Creek, Mr. C. G. Millar’s No. 10 South Union, the Ali e
Hills Company’s claims, and the Yam Creek claims. There are
features about Maude Creek which give promise of yields which
will place this goldfield in the forefront. The Hibernia claims of
Mr. Murphy give rich indications of future prosperity in this
district.


A very large quantity of the alluvial gold washed out has been
obtained by Chinese fossickers, who are content to work if they
can obtain from half to one pennyweight per day.
Generally, of the gold-bearing character, the following extract
of the Rev. J. E. Tenison-Woods you will hear with interest:—
I do not believe that the same quantity of mineral veins of gold, silver, tin,
copper, and lead will be found in any equal area in Australia. In fact, I
doubt if many provinces will be found in any country so singularly and excep-
tionally favored as Arnheim’s Land is in respect to mineral riches. Of the
mines that have already been worked, in gold especially, they cannot be said to
have gone to any depth, but all nearly have shown unusually good ore, and it
is unquestionable that not 25 per cent, of the veins visible have ever been worked
at all. As to the causes of this and the depression in the mining interests in
the Territory generally, the report will give ample details, but it is from no
want of mineral deposits. Years will not exhaust the discoveries to be made
here when the difficulties of labor have been got over, as they will be surely
ere long. The Peninsula of Arnheim’s land will become one of the great mining
centres of Australia.
As no accurate statistics have been kept it is impossible to give
with accuracy the quantity of gold which has been obtained, but
it may safely he placed at not less than ten (10) tons in weight.
Tin. —All who are acquainted with mining know that tin is a
very fickle and often a disappointing metal; so it has certainly
proved in the Northern Territory. The history of its first dis-
covery is of some interest. Goldminers washing out the gravel
from the beds of the creeks in certain localities found at the bottom
of the dish a deposit of small black gravel and sand. Mates asked
each other what it could be, hut though known to exist for many
years its true character was unknown. In the year 1881, when I
was Minister for the Territory, Mr. David Tennant, who was then
at the Ten Mile, sent down by Mr. Andrew Broad some small
parcels containing samples of this ore, and asked that they might
he assayed. They were handed to an assayer, who pronounced
them to be stream tin. In one sample the percentage of tin was
as high as 75 cent., and in another the percentage of tin was
46 per cent, and at the rate of 40 ounces of gold to the ton.
Somehow this leaked out, and the result was that an application
was received one morning for mineral licences for 100 persons for
ICO square miles of country around Mount Wells. The rent at Is.
per acre was deposited with the application, and after granting the
prospectors claims the licences were issued. As was the case with
gold in 1873 so was it with tin in 1881, wild speculation set in,
companies were formed and share lists opened.
When the Parliamentary party visited the Northern Territory
in 1882, we visited Mount Wells, Snadden’s Creek, the McKiniay
and other spots, and saw the stream tin washed out from the beds
of the creeks. It is much to he regretted that the results have
not fulfilled the early promise nor made the expenditure remunera-
tive. Without entering into a detailed account of individual mines,
I confidently affirm that the causes of failure may be largely
attributed to —(1) insufficient and unskilled prospecting and


development; (2) bad, wasteful and inexperienced management;
(3) dear and inadequate machinery.
I may add that in the Rev. J. E. Tenison-Woods’s report on the
geology and mineralogy of the Northern Territory he points out
that a great belt of country containing oxide of tin in mica and
quartz extends from Talc Head, a point on the west side of Port
Darwin Harbor, through the Bynoe Harbor country to Mount
Shoobridge, and on to the southward. It has since been struck and
worked near Mount Tolmer, in the Baker Range. This class of
ore Mr. Dunn, who is second to Mr. Cosmo Newbery in Mel-
bourne, stated was the most promising with which he was
acquainted.
Cupper. —The chief deposits of copper have been discovered
near the banks of the Daly River and at Copperfield near Pine
Creek. There is also a good outcrop near the Howley. From
the Daly, where there are two large mines, and from Copperfield
thousands of tons of ore, averaging over 28 per cent, of copper,
have been exported. In the year 1889 over 900 tons were sent to
Newcastle, the value of the copper being over £12,000.
With the present rates it appears to me strange that these two
fields are not being vigorously developed; but the capitalists, for
the most part, who have gone in for Northern Territory ventures
appear to belong to the class who either expect dividends from
the start, or else are more eager to sell out to a syndicate than to
prosecute genuine mining.
Silver. —Silver-bearing ores are found distributed over a large
area of country. The first discovery which attracted attention was
at Mount Pinaud, about forty miles from Burrundie. This is the
site of the well-known Eveleen Mine. The assays were so good
and the opinions expressed by experts so confident, that a large
company was speedily formed, machinery placed on the ground
and the mine opened. But here, as in so many other mining
operations, bad management, a badly-selected battery site and
extravagance did their disastrous work. Later, under the super-
intendence of Mr. Drake, it was confidently anticipated that the
Eveleen had entered upon an era of settled and increasing pros-
perity. The output was regular, the dispatch of bullion con-
tinuous, and the appearance of the lodes “keenly.” Then came
disappointment, and, although the mine is still working, there is
no hing very satisfactory to report.
Galena carrying good silver was found near the McKinlay river,
and the Flora Bell and McKinlay and Mount Wells mines were
regarded by practical and experienced men as likely to prove
splendid properties. The original discoverer of Flora Bell re-
ceived about £B,OOO for his share. The shares commanded a high
figure, and on the McKinlay and Mount Wells a very rich lode
was struck. I have several times visited both these properties,
and the appearances, and the opinions of those on the spot amply
supported the confidence of the public. I have brought away from


both specimens which have won the admiration of skilled mining
men. But, from some causes, it is useless to evade the fact that
at the present time the hoped-for prosperity and the large divi-
dends have not occurred.
Then south of Borroloola, on the Macarthur river, authentic
reports have been received of the existence of huge lodes of lead
and silver-bearing ores. Large quantities of specimens were
forwarded for assay from the surface shows. The results of assay
showed about lOozs. of silver to the ton, and over 70 per cent, of
lead. Want of capital and lack of enterprise have left this district
virtually untested, and so far as I know no one with any real
knowledge of minerals or mining has ever been over the country.
Precious Stones. —We must now take a leap southward to the
Macdonnell R anges, the great mountain region of Central Australia.
You will well remember the excitement which was caused by the
arrival of these gems in Adelaide. Sanguine people anticipated
that Central Australia would eclipse Burmah, and that rubies
would be a glut in the market. Large parcels were shipped to
London, and news of the reports from experts and lapidaries was
eagerly waited for. You know the result—the so-called rubies
were unceremoniously and rather scornfully called garnets. But
while analysis distinctly proves that the stones are not rubies, it as
distinctly proves that they are not garnets. The constituents of
the true Oriental ruby, as supplied to Messrs. Stevenson Bros., of
Rundle-st., are alumina 900 and over, and the rest magnesia.
The spinel ruby contains alumina 72'0 and magnesia 28'0.
The constituents of these stones from the Macdonnell Ranges
are silica 36'40 per cent., alumina 23 44 per cent., oxide of iron
30 - 98 per cent., manganese oxide 1'33 per cent., lime 2-82, mag-
nesia 6-03. Of course, the deficiency of alumina is fatal to their
claims as rubies; but the fact that they are not fusible under the
blowpipe demonstrates that they are not garnets. If, instead of
their being sent to London by the bushel, the best of the stones
had been selected and forwarded in limited quantities, there is very
little doubt good prices could have been obtained, and the market
might, by being continuously supplied, have gradually expanded.
As it was, the jewellers were scared and their estimate of value
lowered.
As, however, the matrix is the same as in Burmah, and as stones
which have been pronounced to be true diamonds have been found,
there is every reason to expect that further prospecting will lead to
the discovery of richly payable precious stones in Central Australia.
Mica. —The uses for this product are largely on the increase,
and its existence, of the right clearness and of sufficient siire, in the
Macdonnell ranges is now certain. Mica, therefore, may be added
to the list of valuable products. It is, however, to be hoped
that in this case a market, which after all is limited, may not be
swamped by excessive shipments. This danger is very forcibly put
in a letter recently published in the Register from Mr. Baker, a


large London merchant, to Messrs. Harrold Brothers. In that
letter Mr. Baker further says :
Uncut or natural plates, slabs, or sheets of this quality would vary in price
fr •m about 6d. a pound up to as high as Bs. or 10s. a pound. The smallest sizes
that would answer to ship would be about Sin. or 4in. This size, if spotted or
stained, would oe worth about 6d., rising gradually in value as the plates were
larger. If about Sin. or 4in. wide by Biu. long, would be worth from Bs. to
10s. a pound. In the event of your shipping any, absolutely clear and free
from spots, I could value same from Is. to 15s. a pound. I could also give
you higher valuations in clear quality for sizes cut into squares and rectangles
according to the demands for various trades, for which I have orders to the
extent of several hundred thousand pounds. I consider this business sufficiently
important as to suggest your cabling Australia to send on a few tons as a trial
shipment. No box should exceed 1001 b. in weight.
In closing my remarks on the gold and other minerals and
metals in the Northern Territory, I think I am justified in saying
that the evidence is abundant that while there are disappointments
to deplore, mistakes to be confessed, ignorance and inefficiency to
be condemned, there is quite enough of solid fact remaining to
cause us to be of good heart, and to warrant us in anticipating
that the Northern Territory will be a great mineral and metal
producing country. Broken Hill was close to our border for many
a long year of pastoral settlement, but its prodigious wealth lay
undisturbed. Mount Morgan was hard by Rockhampton, and was
sold and resold without its owners dreaming of its fabulous value.
Surely even the most unsanguine mind can perceive that some
adventurous or lucky prospectors may, near at hand or far afield,
light upon one of nature’s treasure troves, which will bring a
fortune to them and fame to the Northern Territory.
AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS.
Probably it was this branch of my subject which the chamber
had chiefly in mind when they asked me to address you to-night,
and which the samples around me so clearly illustrate. Of the
value of agricultural products to any country it is impossible to
speak in exaggerated terms. Very sagacious is the remark of
Louden:—“ The importance of agriculture is obvious, not only by
its affording the direct supply of our greatest wants, but as the
parent of manufactures and commerce. Without agriculture there
can be neither civilization nor population.”
Take, for instance, the United States of America. It is com-
puted that the value of the agricultural products there amounts to
the immense sum of £800,000,000 every year. There are over
5,000,000 farms, great and small, and on the supposition that there
are six persons on each farm, we see that 30,000,000 of people—
one-half of the population of the country—derive their livelihood
direct from the cultivation of the soil.
The tropical and sub-tropical countries and islands which lie to
the north and east of us would be quite unable to sustain their
dense populations unless they lived close to mother earth and care-


fully garnered the lavish harvests of the year. Nor can we expect,
however wide may be the pasture lands, however rich may he the
mineral deposits of the Northern Territory, that it will ever be ft
conspicuously great and prosperous country until the natural pro-
ducts of the ground are secured by cultivation and husbandry.
Now, you must distinctly understand that when I speak of agri-
culture I mean tropical and sub-tropical agriculture. It is true
wheat will grow there, and 1 have seen it in ear, but there is no
necessity to enter upon further competition with the south in the
growth of cereals, as climate and soil both are specially adapted
for the growth of the plants and fruits which belong to the
tropical latitudes.
The flats between the ridges even in the metalliferous country,
a fine stretch of arable land lying between the Edith and the
Katherine rivers and on to Maude Creek, consisting of chocolate
stony soil, with breaks of black soil and somewhat sandy flats, and
the alluvial banks of the many great tidal rivers, all give ample
room and verge for the tropical agriculturist. I can state this with
confidence, because I have frequently travelled through the
country and voyaged upon the rivers. lam further in a position
to speak with certainty, because I can tell of what has been, and
still is growing in the Experimental and Botanic Garden at
Palmerston.
But as I do not claim to be either a practical or scientific agri-
culturist, I will give you the report of the curator of the garden
at Palmerston, Mr. Maurice Holtze, F.L.S,, who has had many
years of practical experience in the Northern Territory, who has
pursued agriculture in Germany and Russia, and who is a Fellow
of the Linnsean Society. In his official report for the year 1888
he says:—
I will endeavor to correct some erroneous opinions about the agricultural
capacities of the Northern Territory. People who pretend to know all about it
assert that the climate is too dry, and that no large areas of good soil can be
found. Now we will see how far this is true. Our average yearly rainfall for
the last fifteen years is During these fifteen years only once was it as
low as 474 m. (1887-8), and as high as 7oJin. (1878-9). The remaining"
thirteen years had, as nearly as possible, average rainfalls. Cochin China,
the great ricefiehi of the east, has exactly the same rainfall and the same
length of wet season, and lying on the same degree north as we do
south. Now, nobody will assert that Saigon, with its export of half
a million tons of rice per annum, is unfit for cultivation. In Jamaica,
with a nominal rainfall of about 70in., we find that for the five years,
1880 to 1884, a rainfall of respectively 65, 60, 68, 48, and 60 inches wag
registered. Even in Ceylon, with its magnificent rainfall, we find at four
registering stations the rainfall considerably lower than our own. These four
stations are—Batticaloe, with 58in.; Trincomale, with 59in.; Jaffna, with
42in.; and Pattalam, with 44iu. Four-fifths of this rain falls during the six
months from October to April; still the Ceylon Directory enumerates many
plantations for these districts.
Of course we must not expect impossibilities ; plants requiring an uninter-
ruptedly moist atmosphere, and those growing only at high elevations, we must,
for the present, not expect to grow. 1 use the expression “ for the present ”
advisedly, for what do we really know of the Territory ? It is quite possible,


and even likely, that on the borders of the Gulf of Carpentaria a heavier
rainfall than here at Palmerston exists. At Glyde’s Inlet, and on the Goyder
this is presumed to be the case.
Now to come to our lands. It has been maintained that land fit for agri-
culture can only be found in patches, and that there are no large areas of good
soil in the Territory. Now, this point is in most cases raised by people who
have never been more than a couple of miles from Palmerston, or at the most
not off the telegraph and railway track, or on the goldfield. To expect in those
places large blocks of good land is absurd, for the telegraph line was made on
the high stony ground where the ro*d would be passable during the wet season,
and mining districts are not generally blessed with agricultural soil; but even
here are many places, such as the Rum Jungle, The Margaret, Saunders’ Creek,
the back of the Finniss, &c., where really good soil is found in considerable
blocks. But it is not there that we must look for our good land ; it is on the
wide plains of our rivers where the tropical rains of centuries have deposited
the alluvial soil of the higher country that our agricultural lands are chiefly
situated. Here again I must remind you that we really know nothing of our
Territory as yet. The few persons who have seen at least parts of the Terri-
tory give of some places most glowing descriptions. We hear of the magnifi-
cent soils of Florida Station, and Mr. D’Arcy Uhr, who is surely able to speak
with authority, tells me that some of the soil of the country lying between the
Howley and the Daly river equals the best soils he has ever seen in Queens-
land. But now to come to another point, viz., that our soil is patchy and that
much unsuitable soil is found. This I will not deny, in fact in almost every-
one of my reports I have cautioned against selecting land carelessly ; but what
area of land is required for a plantation ? Here and in Adelaide it seems to be
th ught that 10,000 acres is just about the size for a snug plantation, but how
stands this in other countries ? From the Ceylon Directory, of which un-
fortunately I have only an old copy for 1881, I have been able to compile the
following statistics, I find that for the whole island of Ceylon, including the
natives' small plantations, there are 2,333 plantations, with an aggregate area
of 726,580 acres. This gives an average area of 311 acres per plantation.
Only eighty-nine plantations have more than 1,000 acres each; 818 have each
less than 200 acres. Of these plantations 1,840 cultivate a total area of
319,' 15 acres, that is an average of acres of cultivated land per planta-
tation. This area is cultivated with coffee, tea, cinchona, cocoanuts, cardamon,
pepper, vanilla, cocoa, citronella, sugar, and cinnamon—one or several of them
on each plantation; 314 plantations cultivate over 300 acres each, while 329
plantations cultivate under 100 acres each. The remaining plantations (about
1,200) cultivate between 100 and 300 acres each. As I said before, we have
good soil, though mostly in patches ; still these patches are sufficiently large to
make plantations of equal size to the above. What we want before plantations
can be started with success is—(1) Facilities to obtain suitabl3 land ; (2)
Facilities to obtain suitable cheap labor ; (3) Capital to take advantage of the
first two conditions ; and (4) intelligent managnment to use and not to squander
the capital. Given these four conditions, and the Territory will surely become
a prosperous field for plantation enterprise.
That will, I think, be accepted as authentic evidence that the
land, the rainfall, and the climate are right.
But in addition to theory, opinion and comparison with other
countries, we have the results of actual operations in the garden
itself, wdiich I may inform you is only a very ordinary piece of
ground, lying between the shore mangroves and the foot of a low
stony ridge.
This is Mr. Holtze’s report for 1877 :
That agriculture is at the present little advanced in the Territory cannot be
doubted; but this is only attributable to avoidable causes; mistakes are, of


Number of plants fully successful
292
Number of plants moderately successful
64
Number of plants unsuccessful
49
More or less successful, but destroyed by vermin
6
Plants which have been too short a time in the garden to
give an opinion about their suitability
257
Total number of all plants grown in garden
668
course, sure to be made in every new country, and will teach the next comer to
avoid them. That the present sort of labor is not exactly suitable cannot be
denied , but suitable labor is easily obtainable, and it should not be forgotten
that the fact that rich virgin soil can be obtained at very moderate prices
counterbalances the above defects manifold.
That rice, sugarcane, pepper, coffee, tapioca, arrowroot, cinnamon, ginger,
and several other plants grow exceedingly vigorous here has been again
acknowledged by the Cingalese recently arrived, and it will be only a matter
of time to see prosperous plantations of those plants started in the Territory.
I beg to diaw your particular attention to the annexed list, comprising 668
species of useful plants tried in the garden. This list contains only such plants
whose product is useful in arts, commerce, medicine, and as human food;
fodder plants, timber trees, ornamental plants, shrubs, &c., are for the present
omitted in this list.
I think the number of plants which have been quite successful, marked with
u 1,” is very respectable; those plants marked with “2” have only been
moderately successful; while those marked with ‘‘3” have been as yet un-
successful. Those plants without any mark have not been long enough in the
garden to give an opinion about them, while a few marked “ + ” have been
more or less successful, but, being destroyed by vermin, are at the present time
not represented in the garden.
Many of the new plants, together with valuable collections of palms,
bamboos, timbers, ornamental plants, &c., I obtained during my visit to the
Botanical Gardens at Hongkong, Singapore, Saigon, and Java. An account of
this my visit has been forwarded to you before this in a separate report, and a
perusal of the same will only confirm my utmost confidence in the future of
the Northern Territory as a field for successful tropical agriculture. I shall
be happy if I can at last induce the people to share in this my confidence.
The following is an analysis of the list to which Mr. Holtze
refers:—
Useful Plants grown in the Government Botanical Garden at Port Darwin.
Included in the above successful list there are 7 varieties of pineapples,
12 oranges, 3 lemons, 3 citrons, 4 limes, 9 bananas, 27 tobacco, 17 rice,
23 oil plants, 21 sugarcane, 14 maize.
Now, I will take some of these in detail.
Sugarcane. —I am well aware that the general opinion is that
the growth of sugarcane and the manufacture of sugar in the
Northern Territory have both been unmitigated and ruinous
failures. Ido not wonder at it. The history of the sugar industry
there reads like a grim fable. In the year 1880 an Act was
passed specially to start and assist sugar plantations; 100,000 acres
of land were dedicated for selection. lam afraid it was in the
main used more as a huge land speculation than as a legitimate
sphere for the growth of sugarcane. There was one honorable
exception at least —I mean the DeLissaville Company. Delissaville
was the first plantation selected, consisting of 10,000 acres. The


first manager was Mr. B. C. DeLissa. He was sent to the Northern
Territory to select the land. Instead of going where he was
advised to go hy those in Palmerston who know the country, to
the hanks of the rivers, he proceeded across the harbor to
Douglas’ Peninsula, and selected a piece of country through which
ran a small brook. Except a narrow strip on the banks of the
brook there was scarcely an acre of land that was really suitable
for sugar-growing. The ironstone rook crops out all over it, and
where it is not rock the thin soil is full of ironstone detritus and
gravel. It were as reasonable to expect sugarcane to grow and
thrive in the streets of Palmerston as there. I have taken sugar-
planters from Queensland and Fiji to see it, and they have unani-
mously condemned it as an absurdity, and have expressed their
amazement that a man who evidently knew so little about sugar
plantations should have been entrusted with so important a pioneer
venture. The mistakes and muddles at DeLissaville have thrown
back agriculture for years. After an expenditure of, I believe,
£25,000 not an ounce of sugar was manufactured during Mr.
DeLissa’s management.
Shortly afterwards a plantation was started on the Daly River
by Mr. Owston, who selected 20,000 acres there for a Melbourne
syndicate. Some sugarcane was planted but they waited for the
results at DeLissaville before commencing operations in earnest.
Hearing of nothing but failure there the plantation was abandoned.
I visited it in 1884, and found the sugarcane still growing, although
it had to contend against the rank natural herbage.
Later still a plantation was commenced on the Adelaide River
by Mr. Sergison, but this, too, after some tentative efforts was
relinquished. I was there also in 1884 and found the sugarcane
still growing.
At present the only sugar plantation is that of Mr. Brandt, at
Shoal Bay. The land is not by any means good sugar land.
Water also is scarce. For the large expenditure the results have
not been satisfactory.
It is difficult indeed to account for these conditions, as both in
the old garden at Fannie Bay and also in the new garden there
has been a good annual crop. Over 700 tons of sugarcane have
been distributed to growers, and a trial crushing at DeLissaville in
1884 gave an average of nearly 1|- ton of sugar to the acre of cane.
When Mr. Holtze and I returned from our trip to the east there
was over an acre of sugarcane growing in the garden at Palmerston,
which we considered to be superior to anything we saw even in
Java.
Ultimately the sugar plantations will be established on the banks
of the rivers. The soil of the Adelaide, on analysis by Mr. Cosmo
Newbery, has been proved to me almost identical with that of
British Guiana, and there are no frosts on the north coast.
The condition of affairs in North Queensland gives a great
opportunity for the Northern Territory. The skeleton Act Queens-


land once had has been repealed, so (that the planters cannot obtain
Tamil coolies. The stringent Chinese Act prevents the introduction
of Chinese. The Polynesian Laborr Act expires in 1892. Unless
some change comes before that chute there will be 'hundreds of
thousands of pounds worth of sugair machinery standing idle and
plantations wall be deserted. lam informed on the best authority
that if South Australia would guarantiee that the supply of Tamils
under the Indian Immigration Act would not be interrupted for
say twenty years, the enterprise and capital would be transferred to
the Northern Territory. So great a prize is well worth the effort
required to secure it.
Rice. —Rice is indigenous to the Northern Territory'. A wild
rice of the upland variety is found widely distributed. Of foreign
kinds seventeen varieties are now growing in the garden, some swamp
some hill. For the growth of swamp rice the reaches of our rivers
furnish an almost unlimited area. I have visited the Pearl River
on which Canton is situated, and also the Donnai River above
Saigon. The appearances are very similar, and the soil brought
from both in comparison has been found to be almost identical
with ours. Remarkably fine specimens of this rice just as it was
cut are here on the table before me. lam satisfied that the growth
of rice on a large scale would prove a most profitable investment;
and it is much to be wondered at that the Chinese have not availed
themselves of the opportunities given for its cultivation. But they
are a timid race, and are mightily afraid of the blacks, who regard
them with absolute contempt as being neither “ whitefellow ” nor
“ blackfellow.”
Tobacco. —Tobacco has been grown for many years, and has
always been found to thrive well. Of late its cultivation has
received a great impetus from the enterprise of Mr. Brandt,
who has had two crops at Shoal Bay, and is now establishing a
plantation at Rum Jungle. There are twenty-seven varieties of
tobacco growing in the garden, which have thriven uniformly.
Of a parcel of tobacco sent from Shoal Bay to Germany, Mr.
Holtze has just written me :
I saw Jaenseh the day before yesterday, and he told me he had a letter from
Mr. Brandt saying that the tobacco sent to Germany had been sold at m. 1-60,
that is Is. 7d. per lb , and was pronounced as a very high-class tobacco ; in fact,
if the leaves had been better treated, it would have fetched 2s. per lb. I think
that will be grand news for your lecture. I must say I consider that as the best
news the Territory has ever had. Say, a farmer with half a dozen Indian
coolies to cultivate ten acres of tobacco, giving at the average SOOlbs. per acre,
at Is. 6d. per lb. = £6OO. Two hundred pounds pay for the coolies, £IOO
exorbitant margin for freight and commission, leaves £3OO for tobacco alone, and
he would, of course, have ample lime to grow at least his own food. I send you
hereby the return for the Deli-Sumatra tobacco crops:—lß64, 4,000 guelders;
1865, 40,000 guelders ; 1866, 80,' 00 guelders ; 1868, 200,000. guelders; 1888,
168,114 bales sold in Amsterdam for 33,000,000 guelders.
The German New Guinea Company have had a splendid crop of superior
tobacco, and are going to concentrate their energies chiefly on this pronuet.
The average price for American tobacco for the last year has been under 6d. per
pound. Brandt sent also a cutting out of a German newspaper speaking about his


tobacco, and laying particular stress on the fact that the crop has been a failure
in several of the old tobacco-producing countries, and that it is therefore of
great interest to open new fields. lam sure you will be glad to receive those
news. Let only the Government do their duty with encouragement and liberal
land laws and we will be all right yet.
Coffee.— There are two great varieties of coffee—the Arabian and
the Liberian. The Arabian has been always a failure with us ; but
the Liberian invariably successful. There are now over 800 plants
in healthy growth in the garden. A few years since, at Poett’s
plantation, a nursery was established and an immense number of
young plants were raised from seed ; but here, again, there was
a good deal of the land speculation element in the enterprise.
Sufficient capital was not advanced for clearing, cultivating, and
planting out, and the plants were allowed to choke each other in
the nursery. Ultimately it was given up, and some portion of it
passed into the hands of Mr. Brandt who is growing tobacco there.
A coffee plantation of about ten acres was also established at Bea-
trice Hills on the Adelaide River. Although cultivation was
relinquished the plants have continued to blossom and bear berries.
When in Singapore I visited the large plantation of M.
Chassario. where hundreds of acres are covered with Liberian coffee,
and from him I leai ned that this coffee thrives much better where
there is a wet and dry season, as in Liberia, from which it originally
came. I look forward to the time when large quantities of coffee
will be exported from Port Darwin.
Tea is, up to the present, only an experiment, but there are
indications which warrant the hope that Assam tea will be success-
fully and profitably produced.
Pea Nut. —This is a very valuable product. From the nuts a
very useful oil is expressed, and the substance which remains, as
also the stems, make excellent fodder for stock. The pea nut is
extensively grown in China, and the Chinese state that it attains a
stronger growth with finer nuts than in their own country. In the
United States it is also largely cultivated, the nuts being ea'en
roas ! ed like chestnuts in England. But the great centre of the
pea nut industry is in Africa. An enormous quantity of the oil is
exported to Europe, and after manipulation is re-exported as olive
oil. The average crop is 100 bushels to the acre, and one bushel
yields a gallon of oil.
I will give }ou tne result of a small experiment made in the
Palmerston garden. One acre was planted, and after reserving
sufficient seed for the next year, the balance was sold to a Chinese
storekeeper for £2O. This is obviously a sufficient margin of profit
to make it a most remunerative plant.
Tapioca , Arrowroot, and Ginger. —These plants now in the
garden leave nothing to desire. They have been seen by agri-
culturists from the East and Netherlands-India, and, without an
exception, they have pronounced them to be as fine as any they
had seen. Here before me you will see samples of the manufac-
tured articles made by Mrs. Holtze, with rude domestic appliances


only. They have all obtained prizes at several exhibitions. Here
I would like to add that when Sir. G. S. Fowler was in Palmerston
he expressed himself as being greatly struck with the manifest
healthiness and vigor of these and other plants.
Cocoanut Palm. —This, again, is a crop of immense value.
There is the nut itself, the oil, the fibre, and copra. It is esti-
mated that the value of the cocoanut plantations of Ceylon
amounts to £15,000,000 ; and the annual crop is stated to be
worth £2,000,000, and the export value is £BOO,OOO. From one
district, in which 200,000 acres are planted with the cocoa palm,
the yield is between seven and eight millions of nuts One result
of our trip to the East was the importation of 1,000 nuts from
Singapore. These have been planted in the salter portion of the
garden, and there has scarcely been a miss. There is this, how-
ever, to be said ; it is regarded as a great delicacy by the white
ants, and must therefore be grown by the coast, where thousands
of acres can he found suitable for planting.
There are, of course, a large number of other products, such as
cinnamon, oil, and medicine plants, millets, dhol, &c., on which I
could enlarge ; but my time has gone, and your patience must he
exhausted. I will only refer to one more.
Bate Palm. —We hear a great deal of the arid and sandy regions
in the interior of Australia. Here we have a fruit-bearing tree
which probably will he found to be the means of settling a large
number of cultivators in the very heart of the continent when the
Transcontinental Railway is constructed. It grows in the great
desert of Sahara, and by cultivation the oases are being greatly
extended, and where water can be struck new ones are created by
its growth. It produces fruit in from three to five years after
planting. It lives for 100 years, and continues in bearing through-
out the An acre will carry eighty date palms, and the
value of the crop is £l6 at Ifd. per lb., which is the price on the
spot. The value of each tree, as reckoned by the Arabs, is that a
camel worth £l2 is often exchanged for one. Here then we
have something that will come in as an aid to the settlement and
prosperity of the southern latitudes of the Northern Territory.
I must now make an end. I wish you clearly to understand that
on the products of the Northern Territory I have not spoken to
you without practical and personal observation and examination.
When I went up to that region, I made up my mind I would see for
myself, and take nothing that I could possibly investigate either
upon hearsay or from official reports. I therefore at some risk,
and at the cost of much fatigue, travelled through the country and
went up the rivers. I have camped out beside malarial waters, and
made the acquaintance of the mosquito and the sandfly where their
name is legion. I have been among wild blacks, and ridden and
roughed it, that I might he able to say, “ I have seen, and I
know”; and I say this as the result: Notwithstanding all the
disappointments, the delays, and the disasters in connection with the


Northern Territory, my faith in its bright and great future remains
not only unshaken, but is strengthened. There is much that needs
yet to be done. Better laws, wiser administration, greater confi-
dence, larger capital are all required, and in time will be forth-
coming ; and when the railway crosses the continent, the north
will be firmly bound to the south by the bonds of amity and of
mutual interest. Here in the south are grown the fruits of colder
climes and cereals. In the centre of Australia we may look for
rich minerals and precious stones, while the broad expanses to east
and west and north and south will be stocked with cattle, horses
and sheep. In the north, on the banks of the great tidal rivers,
the fruits and,products of the tropics will be produced, and to the
world it will be demonstrated that there is no area of the earth’s
surface so self-contained and so self-supplying as this great
island continent of Australia.
One thing only remains to be said, and that is that for the
cultivation of these products in the north, so that our own markets
may be supplied and the markets of the world successfully
challenged, it is absolutely necessary that labor adapted for the
climate must be obtained. Given this and whoever may despair
and whoever may doubt about the fortunes of the Northern Terri-
tory, I, at any rate, shall keep heart of hope, and continue to look
forward with confident expectation for the firm, the assured,
and the advancing prosperity of the Northern Territory.


