

■ T * ■ ' r . .2*l
few* ...
THE
I GOLDEN FLEECE GAZETTE:
A Wl I T7 I T T TAITPN A I
Narrative. Science, am! Daily (Omirrnm\ , i.
WRITTEN BY THE PASSENGERS OF THE STEATvi SHIP
“GOLDEN FLEECE,” 1
I
DURING THEIR HOMEWARD VOYAGE FROM INDIA.
MAY—-NOVEMBER, 1862.
u A labour'd Ion" exordium sometimes tends
Like patriot speeehes but to paltry ends;
And Nunse.vse, iu a lofty note goes down,
As pert ness passes with a legal gown.”
Byron*








THE
GOLDEN FLEECE GAZETTE:
A WEEKLY JOURNAL
llaiptim, Jldcncp, mil 6mn;rmpL
WRITTEN BY THE PASSENGERS OF THE STEAM SHIP
“GOLDEN
FLEECE,”
DURING THEIR HOMEWARD VOYAGE FROM INDIA,
MAY—NOVEMBER, 1862.
“ A labour’d long exordium sometimes tends
(Like patriot speeches) but to paltry ends;
And Nonsense, in a lofty note goes down,
As pertness passes with a legal gown.”
Byron.
W. W. MARSHALL, 21, EDGWARE ROAD,
LONDON. W.
1863.




PREFACE.
Fellow Passengers,
For the last time we, in the capacity of Editors, address you.
It was our pleasing duty, for nearly six long months, to assist in beguiling the many-
dreary hours we passed together; and if we succeeded or contributed in any way to your
amusement and pleasure, we are more than rewarded. To those who assisted us with their
contributions we tender our best thanks, and those who did not write we still thank for the
kindness and forbearance with which they treated our feeble attempts, at the same time
mildly upbraiding them with their want of energy.
Should we ever meet again under happier circumstances, may we still be the same
to each other as when we parted.
Wishing to all every happiness and prosperity, we for the last time utter a
sorrowing farewell.
Yours,
D. HALKETT INGLES,
B.C.S.
CAPTAIN SMITH,
7th D.G.
FRED. KEYSER,
7th It. Fusiliers -




NARRATIVE OE OUR VOYAGE.
The Steam Ship “ Golden Fleece ” steamed from her moorings in Calcutta River on the 25th May, 1862,
-with about 70 passengers, and arrived at Madras on the 3rd June. The passage down the River was an
unusually hot one, and occupied five days, as the ship could only proceed at high water, she drawing 21ft,
and notwithstanding the utmost precautions on the part of the pilot she scraped the muddy bottom no less
than three times.
One passenger, a lady, died of dysentery on the 6th day and was buried at sea. The voyage
between Calcutta and Madras was a most unpleasant one, the heat being overpowering, and as most of the
passengers were officers and officers’ wives and children going to their native land in search after that
greatest of all boons, health, which the burning climate of India denied them, they were anything but a
lively lot; however, we were well supplied with the wherewithal to satisfy the cravings of nature, and claret
and beer flowed in plenty to soothe our thirsty souls, but all hailed the arrival at Madras with joy as being
so much further on the voyage to Old England. We were detained at Madras until the 7th. ihese five
days were passed by such of the passengers who were well enough to land, in buying Ohutnies, Curry
Powder, and various other curious things too numerous to relate, for absent friends. Having obtained our
full complement of passengers and cargo, we sailed on Saturday, the 7th June, in high spirits, anticipating
a speedy and pleasant termination to our voyage. But soon a fearful “ change came o’er the spirit of our
dream,” with the arrival of the Madras passengers (no fault of theirs though) claret and the liberal table
vanished, and in their place appeared what “ Hot Rolls ” in his tenth verse has so ably and graphically
described —
“No claret now at breakfast flows,
No fresh meat, e’en no chops;
Bacon and pork replace the last,
The first hot water slops.”
Ret us draw the curtain over this painful scene, and refer our readers to the poem above quoted for further
particulars. Nothing now disturbed the monotony of the voyage till the 12th, when a large steamer,
supposed to be an American, suddenly altered her course and bore down upon us ; our gallant commander
immediately cleared for action, we being armed with six long 24’s or long somethings, and lots of powder
and shot; but on the nearer approach of the hostile American we discovered her to be a French transport.
Here let us digress from this veracious narrative of events, and describe our every-day life on board.
At about six some of our early he-birds sleepily arose, and after imbibing a cup of hot coffee or what was
meant as such, mixed with a teaspoonful of dessicated milk, mounted the companion stairs and appeared
on deck in the loosest of loose costumes, there after having been well ducked with salt water, they again
descended to dress for breakfast. The children’s breakfast bell rang at 8, which was the signal for the
lazy ones to turn out, and to look sharp about it, for in those starvation times to be five minutes late meant
to go without one’s breakfast. Our breakfast bell went at nine, which meal being hastily swallowed, pipes
and cigars were speedily produced by “those nasty men.” For all such as were religiously and devoutly
disposed, morning prayers were held in the saloon at ten o’clock, when the unfortunate piano beginning
the day well with a psalm, never ceased to be strummed until Mr, Ward (the inexorable head waiter, the
terror and bugbear of the children) doused the glims at 10 p.m., 12 mortal hours of unmitigated jingle,
varied occasionally by the tootle of a flute, or the screech of a penny whistle; a species of harmonium
certainly did its best to help the piano through, but its sonorous music (P) generally resulted in a miserable
failure from want of breath, which shut it up, or rather caused it to be shut up. Knitting and books,
sewing and pipes, passed the time until the 12 o’clock luncheon of cheese and beer with an occasional
sardine few and far between by way of a treat, called by our incorrigible wit, for of course we had a wit,


oily gammon. After luncheon, amusements as before, varied with games at quoits, or an occasional
shooting match; then came the meal of the day, dinner at four, when everyone plied his or her knife and
fork to their utmost power, knowing full well that nothing substantial in the eating line would he forth-
coming till dinner the next day. An occasional speech or two varied the monotonous dinner, and once a
month our enjoyment of this delightful meal was enhanced by the appearance of clean table cloths. Being
naturally wearied after our dinner exploits, pipes and small talk filled up the interval till the children’s
tea at six, when some of the more gallant and tender hearted of our bachelors went below to see anxious
mothers through it; others walked the childless ladies, or those who were lucky enough to possess a price-
less treasure in the shape of an ugly ayah to watch her noisy progeny, up and down the deck, framing
endless small talk, which towards the end of our six months’ voyage became rather an envied accomplish-
ment. Our tea hour was at seven, which meal consisted of bread sometimes, butter seldom, and jams of
all sorts when we were good, which could not have been often. Now in bad weather, and we generally had
bad weather, the saloon was crammed and reminded one of a German Kur-Saal in a small way; whist,
chess, van-john, draughts, 100, picquet, backgammon, ecarte, and cribbage, were persevered in night after
night with a zeal and attention worthy of a better cause : a graphic and truthful account of an evening in
the saloon will be found in our last number. Grog was put on the table at 8,30, consisting of brandy,
whiskey, rum, and gin, with port wine and sherry for the ladies. At 10 lights were extinguished in the
saloon, and the ladies retired to rest; the gentlemen mostly going on deck to do one more pipe before
turning in. At 11 the officer of the watch descended and ordered out all lights in the cabins. All noises
were now hushed for the night, the peaceful stillness being now and then rudely broken by the sailors on
deck, a fractious child, or a sleeper’s snore. Such is ’board ship life, at least such was ours, a life teaching
to all patience, to ladies endurance, and fitting bachelors for domestic life. We sighted Bourbon on the
28th July, and the wind falling light were still in sight of land when day dawned on the 29th. To those
who would wish for an accurate and amusing description of this Island we would refer them to a capital
little work on the subject by M, C. Furnell of the Madras M.S. On the 30th an apprentice died of heart
complaint, his remains were committed to the* deep the same afternoon. *******
And now
“ The South and West winds joined and as they blew
Waves like a rolling trench before them flew.
Sooner than you read this line did the gale
Like shots not feared till felt our sails assail,
And what at first was called a gust, the same
Hath now a storm’s, anon a tempest’s name.”
From the beginning of July until the 12th of August, one misfortune followed on another in rapid and
endless succession. We append an account of all our disasters, as sent by us to the Editor of the
Cape Argus :—
The “Golden
Fleece.”
Disasters at Sea.
A passenger sends us this, the only full and correct
account of the accidents which crippled that splendid
ship, the Golden Fleece :
prospect of success; but at 5.30 p.m., when less than a foot
more was required to raise it to the proper height, the chain
parted, letting the screw slide down into its old position
amidst a perfect flame of fire, caused by the chain rushing
through the iron block. Although several of the crew and
passengers were standing round assisting and Avitnessing
the operation, no one fell a victim to this mishap but our
much respected and beloved commander, Captain Western,
E.N., who expired at about 11.30 p.m. from the effects of
the severe injuries he had sustained. A piece of the chain
(nearly half a link) Avas extracted from his back, having
entered his chest, breaking the breast-bone and seven ribs.
When the purchase parted the screw came down with a
terrific crash, and for a short time it was feared that some
serious injury had been done to the stern-post, but on sounding
the well by order of Captain Western, who to the last thought
of his vessel and passengers, it was found that nothing was
to be apprehended on that score. On being raised from
the deck, Captain Western at once inquired if anyone had
been hurt, and being answered in the negative, exclaimed,
“ Thank God it’s only me,” and then walked to his cabin,
supported by two of the bystanders. On the 19 th it was our
melancholy duty to commit to the deep the remains of this
brave and deeply lamented officer. On the 21st, cloudy;
22nd, fresh gale from the west; 23rd, 24th, and 25th, strong
gales, our ship rolling heavily and taking in seas; 26th,
gale moderated; 27 th, sighted Cape Infanta; the breeze
increasing, we lost one main-topmast staysail and fore stay-
We left Calcutta on. the 25th May, and Madras on 7th
of June. We had been proceeding prosperously, with every
chance of a fair passage, until July 10th, when, on examin-
ing the screw previous to steaming, it Avas found that the
locking gear of the screw was out of order. Preparations
were accordingly made to raise it. Between the above date
and the 13th we had fresh breezes, which split several of
our sails. On the 14th there was a light breeze, but the
ship was rolling very heavily. On the ensuing day the
barometer began to fall steadily. We then had four ships
in company, one of which, the Shannon , for Mauritius (four-
teen days out), we signalled. 15th, blowing a moderate
gale; split the mainsail and foresail, and hove-to owing to
the increasing gale and rising sea. On the 17th the ship
rolled and lurched heavily ; one of the port life-boat davits
carried away ; the boat hung for some minutes by the other,
and then fell into the sea and drifted quickly out of reach.
On the 18th, having light winds, and the sea having gone
down greatly, the crew were employed in the morning in
rigging purchases to raise the screAV. This screw weighs
about seven tons, and it had to be raised about eleven feet
to enable the chief engineer to execute the necessary repairs.
In the afternoon the attempt was made, at first with every


sail; 28th and 29th, fresh breeze and squally, with very
confused sea. On the afternoon of the 30th we split the main
and mizen topsails ; and a heavy sea lifting our first cutter
off the davits, the next roll dropped her on to the muzzle
of a gun, and stove her in. At midnight it blew a violent
gale, with terrific squalls. The reef-points of the fore-top-
sail, which was close reefed, drew through the eyelet holes,
giving the sail the appearance of an enormous comb. The
next day the weather was, if possible, worse —the fore-top-
gallant backstay carried away, leaving the fore-top-gallant
mast in much danger. Next, two of the weather shrouds
of the fore rigging parted, the other two looking very doubt-
ful, and great fears were entertained for the safety of the
lower masts ; however, tackles were got up, and they were
secured in the best manner we could. In the afternoon a
more terrific squall than usual split the fore-top-sail to
ribbons, necessitating the cutting away of the sail, as it en-
dangered the yard and mast. Here Mr. Connop, the fourth
officer, showed true courage and presence of mind. Going
out, axe in hand, to the very extremity of the lee yard arm,
he remained until the whole entangled fragments and gear
were cut away, notwithstanding that the lee braces of the
yard were slack, and the yard jerking violently; one of the
sailors, named Fox, was the first to follow and assist Mr.
Connop. At a quarter-past six the main-top-gallant mast
was carried away, taking with it the top-mast head : the
wreck was secured as soon as possible. At eight o’clock it
was blowing a tremendous gale, which lasted all night. On
the following morning (August Ist), at about 4 a.m., the
foremast being considered in imminent danger, it was
deemed advisable to cut away the fore-topmast to save the
lower mast; but before this could be effected, and whilst
bracing up the fore-yard to allow the topmast to fall clear,
the foremast went over the side, about 12 feet from the
deck, carrying away with it the main and mizen masts, the
former about 4 feet, and the latter close off from the deck,
leaving us in a furious sea a perfect wreck, with our screw out
of order, drifting away where the winds and sea willed, like
a log. We immediately began to clear the wreck, and in
cutting away the gear, lost four boats and two guns, which
were so broken and entangled as to render it an impossi-
bility to save them. At daylight we found that the main
yard and the stump of the mainmast were partly under the
ship’s bottom, and foul of the screw, bumping heavily, and
threatening every moment to knock a hole in the ship’s
bottom and sink her; but in a short time, to our unspeak-
able relief, they broke away, and we soon had the satisfac-
tion of seeing ourselves drifting clear of them. We were
now lying perfectly helpless in the trough of a heavy sea,
the vessel labouring fearfully, with all hard at work in
rigging shears, &c., preparatory to rigging jury-masts.
August 2nd, the gale moderated, but the sea was still
running very high. At daylight we sighted a ship, which
very kindly altered her course and bore down upon us, and
proved to be the ship Androldda, of Gottenberg, bound to
Falmouth. Her captain sailed round us twice, and offered
every assistance, which was declined with thanks, as we were
then getting on well with the jury-masts, and had every
hope of being able to raise the screw as soon as the weather
should permit. In the course of the afternoon we shipped
and rigged a jury-mast aft on the stump of the mizen mast,
and set a mizen-staysail and a reefed top-gallant studding
sail to keep her head to the sea, and so prevent her decks
being swept. August 3rd, half of us were employed in
raising shears, whilst the rest were busy with the purchases
for raising the screw. At 12.30, having got one treble and
two double purchase-tackles on the frame of the screw (one
of chain and two of rope), we commenced heaving, and in
an hour it was raised sufficiently high to replace the lost pin
of the locking gear, that fortunately being the only defect;
but on lowering it down it did not exactly fit into its place,
and night coming on prevented for the time any further
operations, as it required to be lifted again in order to turn
the bottom blade of the propeller uppermost. At about
half-past nine, seeing a ship, we burnt a blue light, which
she answered, and bore down. We found she was the bark
John Henry, from Newport to Mauritius, 77 days out; her
commander, Captain Scott, most kindly lowered a boat, and
came on board to enquire if he could bo of any assistance;
we thanked him for his kindness, and gave him throe hearty
cheers on his leaving the ship. The weather at this time
was quite fine: the sea had gone down rapidly, and we were
in hopes that our troubles were nearly over ; but towards
morning the barometer again began to fall, and the breeze
to freshen. Nothing daunted, however, at daylight we re-
commenced operations on the screw—now our best friend.
By noon the screw was again in working order, and the
fire alight. Too much praise cannot be awarded to Mr.
Randle, chief officer (in command), for the admirable pre-
cautions taken to insure success; to Mr. Bray, chief en-
gineer, and his subordinates, for the courageous and deter-
mined manner in which they performed their dangerous
duty, and the way they worked at the screw in so heavy a
sea ; and to all the officers, for their untiring exertions and
the spirited manner in which they carried out the orders of
their commander. No sooner had this important work been
so successfully finished, than a hard gale set in, with a
more heavy sea than ever. Steam being up, the engines
were set going “dead slow,” and after some time the ship
was brought round, and was soon on her right course for
Simon’s Bay, although making very little headway on ac-
count of the tremendous sea and violent squalls. At
midnight it was blowing a fresh gale with a very high sea,
the ship taking in much water. August sth, very squally,
with rain ; in the afternoon an attempt was made to raise a
fore-topmast as a jury-foremast, but on account of the very
heavy rolling we were obliged to desist. At 8 p.m. it was
blowing a hard gale, and we shipped a heavy sea fore and
aft, there being at one time as much as six inches of water
on the main deck, at the lee side.
At three in the morning of the ensuing day (August 6th)
we shipped a tremendous sea on the port bow, which washed
away about thirty feet of the bulwarks, stanchions and all,
and split the covering board, and knocked down the shears,
which in its fall smashed the ship’s galley. This tremendous
rush of water carried with it sheep pens, lamps, side houses,
filling the forecastle with water, and covering the decks
with paint, blocks, and splinters. But it did not confine its
ravages to the upper deck only; at the moment of the sea
striking, the ship quivered so violently that the general im-
pression among all was that she was filling and going
down; the bulwarks of some of the cabins filled with cargo
were torn out, and the cargo scattered about; the water
rushed from one end of the ship to the other, swamping the
saloon and many of the cabins, On sounding the well it
was found that no serious damage was done, though few
ships could have sustained this tremendous shock with
impunity. The next day was comparatively fine, and we
succeeded in raising a top-gallant mast for the jury-mast,
but on the Bth the wind again came round to the old quar-
ter, blowing harder than ever, with a very high sea running,
causing the ship to pitch a great deal, at times completely
lifting the screw out of the water, when it would rush round
with a whirr, shaking the ship violently, and causing the
lamps and glasses to jump and rattle on the tables. We
were greatly afraid of straining the engines, but being very
carefully attended to, they did not receive the slightest
injury. On the 9th it was still blowing very strong with
very high sea and violent hail squalls. At last on the 1 Oth
the weather began to moderate. On the 11th we sighted
land, and early on the morning of the 12th were, to our
unspeakable joy, lying safely at anchor in Simon’s Bay,
And now, in conclusion, I know I am only expressing the
feelings of all the passengers, in tendering our warmest
thanks and acknowledgments to Mr. Randle, our present
Commander, and his able officers, for their great exertions
and untiring efforts during the past anxious and trying
fortnight, and I hope that if ever it should be my misfor-
tune to again round the Cape of Good Hope during the
winter months, I may be in so good a ship, and under the
care of such kind and able officers.
On Saturday, 20th September (our ship having been refitted and jury-rigged with small masts that were
of no earthly use to her) we intended once more to trust ourselves on the bosom of the pathless deep; but the
“ Calcutta,” one of the same line of ships, having arrived in Table Bay, it was determined on account of the in-
surance, that her Chief Officer, who had a master’s certificate, should take command of our ship. This
little arrangement was completed at last, and we sailed or rather steamed from Simon’s Bay on the 23rd; but


yin.
our luckless skip could not even make a start without a mishap—in getting under weigh we lost our best
anchor and some chain ! We steamed along at a snail’s pace with nothing to vary the monotony of tho
days till about the first week in October, when complaints were frequent about there being no butter and
no good sugar. On the 21st October we arrived at St. Yincent, one of the Cape de Yerde group of islands.
St. Yincent is a wretched barren little island, obtaining all its supplies from St. Antonio, distant 10 miles.
There is one inferior hotel and a miniature billiard table of the very worst description, so the chief amuse-
ments were boating and fishing—a match was here made between the starboard and port tables, and rowed
one very stormy evening in the ship’s gigs. Now although we do not profess to know much about nautical
matters, it was very apparent to us that with a more skilful steersman the starboard would have won, or at
any rate made a very close match of it; as it was, the port won easily. The Brazilian mail steamer touched
here to coal on her homeward voyage, and on the afternoon of the 22nd sent her band on board of us to
cheer us up a bit. The evening passed off very pleasantly. Our band of Christy’s Minstrels performed in
the evening before a delighted audience from the mail steamer.
Sunday evening, 26th, sailed from St. Yincent at about six p.m. On the 31st, requiring to shift
some cargo aft to trim the ship, it was found that some of the iron girders and stanchions of the ship had
been broken and displaced. (So much for the survey held on the ship at the Cape.)
The straining of the ship had started the planks of the deck so much and caused them to leak, that
most of our cabins were hardly inhabitable. We experienced head winds and nasty weather nearly the
whole way. On the 19th November we sighted the shores of Old England, but on the morning of the 20th
we were blown out of sight again. Great anxiety now prevailed, for we had finished nearly all our coal and
food, and we were given to understand that if we failed to reach some land by evening it would be a bad
look out for us. We intended to run for Plymouth, but this at last appearing impossible we altered our
course a little, and the wind moderating, we at last through God’s mercy reached Penzance. Here six of
our passengers, without hardly a sixpence between them, jumped into the pilot boat, intending to reach
their homes somehow without the loss of a moment. Alas, money is not to be picked up in Penzance,
and human beings must have dinners, and must have beds to sleep in. The six turned their steps towards
Ball’s Hotel. They have not tasted English draught ale for years, they have not sat by a cheerful English
fireside for years.—“ Ho, Waiter! Six pints of draught ale, and a good dinner for six as soon as possible.”
—“ As soon as possible, Sir? Yes, Sir.”—(Exit Waiter.) —The hands in vain search the pockets, they
are empty, and the six feel in low spirits. But the Telegraph soon informs the anxious relatives of the six
that they have landed safely at Penzance with no tin to pay their way home. However a good dinner and
a comfortable night’s rest restores the spirits of the six—they rise, breakfast, and then inform the landlord
of their deplorable condition. The landlord (jolly good hearted chap as ever breathed), said, “ Never
mind; do not waste your time and money here—l will find you the tin to go to your homes with. I have
often lent money to passengers in distress, and have never once been sold !”
Having thus obtained the wherewithal to pay their way to London, the six (amongst whom were
the three Editors of this Gazette) paid their bills, hurried to the train, and from the windows of their
carriage caught the last parting glimpse of the ship in which they had passed so many happy and weary,
joyful and dreary, careless and anxious hours.
Fellow passengers, our task is done. Vale, Vale.


Date.
Lat.
Lon.
Run
Milos.
Remarks.
Date.
Lat.
Lon.
Rim
Miles.
Remarks.
May25
• • • •
i Steaming down
July 31
36° 14'
20° 37'
67
26
> the Hoogly in
Aug. 1
36° 14'
20° 50'
....
Dismasted
27
....
....
; charge of Pilot
2
36° 21'
21° 45'
60
28
....
3 p.m., Pilot left
3
36° 55'
21° 40'
39
29
19° 57'
86° 40'
105
[ship.
4
37° 66'
21° 37'
63
Steamed ahead
30
19° 8'
84° 55'
no
5
38° 7'
21° 5'
44
31
17° 63'
83° 40'
99
6
38° 31'
20° 26'
54
June 1
16° 12'
82 3 23'
125
7
37° 28'
20° 1'
44
2
14° 22'
82° 52'
115
[in Madras Bead
8
37° 3'
19° 49'
• • . •
3
5 p.m., anchored
9
36° 14'
20° 5'
53
7
Weighed anchor
10
35° 28'
20° 5'
45
8
IP 51'
82° 47'
184
[at 5 a.m.
11
35° 5'
19° 23'
49
9
10° 46'
84° 46'
148
12
....
....
Arrived inSimon’s
10
8° 47'
87° 27'
200
....
• • • •
....
.... [Bay
11
7° 16'
89° 30'
153
Sept23
....
Weighed
12
6° 3'
90 3 18'
110
Steamed ahead
24
32° 48'
16° 19'
i4s
13
4° 19'
89° 54'
105
Ditto
£5
30° 40'
15 n 3'
154
14
1° 51'X
88° 40'
165
Ditto
26
29° 7'
13° 34'
129
d~i V 7 1*11 n
27
27° 42'
1 9, 3 Ifi'
115
15
0° 36' S
87° 20'
162
v/ OSo&Cv
Steamed ahead
28
26 3 6'
10 3 51'
131
16
2° 37'
86° 40'
125
Stopped Engine
29
24° 0'
8° 55'
169
17
2° 55'
84° 30'
136
30
21° 43'
7° 1'
180
18
4° 16'
81° 45'
182
Oct. 1
19° 39'
5° 4'
169
19
5° 47'
79° 45'
150
2
17° 31'
3° 5'
169
20
7 3 30'
77° 10'
186
3
15° 28'
1° 14'E
167
21
8° 34'
75° 20'
125
4
13° 21'
0° 45'W
174
22
10° 13'
73° 10'
165
5
11° 20'
2° 33'
161
23
11° 40'
71° 20'
140
6
9° 22'
4° 12'
150
24
14° 0'
68° 62'
206
7
7° 30'*
5° 65'
152
25
16° 13'
66° 00'
215
8
5° 48'
7° 44'
149
26
17° 54'
62° 47'
210
9
3° 57'
9° 31'
155
27
18° 57'
59° 23'
206
10
1° 49'S
11° 25'
171
28
20° 14'
55° 46'
225
Crossed line
29
21° 4'
54° 39'
90
11
0 3 24'N
12° 46'
156
30
22° 58'
52° 45'
168
12
2" 19'
14° 29'
149
July 1
24° 57'
51° 10'
154
13
4 3 13'
15 3 46'
140
2
25° 57'
50° 10'
86
14
5° 40'
17° 0'
125
3
26° 31'
47° 0'
180
15
6° 46'
18 3 36'
116
.
4
27° 42'
44° 40'
165
16
5
28° 30'
41° 45'
181
17
9° 53'
21° 36'
120
6
29° 45'
■*39° 0'
182
18
11° 30'
23° 3'
128
7
29° 58'
38° 00'
67
19
13° 11'
24° 7'
130
8
30° 31'
37° 0'
63
20
14° 63'
25° 0'
140
[cent
9
30° 48'
35° 40'
71
21
....
....
....
Arrived at St.Vin-
10
30° 11'
34° 42'
65
• •
....
....
....
11
31° 01'
32° 30'
124
27
18 3 10'
24° 48'
80
12
31° 44'
30° 45'
93
28
20° 6'
24 3 52'
117
13
32 3 21'
29° 35'
75
29
21° 53'
25 3 03'
108
14
33° 20'
28° 30'
88
30
23° 27'
25° 21'
98
15
33° 53'
28° 20'
25
31
25° 5'
25° 21'
95
16
34° 18'
27° 30'
60
Nov. 1
26° 49'
25° 19'
104
17
34° 26'
26° 29'
20
2
28° 50'
25° 26'
122
18
34° 30'
25° 45'
98
Captain died
3
19
35° 7'
23° 34'
130
4
32° 47'
24° 47'
112
20
35° 2'
21° 34'
97
6
33° 37'
24° 5'
65
21
35° 23'
21° 21'
26
6
34° 49'
22° 55'
104
22
35° 46'
21° 17'
23
7
36° 18'
21° 40'
118
23
36° 28'
21° 12'
42
8
37° 50'
20° 43'
no
24
37° 4'
21° 44'
53
9
26
36° 12'
21° 20'
64
10
26
35° 14'
21° 29'
54
11
27
34° 54'
21° 12'
87
12
28
35° 27'
21° 2'
13
Arrived and an-
29
36° 13'
20° 27'
61
14
chored in Mounts
30
35’ 18'
20° 4'
62
15
Bay, Penzance
/




Golden Fleece Gazette
No. 1.
“ Dear authors suit your topics to your strength
And ponder well your subject and its length.”— Byron.
ATLANTIC OCEAN.
JULY 2.
An Appeal to tlie Public.
No newspaper, no newspaper, nothing of the sort as yet,
Will no one take the trouble to start a Golden Fleece Gazette ?
Oh, the men are all too lazy and the ladies will not write ;
What a nuisance, what a bother, real good work would serve them
right.
Oh! we ladies, more than any, are most dreadfully ill-used.
We’ve no means of scandal, gossip, no redress when we’re abused;
No near outlet, no safe exit, for our poetry and prose.
Every day there’s nothing for us hut hooks, small talk, and quiet dose.
When we lose our thimbles, scissors, hooks and eyes, and crinoline,,
We’re obliged to ask and bother, make a fuss as ne’er was seen.
Notwithstanding all this trouble, nothing could we find or get:
One advertisement would do it in the Golden Fleece Gazette.
And the men, I do assure you, grumble louder than the others, —
Are cross and sulky, like small babies when away from tired mothers,
Sit and smoke abaft the mainmast, sit and smoke the live-long day;
Only beer, hot grog and sodas, can get the nasty things away.
These and other loud complainings have frequently been heard by me,
Till my temper, spoilt and worried, angered to the last degree,
So on all I took compassion (self included) and have set
All my types and devils ready, to start the Golden Fleece Gazette.
Now, for all there is employment; all should help,—at least, they
ought,
Pens and paper, ink and pencils, from the steward can he bought.
Now, dear ladies, kindly help us, give us all the aid you can ;
Every piece you know is incog., no name shown to any man.
No one knows what they can do till they’ve had a real good try :
Some are eloquent in prose, others in gushing poetry.
All your papers, when they’re finished, drop in the editorial box.
Which I promise shall he guarded from prying eyes by double locks.
And you men on gloomy evenings, when inspired by grog and pipes,
Sit you down and write us something, anything,—An ode to Swipes,
Bobstay.
The above, contributed by one who will be, we greatly
fear, some day an inmate of a lunatic asylum, has taken
the very words from us with which we were about to com-
mence our opening address.
In starting a journal on board ship we are quite aware of
the difficulties with which we shall have to contend; but re-
lying, as we do, upon the good nature and ready help of
our readers, we have little fear for its success.
Our great objects are two in number—'first, to afford
some slight amusement; and second, to find pleasing em-
ployment for all during the many tiresome hours which are
inevitable consequences of a long voyage.
Being circumstanced as we are, and necessarily limited
in our matter, we trust for the most part to the kindness of
our correspondents, who may be sure that “ all contribu-
tions will be thankfully received.” At the same time they
must bear in mind that we shall now and then be obliged
to have recourse to a little judicious pruning, as all matter
which might give offence or be liable to misconstruction it
will be our duty to exclude, which duty we shall perform
with the fortitude of a Brutus.
Dreadful railway accidents, murders, suicides, fires, ex-
plosions, shocking deaths, burglaries, thefts, and all the
other more startling incidents, political and domestic, of
modern journals, can naturally form no part of ours. We must
rely therefore solely on our readers’ aid and our own inven-
tive powers ; chronicling from time to time the few passing
events which may he deemed worthy of interest. In fact,
we hope to make our little paper the happy medium of
circulating a friendly feeling amongst us all; and, in short,
to have the same effect upon us as that noble beverage
which “cheers but not inebriates.”
Below will be found a short summary of the history of
our gallant ship. We hope hereafter to be enabled to pub-
lish a more detailed and collected account.
We cannot undertake to return rejected communications,
unless the names of the authors accompany the articles—
not necessarily for publication, but to enable us to identify
them.
We shall be very happy to give, and especially invite,
attention to subjects for discussion in the pages of this
Gazette ; but we must be allowed to use our own discretion
in limiting the duration of such correspondence.
Theatrical Gossip.
All our readers are, no doubt, aware that extensive ar-
rangements are in the course of progress for getting up a
few theatrical performances.
We consider, however, that a few remarks on the subject
of the difficulties to be contended against will not be deemed
out of place in this journal.
As far as the acting itself is concerned, we feel confident
that the obliging amateurs who have so kindly placed their
services at the disposal of the manager will not disgrace
the (very badly caulked) boards of the Golden Fleece.
In the first place, it must be borne in mind that the
scenery cannot be of that grand and artistic order which
might perhaps be expected by some on board who are
“ dabs ” with the brush and palette, owing to the absence
of professional scene-painters; this defect, however, will
probably be remedied by writing “ This is a tree,” “ That
is a boat,” &c., &c., under what is intended to represent
those objects respectively.
It is evidently not generally known among the passengers
of the Golden Fleece that that truly British drink vulgarly
called “beer” (and which by-the-by, when mixed with
porter constitutes “ arf and arf ”) is very extensively used
in scene-painting; and as that (together with sundry other
trifles) is not easily procured, except by paying for it (we
were going to say “ through the nose,” only that, unfor-
tunately, it is out of the pocket), the volunteers engaged in
that arduous duty are not getting on as fast as might be
expected.
We feel confident that those who hope to participate in
the amusement of looking on will not allow this dearth to


continue, as the result of it will he that neither the scenery
nor the painters will he as “ spirit ”uelle (so to speak) as
could be desired.
We would next hope that the good example set by
Captain Western and officers of the Golden Fleece, who
have so kindly assisted the corps by providing the scene
materials, will be followed by the fair sex (the dears, bless
’em!) in furnishing property for the female characters.
The old familiar proverb of “ too many cooks spoiling the
broth” has been, in our opinion, fully exemplified (not,
however, without af-FoORD-ing some amusement to the
proper number of cooks engaged) although perhaps the
supernumaries may say (and perhaps with justice) “the
more the merrier.”
We will conclude our gossip by bidding the corps success,
and above all speed, and trust that our strictures will be
taken, as they are meant, in good part.
B. Hall.
Ancient Burying-places in the
Kingdom of Cochin.
Dear Sib, —The following sketch by a lover of antiqui-
ties of the opening of some curious cairns in the Cochin
country may not be without interest to many of your
readers.
In many parts of this country largo chatties of about two
feet diameter are found sunk in the ground. On opening
them the contents usually found are some bones, ashes,
and a little fine sea sand. They are not only met with
isolated in the retired spots, but also in large groups near
temples and on high roads. Not so common as these chat-
ties are the isolated “ cairns,” which, though more elabo-
rate and costly, must have belonged to the same age.
[Regular burying places, i.e., many cairns clustered toge-
ther on the same spot, are of very rare occurrence. I have
heard of one five miles east of Bey poor, which the natives
call “ field of death,” but I myself never opened one till
lately, of which I now give you a few particulars.
In the immediate neighbourhood of Kununkulum, on
the slope of a hill called “ Stone Post Hill,” stand sixteen
cairns together, having somewhat the appearance of so
many monuments in a churchyard. They are circular in
shape, being built of ten stones of about one foot thick and
four feet long, pointed at the top and placed in a standing
position. This gives them at a distance the form of a huge
sugar-loaf with its top cut off.
To get access to the inside, I first removed five of these
stones; which, however, was no small task, as it required
twelve men and a lever to throw each back. This accom-
plished, I thought the chief labour was over, when alas !
over what appeared to be the mouth of a well, lay a circu-
lar slab of some two feet in thickness and five in diameter.
As it was impossible to remove this whole, I had it cut
in pieces, and then began to dig downwards. At the depth
of two feet, chatties of sizes made their appearance which
crumbled to pieces as soon as they were touched. Presently
we came upon a large stone from which proceeded a strong
hollow sound as often as it was struck. Some of the
natives who stood by began to feel uncomfortable, half ex-
pecting that some pigmy of 2,000 years might spring up.
It was soon clear that this stone was but the lid of an im-
mense jar which filled the whole well-like cavity. Pound
this lid we found a layer of small drinking cups with covers,
the size and shape being three quarters of a cocoa-nut:
also a knotted rod of iron which was so corroded that it
afforded no clue to what might have been its use.
Haxs.
(To he continued in our next.)
Summary History of the S. S. “ Golden
Fleece.”
Was built in 1854 by C. S. Mare, of Blackwall, for the
“ General Screw Steam Shipping Company.” She was after-
wards sold to the “European and American Steam Ship-
ping Company.” That company having met with pecuniary
difficulties, under which disease they still linger in Chancery
hospital, she was re-sold to the “Anglo Luso Brazilian
Company,” but that company becoming more insolvent (if
possible) than the last, she was for the third time sold to
the “ East India and London Shipping Company,” in
whose able hands she now is. All success to her, her en-
terprising owners, and gallant captain.
She was employed in the Transport service during the
Crimean war, the Indian mutiny, and the other day when
war was anticipated with America. In 1857 she made the
passage to Calcutta, touching at two ports, in 65 days;
her last voyage to the same place was made in 95 days.
May she have equal success with our homeward trip.
Navis.
Poetry.
THE DISCONSOLATE YOUNG LADY’S PETITION.
I am pensive, I am weary,
I am not all the cheese ;
The hours seem long and weary,
Oh ! set my mind at ease.
Oh! Captain, I conjure you
To listen now to me,
My grief, I do assure you,
Is great as you shall see.
It is not the horrid rocking,
Nor the ringing of the bell,
Nor the donkey always knocking,
Nor the everlasting swell,
Nor the little babies howling,
Nor the fumes of cutty pipes,
Nor that big Newfoundland’s growling.
Nor the small amount of swipes.
’Tis not the dread sea-sickness, —
That trouble I am o’er, —
’Tis not the pea-soup’s thickness
(Though that’s a horrid bore),
’Tis not the holy-stoning
Which wakes me from my sleep,
, Tis not the dismal moaning
Which rises from the deep.
Piano, flute, and soraphine,
They sound the blessed day,
My head aches from the row, I ween,
But naught I care for they.
’Tis not the want of linen,
Though my clothes are nearly done,
(My petticoats are thinning,
Clean stockings I have none) ;
’Tis not the knives are rusty,
Nor the butter just like lard,
Nor that the beef is musty,
Although it’s wondrous hard ;
Not that they leave me in the dark
Before I’m half undressed,
Nor noisy youngsters at a lark.
Although they spoil my rest;
Not that the odious hairy sex
Take possession of my chair,
Then fling it down upon the deck
Broken—beyond repair!
’Tis not the wicked swearing
In which the youths indulge,
Nor that stupid way of staring,
Nor the secrets they divulge ;
It is not for my absent friends
That I now daily mourn,
For some on board quite make amends,
And sorrow can be borne.
The other day they told us
We might open all our ports,
The sea came in, I made no fuss,
Gave my wet things no thoughts.
I ope’d the ports as all did,
’Tis not that I was ducked,
’Tis that the fowls are scalded,
Instead of being plucked.
J E'HMA.
The Glutton’s Growl.
I came on board this gallant ship
On the 24th of May,
I really did enjoj’- myself
That well-remembered day.
We had such a splendid tiffin,
With lots of good champagne.
What luck to sail in such a ship
To the old land again!
The next morning at our breakfast
They gave us claret good,
With mutton chops, joints, pies, and stews.
Cooked as a good cook should.
THE GOLDEN FLEECE GAZETTE.


you, or any of your numerous correspondents, enlighten
me on the natural history of the animal, —mental and
physical endowments, habits, and propensities ?
I am told one thing, viz., that the female species is a
most fascinating and interesting creature, and differs, in
most respects, to the male, presenting a most striking and
instructive profile for the study of the physiognomist, or
painter, and is so far advanced in civilization as to dis-
approve of polygamy amd strong drinks. Gorilla.
At tiffin lots of sardines.
Good porter and bitter beer;
At dinner everything there was
That Could satisfy or cheer.
So lived we like the fighting cocks
One reads about of old;
Thus should we live the whole voyage home.
At least so we were told.
We lived like this, and better too,
Until we reached Madras,
And I believed what I’d been told;
Oh ! wasn’t I an ass.
Conundrums.
My first’s a dear and joyous thing,
Trudging along from school,
My next they put on horses’ heads,
When wintry winds blow cool;
And oh! my whole I love to think,
When you and I were one,
Oh ! that that happy, glorious time,
Never again should come.
When from Madras the passengers
Were safe and snug on board,
Our splendid table soon was stopped,
And all my hopes were floor’d.
Tor breakfast greasy Irish stew,
Made up of bones and taties,
Salt beef, salt pork, salt herrings, too,
Woe betide him who late is.
Bobstat.
My first I wear upon my foot,
My second’s the name of a man;
My whole I use for boots and shoes,
Now tell it if you can.
For is he e’en five minutes late
Nothing he’ll get to eat,
’Cept p’r’aps some currie made of bones,
Or lumps of jagged salt meat.
Bobstay.
Solutions to the above earnestly requested.— Ed.
Domestic Occurrences, Passing Events,
&c., &c.
No claret now at breakfast flows,
No fresh meat, e’en no chops,
Bacon and pork replace the last,
The first hot water slops.
BIRTHS.
The sardines we for tiffin get
On Sundays, like good boys.
No longer now the epicure
This little fish enjoys.
At Porkina Lodge, on Monday, 30th June, the wife of
Mr. Hog, of three daughters.—Mother and children are
doing well.
The spirit of economy
Pervades now over all,
Champagne now only once a week,
Our pride has had a fall.
Passing Events.
Charley Sneezer, hearing it was the birth-day of one of
the Editors, and knowing him to be a most vicious smoker,
sent him a most superb cutty, with the following lines :
The after-dinner-claret we
Now get by fits and starts.
Really, this dreadful stinginess
Will surely break our hearts.
I send you a pipe,
As a kind of a type.
Of my love and affection for you;
So prithee don’t lag,
But fill it with shag,
And smoke it till everything’s blue.
At grog-time now there is’nt port
Enough e’en for the ladies;
And ’pon my word they stint the milk
From blessed little babies.
To which the Editor replied:
Many thanks for the clay
You have sent me to-day,
I’ll smoke like a Briton, good lack,
In remembrance of you
I’ll smoke till all’s blue,
If I don’t till the cutty is black.
And now I’ve told my grievances,
And hope the powers that be
Will take them all in kindly part ,
And find some remedy.
Hot Rolls.
Picked up in the Saloon.
Notices to Correspondents.
(Supposed to have been written after Grog Time.)
If “Nimrod” will confine himself to his subject, and
not indulge in disjointed and unconnected personalties, his
communications will always find a prominent place in our
journal.
There’s wailing on the midnight,
A sound of many squalls,
A dozen babes, three angry cats.
The “ Golden Fleece ” appals.
We fear that “Fossil’s ” advertisement might be deemed
personal.
Now all is hushed, the babes are still,
The angry cats arise,
The gallant ship with right good will,
Upon her journey hies.
Our correspondents are particularly requested to send
their communications written in ink, and to write them as
plainly as possible.
Our best thanks are due to “ Blowhard ” for his mottoes ;
but having already fixed upon one, we were unable to avail
ourselves of his kindness.
The Captain smiles, “Now, go it, go,”
He gleefully does say,
With winds above, and squalls below,
My good ship you must pay.
“A,” “ Timothy Timkins,” and “ Xit,” are thanked for
their communications, which will duly appear in our next.
Correspondence.
Domestic Occurrences.
Editor, —I am particularly anxious to get up the
before appearing in good society in town. Would
Just as we were going to Press we received the mournful
3
THE GOLDEN FLEECE GAZETTE.


intelligence of the untimely demise of one of the young
Miss Hogs. The mournful event took place early this
morning.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
A Card.
ME. PHILLIP LEYI, Haircutter, &c., &c., has much
pleasure in announcing that his services are always
at the disposal of the Passengers.
London Prices.
Found.
NEAE Wheel Crescent, a Flowing Lock of Hair, supposed
to have very recently changed hands, and to have
been dropped during a moonlight reverie by a gallant Sub.
Any one having a right to the above, and applying for it
to the Quarter-Master on duty at the wheel, may, on pay-
ing the expenses of this advertisement, receive the same in
perfect order.
N.B.—lf the above be not claimed by the 10th inst., it
will be sold by public auction to defray expenses.
Wanted,
BY the Theatrical Manager of the ship, a few good Scene
Painters and Scene Shifters. For further particulars
apply to the Editor.
N.B.—None who have studied the art from an early age
need apply.
Wanted,
BY the Scene-painters, some Locks of Hair (Ladies’ pre
ferred), for the purpose of making
Camel’s Hair Brushes.
Wanted,
BY the Editors of the Golden Fleece Gazette , Half-a-dozen
Quills from any Goose on Board.
Lost.
LOST, from the Book-stand, in the Saloon, a volume of
Caird’s Sermons. The owner hopes that, when the
Book has been well read, it will be returned to the place
from which it is taken.
Oh! Scissors!!!
LOST, in the Saloon of the Golden Fleece , a pair of Nail
Scissors, with the name of “ Eogers ” inscribed on the
handle. It is requested that whoever has found the same
will restore them to the Editor.
Lost,
SOME WHEEE in the vicinity of Painter’s Alley, a White-
handled Knife and a Red Pencil. Whoever will restore
the same to the disconsolate loser will be handsomely re-
warded with thanlcs.
Lost,
The following articles:
2 Silver Thimbles,
1 Pair of Nail Scissors,
1 Worsted Comforter,
1 Silk Scarf.
Can be given to the Editor.
Found,
AFULL-GEOWN Baby’s Starboard Stock. Any one
having lost the same can obtain it by applying to the
Chief Officer.
4
THE GOLDEN FLEECE GAZETTE.


Golden Fleece Gazette
“ Dear authors suit your topics to your strength
And ponder well your subject and its length.”— Byron.
JULY 9,
INDIAN OCEAN.
No. 2.
The very cordial reception which our last humble efforts
received has afforded us much gratification, and incited us
to fresh exertions in this our second number.
We have to thank our contributors for their very hearty
support; but at the same time we must confess that we
hope that ere long their numbers will increase, and that
the invigorating and bracing air of the Cape winter will
be the means of extracting those hidden treasures of intel-
lect which we are confident are possessed by all, but are at
present concealed under the bushel of modesty.
Will no Nimrod write us of his deeds in the chase ?—no
fair lady present us with a three-volumed novel, killing her
hero in the first volume, and resuscitating him and marrying
him to her beauteous and blushing heroine in the third ?
Will no hardy seaman tell us of storms, shipwrecks, and
escapes ? —no old soldier of his adventures in love and war ?
Will no physician write us a treatise, no philosopher an
essay, or will no matron expatiate to us upon her domestic
grievances ?
Without something of this sort, we are afraid that our
journal will, notwithstanding our most strenuous endeavours
to amuse, soon become somewhat wanting in interest.
We take this opportunity to remind our readers that all
contributions must be original; and hope that they will
bear in mind the old, though perhaps hackneyed and some-
what vulgar, saying of
“ He wot prigs wot isn’t his’n,
Yen he’s cotched ’nil go to pris’n.”
We must point out to our correspondents the absolute
necessity of their placing all communications intended for
us in the editor’s box, as we really cannot _ receive any that
are given to us personally or sent to our private residencies.
Our object in making this a sine qud non must be apparent
to all.
Below will be found a letter from a person who signs
himself “A silent admirer of the Golden Fleece Gazette .”
From what he has written we should say that he was
amjthing but an admirer, and certainly not a silent one;
however, let that pass. Let us then remind our silent friend
that the evil he complains of can be no fault of ours ; he
should remember that the duty of editors of a journal, at
least of a journal like ours, is simply to write some short
introduction to each number, and to arrange and copy the
different articles sent to us by our contributors. If
“Jemima” or “Hot Rolls” prefer distinguishing them-
selves in doggerel rhyme to being eloquent in prose, is it
any fault of ours? Our silent friend evidently admires
“ jemima ; ” would it be possible to exclude her able poem,
and to replace it with some muddy article of our own ? If
our silent admirer really wishes to see the Gazette flourish,
and has only our interest at heart, let him come forward
himself, and send us next week some article in prose which
shall raise our modest little journal to a high place amongst
its more ambitious brethren.
We regret that we have not this week been favoured
with any communication from our talented correspondent
“ Jemima; ” but we trust that she will not be daunted by
“ Bella’s ” vigorous attack, but again resume her pen with
the same success as attended her first essay.
We trust that we shall not be considered too exacting
when we request that those obtuse individuals who are
unable to amuse either themselves or others by writing any
readable matter, will kindly abstain from the very childish
amusement of filling our editor’s box with nuts and
biscuits.
We have received a letter from old “ Indian Neptune,”
which we give below. The mistake he complains of oc-
curred through the carelessness of one of our young
devils. We need scarcely add that the young reptile has
been made to feel sorry for it ever since.
Ancient Burying-places in the King-
dom of Cochin.
(Continued from our last.)
As every one was very anxious to have a look at the
inside, I had the lid removed, when lo ! a jar almost empty,
and of about four feet depth, was brought to view. Bound
the neck on the inside were about sixteen strong large
hooks of the same material as the chattey. These I sup-
pose were intended to lower it into the pit, which was
about eight feet deep. As the bottom of the jar was
covered with white sea sand, I was curious to know what
was mixed with it; but at first none of the coolies would
go down. Fear being gradually overcome, we were all
disappointed when only bones were found mixed with the
sand.
The story which the Brahmins and others told me about
these graves is this : “ About three thousand years ago
this part of the country was inhabited by powerful men,
who lived to the age of nine hundred years. When the
infirmities of age came upon them they slowly shrivelled
into pigmies of a few inches long, gave up eating and
drinking, and in this state, though not dead, they were
buried.” Silly as this explanation is, we may, I think, be
pretty sure of two things:
Ist. That these are the tombs of a race of men who lived
here prior to the arrival of any of the present castes —for no
one has the slightest notion what they really are; nor are
any objections made to their being dug up; nor does any
caste at present bury in anything like the same mode.
2ndly. They cannot be the graves of common people, but
must be the tombs of kings. The immense stone over the
mouth of the grave could never have been put there by
human hands alone, and if elephants or any kind of


machinery were used, that would prove too expensive for
common people, and lie only within the reach of their
princes; no common man would ever get the number of
hands together that were required to make such cairns.
Hans.
Rough Notes from Memory of a Trip
to Simlah from the Punjab in 1860.
The people of glorious old England can scarcely picture
to themselves the intense longing with which a resident in
the burning plains of India looks forward to his month’s
“privilege,” which enables him to cast dull care behind
and rush away to enjoy the beautiful scenery and still finer
climate of the magnificent Himalayas.
It was with feelings of great satisfaction one burning
day in July that we espied a sowar cantering towards our
bungalow bringing the desired leave. It was almost
impossible for the thermometer to rise any higher, but at
once we revelled (in imagination) in the glorious breezes of
the Hills.
The wished-for morning came; but on rising what a
change had occurred. The night previous had been per-
fectly hot, and no signs of rain, but the morning showed
most unmistakably that it was not only raining but that
the “ rAins ” had set in ; still there was no hope for it, and
the only thing was to put a good face on the matter. Till
three p.m. we watched with longing eyes for an abatement
of the storm, and then, finding that it would not cease, we
ordered our horses, and, accompanied by a friend, com-
menced a dreary ride of twenty-two miles to the nearest
station. A canter was impossible, and in many places it
was a matter of the greatest difficulty to get along. At
length the glimmer of lights showed that we were
approaching the city, and shortly afterwards perseverance
was rewarded with “brandies hot.” At midnight, in spite
of the wishes of our friends, we jumped into a dak gharrie,
and were fairly launched on our journey.
Accustomed to Indian travelling in every shape and at all
seasons of the year, we did not look for any serious hin-
drances on the road, and were greatly surprised at early
dawn by finding the gharrie at a stand-still, the coachman
doing his “ hubble-bubble,” and the syce on the roof in a
refreshing nap. The fact now showed itself that the rain
must have been general throughout the Punjab ; for here
was a small stream converted into an unfordable river, and
rushing across the road with tremendous velocity. As
there is no use in contending against circumstances we
lighted our pipes and quietly awaited till the stream some-
what subsided; and having forded it with no greater loss
than the coachman’s pugree, we pushed on to the Beeas.
Here we were in a fix. The river was rough to a degree ;
and the boatmen refused to cross till the swell went down.
Having nothing for it, we concluded that it would be as
well to breakfast, and adjourned to the serai near the
river (there being no dak bungalow), and inquired for a
mutton chop. None, sir. Sudden death, then? None,
sir. Eggs, then ? None, sir. Then what in the name of
goodness can you get ? They replied, chupatties and ghee,
sir. Having a mortal dread of chupatties in any form,
and a still greater detestation of ghee, we suddenly recol-
lected that our kind friends had put (as they said) a few
biscuits in the box of the gharrie. Rushing, then, in the
pangs of hunger, we descried first a cold chicken, bread,
eggs, a bottle of rum, and one of sherry. “Richard was
himself again;” and after doing justice to our friends’
kindness we felt at peace with all the world, and smoked
away the time in calm enjoyment till the “ Manjee ” of one
of the boats announced his willingness to venture the
passage. Another ten minutes saw the gharrie on board,
and after two hours and a quarter we were landed on the
other side, the width of the river being about a mile and a
half. The river crossed, bullocks were yoked to our ghar-
rie, to enable us to pass over that portion of the “Kutcha”
road, which then lay between the Beeas and Jullunder.
This road we knew from frequent experiences, was trouble-
some and fatiguing in the best of weather, and therefore
resolved to rough it out without grumbling. The unfor-
tunate bullocks shortly became exhausted, but could not be
spared, as the road was in many places under water, and
the latter rapidly rising. Several of the Kutcha bridges
that we had passed were fast giving way, and it was of the
utmost importance we should push forward without delay.
Having obtained a few coolies, better progress was made ;
and to ease the weight we walked, and made coachman
follow our example, but it was evident he did not see the
fun of the thing.
(To le continued in our next.)
Riddle.
When will the editors be certain of getting fresh eggs
for breakfast ? Senex.
N.B.—Answer requested.'— Ed.
Discipline as it was (and perhaps now
is) in the American Army.
Sir, —As the Affairs in America during the present crisis
occupy a good deal of public attention, perhaps the accom-
panying may not be devoid of interest to your readers; it
was told me (as nearly as possible) by an intimate friend,
who solemnly affirmed that although “he had not ax’ly
sin it, he had heer’d tell on’t and that’s a faek !!”
Scene. —The Colonel of the Onety-oneth Regiment of
Militia, with an orderly in attendance.
Col. (loq.) : Corporal Jones! ! Tell Private John Davis
to go to the out-post to-night.
fExit Corporal Jones, who after a short time returns.)
Col.: “Wall! Did you tell Private John Davis to go to
the out-post to night ? ”
Corp. Jones (satisfactorily): “ Yaas, kurnel, I guess I
did.”
Col. : “ And what did he say ?”
Corp. Jones : “ He said he war’nt gwine to no out-post
to-night, no way. No how you can fix it ?”
Col. (indignantly and authoritatively): “ And did you
tell him that I, the Kieeurnal of this here reg’ment of
militier told him to do it ?”
Corp. J. (sulkily): “ Yaas !—I did!!!”
Col. (mildly): “ And wot did he say ?”
Corp. J. (with emphasis): “ Why! he said he’d see you
daarned a fust.”
Col.: “ Then tell Private John Davis to put his head in
a bag!!!”
Correspondence.
ADVICE TO MAMAS IN GENERAL.—(GEATIS.)
Mr. Editor, —Children being introduced at a dinner
party at dessert time, is disagreeable enough, how much
worse is it to have the brats pushing their bullet heads
between each chair, to get a piece of pudding, and then
dabbing their dirty paws on the ladies’ (with no children)
dresses, and the gentlemen’s go-to-meeting inexpressibles.
We would therefore advise the youngsters being taken, by
their attendants, to the nearest play-ground,—say Cap-
stan Square, Bucket Terrace, or visit the Zoological Gar-
dens in the neighbourhood, till such times as their mamas
take their evening promenade.-
A Dyspeptic Matron.
AN APPEAL FOR MORE PROSE.
Sir, —The Golden Fleece Gazette has so far prospered most
completely ; but I think that something very material to
its welfare has been omitted ; I allude to a dearth of inte-
resting matter in the prose portion of the first number that
appeared yesterday, the whole, or almost the whole, of the
paper was composed of articles written in verse ; and may
I say that almost the whole of the amusement derived in
reading the Gazette was from the pithy “ Hungry Growler ”
and our friend “Jemima’s” Lament. Far be it from me
to depreciate the “ Stone ” of the Druids, or the Theatrical
Gossips, who amused and interested much; but yet I hope
6
THE GOLDEN FLEECE GAZETTE.


that an appeal to those who so brilliantly distinguished
themselves in rhyme yesterday, to give sometimes in future
a specimen of their capabilities in prose, may not fail totally,
and I may read next Wednesday intellectual and delightful
articles from our poets, besides their other effusions, which
will complete our family Gazette in every respect.
A Silent Adherer of the G. F. G.
Poetry.
AN ACROSTIC.
Q ladly do we convey our thanks to those,
0 ur numerous friends, who both in verse and prose
1 ent us their aid, when this Gazette last week
3) id sally forth, a patronage to seek, —
E merging into life, —though late, ’tis true,
N o kinder welcome could mark its dehut.
P or which to you (though poor the gift, we know),
L adies and Gentlemen, our best thanks we owe:
E ach week you’ll find, with us ’twill be the same, —
E ndeavouring to please our only aim;
C ontented shall we be, if in the end,
E ’en this Gazette may to some pleasure tend.
G ive me permission for a few words more,
A nd then your patience I’ll no longer bore,
Z eal for this paper makes me bold to ask
E very one’s help, in carrying out the task;
T he Editors of the Golden Fleece Gazette
T rust that the patronage with which they’ve met,
E ’en more contributors may bring them yet.
Albert.
Three Cockroaches. A Nautical
Yarn.
Oh, who will dare
To keep the stair ?
Oh, who will dare it with me ?
I will, and I,
Three voices cry,
While we’ve breath we’ll stick to thee.
Three cockroaches bold
From out the main hold.
Issue forth on their tip toes ;
They will hold the stair
Against all who dare
Their lordships to oppose.
But ere on that dismal night they went.
On premeditated mischief bent.
They did all agree with one consent,
(Like the heroes bold,
Who in Rome of old,
Held the bridge all alone, at least so we are told,
When naughty Tarquinius Sextus was sold),
That they would stand there
On companion stair,
And for all comers on oath they swear
They will not budge the breadth of a hair.
First the way to dare
Comes a lady fair;
Little, oh ! little wots she
Of the danger nigh,
As with head on high
She trips so daintily.
But she tries in vain
Again and again
To pass the guarded stair;
Once more draws near,
O’ercome with fear
Retires in mute despair.
Now rushing wild
A chubby child
The danger next assails;
Pa’s only boy,
Ma’s pride and joy,
He miserably fails.
He sees them not
Until he’s got
Them almost on his toes,
With scream and yell,
Mamma to tell
He rushing crying goes.
In thought intent,
On smoking bent,
A youth they next did see;
No signs of hair
On lip are there
Although a soldier he.
His eyes soon mark
The insects dark,
A sickly smile he smiled :
He stops, turns pale,
Will his pluck fail ?
And he of Mars a child.
He looks around,
Lists ev’ry sound,
To see if aught approaches.
Then mutters low,
“ Bless'd if I go,
I do so hate cockroaches.”
But now to bed
With heavy tread
Paterfamilias goes;
Pear takes his heart.
And with a start
He stops, and—blows his nose.
What shall he do,
Shall he bolt too ?
And he a soldier bred, —
He has half a mind.
But his wife’s behind.
And wants to go to bed.
He stopped and took
A side-long look
Pierce at the three cockroaches;
They will not budge,
His wife cries “ fudge,”
And loads him with reproaches.
This man, so mild.
With frenzy wild
Then at them madly rushes;
His great flat foot
Upon them put,
The three to one he crushes.
My own, my life,
My love, my wife,
Oh, quick! some Bass’ beer,
Upon my word
That scrunch I heard
Has made me precious queer.
Oh! ’tis a shame,
A crying shame,
To all sailors a reproach is,
That there should be
In ships at sea
These cussed black cockroaches.
Albatross.
Correspondence.
Mr. Editor, —I noticed that in the first impression of
your very able and amusing paper you dated from the
Atlantic ; whereas I beg to inform you that at the time of
your going to press, and after issue, the office was in my
dominions, “ The Indian Ocean.”
Yours truly, Indian Neptune.
Dear Sir, —One well authenticated trait of the Gorilla
is that he never repeats his blow ; but having knocked the
enemy down with one blow of his open hand, he leaves
him weltering on the ground, and stalks away with wrath-
ful dignity. In this respect it forms a subject of interest-
ing inquiry whether there is any foundation for the suppo-
sition of the ancient Britons having made his acquaintance,
as it is well known that an Englishman prides himself on
his love of fair-play, and in never hitting his enemy when
down. This probability is farther strengthened by the
additional circumstance that the Gorilla before advancing
to the combat utters a dreadful roar, which may be heard
at a distance of three miles (as Du Chaillu asserts), and
7
THE GOLDEN FLEECE GAZETTE.


"beats oh his huge breasts so as to emit sounds like a drum,
—and as everybody knows an Englishman delights to beat
the booby* while his shout causes the welkin to ring again,
the above supposition is not so unlikely as it might at first
sight appear. If this should be proved the case, the boasted
honour of the Frenchman’s discovery will have been anti-
cipated by the Anglo-Saxon race.
A Briton.
* “Beating the booby” is that method of warming oneself with the
arms, so peculiar to London cabmen. — (Printer’s Devil.)
Dear, Dear, Mr. Editor, —I am really quite shocked
and annoyed at your inserting that dreadful article by
Jemima in your last issue, not that I prefer “scalded”
fowls to “plucked” ones; hut there are such dreadful
insinuations about our dress in it; and I can assure you
they are quite untrue. Indeed, I can assure you that when
I read the article I almost blushed, and felt so uncomfortable
that I could have wished to have hidden myself in my
stockings, only (don’t mention it, please —there’s a dear),
there are two or three such large holes in them, I am sure
that I should have been discovered. I will stake my exist-
ence, dear Mr. Editor, that no female on board wrote that
article, because those dear creatures the men, whom we all
look up to and revere so much (although we never will
acknowledge it), are called the odious hairy sex : and I
know we always like nice whiskers (at least I do), they are
so becoming ; aren’t they, Mr. Editor ? No! lam positive
that it is a man that has written it, and signed himself
Jemima ; and what’s more, I will tell you why,—’tis just
like their impudence (I mean the men’s), talking about our
clothes —“our petticoats are thinning,” and “clean stock-
ings we have none.” Indeed! What can they know about
petticoats I should like to know ?—and as to our stockings,
what business have they to look and pry about to see
whether we have any on, or whether they are clean or dirty ?
However, it has taught me a lesson; and now, since the
men will make themselves inquisitive about things they
ought not, I for ONE will no longer wear a crin—e! Well,
I won’t write the word in full, as I suppose you well know
what I refer to.
So, now, Mr. Editor, take my advice, and don’t publish
any such trifles as the so-called Jemima’s (for I am sure
she isn’t a woman), under the penalty of receiving no more
contributions from your indignant
Bella Hall (N.B. —“ Spinster”).
Notice to Correspondents.
“Boa Constructor’s,” “Xshaw’s,” and “Porkian’s”
contributions have all been duly received; but being
written in pencil, and all but illegible, it has been impossi-
ble for us to give them insertion. “ Bristles ” is too per-
sonal. “ Snooks ” must send us the answer to his conun-
drum before it can be published.
Those who send “ conundrums,” “riddles,” or “rebuses”
will greatly oblige by favouring us with the answers —not
for publication, but simply that we may be the better able
fo judge of their fitness for insertion.
Conundrums, Enigmas, &c.
My first I daily eat,
My second I daily drink,
My whole not food for man,
Now tell me if you can.
ENIGMA BY THE LATE LORD MACAULAY, NEYEE BEFORE
PUBLISHED.
Cut off my first, and singular I am,
Cut off my last, and plural I become,
Cut off my first and last, and nought remains.
What is my first ?—a sounding sea;
What is my last ?—a flowing river
Within whose placid depths I ceaseless play,
Parent of sweetest sounds, though mute for ever.
Postscript.
We have much pleasure in announcing that, by the kind
permission of Captain Western, we may hope to see a per-
formance by our talented amateurs on SATURDAY NEXT,
when they will appear in the instructive and amusing bur-
lesque of BOMBASTES EURIOSO; after which they will
delight the lovers of harmony with some of the more thril-
ling of the far-famed NEGRO MELODIES.
We wish them all the success which their unremitting
efforts to amuse deserve.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
Wanted,
BY THE THEATRICAL AMATEURS, a Pair of Spec-
tacles, 3 pairs of white stockings, some pins, and some
Rouge !
SHEETS! SHEETS!! SHEETS!!!
NOT of Linen, for we have to thank the ladies and
gentlemen, on behalf of the Theatrical Amateurs, for
their generous response to our former appeal.
The present sheets we want, are sheets of Paper,—Fools-
cap Paper.
N.B.—Can any one favour us with the derivation of the
above name ?
Wanted.
WANTED at any given moment, and at all times of the
day, Good Breakfasts and Dinners , obliging friends
to pass dinners and condiments, and a good appetite to
enjoy them. Address, No. 29, opposite Pantry House.
To Ibe Raffled,
A GOLD CHAIN. 20 Tickets, at ss. (five shillings)
each. Intending purchasers to apply for tickets at
the Editor’s Office.
Lost,
A KNIFE, with a buck-horn handle, and the name of
Pearson engraved thereon. Whoever shall return
the above to its disconsolate Owner, at Bachelor’s Hall,
shall be handsomely rewarded.
Lost,
BY A LADY, a Silver Thimble, with a steel top. Any
one finding the same will perform a most polite and
kind action by returning it to the Editor G. F. G.
8
THE GOLDEN FLEECE GAZETTE.


Golden Fleece Gazette.
“ Dear authors suit your topics to your strength
And ponder well your subject and its length.”— Btron.
JULY 16.
INDIAN OCEAN.
No. 3.
We had hoped that our remarks in last week’s issue would
have had the effect of inducing some of the more spirited
few of our readers to come forward to our assistance. But
no, we have been bitterly disappointed. At all hours of
the day our unfortunate boy, with streaming hair and
anxious visage, might have been seen any day during the
past week, by the frequenters of the saloon, rushing madly
to the editor’s-box—which possibly may not be known by
all to be situated abaft the mizen-mast—and then, with
countenance more elongated and careworn than ever, sneak-
ing dolefully back to our office, where he faintly murmurs
the same old story, “ Nothing in it yet, sir !”
Fellow passengers ! Why should these things be ? Is
it that your veins of learning are frozen by the cold, or
your inventive powers paralyzed by the rolling ? If this
neglect of us and of yourselves be attributable to indolence
or the above causes, come, we entreat you, to our office,
where you will see us, coats off, wristbands tucked up,
inky fingers, and more inky inexpressibles, holding on
grimly with one hand, whilst with the other —watching a
favourable pause in the motion of the ship, we transfer to
paper our latest ideas on things in general.
Instead of wasting so much time in idle talk, dip the pen
of your tongue into the ink of your heart, and it will then
write of itself many of your past experiences which might
interest or amuse others, though hitherto they have been
selfishly hidden in the dark recesses of your mind.
We greatly fear that the present number will be found
less interesting than either of its predecessors ; this is alto-
gether the fault of yourselves. Remember, our paper is
as yet merely a glowing spark bursting into flame, and
that unless you continually contribute fuel, all our endea-
vours to fan it into fife will fail, and some future Wednes-
day you will be left to the utter darkness of your own
thoughts.
“ Ex nihilo, nihil fit.”
Owing to the inclemency of the weather the theatricals
advertised to take place in our last were postponed until
Tuesday. We refrain from further remarks, as two notices
from abler pens than ours will be found below. We also
insert the prologue spoken on the occasion.
A Twice-born Rajah.
In the S.W. comer of the Madras Presidency lies the
little kingdom of Travancore. Being bounded on the S.
and W. by the sea, and on the E. by a high range of moun-
tains, nature thus assisted the Rajah of this little kingdom
to keep his own, so that as far back as history goes this state
was never subjected to any foreign power. Hence it follows
that many heathen rites and superstitious observances are
perpetrated, which have long since become obsolete in
states that have come more in contact with European civili-
sation. Among other ridiculous rites is the ceremony of
making the Raj ah (who hy birth is a Shudra) a Brahmin.
The laws of Brahminism are that no one who is not born a
Brahmin can become such. Travancore may be called the
country of Brahmins. Formerly they were both the kings
and priests of the people; but during a revolution a Shudra
family became the ruling dynasty. As a Shudra cannot eat
with a Brahmin, nor do any duties in the temples, the pride
of the new king was mortified, and he assembled a college
of Brahmins, with the request that they should devise a
means by which he might be made a Brahmin, —whatever
the sacrifice. After much consultation they decided that
nothing short of a second birth could introduce him
to their dignity. The king being willing to undergo
the prescribed ceremony, the following process was esta-
blished, and every succeeding Rajah has been thus installed
on his throne. A few days after his accession all the Brah-
mins in the kingdom are again assembled, to take the
weight of the Rajah in gold coins (English sovereigns being
preferred). The gold is taken and beaten into the shape of
a cow, the hoofs and horns of which are made of silver.
When finished, it is adorned with wreaths of flowers and
smeared inside with cow’s dung. The day fixed upon for
the second birth having come, the Rajah passes through this
cow r in a state of nudity. After this, he is bathed by the
Brahmins, invested with the sacred cord, and considered one
of their fraternity. He is now taught his first mystical
prayer, which contains twenty-four letters, and for each let-
ter he has to pay a fee of one thousand rupees to his new
brethren. When the present Rajah was installed a curious
circumstance occurred. By a law of the country the slaves
can claim all dead animals. Some slave came forward and
demanded the golden cow as his right; but I need scarcely
say that this appeal was refused, and that for once in their
lives the holy Brahmins did not refuse to partake of carrion.
Hans.
Theatrical Gossip.
Deae Me. Editoe. —On Tuesday evening last our
talented amateurs gave the first of their theatrical per-
formances, which passed off with all the eclat which their
laborious and persevering efforts for the last month deserved.
A prologue, written expressly for the occasion by a
singularly talented contributor to the Golden Fleece Gazette ,
was most ably spoken by Underwood, Esq., and was
received with marked expressions of approbation. After
which followed the piece of the evening, “Bombastes
Furioso,” which was put on the stage with a completeness
and attention to all the minute details that does infinite
credit to the able and indefatigable manager, Captain
Cassidy.
The scenery, which was painted by those eminent and
gifted artists, Messrs. Salmon, Green, Foord, and Co., was
a triumph of scenic art, and surpassed any of their previous
efforts, but, at the same time, we cannot help thinking that


the neutral tints of the bridge (in the second scene) con-
trast rather too strongly with the bright colouring of the
boat in the foreground, and somewhat mar the effect of the
ohtaro scuro in the background; and the greens are too
cold and want warming up. The aerial perspective is good,
especially the mountains at the back. We are sure that
the artists will take our remarks into their serious considera-
tion and that the next production of their joint genius will
be a master-piece.
The acting of the whole was first-rate, but we most par-
ticularly notice Mr. Salmon, who was intrusted with the role
of “Bombastes,” which he performed with remarkable artis-
tical power. The part abounds in fine language and one that
gives great scope to an actor’s abilities; his rendering of that
fine passage : “He who does these boots displace,” &c., he
gave with wonderful power and effect. His forte is evi-
dently declamation; he should not attempt sentiment. If
he attends to this hint he will become one of the greatest
ornaments of our stage.
The entrance of “Distaffina” (Mr. Pierson) was the signal
for a general burst of applause ; her graceful and elegant
appearance was the theme of universal comment. Her
acting was splendid, and the manner in which she exe-
cuted that beautiful and touching song “ Queen Dido sat
at her palace-gate darning, a hole in her stocking, oh!”
was received with continued bursts of applause. She was
dressed with consummate taste and simplicity, and we are
sure that she will become an established favourite with
the public.
We must not omit the extraordinary sensation caused
by the appearance of Mr. Inglis as the drummer —his
noble and commanding figure caught universal attention;
he was every inch a drummer (and a good many inches
too). His part, though simple, he performed with that
graceful dignity and quiet elegance of bearing that at
once stamped him as an actor of great artistical powers.
Mr. Keyser’s “Fusbos” was extremely good; he has
a clear perception of the meaning of the author, and an
elegance of diction that is truly astonishing in one so young.
And, last though not least, Dr. Bright’s acting was a
perfect gem in its way, and evinces a knowledge of character
and a keen appreciation of all the beauties of the difficult
part allotted to him.
The pathos with which he executed the exquisite song
“My love is so charming, so pretty and witty,” &c.,
evinced a depth of feeling and a sympathy with the spirit
that pervades the whole of those beautiful verses that called
forth round after round of applause from the spell-bound
and delighted audience.
We hope and trust that the first attempt to amuse us so
ably commenced and so energetically carried out will be
frequently repeated, and that we may soon have another
treat similar to that of Tuesday evening last.
John Bull.
Dear Me. Editor, —It was our purpose to have this
week given you a long dissertation on the remarkable
event which occurred on Tuesday evening. It is almost
needless to observe that we allude to the first performance
of the Theatrical Amateurs of the “ Golden Fleece.”
The inclemency of the weather has necessarily interfered
with our arrangements; so we must curtail our remarks.
Your readers are doubtless aware that the entertainment
was fixed for Monday evening ; but it may not be generally
known that the clerk of the weather being so thoroughly
disgusted at your correspondent’s hints not being attended
to (regarding the liquors and spirits so urgently required
by the scene-painters) took it into his weather-beaten head
to make the ship roll and labour so heavily that the per-
formance had to be postponed till the following day.
We consider that the Prologue, as a prologue, was very
fair. We have been credibly informed that it was the
joint production of two steadfast supporters of your journal:
this may or may not be. However, let us now turn our
attention to the youthful aspirant to stage honours who
introduced it to the public. His attitude was good, his
get-up was better; and we are of opinion that his decla-
mation (though we would mildly suggest a little practice)
promises well for the future.
It would be invidious for us to draw comparisons between
the acting of the several amateurs who have so kindly
catered for our amusement. They all did their best; they
all acted equally well. We think ourselves, however, espe-
cially fortunate in having so good an actress as “ Distaffina,”
who was got up in a manner we little expected to see on
board a ship. Thanks to Mrs. and Mrs. ,
who so generously lent their assistance in producing and
making up the various articles of her dress.
The comicality and self-possession of “ Fusbos” (Mr. Key-
ser brought the great Robson vividly to our mind. The
King (Dr. Bright), who, by the way, wounded his antagonist
on the thumb, acted his part to perfection. The acting of old
“ Bombastes” drew forth shouts of laughter and applause;
and while speaking of him we must not forget our little
fifer, whose acting was inimitable.
We trust that we are not exceeding our prerogative
when we suggest that the next time that a drummer is
employed on the stage some allowance or regard should be
paid to the height of the saloon, as in the present instance
the audience were only treated to a view of his legs, hips,
and drum, the rest of his person being concealed by the
proscenium.
During the interval which occurred between the Farce
and the Serenaders we were favoured with a hornpipe, which
was remarkably well danced by Captain Parsons, who
looked every inch a “ man-o’-war’sman ” —we might
almost say, every hair a rope-yarn and every finger a mar-
lin-spike.
The pauses in the proceedings were filled up by a regular
“Lyceum” apparition, in the shape of our eccentric and
laughter-loving “ Boots,” who with a well-filled basket on
his arm, and with the familiar cry of nuts, almonds, cakes,
and lemonade, afforded both amusement and refreshment
to the patient public.
The evening’s entertainment concluded with the Ethio-
pian Serenaders, to whose melodies we listened with much
pleasure. Jem’s singing, and the untiring exertions of the
indefatigable Bones, to say nothing of his supernatural
grimaces, were well deserving of the rapturous plaudits
which they received. Mr. Philip Levi is also deserving of our
warmest admiration for the very able manner in which
he performed on the concertina.
Having thus given a slight sketch of last Tuesday’s
flareup, it now only remains for us to wish the amateurs
all possible success for the future, and to tender them our
most cordial thanks for what they have already done.
Yours, &c.,
Two Bandolines.
Rough. Notes from Memory of a Trip
to Simlah from the Punjab in 1860.
(Continued from our last.)
We were now nearly over the worst part of the Kutcha
road, and congratulating ourselves on the tolerable ease
of the passage, when the coachman reported “ a bridge
carried away,” over a deep nullah just ahead. On inspec-
tion it turned out that the bridge itself was standing, but
that the embankment of the roadway had been nearly
carried away, leaving only the crust of the roadway stand-
ing. Not a moment was to be lost. Our baggage was
hastily passed across by coolies, the bullocks followed, and
collecting a few of the niggers who were looking after the
road repairs, the gharrie was run across the bridge with a
rush, and cleared it safely; but so closely had it shaved
that the men pushing behind fell into the water, and were
washed several miles down the stream. After this we
found the road clear to Jullundar, and at this nice little
station —one of the best in the Punjab—enjoyed the com-
forts of life.
In the early morning we pushed on to Loodianah, and,
except that it was raining hard, the gharrie leaking in the
roof like a cullender, and that the horses, generally speak-
ing, preferred backing to going on, and that we were four
hours crossing the Sutlej, we got on all right. The line of
country between the two places presents nothing interesting,
except to the Shikaree, who will see dotted here and there
herds of antelopes within easy rifle shot.
Loodianah is rather famous for its cashmere work, and
the temporary occupant of the dak bungalow shortly finds
himself surrounded by dirty Cashmeres shoving caps.
10
THE GOLDEN FLEECE GAZETTE.


shawls, and slippers into his face, and doing their best to
cheat him out of dibs. A few years since Loodianah used
to be rather a good place to buy this sort of work, but
latterly it has fallen off, and the prices are greater; whereas,
in Umritsur the work is better and the prices considerably
lower.
From Loodianah we made a move to Umballah, about
thirty miles from which place the Grand Trunk Road pre-
sented a scene of the greatest confusion. A pucca bridge
had been carried away and the traffic completely stopped.
Here was a fix! The stream, though not wide, was run-
ning like a mill-race, and some ten feet deep. At last a
thought struck us, and, hastily unloading a bullock cart
laden with bamboos a raft -was made to pass ourselves and
luggage; then there was the gharrie to get over, which
was managed by tying one rope to the front, and one behind,
a quantity of coolies hauling from the front and a few be-
hind keeping it steady. The gharrie was wet, but we
were jolly at our success. Umballah was reached at mid-
night, and having rested we got in a doolie and pushed on
for Kalka, forty miles distant, and at the foot of the Hills.
Here you take a Jampan or Zat, according to your taste,
and in half an hour have left the heat and dust of Kalka
behind and are feeling cool; every fresh turn of a hill
shows something more beautiful than you have just passed,
and there is only one unpleasant thing all the way, viz., a
turnpike.
(To le concluded in our next.)
Poetry.
THE MOTHER’S DARLING.
“ Oh tell me my darling; tell me,
What ails my child to day ?
Why are you not with other babes,
Having your game of play ?
“ Why arc you crying darling ?
Ob! why do you suck your thumb ?
Come to my lap my little one,
Come, chicky-biddy, come.
“ Has any one been beating it ?
Or do its toothies ache ?
Or did any other nasty child
Its bread-and-butter take P
“ Come, answer me, my jewel,
Toll its own ma its woes;
Look, here’s a pocket handkerchief;
There, let me blow its nose.”
“ Oh ma, as I was playing
With Tooney, Bowles, and Jock,
That naughty Sarah beat me;
Look, ma, she’s torn my frock.”
“ You naughty, wicked little thing!
Oh what a dreadful state! it
Will take me a full hour to mend.
Bother the child, I hate it! ”
Prologue.
Ladies and gentlemen, my pals have sent me here. [hear.)
Unaccustomed as I am to pub—(voices behind the curtain —hear,
They’re not quite ready, so I’ve come to say,
A few short words—a prologue to this play.
Plays, you all know, have been on the increase
Ever since Thespis wrote the first in Greece.
“ All the world’s a stage,” so says our greatest poet:
In this play to-night our purpose is to show it.
A very pleasant way as every person knows,
Of showing up our faults, joys, passions, virtues, woes.
All nations, kings and queens of every age,
Have ever had a liking for the stage;
With their good subjects, too, both high and low,
Theatricals have ever been the go.
I’m glad you’ve come to-night to see the piece,
The first performance in the Golden Fleece.
I’m sure it will beat creation out of sight,
At least ’twill if everything goes right.
We ask you not to give us your applause
Unless you really see sufficient cause;
But as at school, masters their dunces train
With kindly words instead of birch or cane.
So please use us, and only when we fail
Crush us beneath your satire’s smarting flail.
We know our failings, but we also know
An Englishman ne’er hits a fallen foe.
So should our tiny efforts to amuse,
Give satisfaction and some mirth infuse,
Our task is done. (Ho ! Prompter, are you ready ?
No, not just yet; I cant fix this scene steady;
Give ’em a little more.) As I was saying,
Don’t be too critical on those who’re playing.
And now I cannot better pass the time
And finish off this somewhat halting rhyme
Than giving thanks where best our thanks are due.
Ho! Capt. Western! here’s success to you!
Now, Prompter, are you ready P—Yes; all’s right now.
Then, ladies and gentlemen, I make my parting bow.
Correspondence.
Dear Mr. Editor, —It is with much regret that I have
to inform the ladies and passengers in general .that most
of the green pea sprouts in the fore-top and the young
gooseberry bushes and strawberries lately planted in the
main-top have become greatly dried up and withered
during the past week, owing to the careless neglect of the
gardener. I have stopped his pay for fifteen days and
reduced his wages, so that it is not likely to occur again,
and I hope we may soon again have as flourishing a crop
as heretofore. On the other hand, the plums and black
currants in our mizen garden are flourishing splendidly;
and unless the severe weather we have lately encountered
has not destroyed the tender shoots and blossoms I have
every hope that there will be fruit in abundance to make
into tarts and puddings until our gallant ship is safely
anchored in Victoria Docks.
Yours, &c.,
Cape Pigeon.
Mr. Editor, —Please let me correct your remark of my
run to Calcutta on the present voyage. I managed to do it
in 82 days from Gravesend to Madras, and 2f from thence to
Calcutta, and I had only 550 tons of coals to eat; whereas
my late master let me have 2,500, when I did it in 66 days.
Yours, &c.,
Steam Engine.
Conundrums, Enigmas, &c.
ANSWERS TO THOSE ALREADY PUBLISHED.
First Number—“ Bobstay.”—l. Childhood ;2. Bootjack.
Second Number—“ Sen ex.”—When the ship lays t(w)o.
“ Lord Macaulay’s.” —Cod. “ A.”—Buttermilk.
Conundrum.
My first is found in every fish,
My second is of wine a bumper,
My third it is a verse or two,
My whole suggests a real thumper.
G. B.
Snook’s conundrum has some merit, but is decidedly
lame, and is declined with thanks.
Riddle.
Cut of my first and last letters and you make me a
hundred and sixty times heavier than I was before.
G. B.
11
THE GOLDEN FLEECE GAZETTE.


• Notice to Correspondents.
Found,
A BUNCH OF KEYS. The owner will obtain them
on applying to the Chief Steward, Mr. Feekis.
Susan’s contribution is simply personal, without being
in the least degree amusing, and is consequently rejected.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
Lost,
THE BOOK “From New York to Delhi.” The finder
will be liberally rewarded on taking the same to
No. 31 Cabin.
Wanted,
BY the Editors of the G. F. Gazette, EEADEE,
who will do justice to our paper every Wednesday.
None of those who read last time need apply.
N.B.—Any applicant will be allowed to read the paper
before its publication.
12
THE GOLDEN FLEECE GAZETTE.


Golden Fleece Gazette
JULY 23.
INDIAN OCEAN.
No. 4.
“ Dear authors suit your topics to your strength.
And ponder well your subject and its length.”-
’ —Btron.
We have to apologize to our readers for the irregularity
and delay in the issue of this and our last number, but
the late sad event has cast so deep a gloom over us, as
over all on board, that we had not the heart to write.
Our late Captain, though known to most of us for only
two short months, was beloved by all, and one and all
felt, when they heard the sad news of his sudden death,
that they had lost an able commander and a kind friend.
His sudden and violent death after thirty-six years of
continued active service, both in the Royal Navy and
merchant service, has caused a blank in our little com-
munity, which can never be replaced, and which will be
felt by all until the end of our voyage ; but it is some
consolation to us, and to his absent friends to know
that, like our great naval hero, Nelson, he died in the
performance of the work intrusted to him, and that,
like Nelson too, almost the last words he spoke were,
“ Thank God! I’ve done my duty.” We know that we are
but expressing the feelings of all our fellow-passengers,
when we say that the confidence which we reposed in
poor Captain Western is now as fully bestowed on the
young and able officer on whom the command of this
ship has now devolved. * * * * * *
We must, we regret to say, for the third time point out
to our correspondents the absolute necessity for increased
exertions on their part, and to request those who do write
to send in their contributions as soon after every Wednesday
as they can, as it is impossible for us to collect, arrange,
and re-write for publication unless we close our box on
Saturday evening.
Unless they receive a little more support during the present
ween, the Editors leg to state that , much as they will regret
doing so, they will he FORCED to RESIGN.
Hough Notes from Memory of a Trip to
Simlah from the Punjab in 1860.
( Continued from our last.)
As you near Kussoulie the scenery becomes finer, and
the firs thicker, but you get a feeling of uneasiness owing
to your Jampanees persisting in walking on the outside
edge of the road, and knowing that should one of them
slip you would be dashed to pieces instantaneously. Abuse
—remonstrate—it is of no use ; the little Hill men pretend
not to understand Hindostanee, and the jargon they jabber
you can make nothing of. At last Kussoulie is reached,
and you feel that you are really in the Hills. We reached
there about seven p.m., in a pelting rain, and hoped to get
one old room at the dak bungalow; unfortunately, every
place was full, and it was necessary to go on to the next
stage.
Kussoulie is but a small station, and much warmer than
Simlah. There are, however, good barracks, and every
summer a quantity of invalids are located there. From
Kussoulie you get a good view of Dugshaie and Subathoo,
both military stations ; you also see the Senowar Asylum, for
soldiers’ orphans, built and endowed by the good and great
Sir Henry Lawrence, who was truly the Soldier’s friend,
as also Lady Lawrence, who took the greatest interest in
its success, and devoted both time and money unsparingly
towards it. Here the sons of soldiers receive a plain useful
education, and are placed in positions which many of them
could not otherwise attain. The girls are brought up to
cook, sew, and make themselves generally useful, and
married only to men who can prove themselves respectable.
Some thirteen miles from Kussoulie you pass down a deep
defile, and find yourself crossing a very pretty iron bridge,
which is built over a beautiful mountain torrent, and the
rocks rising almost perpendicularly a thousand feet and
more on each side of you. You now find that you are
getting into really magnificent scenery, where man feels
his own littleness and insignificance. After a toilsome
ascent on the other side of the bridge you see hill after hill,
one rising over the other, covered with verdure and wild
flowers. Here, too, you see splendid wild cherry trees
(we stopped and cut a quantity for pipe stems); and the
glorious gorgeous rhododendron, in itself a sight for a life-
time. Here and there a covey of black partridges fly down
with a rush to some valley fifteen hundred feet below,
and then a pheasant in all its brilliant plumage darts
down with a whirr, and is lost to sight. Butterflies, such
as the Himalayas alone can produce, revel in the sun, and
dotted over the winding pathways you see the Hill women
toiling upwards with their burdens. Such a sight as this
is almost reward sufficient for years of heat and burning
winds in the plains. Here you feel that you are a man,
and not an automaton with a soul intent on nothing else
than scraping the dibs together. The cool bracing atmos-
phere rouses the dormant energies long since utterly pros-
trated. Thoughts of home arise as we see acre after acre
covered with the glorious old oak, and we push on to
Simlah with the spirits of a school-boy. The scenery all
the way is indescribable in its magnificence; and the
further up you go the more intense is your enjoyment, as
each turn shows you something grander than before. At
last proud Old Jockoo (the largest hill close to Simlah) rears
its giant head, and, after a stiff ascent, up which we prefer
walking, Simlah opens out in all its beauty, the queen of
hill stations, and we revel in the enjoyment of a blazing
fire, and pity the unfortunates in the plains.
Kingston.


Riddle.
Why are the Editors of the G. F. Gazette
As good men as ever you see ?
And why are all the rest of the passengers on board
As bad as bad can b.e ?
P. D.
A Trip to the Andamans.
In the month of June, 1861, Her Majesty’s ship
was quietly lying at anchor in Rangoon River, when an
emergent request was received by her commander from the
Chief Commissioner to proceed in search of one of the
Calcutta and Burmah steamers which had sailed from Ran-
goon from Madras some fifteen days before. Considerable
fears were entertained for her safety, as she had left very
deeply laden with stores and troops during a bad season of
the year, and no tidings of her had been received.
Having got up steam without delay, and cleared the
river and gulf of Martaban, we shaped our course to the
Andaman Islands, where it was supposed the vessel we
were in search of might have put in through stress of
weather or an accident to her machinery.
Several officers of Her Majesty’s 68th Light Infantry
having obtained leave of absence, joined the commander’s
and ward-room mess as guests, and we started, anticipating
a pleasant pic-nic, with good fellows to keep us company.
As very little is known regarding these Islands, before
proceeding with the narrative it will be necessary to give a
slight idea of their position on the chart.
The Andaman Islands (or, as they are commonly called,
“ The Great Andamans”) consist of three separate islands,
called respectively North, Middle, and South Andamans,
and they lie between 11° and 14° north latitude, and in
about 93° east longitude. They are rather high in some
places and densely wooded, down to the very water’s edge.
As there is deep water close to the shore, we were enabled
to keep close in, and enjoy the scenery, which was beautiful:
the only place which comes up to it in this respect is, in
our opinion, the Straits of Malacca. One of our objects in
keeping close under the land was that by so doing we were
enabled to examine the numerous little bays and harbours
for some sign of the missing vessel.
The first place in which we dropped anchor was Port
Cornwallis, situated on the east side of the North Andaman.
This is a very fine harbour, being land-locked on every
side. Some idea may be formed of its size when we state
that it runs about six or seven miles in a north-west
direction, and is three miles in breadth. There are several
small islands in it, the largest of which is Chatham Island,
about one or two miles long. Horsburg informs us that it was
first colonized by Europeans in 1791, but the colonists in a
couple of years removed their settlement to the main land,
and after a few years more were obliged finally to give it up on
account of the impenetrable forests and incessant rain during
the south-west monsoon. We anchored in Port Cornwallis
at 10 a.m., during a heavy shower of rain, but at noon it
cleared up, and having lowered two boats and formed our-
selves into two parties, we armed ourselves with revolvers
and ammunition, and the “blue jackets” with cutlasses
and tomahawks. Thus equipped, we made sail for Chat-
ham Island. Here (having left a guard to protect the boat-
keepers) we disembarked and began to explore. The
jungle was thick indeed, but thanks to the hardy sinews
and sharp hatchets of our men we managed to get a couple
of hundred yards into the bush. Nearly all trace of the
old colony is obliterated. All that met our view was a
piece of a wall with very coarse bricks, thrown on its face,
and here and there a few blocks of coal; whilst the sea was
washing up to the spot where the old wall had fallen. The
track of the wild boar was distinguishable by the large
patches of ground which had been rooted up, but no single
vestige of a human being was perceived by any of our
party. Having nothing more to see on the island, we em-
barked and made for a fine sandy beach on the main land
opposite. The breeze had freshened, and after a pleasant
sail, we anchored (the water being too shallow to allow
the boat to get nearer) and waded on shore. Imagine our
pleasure and excitement at seeing footmarks just made in
the sand, and a slight slope rising above a tope of trees
a short distance off. Having drawn up our force and exa-
mined the caps on our firearms we proceeded cautiously in
the wake of the footprints. We found a canoe, very neatly
made, hauled up close to a smouldering fire, on which
some small fish, like sprats, and evidently just caught, were
broiling.
The manner in which the Andamanese cook is deserving
of notice. They get some large nautilus shells (which
abound here), plaster them outside with thick mud, and
then having placed the fish inside the shell they put it on
the embers. Beside the fire we also found a bow, unstrung,
and near that a basket containing more fish. As we had
been particularly enjoined not to hurt or annoy the natives
if we fell in with them, we left everything as we found it,
though our fingers itched to carry off some little trophy.
It was now getting dusk, so we waded off again to the
boat, and taking a pull at the brandy flask, weighed anchor,
and beat up to our vessel, which we reached at 7 p.m.,
when we changed our wet clothes, and did ample justice to
our dinner.
(To be continued in our next.)
Answer to P.D.’s Riddle.
The editors always do write fright).
The passengers never do write (right).
[Uncommonly sharp of our boy.— Ed.]
Tlie Irish Boy.
Dear Mr. Editor, —I send you the following, trusting
that should you think it worthy of a place in your admi-
rable journal, your readers may be both pleased and
edified thereby.
Erin.
Travelling one cold and dreary December morning, from
Blarney to Cork, on one of Bianconi’s cars, and when
almost a mile from my destination, I came up with a little
Irish lad trudging along on the side of the road neatly
dressed in a suit of corduroys (an exception, by the way, to
the general rule), who accosted me with the “ Arrah, sir,
will ye give us a lift?” and, suiting the action to the words,
began to run after the cart as fast as his legs could carry
him. After several repetitions of the above request, and
moved by the perseverance of the little fellow, I obtained
the driver’s permission and lifted him into the cart beside
me, when the following dialogue took place :
Traveller: “Well, my lad, how far are you going in
this direction ? ”
Boy (pertly): “To Cork, yer honour.”
Traveller: “ And what are you going to Cork for ? ”
Boy: “ A hap’orth of salt, yer honour.”
Traveller: “ Can’t you get salt nearer than Cork ? ”
Boy: “ Yes, yer honour; but we get a bigger hap’orth
at Cork than Misterish M'Gee at the post-office gives us.”
Traveller: “ What do you use the salt for, when you get
it, that you go so far to fetch it ? ”
Boy: “To make dip, yer honour.”
Traveller: “ What is dip ? ”
Boy: “ Well, yer honour, the owld people (the name by
which he was pleased to call his parents) puts a pinch of
salt in a dhrop of wather, and dips their praties in it, and
that’s dip.”
Traveller: “And do you, my fine little fellow, get dip
also?”
Boy (looking rather knowingly into my face) : “Arrah,
yer honour, cock me up with dip, indeed! Ah no! dip’s
only for the owld people; I must eat my praties without
salt or dip.”
The pert answerer of the above questions was a sharp-
looking, chubby-faced, rosy-cheeked boy of about eight
years old, who possessed so much manliness as to travel tD
Cork, near upon a mile, so that the halfpenny might be
spent to,the best advantage.
[The readers of the Golden Fleece Gazette are reminded of
the old adage, “ Take care of the pence and the pounds
will take care of themselves,” of which principle the above
is an apt illustration. —Ed.]
14
THE GOLDEN FLEECE GAZETTE.


Poetry.
REFLECTIONS SUGGESTED BY CAPTAIN WESTERN’S
MELANCHOLY FUNERAL, SATURDAY AFTERNOON,
JULY 19, 1862.
“ And the sea gave up the dead which were in it.”
Blest words of hope to many a mourner these,
Whose loved one’s tomb was in the stormy seas,
For whom “ God’s Acre ” shows no cherished spot;
True, in death, as in life, that “ they are not.”
No mourners, sable clad, attend their bier,
No mother’s wail, no widow’s tears, are there ;
Unheard by kindred are their requiems kept,
And tears (if any), stranger's tears are wept.
O’er them no “ flowers ” spring from “ holy dust
No turf-clad hillock lures to balmy rest;
No “ sculptured urn,” no storied tablet’s lays,
Reveal to passers-by the loved one’s praise.
Yet Ho who made us, He who takes our breath.
Fixes our sepulchre—our mode of death;
Comforts survivors with such words as these,
Ye may not keep our dead ye stormy seas.
Blest resurrection hope ! Bo it my lot
(Though ocean’s bed should prove my resting spot)
To rise amongst the first-fruits of the tomb,
And hear the call, “ Come, faithful servant, come!”
J. 0. B.
“ He was a man, take him for all in all,
“We ne’er shall look upon his like again.”
6 one from amongst us! —Yes, ’tis hut too true.
E ’en like a flower, has faded from our view
O ur truest friend, whose voice, though hushed in death,
R ings yet within our earsi; whose latest breath
G ave God the thanks that he, and he alone,
E ndured the death that others might have known.
W ell, truly well, hast thou thy duty done,
E nded are all thy toils, and though thou’rt gone,
S ome lesson hast thou left us—e’en to try
T o do our best, that when we’re called to die,
E ach in our turn, as thou couldst, we may say,
R ough though our life and danger strewn our way,
N e’er duty’s calling did we disobey.
An Officer of the “ Golden Fleece.”
The very last (and, we hope, lasting)
Appeal to the good sense of our
Readers.
Why don’t you write, why don’t you write ?
You really arc not acting right;
Must we alone, then, rack the brain,
And ink our fingers for your gain P
Work any more we swear we won’t.
But we’ll resign, though you say don’t.
We speak to all, except a few
To whom our thanks and praise are due.
Have we offended some of those
Whose contributions, verse or prose,
In duty hound we have rejected,
That thus our paper is neglected P
If so, ’tis high time we should stop,
Take down our box, and shut up shop.
Sit down, take paper, mend your quill,
And work away with right good will.
Then when ’tis finished, if it’s good
We’d publish it, of course we would.
But if it’s personal and had
We’d tear it up ; but don’t go mad
About such trifles, try again ;
Failure, we all know, gives some pain.
Rome was not built all in a day.
At first few write well, though some may.
Remember the spider’s three times nine
Unfortunate attempts to climb
The prison walls wherein Bruce lay.
But did at last, and so you may.
Whom this cap fits, why let him wear it.
Remember this, —now mind, we swear it.
If we continue thus ill-used
We shall not care how we’re abused,
We shall give up, we really will,
And what is more, send in a bill
For what we’ve done; ’twill be your loss.
Your servants, the “ Three Editors.”
Naval and Military Intelligence.
Proceedings of a Naval Court-Martial held on board the
S. S. Golden Fleece, assembled by order of Rear-Admiral
L’Agulhas for the purpose of trying such prisoners as may
be brought before it.
President: Vice Admiral Poop.
Members:
Capt. Tarpaulin Capt. Marlinspike
~ Oilskin „ Bobstay.
The Court being duly assembled proceeded to the trial of
Commodore Jno. Boreas, C.W., on the following charges
exhibited against him by the officers of the Golden Fleece:
Ist. That he, the said Commodore Jno. Boreas, C.W.,
did behave in a manner unbecoming the character of an
officer holding the high position of clerk of the wea-
ther, in not having attended to the wishes of the officers,
crew, and passengers of the Golden Fleece , by not sending
them a south-easter, he having been frequently and respect-
fully entreated to do so.
2nd. For that the said Commodore Jno. Boreas, C.W.,
did forcibly and wilfully detain the Golden Fleece and of
malice prepense prevent her from rounding the Cape of
Good Hope, thereby keeping the officers, crew, ■ and pas-
sengers from their homes and the bosoms of their families.
3rd. For that he, the said Commodore Jno. Boreas, C.W.,
did allow a north-wester to blow with such violence as to
cause damage to the sails and rigging of the Golden Fleece ,
the same being subversive of good .order and discipline on
the high seas.
4th. For that the said Commodore Jno. Boreas, C."W.,
did, on being respectfully remonstrated with, place two
extra hands at the bellows and did thereby cause the
Golden Fleece to roll worse than before, causing much addi-
tional annoyance to the passengers, especially the ladies,
who were debarred from their usual walk on the quarter-
deck, and who voted him a “ Hard-hearted wretch,” “A
Bore,” and “A Nuisance,” or words to that effect.
The Court after due and careful deliberation on the
evidence brought before it, together with what the prisoner
had to urge in his defence, find as follows:
Ist charge—proven.
2nd charge—proven.
3rd charge—proven.
4th charge—proven, with the exception of the
words, “ especially the ladies. ’ ’
The Court does therefore adjudge that the prisoner,
Commodore Jno. Boreas, C.W., be “ kicked,” and turned
out of his appointment of clerk of the weather, and further
be rendered incapable of ever serving in that capacity
again.
(Signed) A. Poop, Yiee-Adm., President.
At Sea, July, 1862.
REMARKS BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE LORD
HIGH ADMIRAL SIR WM. NEPTUNE, X.Y.Z.
It is with great regret that I find such grave charges
brought against so distinguished an officer as Commodore
Jno. Boreas, C.W., and one who, though somewhat fickle,
has hitherto generally given satisfaction; and it is with
still greater regret that I find, by the evidence before me,
those charges fully substantiated.
Under the circumstances I cannot but fully approve of
the sentence awarded by the Court, with the exception of
the word “kicked.” Commodore Jno. Boreas will there-
fore, in consideration of his services, be allowed to resign his
appointment; and I trust that the leniency now shown him
will be a warning to be more careful in future.
(Signed) Wm. Neptune.
CR. MEMO.
It is with great pleasure that H. E. the Commander-in-
Chief has observed the rapid growth of hair on the upper-
lips and chins of the subalterns under his command. This
is more especially noticeable in the Horse Marines. This
fact proves to H. E. the great ambition these promising
officers have (not only to wear beards and moustaches but)
to comply with the rules and regulations of the service.
By Order,
(Signed) Jno. Pipeclay, Adjutant-General.
15
THE GOLDEN FLEECE GAZETTE.


Correspondence.
Mr. Editor, —What is the meaning of that piece you
inserted in your paper about “Ye Three Cockroaches ?”
I wish you would be more careful in your selections and
not be personal. Yes, personal—for I know there was an
allusion made to me in it. I know I once said, “Ido so
hate cockroaches.” But it is not that annoys me; there
are base insinuations about “pluck” failing—and last,
though not least, I consider that passage “ No signs of hair
on lip are there, although a soldier he,” is very objection-
able ; and I beg that you will publish this letter, because I
haven’t seen a single cockroach since I’ve been on board,
so no one can tell how I might have behaved if I had.
So beware, Mr. Editor, how you trample on my feelings
(my moustache is getting on splendidly), or you’ll find out
that I really am a
Son of a Gun.
[We assure the “ Son of a Gun” that no personality was
intended, and although we willingly give insertion to his
letter yet we must own that we do not see how we have
offended this gallant “ Son of Mars,” who it appears to us
has taken this opportunity of sounding his own trumpet
merely for the purpose of making himself heard and praising
his incipient moustaches.— Ed.]
Answers to the Conundrums, &c.,
PUBLISHED IN LAST NUMBER.
Conundrum, G. B.—Rotundity.
Riddle, G. B.—(A.) Stone.
Conundrums, Enigmas, &c,
My first is a title of distinction,
My second imprisons us all, and
My whole is a mode of addressing my first.
800.
An Enigma never before published, very like the late
Lord Macaulay’s, but not his :
Cut off my first and it is close at hand,
Cut off my last and then to buy I stand.
What is my first ?—a busy bee,
What is my last ?—’tis tea to drink,
Between which two an eye you’ll see;
D’ye see it yet ?—if not, sit down and think.
Bobstay.
Conundrum.
My first is the name of a hero great,
Far famed in the annals of war;
My second’s as useful in building this ship
As a carpenter’s rule, axe, or saw;
And my whole, were I going to build me a house,
I should buy before all other things,
Except, perhaps, some bricks,
Or some scaffolding sticks.
Of this riddle please cut me the strings.
Bobstay.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
I’VE Lost, I’ve lost, a pewter pot,
Engraven with my name,
If found or stolen, yours it’s not,
So please return the same.
“Keyser,” No. 3, B. Hall.
Lost.
BY a ruined Gambler, Thirteen Shillings and Sixpence.
Whoever will pay the same to the fortunate Winner
will greatly oblige the desperate Loser.
Wanted,
BY the Editors, G. F. Gazette , several Weekly Contribu-
tions.
Wanted,
BY the Ladies of the Ship, a person without encum-
brances who will take charge of the Children when
the Ship rolls. N.B.—A Bachelor preferred.
Wanted,
BY a Person with whom clean linen is scarce, a skilled
Washerman or Washerwoman.—Terms liberal.
For Sale,
SEVERAL Bars of Soap and Gallons of fresh Water,
carefully saved during the last month, the owner
having no use for the same during the present cold weather.
16
THE GOLDEN FLEECE GAZETTE.


Golden Fleece Gazette
No. 5.
“ Dear authors suit your topics to your strength
And ponder well your subject and its length,”— Byron.
JULY 30.
INDIAN OCEAN.
It is with, the utmost satisfaction we find that our last
earnest, though perhaps somewhat rough, appeal has had
the effect of rousing the dormant energies of our fellow-
passengers. At the same time we confess that we were not
prepared for the inundation of communications which has
nearly swept away our box, and which has only demon-
strated to us the more clearly their former intense laziness.
We do not wish to he severe, hut we consider it to be part
of our duty to point out that one great defect among you
all which we could not help observing of late. Enough,
let bygones be bygones; let us turn over a new leaf of our
journal, and let it be your pleasure and aim that our only
ground of complaint for the future should be that we daily
receive more contributions than we can weekly copy.
We are deeply grieved that notwithstanding the late dis-
missal of Mr. John Boreas, late C.W., confirmed by H.E. Sir
W. Neptune, X.Y.Z., we still are obliged to date our paper
from the Indian Ocean ; but during the last week we have
been playing at the juvenile game of hide-and-seek, first
with the Coast of Africa, then tantalising the icebergs of
the far south, and again retracing our steps, once more in-
dulging the land with a distant view of our weather-
beaten and distressed selves. During one day we were
becalmed on the bank, tdien we made good use of our
time in fishing. One of us —a gallant captain —met with such
success as to provide us all with fish at dinner and at break-
fast the following morning, which morning, by-the-bye, we
have marked in our diary with red ink in remembrance of
its being the first time we got enough to eat since leaving
Madras. Therefore, oh gallant captain, accept our best
thanks!! We must bear testimony on behalf of all to the
courtesy of the warrant officers who, having caught a large
Cape salmon, sent it with their best wishes to the cuddy
table. May we soon obtain a fair wind, for really at present
this painful and tiresome operation of rounding the Cape
seems to us to be only another name for squaring the circle.
Various Modes of Catching Elephants
in Travancore.
In this kingdom many elephants are required, partly in
temples to give eclat to idol worship, and partly in the
public works department. Formerly large sums were ex-
pended in purchasing them ; but this proving too heavy a
drag upon the public revenue, an establishment was or-
ganized to catch and tame them in the jungle. At first the
appliances used were rude and simple. Large wooden
planks were studded over with iron spikes and concealed in
paths frequented by herds of elephants. All that stepped
on these were of course lamed, and became an easy prey to
the men who were lying in wait watching. But as most
of the animals thus caught remained lame for life, another
mode was tried. Large pits were dug and well covered
over with brushwood, and a layer of sods, so that not even
the sharp and sagacious eye of an elephant could detect the
trap. If any in passing fell in, he was kept^there on spare
diet till his first fury had subsided. Then earth was lowered
down into the pit to bring him gradually to the surface.
As soon as practicable a noose was slipped over his neck
and legs, and he was fastened between two tame elephants,
which led him away to the. taming establishment. As at
least one half of the elephants'that tumbled into these pits
broke their necks or were otherwise disabled, this mode also
was discontinued, and a third had recourse to, which is
still practised.
A large ravine in the East Mountains had long been
known as the resort of elephants in the dry season when
they were driven down from the higher mountains in search
of water. In a convenient spot in this valley several acres
were cleared and fenced in with the stems of gigantic trees.
Within this enclosure various vegetables were cultivated,
and the spaces filled up with plantain trees, so that the
whole presented the appearance of a thickly planted garden.
At the upper and lower ends were entrances with trap doors
which could be raised or lowered by means of a pulley at-
tached to a pole in the centre of the garden, and which also
fell down when this pole was touched. The vegetables in
this garden of course attracted the elephants, and when
once in they could not fail to touch the pole which fell and
shut them in. Their rage and surprise when thus caught
can scarcely be imagined. They rush frantically about and
dash then- skulls against the fence with blows which one
would think sufficient to break their heads. Within this
large enclosure and attached to the side of it, are several
small ones like cages, sufficiently large to admit an elephant,
but not to allow of his turning. As soon as practicable
the newly entrapped elephants are enticed into one of these
cages, where they are fed with the bark of trees. Here
their education commences under a “Mahout,” who knows
so well how to apply his goad that the poor beast which
considered itself Lord of the Eorest a few weeks since, now
trembles at a rod which would scarcely frighten a school-
boy. After the lapse of from four to six months, he is
allowed to take his first exercise in the open-air, accom-
paned by a few old sober and well-trained elephants. If
he prove tractable, the exercise is repeated daily until he
can be trusted alone; if not, he is sent to school again for
another period.
In 1851 an unusually large “tusker ” having been caught,
the Conservator of Forests sent to ask me to go up and see
him. Though he had already been for two months in the
cage, he was so frightened at the sight of my black clothes,
that he trembled like an aspen leaf, or I should rather say,
shook like a mountain in fear.
Hans.
The Andamans.
( Continued.)
The next morning at day-light we weighed anchor and
made the best of our way towards Port Blair, so called after


Lieut. Blair, R.N., who first surveyed these islands. It is to
this part of these islands that we now send our native convicts.
It was first established as a penal settlement after the
mutiny, and the greater part of the convicts are mutineers.
Ross Island is the spot chosen for the administration of this
convict colony; it is there that the Commissioner, the
Commandant of the Naval Brigade, and the other officials
dwell. We sighted the Island at 8 a.m., and at noon were
safely anchored under its lee; Lieut. Hellard, commanding
the Brigade, having piloted us into the anchorage.
No sooner anchored than our ship was thronged with
the European inhabitants of the Island. We found lying
at anchor, H.M.’s Gun-boat Clyde , Commander Lieut.
Dickson, who came on board to report himself to our Com-
mander. That the advent of a vessel in the Andamans is a
joyful event may be imagined (isolated as they are from
the world) and where the communication is so uncertain.
The guard over the convicts consists of the gun-boat
above-mentioned, a company of the Seebundy Corps (lately
disbanded) and some 150 or 200 of the Naval Brigade. The
convicts are employed felling trees, erecting huts, &c.
Some are formed into boats’ crews, and taught to row;
others of the better behaved have been allowed to set up
shops and have formed a regular bazaar along the sea-side
—their little articles of commerce being got from Calcutta
as opportunities offer. Our stay here was a round of pic-
nics, oystering parties, theatricals, and dinners. Instead,
however, of describing them, we will here give a slight
sketch of the natives of these islands.
The Andamanese are little of stature with very small
hands and feet; they resemble Africans in their features
and hair, and their teeth have the appearance of being
filed to a point—they are shy and treacherous to a degree,
and although our manner and conduct towards them have
been conciliating and generous, they steadily refuse to have
anything to do with us. Europeans they especially dread,
and we are indebted to the few convicts who have been
amongst them for the little we know concerning their habits.
They live in the open air ; but during the rainy season they
sometimes made a sort of roof with matting of palm-leaves
very neatly put together ; this they attach to the stem of a
tree in a slanting position. They are migratory, moving
about in small bodies of some 10 or 20 in number. Their
food consists principally of pork and fish, and when they
have not the means of procuring these they live on roots.
During certain seasons of the year they feed on a curious
fruit, which looks very much like a wild pine-apple, but is
very different in flavour ; it has a slightly sweet taste, but
is decidedly mawkish and insipid. It is called the Anda-
manese bread fruit. They hunt the wild pig with arrows
which are made of thin bamboo reeds tipped with fish bones
or sharp flints. Their great ambition is to obtain bottles,
not for the purpose of putting anything into them, but for
shaving their heads which they do with chips of glass.
They are guiltles of anything in the shape of clothing, and
go about in a state of nature.
Now, the question which presents itself is, How were
these Islands first populated ? and where did these extra-
ordinary people come from ? The Andamanese have no
affinity with any of the nations near them, either in looks
or language; indeed no single word in their vocabulary
corresponds with that of any other known language. The
only supposition we ever heard with any probability in it
was, that a ship laden with some African slaves of both
sexes was lost on the N. Andaman and they populated
the island; but were it so would they not have retained
their language or some trace of it ? Their African descent
is given by some as a reason for their mistrust of strangers
—'traditions of their bondage having, perhaps, been handed
down to them. This is a mystery which we fear will take
long to unravel, owing to their obstinacy in refusing to be
friendly with us. The Andamanese have by many been
considered to be cannibals. This is quite untrue, they
abhor it as much as we do.
After a very pleasant stay here of three days we weighed
anchor and steamed for Rangoon again, but took the oppor-
tunity of going on a cruise to an island some miles from
the Andamans called Barren Island. It is very high and
volcanic, and is covered with lava to the water’s edge. It
abounds in hot springs, so much so that we recollect
once reading that the sea close to the rocks is quite hot. A
boat’s crew from a vessel sent there to explore it some time
ago jumped into the water to wade ashore, but very soon
jumped back again. We did not land, much as we all
wished it, the commander being anxious to get back again,
so we were obliged to be contented with merely steaming
round it and examining it with our glasses.
We reached Rangoon safely on the sth July, after an.
absence of ten days, and the first intelligence we received
was that the missing vessel had reached Madras after a
tremendous passage of ten days having encountered very
heavy weather the whole time. Navigator.
A Visit to the Cabul Princesses.
In the station in which we were living before leaving
India there were several of the former princes of Cabul,
sons and nephews of the dethroned Shah Tooja, king of
Cabul; they were all Government pensioners, and lived
there very comfortably with their families. My husband’s
duties bringing him often in contact with two of the
Shahzadehs, and they having exchanged visits, they
entreated him to allow me to go and visit their Begums,
so we appointed a day when my husband drove me over to
their residence. We were received at the entrance by the
brother princes, the Shahzadehs, Shahpore, and Nadir
Shah, and at first conducted into their own receiving room,
the walls of which were covered with glittering mirrors. I
was then conducted by one of the brothers from the ante-
room along a dark corridor, which opened into a large
square courtyard, in which there were trees and flowers
growing in neatly laid out plots, the whole being surrounded
by small outhouses in which lived Cashmeree and Cabulee
women and their children, attendants on the Begums.
The Shahzadeh who led me to the court said a few words
in Persian, on which a number of women rose up from the
carpet on which they were sitting and welcomed me with
many pretty phrases, and the mother of the princes shook
hands with and embraced me in her fashion, and then all in
turn saluted me in a similar manner. They were beauti-
fully dressed in purple and yellow satins, with lace veils,
and their heads covered with ornaments like coins studded
with jewels of various colours. The old mother then took
me into their reception room, an apartment not nearly so
handsome as that of the princes’, but very comfortably
fitted up ; at one end was a couch covered with -white
drapery on which the Begums, about seven in number,
sat according to their rank; in the centre of the
room was a divan on which all the children, of whom
there were a number, richly dressed, arranged them-
selves. The elder Begum and next in rank to her
sat on chairs on either side of me. One was a very
handsome Turkish girl, very fair with a rosy blush on her
cheeks, who said she had come across from Stamboul, that
her husband had bought and married her in Cabul; such
a merry girl she was, asking me all kinds of questions.
Another Begum was also very beautiful, with large liquid
melancholy eyes —quite like one of Byron’s beauties;
one young unmarried girl, the daughter of one of the
princes, was very pretty, such a retiring, modest looking
creature, and so beautifully dressed. They asked mo
a whole host of questions whether I did not find it
very dull living in a house alone with my husband, to
which I replied that, on the contrary, I thought they must
feel it very dull never seeing anything beyond their four
walls; they said, however, that they were quite contented
and happy, and in the society of each other they did not
seem to realise the real solitude of their life. I was
entreated to bring my children and show them some other
day, which I promised to do, and then rose up to take leave,
but they made me stay a little longer ; at last I thought I
had kept my husband waiting long enough (he was con-
versing with the princes in the anteroom) so I told them I
must leave. The old lady first embraced me very
affectionately, entreated me to consider her as a sister, said
she would never forget me (in which sentiment they all
joined), and begged me to send her as a memorial from
England a pair of spectacles. Of course I was quite over-
powered by all the flowery Persian speeches, and tried to
make one or two myself, but failed ; they all shook hands
with me, and my gloves retained the otto of roses scent of
their pretty hands for a fortnight after. I did take my
children on another occasion, at which they were delighted,
and passed them on from one to the other as if they had
been toys, examining everything they wore minutely.
I think I must remember the old Begum’s wish for a pair
of spectacles when we are at home. Laura.
18
THE GOLDEN FLEECE GAZETTE.


nate flirtations and rational conversations with the ladies.
F. M. Bivouac trusts these remarks will not be without
good results. By order,
Poetry.
AN ODE TO MY PEWTEK.
H. SABRETACHE,
[A First Attempt.)
Deputy Adjutant General.
Our cups are broken, so’s our glass,
Drinking at all is quite a farce,
I’ve brought, I’ll use, or I’m an ass,
My Pewter.
Post-Office Notice.
Many there are to me quite near.
Who daily live in thirst and fear,
But while I’ve thee I’ll get my beer,
The Postmaster-General has much pleasure in informing
the public in general, and the passengers of the Golden
Fleece in particular, that the splendid white Carrier Pigeon
(which may be seen at any time in the ship’s galley, but
which is rapidly turning black owing to its residence in that
locality) will be ready in a few days to carry a packet to
London direct. The Postmaster-General cannot help
thinking that an opportunity like the present should be
seized by those in the Golden Fleece to forward a petition
to Her most gracious Majesty to the effect that the Exhibi-
tion be kept open till Spring next year, about which time,
if not sooner, they will arrive in England.
The P.M.-General assures the passengers that their
petition will be granted, as he has just received private
intelligence to that effect by an highly educated and intelli-
gent Cape Pigeon, despatched by his friend, Old Pam.
My Pewter.
Eor tea or beer, grog, cold or hot,
I’ll never want while thee I’ve got,
All envy me my happy lot,
My Pewter.
Commands, or growling, e’en no money,
The steward says it is all one, see
I can’t raise more. Aint all this funny.
My Pewter ?
Soup-bouilli tins, now for a cup
They use, their tea or grog to sup,
Now I can laugh and treasure up
My Pewter.
Prospectuses are all forgotten,
Promises fine and soft as cotton,
Now isn’t their whole system rotten
By order,
My Pewter ?
EBENEZER SEALINGWAX,
No tumblers, cups and saucers, glasses,
The stingy grub this quite surpasses,
Are the board of directors asses,
Deputy P.M.-General.
My Pewter ?
I care not whether they are or not,
They’re anyhow a stingy lot,
And soon, I think, must go to pot;
But I’ll leave off, for this is rot
Mind nothing now, for I have got,
Correspondence.
Dear Mr. Editor,
My Pewter.
It was with feelings of the greatest con-
sternation and alarm that I read in the last issue of the in-
valuable Golden Fleece Gazette that you had arrived at the
unalterable determination of “shuttingup shop,” provided
greater spirit in contributing was not shown by our little
community. Now, as you value the welfare of all on
board, I trust you will reconsider the matter, and depend
upon it you will shortly be inundated with communications
on various subjects. For the ensuing week I fear very
much cannot be promised, as your stern warning has
almost paralysed many, who wishing all success to the
spirited editors and willing to contribute their mite to the
common stock, feel so dispirited that it will require a long
course of sodas and brandys to enable them to recover the
shock. I can only say that it is to be sincerely hoped you will
follow your own advice with respect to the spider and try
again, and depend on it your good feeling will be appre-
ciated, and many come forward who have hitherto held
aloof.
H. A. D.
Theatrical Gossip.
We beg to inform our readers that another treat in the
shape of a theatrical performance is on the tapis , as soon as
we round the Cape; at the same time we would mention
that considerable expense has been incurred by the
manager and amateurs of our illustrious corps, in the
shape of certain understood expenditures for those who
have assisted in the mechanical line. It would be very
desirable to relieve the above-mentioned parties from any
charges of this kind (from which, in common justice, they
ought to be exempt) by a contribution being raised without
delay of, say, half-a-crown from each of the saloon passengers,
and with the approval of the manager, a subscription list
be prepared and left upon the table of the saloon to give
all our friends an opportunity of responding to this appeal.
Furthermore we are requested to state that it is imperative
that the saloon passengers should furnish the stage mana-
ger with a proportionate number of candles from each
cabin to light up the stage.
Yours in direst distress,
A Passenger.
“ Caelum non aminum mutant,
Qui trans mare currunt.”
What! through the wide wide world we range,
The sky—hut not our mind we change.
Dear Mr. Editor,
If you can find space in the columns of
your extensively circulated and widely read Gazette for the
following lucubration, you 'will, while gratifying my love of
scribbling, at the same time it may be help to keep the
Gazette afloat, a consummation devoutly to be wished by
the discerning public. I have often indulged in the thought
that happiness, which we all sigh after, is much more
dependent upon ourselves than upon any external circum-
stances in which we may be placed. Yet, were I disposed
to follow the vein of thought of “ The Dyspeptic Matron,”
I would give you a long tirade upon the miseries of life
on board-ship, and dwell upon its many discomforts. Pic-
ture to yourself, Sir, the inconvenience of a sea breaking
into one’s cabin, and setting boxes, bags, and portmanteaus,
all afloat. Reflect on the grief caused by dresses and col-
lars irretrievably ruined. Then what can be more wretched
(in a small way) than to lie in bed and feel the drops of
water drip, drip, drip, through the apertures in the deck
overhead; or if we turn to the culinary and provision
Military Intelligence.
Field-Marshal Bivouac notices with regret a great falling
off among his officers in that very essential quality in a
soldier, gallantry ! It is not gallantry in the field to which
he refers —no Briton can be wanting in that—but it is gal-
lantry towards the ladies.
F. M. Bivouac fears that tobacco and brandy and water
(when it can be procured—he means the brandy, not the
water) now occupy that place in the hearts of those under
his command which should be devoted entirely to the other
sex. He has noticed with alarm of late that the ladies are
not promenaded , their children dandled , or their maids taken as
much notice of as in his time. He wishes, therefore, to
impress on the minds of all that instead of ruining their
constitutions with brandy, tobacco, and small talk, they
should be improving their minds and manners with alter-
19
THE GOLDEN FLEECE GAZETTE.


department and follow in the wake of “ Jemima ” and the
“ Growler ” (though not gifted with the trick of verse) —
Dear! Dear!! the arrowroot is all gone, the soogie is
coming to an end, and then if we cannot put in at the
Cape or St. Helena for a fresh stock of provisions, for fat
beeves and sheep, and fowls, how can we exist on salt junk
and fat pork. Is it not disheartening, moreover? The
wind still contrary! However, I do not intend to dwell
upon the dark side of the picture, but to take a more hopeful
view of things in general. I think it is Mrs. Stowe, in her
work on “ Sunny Memories,” while meditating in a quiet
kirk yard in Scotland, who exclaims, “What a peaceful
spot! Surely, if content dwells anywhere on earth, its
home is to be found here ! ” and then, afterwards, corrects
the idea by the remark, “ Yet, after all, happiness is more to
be found within than without us.” The sentiment which
our great poet, Milton, puts into the mouth of Satan in his
immortal work, “Paradise Lost” I think is very fine:—
“ The mind is its own place, and itself can make a Hea-
ven of Hell, a Hell of Heaven.”
It is narrated that Alexander the Great on beholding
Diogenes, who lived in his tub, was so much struck at the
contentment of the man, that he exclaimed, “ What can I
do for you ?” “ Get out of my way, and do not obstruct the
light and warmth of the sun,” was the philosophic reply,
whereupon the conqueror remarked, “If I were not
Alexander I could be content to be Diogenes.”
You have, of course, Sir, heard the well known lines,
“ Man wants but little here below,
Nor wants that little long,”
and although “ The Son of a Gun ” may think the
remark personal as an allusion to his incipient beard, I
disclaim all personalties, and take it rather as a text to
preach upon the duty of cultivating a contented mind amid
the daily rubs of life, thus causing many sunny memories
to follow us into the calm monotony of our after existence.
And, dear Mr. Editor, as I began with a quotation, so I will
conclude with one :
“ Forsitan hoc olim mexninisse juvabit.”— Virgil.
“ Perchance when we’ve arrived on shore,
Our troubles we’ll again fight o’er.”
A Blue Stocking.
Me. Editoe,
In the last impression of the Golden Fleece
Gazette you threaten to close the journal if you do not
receive more contributions. I think, in starting your
journal, you should have laid down the principle upon
which you meant to conduct the same. I ask you do you
mean to gag the press, or allow that liberty of speech
which Englishmen boastingly throw in the face of foreigners
as being one of Britain’s noblest institutes ?
It is useless trying to form a journal when the subject
matter is to be so handled as to suit the scruples of the
worthy conductors. Your paper ought to act the “ critique ”
upon all occurring on board the good ship, Golden Fleece.
What pleasure can an old East Indian derive in reading
of “A Trip to the Hills,” or “A journey from Dehradoon to
Allahabad.” It may lie information to some to know that
antelope and black partridge are to be had in Cashmere
and the Punjab, but for my part I would as soon you tell
me that Cape salmon are to be found on the La Gullas Bank,
and cabbages in Covent Garden-market. Your object in
having a journal I think should be to correct abuses and
remedy defects. For instance, can you not use your
endeavours to get us clean knives for meals, I have not had
one for a week, and could not the wish of your correspondent
be carried out, and make Bachelors’ Hall a nursery, we
should then have all the squalling in one place, and the
ministers of religion would not be compelled to stop in the
middle of prayers, and I could spend my evenings in com-
pany with the Arabian Knights.
Yours obediently,
Ceitio.
[We give insertion to “ Critic’s ” letter as a proof that
our columns are ever open to the public for the purpose of
exposing their grievances, and although we have not space
to comment upon it so fully as we would wish, yet in passing
we would inform “ Critic ” that we never undertook to sup-
ply the table at meal-times with clean knives, and we have
no doubt that if he would but make his grievance in this
respect known in the proper quarter (the chief steward) his
wishes would bo attended to in future.
We would also inform him that we have never heard
of their being any squalling in “ Bachelors’ Hall,” nor that
the ministers of religion had ever been disturbed at their
devotions; and in conclusion we beg to remind him that
Arabian Nights is not usually spelt with a “ K.”— Ed.]
My Deae Me. Editoe,
In the last copy of your valuable journal there
was an advertisement relative to some soap and a quantity
of fresh water that were for sale by one of the passengers,
meaning me of course , although no names were mentioned:
thanks to the wise restrictions which prevent people from
being personal.
I certainly did happen to remark that the mornings were
so cold that I should be glad when our cruise in the neigh-
bourhood of the ignis fatuus, Cape I’Agulhas, was over, and
we received sailing orders for St. Helena. But what if I
did ; does that afford the slightest guarantee that some day
I shall die in the “ Odour of Sanctity ?”
Allow me to mention, Mr. Editor, in contradiction of such
a false idea, that I overheard my steward say in the pantry
that he “ really thought No. 72 must be a Hindoo, or
something of the kind, as he wanted a fresh can of water
four times a day;” alluding, of course, to the frequency, and
scrupulous regularity of my ablutions.
So far from having any over-supply of the commodities
in question, I beg to say that I have serious thoughts of
purchasing a few bars of soap from Mr. Eerris, to last me
until we reach St. Helena (an event that will, in all proba-
bility, take place about Guy Fawkes’ Day). Should that
fail I shall be under the painful necessity of hanging my
shaving-box outside my cabin door (you need not mention
that it has not been used since I came on board), entreating
the generous passer-by to drop in any fragments that he or
she can spare.
Excuse me for trespassing so long on your valuable time.
Believe me, yours,
“ Old Beown Windsoe.”
Conundrums, &c.
Bobstay.
Of my first, many are on board ;
My second loves to store and hoard;
My third is found in every field ;
My whole you do to those who yield.
Bobstay.
No one can do anything unless my first they do ;
My second after A B 0 I guess was taught to you ;
Three coming together give my whole: ’tis found in music too.
Bobstay.
My first’s incurred by obligation;
My next’s a name for botheration,
My whole’s a scourge in every nation.
Bobstay.
Answers to Ditto
Published in Last Nuhbee.
Conundrums, “Bog,”— Lordship.
~ “Bobstay,” —Mortar.
Enigma, “ Bobstay,”—Bit.
My first I do when I undress ;
My next’s a fish, and nothing less;
My whole’s a lad —now try and guess.
20
THE GOLDEN FLEECE GAZETTE.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
Wanted Immediately,
A LARGE quantity of Cups (handles not insisted on); also,
Saucers and Tumblers, for the use of the passengers
on board the Golden Fleece.
Liberal terms offered, as it is believed many of the pas-
sengers, to prevent further inconvenience, will pay half
their price.
Apply to Chief Steward, S. S. Golden Fleece.
27ih July , 1862.
Lost,
SHORTLY after leaving Calcutta, “ Roget’s Thesaurus of
English Words and Phrases.” Whoever will return
the same to the Editor will greatly oblige the disconsolate
owner.
Wanted,
BY a Young Gentleman, a pair of Sea Legs, calves no
particular object.
Apply “H. J. E.,” care of the Editor, G. F. G.
21
THE GOLDEN FLEECE GAZETTE.


Golden Fleece Gazette.
OCTOBER 1.
ATLANTIC OCEAN.
No. 6.
“ Dear authors suit your topics to your strength
And ponder well your subject and its length.
’—Byron.
We congratulate our readers and ourselves upon being
once more on our homeward course and our good old ship
wending her propitious way like a giant refreshed across
the boundless track of the briny ocean; we have every
hope that the bracing climate of Simon’s Bay has infused
fresh vigour not only into the physical bodies of our readers
but likewise into their intellectual souls, and that this will
become weekly more and more apparent in each succeeding
issue of our Gazette. The old excuse of nothing to write
about will now no longer hold good, every one of our
readers if they will but seriously reflect must we feel
assured find in their late visit to Cape Colony at least one
subject on which to pen an interesting and amusing article.
We have already received the “Mountaineer’s Lament,”
and only hope that he will follow this up with a detailed
description of his interesting and adventurous travels;
another contributor has commenced a capital account of
how he “did” Table Mounting with his H dropping
friend, let his example be followed by many more of you;
tell us of the picturesque Stellenbosch or the glories of
Constantia, of Cape Town experiences and railway excur-
sions. To you, too, who give wing in ambitious flights to
the poetic muse a vast area is now open, for your imagina-
tion must be dull indeed if the sight of so many fair belles
and the remembrance of so much hospitality cannot arouse
your dormant energies and make them assume the form
of grateful odes and admiring sounds. And you who
in a kind of antiquarian spirit have made immense collec-
tions at an enormous expense of ostrich feathers, rusty
assagais, knob kerries, rhinoceros hides, samboks, and
stuffed birds, give us an account of these things, and show
us how the national habits and customs of the natives of
Kaffraria, may be learnt and understood by a diligent
study of these curiosities.
We were unable to have more than the first four issues
of our paper printed in Cape Town as the fifth was taken
from the saloon on the day of its publication, and no one
could be found to plead guilty to the charge of its criminal
appropriation. Owing to the very heavy rolling of the ship
only one copy of this number had been made. The indi-
vidual, whoever he may be, will doubtless feel some satis-
faction in the reflection that his selfishness has been the
cause of annoyance to the public in general and the editors
in particular; we wish him joy in the possession of the
purloined paper, but at the same time hope that he found
it so uninteresting that he will not care to risk detection
by serving us so dirty a trick again.
We take this opportunity of requesting our readers on
no account to make away with the copies of this Gazette ;
if any one wishes for a more lengthy examination he can
always obtain a copy on applying to one of the editors.
The Gazette when placed on the table is public property, and
as such ought to be sacred to individuals ; kindly bear this in
mind, and it will save endless trouble and annoyance to all.
The editors promise no exertions shall be spared on their
part to render the future numbers of the Gazette amusing
and instructive, and hope that their endeavours may be
marked with the same approval and support which they
formerly received.
Theatrical Gossip.
We have much pleasure in informing our readers that
Captain Cassidy will again shortly open our elegant and
commodious theatre, and from the success that has inva-
riably characterized his management, we are sure that the
forthcoming season will prove even more hriliant than the
last.
During the late recess the house has been entirely re-
decorated, and considerable alterations and improvements
have been effected, which will greatly conduce to the com-
fort and convenience of visitors.
In addition to the old favourites, two or three important
additions have been made to the company, especially one
gent who has never before appeared on the boards of any
theatre, and who we are sure will prove a great acquisition.
Negotiations are still pending which will, if brought to a
satisfactory conclusion, make this the most complete com-
pany that has ever performed in our theatre. An entirely
new and original burlesque (in no way copied from the
French) written by an esteemed member of our editorial
staff (which of course must be successful) will be produced
on the opening night, which will be put on the stage
with that regardlessness of expense and attention to every
minute particular that distinguishes the present manage-
ment.
The sable band of brothers who gave so much satisfac-
tion last season are also engaged, and will give a new
edition of their popular songs.
We heartily wish our enterprising manager every success,
and trust he will meet with all the support and approbation
which his unremitting exertions so well deserve.
John Bull.
[Since printing the ahove we are sorry to learn that Capt. Cassidy
has determined to resign the managership in consequence of ill health.
TTk loss will he severely felt by our amateurs. — Ed.]
An Excursion to the Summit of
Table Mountain.
Every stranger who visits Cape Town must be struck
with the magnificent appearance of Table Mountain.
Nothing daunted by sundry reports as to the difficulties
of the ascent, the dangers of finding the way back again,
the falling in with lions, and baboons who might run away
with one’s hat, and having found three companions, who
were as eager as myself to climb into a purer atmosphere,
I made the necessary arrangements to start. To say, en
passant , something of our party, I would mention that,
though our object in view was one, our characteristics were
very dissimilar. If I group them in two pairs, one of the
first couple was fat, and the other lean; while the former
put an H wherever he possibly could, speaking of cold
(h)air and his (h)aching (h)arms, the latter cut it always
off, and spoke of being (h)orribly (h)ungry and nearly


ex(h)austed. Of the other two I will only say, that one
was tall and the other short; one black —I don’t mean in
skin—and the other blue, and that the former spoke
English with the essence of an Irish accent, while the other
was so much given to nautical expressions that he con-
stantly spoke of heaving to and dropping his anchor. After
this description of our party I will just mention our pro-
visions for the journey. Here, also, some difficulties arose.
While some said it was needless to carry any refreshment
for the inner man, as they would only impede the progress
of the outer; others, speaking from experiencce, thought
it advisable to sit down every half-hour and satisfy the
appetite. Being convinced that the medium lay between
the two, a basket of oranges, a plate of sandwiches, and a
parcel of buns were packed, and slung on the back of our
cicerone. For drink we had a shilling’s worth of eau de
vie mixed in a bottle of water, but on opening it found it
simply eau de Cape Town.
Ibex.
A villain hawk has watched and siezed my dove,
And in his talons borne her far away.
Then welcome death, thou cold, yet constant wife:
I claim thee as my pale and shadowy bride.
Adieu to love, to happiness, to life;
The last dread trump alone our union shall divide.
F. 0.
TO DETRACTION.
Thou mischief-loving, many headed thing!
With serpent’s tooth, or scorpion’s tail to sting ;
And e’en on truth and worth a slur to fling
Detraction
Thee I denounce ! May not my lot or cot
Be ever planted near thy upas spot;
And on my heart’s best treasures breathe thou not,
Detraction
The blight on Eden’s flowers —tho’ it be
A “ Serpent’s Trail” —is not enough for thee;
Thy envious eye must still more evil see.
(To he continued.)
Detraction
Oh speed the day when, in the human mind.
Slander’s foul taint no kindred soil shall find;
But to one doom, with thee, shall be consigned,
Poetry.
Detraction
MOUNTAINEER’S LAMENT.
SEA SICKNESS.
A Sympathetic Squeak.
I’m leaving thee in sorrow, Simon’s bay,
To-morrow’s dawn will see me far away;
I’m leaving thy bold shores with heavy heart;
Alas! how sad a thing it is to part
From rocks like thine, where I have clamber’d o’er
Hundreds of places never climbed before,
Regardless of my life, while all alone
I like a statue stood on ground unknown.
I’ve carved my name in many a barren place
No living mortal ever dar’d to face.
I’ve met with bear and tiger, lizard, leopard.
Far, far above the haunts of sheep or shepherd;
They raised their tails and stared, as well they might,
Being quite unused to such a curious sight,
And marvell’d who this mountaineer could be,
So many million feet above the sea.
How sweet to sit beneath the shade
Of some wide-spreading oak;
Or else to stroll in peaceful glade.
And have a quiet smoke.
Thus thought a wretched sea-sick man.
As he lay in his cot:
His face leant o’er the wash-hand stand;
His head was very hot.
I wish I was in Dixey now,
In my house behind the Church:
I would enjoy myself, I trow—
Oh crikey! what a lurch.
Upon the floor, I see them there,
My boxes in a heap ;
I’m in the anguish of despair—
I’ll sing myself to sleep.
Farewell, 0 Table, that o’erlooks the bay
That bears thy name; for on thee one fine day
I lay and dreamed of mountains’ worth ascending
From thee, first stepping-stone, so unpretending
(Yet made so much of, thought so full of dangers,
By ordinary run of English strangers).
Farewell, lov’d mountains steep ! no more I’ll tread
Thy giddy heights, nor sean thy chasms dread!
For now, alas! for me those pleasures cease ;
Time waits for none, nor does the Golden Fleece.
Beautiful star, in heaven so bright,
And what do you think she said ?
Oh kiss me quick and go, you fright.
For I want to go to bed.
Oh tell me now, ray Phyllis dear,
Who’s that knocking at the door;
De Camptown ladies sing so queer,
I’m going home —to snore.
G. M.
Land Lubbes.
LOVE’S LAMENT.
A summer’s sun is wreathed in setting light,
Leaving the landscape in a golden hue;
The sea-bird homeward wings its weary flight;
The bright day bids a lingering adieu.
Here, with a heart scarce beating in my breast,
I look on Nature’s beauties, and I crave
That, as that sun now going to his rest,
I might so tranquilly sink into my grave.
For life, alas ! has no more charms for me,
Bereft of all I held on earth-most dear;
Left friendless in this world’s sterility,
I ask no boon except an early bier.
I loved, alas ! too fondly and too well:
Now looking back to boyhood’s happy days.
In vain I struggle rudely to expel
A phantom that my heart will ever raise.
I see her now in all her lovliness,
Her dashing smile, her laughing hazel eye ;
Tet, when my fever’d hand seeks her’s to press,
The darling vision does but fade and die.
Oft has she sworn to me her lasting love;
Oft clasped my hand with fervour to her breast;
Oft raised my hand from earth to heaven above;
Oft told me we should never, never part.
But now ’tis o’er! What feeling ecstasy;
How short her nectar was it mine to sip;
She plotted darkly future agony,
While words of love still lingered on her lip.
0 would that she were lying ’neath the ground,
Her lovely form wrapped in the shroud of death
Then would her heart to dust alone be bound.
Then flattery fan no cheek with foetid breath.
What now to me is happinesss or love,
What now remains but Hades and decay ?
Correspondence.
A SUGGESTION.
My Dear Me. Editor,
When I was a child, a time long since gone by,
as my white hairs testify, I was made by my respected
parents to study for a given time—say two hours—daily.
I cannot with honesty say that I at the time saw the neces-
sity of this or the promised benefits to be derived, but this
I can say, that I always went back to play after the
obnoxious two hours' work with much greater zest and enjoy-
ment.
You are doubtless conversant with that trite old English
proverb of “ All work and no play makes Jack a dull boy,”
but this reversed, “All play and no work would make
Master Jack a still duller boy.”
I daresay by this time you will have seen what I am
hinting at, viz., the establishment of some kind of morning
school for the children on board.
Why should not this be ? .
Surely there are some on board, hitherto lazy, who would
undertake a teacher’s duties for two hours daily, say from
10 till 12 ; this would not only keep the children quiet and
employed, but impart to them sufficient general information
to give a taste for wholesale literature, and prevent their
young minds from running wild; whilst the teachers them-
23
THE GOLDEN FLEECE GAZETTE.


selves would thus find profitable employment with the
pleasing feeling of being useful at last.
I hope Mr. Editor you will deem this worthy of insertion,
and trusting it may not be without fruit.
I remain, yours, &c.,
Dr. Syntax.
Notice to Correspondents.
The imbecile attempts at rhyme committed by Messrs.
Saxony and Pietumaritzburgh induce us to believe that
whilst composing they must either have been in a state of
temporary insanity or suffering from the effects of strong
potations.
Snap’s effusion is simply childish. We should like to
know his age and where he found all his Punch’s hammers
and little whims.
Z. Z. G. Y.’s able article shall find insertion next week.
To Fanny. —We have not heard that sleeping on the left
side causes the right ear to stick out, but ask the cook.
If Mary Jane had a better flow of words, possessed any
imagination, and knew how to spell, her poems would be
passable, but those now before us we cannot insert.
To Jigger. —Of course when yellow’s on red green’s your
player ; you ought to know that by this time.
Notes by a Lounger.
Events this week have not been of a very extraordinary
character, consisting principally of individual cases of sea-
sickness, love-sickness, home-sickness, Cape Town-sickness,
heart-sickness, or any other sickness ; of these sea-sickness
has decidedly predominated, but has I hope for the present
disappeared.
A mania for changing residences has also been prevalent,
but all are-settled at last, and I hope happily. One insti-
tution has, alas ! gone from amongst us —Bachelors’ Hall —
the resort of all lovers of harmony and good fellowship is
broken up and has become a thing of the past, sic transit
gloria mundi.
Every body seems to be much satisfied with the rolls,
which are of a much better quality than those with which
our teeth had to contend whilst in the “ Indian Ocean,”
but they are few and far between, in fact the great cry of
the week has been, “Bread, give us bread, or we perish
with hunger.”
Several gentlemen have introduced new styles of hats,
and one has actually had the effrontery to appear on the
quarter-deck in a jelly-mould.
Bristles seem the order of the day, and it is currently re-
ported that heavy wagers are afloat upon the growth of the
various crops now just making their stubbley appearance.
Baggage day has passed away in unusual peace and
tranquility.
Theatricals are again on the tapis to enliven our little
community.
Those who caught an affection of the heart in Cape Town
are gradually recovering, though the moody looks and
downcast eyes of some still indicate the presence of the
fatal disease.
The health of the children is good and their noise more
insufferable than ever, but as their mothers saj we were
all children once, and for that matter there may be some
big babies amongst us now. More anon.
Yours,
Observer.
Hi! Stop there !! Look here!!!
Why is “ Stormy weather ” like “ Cheating ? ”
Printer’s D l.
Because it isn’t fair!
Conundrums, Enigmas, &c.
My first is an affectionate, sectarian, assuming, and de-
votional mode of address.
My second far outnumbers my whole, which may be mul-
tiplied to almost any amount.
My First.
I was great now am naught, once loved now detested;
My nation’s the greatest that earth ever saw;
But now every civilized land is infested
With hundreds, nay thousands, now noble no more.
Once we were respected, now lost in contempt,
Now buyers and sellers, then soldiers of fame,
Not one of us then would have thought or have dreamt
Of hearing reproach always mixed with our name.
My Second.
A species of com, of a much coarser kind
Than wheat, oats, or barley not grown without rain ;
If you turn up in Webster this word you will find
There fully described as an esculent grain.
My Whole.
Like reform bill, corn laws, red coats, and pale ale,
I’m a settled and fixed institution;
Or form like the Parliament, Horse Guards, and bail,
Part of Britain’s far-famed constitution.
My number is fix’d, my age is unknown,
I’m made up of the rich and the poor,
And many a wretch on my mercy is thrown,
When hope of all mercy is o’er.
Bobstay.
My first you did when you were unable to lie or stand.
My second forms sometimes a tenement, sometimes a
garden-border, and sometimes a ladies’ brooch, and my
whole is the receptacle of a school-boy’s books and marbles,
and of a lady’s odds and ends.
Hulloa, there ! this way!! Here’s a
better one !!! —
When shall we require our warm clothing again ?
Why, when we’re (cold) coaled at St. Vincent’s, to be
sure!
Walker.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
Lost,
BY a Young Gent, a Full Beating Heart, supposed to have
been left at Cape down. Any one having seen or
heard of the same will confer a lasting obligation on the
love-sick owner by giving him notice of its whereabouts.
ri>HIS is to give notice —listen there!
I’ve lost a Fin, I don’t no where:
A most splendacious golden twist.
On Saturday Afternoon I miss’d
This pin, lost or stolen, it I suppose, is ;
That ’t must be somewhere all I knows is.
IF the party who left Simon’s Bay without paying for his
Washing will apply at our Office, he will hear of some-
thing to his advantage.
SHOULD this meet the eye of 0. P. G. he is requested to
pay his Cape Town debts without delay.
24
THE GOLDEN FLEECE GAZETTE.


XY. Z. is entreated to return to the bosom of bis
i numerous Creditors, when, if be pays up like a man,
all will be forgiven and forgotten.
Lost,
TWO Double-bladed, Black Handled Penknives. Any
person finding the same will oblige by returning
them to the Purser.
Lost,
AFOUR-BLADED PENKNIFE, with hom handle.
Whoever will return the same to No. 9 Cabin will
greatly oblige.
Lost,
A DEAN HARDING’S REVOLVER; supposed to bave
been lent to somebody on the last night but one before
reaching Simon’s Bay, and not since returned. "Whoever
will bring the same to the Editor’s office will be rewarded.
Notice.
A REVOLVER CASE, with brass clamps, is in No. 9
Cabin. The owner can obtain the same on application.
Printed for the Proprietors by an Obliging Devil at 29, Saloon-terrace,
Tank-square.
D 2
25
THE GOLDEN FLEECE GAZETTE.


Golden Fleece Gazette
“ Dear authors suit your topics to your strength
And ponder well your subject and its length.”— Byron.
OCTOBER 8.
No. 7.
ATLANTIC OCEAN.
The event of most startling interest to the public, though
in itself simple, which has occurred during the week is the
erection of a new editor’s box, which has had the effect of
attracting many ; some, we believe, have contributed merely
from a desire of trying the new box; at any rate this is
the only way in which we can account for the conduct of
one simple creature who, unable to compose anything him-
self, favoured us with a leaf of the “Family Herald”
neatly folded up, and we have no doubt thought it an
excellent joke. Poor weak minded individual!
Behold the child by nature’s kindly law,
Pleased with a rattle, tickled with a straw.
Another event, which though perhaps not so startling,
is the arrival of a new passenger. We cordially welcome
the little stranger, and predict for it a happy childhood and
a long and useful career. This auspicious event called forth
a feeling and felicitous speech at dinner from our com-
mander, which was ably responded to by the proud and
happy father.
We have received a letter from “Frank,” which we give
below. Now “Frank” begins by stating that he has
learnt from Mrs. Caudle not to keep silent under annoyances,
and accuses us of inconsistency. Now, mark “Frank’s”
inconsistency. He proceeds to blame us for having
addressed the public on the subject of want of support,
which we, as editors, had a right to expect from them.
Gentle readers, had we no cause of annoyance ? “ Frank ”
is wrong in thinking that we only want to elicit a little
more praise and flattery. Of course we are always glad to
hear our humble efforts praised, but our object is to elicit
a few more articles for our paper; and we must tell you
that our verbal solicitations on Friday and Saturday last
have been eminently successful. Yes, “Frank,” w r e
acknowledge that we can write —well or not we leave for
others to judge —but a paper of this sort should not be
written by the editors, but by the community in general.
Neither do we labour for fame, for what fame is there to be
got in the mere arrangement and copying of the pieces sent
in to us, and the penning of a few introductory remarks ?
We have undertaken the editorship with the sole desire of
affording some amusement, and we may say, of being of
some use to our fellow passengers. We cannot plead
guilty to having forgotten the little rhyme quoted by
11 Frank,” as odd enough neither of our mothers ever
instilled the same into our little heads—no doubt a
thoughtless and much to be reprehended omission on their
parts. Finally, we thank “Frank” for the compliment he
pays us in wishing our mental capacities to be instilled with
fresh vigour. If we find that such proves to be the case
we’ll let him know.
The Gazette of last Wednesday has met the same lot as
the sth number, and thus again the interests of the public
are made subservient to the selfishness of the individual.
An Excursion to the Summit of
Table Mountain.
(Continued from our last.)
Looking at Table Mountain from Cape Town one would
imagine that the ascent must be made either from the right
or left end. To be told that you have to climb up in front
seems a task only fit for a Hercules, for it looks down upon
you not so much as a mountain, hut as a terraced wall of
some 4000 feet high, in a slow process of decomposition,
which might have been built in the time of Nimrod.
The road leading to it is, for the first two miles, even and
pleasant. It winds along a little stream, whose plaintive
murmurings make you feel inclined either to whistle or to
sing. Everything is life : for here negroes are washing
cart loads of the dirty clothing of the common people in the
soap-suds which flow from a little higher up, where a host
of Malay washerwomen, standing in the water up to their
knees, beat the linen of the Cape Town gentry as if they
meant to make it into paper.
As you go on the road becomes rugged and gradually
dwindles away into a bridle-path, or what the natives of
India would call a jackall’s-way. You have to walk on
rough-pointed stones, which prove more profitable to your
shoemaker than to yourself. As if for diversion, you have
now and then to clamber over a huge block of granite
which seems to say, get over me if you can!
For the last mile you are shut into a ravine, the rocks
like a wall on either side almost meeting over your head.
Here, very suddenly, a heavy fog came up the valley and
in a minute enshrouded us in darkness, so that we could
not see each other. Presently heavy drops began to fall,
and one of my companions said, “(H)ere is the rain which I
so much dreaded.” I, also, being in a profuse state of per-
spiration and feeling a chill, wished for my umbrella with
which the Cooly had lingered behind. However, as sud-
denly as it came, the fog left us, when, on looking above,
we saw that the shower was but the drippings of the water
through the rocks. Therefore, instead of sheltering our-
selves against it, we took a vessel and had a delicious
draught. Thus refreshed we reached the summit; and
here I will sit down awhile, and describe to you the view
on another occasion.
Ibex.
A Battue in the Punjab
One fine evening towards the close of the last cold season
we received an invitation from the Deputy Commissioner of
the District to join in a grand battue against the wofres
and hyenas, which were numerous, and had lately become
so bold as to carry off children of ten and twelve years in
the open day close to the villages.
On the appointed day we rode some fifteen miles to the
rendezvous, having previously sent forward our tents, and


soon after our arrival we were joined by several friends,
some of whom had come a long distance for the sport.
Our camping-ground presented quite a picturesque appear-
ance, surrounded by nearly 5,000 niggers, cooking their
evening meal and vowing vengeance on the destroyers of
their children. We made our arrangements for the en-
suing morn and retired to rest in anticipation of a fair day’s
sport. Dawn saw us in the saddle, rifle in hand, at our
respective posts, the tom-toms sounded, and simultaneously
we commenced drawing in the circle formed round one of
the thickest jungles. Our chief game, of course, was the
wolf; but as pig, antelope, and neelghyr were numerous,
we determined on knocking over as many as possible.
After half an hour’s beating there was a crash in the
jungle, and rushing across a small clearing some ten pigs
were seen. In a moment a bullet stopped the largest,
amidst the yells of the darkies, who now began to get ex-
cited. The sound of rifles at short intervals showed the
presence of game, which now becoming more and more
enclosed offered us splendid sport, and before noon five
wolves had fallen to one rifle alone, besides deer and pig.
Others in the field were more successful, and the wolves
if not thoroughly exterminated gave no further trouble in
the neighbourhood up to the time of our leaving. The
quantity of pig, neelghyr, and antelope killed, more par-
ticularly the latter, was such that the jungle, hitherto con-
sidered as affording splendid sport, was quite deserted by
the Shikaree. After a hasty tiffin operations were recom-
menced, and the frightened deer, driven from all points,
were trying to find an opening to escape, when a huge boar-
pig charged straight through the line followed by some
fifty deer. Telling one of the Sirdars to close it up sharp,
and taking spears from our syces, three of us started in
chase, accompanied by a brace of Eampore hounds. The
pace was tremendous the first mile, when our game took
shelter in a field of sugar-cane from which the dogs failed
toturn him out. Two of us then dismounted, and, beating
through the cane, drove it out with our mounted friend in
full pursuit. We were soon in the saddle, but not up in
time for the first spear, which fell to our more fortunate
competitor; a second thrust finishing the business we re-
joined the beaters just when they were on the point of
knocking off for the night. Another jungle was tried the
following day, with almost equal success, after which the
game began to separate, and at the end of a week a single
wolf was considered a fair day’s sport. One hyena only
was shot, and that, strange to say, one I had wounded in
the shoulder some months before.
Though not approving battue shooting as a rule, it is
desirable in very thick jungle,' and more particularly in
wolf shooting, and I must confess that I seldom spent a
week with greater satisfaction than the one in question.
Antelope.
Shooting in Central India.
To the Editor of the Golden Fleece Gazette.
Dear Sir,
Perhaps the following recollections of a few days
shooting in Central India would be interesting to some of
your readers who may be lovers of sport, especially as
tigers are now becoming less numerous in most parts of
India (excepting, perhaps, the dense miasmatic forests of
the Sunderbunds,) owing to the rapid inroads made in their
haunts by the extension of cultivation and their yearly
destruction by hunting parties, in fact, of late one rarely
hears of a good bag being made in the Dehra, Dhoon, and
the Eastern Terai, and other forests not many years ago
infested by these noble but fierce and treacherous animals.
Not long after my arrival in India I took the opportunity
of joining a shooting party in quest of tigers, and the
morning I joined them I had the satisfaction of bowling
over my first tiger, a handsome male, at which I was
naturally much elated, yet so little had I expected to get a
shot that I had not thought it necessary to load a rifle in
reserve, the' result was that a tigress, which followed close
on the heels of her mate, escaped scathless into the forest
glades with a few elastic bounds that soon placed her out
of harm’s way for the present, to wonder at the sudden dis-
appearance of her companion. On this substantial proof of
the vicinity of tigers another party was formed, consisting
of Major E , Capts. the Baron von M and J ,
of Scindia’s Contingent, and myself. We first of all tried
our luck after a pair of lions, which had been making an
unceremonious appearance on the woodland banks of the
Chumbul, where though rare they were occasionally to be
found. We were, however, unfortunate in this instance,
for we did not succeed in getting a shot at them, which
was a great disappointment; as although the Indian lions
cannot bear comparison in physique with their African,
brothers, still they are prized as being uncommonly scarce.
From the Chumbul river we made for the glens known
as “Logee Khoh,” where we knew we should find bears,
at any rate, if nothing else. The Mahrattas have curious
legends about these glens, which have a strikingly romantic
appearance ; where nature, in the extreme of wildness, ap-
pears most beautiful.
On the rugged declivities of the surrounding hills are
numerous caves, inhabited by the wild beasts of the forest,
the approaches to their dens being generally concealed by
thick copsewood. The bears are so numerous in these caves
that even the hardy wood-cutter will rarely venture to ap-
proach the seclusion of the “Logee Khoh.” In both of
these glens are streams of the purest water, forming beau-
tiful pools at the bases of large rocks, and kept cool in the
most sultry weather by labyrinths of willows clustering on
the banks. It’s no wonder that the bear and tiger love to
frequent these charming retreats, till the ruthless hand of
civilization forces them to vacate. We traversed the country
with varied success in our shooting, occasionally bagging a
few deer and pigs, and any amount of black and grey part-
ridge, until we arrived at the plain at the skirts of the
“ Logee Khoh,” where we pitched our camp and mad©
arrangements for the beat. Different from the plan pursued
in Lower Bengal and the Terai, of beating up the game by
a hue of elephants, in Central India, where the forest is
not so dense, the game is generally driven by a host of
beaters towards the sportsmen, who form a line at one end
or any convenient opening of the jungle. The Baron Von
M , a great Shikaree, was our chief in these matters;
but on this occasion, before he had placed himself into posi-
tion, he fell in with a stray bear at the top of the smaller
glen, with which he had a very close and amusing engage-
ment. The bear received a very severe wound; but the
Baron’s rifle was then empty, so he had to retreat before
his pursuing foe and load his rifle at the same time. Luckily
the bear was pretty well crippled, for the Baron managed
to get another crack at him, which sent him rolling down
to the bottom of the valley, during which process the bear
had coiled himself up like a ball to secure his face from the
rough surface of the hill. He opened out, however, on
being trod on by one of our elephants in the valley, who
mauled poor wounded bruin so much that he could scarcely
crawl away a few yards before he was overtaken and de-
spatched by the swords of the native Shikarees.
It seemed that the elephant had acted more from what
is unusually called funk than courage, the victim having
rolled right under him : for he could not, without the
greatest difficulty, be induced to allow us to sling the dead
bear on his back ; and while we were doing so he looked
slily round, and, watching his opportunity, kicked the bear
after the fashion of a foot ball through the air, most un-
comfortably close to the heads of the observers. This
almost made us despair of further operations, but the
Mahout’s goad at last worked submission, and “Motee”
walked home laden with the detested burden. This some-
what premature amusement interfered with our sport, for
all sleeping denizens of the glen were roused, and we got
nothing more out of it but a deer, which, on receiving a
slight flesh wound, was run down by the Baron’s leash of
dogs in a pretty spurt of about a mile.
J. B.
(To he continued .)
A Rhapsody.
A Monody after Ossian .
The hot weather is again approaching; things in general
wear a warmer aspect; muslin dresses are floating about
the decks; the awning is again spread ; the butter resumes
its former oily state; pugrees, white pants, and topees are
all the go; the oppressive heat makes us weary and dreary ;
sleep is the order of the day j and even the windsails, feeling
THE GOLDEN FLEECE GAZETTE.


the effects of the heat, have dropped their long tails lazily
into the saloon, engine-room, and happiness seems to
pervade over all. The upper-deck is crowded, the lower,
deserted. But hark ! what do I hear ? ’tween the lazy rip-
plings of the waves there is heard, now and anon, a low
distant murmur, where is my chair ? Oh! Where is my
arm-chair? Where, indeed, is the response?—Where?
Hark! Hear you in the distance a still fainter sound, the
fire burns bright in the galley, leaping up with a joyous
crackle, waking the distant echo, which faintly murmurs—
There!
Z. Z. G.Y.
Poetry.
A Fragment.
How oft at even, when the setting sun
Tells all the world that his day’s work is done;
And hides that face, a short time since so bright.
Leaving us in the darkness of the night.
How oft, I say, upon the deck I roam,
Thinking of those dear friends I left at home.
When, shedding tears, I left my native shore
So long ago—ten years, or rather more.
Then fancy conjures up some well known face;
With fancy’s steps I tread some fav’rite place.
Where, ’neath a tender mother’s kindly eye.
My boyhood’s happy days went glibly by.
And then my fever’d brain, from time to time.
Reverts its thoughts to India’s burning clime;
And weighs her faults and merits one by one,
Though some assert that merit she has none.
And then I think of thee, O Simon’s Bay,
And thankful feel that I’m alive to say
How well our good ship battled with the wave.
Which might have proved to us an early grave.
Thus, as a streamlet wends its silv’ry way
In rocky bed, so, at the close of day,
These frenzied thoughts go wand’ring to and fro
Till it is nearly time to go below :
At such a time how sweet it is, I say,
TO SMOKE TOBACCO IN A PIPE OF CLAY.
Auctioneer.
THE FIGHT OF THE PORPOISES.
A LAY OF THE “ GOLDEN FLEECE.”
The Chief of the Porpoises
By all the gods he swore
That the fine Ship, Golden Fleece ,
Should have fair winds no more.
By all the gods he swore it,
And named the meeting day,
East, and west, and south, and north,
The Porpoise King swam madly forth
His forces to array.
East, and west, and south, and north.
In flocks and shoals they came ;
South and north, east and west,
Of every kind and name ;
West and south, east and north,
Was heard their leader’s cry,
“ Now down with the south-easter,
We’ll change it or we’ll die.”
The Captain’s look was angry.
The wind's ahead again,
With anxious eye and telescope
He scann’d the distant main,
And now he sees them coming
From all the compass’ points,
From the wide Indian Ocean,
From Atlantic, north and south,
From Cape Hope’s land of lasting storm,
From the cold waters of Cape Horn,
And the South Pole’s sea of ice forlorn,
From Melborne to Port Louth,
“ On the doomed ship” the cry, “they come, ,r
Then ran from mouth to mouth.
Then spoke our noble Captain,
“ Who’ll with me make a stand ?
Ho, there! now quick, your rifles,
Foord, Keyser, boar a hand ;
For if these things should pass us
The wind will not go round,
But will increase, and then, by Jove,
We’ll lose, not gain our ground.”
Then all stood by him nobly,
And each one seemed to try
To be the deadliest rifle shot
And wipe his neighbour’s eye.
But, “ Stay your hand,” cried some one,
“ You should not have begun,
Just wait till they come singly on
And shoot them one by one.”
First came a great big porpoise,
He was uncommon spry,
For he swam off, and kept away
And wouldn’t come too nigh.
The Captain took his rifle,
Waited a little bit,
And by his eye then all men saw
That he had often shot before,
And as the fatal missile went,
The air with one loud shout was rent,
“ Hurrah! by Jove, he’s hit.”
“ Can’st tell,” he asked proudly,
“ What place the shot went in ?”
“ Yes, there it’s very bloody
Below the dorsal fin.
Oh, look, he’s dead ; that must have been
A most prodigious whack—
That chap will trouble us no more,”
With joyful eyes each person saw
Him flat upon his back,
And ail exclaimed with laughter
“ Why, Captain, you’re a crack!”
Then, like an agile monkey,
Up sprang young Keyser quick,
To show to all beholders
He too could do the trick;
And thrice he raised his rifle,
And thrice he aimed in vain.
And so he waited patiently
Till they were near again;
One tempted him most sorely.
But still did he refrain.
But now they’re coming closer,
Quite close up alongside,
And now once more young Keyser
To bag a big ’un tried.
Not long he aimed, but quickly
Shot one right through the head;
So true a shot, they all did say,
Had not been seen before that day;
And, midst a mass of blood and spray,
The porpoise sank quite dead.
But short time paus’d the monsters, ,
And shorter still paus’d we,
And one by one the porpoises
Were made to bite the sea ;
For straight from his left shoulder
Foord unerring dealt a blow;
No other man dealt such a smash,
For midst a horrid noise and splash.
He killed two at one blow.
Nothing could stand ’gainst that left hand.
And ev’ry one said so.
They come, once more they’re on us.
Once more the bullets fly,
But still their chief, that chief of might.
With all his force, a hideous sight,
To go ahead does try ;
And on and on they headlong race,
Wounded as well, at fearful pace,
Resolved their name they’ll ne’er disgrace.
To change the wind or die.
But still we bravely fought them.
By far outnumbered tho’,
And every whistling bullet
Laid low a snouted foe.
The Captain still shot at them
As shot no man before,
Still Keyser killed at every go,
Parsons, left-handed Foord also,
Till all the brutes had sunk below
And came again no more.
28
THE GOLDEN FLEECE GAZETTE.


Then came a fine south-easter
And sent us on our way
Full one hundred and sixty miles
Quite reg’lar every day.
And you who read this, don’t you think
That it is all my eye,
If so, just go to Atkinson’s
And ask him if I lie.
But far in every ocean
There’s sorrow on the waves.
For all those brave porpoises
Sent to untimely graves.
But all who’ve heard the story
About that dreadful tight,
Have always said, and rightly too,
That it just served them right.
If e’er again they try it
May they again be licked,
And he who says they oughtn’t
Deserves to be well kicked.
In every sea, on every shore,
Long will this tale be told,
How well the Fleeceites held their own,
And porpoises were sold.
Flying Fish.
Correspondence.
My dear Mr. Editor,
I have lately been reading Mrs. Caudle’s Curtain
Lecture. From her I have learned not to keep silence
under annoyances, and therefore tell you a bit of my mind.
Now, Mr. Editor, your conduct of late has not been con-
sistent. You have undertaken the editorship of the Golden
Fleece Gazette , and at first you set right heartily to work
without grumbling. But, on several occasions, when you
experienced some small difficulty, you threatened to throw
up your engagement. Yesterday you did the same again.
Is that public spirited ? I feel inclined to think that you
only want to feel your reader’s pulse and to elicit a little
more praise and flattery. It is well known that before
leaving Capetown you laid in a large stock of paper, quills,
and ink for the Gazette , from which it is clear that you
mean to go on with the paper. You also told us, that
hitherto you wrote almost all the articles yourself, which
is proof enough that you can write. What do you want,
then ? Must not a man labour to' earn fame ? Have you
forgotten the little verse which your mother sung to you
when you sat upon her lap :
“ When a weary task you find it.
Persevere, and never mind it;
You will conquer, never mind it. !
I will not touch upon your emoluments; but to judge
from your table and the number of your servants they
must be considerably more than all the “penny-a-liners”
of London receive.
Hoping that the good health we drank to you will instil
fresh vigour into your mental capacities, and that you will
never suffer again from want of pabulum for your paper,
I remain, Mr. Editor,
Yours faithfully,
Frank.
“ Man wants but little here below,
But likes that little clean."
Dear Mr. Editor,
You must have felt proud and happy seeing the
Washing, holy stoning, and scraping going on on our
decks; you must have noticed that beautiful capstan on
the quarter-deck. Your eyes must have been dazzled
hy the rails and guns, “shedding forth a silver radiance,
glancing bright;” you must have been struck with the
same idea as I was. By Jove ! if the cook had holy stones
and scrapers lent him, I should not wonder if our puddings
and potatoes would look equally clean and nice. Please let
sae know if you were not struck with this idea too.
Aloo.
Notices to Correspondents.
il Nemo’s” style of versification is good, but it is wanting
in connectedness. If he will apply to one of the editors it
shall be returned for revision.
“ A Cracked Survivor” is thanked for his lament, which
shall appear next week.
“ Lucy’s love-story is, we fear, wanting in general in-
terest, incident, and flow of language.
“ Y’s” letter has been shown to the gentleman to whom
it has reference. The latter agrees with us that it should
not be inserted.
“ Van John.” —lst knave usually deals, but there is no
fixed rule.
We are sorry we cannot oblige Alice ; but we believe
that biting the lips and pinching the cheeks is usually
advised by anxious mothers to produce colour.
“ Compass.” —Don’t know; ask the quartermaster.
We are sorry again to be obliged to reject the poetical
effusions of “ Saxony and Pietumaritzburg.”
Thirty-six flounces are not usually worn, but if you have
material enough we see no reason for your not doing so.
Notes of the Week.
BY Q.TJ AHTEK-DECK.
There is little of importance to chronicle during the past
week, the principal event of which was the reappearance
of the Golden Fleece Gazette , which afforded much amuse-
ment. Our gallant vessel has been steadily pursuing her
homeward voyage most prosperously, and many are
already counting the days which must elapse previous to
its termination. There has arisen quite a mania for
“ boats” among our juvenile members, and obliging
papas may be seen at all hours, knife in hand, gratifying
the anxious wishes of their darlings. As usual, there has
been a full allowance of vocal and instrumental music,
particularly among the children ; and we are informed on
good authority, that our energetic company of amateurs
propose, during the ensuing week, bringing on the stage a
most amusing burlesque, in addition to other novelties,
which we doubt not will ensure them all the success they
so well merit.
We had the pleasure, one evening, of having the ladies’
health proposed by a gallant Sub, whose feelings nearly
overpowered him; it is needless to add, that it was most
rapturously received by all on board.
By the bye, I was glad to see the editors of the Golden
Fleece Gazette on their legs on Friday and Saturday last.
There is no doubt that they have not received the support
which I consider that their public spiritedness has entitled
them to; and lam inclined to think that some people have
begun to look upon them rather in the light of paid ser-
vants than in that of most obliging and disinterested
fellows, which all three of them undoubtedly are. I have
been told, however, that, during the last few days, my
fellow-passengers have been seen dropping their contri-
butions into the new box, so I sincerely trust that the
editors will have no further cause to complain. Whilst
penning these few words I have been apprised of the
arrival of a new spin amongst us, who, doubtless, will
shortly prove a source of great delight amongst the small
fry.
Yours very truly,
Quarter-Deck.
Conundrums, Enigmas, &c.
Charade.
My first we have just left behind,
And yet we have it still;
And if you doubt it, never mind,
You may doubt if you will.
Its never right, I do not mean;
Of goodness ’tis bereft;
But like the cheese to tiffin brought,
I mean ’tis always left.*
• This has reference, at least, to what takes place at our end of the table. I may
mention one remarkable exception, and that was on one occasion, we were surprised
to see our cheese walk off the table entirely by itself 1 It was afterwards followed
by several biscuits.
N.B, These were not the Cape biscuits, but some of the old stock.
29
THE GOLDEN FLEECE GAZETTE.


My second, oh ! I’m very sure
With me you will agree,
Of it we’ve seen as much or more
Than we again would see.
My first and second if you add,
Before you will appear;
A town whose sight would make you glad,
For English soil is there.
Reverse my first and second, then
If you’re sharp, you’ll see
Of what importance I have been,
And ever hope to be.
Albert.
My first is another word for stay,
My next men do who go astray,
My third is done to make a knot,
Only the rich my whole have got.
Answers to Conundrums of last
Numbers.
“ Thousands.”—“ Jury.”—“ Satchel.”
ADVERTISEMENTS.
Theatre Royal, “ Golden Fleece.”
ON THURSDAY next, the 9th inst., the Amateurs of
the above theatre will perform the splendid, original,
and amusing burlesque of
ALONZO YE BRAVE AND YE FAIR IMOGENE.
After which an entirely new, laughter-causing, side-split-
ting, mouth-aching INTERLUDE.
To conclude with
SONGS BY THE CHRYSTY’S MINSTRELS.
(These minstrels are the very same as those imported by
T. P. Chrysty.)
Programme:
Poor Old Jeff.
Kiss me Quick.
Hard Times.
Tapioca (by desire).
Concerted Piece. Full Band.
Alabama Rose.
Dixie’s Land.
Rosa Lee.
Rocky Road.
Previous to the burlesque an occasional Prologue will be
spoken.
Wanted,
BREAD at Tiffin and butter at tea. Tenders for the
above will be received at our Office until next
week.
Wanted,
BY the Theatrical Amateurs, on Thursday next, a patient
hearing and lenient criticism.
Wanted,
BY the Captain of the S. S. Golden Fleece, Volunteers
to polish the brass-work and scrape the decks. A
liberal stipend will reward their labours.
Found.
TWO NUTS and a Leaf of the “ Family Herald,” in
the Editor’s box. The owner or owners of the above
can receive the same on apologising for their insertion.
Lost,
BY many of the passengers, all their former zeal for the
prosperity of this Gazette.
Any person finding the same may keep it.
Wanted,
BY the Amateurs, a Composite Candle from each passen-
ger to light up their humble efforts.
Lost,
ACAMPSTOOL. It was last seen near the fireside in
the Saloon. JVo thanks will be given on delivery,
for the present owner*' must be well aware that it does not
belong to he, she, or it.
It may be given to the Editor.
[* Query, Possessor. —P. D.J
SHOULD this meet the eye of the unprincipled indi-
vidual who surreptitiously purloined one of the num-
bers of the Gazette, he is advised to abstain from further
proceedings for the present, as he is known to the police,
and his movements will be strictly watched.
Isabella.
QOWAQK we xeaq suqokrop, wgo supw ip hewfiwok wgo
hawago ip powwinoc, uke umm tim do tomm.
A. S. S.
Printed for the Proprietors by an Obliging Devil, at 29, Saloon
Terrace, Tank Square.
30
THE GOLDEN FLEECE GAZETTE.


i.\d r* I
Golden Fleece Gazette
No. 8.
“ Dear authors suit your topics to your strength
And ponder well your subject and its length.”— Byron.
OCTOBER 15.
ATLANTIC OCEAN.
Is a leading article absolutely necessary ? Must editors
rack their already overwrought brains to find matter
which they feel they do not possess ? Yes, answers
our stem proprietor, the public must have a leader;
for, like a ship without a rudder, a book without a
preface, a child without a mother, a pipe that won’t
draw, bread without butter, a paper without a few opening
remarks, will not pay, and is as naught in the eyes of a dis-
cerning and exacting public. Thus it will be seen that it
behoves editors, whether or not they have anything to
write about, to sit down with an air of the most praiseworthy
complacency, and do their best.
We cannot compliment our readers on the number of
their contributions for the week; for, like good men in
this wicked world, they are few and far between, and the
editors have been like three Patiences on three monuments.
By the way, with all due deference to the proprietor afore-
said, the weather is most uncomfortably hot, and “that’s
what’s the matter.”
We publish an excellent critique on the theatrical per-
formance, by John Bull. We should be glad if this gentle-
man would write more frequently for us, as the specimens
he has given us of his powers in the writing line mark him
as a man of good sound sense and a keen perception of
what’s what and what ought to be.
Leaving to the “ Lounger” the arduous task of recounting
the events of the week, we lay aside the quill of ambition
and the ink of eloquence, and, hoping that the weather
may be less oppressive by next week, we bid our readers
farewell for the present. ,
Theatrical Gossip.
To the Editor of the Golden Fleece Gazette.
Sir, —The second performance of the Golden Fleece
Amateurs came off on Thursday evening last, and was,
upon the whole, tolerably good, although not so successful
as the first entertainment.
The proceedings commenced with an occasional address,
spoken by Underwood, Esq. The opening piece was,
according to the play bill, an entirely new and original
burlesque, founded upon that popular and pathetic story
of “ Alonzo the Brave and the fair Imogene.”
The author of the piece may fancy that he has a natural
talent for writing burlesque, but we beg to inform him that
burlesque writing is one of the most difficult departments
of dramatic composition (we ought to know something about
it, having studied several of Lacy’s sixpenny editions of the
acting British Drama), it requires a breadth of humour, a
depth of feeling, a height of imagination, elegance of
versification, a refined and brilliant wit, an appreciation of
all the minor peculiarities of character, and a faculty for
combining all these varied materials into one humorous
whole. Now, all afid every of these characteristics are
wanting in the so-called burlesque: where was the humour ?
was there any refined language ? was there one elegant
trophe, one passable song, or any wit ? Most decidedly
not. However, it seemed to please the audience immensely,
if loud applause and much laughter is any criterion. We
can only pity the author (for he is a promising youth, and
great things may some day be expected of him), and hope
next time he tries his hand at dramatic composition, it will
not be burlesque. We would suggest tragedy, as we think
he might be more successful in that department of the
drama, his style of writing being rather heavy.
The actors did all in their power to sustain the piece, but if
it had not been for Mr. Douglas (as Imogene) whose get-up
was splendid, and whose appearance was loudly applauded,
the piece would have been inevitably “ damned.” His
acting was first rate, and he has a steadiness of nerve, a
sweetness of expression, and a most melodious voice. He
executed several songs with charming grace and effect.
We cannot speak too highly of this young actor’s abilities,
and hope the next time we have the pleasure of seeing him,
he will have a part more in accordance with his merit. Dr.
Bright’s acting was, as it always is, good; and his drunken
Baron was a masterly performance. Mr. Salmon and Mr.
Keyser were both very good and played with great humour.
Mr. Pierson, who created such a great sensation last per-
formance, again sustained a female part, and by his acting
fully confirmed the high opinion we previously expressed of
him. After “the burlesque ” was (to use a rather vulgar
but emphatic expression) a most complete and decided
“ sellthe curtain rose and discovered two persons sitting
at a table smoking, and making what appeared to be dumb
motions; the audience expecting every moment that they
would speak, sing, dance, or do something ; but there they
sat, smoking and grinning at each other ; and, after about
five minutes, when the curtain dropped, the audience did
not know whether it was all over, and whether to applaud
or keep silence, and waited patiently for what should come
next.
The whole concluded with the minstrels, whose principal
performance was a Virginian Breakdown.
We hope the amateurs will favour us with one more per-
formance before the conclusion of the voyage, and that they
will be more successful than on Thursday evening last.
Yours truly, John Bull.
Shooting in Central India,
(Continued from our last.)
We still, however, had the finest glen to beat, and had
therefore hopes of better success. It. and J. took up their
positions on elephants in the valley, and the baron and
myself remained on foot on either side of the skirting hills,
and then the beat commenced with its concomitant howling,
tomtoming, and trumpeting, which has this advantage that
it causes excitement whether game turns up or not. In a
short time there were cries of “reech,” “reech,” (bear,
bear), and I then saw a fine bear coming steadily towards


elephants. The beating and howling commenced, and
again there were calls of “ reech ” as a bear bundled him-
self along the ravine. He made for the rock on which J.
was standing, and came right on the cave where the
wounded tiger was lying. Smarting from his wounds the
tiger rushed out on the bear, and they were both soon
locked in a deadly struggle, rolling and tossing on the
ground below J.’s position. He watched the combat for a
short time, and then with cool aim he stretched both com-
batants dead on the sward with a single bullet in each. J.
called to me to come up as he could not see the effects of
his shots, the antagonists having fallen into thick under-
wood, and on driving the elephant to the spot I found both
the tiger and the bear as lifeless as if they had been lying
there for a month. They certainly each had their revenge
out of the other. Thus ended our sport in the Jogee Khoh,
which I hope, Mr. Editor, you will go and see if you ever
visit Scindiah’s dominions.
the rock on which I was standing. I let him come on to
within the murderous distance of about ten yards of me,
and then opened on him with my two-groove. The ball,
entering his neck, rolled him down to the bottom of the
valley, apparently quite dead, but to my surprise and
chagrin also (for I could not fire for fear of hitting the
beaters below) he shortly afterwards regained his legs,
and rushed on the first man he met —one of the un-
fortunate beaters—for whose fate I was really in great fear,
when J. arrived on his elephant and gave the coup de grace
to the wounded bear. J. was one of the best shots I had
ever met with, and death generally followed quickly on the
report of his rifle ; and luckily in this case that it was so,
for the poor beater was exhausted and losing heart when
the infuriated beast was felled to the earth. We should
probably have killed more than one of the bears, which
were now dispersing in all directions, but our beating line
was broken and great confusion caused by the sudden
appearance among the beaters of several tigers. The baron
and myself could see them from our distant but command-
ing positions, and we fired several long shots at them, but
unfortunately our companions on the elephants below lost
sight of them owing to the thick surrounding foliage;
and the tigers which alarmed the beaters so much at first,
sneaked away under cover of the willow trees, and then
took to their heels at a racing pace, out of the glen. Our
arrangements must have on this occasion been faulty, and
we thought two bears and a deer but a poor day’s sport,
which really it was when so much game was on foot. At
any rate we had a good talk over our dinner about the
tigers, if we didn’t bag them, and we determined to see if
they were hazardous enough to return again to their home
in the Jogee Khoh.
Before breakfast the following morning we were at the
second glen again. All three of us this time mounted on
elephants ; Major E., luckless man, would not accompany
us, as he thought that we had already frightened all the
game out of the country. On our entering the glen a bear
passed by my elephant along the side of the hill: I fired
and wounded him in the foot: he limped away, and was
afterwards killed. I did not remain to see his end as J.
declared that he heard the growl of a tiger on ahead in the
glen. J. was unable to go forward, as he was on the bear-
funking elephant which literally cocked his tail aud bolted
with J. on his back, when the first little “ tamasha ” with
the bear attracted his attention. The baron and myself
pushed on our elephants, mine taking the lead as he was
one of Scindiah’s best Shikarree elephants, and before long
we fell in with the tigers, our old friends of the previous
day, four in number. I opened on them with every barrel
I had in the howdah, and they bolted about in all di-
rections and got among the beaters. It is surprising that
some of the men were not killed by the tigers, to say
nothing of the danger of their being shot by bullets whiz-
zing throughout the glen. The beaters however this time
behaved most pluckily, and when one of the tigers tried to
escape over the hill, the men on the heights above pelted
him down again with large stones. The tigers now seemed
to get confused at the cordon drawn round them, and so
infuriated that they no longer tried to bolt away. A large
tigress, badly wounded, sprang on the trunk of the baron’s
elephant who managed to shake her off, but when freed
the elephant would not face so ugly a customer again. The
tigress did not attempt to move away till my elephant
pushed up to her, and she was then killed. Another tiger
also charged and gave us grand excitement as he mounted
a hillock, which put him on a level with the elephant’s
heads, and they could scarcely be driven to within reason-
able distance; while the tiger gnashed his teeth and
growled fiercely all ready to spring on the first who came
nearer. A lucky shot in the head, however, terminated his
existence. "Within a shorter time than it takes to write the
business, the baron and myself had disposed of three of
the tigers, but the fourth (a large male, which was hard
hit), ran up the side of the glen, and got into a cave, where
the elephants were unable to approach; and, as the beaters
could not be induced at any price to attempt to drive him
out, we returned to camp with our bag of three tigers, and
a bear laden on our elephants. The major was not a little
astonished, especially as we were back to breakfast before
noon.
Yours truly,
J. B.
Oct., 1862
Poetry.
THE BROKEN CHAIR’S LAMENT.
“ I love it, I lovo it, and who shall dare,
To chide me for loving that old arm chair.”
Eliza Cook .
A goodly host we came on board,
From camp, and hill, and plain,
Each bound to serve his lawful lord,
In weariness and pain.
And well our duties were performed;
Nay, more than duty asked,
With burdens of both friend and foe,
Our creaking limbs were tasked.
Oppressed with heat on sultry nights,
While Ganges banks between,
Within our arms ye hapless wights
Were soothed to rest I ween.
Through languid days ’neath awnings wing,
We spread the tortuous curve
Of our bent backs with hinge and spring,
Your purposes to serve.
And well our service ye repaid,
When cold the north wind blow,
When chilly dews and ocean’s wave
Wetted us through and through.
Our ventilating lungs were tom,
Our arms were dislocated,
And oft on raging billows borne,
Our frames to ruin hasted.
Yet deem not unavenged the wrong
Of such poor slaves as we,
Revenge is sweet, and before long,
Requited we shall be.
For when in Tropic’s torrid zone,
On deck becalmed the sea,
From smoke and heat from engine room,
No spot below is free.
Where will ye rest your languid frames,
To court the oblivious nap ?
The rack-like bench alone remains,
There—stretch your weary back.
Now learn this lesson from our woes;
Learn wisdom from our meed.
What we neglect when fortune blows,
We yet may live to need.
A Cracked Survivor.
Prologue favoured by Under-
wood, Esq.
The
Thirsting once more for histrionic fame,
Careless alike to censure, praise, or blame;
Again before you all with trusting hearts we come.
And as the sun his rays and sunshine darts
On the dull earth, so please, upon us all
Allow your praises and applause to fall.
Hiss if you like, but please to draw that mild,
Hissing, of all things, makes a man most ril’d.
We thought it a pity to leave the best tiger behind, so
before changing ground we had another look after him. J.
now took up his position on a rock in advance of the
32
THE GOLDEN FLEECE GAZETTE.


If dull, don’t think wo are not worth our salt.
For that’s the author’s, not the actor’s fault ;
And on him, too, your hlame should gently rest.
His play’s perhaps, stupid, but he’s done his best.
And its not fair with hissing to requite
His maiden work, for he was asked to write;
He’s never tried this sort of thing before,
And if you damn his first he’ll write no more.
Our Manager has asked of me to say,
No efforts have been spared in any way
To make his theatre the most complete
And give to all an intellectual treat;
His powers he’s taxed the utmost to engage
The greatest players and singers of the age.
He’s searched the world, and, tho’ he Yankees hates.
He’s brought the Christy’s from the United States:
A startling interlude, a new invention
The name of which I’m ordered not to mention,
Will show to all what really are our powers
And make you laugh and grin away for hours.
Thanking you all for favours of the past,
And hoping these favours may at present last.
We now begin : the rest now rests with you.
Prompter, ring up.—Ladies and gents, adieu.
Golden Fleece Nursery Rhymes.
Little Jack Able
Sat at the table
Eating a Golden Fleece puff,
He cut it all over
The jam to discover
But found in it nothing but duff.
Goosey goosey gander, whither shall I wander.
Up and down the quai’tcr-deck, then just step over yonder.
There I met an old man, and asked him “ Who’s your hatter ?”
He gently cocked a snook and said, “ That’s what’s the matter.”
Pat a cake, pat a cake, baker’s man,
Bake us some bread as fast as you can,
Then fetch us some butter and give us some tea.
For bread without butter don’t seem to suit me.
Old Mother Hubbard jumped out of her bunk
And looked out of the port in a horrible funk,
The ship is on fire, and the boiler has bust,
Do you think the Chief Steward could give me a crust-
Little 80-peep has had no sleep
And can’t tell where to find it,
If she will eat dried fruit as tough as my boot.
She must grin and never mind it.
This is my last story, I hope it don’t bore ye,
’Tis some time since I begun;
I’ll tell you some more next week or before,
For the present my stories are done.
Dickery Dickery Dock, D.D.D.
Charade.
My first is a noise denoting the pleasure
Of a creature that’s often considered a treasure
By elderly girls who have no other friend,
No husband, no children, no nothing to tend.
Put I for an E my second you’ll see,
Is a term of respect, or a title.
My whole is a man in authority here,
Who looks to our eatables also our beer.
Paterfamilias.
Another equally bad by the same
Author.
Of my first I think the usual run
Of men are blest with half a score.
But of my second only one,
At any rate, they don’t want more.
My third denotes a lot of men—
Or if you like, say two or three,
Five or six, or eight, or ten —
People of high or low degree.
My whole a herb in general use,
Which proves a solace to the weary,
And spite of foolish folks’ abuse,
It cheers a cove when he is dreary.
Notes by the Lounger.
The events of the past week have been of an unusually
stirring and interesting character. On Thursday last the
theatrical amateurs gave another performance, the chief
feature of which being the very laughter-exciting burlesque
of “Alonzo and the Fair Imogene,” lately composed by a
gentleman well known behind the footlights of the stage.
The piece, which was admirably acted by all concerned, is, of
course, founded on the old song, but the author has made
the ghost of the amorous warrior come to life and be
reconciled to his wife, and even to his rival, instead of
retiring to the regions below, dragging poor Tin my by the
hair as the original Alonzo is supposed to have done. The
appearance of Mr. Douglas on the boards for the'first time,
created an immense sensation, and the whole house rang
with the well-merited applause which greeted this very
promising young actor. His manner throughout was most
ladylike, and there is no doubt that though rather a
strapper, he makes a very nice looking girl. Mr. Pierson
made as good an old woman as he did a young one in the
former performance, and the cracked voice of the old lady
in the choruses, produced shouts of laughter from the
delighted audience. Mr. Salmon, whose forte appears to be
the performance of an old gentleman’s part, Jfeilly sustained
his reputation as an actor of the first water. A better man
than I)r. Bright could not have been selected to do the
Baron.
Mr. Keyset’s acting called forth roars of merriment, and
we must not forget to mention Mr. Mainwaring, whose
acting was wonderful for one so young, and promises great
things for the future. Altogether we consider that the
Burlesque was a success, and I hope that the author will
write another for us before we reach Gravesend. While
the Christy’s were preparing for their part of the evening’s
entertainment, the company were somewhat taken aback by
the entrance of two strange creatures, who seated them-
selves at a table and drank gin and water through straws,
doubtless much to their own satisfaction; not a word did
either of them speak, but they appeared to have a great
veneration for one another, at least to judge from the
polite bows which they kept on exchanging.
I was not so well pleased with the vocal entertainment as
on the former occasion, as I think that the songs were rather
too lengthy and with a few exceptions somewhat mournful.
“I’m going Home to Dixey,” the “Camptown Races,”
and “ Tapioca,” were, I think, the most appreciated.
Bones’s grimaces were more extraordinary than ever, and
Mr. Connop’s performance on the banjo was really first-
rate.
Some excitement was created some days since by the
sound of strange noises under the main-hatchway; anx-
ious parents rushed to the spot; idle bachelors sauntered
up to see what was the row; and when, after extraordinary
exertions on the part of some of the bystanders, the grating
was removed, a young gentleman, named “ Tooney,” and
another who rejoices in the cognomen of “ Arty,” were found
seated on the cargo, these two respectable youths having
been incarcerated by , as one of them, when he
could find words to speak, stated to be somebody. The joy
of the parents, on the release of these young gentlemen,
can be more easily imagined than described.
The markets continue dull; jute continues at its former
position; a great demand for lutter seems to indicate that it
is a scarce commodity; the price of jam has been consi-
derably affected by the supposed scarcity of butter ; and we
would advise any gentlemen who are taking home Indian
condiments to their friends to take the opportunity of rea-
lising the enormous prices obtainable at the present season.
We are at a loss to account for the failure of the butter
supplies; can anybody give us any information on the
subject?
Everybody was looking forward to a visit to Sierra
33
THE GOLDEN FLEECE GAZETTE.


Leone, some with fear and trembling; others, with joy at
the thoughts of being able to purchase a grey parrot.
Hopes and fears were at once dissipated by the sudden
change of the good ship’s course, and the announcement
that her destination was not Sierra Leone, but St. Vincent.
Well! perhaps it is all for the best. Some of us, in the
pursuit of grey parrots, might have picked up a yellow
jack; and there is no doubt that, in all probability, the
duration of our voyage might have been increased had we
gone into Sierra Leone for coals. I don’t suppose we shall
find St. Vincent a very lively place, but there will be some
pleasure to be derived from a stroll on terra firma after
being confined so long to the narrow precincts of the ship.
Some of us may also be able to get a mouthful of the
much-coveted butter , which will indeed be a treat.
By the way, I think it would be such a good plan if you
were to publish the latitude and longitude, as they have
been daily logged since our departure from Calcutta ; and
I think that the account of our disasters, as given in the
Cape Argus of the 19th of August, might be republished in
our Gazette with good effect.
Notwithstanding the great heat there has been more fun
and real evening amusements during the past week than
during the whole voyage.
The ladies have caught a sudden and infectious mania
for quoits. A month ago they would have thought such
an idea monstrous; they now play constantly and are
becoming adepts; few gentlemen can stand against them.
The other evening they startled us with charades, which,
'Considering the short preparations allowed and impromptu
manner of the whole affair, were very creditable indeed;
the ladies, assisted by one or two gentlemen, sustained
their parts to perfection, and we trust this first attempt
will not be the last.
On two other evenings round games have been intro-
duced, into which all, or nearly all, the ladies have en-
tered with such zest and vigour as proves to us unmis-
takably that we are approaching dear Old England, and
leaving behind, for the present, the stiff and indolent habits
of that dreadful country—lndia.
(Note by Editors.—We think that these are very good
ideas. We will, therefore, endeavour to obtain a state-
ment of latitudes and longitudes up to the present time,
and in future will publish them every week. The Argus
account of all we went through will also be republished.
—Ed. G. F. G .)
ADVERTISEMENTS.
Lost,
THE 11 Ingoldsby Legends’’ and “ Tennyson’s Works.”
Any one finding the same will greatly oblige by re-
turning them to the Surgery.
Wanted,
AN owner for a revolver ramrod. If not claimed in two
days after date the same will be cut up into tobacco
stoppers for the benefit of the smoking community. Apply
to No. 9 Cabin.
Wanted,
BY the non-acting passengers of the “S S” Golden Fleece ,
another performance as good as the last.
N.B. Candles will be supplied “ ad lib”
Notice.
NOTICE is hereby given, that the Editors of the
G. F. G. are about to have their hair cut. No appli-
cations for locks of the same will be attended to after
12 o’clock noon on Saturday next.
34
THE GOLDEN FLEECE GAZETTE.


Golden Fleece Gazette.
No. 9.
“ Dear authors suit your topics to your strength
And ponder well your subject and its length.”— Byron.
OCTOBER 29.
ATLANTIC OCEAN.
The delay in the publication of the Gazette will naturally
cause many to suppose that it has died a natural death.
Not so, however. Of course no one was so unreasonable
as to expect one at St. Vincent; the coal dust rendered that
quite out of the question. Well, then, our readers may
ask, why did not the paper appear on the following Wed-
nesday ?
It is not difficult to answer this question; the total
absence of anything in the shape of a contribution furnishes
an ample excuse for the non-appearance of our journal;
and were it not for the assistance of our able corressondent
“The Lounger,” we really do not think, that our own
humble efforts could keep the paper going. Would that
instead of one “Lounger” we had six. Would also that
we had a Loungeress to chronicle the changes in fashion
and to give us all the gossip of the ship; the fact is, we
believe, that everybody is so thoroughly sick and wearied
with the unheard-of length of the voyage that they have
not it in them to write, or in fact to do anything requiring
exertion either of mind or body. We feel it ourselves, and
are therefore unwilling to reprove our fellow-passengers for
idleness, in which we would fain indulge were it not that a
sense of duty impels us to do our best to sustain the
Golden Fleece Gazette to the last. At the same time we do
hope that others besides the “ Lounger” will come forward
and give us a helping hand.
The weary days are dragging out their slow length in
dismal monotony, each being so like both that we are
puzzled to tell t’other from which, and lose all count. Per-
haps our readers will call us inveterate growlers; but we
cannot but find fault with them in many ways; for in-
stance (leaving alone the fact of their not writing), at the
commencement of our voyage, when, from the novelty and
freshness of everything around us little excitement was
needed, they frequently amused us with theatricals, reci-
tations, &e., &e. Now, when every stimulant is needed to
keep up our drooping spirits, nothing of the sort is ever
attempted or ever talked about. We merely mention this
at present, hoping that a gentle admonition may not be
without some effect; but should the once energetic few
continue in this much-to-be-lamented relapse, we shall
have to bring the young ones in question more prominently
before the public, and overwhelm them for ever with shame
and confusion. We hope they will call to mind the old
proverb about a word to the wise being sufficient.
Notes Iby the Lounger.
Sir, —As I imagined that our visit to St. Vincent would
put an effectual stopper to the publication of the Gazette ,
I refrained from troubling you with a letter last week, and
I now take up my pen to scribble a few lines on things in
general—past, present, and to come.
Since I last wrote to you we have had no small amount
of excitement to keep us alive. Just before our arrival at
the great coaling depot we had two grand rifle matches,
which terminated in the victory of Captains S. &P. With-
out wishing to detract from the praise due to the successive
marksmen, I must say that I think a great deal must
depend on chance, as several of the, competitors made ex-
cellent shots with one barrel, and missed the target entirely
with the second.
I trust that these sporting reunions will not be allowed
to fall to the ground; but I suppose that, in this very
rough sea, that fickle dame fortune would have more to
do with the result of the match than ever.
Well, we got safe and sound to St. Vincent; and,
stupid little place as it is, we were all very glad to get
away for a short time from the good ship and stretch our
legs on shore. Some of us might have been seen in the
general store, tasting wines and smoking sample cheroots;
others, again, found amusement in knocking about the
balls on one of the most miserable imitations of a bilhard
table that I ever remember seeing ; its only recommenda-
tions being the moderate charge made for its use (6d. for
a 100 game), and the fact of there being a bar in the room
quite handy and convenient to thirsty souls.
Looking along the sea-shore you might have seen con-
chological parties (some of them having rashly divested
themselves of their shoes and stockings) bending diligently
over the sand, and now and again pocketing some of the
more singular-looking and washed-up wonders of the deep.
Another inquisitive party might have been seen peering
into the keyhole of the door of the Roman Catholic chapel,
doubtless much to the surprise of the hybrid and hetero-
genous population of the island. Others, sick of the life
of utter inertness which they had been leading for so long,
gladdened their drooping spirits by pulling one of the
ship’s boats between the ship and the shore, and round
the eccentric-looking little-bird island, thus strengthening
their thews and sinews for the coming boat race.
Of course we were surrounded by bum-boatmen, who,
at the usual exorbitant prices obtainable from strangers,
supplied us with oranges, plantains, grass mats, and doubt-
ful eggs (evidently not born yesterday), and, I daresay
would have sold us a bargain or two in grey parrots, only I
fancy we were most of us too poor to think of anything so
extravagant, Cocoa nuts too did their utmost to spread
indigestion through the ship, with what result I have not
been informed.
The day after our arrival, in came the Brazilian Mail
Steamer “Magdalena,” homeward bound, which enabled
us to communicate our ideas on things in general, and the
probable duration of our voyage in particular, to our
anxious and expectant friends at home. In the evening we
had a visit from Captain Woolwer (who kindly allowed his
band to attend), and many of the officers and passengers of
his ship; a dance was speedily got up, then followed the
Christy’s, who were better than ever, and whose efforts
were evidently fully appreciated by our guests; then more
dancing; and finally, our new friends left us under a tre-
mendous fire of cheering. They sailed within an hour of


their departure from the “ Fleece,” and (lucky fellows) ex-
pected to get to Southampton in Bor 10 days.
From the “Magdalena” we got English newspapers,
turkeys, geese, ducks, fowls, sheep, jams, sugar, beer, &c.,
and butter (for the children).
The next event of importance was the boat-race, which
turned out somewhat a failure. The blues, who pulled, in
the opinion of many of the bye-standers, much better than
their opponents, and had the additional advantage of being
beautifully steered by one of the ship’s officers, came in
long, long before the reds, who, however, won the race, as
the blues in their exultation quite forgot to pass the win-
ning-post, which was the stern of the ship, and pulled
straight for the ladder, while the reds, whether acciden-
tally or not I know not, pulled over the whole course.
In the midst of all this excitement coal dust reigned su-
preme, and we all looked like so many “ Christy’s Min-
strels.”
There has been a tremendous loss of hats of all sorts and
descriptions by the ladies and children; I expect we shall
all have to land in sou-westers if Boreas will be so ungen-
tlemanly as to carry off all our hats. Truly Dibden would
have said, and with justice, “Cease, rude Boreas;” espe-
cially if his own tile had been blown away.
Another little stranger, also a young lady, made its
appearance on the 17th inst.
Bets are being laid against our arrival in England before
the 25th prox. I think we may manage it by the 20th,
if our luck be only as good as it has hitherto been bad.
Having spun you a somewhat lengthy yarn, and hoping
to be able to do ditto next week,
I am, dear Sir,
Yours truly,
Observer.
A Spiritual Effusion.
(before dinner.)
Why sit moping here below, this fine weather, my friend ?
Come, stir yourself, be sociable; come and take a walk on
deck.
Leaving tbe saloon, and the preparations for dinner to
take care of themselves, I step up the companion-ladder,
and, emerging on deck, find myself among a group of
young men luxuriating in the use of the delicious, though
to non-smokers odious, weed, vulgarly called “ baccy.”
Passing on (for this has no attractions for me a non-
smoker) my eye next rests on groups of both sexes, clus-
tering round two chalk circles, about seven or eight yards
apart, probably the result of the experience of some rising
mathematician to judge from the numerous corners in the
same. The chief occupation of the ladies seems to be that
of throwing rope grummets to any given distance from the
opposite circle ; while the gentlemen are taking legular and
hackular exercise, procurable to all appearance by running
after and picking up the aforesaid articles. Thanks to the
kindness of a bystander, I am able to inform my readers
that this is the noble game of quoits.
But stay not here; pass on yet a little further, then
pause, and mark the scene before you. Around the cap-
stan is collected, in a most picturesque group, a bushel or
two of the fair sex, listening, it seems, either to an inter-
esting book, or to the humorous, witty, or sensible articles
to be found only in the Cornhill or Temple Bar magazines,
kindly favoured by one or two more of that obliging sex,
whose pilgrimage through this weary world has above been
stated to be lightened by the pleasant and highly interest-
ing task of chasing and securing those ropish articles in-
wardly rejoicing in the name of quoits.
Their secondary occupations are different; one, more
youthful than the rest, seems to be persisting in cutting
a few yards of calico into holes, and as fast sewing them
up again; this is, I believe, styled chicken work. Another
matronly individual is seen enjoying the delights of spec-
tacles and worsted-work, the latter of which she rolls up to
within half an inch of the place where she is working, in
order to excite the curiosity of some female (?) wanderer,
who, for the sake of getting a peep (such is life!), will come
and assist in (oh, much to be coveted) gossip. Another,
trying very hard to keep awake, and a few more mending
stockings, hemming pocket-handkerchiefs, and making
children’s pant**! knickerbockers we will say, complete
the group.
Having feasted your eyes on them, turn once more and
look towards the tank; do you see that bearded warrior,
apparently writing ? Does he not excite your curiosity ?
What is he doing ? Is he writing to the Gazette ?—No !
It is something quite new if he is. Is he writing home ?
I think not. Well, come with me, and we will for once
break through the time-honoured rules of propriety, and
look over his shoulder—what do I see ? I know that nose,
that mouth; casting my gaze around, I see that it but
wants the eye to be as a reflection in a glass of that senti-
mental looking lady, sitting apart from the rest, enjoying
the dry eloquence of the “ Wide, wide world.” What
delight can he find in it? Well! nevermind; I will not
follow up his history, as there is but little time left to
remark the rest of my picture. In the various [corners are
gentlemen lying on the velviest of rugs, with their heads
on the downiest of pillows in the hottest of places, under
the brightest of suns, enjoying the warmest of embraces
in the softest of arms of the most affectionate of murphies.
Sleep on, oh idlers! but let me pass. Come, my friend,
see you those children sitting in groups ? they are playing
at dinner parties; others, trying their best to climb the
bulwarks, and from thence tumble into the sea, are, I be-
lieve, playing at ships.
Pretty picture; had I but a camera, I would transfer
it all to everlasting memory and the showroom of the so-
ciety for the propagation of the photographic art. Never
mind, whispers a soft voice, content thyself with pencil
and paper—
# ir
An interval of five minutes. Now, again, behold the
scene; there is one more on the stage, he is seated near the
wheel pencil and paper in hand. Ask ye who it is?
’Tis I—my outline is sketched in—
The bell rings—the stage is clear —where are the actors ?
—Where ? But two remain ; one is just disappearing in
the companion. Let us hail him. Ho! young man! Not
so fast; the play is barely finished; spare one moment
from your arduous dinner toilet and look once more around.
The quoits have gone to rest; the book is closed; where all
was din and confusion all is now peace and quiet. Spare, I
say, one moment ; see you not a sleeping form, in whose
lap reclines lazily a half-opened volume of the Wide, Wide
World ? Turn back for one moment, wake her up, and tell
her that the dressing-bell has rung.
A Dexterous Wanderer.
Poetry.
THE MOUNTAINEER OVERCOME AT LAST.
I’ve climbed up many a mountain’s side,
Looked down on many a peak;
In mighty caves my chops I’ve fried,
And even grilled a steak.
There’s not a valley or a glen
That I would not explore;
I’ve bathed in many a stream where men
Have never bathed before ;
I’ve braved the scorching sun, although
My face got brown as tan ;
I’ve gone where no wild beast could go
Or any other man;
I’ve gathered shells along the shore;
I’ve seen some fish most queer ;
I’ve worn out twenty pairs or more
Of boots within the year.
Of Cape Town’s Mount the tale I’ve told,
Four thousand feet or more.
It stretches up now as of old
Above the wave-washed shore.
Another mountain, too, I’d beard,
There was in Vincent’s Isle;
I climbed this hill, though upon my word,
’Twas hardly worth my while.
I climbed up Vincent’s Hill, I’ve said,
It was a horrid bore,
I’ve done it once too often yet,
And will do so no more.
I’m on my way to England’s shore,
Farewell my mountain home,
I never wish to see thee more
Or on thy hills to roam.
36
THE GOLDEN FLEECE GAZETTE.


To walk again I’ll never try,
As sure as eggs is eggs ;
D’ye want to know the reason why ?
Then just look at my legs.
It was no use to rave and storm,
The poor ship had no other;
So I got up and vengeance vowed,
Like a boy who tells his mother.
But still, when you have paid your fare.
And stumped up like a man,
It’s hard to treat one thus I say.
At any rate I came away
A sad, perhaps wiser man.
Piece of Sentiment which has
Disturbed my Peace of Mind.
Now all of you who live on shore,
Take my advice, don’t roam,
It will be better if you all
Stay quietly at home ;
But if you can’t, and really must
Make tracks upon the sea,
Don’t take your passage for the trip
In any craft made like this ship,
A screw auxilliary;
Or else, by jove you will repent.
That against advice you went,
And get served just like me.
In vain I rack my brain in anxious thought,
Resolving deeds impossible to do;
In vain stupendous intellect I’ve brought
To bear on it, tried every thing I knew.
Though many an anxious sleepless night I’ve passed.
Thinking and thinking till my brain did bum.
On many a friend my heavy grievance cast.
Hoping in vain from good advice to learn,
Yet no relief, no aid, as yet I’ve found.
Oh, dismal! wretched! is my earthly lot.
In vain I search for sympathy around,
The milk of human kindness no one’s got;
The day I pass in moody care and woe,
Joy, mirth, and appetite alike are gone.
Would that I too, with them from hence could go;
How can such misery alone be;
The near approach of night I see with dread ;
The coming mom my grief again renews ;
I hardly dare approach my downy bed.
Pity, oh fortune ! cease thus to illuse.
Patience alone and dirt, I greatly fear,
Is now alas ! all that remains for me,
No other better remedy is near;
Fortunes I’d give to be on land and free
But glittering gold, which nearly all things buys,
Can’t bring to me, unfortunate, relief.
This heavy load which on my bosom lies,
Will be the death of mo, it’s my belief.
Oh heavens ! I’m mad; kind friends my burden ease,
In pity listen while I tell my woes :
Detained so long by contrary winds and seas,
Iv’e no more shirts or any more clean clothes !
Allsopp.
Golden Fleece Nursery Rhymes.
( Continued from our lad.)
There was an old engine and what do you think,
It had coals for to eat and water to drink,
Though’t had coals for to eat and three hundred horse power.
It was seldom it did more than five knots an hour.
I went on shore at St. Vincent to stroll,
But when I came hack they were taking in coal,
So I .went back ashore and had some good fun,
And never came back till the coaling was done.
A Bachelor,
Old steward Langtry went to the pantry,
To get the saloon folk some beer,
In the course of an hour it came but ’twas sour,
Which made the good people look queer.
For some grab, I am told, he went down to the hold,
He said ’twas quite wrong, but he’d risk it,
He came back with some bread, and some cheese it is said.
But found them all eating the biscuit.
The
Growl of an Individual Soured by
Sourer beer.
Dickery Dickery Dock.
It was on board the Golden Fleece ,
And not two days ago,
I heard the bell for tiffin ring
And hurried down below.
Correspondence.
Yes, I was very thirsty,
The sun was burning hot,
For we were ’neath the torrid zone,
Our stores were very nearly done,
I cursed my wretched lot.
Me. Editor,
Sir, —Having heard that a gentleman passenger has
lost a sponge, I am desirous of knowing what colour it is,
and whether it is a genuine one, or only a piece of flannel.
Having so many sponges on hand, that have been ob-
tained from suspicious persons, I am now only waiting for
a full description of the same.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
Little Joe Buggins.
Hungry as well as thirsty,
For on that very morn,
I had not heard the breakfast bell,
Had without breakfast gone. ,
But quite resigned I waited,
From morning till midday;
Visions of every kind of cheer,
Of bread and cheese and Bass’s beer,
Were now my hope and stay.
Mr. Editor,
Sir, —I shall feel much obliged if you, or one of your
correspondents, will let me know what has become of the
dried fruit, as I fear from the state they were in when I
last saw them (one being absolutely black in the face), that
they have died of thirst. If they are still alive they must
still be very thirsty, and so I should advise their being sent
away in company with the condemned beer.
Yours obediently,
Almonds and Eaisins.
I took my seat at tiffin,
And looked about for bread,
Saw none, so called a steward,
Now what d’ye think he said ?
He said there is no bread, sir!
Will biscuit do as well ?
Biscuit! I yelled, that horrid stuff ?
Yes, sir, he said, ain’t that enough ?
My rage I cannot tell.
Though hungry, yet I could not eat,
But still I thought I’ll drink,
So called out, “ Ward, bring me some beer! ”
Did I get it do you think P
Oh yes, it came, I tasted it,
And taste it till this hour;
It made me wince and blink my eyes,
And grind my teeth in mad suprise,
Notices to Correspondents.
all our correspondents—Please write more and talk
It was so precious sour.
37
THE GOLDEN FLEECE GAZETTE.


“ Bread and Butter.” —You complain of having no
butter; we are sorry we cannot help you; but anchovy
paste and marmalade are “ excellent substitutes for butter
at breakfast.”
“ Nauticus.” —Splicing the main-brace is the nautical
phrase for liquoring up.
“ Ecarte.” —No, certainly not. If, when playing with
a lady, you propose, and she accepts, you cannot be had up
for breach of promise.
We must request that “ Messrs. Saxony and Pietu-
maritzburg” will leave us alone. We really cannot insert
their wild and incoherent productions.
An Excursion to the Summit of
Table Mountain.
( Continued from our lad.)
There are few who do not know what joy and satisfaction
it gives when, after a long ride or walk, you arrive at your
destination and find the table spread. Yet, when, after an
ascent of some 4000 feet, we reached the top of Table
Mountain, it was with great dissatisfaction that we found
the table-cloth indeed laid, but the viands on which we had
come to feast hidden from our view. We had toiled for
upwards of two hours and had reached the summit with
the highest expectation, when, lo! a dense fog so spread
his thick mantle that we could not see each other at a few
yards off. (When the mountain is covered with a dense
white cloud the Cape Town people are accustomed to say,
“The table-cloth is spread.”)
As we had been warned that, in case a fog overtook us,
we were not to leave each other’s company, since, a few
years ago, a man, who had been up nineteen times, had
lost his life in one of them, we sat down for a little refresh-
ment and rest, thinking that, if, after all, it did not clear
up, at any rate we should have the satisfaction of being
able to say that we had been on the top of Table Moun-
tain. After half an hour the fog became somewhat trans-
parent, and here and there you might perceive a break
through which a hasty glimpse of the low country would be
snatched. Here was a great struggle, and our hopes rose
and fell with the thinning and thickening of the fog. At
last the sun shone brightly, and with a vigorous effort
drove the mist to flight. The view which now opened
before us was splendid. To the south and west, the sea
with tiny waves dancing upon its surface. To the north,
mountains, some of whose tops were still covered with
silvery snow. Below you, Cape Town, with its many
churches towering to the sky. A little beyond was Salt
Eiver, whose silent course could be traced for miles up the
country. With one view you could take in both Table and
Simon’s Bay. To judge from the features of the tract of
land which connects them, and from the swamps and lakes
with which it is studded, I felt inclined to think that a com-
paratively short time ago they must have been one, and that
the country lying south must have been once an island
standing in the same relation to the African continent as
Ceylon does to India. The appearance of the plateau of
the mountain itself was rather disappointing. Were it not
that lichens, growing and decaying on the rocky surface,
formed a little earth into which seeds, carried there by
birds and winds, fell and germinated, it would be barren-
ness itself. Lichens, mosses, heaths, and a few euphorbia,
were the only plants I could see. Neither were there any
birds, a solitary kite excepted, and he may probably have
followed us through mistaking the orange peel, which we
had scattered along the road, for yellow chickens. Cheered
by the bright prospects, enlivened by the invigorating
atmosphere, we retraced our steps, and when on reaching
home we found the table cloth groaning under a plentiful
dinner, we felt well repaid for our day’s labour by the
appetite it had given us.
Ibex.
Conundrums, &c.
\ Do you speak French ? Of course you do;
Then think of a number in French.
My second’s a member which, if destroyed,
Life’s greatest joy would quench.
Bread is the staff of life, they say,
But had you not my third,
To try to make this staff of life
Would be utterly absurd.
About my whole zoologists fight
Whether it be or not,
Though most suppose there’s no such thing,
As none have yet been shot.
Bobstay.
My first it is plain is by no means a plain,
’Tis more like a mountain I think;
And often ’tis hard its summit to gain,
At least without something to drink.
My second, though often made only of hair,
Is sometimes uncommonly hard to be burst ;
Its colour is various, its dark or its fair;
My whole is a name for a very small first.
Opkins.
Answers to Charades, by Pater-
familias.
I. The Sir somebody, who left his soap in the ladies*
bath on Saturday morning last, will receive the same on
application to one of the “Elderly Girls” at Cat's Cradle
Lodge, Purser's Villas. If not applied for before the next
half-holiday it will be made into suds and sent to the
infant-school playground, for the purpose of instructing
the smalLboys in the art of blowing bubbles.
11. Tobacco.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
Notice.
A SALE of condemned beer will take place on Nov. sth
_£3 (Guy Eawkes’ Day). To any one in the pickling or
vinegar line this will be an excellent opportunity for
investment.
Notice.
THE Captain of the S. S. Golden Fleece requests that all
passengers of any size or weight will kindly occupy
the Stern-boat until further orders, in order that their
additional weight may influence the status of the ship.
A steward shall be told off to provide them with all the
necessaries of life, &c., &c.
N.B. The ship being of iron, and wooden-figure-headed,
and therefore dull and heavy, intellectual weight will have
no influence.
Wanted,
BY a lady, within one week after the arrival of the good
ship Golden Fleece at the London Docks, Photogra-
phic portraits of all the gentlemen on board. Address,
“Ada,” care of the Editor G. F. G.
Wanted,
BY a lady, a hat. The advertiser has no objection to one
of the jelly-mould pattern. Address, “A. 8.,” care
of the Editor.
Wanted,
BY a carver, a guard for a tolerable sized steel fork.
Address, “ 0. F. Q.,” care of the Editor.
38
THE GOLDEN FLEECE GAZETTE.


Wanted,
BY a gentleman, courage to ask a lady to walk on deck
of an evening. The advertiser is young, good looking,
highly accomplished, and altogether calculated to make an
excellent partner. Apply to “Young England,” care of
the Editor.
Wanted,
BY a nervous gentleman, a little less noise on the part of
the children. The advertiser is willing to exchange
oranges for the same. Address “B. A.,” care of the
Editor.
Tenders
FOP a limited allowance of spirits received daily at
No. 93, Saloon-square, between the hours of 12 and 1
p.m.. The lowest offers will not necessarily be accepted.
Lost,
NEAR the capstan, on the quarter-deck, a leather ink-
stand, with patent brass spring; the owner being
engaged in deep and interesting conversation (it the time
of its abstraction. Address “ H. A. D,,” 29, Corridor-place.
A PATENT Leather Revolver Case and Belt is in No. 9,
Saloon-square. If not claimed on or before the 4th of
November the leather will be converted into shoes for a
small boy.
Wanted,
A WATER-CAN. The advertiser is in dire need of the
above, and therefore is not particular as to handle or
spout, and has no objection to a moderate amount of leak-
age. Apply to “X.Y. Z.,” care of the Editor.
Lost,
A MELTON Cloth Over-Coat. The finder is earnestly
f\ requested to return the same to No. 9, Saloon-square.
Notice.
IS hereby given, that the ramrod advertised in the last
Gazette, as lying in No. 9, Saloon-square, has been
converted in baccy stoppers. Parties feeling interested in
the same may obtain a limited supply at a very moderate
price.
Wanted,
BY one of the editors, who has thoroughly broken down
in his understandings , a new pair of uprights to support
his emaciated frame.
Sealed tenders and photographs of the above to be sent
to No. 29, Saloomterrace, Tank-square.
Parr’s Life Pills.
ON account of the unheard-of length of the present
voyage and the daily slowness of progression, the
undersigned, who has a limited supply of the above unfail-
ing remedy, has been induced to come forward and offer
them at reduced rates to such of his fellow-passengers as
are desirous of once more beholding their native land.
Address, “ Ezra Jones,” No. 5, Saloon-square.
Wanted,
LEET-OPP Clothes (not for the colonies but for myself,
not having a rag left I can call my own. Address,
“ The Haughty One,” No. 31, Saloon-terrace.
Printed for the Editors, Golden Fleece Gazette, hy an obliging Devil.
No. 1, Eandle Buildings, House Square.
39
THE GOLDEN FLEECE GAZETTE.


Golden Fleece Gazette
No. 10.
Dear authors suit your topics to your strength
And ponder well your subject and its length.”—Btron.
NOVEMBER 5.
ATLANTIC OCEAN.
One or two of our readers have been charging us with
inconsistency, declaring that several of the articles in last
week’s issue were personal. We beg to assure them that
no personalities were intended ; and that with the exception
of one advertisement, the subject of which was too sensible
to feel annoyed, nothing which could in our opinion be con-
strued into personality was inserted. One individual was
even heard to say that he hoped there would be no more
Gazettes. How dreadful! How truly shocking ! Gentle
readers, can you believe it ? Is it not hard that because
sensitive people take offence where none is intended, we,
the unhappy editors, should be doomed to destruction when,
after unheard of struggles, we had hugged ourselves with
the idea that our Gazette was at last firmly established in
the public favour ? No, Sir, as you see, it is not the last,
and we even hope to be able to produce one more number
after this; and if we are so unfortunate as to encounter head
winds and cross seas, we may say two ; and if extra unfor-
tunate even three more. Now, we realize and fully under-
stand the blessings of a free press, and look forward with
eager anxiety to our arrival in that country where newspaper
editors are not expected to bow to individual opinion.
If the dissatisfied portion of our subscribers, instead of
growling in public, would only grumble through the
medium of our columns, their complaints would meet with
that ready attention and polite answer for which our
Gazette is so justly famed. This arrangement would fulfil
three ends. It would prevent public and unseemly discus-
sion, employ their idle moments, and fill our columns.
They would also have more time for thought, and with
maturely considered sentences wither us completely with
overpowering sarcasm.
Another complaint! The Lounger of this week complains
of our breaking our promise in not having inserted the lati-
tudes and longitudes. We beg to state that we have not for-
gotten it, but on thinking the matter over, considered it better
to publish them all at once in the form of a supplement
which shall be distributed gratis to our subscribers, an
arrangement which we hope will make up for all complaints
and shortcomings proven and not proven. We see with
pleasure that our late wish for a female Lounger has been
responded to. Her letter will be found below, we insert it
with thanks, and hope that it will be continued.
Dear Mr. Editor,
The first lieutenant of a vessel on board of which
I was serving, having been caused a great deal of trouble
and annoyance on several occasions by two cooks,
natives of Goa, who were in a chronic state of enmity
with one another, which generally ended in a battle royal
among the saucepans and coppers, had recourse to a rather
ingenious method for putting a stop to it and restoring dis-
cipline in the galley. The two delinquents having been
again brought before him for the same offence, both ver-
sions of the story having been heard and patiently investi-
gated, and both parties proved equally guilty, the following
order was given: “ Quarter Master, bring two reef points
and tell the sergeant to send two marines aft with two
ratans.” The next order was, “ All cooks and natives to
muster.’’ These mandates having been speedily obeyed,
the two belligerents were placed face to face at a good
striking distance with the reef points above mentioned in
their hands, whilst behind each was placed a marine with
a ratan. “Now my boys,” said the Ist luff, “I shall
have no peace until you find out which is the best man, go
ahead.” The combatants not making any show of going
ahead, the next word given was, “ Touch’em up, marines,”
which the marines did, and with great gusto too; and
under the influence of the ratans at it they went in style,
lamming at one another with their colts, now closing, now
separating, now slipping, now sliding; at last down goes
one, and, as he doesn’t much care about getting up of his own
accord, he is lifted on to his pins and placed as before.
Still the same reluctance to recommence, and still the same
means prove efficacious ; and after another good round ot
four or five minutes, during which the first luff’s voice is
heard between the “thug” “thug” of the reef points, “ Look
out marine, touch up that fellow to the left, he is not
hitting fair,” and the “ thug,” “thug” is diversified with
the ‘ ‘ whack,” “ whack ’’ of the marine. The first lieutenant
having allowed them to punish one another till one gave
in, through the medium of an interpreter, thus harangued
the assembled natives : “ You see this man is evidently
the best one; now whenever any of you fight I shall always
serve you in the same manner, so as to find out which is
the strongest; ” then, turning to the two antagonists, “As
for you, now that this point is settled, I shall proceed to
punish you for the offence for which you have been brought
before me, namely, fighting in the galley instead of doing
your work. Quarter-master, put these two men over the
gun and give them each one dozen cuts with the ratan,” I
don’t recollect a single instance of a fight among the
natives from that day, so the experiment was evidently a
good one. Now one thing that brought this to my mind
was witnessing a scuffle between two of our young friends
on board the other day, and instead of their being sepa-
rated don’t you think, Mr. Editor, the first luff’s plan ought
to have been carried out ?
Yours in haste,
Pugilist.
My Dear Mr. Editor,
I will premise that I am not one of those “ Elderly
Girls” whom you have animadverted upon as having no-
thing to do but to pet cats. No, indeed, idleness finds
no place amongst my clique. We have too much to do
in sewing on buttons, darning socks, and in letting out
and lengthening for the six months’ growth of our families
on board, for us to indulge in laziness or gossip. Never-
theless, since you ask it as a favour, I (for one) will relate
a little of what I hear going on around me while I am
busily occupied in my own duties.


It is quite true as you say, that there is a lack of subjects
to write and talk about. As a proof of this I have heard
one and another relating their dreams over the breakfast-
table ! which is indeed “the voice of the sluggard for he
told me his dreams,” says Dr. Watts ; s who also goes on to
say, that the same individual “never loves thinking.”
I am almost sure this is the reason why you have so often
to complain of the lack of contributions to your valuable
paper.
Linen also, as your late advertisements declare, is being
much talked about. I was awoke on Sunday morning
*>y a warm discussion between two young men about “ one
clean white shirt. ” I wondered if they were going to divide
it, and which would appear at church in the front and which
in the wristbands ! I have also heard during the week,
that one of our swells has had the good luck to discover
six clean shirts. Some of the sterner sex are reduced so
low as to become their own dhohies, and I was myself in
the neighbourhood of a gentleman the other day who was
ironing a garment with the heated nails in the floor over
the engine-room. He remarked that the irons were “not
as hot as usual,” so I suppose he is in the habit of using
them. Paper-collars, lam told, may be had for the asking.
Would it not be a good plan, Mr. Editor, to apply for a
grant of these and distribute them amongst the passengers
to write articles on for your paper ? I really think it must
be for want of materials of this kind that some of our
gifted companions do not send you their effusions.
By the way, talking of clothing, I believe you once
hinted in your paper that quoits is not a feminine amuse-
ment. Now it has struck me lately that it is more suited to
the loose dress of ladies than to the tight-fitting garments
of gentlemen, I have noticed several rents and cracks in
the wardrobes of the latter, when engaged in the game,
and I have myself used up nearly a skein of silk in darning
a coat, &c., which were cracked at the armholes and back
while “ pitching quoits.”* For my own part it seems to
me very much to resemble the ladylike game of “Les
Graces,” which consists in throwing small hoops upwards
through a circle instead of downwards upon one.
The only other on dit which I will now mention is, that
the season seems approaching for going from home for a time.
One lady has actually removed to lodgings at the sea-side
for change of air. Would it not be a mutual benefit if we
all changed places with one another, as they do in the game
of “ The Family Coach?” It would be a pleasing variety,
make a stir, give the idlers among us something to do,
besides having the advantage of getting rid of a good deal
of rubbish which has been-accumulating in our dwellings
during the last six months.
If you deem this worthy of a corner in your paper I shall
keep my ears open in future and let you know with what
result.
I remain, Mr. Editor,
Yours, no Lounger but a
Listener.
* [“Picking from the ground,” not “pitching” the
quoit, is the part of the performance which strains the
clothes most; and our fair correspondent should bear in
mind that the gentlemen do a deal more in that line than
the ladies, who don’t much care about stooping so low.
—Ed. G. F. G.']
Poetry.
A NEW EDITION OF AN OLD STORY.
I know not where it was I’ve somewhere read,
Or, possibly, I may have heard it said,
That some way off there lies a certain land
Where surging billows ever beat the strand,
And make it very hard indeed to land,
And many lose their lives close by the sand.
The boats are crankey and have no out-riggers,
And if one pays not well, why then the niggers
Upset a cove through spite or, perhaps, from lark,
And leave him to the mercies of the shark ;
For sharks, being epicures, don’t care to bite
The darkies, and stick closely to the white.
Of course, if there were no one of the latter,
They’d think that it was quite a different matter.
Another pair of shoes—a “ doosea-jora jootee,”
And look on blacks as very decent booty.
A short way inland lies a largish city,
In which resides the subject of my ditty;
And in it, too, are many English folks,
But none do swell as the great firm of Okes :
Dealers in baccy-stoppers, teas and jams.
Barometers and scissors, Yorkshire hams,
Grog of all kinds, Havannah shap’d cheroots.
Umbrellas, prunes, and every sort of fruits,
Bacon and parasols, and Bass’s ale.
Brushes of sorts, for hair and tooth and nail,
Bottles of milk, or powder meant as such,
Cheeses the primest, Cheshire, Stilton, Dutch,
Curios from China, also ostrich feathers,
And Garibaldi lights and stirrup leathers,
Coffee preserved and every sort of papers.
Boots and Odonto, raisins, almonds, capers,
Bonnets for ladies (I think they call ’em chips),
And ribbands, too, and rose salve for the lips.
And honey-dew, and clipping tandem whips.
Candles of wax and composite and dips,
Steamers and other kinds of children’s boats,
Angola trousers and alpaca coats :
Hooks, lines, and fishing rods, and patent floats,
Things cunningly devised for bruising oats,
And writing desks, and Mappin’s finest razors,
Crackers and squibs, ye gods, such awful blazers,
Then there are plates and spoons, and knives and dishes,
And tins of potted meats and potted fishes.
Boys’ frocks and knickerbockers, babies’ socks,
Biscuits from Reading, Bramah’s patent locks,
Eau de cologne, golden pens and small swords,
Large dining tables, also little chess boards,
And, likewise, wide-awakes and beaver hats,
And funny jims for puckero-ing rats,
A large assortment, too, of puppies’ collars,
And Spanish produce worth no end of dollars.
And balls and bats, and leggings, gloves and stumps.
And walking sticks and lovely pickled humps,
Rowland’s Kalydor, patent respirators,
H ammers and chisels, Ell wood’s- ventilators.
Toys for the small boys, and fancy rugs,
And Persian powder for destroying bugs,
Thermantidotes and jars of English honey,
Purses for coves to stow away their money,
Meerschaums and clays and anti-nicotines,
And rouge and powder ; also crinolines,
Neckties, and chocolate, and jelly mould,
All these and many more by Okes are sold.
So much for introduction, now it’s time
To change somewhat the burthen of my rhyme,
And on these good things let the curtain drop,
Changing the scene from Okes’s famous shop
Into his oflice, where he sits as snug
As any little insect in a rug.
With pen in hand all pros and cons he weighs,
And thinks of debtors, sure and doubtful pays ;
Reckons the interest on money lent,
And probable results of money spent,
Till wearied with these calculations deep,
He yawns, then yawns again, and falls asleep.
He sleeps, good luck for him, serene and calm,
Nor dreams he aught of any coming harm,
Till suddenly aroused by “ Ship ahoy,”
He wakes, and bellows loudly for his boy
Who ushers in a man whose very air
Would make you take him for some Russian bear.
Who utterly ignoring Oke’s frown,
Spits coolly on the ground and sits him down,
Then shouting “ Ship ahoy,” as if at sea,
He helps himself to Uke’s Eau de vie.
Then to the Okes so mercantile and staid,
“ I reckon, stranger, I have come to trade.
My soul is liberal, my hand is free,
Let’s liquor up (hands him the Eau de vie).
Your tipple’s good, as far as I can tell,
Least ways, old cock, I’ll say its average well,
But if you be not funkey of the sea,
Just come along and have a feed with me;
It’s getting late, we’d best go ’board the bark,
Else we may lose our bearings in the dark.”
The head of Okes, so stately and so grave,
Considered this an odd way to behave;
And, perfectly bewildered and amazed,
He mopped his melting forehead, as he gazed
At his new friend, so redolent of smoke.
At last he plucked up courage and he spoke;
“ May I request the favour of your name;
I’d also like to know your little game.
If trade’s your object, then, I’d have you know,
In strictest confidence, I'm Okes and Co.”
“ My name is Jones,” replied the Yankee skipper,
I’m proud to say, I’m captain of yon clipper.
My cargo’s at your service very cheap.
So look alive, and come and take a peep.
I have on board the real Brazilian yams,
And crikey, Bill, some most delicious hams.”
At the last word our friend looked very sad,
Though, in reality, his heart was glad,
To hear that hams, of which he’d just run short,
Had come, thus opportunely, into port.
A cunning hand was Okes, and up to snuff,
And, in the bargaining line, no hand so tough.
And so he told his friend he’d lots of hams,
But didn’t mind a deal about the yams.
The Yankee twigged his man, and bowed his head,
41
THE GOLDEN FLEECE GAZETTE.


And, parrot-like, ho thought, but little said.
So blandly smiling on the oily sinner,
Mildly suggested it was time for dinner.
Well, then, this worthy pair, just after dark,
Got safe and sound aboard the gallant bark,
And soon began the game of knife and fork ;
Nor had their teeth to work on salted pork,
Which Okes had fancied all ships’ Captains had,
With biscuits kept until they had gone bad,
And butter only fit for engine grease,
Or passengers on hoard the Golden Fleece.
So you may fancy Okes and Co. was glad,
To find that things on hoard were not so bad.
Mock turtle soup, and cutlets made of veal,
And pigeon pie, and snipe, and duck, and teal,
Puddings, and tarts, and jellies, and blanc-mange,
And cakes of almond, also cakes of sponge,
And ham, and tongue, and curry, also rice,
And everything was cooked uncommon nice.
All these he eat, and everything in fine,
Was worth the eating ; then the tip top wine—
Moselle and claret, port and golden sherry—
Soon made our hero somewhat more than merry ;
Screwed some would call it, some intoxicated,
At any rate our friend was much elated ;
Called Jones his brother, shook him by the hand.
For good wine makes e’en merchants hearts expand.
Well, to he brief, for long enough I’ve been,
I’ll hurry quickly to the final scene,
And tell you all the melancholy end,
Of Okes’s visit to his Yankee friend:
O’ercomc with wine, and thus bereft of thought,
Wisdom, and prudence, our hero bought,
Of Yankee hams, some five and twenty score,
And paid for them, and got them safe ashore,
And thought to make a profit, if he could,
But —lackaday, the hams were made ol WOOD.
And now, when youngsters wish to crack their jokes,
They call for ham, when calling in on Okes.
“ Some of that ham,” the beggars always say,
“ You bought at sea ; I quite forget the day.”
Forget the day !!! hut who’ll forget the hoax,
The Yankee skipper played on Mr. Okes.
Moral.
Now all who’ve heard this doleful tale of mine,
Be very careful how you mix your wine;
Be true to one sort, for its my belief,
Mixing his liquor brought our friend to grief.
Whiskey.
Correspondence.
Deae Sie,
Touching the sponge!!! I still hold the above
article in my possession, and am only waiting to know the
colour, size, and shape. Should I find the description to
be correct, I shall only be too happy to return the same to its
rightful owner, who, I dare say, is one of “ the cures” that
likes a sponge when he goes to dip. What a capital thing
is the Golden Fleece Gazette !! ! So very convenient if any-
one should lose anything; and especially for honest indi-
viduals, who wish to return what they find kicking about
lower decks, &c.
Perhaps the party who has lost the sponge may be timid,
or nervous, or even afraid to apply to our kind and friendly
editors ; or it may only be laziness, if so he doesn’t deserve
ever to have it; however, I shall nov; find out, I hope, the
truth, and then it will be such a great relief to my mind to
know that the dear fellow has his sponge once more. He
will then exclaim, “ Ah! At last I’ve found my long lost
(what ?) sponge, which used to be so soft and pleasant.
Hoping I’ve not taken up too much room in your valu-
able paper,
I am, dear Sir,
Yours truly,
Little Joe Buggins.
[We ourselves have lost a sponge, and if Little Joe
Buggins will only have the kindness to call at our office
with the “ soft and pleasant” little article we shall be
much obliged. — Ed. G. F. 6*.]
Sie,
In your last issue I was amazed at your presump-
tion in inserting an advertisement, purporting to be from
me for “old clothes.” Now, sir, I never sent such an
advertisement to your paper, and what is more, I feel
indignant that my fair fame should be attacked in so
slanderous a manner. Why should I want old clothes ?
Have I not seven Sunday suits safely packed in the hold,
ready to cut a swell in the aristocratic neighbourhood of
the London Docks ? Sir, your conduct is infamous , and I
feel warranted in asserting that no respectably conducted
journal would hesitate for one moment in refusing admit-
tance to such calumny in their columns; and further, I
have to inform you that, unless the name of the author is
revealed and an ample apology given in your next issue,
I shall place the matter in the hands of my solicitor.
Yours in disgust,
The Haughty One.
[The Haughty One is quite at liberty to consult as many
solicitors as he may think proper. Advertisements for old
clothes are by no means uncommon, and if they were to
be made the subject of lawsuits we think that those parties
who advertise for “ left-off clothes for the colonies” might
be sued by the inhabitants of those out-of-the-way places
which doubtless contain many haughty ones; besides, ad-
vertisements of this nature, which are duly paid for, are
always inserted. We can only suggest that the party in
want of old clothes must have been some other haughty
one. — Ed. — G. F. G.~\
Answers to Correspondents.
“ Nauticus” will bother us with questions as to the
probable day of our arrival at Plymouth. We can only
say, that we’ll tell him when we get there.
"We have received a capital letter from “Jack Stay,”
which shall appear in our next with a few prudent altera-
tions.
We cannot inform “ Lady-killee” what is the best
means for promoting the growth of moustache and whiskers.
We advise him to consult the hairiest individual on board.
We hope all will write for the next Gazette, as it will
most probably be the last.
Charades, &c.
My first is a place in which sheep are confined—
Least such is the case in my own native land—
Yet I hope you’ll not think I am out of my mind
When I say (and with truth) I have one in my hand.
My second’s a member, I do not quite mean
Of Commons or Lords, no nothing so deep ;
One thing that is certain, its not often seen
In woman or man when indulging in sleep ;
It varies in colour, but often I ween,
The hue most apparent’s undoubtedly green.
My third’s made of canvas, of carpets, of wood,
It’s single and double, square, oblong, and round,
Silk, velvet, and satin adorn it when good;
Surrounded by air yet it rests on the ground.
Proud Henry 11. my whole once was seen
When with scourges deservedly beat;
But when a fair face white veils and weeds screen,
My whole is then justly called sweet.
Jemima.
I’m a word of letters three, wags make that word of
me,
As a part of speech you see me in books.
Full of spirits, beer, or sherry, I am enticing very,
When drunk I make men merry.
Weit by Snooks.
Answers to tlie Conundrums, &c.,
PUBLISHED IN LAST NUMBEE.
“ Bobstay ” —Unicorn. “ Opkins ” —Hillock.
42
THE GOLDEN FLEECE GAZETTE.


Extra superfine Charade, or whatever
you like to call it.
What part of the Golden Fleece would a Welshman think
most of? G. B.
Notes hy the Lounger.
Sir, •
It looks like old times again to see and to feel the
ship rolling about, as if it would’nt be much easier for the
old girl to go steady. Well, it can’t be helped; if she
must roll she must, and people should keep their weather eye
open at dinner time if they don’t want a lapful of soup and
•claret, or something to nurse in the shape of a boiled leg
of mutton instead of a baby. We have had beautiful
moonlight nights lately, but odd enough most people seem
to prefer a trial of skill at chess, draughts, backgammon,
cribbage, or whist to the more healthy enjoyment of an
evening walk. Chacun a son gout —some likes apples, some
likes inions. I heard a still small voice the other day
saying something about there being no more Gazettes , but,
of course, there can be no foundation for this. By the way,
talking of that, I thought you promised to give us the
latitudes and longitudes, and the account of the dismasting
of the ship, but I suppose that other more weighty matters
have occupied your valuable time and attention. As I write,
two friends of mine keep growling about the everlasting
rolling, and talking about all they have picked up out of
Barlow’s “ Tension and Tortion,” and whether Barlow
would’nt have thought he had committed a great error in
coming on board a ship like this with all his knowledge.
I don’t care twopence for the opinion of my two friends, or
for that of their friend Barlow, but I do wish they wouldn’t
make so much row when a man is writing. Well, they’re
gone at last. No, by Jove, they’re back again to say
there’s a heavy squall coming on. Oh, that I could give
them both a sleeping draught to keep them quiet till we
get to Gravesend, or at any rate to Cork or to Plymouth.
Now they’re talking about power of resistance , girders and
stanchions. I think they ought both to be sent down into
the engine room to look after the safety valves. Hurrah!
they’re gone at last, having, however, surreptitiously
perused all that I’ve been writing ; and they declare that
they will write an answer to my assertions in this very
issue.
We have had but little to interest us. during the past
week. Wild speculations, and wilder wagers are being
made concerning the probable day of our arrival. People
are now mad to get ashore at Plymouth in the pilot boat,
and I am sure I hope we shall have the chance. The
children, dear imitative little things, have taken to playing
at engines, and one small boy has been told off as the
donkey. Yesterday we had a second edition of the coal-
dust as, being the first baggage day since we left St.
Vincent, all the boxes were found to have a thick coating
of that disagreeable article. The sth of November seems
likely to be allowed to pass without a Guy Fawkes. What
a clever lot we must all be if there’s no Guy to be found
amongst us. Still no word of theatricals or rifle matches.
What are we all about ? Are we packing up our things so
as to be ready to get into the pilot boat at a moment’s
notice ? Do we sleep all day ? Are we occupying our
time in study ? Let us in a spirit of love, as the oily but
immortal Chadband would say, enquire, what are we doing
with ourselves ? Perhaps one or more of your readers
may be able to answer this question in your next issue.
Yours as usual, Observer.
Golden Fleece, Nov. sth, 1862.
P.S. —Since writing the above I have heard that theatri-
cals are being got up.
P.P.S.—I ~ have just this moment received a letter
(utterly unintelligible to me) from my two friends, which I
enclose.
We publish the letter alluded to by the Lounger:—
Sir,
Two of your friends, whose private conversation
you have taken the liberty of introducing into the columns
of the G. F. G., had the pleasure of reading your remarks
as they were committed to paper, and now send you some-
thing to put into your pipe and smoke. You do not care
what they and Barlow think, don’t you? Do you ever
think ? If so, think over the following, and may you after
thinking over it remain in as happy and contented a frame
of mind as you were before—thinking over it. Now, sir,
perhaps you are not aware that the resisting of materials
to a crushing force appears to be directly proportional to
the fourth power of the diameter in cylinders, or of the side
in square prisms, and inversely proportional to the square of
the height.
And again, sir, perhaps you are not aware that the
resistance of materials to the force of torsion is directly
proportional to the angle of torsion and inversely as their
length.
I may as well now tell you that the preceding principle
is employed in the construction of the balance of torsion,
and further, that the lateral or transverse strength of any
frame depends mainly on the distance and cohesion of the
upper and under surfaces; whatever stiffens the exterior
layers contributes greatly to strenghen the whole. And
now, lastly, sir, if, after reading and thinking over this, you
should not understand it, let me know and I will place
my scientific library at your disposal, but you must promise
me, Mr. Lounger, to wash your hands before opening the
books and not to dogs-ear the leaves.
Yours vindictively.
Tension and Torsion.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
Wanted,
IMMEDIATELY, some more lights in the saloon be-
tween the hours of six and ten p.m., the present
arrangements for lights being wretched in the extreme.
Notice.
IN consequence of the article having been disposed of by
private contract, the sale of condemned beer, advertised
in the last issue of the Gazette , will not take place.
Notice.
SHORTLY will be published, KISSING AND ITS
CONSEQUENCES. A novel, in 3 vols. By a po-
pular author. Price 3ls. 6d.
Now’s yer Time !!!
TO be raffled, a splendid grey African Parrot, not stuffed
but alive; warranted not to talk, but thinks deeply.
A suitable present for your grandmother!!!
20 Tickets at 2s. each.
Look sharp if you want one, as but few are left.
Names and number of tickets desired, to be sent to the
Editor.
WHO foretold the Winner of the Watch ? Who named
the Winner of the Rifle Match three days before it
took place ?—Greenhorn did all this.
IF those who have taken tickets in Lotteries, or have bets
on the Day of Arrival, will send him an envelope con-
taining 72 postage stamps, Greenhorn will ensure these
applicants success.
Wanted,
AN elegant Moustache to captivate the Ladies at home.
Any one having a receipt for forcing the same will
greatly oblige the advertiser by sending it to “X. 0.,” care
of the Editor.
Wanted.
THE Advertiser, possessing every qualification to make
home happy, is desirous to enter the matrimonial
state, and is willing to meet on equal terms any party willing
to close with his offer. Photographs must be enclosed,
with a general outline of disposition, &c., and the strictest
secrecy may be relied on. Address No. 9, Saloon-square.
4 3
THE GOLDEN FLEECE GAZETTE.


Golden Fleece Gazette
No. 11.
“ Dear authors suit your topics to your strength
And ponder well your subject and its length.”— Byron.
NOVEMBER 14.
ENGLISH CHANNEL.
At last, then, after one of the most protracted journeys that
we ever remember to have heard of, we approach the welcome
shores of the land of our forefathers. The glad time when
we are to dive into the bosoms of our anxious families is
drawing nigh; and, after all the privations and discomfort
we have endured, we feel assured that the pleasures of
home will seem doubly sweet to us; and that although we
shall arrive at an unfavourable season, England will be
to us a far greater Paradise than it has ever before seemed
to be.
Somehow or other we have kept up our spirits under
adversity wonderfully well; we have passed the last six
months with a surprisingly small amount of that snarling
and squabbling so very commonly to be found in long pas-
sages ; but how, we would ask, have we been passing our
time, for really our amusements have not been numerous.
We suppose that we must all have been living on hope.
“ Hope deferred maketh the heart sick,” and pretty well sick
we daresay we all are; but, at the same time, it must be
borne in mind, that “ when the desire cometh it is as a
tree of life.” May we all pluck the fruits of that tree to
our heart’s content; and we recommend our readers, if
ever they do happen to look back upon their passage in
the Golden Fleece , to thank their stars that things were not
a great deal worse.
Upon the whole we have every reason to congratulate
ourselves on the success which has attended our editorial
labours. We certainly believe that many could have
favoured us, both in verse and prose, with articles which
would have afforded much entertainment and instruction
had they put their minds to it, or, to speak more plainly,
had they taken the trouble; but, at the same time, we have
had some steady supporters, and to the latter we now beg
to return our most hearty thanks. Of course we could not
expect to escape entirely from censure, but we are glad to
think that the number of those for whom our Gazette is not
good enough is very limited. We have, during the past
week, received several communications in verse bidding us
farewell; some of these effusions are extremely compli-
mentary, others (evidently the work of one satirical pen)
quite the reverse. Wo publish them all as we have re-
ceived them.
We can unblushingly say that we have done our best;
and if we have contributed in the smallest degree to the
amusement, and lightened in any way some short moments
of the many tedious hours, we are more than rewarded.
If we have offended any, we apologise; for though we
may, perhaps, have criticised some rejected communications
rather harshly, we only did so for the amusement of others at
the expense of no one, as nobody knew who wrote those un-
fortunate effusions but ourselves and their martyred authors.
Authors of offended dignity we shake you with our edi-
torial hand, and hope that you will forgive us as freely as
we have forgiven the transient annoyances caused us by
our literary enemies.
Fellow-passengers all, farewell; we say it with regret,
and hope that the next time we meet it may be under
happier circumstances. We wish you every happiness and
jollity at home, and should it he that your unlucky star
should once more compel you to undertake another voyage
round that preposterously so-called Cape of Good Hope, we
wish you a faster passage, and —and—what shall we say ?
oh! another Golden Fleece Gazette to cheer you on your way.
And now, good bye, or rather au revoir; and with the dear
old English compliments of the season we leave you sor-
rowingly—
A MEREY CHRISTMAS AND A HAPPY NEW YEAR
TO YOU ALL.
We are sorry that the issue of the last number of our
Gazette should have been so long delayed; we postponed
its publication in the hopes of being able to give you an
account of the final doings of our theatrical friends, but
ill-behaved and inexorable rude Boreas put his ill-timed
veto on the performance, which had to be postponed.
Farewell, farewell, words cannot tell our deep regret to part,
From all our friends who’ve loved us well, it well nigh breaks our heart.
Good bye, good bye, with heavy sigh, we’ve broken up our types,
Our only consolation lies in Cavendish and pipes.
Adieu, adieu, to all of you, when scattered far and wide.
May every prosperity and happiness betide.
Yale, vale, we hope to see all at some future day,
Though when that future time may come, we fear ’tis hard to say.
Five months and more since India’s shore we left to sail for home,
Have passed away, and now at last the end is nearly come.
With deep regret, this last Gazette wo launch upon the wave
Of public approbation, which you so freely gave.
What we have done we’ve freely done, and hope we have beguiled.
Some of your tedious hours, and soothed you, too, when riled ;
And when on shore we meet no more, you read our parting line.
Toss off some beer, and shed a tear, to the days of Auld lang syne.
Ed. G. F. G~
To the Editors.
Conceited three, your reign is o’er,
No longer you’ll annoy,
No more our quiet evenings bore,
I hail your fall with joy.
Common Sense,
A Parting Word.
All arc rejoicing, now that wo are nigh,
To dear old England’s hospitable shore;


But it is time for us to say good bye.
To those we’re never likely to see more.
Farewell, 0 editors of our Gazette,
May you be happy as the livelong day;
May never awkward hindrances or let,
Lie in the path of what you’d do or say.
Lucretia.
Good Riddance of Bad Rubbish,
or Getting Rid of our Editors.
Hurrah ! and is this quite the last ?
Oh that I could with one word blast,
Your happiness and future joy ;
If sneers or anger could destroy,
I’d long ago have sneered and raged,
In any rash attempt engaged,
To stop you writing that Gazette,
In which you’ve done your best to set
People at enmity with each other,
And make them fight with one another;
The whole contents, I say and think,
Were only waste of pen and ink;
How one can read it me amazes,
You only wrote to hear your praises.
If you, all three, burst with conceit,
’Twill make the whole affair complete.
People who do write you ill-use,
People who can't write you abuse;
Some people’s writing you neglected.
Some without reason you rejected ;
Whilst oft with petty spite imbued,
You wrote things which were downright rude.
Finding that you could not be trusted,
Most left off writing quite disgusted.
What makes the whole affair much worse,
And be to all a greater curse,
The most conceited of you three,
This thrusting-forward fellow he,
Beads it aloud, I really mean it,
As if before he’d never seen it.
He must be very vain indeed,
If he considers ho can read.
Go ! I have done, go to your homes in peace,
Ye plagues of Egypt, to the Golden Fleece.
H. E. J.
Parting Tribute to the Editors,
“G. F. G.”
Farewell, most potent Golden Fleece Gazette,
Ho more thy brilliant leaders we shall see;
I say farewell with bitterest regret,
For thou art truly all in all to me.
Farewell, farewell, disinterested three,
Whom difficulties never made to pause,
Who claimed not even thanks as your just fee,
Who earned so well the popular applause.
Yet you had enemies as well as friends,
Creatures who’d turn a heaven into a hell;
Admirers’ praise will amply make amends.
For most of us are those that wish you well.
Think not of those small-minded paltry lot,
On whom the caps of satire closely fit;
Whether those caps are meant for them or not,
A guilty conscience ever thinks he’s hit.
Small-minded, said I, those could have no mind,
Who’d vent their spleen in such a silly way,
So snapishly and growlingly inclined,
Better for us if they had stayed away.
Thank goodness for us all, we soon shall see
The backs of those to whom I now allude,
I hope for them that they may some day be,
With better Christian principles imbued.
Again farewell, believe it when I say,
That all your labour ne’er forgot shall be,
And when, alas, you three are far away.
I’ll think of those three friends I met at sea.
Amicus.
To the Editors.
Though all my contributions you’ve rejected,
Though all my humble efforts you’ve neglected.
Though to my verse and spelling you’ve objected,
Though of your prosy nonsense I’m suspected,
Though from my prose refused you’ve much selected.
My best ideas you’ve pilfered and connected,
My happiest thoughts and best of jokes collected,
Though your ill-natured envy I detected,
Though worst of all my name you’ve not protected.
Yet still you editors I’ve much respected.
One of a Forgiving Disposition.
To the Editors.
Dear Mr. Editor, I think its as well,
To take up my pen and address you,
Some mutual friends have asked me to tell,
How very sincerely we bless you.
We wish you enjoyment of rudest of health, ,
Many years may your life be preserved.
May you never be wanting in oceans of wealth.
And happiness richly deserved.
Had it not been for you, I really don’t know,
"What we all should have found to have done.
Your Gazette has enlivened our spirits so low,
And afforded us no end of fun.
Then, dear Sir, I say you’ve amused us all much.
Your journal has ever been full of reality,
And has always been writ with a masterly touch,
Yet is perfectly free of all personality.
Many thanks for your trouble, and labour, and toil.
Believe me its not been in vain,
We’ll soon have our feet on our own native soil,
When I hope we shall meet you again.
A. B. C. X, Y. Z.
A Tribute to the Editors.
Dear gentlemen, you all along I’ve watched with humble eye.
And thank you for your bright attempts in prose and poetry ;
I think, as all must think, and all will own full soon,
The Golden Fleece Gazette was to us a golden boon.
A Constant Reader.
Female Lounger.
My Dear Mr. Editor,
As no one seems to have taken offence at any
remarks made in my last I have taken courage again to
address you, though I shall be very glad if some more
spicy gossip usurps my corner. Little now goes on worth
relating. All the morning an unusual excitement prevails
concerning the run. I have heard it said, that “it is not
worth while even coming to the breakfast-table,” and I
dare say many more would absent themselves only that
they want to save their rolls for tiffin, though this meal is
partially suspended until the welcome strip of paper makes
its appearance. When the account is under 60 miles and
the wind is contrary, we speculate on the probability of
having our boxes burnt to supply the deficiency of coal;
but the next day, when the wind has changed, you may
find some of us packing the same boxes to be ready to land
in the pilot-boat at Plymouth ;we were encouraged in the
latter course by observing a gentleman’s wardrobe being
packed and his boxes actually corded several days since.
There is also a tendency to grumble about the straight-
backed narrow benches in the saloon, and to call them
school-room forms, which looks as if we were indulging ia
visions of a comfortable steady chair at meals and a loung-
45
THE GOLDEN FLEECE GAZETTE.


ing one by the fireside afterwards. You have often alluded
to the provisions put upon the table; I have sometimes
wished that you had taken notice of the manner in which
they are often carved. It is true that the knives them-
selves are frequently in fault; and it must be a difficult
task to cut thin slices from a sirloin of beef, or a large
ham, with a pudding-knife and a silver fork; but really,
Mr. Editor, the ladies do complain sadly of the lumps of
meat, and thick slices of bread, which gentlemen persist in
helping them to; on several occasions I have seen them
sent away untouched. Indeed, once or twice a rather
sea-sick gentleman received such an unsightly piece of
roast pork or beef that he sent away his plate, saying, it
took away his appetite to look at it! What a good thing
it would have been if some of these novices in carving had
assisted the cook in slicing the cold meat for the children’s
stews, and in cutting their bread and butter. Even now
it might not be too late to improve, as they would reap the
benefit afterwards in their own families on shore, and I
have no doubt one of the doctors on board would show
them the direction of the ribs and sinews in a joint of beef,
and teach them the difference between the wing and the leg
of a fowl. This subject reminds me of a little occurrence
at the Mother's Treadmill (this is a term amongst us for
the children’s dinner) the other day : no rice having been
cooked, one of the little epicures suggested Aim -chokes. This
was understood to refer to a young gentleman at the upper
end of the table, who is in the habit of eating in a hurry
and of putting as much into his mouth as can possibly go
there. Anxious eyes were turned in that direction, but this
time happily it was a false alarm, as he was only in the
act of upsetting his wine-glass of beer.
We ladies are all busily occupied in preparing something
presentable in the way of garments for our children to land
in. This must be my excuse for not writing more now.
Believe me, Mr. Editor,
Yours, &e.
Poetry.
Coming to the saloon one night,
I really was not able,
To hear a single word, I said
’Twas like a second Babel.
First, there were the children
Playing at ships and boats,
Or roaring out like engines,
I thought they’d burst their throats.
One sang, “I’m off to Dixie,”
Another “Tapioca,”
A little girl cried “ Dooda-Corks,”
I’d half a mind to choke her.
An older set of minstrels
Were playing the piano,
And singing songs of every sort,
In treble, bass, soprano.
One played a penny whistle,
Another blew a flute,
One had a comb and paper,
I could have kicked the brute.
Two sets of four were playing whist,
And yelling out “ Ace! trumps! ”
And putting sugar in their grog,
Picking the biggest lumps.
Another cry now strikes me,
“Take Miss ? By jove, you’re loo’d!”
“What, squeeze my hand f” a lady cries,
“ How dare you be so rude ?”
Two men discussing politics,
Six ladies squabbling high,
Which of their babies had most teeth,
And which the largest eye.
Whilst “ Steward, bring the brandy,”
And “ No, I want the gin,”
Are cries and yells which now are heard
Above the loudest din.
Now comes a lull, and now again
’Tis chatter, chatter, chatter,
Whilst spoons, and plates, and glasses,
Add to the fearful clatter.
“ Hurrah! I’ve got a natural,”
“ Take care, there, you’re in check,”
A lady asks a gentleman
“ Please come and walk on deck.”
Some playing cribbage, others draughts,
“ Not take, my word, I’ll huff
In frenzy wild I stop my ears
And Bolt, I’ve had enough.
A Cranky Old Bachelor-
AN 11 P.M. REVERIE.
Now grog time is past, and lights are put out,
Now cats, rats, and roaches are wandering about;
The ladies have now from the saloon all retired,
To seek their soft couches this half hour desired.
So I’ll go on deck, and will have one more smoke,
To hear the last gossip, to crack the last joke.
But, ha! I must from this indulgence refrain,
The wind’s blowing foul, and its pouring with rain;
So I’ll to my cabin, and then to my cot,
There swinging and sighing I’ll ponder my lot.
Now, happy were I had I something to swipe,
And oh, that the rules would allow me a pipe.
But even though smoke bo denied me at night,
I feel thoroughly happy, perfectly, quite ;
Now I’ll read and I’ll drink, I’ll ponder and dream
(How noisy the stokers are, getting up steam),
I’ll open the port to feel the fresh breeze,
(I hope in the night I shan’t ship any seas).
The ship’s rolling softly from side to side,
My cot’s moving lazily trying to hide
The flame of the candle, whose flickering light
Tries to lighten my darkness, and cheat the dark night.
While I lying still ’twixt the cleanest of sheets,
And dreaming of happiness, tasting its sweets.
Ah, yes, I exclaim, if on earth there is bliss,
I’ve found it at last, it is this, it is this ;
Thus lying, thus lighted with soft shedding hues.
Who’ll dare to disturb me ? my thoughts who’ll confuse ?
Who says on board ship, you ne’er enjoy case ?
Who’s knocking, who’s that ? COME LIGHTS OUT
THERE PLEASE.
Candle-grease.
Now guess this !!!
Why is our “Boots” like Blarney?
Answer : Because he is all soft sawder (Sworder). —P.D,
MY PARTING GROWL.
A journey long and tedious, too,
We luckless wights have made,
I think far better it had been,
Had we in India stayed ;
Or if we must to England’s shore,
Why then the P and 0.
In six short weeks instead of months,
Could have taken us I know,
And much more comfortably, too.
Although their berths are small.
For there they feed us decently,
And here not so at all.
The grub’s been bad, attendance worse.
The liquor scarce and poor;
In fact, the journey’s been a curse
To all of us I’m sure.
Oh, I shall ever rue the day
In this ship I set my foot,
Instead of going by the way
Of over-landish route.
Our grievances have oft appeared,
In th s old tub’s Gazette,
46
THE GOLDEN FLEECE GAZETTE.


The company should read of them.
With feelings of regret.
Farewell, farewell, 0 Golden Fleece,
Farewell for ever more,
And time it is this trip should cease.
And we should go ashore.
For six long months we’ve been in thee.
Begrudging every day,
Auxiliary thou may’st be,
But thou wilt never pay.
For when it blew a moderate gale,
Oh how thou used to creak;
And thou wer’t sure to split a sail.
And how thy decks did leak.
A sailing vessel thou art not,
Steam cannot make thee go,
This voyage ne’er will be forgot,
At least, by me I know.
The directors of the company
Much edified will be,
To hear their ship so much abused,
As justly she may be.
0 •woman, wilt thou never change thy skin,
Never desist from trying to take us in;
And are we ever thus to be entrapp’d,
And in thy snake-like folds remain enwrapp’d.
Thy subtle wiles have had their turn with me
Successfully, the victory lies with thee.
My spirits droop, I’m getting very thin,
1 think I’d better TAKE A GLASS OF GIN.
Albatross.”
ACROSTIC.
I have a task kind friends before me set,
N ow that the Editors of Gazette
G ive us their efforts ; which task to me
L ight will appear, if likewise you agree
I n its performance. But why need I ask ?
S ince I feel sure that you’ll approve the task.
K illing one’s time for six long months or so,
E specially at sea’s no easy matter;
Y et have we managed, how I hardly know,
S ix weary months of our short lives to scatter.
E nthusiastic friends ’tis true have done their best,
E endering all their aid to interest.
“ Tapioca.’
AN APT COMPARISON.
S uch are the Editors of this Gazette ,
M ay the success with which from us they’ve met,
I ncline them still to do their best to please;
T hanks from us all, I’m sure each one will own,
H ave they deserved for their great kindness shown.
Yo monkeys three,
Brutes though you be,
Both sport and glee
Ye make for me.
In spite of fun,
With “ Grip” to run,
Or dinner done,
For nuts to dun.
Albert.”
Just as I please,
To play or tease,
Then mount the “ Trees,”
And catch your fleas.
Theatrical Gossip.
Our theatrical amateurs gave their farewell entertainment
last evening; it was a complete success. The Prologue was
spoken with remarkable power and effect, by Mr. Zambezi,
his delivery was clear and distinct, his action graceful, and
easy, and although it is the first time he has appeared on
the stage, he is well known to our readers by his excellent
singing—for which he has quite a natural talent. His
rendering of that fine old song (a few evenings since) “ The
Bay of Biscay,” forcibly reminded us of the elder Braham.
We only wish he had joined the amateurs earlier in the
voyage, as he would have been a great addition to their
strength.
The performance only consisted of one piece, viz., “ Did
you ever send your wife to Camberwell,” which passed off
very well. Mr. Pierson and Mr. Douglas, as “ Mr. Honey
bun” and “Mrs. Crank,” created roars of laughter by
their capital make up. Mr. Keyser was, as he always is,
first-rate. Mr. Mainwaring as “ Aunt Jewel,” looked the
character to perfection, and there was a decided improve-
ment in his acting. Mr. Foord as “ Honeybun” was
splendid. We are very much surprised that the manage-
ment have not brought him out before, as he would have
been an invaluable acquisition to the company. He played
with great spirit, his whole mind seemed identified with the
character, and we are only sorry we shall not have the
pleasure of witnessing his performance again. Mr. Salmon
sung a comic song in character, and spoke an Epilogue,
both of which were exceedingly well received.
We are now nearing the shores of Old England, and
shall in a few days be all separated. We are sure you will
all join in a cordial vote of thanks to the amateurs of the
Golden Fleece Theatre for the amusement and pleasure they
have laboured so hard to render us. Trusting you may
find all old friends alive and well, and that whilst sitting
round the fire on winter evenings recounting the trials,
troubles, and misfortunes of the voyage, you will sometimes
think of those who did all in their power to lighten the
long and tedious hours, and make the time pass pleasurably
away.— Vale ! Vale !
John Bull.
Ye monkeys many,
Jack, Jem, and Lenny,
Dick, Fan, or Harry,
In name ye vary.
In dirt and play,
The live-long day.
Go where I may
Ye’re in my way.
Times without number,
When wrapped in slumber.
Or deep in wonder,
O’er science ponder.
Your shout or yell.
My dreams dispel,
“ Papa I’ll tell,
“ He’ll thrash you well.”
“ He say I may,”
They mocking say,
Roar out some lay.
And stamp away.
Now neighbours dear,
To me lend ear,
Of rooms keep clear,
With cliildren near.
“Gorilla.’
A BROKEN-HEARTED LAMENT.
I’ve loved, that love is much to be deplored.
Her very shadow I, poor swain, adored;
And yet she thinks me now an awful bore,
I’ve gained experience and will love no more.
No more I’ll bow my head at woman’s shrine,
Nor ever wish to call a woman mine ;
Mine for a time, then leave me for another,
Ye gods my baffled rage I scarce can smother.
And doubtless she has let out all we said,
Laughing the while ; and my poor heart has bled
To see that all my love has been in vain.
Ah, well-a-day, I’ll never love again ;
For it was ever so that woman’s tongue
Betrayed men’s secrets, and from others wrung
Confessions of their hopes, and fears, and love, and hate,
Repented by the victims when too late.
Correspondence.
And, yet, with all thy faults I love thee still,
I love thee very much against my will;
I never can forget that winning smile,
Which smiled on me, unmindful of the guile
Which in the breast of fair “ Delilah” lay,
Her one great motive “ Samson” to betray;
And which, I think, in every woman’s breast,
At least, in most, is no unwelcome guest.
My Dear Mr. Editor.
In a spirit of love I would ask you a single question,
which, I trust you will answer me candidly in your next
issue of the Golden Fleece Gazette,
47
THE GOLDEN FLEECE GAZETTE.


Do you think it proper for a gentleman when he takes
champagne with a lady to say “ Here’s my love to you.” It
sounds so odd does it not, not that I dislike it—but still—
I remain, Mr. Editor,
Yours very sincerely,
Isabella,
My Dear Sir
A friend of mine in England has for many years past
cultivated his own tobacco, and as I am a lover of the
delicate weed, I am prepared to say that for flavour and
quality it is not to be surpassed by any foreign growth and
manufacture.
I am taking home a sample of tobacco seed, grown from
seed recently imported into India from Virginia; and if any
gentleman on board will take the trouble to cultivate
a little as an experiment, I shall be only too happy, not
only to place sufficient seed at his disposal, but give him,
which I shall now do, a few hints as to the modus operandi.
Procure a box, say a two dozen case, and after boring a few
holes in the bottom, place in it first a thin layer of broken
tiles or bricks, then a small quantity of straw neatly spread.
After which place decayed vegetable manure about two
inches deep, and then fill up with good garden mould mixed
with a little sand. Place the box in the coolest part of the
greenhouse, and sprinkle the seed gently over the earth,
after which let it be raked in.
For the first week let it be moderately watered night and
morning, after which it needs but little water. The plants
should now be seen breaking through the earth, and if
kept in a temperature of about 75° or 80° Farht., they will
at the end of two months from planting, be fit for removing
to their more permanent abode. When the plants are
taken out of the nursery, they should be removed quickly,
and not allow the roots to be exposed to the sun or to
much heat. If there be no available bed, place each plant
in a separate flower-pot, not less than 18 inches deep. Let
the earth in it be of the same character as that from which
you have just removed the plant. After the earth has been
placed in, remove a little from the centre, so as to admit
your hand. Before transplanting, the top root had better
be nipped off within an inch of the primary roots; after
the earth is covered in, gently lift the plant so as to allow
the roots to assume their proper position. Water should
now be given freely for 2 or 3 days, after which sparingly.
Keep the plants free from weeds and from insects, and
when they have grown to a height of about two feet, pluck
off the top, which will cause new shoots to spring out and
will also give strength to the other leaves. When the leaves
are from twelve to fifteen inches in length, they are fit for
plucking, and may be cured in the following manner :
Nip the leaves off as close to the stem as possible, but
take care not to injure the bark of the tree, double the leaf
flown to the point, and strip off the long and coarse fibres.
Wash the leaves with a weak solution of sugar and
saltpetre, tie them up by the stem and hang them in
a warm room, say of 85° temperature, and occasionally
allow th a m a little fresh air. After they have gained a
golden brown colour, they may be again washed and dried,
and used according to fancy. If these directions are
attended to, I am sure tobacco may be cultivated for private
consumption with great success. If the head is not nipped
off, the plant will grow to a height of about seven or eight
feet, and will bear a very pretty lavender flower.
Yours, &c.,
» 1 Pipes.
Answers to Correspondents.
The liberty complained of by Our fair correspondence
Isabella, we consider most atrocious.
The Editors are sorry they cannot oblige Maria with a
carpet-bag to land at Plymouth in, if however, she requires
the above to carry a few articles of necessary clothing, we
will do our best to procure it for her.
Our large types being destroyed, we cannot possibly un-
dertake to supply Paterfamilias with luggage labels.
If Jontcs does not land at Plymouth we advise him to
proceed in the ship to Gravesend, or perhaps it might be a
deal better for him to land in the pilot boat at the Downs.
Notes by tbe Lounger.
Dear Mr. Editor,
So this is to be really the very last Gazette, is it ? I dare
say you are not sorry, especially when you consider that the
cause of the demise of your paper and the end of your literary
labours is the proximity of our well beloved land. Yes,
our journey is dragging its weary length to a close —very
gradually however, for our runs of late have not been so
long as could have been desired; and very gradual indeed
has been our progress ever since we left Bengal for that
matter; but lately we have begun to look upon a hundred
miles as a very decent performance in twenty-four hours on
the part of the old ship. Wagers during the past week
have been laid as to the day of arrival at Gravesend, hour
of arrival at the docks, coming on board of the pilot,
average run of ship, &c., &c., and the head winds we have
lately experienced have already decided many. This species
of speculation recalls to my mind the lines of Byron ;
“ For many till by losing, render’d sager,
Will back their own opinions with a wager.”
By the way, one of us (need I say that it was a smoke
dried bachelor) came rushing down below the other day,
with his mouth and eyes wide open, to tell us that it was
snowing. The snow, however, turned out to be only some
of the feathers of a lately slaughtered, being-plucked fowl ;*
and to those who had hastened up to have a look at what
they had not seen for so long, returned to their various
occupations somewhat disgusted. Por the last two evenings,
or rather I should say on Friday and Saturday evening, the
lovers of harmony have been delighted by some jolly good
songs, jolly well sung. The domestic games of the period
still continue to be played with the most untiring and ex-
emplary zeal; but the question as to who is best at whist is
still, and is likely to remain undecided. The theatricals
were fixed for Thursday, but the rolling of the ship
rendered the performance an impossibility. It has now been
determined that the first favourable day shall be taken ad-
vantage of. The weather is getting very cold, sea-gulls
are hovering around us, sound boots and candles are like
good men, scarce; and we all know holy boots are like
righteous hypocrites, of no use. Peports are flying about
that our stock of provisions is getting low, and that rice and
water stare us in the face. Worse than all, we hear that
we are not to have much more grog ; thus if grog and prog
fail us, whatever shall we do ? Just at a time too when our
appetites are voracious, and we require a glass of something
strong to keep the cold out.
“ Man wants but little here below,
But wants that little strong.”
are I believe the words of the poet, leastways if they are
not, they might have been. Well, Mr. Editor, the best of
friends must part, and so must we ; so good bye old fellow,
a merry Christmas and a happy new year to you.
Yours ever,
Observer.
November 17th, 1862.
* We are glad to see that Jemima’s request has been
acceded to by the butcher. She ought to reward him with
her carte de visite , or at any rate with a lock of her hair. —
Ed. G.F.G.
Prologue.
"WHITTEN FOR AND SPOKEN BY MR. ZAMBESI.
On two occasions we have shewn our pluck
In acting for you, and have had the luck
To please our audience, so again to-night
Our object is that audience to delight.
The play we’ve thought advisable to choose,
Is one we feel quite certain will amuse,
It teems with interest, incident, and chaff,
Thoroughly calculated to produce a laugh.
Laughing’s good exercise without a question,
And exercise, we know, improves digestion.
48
\
GAZETTE.
FLEECE
THE GOLDEN


Thus, when we make you laugh We do you good,
To make you laugh we are just now in the mood,
And firmly trust that all of you will find,
This entertainment suited to your mind.
Duly alive to favours of the past,
Our final efforts at your feet we cast;
As you are strong be merciful and kind,
And to our failings be a little blind,
For now the good ship nears Old England fast.
Of “ Golden Fleece” theatricals you see the last;
We’ll do our best so make your minds quite easy,
And sure, my friends, as I am called Zambesi,
That I for one will do my best to please ye.
Ladies and Gentlemen, —This is the whole of it, and, Ma Word
I think it is a perfect cure.
Epilogue.
Ladies and Gents this play is done,
This third performance o’er ;
The actors from the stage are gone,
Are gone for ever more.
“ In the spirit of love” I ask to night,
Whether you’re pleased, eh ! Am I right ?
“ Or any other man.”
If not, don’t scold, or I surmise,
My fondest hopes you’ll scatter,
But give us a cheer “ or otherwise,”
“ And that’s what’s the matter.”
I see you smile, you’re pleased, I trow,
And really I hope you are;
Oh ! isn’t this delightful, now,
“ My dearest grandmama.”
My thanks I’ve come to offer you,
For all your patronage;
For past and present favours, too,
Since we have graced this stage.
’Tis very hard to say farewell,
It touches up my heart,
Just when we’ve come to know you well,
’Tis very hard to part.
It must be done, so, now, here goes,
I hope I don’t offend,
So I put my finger to my nose,
And make my parting bend (and now I’ve done),
For thirsty cures must want their grog,
His bed, that sleepy cure,
Whoever blames this epilogue,
Can’t be an epicure.
Tuesday Morning,
18th. November, 1862.
Hear Sir,
We had the gratification last night of witnessing the
third and last performance of our talented amateurs, which
will account for my sending you a second letter this week.
The piece chosen was admirable, teeming with broad
humour and farce throughout.
The principal character, Mr. Honeybun, was sustained
with great humour by Mr. Foord, whose soliloquy regard-
ing the squashed baby was inimitable, and it was the theme
of universal regret that this gentleman had not before been
persuaded to exhibit his preternatural power in the “ Low
Comedy” line. Mr. Keyser in his character of “ Mr. Crank,”
surpassed even his previous performances, and his get up
was so good, that we heard several doubts expressed as to
his identity. The part of “ Aunt Jewel,” delivered by our
little Middy, Mr. Mainwaring, was a perfect success—in
fact, in the opinion of many —was the great feature of the
evening. “Mrs. Honeybun,” (Mr. Pierson) went through
her part as we should have expected from her antecedents,
in a manner that is beyond praise.
Mrs. Crank was very good, but we don’t think that she
acted with the same amount of go as on a former occasion.
The Prologue was remarkably well spoken by Mr. Hardistie,
late chief engineer of the “ Pioneer,” in the Zambesi Ex-
hibition, and the emphasis with which he delivered the
words Ma Word, called forth roars of laughter. This
gentleman also, after the conclusion of the piece, favoured
the audience with a few select songs, which coming from so
celebrated a vocalist, brought down thundering applause.
The Epilogue, written by one, revelling in the name of the
“ Cochin China” was ably delivered by our energetic stage
manager, Mr. Salmon.
Another incident worthy of remark in your columns, is
the Eifle Match, which was easily won by Mr. Keyser, there
being a hard tussle for second between Messrs. Green (2nd),
Underwood (3rd), and Foord (4th).
Yours ever,
Observed.
Conundrums, &c., &c.
My first and my second are almost the same,
Except that my second is smaller;
Though alike, yet both have a different name—
A man than this last is oft taller.
My first many people have now got on board,
’Twas caught, I suppose, from a chill;
When old age is on you much pain is endured
With my whole, though it seldom will kill.
Bobstay.
ANOTHER.
My first is a thing I hope to be in
Before many more days are o’er,
On my way to my second away from my whole,
Which I trust I shall never see more.
G. B.
My first, of vegetable growth,
In northern climes abound ;
It and its life-blood, black as jet,
Within this ship are found.
In Southern Gaul or canny Scot
Love of my second reigns,
Though old and weak I’m left to rot
On Ganges’ burning plains.
Within my whole an unctuous mass
Is stored for food at sea,
Though precious little since the Cape
Was seen by you or me.
Beownbread.
Answers to Charades, &c., in our last.
“Jemima,” —Penitent. “Snooks,” —Butt. “ G. B.”—
Leaks (leeks).
AD VE RTISEMENTS.
ME. PHILIP LEVI, Hair Cutter and Perfumer, re-
turns his best thanks for the distinguished patronage
which has been so freely bestowed on him at London
prices.
To be Raffled for,
ON or about the Ist of April, the steam-ship Golden Fleece.
For further particulars apply to the Company.
To be Sold, cheap,
A BAD Character obtained on board. WANTED,
good one to land with.
Wanted,
A RESPECTABLE Hat,, a sound pair of boots, and a
presentable coat to land in. The advertiser is a
family-man and is in dire need of the above. Apply to
“A. Z.,” No. 84 Saloon.
G 2
49
THE GOLDEN FLEECE GAZETTE.


For Calcutta, Indirect.
TO start, positively, the day after her arrival in England,
the steam-ship Golden Fleece. Intending passengers to
apply hy telegraph, as it is expected that there will be a
great run on the ship.
Wanted, Immediately,
ANOTHER set of patient passengers for the steam-ship
Golden Fleece , about to start for Calcutta. Apply to
Mr. H. Walker, Hon. Secretary, London and East Indian
Navigation Company.
Lost,
ALL chance of winning the lottery. Any one who can
assist the advertiser in redeeming his loss will be
handsomely rewarded. Apply to “A. 8.,” care of the
Editor.
Wanted,
AN Onion. The advertiser cannot shed natural tears on
leaving the ship, hut has heard that the juice of the
onion applied to the organs of vision produces the desired
effect. Apply to “X. Y. Z.,” care of the Editor.
Wanted,
A GENEROUS-HEARTED Individual to pay the adver-
tiser’s fare to London. Apply to “ Snuff,” care of
the Editor.
To be Sold,
A BARGAIN, broken-up types. The proprietors of the
H Golden Fleece Steam Printing Press being about to
relinquish business, have a large quantity of the above on
immediate sale.
They are strongly recommended to the E. I. and L.
Company, for when melted down will make admirable deep
sea-leads.
FINIS.


ERRATA.
Page 2, “Disconsolate Young Lady’s Petition,” line 2,
“at” omitted.
Page 11, 2nd column, lines 1 and 2, change “it will”
and “ ’twill.”
Page 29, “ Pight of the Porpoises,” verse 12, line 7, for
“ Atkinson’s ” read “Atkinson.”
Page 37, “A Piece of Sentiment, &c.,” line 16, for
“ alone he ” read “ alone he horned ’
Page 39, line 5, 2nd column, for “in haccy stoppers ”
road “into haccy stoppers.”
Page 41, line 2, column 2, for “ do swell ” read “ so swell.”
Page 41, 4th line from bottom of Ist column, “ doosera ”
instead of “ doosea.”
Page 43, “An 11 p.m. Eeverie,” line 3, omit “now.”
Line 6, verse 4, for “and” read “am.”
Page 48, “Answers to Correspondents,”line 1, for “cor-
respondence” read “ correspondents.”
Page 49, “Answers to Charades,” for “Butt” read
“ But(t)”


W ■
If'
/'• ■ /
y
iSl sf
/ ;;; ~ % *Ti
> V -
1
i
y
/*
•;,y
: #’
p i
N
* '*■ -** *■*'■
' 'r.- :
j
mi 1
f 1
Mr
. .r
M.i
. .•$ *■
at
0
s
-
X
'
X. „ 1
