

THE IMPENDING CRISIS :
AN ADDRESS
TO THE COLONISTS OF NEW SOUTH WALES,
ON THE
PROPOSED LAND ORDERS.
BY ROBERT LOWE, ESQ., M. C.
BARRISTER AT LAW, LATE FELLOW OF MAGDALENE COLLEGE, OXFORD.
' flow Nations sink by darling sv*'' - ,r *s oppressed.
When vengeance listens to the loois request.”
DR. JOHNSON.
SYBOTEY:
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY DANIEL LOVETT WELCH,
AT THE ATLAS OFFICE, GEORGE STREET.
1817.


ADDRESS.
Fellow Colonists. —The present state of the Land question is so mo-
mentous—the interests affected by it are so vast, and the danger which
threatens them so imminent, that I make no apology for addressing you
on the subject. There are many whose interest it is to mystify and mis-
lead you on this matter. Its real aspect has been studiously concealed
from you—its real importance sedulously extenuated. 1 have no such
interest—no such wish. I cannot shew my sincerity better than by
braving the resentment of a powerful class for the sake of the whole com-
munity. I have done my duty by pointing out to you in the following
pages, the real state of your affairs, do you do yours by applying to
them the only remedy of which they are capable.
The position of the Squatter has always varied with the price of
land. Precarious when land is low, more assured when it is high, and
little short of the freehold, when the sale of land is as now, virtually pro-
hibited. Up to the year 1841, when the price of land was raised from
five shillings to twelve shillings per acre, the Squatters looked upon
themselves, and were regarded by the community, as merely temporary
occupants, depasturing the land till it was wanted for sale—as persons
who might soon, and must eventually, be removed, to make way for the
proprietor in fee simple.
The Act of Parliament which passed in 1842, for raising the mini-
mum price of land to £1 per acre, was not intended to have any effect
on the position of the Squatter, it was intended, as Lord Grey tells us,
to prevent jobbing—to concentrate the population—to bring out immi-
grants by raising a large land fund, and by means of such immigrants,
to raise the value of land. Instead of preventing jobbing, it has sacri-
ficed almost the whole territory to one vast job. Instead of concen-
tration, it has given us dispersion—it has destroyed the land fund
which it was intended to raise—stopped the immigration it was in-
tended to promote —and annihilated the value of the land it was
intended to enhance.
But though this act failed entirely in the objects it was intended to
promote, it has produced other results foreseen neither by its advocates
nor its opponents. The Squatters began to look upon it as their charter.
Considering that they held the land till it was required for purchase,
and that purchase had been made by parliament impossible—they be-
gan to look upon their runs as their own. Being sure that they would
not be dispossessed by a purchaser, and fearing no other disturbance,
they foresaw no end to their possession, and began to sprout from ten-
ants at will into freeholders.


Sir George Gipps saw the danger, but instead of meeting it by a
reduction of the minimum price of land, which would at once have ex-
tinguished these aspiring hopes, and restored the Squatters to their ori-
ginal moderation, he sought, by shewing them the precarious nature of
their tenure, by exacting an arbitrary tribute, more objectionable in its
nature than its amount, and by withholding from them all the ma-
chinery of the government to which they contributed, to check this en-
croaching spirit. This injudicious harshness had precisely the contrary
effect. It united in favor of the Squatters all the liberal and constitu-
tional men in the community; and had their enthusiasm been as well
directed as it was honest, the efforts which they made would not only
have defeated the Government, but removed the virtual prohibition
from the sale of land. Unfortunately however, advantage was taken of
this indignation, by designing and interested persons, to divert public at-
tention from the real cause of the evil—the high price of land, which
alone had made the squatting question of importance, and to fix it on
the plausible but delusive palliative afforded by leases and pre-emption.
In the hurry and eagerness of fear and anger, men did not perceive how
entirely this new aspect of the squatting question arose from raising the
price of land—how intimately the two subjects were connected, and
how impossible it was to remedy the one grievance except by remedy-
ing the other.
It is however a mistake to suppose that the Committee of the Legis-
lative Council on Grievances connected with Land, recommended
absolutely a system of leasing. They recommended above all things,
the reduction of the price of land, and subject to that, the giving the
disposal of the land to the Legislative Council, that they might de-
vise such a system of leasing and pre-emption as they might think
proper. Had this recommendation been taken as a whole, the Colony
would be now free from the danger with which it is threatened'.—
The misfortune is that the Home Government has taken only a part,
the part on which the Committee laid least stress, and which, without
the accompanying reduction of the minimum price of land, the Com-
mittee would never have recommended nor the Council have adopted.
It is needless to dwell upon the vacillating and contradictory
schemes of the Home and Local Governments during the years 1845
and 1846, in which they seem to have considered every expedient for
settling the question, except the only effectual one—the reduction of
the price of land. At last the statute 9th and lOth Victoria, chap. 104,
was passed. By this act, parliament being too indolent or too ignorant
to deal with the question, delegated the powers which it has withheld
from the Legislative Council of New South Wales, t<> the Privy Coun-
cil of England. The Privy Council has transmitted a set of proposed
rules to the colony, not for the purpose of obtaining the opinion of the
Colonists, (for what right have they to have an opinion about their own
affairs) but to prepare the Local Government for the exercise of those
powers which the Privy Council, the delegate of Parliament, has dele-
gated to it. These rules are in substance—That the Governor shall


divide the lands of the Colony into three districts, to be called the
“ settled,” “ intermediate,” and “ unsettled.” The settled lands are
to be sold by auction, at £1 per acre upset price, and the unsold parts
are to be leased for not more than one year, and as it should seem,
by auction. In the unsettled lands, every holder of a license
is entitled to demand a lease for fourteen years. His rent is to
be £2 10s. for every thousand sheep, or proportionate number of
cattle, which the run will carry—during the fourteen years nobody
else can buy the run, but the lessee may buy without auction
any portion of the run, not less than 160 acres. At the end of the
lease, the lessee is entitled to a renewal for another fourteen years, un-
less at least one fouth of the run be sold at auction, where the upset
price will consist of £1 an acre and the value of the improvements.
In the intermediate districts, the lease is to be for only eight years,
and the land liable to be sold at the end of every year; in other respects
it resembles the lease in the unsettled districts.
The first observation on this is, that the Governor is called upon to
do that which should be trusted to no man in a free country. He is
not merely to divide the country into districts, but by such division to
decide upon the rights and fortunes of individuals—to make this man
and to mar that. Of course every influence and importunity will be
used to sway his integrity, and if he escape the reality of corruption,
he cannot hope to escape the suspicion. If he makes the settled dis-
tricts small, he will be abused by the Colony—if large, by the Squat-
ters, whom he disinherits of their imaginary freeholds. It is too late
to make such a division now, it should have been made before the Co-
lony was settled. It is not dealing with a map, but with flesh and blood.
How this division is to be carried out, or how the lands contained in
the proposed leases are to be described, in a country not yet surveyed,
and of such vast extent, is a mystery which the event alone will solve.
But let us suppose the division to have been made, and the leases
to have been granted, what will be the effect on the interests of the
Colony? In my opinion the most disastrous possible. As long as the
Squatters remained tenants at will merely, it was always in the power of
the Home Government, at least until their possession had ripened into
title, to re-open the waste lands to purchasers, and once more invite
capital to the colony by reducing the minimum price. But once grant
these leases, and beyond the settled districts, it matters not whether they
reduce the minimum price or no. There will be no'land to be sold.
The lessees of the intermediate and unsettled.land will then really have
got what they pretend now to have—a vested interest in the mainte-
nance of the minimum price—a right to hold their lands until some
one will give at least £l an acre for them. To this the Government
will be .solemnly pledged, and from this therefore, it cannot depart. So
long as the Squatters hold under licenses merely, the Home Govern-
ment can retrace its steps, but once give them vested interests, and the
policy, however pernicious, is irrevocable.
These leases are not, it should seem, assignable i.or divisible—the


privileges conferred by them ar e personal to the occupant, and the orders
recognise no way of terminating his possession, except by forfeiture. In
other words, they will resemble an entailed property —they cannot be
sold, nor mortgaged, nor sub-let. Within the settled districts, or the
small part of them which is or will be sold, landed property will have its
usual incidents. Beyond the settled districts, it-will have none of them.
Be the capabilities of these lands what they may, they are to be a sheep
walk for ever. The growing population of the settled districts will find
no vent there. Up to a certain capriciously marked line civilization is
to go—beyond that all is to be wild and desolate. The increase of the
human race is to be checked to give free scope for that of beasts. Man
is to be penned within narrow limits, that sheep'and cattle may have
leave to roam at large. The Home Government, which raised the
price of land to enforce concentration, is now, in thesequelof its policy
compelling dispersion.
It has been before remarked, that even while permissive occupants
only, the Squatters built upon the high price of land the hope of ob-
taining the freehold without paying for it. If they did these things in
a green tree, what will they do in a dry ? If the high price of land in-
spired them with hopes when they held under licenses, revocable at
any moment, what will the same price of land do when they hold under
leases, irrevocable, and renewable for ever, till they find some one
ready to buy them out by paying £1 an acre for their runs to the Gov-
ernment, together with the value of their improvements to themselves.
The real substantial ownershipof the soil they will unquestionably acquire
the moment the leases are granted to them. Long before the period of
fourteen, or even eight years expires, the Squatters will be all-powerful in
the Legislature—and most of the influential residents within the bound-
aries will have as friends, as relations, or creditors, the strongest motives
to assist them in asserting their claims. The benefit of restoring these
lands to the public, will be regarded with all the coldness of political
apathy. The injury of depriving the Squatter of his run will be felt by
himself, by his connections, and by his class, with all the keenness of
private and personal interest. In this unequal contest, the Home Gov-
ernment is far more likely to side with the Squatter than with the Colo-
nist. It will regard them as the germ of a Loyalist party —as a party,
which like the Cromwellian settlers in Ireland, will hold its lands by the
tenure of union, and see in a sepaiation from-the Mother-country, not
so much the severing of political lies, as the resumption of its unjust
territorial acquisitions. How soon they will deem it politic to throw off
the mask, and declare their runs to be what they even now consider
them —their own, it is impossible to predict. The sooner the better.
The spoliation of the Colony will be complete as soon as the leases are
granted—the only compensation she can then receive will be, in the re-
moval of the embargo which the lease will lay upon her land, till it
be exchanged for a grant. There is another means by which the Squat-
ter may, even under the letter of the proposed orders, without intrigue
or combination, or any other aid than his superior local knowledge,


make sure of his run —by exercising his pre-emptive right in buying up
all the water and water frontage it contains, and thus rendering the
run valueless to any one except himself. What have the rest of the
Colonists done that they should be debarred from this competition ?
The price which he is to pay for these privileges is three-fifths of a
penny for a sheep, or, allowing three acres for a sheep, one-fifth of a penny
per acre. The last “ free grants,” as they are ironically called, reserved an
annual quit rent of twopence an acre. Thus does a Government which
is so niggard of its land that it will not part with the fee simple of the
most barren rock for less than f 1 an acre, while that law still remains in
force, alienate millions of fertile acres at one-tenth of the rent which it
reserved on its free grants. If this is the case with regard to grantees,
what shall be said of those who purchased lands, and by their outlay
brought to the Colony much of the very labor which the Squatters are
now employing. They were led to purchase-by the promise of convict
labor—that labor has been withdrawn ; by the hope of immigration—
that immigration has been checked ; by the reasonable expectation that
the systematic seltlement of the country would go on—that settlement
has been arrested. And now, thus deluded and defrauded, they see the
Government which impoverished them by its avarice, prepare Jo ruin
them by its prodigality. By raising the price to £1 an acre, the Gov-
ernment deterred any one from looking for land in New South Wales
—by giving it away almost for nothing, they will render it a drug and
depreciate its value for generations. The Government first induces its
subjects to purchase by false representations, and then enters into the
market against them and, beats down the value of the commodity
which it has sold, to nothing. Such is the treatment the men have re-
ceived by whose exertions the Colony has been made what it is.
One thing I would suggest to the Squatters themselves, that
though many of them will undoubtedly obtain a freehold under these
orders, many others will be placed by them in a far worse position than
they now occupy. However narrow the construction which these orders
may receive, it can hardly be supposed that a large portion of Port
Phillip, Gipps Land, Maneroo and New England, will not be placed
within the settled districts. Let the occupants of runs within these
limits consider how far it is for their interest, to exchange their present
tenure for yearly leases, whose rent shall be determined by auction,
and whether they are likely to reap much benefit from a measure which,
while it gives a freehold to the Squatter of the interior, exposes those
near the coast to this vexatious and ruinous competition.
The question yet remains, what is the remedy for this impending
ruin ? There is but one remedy, the reduction of the minimum price of
land to a sum not greater than its real value. It was the raising of
this price that has caused all this disorder—it is the lowering of it
which alone can remove it. Reduce this price and the question will
settle itself. The settlement of the country will go on, and the Squat-
ters will be gradually absorbed into the class of freeholders. Retain it,
and as was predicted by Sir George Gipps, this law made for the pre


servation of the waste lands, will end in their confiscation. That con-
fiscation is even now in progress. The system of leases will accelerate
it, but it will be accomplished without them.
Deal liberally with the Squatters. Give them the most ample
compensation—give them the land for nothing till it is wanted for
purchase—comply with all their reasonable, nay, with many of their
unreasonable demands. Their present views of aggrandisement have
been forced on them by the folly of the Horae Government—not origi-
nated by themselves. They are a great and a growing interest, producing
the main export of the Colony—respectable for their numbers, their
intelligence, and their wealth. But we ought never to forget, that if
we give over to them this territory, we are giving away what is not
our own. We are trustees for posletity.
Some people will say, that any effort to prevent these orders from
coming into force, is prematurg, others, that it is too late. Let us
not be turned aside by either of them. In every great crisis, there are
always some who cannot see it V>hen it is really come, and others
who imagine it past before it is arrived. It is not premature to agitate
this question, because the proposed orders in Council have already
arrived among us—not to enable the Colonists to deliberate, but the
Governor to act. It is not too late to agitate this question till the country
has been divided into districts—till leases have been executed, and
vested interests created. Then indeed, but not till then, it will be time
to despair.
Others will say, we cannot obtain a reduction of the minimum
price from the Home Government, and if the Squatters must hold
under a lease or a license, a lease is preferable. But I say we ought
never to surrender our hopes, or remit our exertions, as regards the
reduction of the minimum price, till the Home Government have
placed it out of their power to reduce it, and this they will not have
done till the leases to the Squatters are actually granted. Till then,
we ought to be uuintermitting in our exertions. As long as the Squat-
ters hold under license merely, it is possible to reduce the minimum
price ; and for this reason, if for no other, license is preferable to
lease. Our obvious duty therefore, is by public meetings, by petitions,
by every constitutional means in our power, to press upon the Home
Government the suspension of these orders, and the repeal of Lord
Stanley’s Act, and the Act under which they were made—not as a
measure of abstract policy, but of urgent and immediate necessity—
not because Lord Stanley’s Act has dispersed our population—ruined
our land fund—driven away capital, and checked immigration; but
because this Act, in addition to these minor grievances, is about to
wrench from us for ever, the possession of our own territory, and give
it over to men who have no right to it whatever, and who will neither
develope its resources themselves, nor enable others to do so.
WELCH, PRINTER, ATLAS OFFICE, GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY.
