

Itie Jpiiil-Fiiied Lite.
Rev. John B.A.,
EVANGELIST.




THE SPIRIT-FILLED LIFE.




fcsico^r
THE
SPIRIT-FILLED LIFE.
BY THE
REV. JOHN MacNEIL, 8.A.,
EVANGELIST.
“ Be filled with the Spirit.” —Eph. v. 18.
Melijourne ;
M. L. HUTCHINSON, PUBLISHER, 305 & 307 Little Collins St.




PREFACE.
I have written only forthe “babes.” The “full-grown,”
the “perfect ” who may read will kindly bear this in
mind. A wide and more or less intimate acquain-
tance with the Churches of Australasia has shown
me the need for a simple, homely talk, such as this
little book professes to be. Many, oh! so many of
God’s dear children are living on the wrong side of
Pentecost, living on the same plane as that on which
the disciples were living before they “were filled
with the Holy Ghost;” and thus, by their lives
practically making the sad confession, “We did
not so much as hear whether the Holy Ghost was
given,” or “whether there be any Holy Ghost.”
The object of this little work is to call their attention
to their Birthright, to the fact that the Fulness of
the Spirit is the Birthright of every believer. God
wants us to be living this side Pentecost, not the
other side.
The substance of the following pages has been
occasionally delivered as a series of afternoon Bible
Readings in connection with my Mission Services.
The frequent request, that those who heard them
might have them in a more permanent for


with the hope that the great blessing that has most
graciously been vouchsafed to them when spoken,
might not be withheld from them when being read,
has induced me to commit them to writing.
I gratefully acknowledge help received from many
sources, both in preparing the Bible Readings, and
in preparing them for publication; especially do I
owe a debt of gratitude to my beloved “fellow-
worker in Christ Jesus,” who has now for many
years been “a succourer of many, and of myself
also,” the Rev. H. B. Macartney, M.A., Incumbent
of St. Mary’s, Caulfield. He has most kindly
revised my M.S., penned an introduction, and
encouraged me to publish.
In “much fear and trembling,” because of its
inadequateness, but with earnest and unceasing
prayer to Him Who has been pleased before to-day
to “ choose the weak things of the world to con-
found the things which are mighty”—with the
prayer that He would graciously do so again, I
send this little messenger forth on its mission,
trusting that the reading of it may be as great a
blessing to every reader as the writing of it has been
to the writer.
JOHN MacNEIL.
Melbourne,
July, 1894.


INTRODUCTION.
Christian reader, I pray that before you finish this
little book you may become so eager, so intense in
your longings after God, that you will not be satisfied
until you are really and actually “full” of Him,
“filled” with the Holy Ghost.
When the Lord asked Job, in chap, xxxviii. 34,
“Canstthou lift up thy voice to the clouds, that
abundance of waters may cover thee?” he would
undoubtedly have answered, No. We, on the other
hand, with all humility, but without the slightest
hesitation, can answer, Yes. “ Abundance” is the
Father’s will; “abundant” are the Stores of Life in
Jesus ; “abounding” for ever and ever is the Stream
of the Spirit’s energies.
We have only to reflect a little till the truth flashes,
and then the victory is all but won. We have only
to consider, Who was it that first loved us, and called
us to be His own dear children, when we were
wandering in sin’s desert? Who was it that first
crossed the wild with a cup of living water to slake
our dying thirst ? Who now crosses that desert a
second time on our behalf with great camel-loads of
wine and milk? What did it cost Him to draw
that water from Salvation’s well, or to buy those
luxuries for growth and power? What will one


healing, stimulating draught accomplish in us and
others ? How will He grieve if we decline to “ buy,”
or hesitate to “drink”? What, above all, will be
the consequences to His glory? O let us arise!
Let us “shake ourselves from the dust!” Let us
drink abundantly, Beloved! There is just now an
unutterable need for “something more.” Single
souls are drooping, though divinely planted.
Churches are full of bones, “very many and very
dry.” The world is a jungle, a forest ready for the
fire. Men, women and children form one vast
continent of feeling, of ever-increasing sensibility,
with an ever-deepening, an ever-aching void. Even
the Teachers of High Truth themselves are not
“abundantly satisfied” with the fatness of God’s
House; they do not drink deep enough and often
enough from the “River of God’s pleasures.” Yes,
there is a thirst not yet quenched; and I am persuaded
that we can only quench Immanuel’s thirst when in
Him we quench our own. Then let us make haste
to God; let us hurry to the Stream that is “full of
water.” We cannot know what the “ Infilling of
the Spirit” means until we are infilled. It is a new
experience. God is not thereby better seen than
before by nature’s eye, but He is better understood,
better loved, better leaned on; that is what He
wants, and that is enough.


Perhaps, dear reader, the pathway between you
and blessing is somewhat hidden, or your eyes are
dim, or your heart is only beating with a faint desire.
If so, then carefully read this little book; read it
beside an open Bible; read it in prayer. It may be,
through infinite compassion, that it may prove a
key into the “wealthy place”; it may rend the veil,
scatter the darkaess, lead you to joy unspeakable,
and —to power!
I have known the author long, and love him much.
He is not the famous Evangelist from Edinburgh ;
he is just our own dear, eloquent, original, fervent
fellow-colonist. He is, however, a B.A. in both
senses; he is thoroughly trained in theology; he is a
first-rate preacher; his gospel for sinners is as
“clear as crystal”; and when you have read a little
further, you will say the same of his gospel for saints!
He has penetrated far into the “Secret of the Most
High,” and so can speak from a rich experience of his
own, to which, however, he never refers. He hates
the pronoun “I” with a deadly hate. His heart is
all “stone for himself; flesh for his fellow-man ; fire
for his God.” What he wants is not to be known by
men, but that men may know his Lord, his Deliverer,
his King.
I cannot but express the hope that this little
treatise on the “Spirit-filled Life,” may not only be


widely circulated in Australia, but may be reprinted
in England and America. It is fresh, it is homely,
it is temperate, it is timely, it is scriptural, it is
splendid. It sets forth a Promise to be claimed, a
Gift to be received, a Command to be obeyed; and it
portrays the sequel—more liberty, more peace, more
devotion, more fellowship with the Son of God in
His rejection by man, in His fellowship with the
Father.
I am coming. Jesus, coming,
At Thy feet I humbly bow;
I have tasted Thy salvation,
But I want the Fulness now.
H. B. MACARTNEY, Jr.
St. Mary’s, Caulfield,
Victoria,
July 12th, 1894.


CONTENTS.
Introduction — Rev. H. B. Macartney, M.A. .. .. ix.
The Starting Point .. .. .. .. .. ~ i
Every Believer’s Birthright .. .. .. 3
A Command to be Obeyed .. .. .. .. .. 5
Something Different from the New Birth .. .. 7
Proved from the Case of (i) The Apostles .. 8
(2) The Samaritans .. 8
(3) Saul of Tarsus .. g
(4) The Ephesians 9
Unclaimed Deposits .. .. .. .. .. 12
Everybody’s Need .. .. .. .. .. .. 13
Preventive Against Backsliding .. .. .. 15
How Long between the New Birth and the Filling ? 18
Other New Testament Names for “ Being Filled
with the Spirit”—
(1) Baptized with the Holy Ghost .. .. 20
“ Baptized into One Body,” What it Means 21
(2) Rivers of Living Water, . .. .. .. 23
(3) The Promise of the Father 26
(4) Pouring Forth .. .. .. .. .. 27
(5) The Gift .. .. .. .. .. 27
(6) Receiving .. ~ .. .. .. .. 27
(7) Falling 28
(8) Coming 28
(9) Sealed ~ .. .. .. .1 .. 28


How Obtained ? (i) Cleanse, (2) Consecrate, (3) Claim 30
Wrong Motives .. .. .. .. .. .. 31
I. Cleansing .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 32
A “New Heart” not necessarily a “Clean
Heart ” .. .. .. .. .. .. 34
What is a Clean Heart ? .. .. .. .. 37
Not Sinlessness .. .. ... .. 37
Tx T A TV/f-OT DCC •N’/'-vT' 1-T A TTT r P r . _
Blameless, not Faultless .. .. .. 41
“ I was sitting alone in the twilight” .. 45
Cleansing a Crisis, not a Process .. .. 49
11. Consecration: What is it?—
(1) Sanctification .. .. .. .. .. 53
(2) Surrender .. .. .. .. .. ~ 37
(3) Transference of Ownership 39
(4) Enthroning Christ .. .. .. .. 60
HI. Claiming—
-LAlMilSiCr
Prayer .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. 5^
Laying on of Hands .. .. .. .. .. 64
Claiming and Asking. . .. .. .. .. 53
Through Faith the Blessing Made Ours .. 66
Objections Against This .. .. .. ..
How Does it Come ?
Aorist Tense: “Were Filled,” Refilled,
A Crisis .. .. .. .. .. _ _
Imperfect Tense: “ Were being Filled,”
A Process .. .. ~ .. .. . #
Present Tense : “ Full,” the Normal Condition 76
Deacons “Full of the Holy Ghost” .. .. 78
Illustration of Water Trough .. .. .. 81
Illustration of Service Pipe 82


Its Effects— page..
(i) Courage .. .. .. .. •• •• 86
(2) Fruit of the Spirit .. .. .. .. 87
(3) Reach the Masses .. .. .. .. 9 2 '
(4) Persecution .. .. .. . • • • 95
May One Know that he is Filled ?
(1) From the Testimony of the Word .. .. 99
(2) The Witness of the Spirit .. .. .. 100
(3) Signs Following .. .. .. .. .. 100
May One Say that He is Filled? —
Testifying to Forgiveness .. .. .. 102
Testifying to Full Salvation .. .. .. 103
May One Lose the Blessing ?
By Disobedience .. .. .. .. • ■ 104
By Neglect of the Word .. .. .. .. 105
It will be Found Where it was Lost .. 106
An Act of Appropriating Faith .. .. .. .. 109..


■


THE SPIRIT-FILLED LIFE.
THE STARTING POINT.
Reader, are you a B.A. ? This little book is only
for those who possess that degree from the King’s
College. If you are not “ Born Again,” please put it
aside, for this is our starting point in considering the
fulness of the Spirit as the birthright of every believer.
If you have not been born again you have no right
by birth to this, the chiefest of New Testament
blessings. Your first concern is to become one of
the children of God, and then you may enquire as
to your inheritance. If you are born again, ask
that you may read with the anointed eye and with
an unprejudiced mind, for the amount of prejudice
that exists against this subject is saddening in the
extreme. In nothing that he ever wrote does John
Bunyan’s masterful genius flash forth more clearly
than when, in “The Holy War,” he places that old
churl, Mr. Prejudice, with sixty deaf men under
him, as warder of Eargate. Nothing that even
Immanuel may say can reach Mansoul while


Prejudice and his deaf men keep that gate, “There
is nothing about this in the Standards of our Church.”
“ I have not met with this truth in my favourite
authors.” “It is quite new to me, and I never will
believe it,” &c., &c. These, and such like, are
illustrations one meets with of how well Prejudice
keeps his ward ? In the name of the Lord let us
displace him, and determine to give what of God’s
truth may be set forth in the following pages a fair
field, no favour being asked for. Deep-rooted
prejudice is one of the causes of the appalling
spiritual poverty that abounds—yes, appalling when
we consider the treasures within our reach!


EVERY BELIEVER’S BIRTHRIGHT.
On every hand a lack of something is being felt
and expressed by God’s people. Their Christian
experience is not what they expected it would be.
Instead of expected victory, it is oft-recurring,
dreaded defeat; instead of soul satisfaction, it is soul
hunger; instead of deep abiding heart rest, it is
disquiet and discontent; instead of advancing, it is
losing ground. Is this all Christ meant when He
said, “Come unto Me?” Is this life of constant
disappointment the normal life of the Bible
Christian? To these sad questionings the Divine
Word answers with an emphatic “No,” and the
testimony of an ever-increasing number of God’s
children answers “No,”
For this widely-felt, though sometimes inarticulate
demand, the divine supply is the fulness of the Spirit;
and this fulness is the birthright of every believer,
his birthright by virtue of his new birth. Some-
times we hear it said that to be filled with the
Spirit is the Christian’s privilege; but birthright
is a stronger word. Reader, it is your birthright
to be filled with the Spirit, as Peter was filled, as
Stephen was filled, as the one hundred and twenty
men and women in the upper room were filled


(Acts ii. 4, with i. 14, 15), as the men and women
in Cornelius’ house were filled (Acts x. 44-47).
“And ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost,
for to you is the promise, and to your children, and
to all that are afar off” (Acts ii. 38, 39). What have
you done with your birthright ? Have you claimed
it? Are you. living at this moment in the possession
and enjoyment of it? Or, are you, Esau-like,
“despising your birthright?” (Gen. xxv. 34). Or,
if not despising, are you neglecting it? Esau’s
eyes were ultimately opened to his folly in parting
with his birthright for “one mess of meat,” and
he then desired to inherit the blessing, seeking it
“diligently with tears;” but alas! his awaking
came too late (Heb. xii. 16, 17). May every reader
of these lines have the desire graciously awakened
(if it has not yet been awakened and satisfied), to
inherit their birthright blessing, while place of
repentance is to be found. May the prediction be
fulfilled in our glad experience, “The house of
Jacob shall possess their possessions ” (Obad. 17).


A COMMAND TO BE OBEYED.
But lest some one should think, “It is optional
with me whether I claim my birthright or not; no
doubt it would be a very fitting thing for some
people to be filled with the Spirit, but /need not
trouble about it”—in case any one should be
tempted to speak and act like this, let us learn that
“ Be filled with the Spirit” (Eph. v. 18) is a command,
an inspired, New Testament command to be obeyed,
a duty to be done. Many of God’s people are
acknowledging that they did not know “Be filled”
was a command; but it is, and there is no
excuse for not knowing. You will notice that in
Eph. v. 18 there is a double command, a negative,
“Be not drunk,” and a positive, “Be ye filled.”
The positive command is as binding as the negative,
and was binding on just as many of those Ephesian
Christians as was the negative command. Now what
was true for those believers there in Ephesus in
the long-ago is equally true for all believers on
God’s footstool to-day. Is it a sin for a believer
to-day to disobey the command, “Be not drunk?”
and is it then a virtue to disobey the equally
authoritative command, “Be ye filled?” If it is a
sin for a Christian to be drunk, it is just as surely,


truly, really, a sin not to be filled. We are com-
manded and expected to live a Spirit-filled life, to
be filled, not with wine, the fruit of the vines of
earth, but with the new wine of the kingdom, the
fruit of the “true Vine.”
Reader, if you are asked, Do you obey the com-
mand, “Be not drunk with wine,” what is your
answer? If it is, “Yes,” that is obedience.
Now, if you are asked, Do you obey the command,
“ Be filled with the Spirit,” what is your answer?
If it is, “No,” that is disobedience; you are
guilty of breaking one of God’s plainest command-
ments. You have no more license to break this
command than you have to break any command in
the Decalogue. Before you read further, had you
not better confess your sin, and tell the Master that
you purpose in your heart new obedience ?


SOMETHING DIFFERENT FROM THE
NEW BIRTH.
This being “filled with the Spirit” is a definite
blessing, quite distinct from being “born of the
Spirit.” It is objected by some that every Christian
has the Spirit; quite true, for “if any man have
not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his” (Rom.
viii. 9); and “no man can say Jesus is Lord, but in
the Holy Spirit” (1. Cor. xii. 3); but to “have the
Spirit” and to be “filled with the Spirit” are two
different things. “Egypt always has the Nile,” as
some one has said, “but Egypt waits every year
for its overflow;” having the Nile is one thing, but
having the Nile overflowing is quite another. Now
it is the Nile’s overflow that is Egypt’s salvation,
and to overflow it must first be filled. So it is the
Christian’s overflow that is the world’s salvation,
and in order to the overflow there must first be the
filling.
As far as God is concerned, there is no reason
why this filling should not take place at the hour of
conversion, of the new birth. See the case of
Cornelius and his friends, in Acts x. 44-48. They
believed, were saved, “received the Holy Ghost,”
and were baptized with water the same day. But


it were a fatal blunder to assert that all men on
believing received the Holy Ghost in a similar
manner, or were thus filled with the Spirit.
Most certainly in Bible times it was not so.
i. Take the case of the Apostles themselves. In
Acts ii. 4 we read, “They were all filled with the
Holy Spirit,” all in the upper room, men and
women, including the twelve apostles. Now these men
had the Spirit before. When Christ called them to
follow Him, when they were converted, they received
the Spirit. After His resurrection, but before His
ascension, Christ breathed on them and said,
“Receive ye the Holy Ghost ” (John xx. 22), and of
course they did “receive” the Spirit then ; but it is
never said of them that they were “filled with the
Holy Spirit” till that morning in the upper room,
for the simple reason that it could not be said of
them, for “the Spirit was not yet given” (John vii.
39). Yet these men were Christians before that
morning.
2. Take the case of the Samaritans. In Acts
viii. 5 -I 3> we find that under the preaching of Philip
the Evangelist there was a work of grace in the city
of Samaria, the people believed and were baptized.
These people, then, were Christians, but they were
not “ filled with the Spirit ” till Peter and John came
down and prayed for them, thus perfecting the work
Philip had been doing (Acts viii. 15-17).


3. Take the case of Paul himself. Saul was con-
verted when the omnipotent, omnipresent Christ,
standing as picket guard for that little church at
Damascus, unhorsed him, and took him prisoner on
the Damascus road. “Lord, what wilt Thou have
me to do?” That question sounds like conversion,
surely. For three days he lay in darkness in Damas-
cus, a surrendered, believing man, and therefore a
Christian man; but it was not till Ananias came to
him that he was “filled with the Holy Ghost” (Acts
ix. 17). And who was this Ananias through whom this
man Saul, destined to prove himself the truest,
bravest, grandest servant the Lord Jesus ever had—
through whom even Saul received the greatest of the
New Testament blessings ? He was an obscure
obedient believer, of whom we know nothing else than
that he did this service for Saul. Here is the ministry
of the saints. So it may be to-day, some big Paul
may be blessed through the ministry of some little
Ananias.
4. Take the case of the Ephesians in Acts xix. 1-6.
Here were twelve men who were disciples, they had
been believers for some time when Paul found
them; in other words they were saved, they were
Christians. But Paul’s first question to them was,
“ Have ye received the Holy Ghost since ye
believed ? ” Plainly showing that Paul thought it
possible for them to have been believers and yet


not to have received the Holy Ghost. Indeed, in
this case, what Paul deemed a possibility turned
out to be a fact; they had not yet “received” the
Spirit. Of course, in a certain sense, they had the
Spirit; it was by the Spirit they had believed, and if
they had not the Spirit of Christ, they were none of
His ; but for all that, they had not yet “received ”
the Spirit in the Pentecostal sense of the word, in the
sense in which Paul meant it. They had not yet
come to their Pentecost. In the R.V., Paul’s
question is rendered, “ Did ye receive the Holy
Ghost when ye believed?” Proving (i) that it is
possible to “ receive ” the Holy Ghost at the
moment of believing, and (2) that it is possible to
believe without “ receiving,” as has already been
pointed out from the rendering of the A.V. After
Paul had instructed them more fully in the word and
way of the Lord, we read that “the Holy Ghost came
on them.” From this we gather that these men of
Ephesus obtained a blessing subsequent to their
conversion, spoken of here as the “receiving” of the
Holy Ghost, as the Holy Ghost “coming” on them.
This is in strict accord with what Paul himself says
of this event when writing to the Ephesians in
Eph. i. 13, “ After that ye believed, ye were sealed
with that holy Spirit of promise.” First they
“ believed,” and then, some time after “ believing,”
they were “ sealed,” they “ received,” they were


“filled.” From these four cases—(i) Apostles, (2)
Samaritans, (3) Saul, (4) Ephesians—we conclude
that in New Testament times men actually lived as
Christians, were saved, converted men, and yet knew
nothing of the “filling” with the Spirit—this know-
ledge, this blessing coming to them some time after
their being born again. Yet this is the very thing
some to-day deny! Whom are we to believe ?
These objectors or the Sacred Record? The Divine
Word declares it, and there is then no room or need
for argument. So we affirm that it is equally
possible for believers, for saved, converted men, to
live in our own time, as well as in Bible times,
without the “fulness”; nay more, it is possible for
them to live for years, then die and go home to
heaven, to be there for ever with the Lord, and to
have known nothing on earth of what it was to be
“ filled with the Spirit.” But what a loss they
suffer ! Eternal, irreparable loss ! So we conclude
it is abundantly plain from Scripture, that for the
regenerate soul there is in Christ another blessing
over and above the being born of the Spirit, spoken
of as “ the fulness of the Spirit.” “I am amazed
at a man like you going to these Conventions,” said
a man to his minister once. “ What new thing can
these Convention speakers tell you ? it is all in the
New Testament.” “Yes,” he replied, “that’s the
trouble; and we have left these things in the New


Testament; whereas we want to get them out of the
New Testament, and into our hearts and lives.” In
Jesus Christ, God’s Treasury, our share of Pentecost’s
blessing has been deposited for each of us by our
Father God. Have we claimed and received our
share ? Not likely, if we are not aware that there
is such a blessing for us ; but once we recognize
the fact that it is there, we surely will not rest till
we have made it our own. The Scottish bankers
have published the fact, that they have lying in
their vaults a sum of in unclaimed
deposits. Some of those who owned a share of this
money may have died in the workhouse; some of
them may be living at this moment in direst need,
and they might have their money for the claiming;
but they do not know that it is theirs. What vast
unclaimed deposits are lying in God’s Treasury,
Christ! Some of His people have died spiritually
poor; some are living to-day in spiritual penury, a
hand-to-mouth existence, with such “untrackable
riches” lying at deposit in their name. What have
we done with our deposit? We are responsible for
its use or disuse. Remember! the reckoning day is
coming (Matt. xxv. 19).


EVERYBODY’S NEED.
Some have the idea that this blessing of the
Fulness is only for a favoured few, for such as have
some special work to do for God, but not for
ordinary folk, for “ auld wives and wabsters” in their
homespun. Surely this is one of the devil’s champion
lies ! Alas ! alas ! that it has found such credence !
The infilling is what makes this promise true, “He
that is feeble among them at that day shall be as
David; and the house of David shall be as God ”
(Zech. xii. 8), so that “ one man of you shall chase a
thousand” (Josh, xxiii. 10). This means defeat for
the devil, so no wonder that he strives to keep us back
from the “ fulness! ” We are here on earth that
through us Christ may be glorified ; but there is
only One Person that can glorify Christ, and that is
the Holy Ghost. “He shall glorify me” (John
xvi. 14). To the glorifying of Christ as He ought to
be and might be glorified, the filling with the Spirit
is necessary. Mothers in the home, “with thronging
duties pressed,” need the “fulness” to enable
them to glorify Christ as surely as the apostles
needed it; the washerwoman needs it as well as the
pastor ; the tradesman as well as the evangelist.
To live the Christ-glorifying life in the station in


which God has placed us, we individually need to be
filled with the Spirit. “They were all filled” (Acts
ii. 4), men and women, the one hundred and twenty
in the upper room, the rank and file as well as the
apostles. “Ye shall receive the gift of the Holy
Ghost, for the promise is unto you, and to your
children, and to all that are afar off” (Acts ii. 38, 39).
From Acts viii. 17 we gather that all the converts in
Samaria, without any favour or distinction, “ received
the Holy Ghost.” From Acts x. 47 we gather
that all in the house, of Cornelius “received the
Holy Ghost” while Peter was speaking. From
Acts xix. 6 we gather that “the Holy Ghost came
on” all the disciples to whom Paul was speaking.
They all received because they all needed. Do not
we need? why then should we not all receive?
And if we do not receive we will suffer loss, the
Church will suffer loss, the world will suffer loss,
and, above and beyond all, Christ will suffer loss.


PREVENTIVE AGAINST BACKSLIDING.
It is most instructive to note how exceedingly
anxious the early Christians were, that, as soon
as a man was converted, he should be “filled with
the Holy Ghost.” They knew no reason why
weary wastes of disappointing years should stretch
between Bethel and Peniel, between the Cross and
Pentecost. They knew it was not God’s will that
forty years of wilderness wanderings should lie
between Egypt and the Promised land (Deut. i. 2).
When Peter and John came to the Samaritans, and
found that they were really turned to God, their first
concern was to get them filled with the Holy Ghost
(Acts viii. 15). When Ananias came to the newly-
converted Saul of Tarsus, his first word was, “Jesus
.. . hath sent me, that thou mayest ... be filled with
the Holy Ghost” (Acts ix. 17). When Paul found
certain disciples at Ephesus, his first business with
them was to find out if they had “received the Holy
Ghost” (Acts xix. 2). These early teachers did
not wait for a few months or years till the young
converts had become thoroughly disheartened
because of the disappointments of the way,
thoroughly demoralized by encountering defeats
where they had been led to expect that they would


come off “more than conquerors;” neither did they
wait until the novices had become more established
or more fully instructed in the things of God; but
straightway, at once, they introduced them to fulness
of blessing, taught them the open secret of the
overcoming, ever-victorious life, and they did not
leave them until the secret was their very own.
Has modern practice been in accord with apostolic
practice in this respect? The only possible
answer is in the negative. Have we improved
then on the apostolic method? Scarcely! but our
modern method is very largely responsible for the
large percentage of backsliding that one meets with
in the Church to-day. Many of these backsliders
were soundly converted to God, but unfortunately
for them, no Peter or John, no Ananias or Paul, met
them, in the beginning of their pilgrimage to compel
their attention to the “one thing needful” for the
people of the Pilgrimage; so they started out but
ill provided, and after a longer or shorter time they
became thoroughly dispirited: and then asking, “Is
this all that is in it ? ” they threwtheir profession over-
board ; and one can scarcely wonder at it! Preven-
tion is better than cure. Let our young converts be
fully instructed and fully equipped with the glorious
fulness provided for them by a Gracious Father,
and we will hear less about backsliding. Do you
know why Peter and John, Ananias and Paul,


spake of the fulness of the Spirit ? because they
possessed and enjoyed the blessing themselves, and
they could not but speak of the blessing that
had done so much for them. Do you know why
we have not spoken of it to our converts and young
Christians ? because we did not know of it
ourselves! If we “receive” the Spirit we will
“minister” the Spirit; and if we do not “minister,”
why is it, but because we have not “received.”


HOW LONG BETWEEN?
It is often asked what time must elapse between
the regenerating by the Spirit and the filling with
the Spirit ? for be it remembered the filling is as
real and distinct and definite a blessing as the
regenerating. Many people know the moment of
their new birth, they were conscious of the change;
so also many know when they were “filled with the
Holy Ghost;” it was a blessed bright conscious
experience, and it is as impossible to argue them
out of the one experience as out of the other. On
the other hand, some people do not know the time
when they were “born again;” they simply have
come to know by many infallible signs that the
great change has taken place; so in like manner
some do not know when the fulness came to them,
but they have been gently awaked to the fact that
“Jesus came, He filled my soul;” and such people
may be as truly “filled with the Spirit” as those
who can tell when and where and how the blessing
came to them. Now as to the period intervening
between the two blessings, we know that in the
case of the apostles in Acts ii. 4, three or three and
a half years elapsed between the day when they
heard the “Follow Me,” and the day when they


were “filled”; in the cases of the Samaritans in
Acts viii. 17, and of the Ephesians in Acts xix. 1-7,
some weeks; in the case of Saul in Acts ix. 17,
three days. But as we have already noticed in the
case of Cornelius and his household in Acts x. 44,
they were regenerated and filled the same day.
From this we gather that, as far as God is con-
cerned, there is no needs-be for any intervening
period, but that the believer may be “ filled ” as soon as
he is “born again”: the “Life” almost as soon as
we get it may blossom into “Life abundantly.”
If we did not “receive the Holy Ghost when'" we
believed, and if we have not “received” Him since
we believed, and are not living now the Spirit-filled
life, at whose door then does the blame lie?


OTHER N. T. NAMES FOR “BEING
FILLED WITH THE SPIRIT.”
That we may see how full the New Testament is
of this blessing, and that we may the better
understand what it is and how it is obtained, let us
just glance at some other terms used by the Holy
Ghost when speaking of it.
i. “ Baptized with the Holy Ghost.” “Ye shall be
baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days
hence” (Acts i. 5). See also Acts xi. 16, Matt,
hi. 11, Mark i. 8, Luke iii. 16, John i. 33. Now,
though “baptized” and “filled” are sometimes
convertible terms, it is instructive to note that
they are not always so. The promise in Acts i. 5,
“Ye shall be baptized,” was fulfilled in Acts ii. 4,
“And they were all filled,” where “filled” is used for
“baptized.” In Acts iv. Bwe read, “Peter filled
with the Holy Cihost,” and in v. 31, “They were all
filled with the Holy Ghost; ” where the word
“baptized” could not be used instead of the word
“filled.” The difference is this: the “baptism” is
received but once; it is, so to speak, the initiatory
rite to the life of Pentecostal service, and fulness,
and victory. Life begins at the Cross, but service
begins at Pentecost. If there has been no baptism,
there has been no Pentecost; and if no Pentecost,


no service worth the name. “Tarry until ye be
clothed with power,” said the Master (Luke xxiv.
49); “ Wait for the promise” (Acts i. 4); “Ye shall
be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days
hence” (Acts i. 5); “Ye shall receive power when
the Holy Ghost is come upon you” (Acts i. 8).
No service of any kind did these men attempt till
“the day of Pentecost was fully come” (Acts ii. 1).
“Theirs not to make reply!
Theirs not to reason why! ”
Their business was simply to obey. With the
promised “baptism” they entered upon a new
phase of life, experience, and service, and this
“baptism” need not be repeated; but not so
the “filling.” Peter was “filled” in Acts ii. 4, again
in Acts iv. 8, again in Acts iv. 31. The “filling”
may be, and ought to be, repeated over and over and
over again; the “baptism” need be but once. In
support of this, note how frequently the word
“filled” is used in the Acts and Epistles compared
with the word “baptized.” The baptism which we
are considering here must not be confounded with the
baptism in 1 Cor, xii. 13, the “ Being baptized into
one body.” Paul is speaking there of every believer
having been quickened from the dead by the agency
of the Holy Spirit, and thus made a member of
Christ’s mystical body. This is a Pauline way of


stating the being “born again” of John iii. 7. It
was to those who already had been “ baptized into
one body” that Christ gave the promise, “Ye shall
be baptized with the Holy Ghost” (Acts i. 5). In
view rhen of this word of Christ, “Ye shall be
baptized,” and of the word of John the Baptist,
recorded in John i. 29-33, “Behold the Lamb of
God which taketh away the sin of the world ~ .
the same is He that baptizeth with the Holy Spirit”
(the same promise is also recorded by Matthew,
Mark, and Luke), it surely cannot be unscriptural
for a believer—painfully conscious that as yet this
word has not been fulfilled in his experience, that
for him as yet the day of Pentecost has not fully
come —to pray “Lord Jesus, baptize me with the
Holy Ghost?” Why should this be regarded as
unscriptural, when in view of the word, “Be filled
with the Spirit,” the prayer, “Lord, fill me with the
Spirit,” is considered to be in accord with Scripture?
Surely the one prayer in its proper place is as
scriptural as the other. To know Christ as the sin-
bearer is but half salvation; to know Him also as
the great Baptist is full salvation. How many
there are who know Christ as their sin-bearer who
have no experimental acquaintance with Him as the
baptizer with the Holy Ghost ? One cannot think
that it would be grieving to the Holy One that such
people should cry for the promised baptism; but


then, when it has been received, let us bear in mind
the difference, already pointed out, between
“baptized” and “filled”; that now that “the day of
Pentecost has fully come,” and that he has been
baptized with the Spirit, he must not continue praying
for the baptism, for that cannot be repeated; whereas
he may ask and obtain a fresh filling, a refilling
with the Holy Ghost every day of his life.
2. “Rivers of living ivater “ He that believeth on
me, as the scripture hath said, out of his belly shall
flow rivers of living water. But this spake he of
the Spirit, which they that believed on him were
to receive: for the Spirit was not yet given; because
Jesus was not yet glorified” (John vii. 38, 39). One
may ask, what is it to be “filled with the Spirit?”
The Teacher Himself makes answer: It is to have
“rivers of living water flowing” from one’s soul.
See the universality of the promise, “He that
believeth on me;” wo believer, even the weakest,
obscurest, is outside its magnificent sweep, unless
by his unbelief he puts himself there. This is not
a promise for the Spiritual aristocracy of the Church,
as some, with more heat than sense, maintain. Let
us have done with whittling away the vast Godlike
promises of the Divine Word, till they come within
the cramped limits of our poverty-stricken experi-
ence, and let us set to work in earnest to bring our
experience abreast of God’s promises. This promise


is for you. Has it then been verified in your life
and experience? If not, why not? Is there not
a cause? But note more closely its hugeness,
its Godlike vastness; “rivers!” not a tricklet, or a
babbling brook —by its babbling proclaiming its
shallowness—or a stream, or a river, but Rivers!
What divine prodigality! It is the Brisbane, the
Clarence, the Hawkesbury, the Murray, the
Murrumbidgee, the Tamar, and the Derwent all
rolled into one — Rivers! By the widest, wildest stretch
of imagination, could it be said of you that “ Rivers
of living water” are flowing from you? “flowing,”
mind you, “ flowing.” See the freshness, the freedom,
and the spontaneity of the service; no force-pump
work about the flowing of the rivers! none of the
hard labour of the “soul in prison” (Ps. cxlii. 7).
When the “Rivers” begin to flow the worker may
sell his force-pump ; his prayer has been answered,
“Bring my soul out of prison.”
It is worth noting the gradation in John iii,, iv., vii.
In John iii. 7 we have “Life” in its beginnings—the
new birth. In John iv. 14 we have “Life
abundantly ” —“a well of water springing up.” The
secret of the perennial upspringing is in the word
“drink-e-t-h”; “he that drinketh”—not takes a
drink, but—drinks and drinks and keeps on drinking
—is in the habit of drinking, that man never thirsts,
for how can a man’s soul be dry and thirsty with a


well of water in it ? Many people are living in the
third of John, when Jesus wants them to be in the
fourth ! The difference between the two experiences
is well illustrated in the case of Hagar. In Gen.
xxi. 14 we read that Abraham gave Hagar “a
bottle of water” and sent her away. As she
wandered in the wilderness, “the water was spent in
the bottle” (verse 15). But in verse 19 “God opened
her eyes, and she saw a well of water.” There are
“bottle” Christians, and there are “well” Christians.
’Tis a painful experience wandering in the wilder-
ness with an empty bottle and a dying child. Alas!
that there should be so many acquainted with the
pain, when all the time God wants us to be
independent of any bottle, to be abundantly satisfied
with a well of water within us, fed from the hills of
God. He wants us to be independent of all but
Himself. May He break every “bottle,” and open
every eye to see “the well.” Now let us contrast
the “well” of the fourth chapter with the “rivers”
of the seventh. The “well” is for the supply of all
possible local needs; but since the Christianity of the
Christ is essentially an unselfish thing, Christ
has made ample provision for the supply of surround-
ing needs', “out of him” in whom is the “well” —
“out of him” who is abundantly satisfied with
Christ, “shall flow rivers of living water,” bearing
life and satisfaction and gladness into the abounding


death and destitution and dreariness that exist
on every hand, for “everything shall live
whithersoever the river cometh” (Ezek. xlvii. 9).
Does your Church, your neighbourhood feel the
vivifying, fructifying, refreshing influences of your
presence? Most certainly if John vii. 38 is your
experience; in other words, if you have been “filled
with the Spirit.” But remember we must go
through the fourth of John to get into the seventh !
In John iii. we have the indwelling, in John iv. the
infilling, and in John vii. the overflowing.
3. “The Promise of the Father “ Wait for the
promise of the Father,” Acts i. 4. See also ii. 33,
ii. 39, Gal. iii. 14, Luke xxiv. 49. There are many
promises in the Divine Word given us by the
Father, but there is only one promise spoken of
as “ The promise,” giving it a pre-eminence among
all the other “exceeding great and precious
promises.” What that “promise” was is ascer-
tained by comparing Acts i. 4, “Wait for the
promise,” with Acts i. 5, “Ye shall be baptized,”
and Acts ii. 4, “They were all filled,” To whom
does “the promise” of the Father belong? surely
to all the Father’s children without favour or
distinction. Since then “the promise is unto you,''
the question for “you” to settle is, Have you
“ received ” the promise ? A promise never made use
of is like a cheque never cashed, and is of little use


to the one who gets it. Have you cashed the
cheque? If not, why not? the fault is with the
child and not with the Father.
4. “Pouring forth.' 1 ' 1 “I will pour forth of my
Spirit upon all flesh,'’ Acts ii. 17. See also Acts ii.
18, Joel ii. 28, 29, Isaiah xliv. 3, Acts ii. 33, Acts x.
45. From this expression we may learn still more
clearly the copiousness of the blessing.
5. 11 The Gift." “And ye shall receive the gift of
the Holy Ghost,” Acts ii. 38. See also Acts viii.
20, Acts x. 45, Acts xi. 17. From this expression
may we not learn the freeness of the blessing? In
this connection ponder carefully the “how much
more” of Luke xi. 13.
6. ‘‘ Receiving .” “And they received the Holy
Ghost,” Acts viii. 17. See also, “Ye shall receive
power,” Acts i. 8; “Have ye received the Holy
Ghost since ye believed?” Acts xix. 2; Acts viii. 15,
John xx. 22, Gal. hi. 14. Floods of light will be
thrown upon the whole subject if we grasp clearly the
full force of this expression, “ receive.” “ Receiving ”
is the correlative of “The Gift.” A gift will not
profit one until it is received. It is just here, at the
appropriating , that we have come short. God has
not failed in His “giving,” but we have failed in
our taking, in “receiving,” “Receiving” is a
distinct definite act on our part. Have we
“received?” If not, why not? God is “giving.”


7. “ Falling .” “For as yet he was fallen upon
none of them,” Acts viii. 16. See also Acts x. 44,
Acts xi. 15. From this expression may we not
learn the “ suddenness' l ' l with which the blessing
sometimes comes, and comes consciously too?
compare Acts ii. 2, “ And suddenly there came from
heaven a sound.”
8. “ Coming." “ The Holy Ghost came on them,”
Acts xix, 6. See also Acts i. 8, John xv. 26, John
xvi. 7,8, 13. From this expression may we not
learn the personality of the Holy Ghost? “Christ
Jesus came into the world,” and “the Holy Ghost
came on them,” are two parallel expressions. If
Christ is here a person, why should the Holy Ghost
be a mere influence ?
g. 11 Sealed." “Ye were sealed with that holy
Spirit of promise,” Eph. i. 13. See also 2 Cor. i.
22. This “sealing” in Eph. i. 13, is the “receiving”
of Acts xix. 2; the “coming on them” of Acts xix.
6; for here, in this epistle, Paul is evidently referring
to the incident related in Acts xix. 1-7. In Eph. i.
13, “In whom ye also trusted, after that ye heard
the word of truth, the gospel of your salvation; in
whom also after that ye believed, ye were sealed
with that holy Spirit of promise;” we see the
successive stages through which the Ephesians
passed in their spiritual history. (1) There was a
time when they had not heard the gospel; they were


living in the darkness of heathenism. (2) Then
came the day when they “heard the word.” (3)
Then they “believed.” (4) Succeeding this they
were “sealed,” “after that ye believed ye were
sealed;” a very distinct and definite blessing this for
the Ephesians, as definite as their salvation when
they believed. And yet, in the face of this, some
will affirm that there is no such thing as a Christian
receiving a new distinct blessing after his conver-
sion ! If these Ephesians had this experience, why
may not believers still ?
When a Christian is “sealed” by the Holy Ghost,
“sealed” as the property of his Master, there will
be no need to ask, “Whose image and superscrip-
tion is this” upon the “sealed” one? The King’s,
of course. Any one can see the image. Of what
use is a “seal” if it cannot be seen? Is the King’s
image visibly, permanently stamped upon us ? It is
on every Spirit-filled “sealed” believer.


HOW OBTAINED ?
We come now to the practical side of our subject.
Surely the unprejudiced reader, if he has not already
“received the Holy Ghost,” has at least come to
the conclusion that there is such a blessing
mentioned in the New Testament, and lying in
God’s Treasury, Jesus Christ, for all New Testa-
ment believers, and therefore for him —for me.
Until it dawns on one’s consciousness that there is
such a blessing as “being filled with the Spirit,”
it is not likely that he will trouble about seeking it,
and therefore will never obtain it. In all fairness
these terms which we have just been considering—
“ Filled,” “Baptized,” “Rivers,” &c.—mean some-
thing. There is some blessing represented by the terms,
some substance at the back of the shadows. God
the Holy Ghost knows what that blessing is.
“Have I got that?" Is there anything in my life
and experience to correspond with that? Now
comes the question, “ How am Ito get it ? ” The
Bible answer may be summarily comprehended
in three words— cleanse, consecrate, claim.


WRONG MOTIVES
But before proceeding to consider these words, it
is absolutely necessary that we be on our guard
against desiring this so needful a blessing from
wrong motives. We must seek it for one supreme
reason—for the glory of God. If self is at the root
of our motives at all, God will most surely block our
way to fulness of blessing. If we are thinking
in our heart of hearts that it would be a good thing
for us to get this blessing for our own happiness
or satisfaction, or even that we might be more
useful, or that in any way we might have the pre-
eminence, our eye is not single, our whole body
is not full of light (Matt. vi. 22). There is therefore
need for the refining fire to go through our heart. God
must be i\lpha and Omega in the matter. “For
God’s glory, and for God’s glory alone” must be
our watchword as we proceed with our search
after the fulness of the Spirit.


I. —CLEANSING.
As there are conditions requiring to be complied
with in order to the obtaining of salvation, before
one can be justified, e.g., conviction of sin,
repentance, faith; so there are conditions for full
salvation, for being “ filled with the Holy Ghost.”
Conviction of our need is one, conviction of the
existence of the blessing is another; but these have
been already dealt with. “ Cleansing” is another;
before one can be filled with the Holy Ghost, one’s
heart must be “ cleansed.” “ Giving them the
Holy Ghost, even as he did unto us ; and he made
no distinction between us and them, cleansing their
hearts by faith” (Acts xv. 8,9). God first
cleansed their hearts, and then He gave them the
Holy Ghost. How can we be filled with the Holy
Ghost if we are filled with something else? The
heart must first be emptied and cleansed. The
milkman has called on his morning round, and the
housewife hears his call. There is a jug standing
beside her on the table ; it is her own, for she
purchased it only last week. She picks it up, and
looks into it to see if it is clean ; she finds it is not.
Now she would never think of taking that dirty jug
for the milk ; but she empties it and rinses and


cleajises it, and then, having wiped it dry to her
satisfaction, she takes it out for the morning
allowance. Indeed if she brought it out dirty to
the milkman, he would positively refuse to put his
sweet new milk into it. So a heart may belong to
God, that is, it may be the heart of a Christian man,
and yet not a “clean” heart, but until it is cleansed
God will refuse to put into it the precious deposit
of the “water of life clear as crystal.”


A “NEW HEART” NOT NECESSARILY
A “CLEAN HEART.”
But someone objects, “ I thought that, when one
became a Christian, and was made a partaker of
the Divine nature, he had the clean heart.” Not
necessarily. Many, many a one is born again,
is pardoned and justified, and yet has not a “ clean
heart.” “Forgiveness” is one thing, “Cleansing”
is another, and one may possess the former without
possessing the latter. For instance, take the case
of David in Ps, 51. He was one of God’s people, a
restored backslider, when he wrote that Psalm.
“ The Lord also hath put away thy sin ” (2 Sam. xii.
13), said Nathan to him. But forgiveness, great
and sweet as that gift was, was not enough for
Israel’s now so deeply-taught and penitent King.
“ Create in me a clean heart ” (Ps. li. 10), he cries.
This is something over and above being “born again,”
over and above and beyond and deeper even than
“ forgiveness” (compare Ps. li. 2 and Jer. xxxiii. 8).
See also the New Testament teaching on this point in
1 John i, 7, “The blood of Jesus Christ his Son
cleanseth us from all sin;” and 1 John i. 9, “ He is
faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse
us from all unrighteousness.” Is the “cleansing” of


verse 7 the same as the “cleansing ”of verse 9 ? Most
certainly not. The “cleansing” of verse 7 has to do
with the guilt of sin, with sin after it has been
committed; this is the only sense in which the
Blood of Jesus “ cleanses,” it washes white as snow
from the guilt and stain of actual transgression ;
that “ cleansing” is retrospective. Now, this “ Cleans-
ing ’’ofverse 7is the “forgiving” ofverse g; both these
words bear on a sinner’s Justification. But the
“cleansing from all unrighteousness ” of verse 9 is
something different from, something over and above
the “forgiving” of verse g, or the “cleansing” ofverse 7 ;
else, if they mean one and the same thing, would
not the author be guilty of tautology ? The
“ cleansing” of verse 9 is prospective, and refers to holi-
ness of life, to our being saved from sin, from sinning.
And you will notice that it is not the Blood of
Jesus that does this, but Jesus Himself by the
exercise of His own Almighty power. There is a
great deal of confusion on this point in many minds,
a confusion fostered, if not begotten, by some of
our hymns. Powers are sometimes attributed to
the Blood of Jesus, to the Death of Christ,
belong to Jesus Himself, to the living Christ. We
are saved from sin’s condemnation by the Blood,
cleansed from the guilt of all sin, forgiven on the
ground of the Blood; and in this connection we
cannot possibly make too much of the Blood, too


much of the Death of the Son of God—but we are
saved from sin’s power by Jesus Himself. “ Himself
(lit.) shall save his people from their sins ” (Matt. i.
21). “We shall be saved by his life ” (Rom. v. 10).
11 He is faithful and just to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness.” The Blood “ cleanses ” in the
sense of washing the sin away after it has actually
been committed; He “ cleanses ” in the sense ot
preventing, restraining from sin. He keeps us back
from sinning. He “makes us more than conquerors”
over sin; and in this so blessed sense “ Prevention
is better than cure.” But there are whole battalions
of God’s saved, forgiven, and “ cleansed ” people
(“ cleansed ” in the sense of verse 7), who are not
“ cleansed ” in this sense (“ cleansed ” in the sense of
verse g), who are not yet saved from the power of some
besetting (that is, upsetting) sin or other. Have we
not known some Christian men who, as has been
well said, are like well supplied cruet stands ? take
them which side you like, you will get something
either hot or sour, peppery or vinegarish from them !
And yet one can scarcely doubt their conversion to
God ! What are we to say of these cross-grained
or fretful, or worldly-minded, or covetous,or pleasure-
loving professors of religion ? One would fear to
judge some of them and say they were utter strangers
to God’s regenerating grace; no; but one will say
that what they sorely need is the “ clean ” heart.


WHAT IS A CLEAN HEART?
The question then arises, What is it to have a
“ clean heart ? ” what is it to be “ cleansed from all
unrighteousness?” It is to be “saved from our
sins,” according to Matt. i. 21. It is to translate
1 John iii. 9 into practice, “ Whosever is begotten of
God doeth no sin . . . and he cannot sin, be-
cause he is begotten of God.” It is to have a
“ conscience void of offence ” (Acts xxiv. 16). It is
to “ know nothing against myself” (1 Cor. iv. 4). It
is—in the words of another—to be “saved from all
known conscious sin.” But, it is objected, “ that
is perfection!” (It is amazing how frightened some
people are of being perfect ! It were well if they
were equally afraid of being imperfect; for it is
imperfection that grieves God. This dread of per-
fection has been called by someone, “ a scare-
crow set up by the devil to frighten away God’s
people from the very finest of the wheat. ’) “That
is perfection!” Yes and no. It A the perfection
which is not only allowed, but commanded in the
Word of God. But it is not absolute perfection ;
it is not sinlessness. Let us look carefully at
the expression, “From all known conscious sin;”
“From all;” yes, all, not some or nearly all,


but from “all known sin”—known, that is, to us,
though not from all known to God; from “all known,
conscious sin,” so that one might be able to say,
in the language of the lowliest of the apostles,
“ Herein do I also exercise myself to have a
conscience void of offence toward God and men
alway” (Acts xxiv. 16); and “I know nothing
against myself” (i Cor. iv. 4); or, in the language of
the disciple whom Jesus loved, “We keep his com-
mandments, and do those things that are pleasing
in his sight ”(1 John hi. 22). To have a clean heart,
then, is to be “ saved from our sins,” saved from
sinning, saved by JESUS; note it well! not saved
by our own efforts, by our watching and praying,
and wrestling and fighting and struggling, but by
Jesus. So it is not a question of what we
can do, but of what He can do. “Is anything too
hard for the Lord?” (Gen. xviii. 14). Can
He not “guard from stumbling?” (Jude 24).
Can He not save from sin, from sinning ?
Is not this what is meant when it is said,
“He is able to save to the uttermost?” (Heb.
vii. 25,) “ able to save,” as Matthew Poole puts
it, “to perfection, to the full, to all ends, from sin,
in its guilt, its stain, its power.” Yes, He is just
as complete, as perfect a Saviour from the power of
sin, as He is from its guilt and stain. He is
equally powerful in each department of His saving


work. But after all is said and done, and one is
being saved from all known conscious sin, saved
from sinning, that is not to say there is no sin
remaining. We are face to face with the inspired
statement, “ If we say we have no sin, we deceive
ourselves” (i John i. 8). How much sin may there
be in us of which we are entirely unconscious, but
which is naked and open to those “ Eyes like unto a
flame of fire” (Rev. ii. 18).
“ I know nothing against myself,” cries Paul in i
Cor. iv. 4, “ yet am I not hereby justified; but he that
judgeth(examineth) me is the Lord.” God may, and
does, know much against me when I know nothing
against myself; and it is just here that our constant
need of the cleansing Blood comes in. If the Bible
doctrine of the clean heart meant the eradication of
sin, a state of sinlessness, that is, absolute perfection,
what need would we then have of the cleansing Blood
at all ? Though Jesus Christ may have “cleansed
us from all unrighteousness,” so that we “ have a
conscience void of offence,” so that we “ know
nothing against ourselves,” yet we need the Blood to
cleanse from the sins which our eyes fail to detect,
and of which our conscience takes no cognizance. It
is failure to see this that has led many astray
at this point. Having been cleansed and
having “no more conscience of sins” (Heb. x. 2),
they imagine they have no more sin. How super-


ficial is some people’s idea of sin ! How little concep-
tion of the Pauline doctrine of sin! He speaks
of sin as “exceeding sinful.” How subtle it is!
how far reaching! and in their daring ignorance
they have actually taken the penknife, like Judah’s
foolish king, and cut a whole petition out of the
prayer which the Lord taught His disciples. He
taught them to pray, “Forgive us our debts as
we forgive our debtors but these modern lights in
their darkness are correcting their Teacher, and
have cut out that petition, and thrown it away.
“No need have we to confess our sin, for we have
none to confess, and therefore we have no debts to
be forgiven.” Poor mistaken people! never more
need of confession and forgiveness than when they
are speaking thus! The holiest of men are the men
who lie the lowest before the Holy One, confessing
that which they know only too well (because the truth
is in them), that they “have sin,” offering the sacri-
fices with which God is ever well pleased, “a broken
spirit, a broken and a contrite heart” (Ps. li. 17).
The nearer we get to Him “ Whose head and Whose
hair are white as wool, white as snow” (Rev. 1. 14),
to the Ancient of days “Whose garment is white as
snow” (Dan. vii. g), the more conscious are we of
the dulness of our whiteness, of the vast difference
between our whitest and His whiteness; and this
consciousness humbles one. “What is it to have


sin ? What is sin?” asked a great leader once, and
he answered his own question thus; “It is to come
short of the glory of God; and in this sense we sin
every moment of our lives in thought, word and
deed.” Is there 'a man on earth who can stand
before the infinitely Holy One and say, “I do not
come short of Thy glory?” Should we speak thus,
“we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us.”
We may be helped here by observing the difference
between the two New Testament words “ blameless”
and “ faultless.” “ I pray God your whole spirit and
soul and body be preserved blameless (without
blame, unblameworthy), unto the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ” (1 Thess. v. 23). “To present
you faultless (flawless, blemishless) before the
presence of his glory” (Jude 24). Now a person
or work may be “blameless” and yet not be “ fault-
less.” This is not verbal hair-splitting —by no means.
Suffer a personal illustration. I have lying on the
table beside me a letter, which will illustrate the
point at issue. I received it when I was away in
New Zealand on a mission tour, in 1891. It was
from my eldest daughter, then a child of five years
of age. It reads: “Dear father, I wrote all this
myself. I send you a kiss from Elsie.” The fact
of the matter is, that it is not writing at all, but an
attempt at printing in large capitals, and not one of
the letters is properly formed; there is not as much


as one straight stroke on the page. Why is it that I
prize this letter and keep it laid up among my trea-
sures ? Fathers who are as much away from home as
I am will understand when I say that it was my
child’s first attempt at letter-writing. Now, this letter
which I prize so dearly is certainly not a “faultless”
production ; it is as full of faults as it is full of letters,
but most assuredly it is “blameless.” I did not
blame my child for her crooked strokes, and answer
with a scold, for I judged her work by its motive. I
knew it was the best she could do, and that she had
put all the love of her little heart into it. She
wanted to do something to please me, and she
succeeded; and I took very good care to let
her know that she succeeded. By the grace
of the indwelling Christ (for you will perceive
that it is His work, “Faithful is he that
calleth you, who also will do it”—i Thess. v. 24),
this is what our daily life, our daily life-work
may be, viz., “ blameless” ; and He can tell us that
it is so, even as I told my child; we may have this
testimony, that we are “pleasing God,” as Enoch
had (Heb. xi. 5). Oh, the joy! Oh, the inspiration
of this God-given testimony! But what a sad
mistake for any who may by grace have been made
“blameless,” to think that they are “faultless,” a
condition which is to be found only “before the
throne.” For it is to be noted that the Greek word


translated “without blemish,” “without fault,”
( amomos ) is never used of God’s people on earth.
It is used once of the Lamb “without blemish
and without spot” (i Pet. i. 19). Elsewhere of the
saints. In Rev. xiv. 5, “without fault before the
throne of God.”
In Jude 24, “Before the presence of his glory
without blemish.”
In Eph. v. 27 “That it should be holy and without
blemish,” when in the sweet by-and-by He
will “present the Church to Himself.”
In Eph. i, 4, “Even as he chose us in him before
the foundation of the world, that we should be
holy and without blemish before him in love;”
chosen in the past eternity that we should be
“holy and without blemish” in the coming
.eternity, not here, but there; not now, but then;
for the word translated “before” is the same
Greek word ( katenopion ), translated in Jude 24
“before the presence of.”
In Col. i. 22, “To present you holy and without blemish,,
and unreprovable before Him.” Here he is speak-
ing again of our future standing, for the word
translated “before” is the same as in Eph. i. 4.
“Without blemish” then is sinlessness, having
no sin. “And if we say (here on earth) we
have no sin (are sinless—blemishless—faultless—
flawless), we deceive ourselves (but no one


else!), and the truth is not in us” (i John i. 8).
He that has the truth in him knows only too
well that he has sin in him, though “cleansed
from all sin ” by the blood, and though “cleansed
from all unrighteousness” by the might of the
uttermost Saviour. It is most instructive and
humbling to notice how the Spirit of truth has
placed that “If we say we have (present tense)
no sin, we deceive ourselves,” in between His
two statements about the “cleansing from all
sin” and the “cleansing from all unrighteous-
ness.”
But though we will never be able on earth to say
with the truth in us that “we have no sin,” —that we
are without blemish, yet the whole Bible teaches us
that we may, in this life, be saved “from our sins.”
(Note the difference between “sin” and “sins.”)
We may be saved from sinning. “These things
write we unto you, that ye sin not” (i John ii. i);
and this is the condition described as “ blameless,”
“unreprovable,” “without reproach.” See i Cor.
i. 8; Tit. i. 6, 7 ; 1 Tim. iii. 10; where the Greek
word anenkleetos (unreprovable) is used ; also
1 Tim. iii. 2 ; 1 Tim. v. 7 ; where the Greek word
is anepileeptos (without reproach) ; also Matt. xii. 5,
where anaitios (guiltless) is used ; also 2 Pet. iii. 14,
where amomeetos (blameless) is employed; also Luke
i. 6; Phil. iii. 6, and ii. 15; 1 Thes. iii. 13, ii. 10,


and v, 23, where amemptos (without blame) is the
word used. These words describe a state or con-
dition of heart and life which is not only attainable
here, but imperative; and the passages we have
just been reading prove that it has been attained.
This is what is meant by a clean heart, to be
“blameless,” not “faultless.”
1 was sitting alone in the twilight,
With spirit troubled and vexed,
With thoughts that were morbid and gloomy,
And faith that was sadly perplexed.
Some homely work I was doing
For the child of my love and care;
Some stitches half wearily setting
In the endless need of repair.
But my thoughts were about the building,
The work some day to be tried,
And that only the gold and the silver,
And the precious stones should abide.
And remembering my own poor efforts,
The wretched work I had done,
And even when trying most truly,
The meagre success I had won:
“It is nothing but wood, hay, and stubble,” -
I said; “it will all be burned;
This useless use of the talents
One day to be returned:
And I have so longed to serve Him,
And sometimes I know I have tried;
But I’m sure when He sees such building,.
He will never let it abide.”


Just then as I turned the garment,
That no rent should be left behind,
Mine eye caught an odd little bungle
Of mending and patchwork combined.
My heart grew suddenly tender,
And something blinded mine eyes
With one of those sweet inspirations,
That sometimes make us so wise.
Dear child! she wanted to help me,
I knew ’twas the best she could do
But oh! what a botch she had made of it,
The grey mismatching the blue!
And yet, can you understand it ?
With a tender smile and a tear,
And a half compassionate yearning,
I felt her grow more dear.
Then a sweet voice broke the silence,
And the dear Lord said to me,
Art thou tenderer for thy little child
Than I am tender for thee? ”
Then straightway I knew His meaning,
So full of compassion and love;
And my faith came back to its refuge,
Like the glad returning dove.
So, I thought, when the Master Builder
Comes down this temple to view,
To see what rents must be mended,
And what must be builded anew;
Perhaps as He looks o’er the building
He will bring my work to the light;
And seeing the marring and bungling,
And how far it is all from right;


He will feel as I felt for my darling,
And will say as I said for her,
“ Dear child! she wanted to help Me,
And love for Me was the spur;
And for the great love that is in it
The work shall seem perfect as Mine; ”
And, because it was willing service,
Will crown it with plaudit Divine.
And there, in the deepening twilight,
I seemed to be clasping a Hand,
And to feel a great love constraining,
Far stronger than any command.
Then I knew by the thrill of sweetness,
’Twas the Hand of the Blessed One
Which should tenderly guide and hold me,
Till all the labour is done.
So my thoughts are never more gloomy,
My faith is no longer dim,
But my heart is strong and restful,
And mine eyes are unto Him.
A clean heart then does not mean the eradica-
tion of sin, sinlessness; but it does mean
salvation from sinning, victory, over sin; we
need never know defeat. A Christian mother
had just kissed good night to her little daughter,
and was busy in the dining-room arranging the
table for dinner, when she heard little feet on the
stair. Wondering what was the matter, she slipped
into the window recess and hid herself behind the
curtains, and waited. Presently the little one came


into the room, and going straight up to some
peaches that were on the table, she took one of them
away with her ! Oh, the agony in that mother
heart! She did not speak to her child, but standing
where she was, she spoke to God her Father, and
asked Him , oh, so fervently, to speak to her child.
God heard that cry, and in a little while the sound
of the pattering feet was heard on the stair again.
The child came into the room, not knowing her
mother was there, and put the peach in the place
from which she had taken it. As she turned away
with a radiant face, rubbing her hands with delight,
her mother heard her say, “Sold again, Satan!
Sold again, Satan!” That’s victory! Yes, and
the cleansing means more than that. “We are more
than conquerors,” for when Jesus cleanses the heart,
He cleanses the very springs of action and being, so
that our very desires are purified; the desire to sin,
the “want to,” is taken clean away. This is coming
off “ more than conqueror through Him that loved
us” (Rom. viii. 37). Glory to His name !


CLEANSING: A CRISIS.
But how am I to get this clean heart? Peter
answers, “Cleansing their hearts by faith ” (Acts
xv. g). Cleansing is God’s work, and the condition
on which God will do His work is “faith ” on our
part. There is only one way of getting anything from
God, and that is by faith. One obtained forgiveness
and the new birth by faith, and one obtains cleansing
of the heart by faith too. You may, you will, get
“ cleansing ” the moment you definitely trust Christ
for it. “We aye get what we gang in for” was one
of Duncan Mathieson’S favourite expressions; and
along the line of God’s revealed will how true it is!
If you will only venture now on Christ for
“cleansing from all unrighteousness,” He will do it
for you now. “Wilt thou not be made clean?
when shall it once be?” (Jer. xiii. 27). Why not
now f for “cleansing” is a crisis and not a process;
but, as Principal Moule, of Cambridge, has very
tersely put it, “Cleansing is a crisis with a view to
a process.” It is just here that multitudes of God’s
people miss the track. “Sanctification is the work
of God’s free grace.”* Of course it is; it is a
“ growth,” a gradual process ; but “ cleansing ” is
* Shorter Catechism, No. 35.


not “sanctification.” The latter, in the sense in
which it is being used here, is a theological term
embracing all the Spirit’s work in the believer
between the cross and the crown ; but “cleansing”
is an act. While sanctification is a “growth,”
“ cleansing” is one of the conditions of growth, and
the very reason why some who hold most tenaciously
by the gradual theory of sanctification are “grow-
ing in grace ” so very slowly, is that they have not
attended to one of the most essential conditions of
growth, viz., this “cleansing.” “But,” someone
objects, “this is not in the Standards of our Church.”
That may be; but it is in the Bible. To quote the
words of the saintly Dr. Andrew Bonar in another
connection, “ I believe all that is in our Standards,
for I find all that is in our Standards in the Bible;
but I believe more than is in our Standards, for I
find some things in my Bible that are not in the
Standards ; ” for the simple and very obvious reason
that you cannot get a quart into a pint measure.
While every honest churchman believes that all
that is in the Standards of the Church to which he
belongs is in the Bible, no one in his sane senses
believes that everything in the Bible is to be found
in the Standards. The doctrine of a “ clean heart ”
is one of these things.
In support of the statement that “cleansing” is
a crisis, an act, something done in a moment, just as


conversion is, and not a “ process ” drawn out
indefinitely before one can reach a state of
“ cleansing,” let us ponder well David’s prayer,
in Psalm li. 10, “Create in (margin, for) me a clean
heart.” Is creation an “ act ”or a “ work ” ? Is it a
“ crisis ”or a “ process ” ? All the Creator had to
do was to speak the word and David’s prayer was
granted; he then could turn his prayer into thanks-
giving ;“I thank Thee for having created in'me a
clean heart; ” but he could not thank God for what
he had not received. Giving thanks for the clean
heart would prove that it was in his possession.
Note also, that heart “cleansing” is God’s work
alone. We are exhorted to “ Cleanse ourselves from
all filthiness of the flesh and spirit” (2 Cor. vii. 1),
which simply means “ separation ” from all the
palpable manifest evils Paul had just been enume-
rating, such as “ yoking with unbelievers,” “ un-
righteousness,” “ darkness,” “ Belial,” “ infidel,”
“idols,” “ unclean things ” (vide 2 Cor. vi. 14-17).
In reference to all such things God says “ cleanse
yourselves.” The Aorist tense is used in the original,
denoting a definite, decisive act; “ separate from
these things at once and be done with them.”
And where are we to get the enabling power ? In
effect, God says, “ Draw a Cheque on ME ; draw on
My resources for all you need,” for all God’s com-
mandings are God’s enablings. But when it comes


to be a question of cleansing the “heart,” the inner
being, the springs of action, that part of the man
where the affections and the will are seated, God
undertakes that Himself; He says “ Bring that to
Me.” If this work were left to us it would indeed
be a “process” slow and tedious, and progress might
be made, as it so often is, alas ! backward. But
now the question is,—not what can the believer do
by his efforts to overcome indwelling sin, but what
can the Almighty God do ? It is not a question of
our power, but of His.
“ ’Twas most impossible of all,
That here sin’s reign in me should cease
Yet shall it be ! I know it shall;
Jesus look to Thy faithfulness;
If nothing is too hard for Thee,
All things are possible to me. ’ ’
He is able and willing to “cleanse.” Are we
willing to be cleansed ?
Another mistake to be carefully guarded against
is this, making “cleansing” to be the end instead
of a means to the end. “ Cleansing ”is not
the blessing that we are seeking; it is only a
means. The end is the “ Filling of the Holy Ghost.”
“ Cleansing” is only a negative blessing, the separa-
ting from sin ; but we can only be satisfied with a
positive blessing. When the housewife cleans the
house, does she then go out to live in the yard ? Not


so. She cleans the house that it may be the more
fit for her to inhabit. God cleanses, “ empties,
sweeps, and garnishes ” (Matt. xii. 44), that He may
come in to dwell; and if He, the Holy One, does
come in and take up His abode, He will keep His
dwelling place “ clean.” This “ cleansing” of
which we have been speaking is one of the steps
into the Blessed Life; but there is not much likelihood
of anyone living the Life unless they first take the
necessary steps into the Life. It is a Life of Purity,
and it is lived, as it is entered upon, by faith in the
Son of God; hence the name by which the Spirit-
filled Life is sometimes called, the Life of Faith.


lI.—CONSECRATION: WHAT IS IT?
The second step that must needs be taken by those of
us who have been living without the Fulness, before
it can be obtained is, Consecration, a word that is
very common and popular; much more common and
popular, it is feared, than the thing itself. In order
to be filled with the Holy Ghost one must first be
“cleansed,” and then one must be “consecrated.”
Consecration follows cleansing, and not vice versa.
Intelligent apprehension of what consecration is, and
of what it involves, is necessary to an intelligent
consecration of oneself.


SANCTIFICATION.
Consecration is another word for sanctification.
Many people have a confused idea as to what
sanctification really is. It must be borne in mind
that we are not considering the theological term,
sanctification, but the use of the New Testament
word “sanctify.” No one would confound “conse-
cration” with “cleansing,” and yet many confound
“sanctification” with “cleansing.” To “sanctify”
is to purify, to cleanse, to make holy, they tell us.
But the idea of purification, of cleansing, of separa-
ting from sin, is not in the N.T. word “sanctify”
at all, “The very God of peace sanctify you
wholly” (i Thess. v. 23). That does not mean
“purify” you, separate you from sin, as a glance at
two other passages, in which the same word occurs,
will show. “ For their sakes I sanctify (same word)
myself” (John xvii. 19). “Sanctify (same word)
Christ in your heart as Lord” (R.V. 1 Pet. iii. 15),
where it cannot mean purify, separate from sin. In
these passages its true meaning is very apparent —
to “set apart for a holy use,” to “separate to God,”
to “consecrate.” To “cleanse” is to separate from
sin, but to “sanctify” is to separate to God, to set
apart for God that which has already been separated


from sin. We cannot set apart to a holy use
(consecrate) that which is not cleansed. Hence we
see why it is that “cleansing” must precede sancti-
fication or consecration, “that he might sanctify it,
having cleansed it” (Eph. v. 26, R.V.). “Sanctifi-
cation” is not identical with “cleansing,” but it is
its complement. “We have been sanctified through
the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all”
(Heb. x. 10). “Wherefore Jesus also, that he
might sanctify the people through his own blood,
suffered without the gate” (Heb. xiii, 12), From
these passages we gather that it is by the Blood of
Jesus we are sanctified, set apart to God. This is
another function of the precious Blood, in addition to
the one we have already been considering, viz.,
cleansing from the guilt of sin.


SURRENDER.
“In conversion,” says Dr. Chalmers, “God gives to
me, but in consecration I give to God,” Everyope
that knows conversion should have experimental
acquaintance with consecration.
“ In full and glad surrender
I give myself to Thee.”
Consecration, then, involves surrender—total,
absolute, unconditional, irreversible. This is Paul’s
teaching in Romans. “ I beseech you therefore,
brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present
your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto
God, which is your reasonable service” (Rom. xii. i).
These people had already given their souls to God, and
now the apostle insists on their giving their “bodies”
too. “Yield (R.V., Present) yourselves unto God
as those that are alive from the dead” (Rom. vi. 13).
Life first, then sacrifice. Have we life in Christ?
Then it is imperative that we “yield,” “present”
ourselves unto God. It is not a matter of individual
choice or taste or convenience; but everyone that
has been quickened from the death in trespasses
and sins is commanded, yes, commanded, to “present
himself to God.” Have you obeyed this command ?
If not, why not? God excuses no one. Had it


not better be attended to now? Yes; before you
read another line !
Now let us note that the verb translated “yield”
(Rom. vi. 13), and “present” (Rom. xii. 1), is not
in the Present tense in the original, as if Paul said
“be yielding,” “keep presenting,” but it is in the
Aorist tense, the general force of which is a definite
act, something done and finished with. So that
when the command, “ Present yourself to God,” is
complied with as far as one’s light goes, the person
is entitled to regard the transaction as a completed
act, and to say, “Yes, I have presented myself to
God.” Then Faith presses on the heels of that
statement and says, “ God has accepted what I have
thus presented .” It is absolutely necessary that
Faith be in lively exercise on this point, for what
will be the practical outcome of all my presenting if I
do not believe that God takes what I give? “Him
that cometh unto Me I will in nowise cast out ” is
just as appropriate to the saint seeking full salva-
tion as to the sinner seeking pardon. It is failure
here, failure to apprehend by faith the fact that God
receives what I present, that has blocked progress
for so many of God’s people who are truly desirous
of living consecrated lives. From this it will be
seen that consecration is a crisis in the life of the
believer, just as cleansing is, and not a process; but
it, too, “is a crisis in order to a process.”


TRANSFERENCE OF OWNERSHIP.
Consecration implies and involves transference of
ownership. Many a Christian is living to-day as if
he were his own ; but the consecrated heart endorses
the statement of the Divine Word: “Ye are not
your own, for ye are bought with a price ; therefore
glorify God in your body and in your spirit, which
are God’s” (i Cor. vi. 19, 20). The consecrated
man looks upon himself as the absolute property of
the Lord who bought him, and his whole life is
lived in the light of this fact.


ENTHRONING CHRIST.
Consecration involves the “glorifying” of Christ,
the “enthroning” Him, the crowning of Jesus
“Lord of all” in our own heart and life.
“Crown Him, crown Him, Lord of all;”
“and,” says Dr. Hudson Taylor, “if you
do not crown Him Lord of all you do not crown
Him Lord at all." This view of consecration, with
its accompanying results, is beautifully illustrated
for us in John vii. 38, 39, “ He that believeth on me,
as the scripture hath said, out of his belly shall
flow rivers of living water. (But this spake he of
the Spirit, which they that believe on him were to
receive: for the Spirit was not yet given; because
Jesus was not yet glorified.)” The flowing forth of
the livers —just the outflow, the overflow of the
infilling Spirit—was dependent on Jesus being
“glorified.” Jesus had not yet reached the throne,
and so the Spirit had not yet been given. The
reason why they had not come to Pentecost was
that as yet there was no Ascension. Ascension
preceded Pentecost. Let us learn it by root of
heart, that every Pentecost since the first has, in
like manner, been preceded by an Ascension. Do
we know Pentecost experimentally for ourselves ?If
not the reason is close at hand. Jesus has not been


“glorified” by us, not enthroned in our hearts.
He may be in the heart, He may even be in the
throne room, but He has not been placed upon
the throne! There has never been a coronation
day in our lives, when “in full and glad surrender”
we placed the crown on the many crowned Head,
crying, “Crown Him, crown Him, Lord of all!”
“And he shewed me a river of water of life, bright
as crystal, proceeding out of the throne of God and
of the Lamb ” (Rev. xxii. i). When Christ reached
the throne at the Father’s right hand, from under-
neath His throne the river began to flow, the Holy
Ghost was given, His Church received her Pente-
cost. “Being by the right hand of God exalted
he hath poured forth this ” (Acts ii. 33).
So when Christ is “exalted,” “enthroned,”
“glorified” in the believer’s heart, from underneath
His throne will the rivers begin to flow according
to promise; but, no ascension, no Pentecost; and
let us remember, as has been already stated, that
though life begins at the Cross, service does not
begin till Pentecost. No Pentecost, no service
worthy of the name! “Tarry,” was the great
Master’s command to His witnesses; “Tarry till ye
be endued with power.” “Ye shall receive
power” at Pentecost; and then, but not till then ,
“Ye shall be my witnesses.” We need not be
concerned as to how the rivers are flowing


from us, or troubled as to what channels they are
flowing in. They flowed from Peter in one way,
and from Paul in quite another, and from Barnabas
in yet another; there are infinite “diversities” of
ways. We need not trouble at all about the rivers,
and the direction of their flow; our concern is to
“glorify Jesus,” to see that He is on the throne;
and it becomes His business then to see that the
rivers are flowing; and there is not the slightest
danger that the blessed business with which He
charges Himself will be neglected! There are other
aspects of consecration in the Divine Word which
have not been touched upon, but enough has been
said for our purpose to show what it is, and what
its blessed results will be. The consecrated life is
a Christ-centered life, the only truly-centered life;
every other life is eccentric: yet how often do we
hear worldly people or worldly-minded Christians
(what a contradiction in terms!) criticizing some
devoted Spirit-filled man or woman as “ so eccentric,”
simply because of their loyalty to Christ their King!
when all the while it is the critics that are “ eccentric,”
off the true centre. Indeed, so eccentric did the first
Spirit-filled band appear, that “others mocking said,
they are filled with new wine;” so they were “full
of new wine,” the “new wine” of the kingdom!
And in God’s sight these drunken, eccentric men
were the only truly-centered, spiritually-adjusted
men in the city!


lII.—CLAIMING.
Having considered the two conditions necessary to
being filled with the Spirit, viz., the cleansing of the
heart, and the consecration of the cleansed heart to
God, we come now to the very practical question—
How is this Fulness to be obtained by the cleansed
and consecrated believer ? Before proceeding to
consider the answer, “Claim it,” let us notice what
the Divine Word has to say about (a) prayer and (/>)
laying on of hands in connection with the obtaining.
(a) Prayer : “ How much more shall your Heavenly
Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him ? ”
(Luke xi. 13). This promise is given to God’s
children. It is the dearest wish of the Great Father
heart of God, that His children should be filled with
His Spirit. Who has a fathoming line long enough
to sound the depths of that “how much more?”
You “ask”; Father “gives.” What is the next step?
Why, of course, you “receive”! else all Father’s
“ giving ” will be of no avail. “ When they had
prayed . . . they were all filled with the Holy
Ghost ” (Acts iv. 31). “ Prayed for them, that they
might receive the Holy Ghost” (Acts viii, 15).
“Tarry” (Luke xxiv. 49). “ Wait ” (Acts i. 4) —
not idling, but praying, pleading the promise.
“ These all with one accord continued stedfastly in


prayer” (Acts i. 14). “They were all with one
accord in one place, and suddenly ” the answer
came! (Acts ii. 1), So in obtaining the blessing of
the Fulness, prayer has its place. (<6) Laying on of
hands ; “ Then laid they their hands on them, and
they (the Samaritan converts) received the Holy
Ghost” (Acts viii. 17). “Then when they had
fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on them,
they sent them away ” (Acts xiii. 3). Barnabas
and Saul were men who were already full of the
Holy Ghost, but by the laying on of hands (it is
probable that hands had been laid on these men
before this) they received a fresh anointing of the
Holy Ghost, a fresh equipment for special service,
and thus they were set apart for the work to which
the Holy Ghost was calling them. “ And when
Paul had laid his hands upon them (the men of
Ephesus), the Holy Ghost came on them ” (Acts
xix. 6). “ They laid their hands on them ” (the
deacons) (Acts vi. 6). “ Neglect not the gift that is
in thee, which was given thee by prophecy, with the
laying on of the hands of the presbytery” (1 Tim.
iv. 14). “ Stir up the gift of God, which is in thee
through the laying on of my hands ” (2 Tim. i. 6).
It is quite evident that laying on of hands was no
meaningless ceremonial in the primitive Church.
Is there any reason why it should be an empty
barren form in our own day?


We come now to examine the answer given to
the question—How is the fulness of the Spirit
to be obtained ?—viz., “ Claim it.” It must be
borne clearly in mind that we are dealing now
with a cleansed and consecrated soul. If you
are not “cleansed,” attend first to the cleansing.
If you are not consecrated, attend at once to
the consecrating, and then (but not till then) will
you be able to profit by what will be said about
the claiming of the blessing. Do we appreciate
the immense difference between “ claiming ” and
“asking”? I “ claim” that which is mine own ; I
“ask” for a favour. For instance, if a man has a
credit balance of £so in his current banking account,
and draws a cheque for he does not require
to go to the manager and “ ask” for 10 sovereigns;
he presents his cheque and “ claims ” them, for
they are his own. But supposing that same man is
in need of an advance he goes into the
manager’s room, and “asks” for the favour of a loan.
No “claiming” now! So it is often with the Christian
and his God. When God gives him a definite
promise for some definite blessing, it is the Christian’s
privilege to “ claim,” to “ receive ” by faith the
thing promised. If God tells him a certain blessing
is his by virtue of his sonship, it is his to “ claim,”
to “ receive ” what through grace has been made
his own. There is no “ asking ” needed here, that is


“ asking ” in the sense of saying—“ Lord, if it be
Thine holy will, give me this.” Where is the room
for an “ if” ? Has not God told him that it is His
will ?—-has He not promised it ?—has He not given
it to him ? ” Why, then, should he mock his Lord by
saying—“//it be Thy will ?” But supposing, on the
■other hand, that that man wants something which
God has not expressly promised to give, something
in reference to which He has not revealed His will;
all the Christian can do in this case is to “ ask he
■cannot “claim”; and God may give him what he
asks, or He may see that it will be for the best to
refuse His child’s request. A Christian may want
£SO, and may “ ask ” his Father to send it to him,
and God may give or withhold. But if a Christian
man wants to be filled with the Holy Ghost, he need
be in no doubt as to the issue here; he may “ claim ”
the Fulness, for has not God promised it ? Is not
this blessing his very own ? His birthright by
virtue of his new birth ? Let us learn then clearly
to distinguish between “claiming” as an act of
faith based on an express promise in the word, and
“asking” as a request in prayer. That the fulness
■of the Holy Ghost is one of the blessings which it
is our privilege to “claim,” to “receive” by a
simple act of faith, is abundantly clear from the
Book of God. “Christ hath redeemed us from the
curse of the law, being made a curse for us ; for it is


written, Cursed is every one that hangeth on a
tree ; that the blessing of Abraham might come on
the Gentiles through Jesus Christ; that we might
receive the promise of the Spirit through faith ”
(Gal. iii. 13, 14). The double purpose of Christ’s
redeeming work, of His being made a curse for
us, is here plainly stated. He was “cursed” that
we might be blessed with a double blessing—(l)
with “ the blessing of Abraham,” that is, righteous-
ness, justification; and (2) with “the promise of the
Spirit.” How many of God’s children forget the
second blessing ! —they think that if they are saved
from wrath and justified, that that is all ! —but
that is only half salvation ; full salvation consists in
receiving the promise of the Spirit in addition to
being justified. Have we overlooked this fact ? Have
we been stopping short at half salvation ? Those
who are not living the “Spirit-filled life” are making
void to a most alarming extent, as far as they are
concerned, the work Christ accomplished on the tree.
Christ died that we might be made the righteousness
of God, and that we might be filled with God. As
God holds the sinner guilty who neglects so great
salvation, and rejects the offered righteousness, so
He holds the justified believer guilty who neglects
the second blessing which Christ purchased with His
Blood, viz., the offered “ promise of the Spirit.”
But note well how Paul tells us this latter blessing is


to be made ours; it becomes ours “by faith." No one
doubts how we receive the blessing of Abraham (right-
eousness, justification); all are agreed that it is “ by
faith.” “ Being justified by faith ” (Rom. v. i). But
how blind we are to see, how slow to take it in, in
spite of the plain declarations of Scripture, that “ the
promise of the Spirit ” is in like manner received “ by
faith !” The Holy Ghost is the “ gift ”of the Father
and of the Son (Luke xi. 13). This “gift” is received
“by faith.” There is the whole matter in a nutshell.
Of all the deep things in God’s deep Book there is
surely not a deeper than this, that a cleansed and
consecrated believer may by simple faith here and
now claim and receive the fulness of the Spirit—
the greatest gift that even the exalted Christ has in
His power to bestow upon His people! “Be filled
with the Spirit,” saith the Holy Ghost. Note that the
command is in the Passive Voice, “Be filled,” that
is, “Let yourself be filled.” The Fulness is pressing in
upon you, only let it in ! Receive it, and it is yours!
Have you got it? If not, deal with the Lord about
it at once, somewhat after this manner, “ Lord Jesus,
Thou dost command me to be filled with the Spirit.
I take Thy command and make it my prayer, ‘ Lord
fill me with Thy Spirit.’ Thou hast told me that ‘ all
things whatsoever ye pray and ask for, believe
that ye have received them, and ye shall have
them’ (Mark xi. 24). It is Thy desire to fill me;


it is my desire to be filled. I have made, Lord, fill
me! the prayer of ray heart. I claim the
Fulness. I believe for it. I receive it now by
faith, I have received it. I have it. It is mine.
Lord, I thank Thee for filling me, even me, with
Thine Holy Spirit.” And the blessed business
is done! It is yours to believe, to receive. It
is His to fill. Go on your way now, reckoning
that you are filled, and God will make the
reckoning good. It is yours to keep believing.
It is God’s to keep you filled. Stagger not at the
promise of God through unbelief, but be strong in
faith, giving glory to God. Some object to this quick,
almost instantaneous, and easy way of receiving this
greatest of the New Testament blessings. But every
objection urged against receiving the fulness of the
Spirit in this way, applies with equal, if not greater
force to a sinner receiving the pardon of his sins
when he comes to God at the first. It is always in grace
that God deals with the sinner, and justifies him
the instant he believes in Jesus. It is always in grace
that God deals with the justified one, and fills him
with the Holy Ghost the moment he receives the
Fulness by faith. Eternal life is the gift of God, and
all the sinner has to do is to take it. The Holy
Ghost is a gift, and all God’s child has to
do is to take it. But some will still object,
and say that it is necessary to spend some


time “waiting” on God for the Fulness before
we can get it. A night of prayer, or a half
night at least, a more or less protracted season
must thus be spent before we can hope to receive the
blessing we desire. Of course not one word can be
uttered against spending seasons of prayer by day
or by night in waiting upon God. We have the
example of the Man of Prayer Himself before us in
this. But this much must be said, that many a one
has spent whole days and nights and weeks in
earnest crying to God for the infilling of the Holy
Ghost, and all in vain ! All in vain ? Why ? How ?
Because of unbelief. If you want to fill a corked
bottle with water and take it to a running tap, but
neglect to remove the cork, how long will you have
to wait holding it under the tap before it is filled ?
Remove the cork, and the bottle is running over in
a few seconds ! Many a one has cried and waited,
and waited and cried for the fulness of the Spirit,
but the stopper of unbelief has been in their empty
hearts, and so no wonder that they did not get what
they wanted ! Of what avail will all God’s
“giving” be if a man does not “receive”? God
cannot give and receive too ! But some one may
still object, and, in proof of his contention that
we must “ wait ” for the filling of the Holy Ghost,
point to the case of the disciples, who continued
in prayer for ten days, waiting for the promise


of the Father. Quite true that they “waited”;
but it must be remembered that that prayer
meeting was ante-pentecostal ; we live in post-
pentecostal days ; they were waiting for the Spirit
to come from Heaven. “ The Spirit was not yet
given.” We have not so to wait. He come, He
has been given, and all we have to do is to receive
Him. We have read of Christ’s coming into
the world and of His leaving it. We have read of
the Spirit’s descent, but we do not read of His
ascension. A Christian man came to me once and
said—expecting a word of encouragement and
approval—“l have been seeking that blessing for
over thirty years.” “ Brother, it’s nearly time you
got it then!” was the swift rejoinder. For all these
years during which that man was crying, “Give,,
give, give!” God was saying “Take, take, take!
Receive, receive! for Ido give! ” If I heard my
little girl of three years old crying piteously for a
piece of bread, knowing that she must be very
hungry, and having the bread by me, would I tell her
to cry on for another hour and that then I might
attend to her wants? “How much more,” oh!.
11 How much more will your Heavenly Father give the
Holy Spirit to them that ask Him ? ” But what if, in
spite of her crying and of my offering, she would
not take the bread I offered, but still went on
with her crying, “Father! oh, father! do give me a


piece of bread, I am so hungry!” You silly child!
Oh, how many silly children has the Father in
His family, crying year in and year out, “ Give,
give!” and Father all the while yearning over them
and saying, “Take, take, My child!” Let some of us
give over our crying and set to work “receiving.”
Take and thank ! Receive and thank! “That we
might receive the promise of the Spirit through
faith."


HOW DOES IT COME ?
How does the filling of the Spirit come ? “Does it
come once for all? or is it always coming, as it
were?” was a question addressed to me once by a
young candidate for the baptism of the Holy Ghost.
There are many asking the same question. We
have considered how the Fulness is obtained; but
now we proceed to consider, How does the Fulness
come ? In speaking of the blessing of being filled
with the Spirit, the New Testament writers use
three tenses in the Greek—the Aorist, the Imperfect,
and the Present. Each of these tenses has a dif-
ferent shade of meaning. The inspiring Spirit has
employed these different tenses for a purpose, and
it will be to our profit to try and get at that purpose,
to note the differences, and to learn His meaning,
(i) The Aorist tense —a tense to which the English
language is a stranger —denotes generally “a
sudden, definite act in the past,” “something
done and finished with” —“They were filled”—
as in Acts ii. 4.
(2) The Imperfect tense, denoting, as in English,
just what its name implies—“ They were being
filled” (literally)—as in Acts xiii. 52.


(3) The Present tense, also denoting, as in English,
just what its name implies—“ Full,” the normal
condition—as in Acts xi. 24.
The following are the passages in the Acts in
which the various tenses are found :
Acts ii. 2, “It filled all the house.”
Acts ii. 4, “ They were all filled.”
Acts iv. 8, “ Peter filled with the Holy Ghost.”
Peter was already “filled,” in ch. ii. 4.
Acts iv. 31, “And they were all filled with
the Holy Ghost.” Peter was again amongst
them! Peter received an “Aorist” filling in
ch. ii. 4, again in ch. iv. 8, and yet again
in ch. iv. 31. So that an “Aorist” filling
may be repeated and repeated again and
yet again. On both occasions—ch. iv. 8
and ch. iv. 31 —there was special need, and
to meet this special need, Peter received a fresh
and special and definite “filling” of the Holy
Ghost. From this we learn that to equip us
for every new important or difficult service to
which we may be called, the Lord Jesus is
prepared to grant us a fresh infilling, a
“refilling” of the Holy Ghost ; and that these
“refillings” may be, and ought to be, repeated
just as often as the need arises. We see it
reported twice in one chapter that Peter was


“refilled.” It will be noted that for the reasons
already mentioned,* the expression “a fresh
infilling of the Holy Ghost,” or “refilling,” is
used instead of “received a fresh baptism of the
Holy Ghost.”
Acts ix. 17 (Saul), “And be filled with the Holy
Ghost.” Saul was not to begin his life work
until “ baptized ” —“ filled with the Holy Ghost.”
He must receive the very same blessing and
equipment as the other apostles received at
Pentecost. This was Saul’s Pentecost, and for
him, as for others, service began at Pentecost.
Acts xiii. g, “Paul filled with the Holy Ghost.”
The man who was filled in ch. ix. is “filled”
anew in this passage, the “ Aorist” blessing is
repeated, fitting him for the special work on
hand, viz., administering that scathing rebuke to
Elymas the sorcerer. In all these passages
the blessing is spoken of as a crisis, not as a
process.
(2) Imperfect:
Acts xiii. 52, “And the disciples (lit.) were
being filled with joy and with the Holy
Ghost.” This is the only passage in the
Acts where the Imperfect tense is used. It is
not the Aorist “were filled,” but the Imperfect
“were being filled,” implying the inflow, not
* Page 20.


only to make up for, but to sustain, the outflow.
The same idea of the “Imperfect” is seen in
Eph. v. 18, “Be filled with the Spirit,” where
Principal Moule points out that the Greek verb
rendered “be filled,” may with equal correct-
ness be rendered “Be ye filling with the Holy
Ghost.” The preceptive verb “is in the Present
or continuing tense; it enjoins a course, a habit,”
so that in this sense “the Fulness” is always
coming, it is spoken of as a process, not as a crisis.
(3) Present:
Acts vi. 3, “Look ye out therefore, brethren,
from among you seven men of good report,
full of the Spirit and of wisdom, whom
we may appoint over this business;” men
whose normal condition was “full” of the Holy
Ghost. It is well worth noticing the business
for which these “deacons” were wanted; they
were to look after temporal affairs, to feed a few
decent old Greek widows; and yet even for this
business the men must be “full of the Holy
Ghost!” none other need apply. How far has
the Church of to-day strayed from apostolic
practice! When an election of office-bearers
is taking place nowadays, of men, say, to
manage the temporal affairs of Christ’s Church,
whoever thinks of looking out for “men full of
the Holy Ghost ? ” Many a man is elected


to office in the Church of the Living God who
“has not the Spirit of Christ” at all! who is
therefore not a child of God, much less “full
of the Holy Ghost.” “He is a man of social
position, a man of means ; if he is not full of
the Holy Ghost, he is at least full of this
world’s goods, and you know he will be
a pillar in our Church.” Yes, as someone has
well remarked, he will be a cater- pillar
in the house of our God. The Church of
the New Testament does not need pillars of
that kind. The Church of Jesus Christ
and His apostles does not require to be
propped up by children of the devil. What
right have we to ask an “alien,” a man who is
“without Christ,” “having no hope and without
God in the world,” to assist in managing and
controlling Father’s House? Such was not
apostolic practice. “Be ye not unequally
yoked together with unbelievers” (2 Cor. vi.
14). What an amount of unequal yoking there is
in many of our Churches, although the Church’s
Lord expressly forbids it! “Thou shalt not
plough with an ox and an ass together” (Deut.
xxii. 10).
Who is responsible for this unequal yoking ? Is
it not the Church members that elect these
men and put them into office in the Church


of God? Church members, beware! next
time offices are to be filled in your Church,
whether they have to do with the temporal
affairs or with the spiritual, remember apostolic
advice, “Look ye out from among you men
full of the Spirit.” When we get back
in this matter to apostolic practice, we may
hope to get back apostolic blessing, but not till
then.
Acts vi. 5, “Stephen, a man full of faith
and of the Holy Spirit.” In those brave
days of old it was a case of demand
and supply. Wanted—seven men full of
the Holy Ghost; and immediately they were
forthcoming ! Is the trouble nowadays in the
demand or in the supply? In both. The
demand for Spirit-filled men is very slack; but
even if the demand revived to-morrow, how
lamentably few in our Churches could be found
bearing the trade mark as “up to sample!”
Still there are not awanting signs of revival
in both demand and supply. Let us remember
that Stephen’s companions were men full of the
Holy Ghost, although Stephen is the only one
of whom it is expressly stated. He was the
most remarkable man of the seven, a man in
whom the graces of the Spirit shone with
•conspicuous brightness. So mighty was his


faith that special mention must needs be made
of it. It is not sufficient to describe him as a
man full of the Holy Ghost, but it must be
stated that he was “a man full of faith and of
the Holy Ghost.” Faith was his outstanding
grace.
Acts vii. 55, “He being full of the Holy Ghost.”
This was Stephen’s normal condition right up
to the very end of his life; it was true of him
when we get our first glimpse of him, true also
as he passes within the vail into the unspeakable
glory.
Acts xi. 24, Barnabas “was a good man and full
of the Holy Ghost,” a good man indeed, and so
full of the Spirit of God that there was no
room for self; for we read that he came into
the midst of a great revival, in the bringing
about of which he had no hand, and instead
of being filled with envy at the divinely-chosen
instruments, instead of picking holes in the
work and depreciating the whole movement,
he was filled with gladness; we read that he
“ was glad” (verse 23). It goes without saying
that that man was “full of the Holy Ghost.”
How many there are nowadays who are not
like Barnabas!
Having now considered the passages in which the
various tenses are used, we are able to answer the


question —How does the blessing come ? Does it
come once for all, or is it always coming ? There are
sudden definite “fillings,” repeated with more or
less frequency; times when the believer is conscious
of being “ filled,” when he can say, “ I was filled.”
Between this experience—“ filled ” (which is an
“Aorist” blessing) —and that which should be the
normal experience of every Christian, viz., “full”
(which is a “ Present ” blessing), it is evident that there
is a great gap; but God has graciously bridged the
gap for us; the connecting link between the
“Aorist,” were filled, and the “ Present,” full , is the
“ Imperfect ” '■'■were beingfilled; ” so that the blessing
is always coming. Does it come once for all ? A
thousand times No !—if by that is meant that we are
reservoirs into which the Fulness is poured, so that
once we are filled, we are independent of fresh supplies
from the Lord Jesus, That surely were a curse
instead of a blessing ! What reservoir is there that
does not need replenishing? Some Christians say
that at times after some piece of service has been
finished, they feel as if they were empty, as if their
souls had been quite drained, and now they are dry
and thirsty. It need not be so. It is not so with
the Spirit-filled worker whose faith is in lively
exercise, for he is “being filled” all the time. In
driving between Melbourne and my home I often
stop at a wayside trough to give the horse a drink.


I notice that the trough is quite full of water and
that there is a box in one end of it. As the horse
drinks the water is lowering, and presently I hear a
sound as of a running tap. Yes, the sound is coming
from the box. That box is covering a piece of
mechanism that needs explaining. Within it there
is a tap connected by pipes with the Yan Yean
Reservoir up in the Plenty Ranges. Attached by a
lever to the tap is a metal ball, which rests on the
surface of the water. As the horse drinks, the
water on which the ball is floating is lowered, and
thus the ball is lowered; the lowering of the ball
opens the tap and the Yan Yean begins to pour in;
so that, although the water is being withdrawn by
the thirsty animal, a fresh supply is being poured in,
the trough is “being filled” so that it is always
“ full.” Thus may it be with the soul of the believer.
No matter what the outflow into the surrounding
emptiness may be, or the withdrawals by thirsty
needy souls, there is the continual inflow, so that
there may be the constant “ fulness,” Indeed the
outflow depends directly on the inflow; one can
only give as he gets. It is ours to see to the
connection between us and the infinite Reservoir
away up among the hills of God being kept open, to
see that the tap is kept in proper working order by
faith and prayer and meditation, and then, one
might almost say, automatically, the heart will be


kept full, “filled with all the fulness of God,” no
matter what the spiritual drain upon us may be ;
for now it is not a question of our capacity to
■contain, but a question of God’s infinite supply for
all our needs. This too is the explanation of the
“overflow,” the flowing “ Rivers ” of John vii. 38.
It is the overflow, and only the overflow, that blesses.
There is not a drop for thirsty souls till someone
■overflows. It is the overflow in the Sabbath School
class, and in the pulpit, and for that matter, in
every other sphere of Christian service, that brings
blessing; and this overflow is in direct proportion to
the inflow. “Rivers” cannot flow out unless
“ Rivers ” first flow in.
An ordinary service pipe in our domestic
water supply may serve to illustrate some of the
points we have been considering. We take a
bucket to the tap for water, and lo! there is
none. Something is wrong. Either the authorities
have cut off our supply because of some infraction
of the law on our part, or there is an obstruction in
our service pipe, or the pressure is insufficient to
.give us even a drop, or the supply is so deficient
that it has been shut off for a time from us that it
may be sent in another direction. Sometimes alas !
the “flowing” of the “living waters” from the soul of
the believer ceases ; but the ordinary round of duty
either in the district visiting, or in the Sabbath


School class, or in the pulpit, has not ceased ; a
ceaseless stream of talk may still be flowing on, but
there is no “ living water ”in it all. Why ? It is
not that the pressure aback of us, the pressure in
the infinite Reservoir away up among the hills of
God is insufficient, or that the supply is deficient,
unable to meet our needs because it is supplying
needy ones elsewhere. God’s water supply never
breaks down as we often find our city supply
failing. If the “flowing” has ceased, it is from one
of two reasons; either God has, in mercy and in
judgment, cut off the supply, or there is an
obstruction in us, and sin is at the bottom of both
reasons. “ Search me, O God . . . and see if there be
any way of wickedness in me” (Ps. cxxxix. 23, 24).
“ Confession, cleansing ” is the divinely-appointed
method for putting right what has gone wrong.
Sometimes on going to the tap we find that there
is water, but such a miserable dribble ! either from
insufficient pressure or some partial obstruction in
the pipe, or perhaps it is because we failed to open
the tap fully. What a wretched parody of the
flowing “Rivers” of John vii. 38 are the life and
service of many of the Christians of to-day ! Some
of the “living water” is doubtless coming from them,
but it is only percolating through, dribbling, trickling
out of them. Why? Certainly not, as has been
already remarked, from insufficient pressure; the


fault, the failure is not on God’s side, but there is
some local obstruction—amounting in many a
case to almost entire obstruction —some little idol
or other in our heart; if not a “ sin ” yet certainly a
“ weight ” (Heb. xii. i), and this hinders the outflow.
Confession and cleansing are still God’s remedy. Or,
the hindrance may be our unbelief, “ Limiting the
Holy One of Israel; ” opening the tap but a little
instead of opening it full; expecting little when
we were divinely authorized to expect much;
refusing to obey the command, “ Open thy mouth
wide, and I will fill it” (Ps. Ixxxi. 10). “Rivers”
cannot flow through a heart full of unbelief.
Sometimes again, on going to the tap we get a
little water and a great deal of air. What a noise!
Now air is a very good thing in its own place, but
that is not in a water pipe; that- is meant to convey
water and nothing else, and for the water pipe to do
its work, it is necessary that it be emptied and
cleansed of everything else, even of air. Scripture
hath said that some things “puff up,” and there is a
good deal of “ puff” in some hearts through which
the living water is supposed to be flowing. God be
merciful unto us! Such hearts, like our water pipe,
need emptying and cleansing.
Yet once more, on going to the tap, we find a
splendid supply; the pipe is clean, the pressure is
good. Now before we open the tap the pipe is full


of water; when the tap is opened and the bucket
filling, the pipe is still full, for although the
water is pouring out at the tap, it is pouring in at
the reservoir, so that the pipe is kept full , even
though the tap is open and the water streaming
from it. When the tap is shut you cannot say any
more about the pipe now than that it is still full of
water. Even so may it be with the believer who is
spiritually adjusted. When resting at his Master’s
feet he is full; when actively engaged in service he is
still full; his normal condition is “full of the Holy
Ghost,” because he has learnt how to obey the
command, “Be ye filling with the Spirit.”


ITS EFFECTS.
Among the effects and benefits which in this life
accompany and flow from being filled with the Holy
Ghost may be mentioned the following;—
(i) Courage: “Oh, I could not do so and so, I
have not the courage,” is a reply frequently made
by Christian people when asked to undertake some
piece of service or other for the Master. The first
point to be settled is, “ Is that the Master’s will for
me?” If so, lack of courage is a confession to the
lack of the “ Fulness of the Holy Ghost.” The Spirit-
filled man knows the fear of God, and knows no other
fear.
• Acts ii. 14, “Peter standing up with the eleven,
lifted up his voice and spake forth.” No fear of
servant maids now! But can this be the man who
quailed before the look of the waiting-maid who
charged him with being “with the Nazarene?” Can
this be the man that “began to curse and to swear, I
know not this man of whom ye speak?” The very
same, and yet not the same; for the baptism of the
Holy Ghost has changed Peter the craven-hearted
into Peter the lion-hearted, so that he can stand
before that surging multitude, their hands dyed
crimson in his Master’s blood, and without a tremor


charge home upon them the awful crime, “ Him ye
did crucify and slay! ”
Ch. iv, 13: “They beheld the boldness of Peter
and John.”
Ch. iv. 31: “They spake the word of God with
boldness."
Ch. v. 20 ;“Go ye and stand and speak in the
temple.” Taken out of prison, and ordered to go and
do again the very thing for which they had been
imprisoned ! But they were Spirit-filled men, and
so we read in the next verse, “ they entered into the
temple.”
Ch. v. 29 :“ We must obey God rather than
men.”
Ch. v. 40-42 : “ Beaten . . . departed re-
joicing . . . ceased not to teach.”
Ch. xxi. 13 : “I am ready not to be bound only,.
but also to die at Jerusalem, for the name of the
Lord Jesus.” Courage-filled because Spirit-filled!
(2) The fruit of the Spirit will be manifest in the
life: Love, Joy, Peace, &c. (Gal. v. 22, 23). How
can one's life be filled with the fruit of the Spirit
unless one’s heart is first filled with the Spirit Him-
self? In the primitive Church the men and women
were filled with the Holy Ghost—that was the rule,
now, alas, it has come to be the exception—and as a
consequence we see how their lives were enriched by
the fruit of the Spirit.


Love: Acts iv. 32, “Were of one heart and soul
had all things common.” This may be
poor political economy, but it is good spiritual
economy, a simple Bible illustration of the Bible
precept, “ Lay up for yourselves treasure in
heaven” (Matt. vi. 20). If brotherly love were
abroad to-day, how soon the present distress would
disappear ! As the best available commentary on
this heavenly word “ Love,” study on your knees
the whole of 1 Cor, xiii.
Joy: Acts ii. 46, “They did take their food with
gladness and singleness of heart, praising God.”
Every meal was a sacrament. The same cause
would produce the same result to-day.
Ch. v. 41 : “ Rejoicing that they were counted
worthy to suffer dishonour for the Name,” when
some of us would have been bemoaning ourselves
and complaining of the hardness of our lot!
Ch. xiii. 50-52: “ Stirred up a persecution . . . and
the disciples were (being) filled with joy.”
Ch, xvi. 25 ; “ Paul and Silas were praying and
singing hymns unto God.” The heavier the
tribulation the more their joy seemed to “overflow ”
(2 Cor. vii, 4), and of course the heavier the tribu-
lation the more joy they needed to sustain them,
“ For the joy of the Lord is your strength” (Neh.
viii. 10).


Peace: Acts vi. 15, “Saw his (Stephen’s)
face as it had been the face of an angel.”
Ch. vii. 59, 60, “ They stoned Stephen, calling
upon the Lord, and saying, Lord Jesus, receive
my spirit, and he kneeled down, and
fell asleep.”
2 Cor. iv. 8, g, “ Troubled on every side, yet not
distressed ; perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted,
but not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed,”
Thus we might go through the heavenly list—
long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness,
temperance—and see how richly in Bible times the
fruit flourished in the lives of those who were Spirit-
filled. Before passing on let us notice where it is
that Joy grows. It grows between Love and Peace.
It is, as someone has well called it, a sheltered
fruit. If Love withers, Joy is exposed on that side,
and it too will fade. If Peace is interfered with,
even though Love is vigorous, Joy is exposed on that
side now, and it will fade away and die. The only
way to preserve Joy in vigorous growth is to
see that its sheltering fruits, Love and Peace,
are kept free from blight, and vigorous too.
In his letter to the Ephesian Church, to whom he
addressed the command, “ Be filled with the Spirit,”
Paul points out very clearly what the results of the
Fulness will be.


(i) A singing heart (Eph. v, 19). This is what
would bring us and our lives up to concert pitch.
We would no more go “flat.” This would drive
away the leaden dulness.
(2) A thankful heart (verse 20). Such a heart
would not be finding fault with Christ’s government;
will “find none occasion of stumbling in” Jesus
(Matt. xi. 6); will not be offended at Him, no
matter how He may test and try it. “Blessed is
he” that has such a heart in his bosom !
(3) A submissive heart (Eph. v. 21), “in lowliness
of mind each counting other better than himself”
(Phil. ii. 3). “The thing (once) impossible shall
be.”
(4) Spirit-filled wives will be in subjection to their
own husbands (Eph. v. 22).
(5) Spirit-filled husbands will love their wives as
Christ loved the Church (verse 25).
(6) Spirit-filled children will obey their parents
(Eph. vi. 1).
(7) Spirit-filled fathers will not provoke their
children to wrath (verse 4),
(8) Spirit-filled servants (bond-slaves) will be
obedient to their masters (verse 5),
(9) Spirit-filled masters will treat their servants
as they (the masters) would wish to be treated by
their Master (verse 9).


Would not results (8) and (9) be the best possible
solution of the constantly-recurring Labour and
Capital difficulty, and render a labour war impossible,
because unnecessary ?
(10) Spirit-filled men will be strong in the Lord,
spiritual giants, not sickly, hunch-backed dwarfs
(verse 10).
(11) Spirit-filled men will be warriors, clad in the
whole armour of God; if not Spirit-filled they could
not carry it (verse 11).
(12) Spirit-filled soldiers will not be warring
against flesh and blood; internal foes having all
been subdued, the civil war has ceased; their
enemies are now external, and they are free to
concentrate all their attention and God-inspired
energies on them. Their enemies are (1) in the
world—principalities and world-rulers, and (2) in
the heavenlies—powers and spiritual hosts of wicked-
ness (verse 12).
(13) Spirit-filled men will be praying always in the
Spirit (verse 18). In order to this vigilance is
necessary, “watching thereunto.”
Such are some of the results, on the positive
side, of being filled with the Spirit. The effects
on the negative side are manifest in Gal, v.
16, 17, “Walk in (by) the Spirit, and ye shall not
fulfil the hist of the flesh. For the flesh lusteth
against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh;


for these are contrary the one to the other: that ye
(walking by the Spirit) may not do the things that
ye would’’ (if ye were walking by the flesh).
(See verses ig-21.)
(3) Another effect of a Spirit-baptized Church
would be that the masses would be reached. See
how the early Church—which was a Spirit-
baptized Church, and persistently kept that truth in
the foreground—reached the masses, and with what
blessed results ! They were not amused or enter :
tained, but they were converted, saved, turned to
the Lord.
“There were added unto them in that day about
three thousand souls.” Acts ii. 41.
“The number of the men came to be about five
thousand .” Acts iv. 4.
“Added to the Lord multitudes both of men and
women.” Acts v. 14.
“The number of the disciples multiplied in
Jerusalem exceedingly, and a great company
of the priests were obedient to the faith.”
Acts vi. 7.
“ The multitudes (in Samaria) gave heed with
one accord unto the things that were
spoken.” Acts viii. 6,
“And all that dwelt at Lydda and in Sharon
saw him, and they turned to the Lord.”
Acts ix. 35.


“It became known throughout all Joppa; and
many believed on the Lord.” Acts ix. 42.
“While Peter yet spake these words, the Holy
Ghost fell on all them which heard the
word.” Acts x. 44.
“And the hand of the Lord was with them: and
a great number that believed, turned unto
the Lord.” Acts xi. 21.
“And the next Sabbath almost the whole city was
gathered together to hear the word of God.”
Acts xiii. 44.
“And so spake that a great multitude both of
Jews and of Greeks believed.” Acts xiv. 1.
“And when they had preached the gospel to
that city, and had made many disciples.”
Acts xiv. 21.
“The churches . . . increased in number
daily.” Acts xvi. 5
“These that have turned the world upside down
are come hither also.” Acts xvii. 6.
“ Crispus . . . believed . , . and many of
the Corinthians hearing believed.” Acts
xviii. 8.
“So mightily grew the word of the Lord and
prevailed.” Acts xix. 18-20.
We often hear of discussions on the “lapsed
masses.” Why have the masses of the people lapsed
from the Churches ? Perhaps the more correct way


of putting it would be, Why have the Churches
lapsed from the masses? The answer is not far to
seek—because they have lost the driving power
which alone could keep them abreast of the masses,
■even the baptism of the Holy Ghost. The condi-
tions were just as unfavourable in the first century
as in the nineteenth, and yet we read, “So mightily
grew the word of the Lord and prevailed.” It is
positively painful to see the substitutes that are
being tried to-day for the power of the Holy Ghost.
Miserable substitutes are they all! One Church is
trying this plan, another that, and not one of them
has found a new plan that is a permanent success.
They are floundering, and some of them are foun-
dering, and no wonder. It will be no loss to the
kingdom of God if Churches which ignore the Holy
Ghost should founder! Let us get back to Pente-
costal methods. The trouble is that the Churches
have lost their way to that “upper room.” Let a
Church only find her way back there and obtain her
Pentecost; let pulpit and pew be baptized with the
Holy Ghost and ivith fire , and the people will come
running in to see the burning. That Church will not
need to cater for amusements as a bait to catch the
masses, but the people will come crowding into her
pews, climbing into them as Zacchaeus climbed into
the branches of that sycamore tree when he wanted
to see the Lord; for the people still want “to see


Jesus,” and they have heard that He is “to pass
that way.” We cannot improve on Pentecost’s
methods for reaching the masses.
(4) Yet another effect of the fulness of the
Spirit must be mentioned, viz., Persecution.
“Others mocking said, They are filled with new
wine.” Acts ii. 13.
“They laid hands on them and put them in
ward.” Acts iv. 3.
“Let us threaten them.” Acts iv, 17
“They laid hands on the apostles and put them
in public ward.” Acts v. 18.
“And were minded to slay them.” Acts v. 33
“They beat them and charged them not to
speak.” Acts v. 40.
“And seized him and brought him into the
council.” Acts vi. 12.
“And they stoned Stephen.” Act vii. 59.
“ And there arose on that day a great persecution.”
Acts viii. 1.
“ Haling men and women committed them to
prison.” Acts viii. 3.
“Saul, yet breathing threatening and slaughter
against the disciples of the Lord.” Acts ix. 1.
“ Took counsel together to kill him.” Acts ix. 23.
“They went about to kill him.” Acts ix. 29.
“ Killed James the brother of John with the sword.”
Acts xii 2.


“He put him (Peter) in prison.’’ Acts xii. 4.
“Stirred up a persecution against Paul and
Barnabas.” Acts xiii. 50.
“Made them evil affected against the brethren.”
Acts xiv. 2.
“To treat them shamefully and to stone them.”
Acts xiv. 5.
“They stoned Paul.” Acts xiv. 19
“Commanded to beat them (Paul and Silas) with
rods.” Acts xvi. 22.
“Cast them into prison, . . . and made
their feet fast in the stocks.” Acts xvi. 23, 24.
“Set the city on an uproar.” Acts xvii. 5.
“Stirring up and troubling the multitudes,”
Acts xvii. 13.
“Opposed themselves and blasphemed.” Acts
xviii. 6.
“Rose up against Paul, and brought him before
the judgment seat.” Acts xviii. 12.
“Speaking evil of the way.” Acts. xix. g.
“No small stir concerning the way.” Acts xix. 23.
“Filled with wrath.” Acts xix. 28.
“A plot was laid against him by the Jews.”
Acts xx. 3.
“So shall the Jews at Jerusalem bind the man
that owneth this girdle, and shall deliver
him into the hands of the Gentiles,”
Acts xxi. 11.


“And laid hands on him.” (Paul was never
free after this.) Acts xxi. 27.
“As they were seeking to kill him.” Acts xxi. 31.
“ Beating Paul . . . bound with two chains
into the castle.” Acts xxi. 32, 33, 34.
“It is not fit that he should live.” Acts xxii. 22.
“Bound themselves under a curse, saying that
they would neither eat nor drink till they
had killed Paul.” Acts xxiii. 12.
They delivered Paul ... to a centurion.”
Acts xxvii. 1.
‘ From henceforth let no man trouble me; for I
bear branded on my body the marks of
Jesus.” Gal. vi. 17.
All this makes lively reading in this peaceful, easy-
going day of ours; and yet the world has not
changed in its attitude or feeling towards
God and the things of God. But a most palpable
change has taken place somewhere. The change,
alas! is in us, in the people of God; a change that
is not for the better. We have lost that which
brought these men into direct collision with the
world, and with its ways, even the fulness of the
Spirit. Only let a man in our day seek and obtain
the blessing that made these men mighty for God,
and he will soon find that the world has not changed,
and that the “Pharisees” have not changed either;
the fulness of the Holy Ghost makes a man the


uncompromising friend of God, and that certainly
involves the enmity of the world, “Therefore
the world hateth you” (John xv. 19). It behoves
those who are seeking the “Fulness of the Spirit”
to remember these facts, and to count the cost, for
the persecution may come from the most unlikely,
unlooked-for quarters. To be forewarned is to be
forearmed. “In the world ye have tribulation: but
-be of good cheer; I have overcome the world”
<John xvi. 33).


MAY ONE KNOW THAT HE IS FILLED?
The question is often asked—How am I to know
when I am filled with the Holy Ghost ?
(i) You may know it from the testimony of
the written word, “ All things whatsoever ye pray
and ask for, believe that ye have received them,
and ye shall have them” (Mark xi. 24). From
this you know, that if you have, up to your
light, fulfilled the conditions necessary to the
filling of the Holy Ghost, on praying and asking
for the Fulness, it is your privilege to believe
that you have received what you have asked
for ; nay, it is your bounden duty, in compliance
with Christ’s express command, so to believe. If
God gives, and you really receive, you may then
give thanks, and that proves that you possess, for
you cannot truly give thanks for what you do not
possess ! It will be noted that this answer is
precisely similar to the answer that would be given
to the question—How am I to know that I am saved ?
By simple faith on the testimony of the word. As
multitudes have accepted salvation without any
emotion, without any feeling whatever, so many a
one has accepted by faith the “ Fulness of the Holy
Ghost,” without any wave of emotion or f^eiinj


bearing witness to the fact of the filling. But this
is not to say that there is never any feeling, that the
emotions are never stirred ; not so, for the feelings
will come in due course, in God’s own time.
(2) Again, one may know that the Fulness has
come by the witness of the infilling Spirit. Just as in
multitudes of cases the blessed Spirit bears witness
with the Blood when it is applied at the moment of
conversion, so many a one knows in his inner
consciousness the moment when the fulness of the
Spirit was bestowed; they felt the incoming and
can date their Baptism, as others have felt the
regenerating change and can date their conversion.
It should also be repeated here, that as many
are ignorant of the date of their conversion, though
well assured of the fact, so many may be ignorant
of the date of their Baptism with the Holy Ghost,
though well assured that they have entered on
the blessed life. If we are assured of the fact, that
we have received the fulness of the Spirit, we
need not worry as to dates.
(3) Yet again, one may know whether the
Fulness has come to his heart and life by the signs
following, by what “The Men” of the North of
Scotland would call “ the marks.” Christ’s words
used in another connection may surely be applied
in this, “By their fruits ye shall know them”
-(Matt, vii. 20). “ The fruit of the Spirit is love,


joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness,
faith, meekness, temperance” (Gal. v. 22, 23).
The fulness of the fruit will surely be found
where the fulness of the Spirit is. Quantity and
quality will both be there. As this has already
been touched upon when considering the effects of
the blessing, no more need be added here. But this,
however, must be clearly borne in mind, that, while
the fulness of the Spirit is a gift , the fruit of
the Spirit is a growth. Fruit grows, and the fruit
will grow if only we see to it that the conditions are
present which are favourable to growth. That man
does not manifest much wisdom who expects full
growth, without attending to the conditions of
growth.


MAY ONE SAY THAT HE IS FILLED?
The question has been raised—ls it right for one to
say that he is “filled with the Holy Ghost?”
May this not savour of egotism? John said of
Jesus—“ Behold the Lamb of God who taketh away
the sin of the world . . . the same is he that
baptizeth with the Holy Spirit” (John i. 29, 33).
Christ’s twofold office here is to “take away sin,”
and “to baptize with the Holy Spirit.” Each one
who knows Christ as the “Sin-bearer” should have
an experimental acquaintance with Him as the
“ Baptizer” too. Indeed, this alone is full salvation.
To have sin taken away is but half salvation; to be
“baptized with the Holy Spirit” as well, is to
possess full salvation. Now, if Christ has taken
away a man’s sin, may that man not know it ?
Certainly. And if he knows it may he not bear
witness to the fact ? Nay, does Christ not expect
him to confess ? —to tell what great things the Lord
hath done for him ? No right-thinking person
would regard it as wrong for a saved man to confess
his Saviour, or would regard his confession as
egotism. By parity of reasoning, if Christ has
baptized a pardoned man with the Holy Spirit, may
that man not know it ? Surely! and if he knows


it, may he not bear witness to the fact ? May he
not tell what still greater things the Lord hath done
for him ? Would this be wrong ? Must this
necessarily be egotism? At the same time, while
it is perfectly scriptural for a Spirit-filled man
to testify, for Christ’s glory, as to the infilling
of the Holy Spirit when questioned upon it—
for we must be careful not to libel the grace
of God that is in us, and not to grieve the
Holy Spirit by ignoring Him or His work within
us—one cannot be too careful lest he be found
casting his “ pearls before the swine ” (Matt. vii. 6),
and as a rule it will be better in this matter to let
the life speak rather than the tongue. Indeed it
will not often be necessary for the Spirit-filled man
to be questioned on the subject at all ; his speech
will betray him, his manner of life, his fruitful
service.


MAY ONE LOSE THE BLESSING ?
The question trembles from many a lip—lf I get the
blessing, may I lose it ? Most certainly. But,
glory be to God! He has made ample provision for
failure. There is no reason why we should fail;
God has made ample provision against failure ;we
must not expect to fail; but in case we do fail, pro-
vision has been made. The most prolific cause of
loss is disobedience, disobedience either to one of
God’s written commands, or to the inward
promptings of His Holy Spirit. “The Holy Ghost
Whom God hath given to them that obey Him”
(Acts v. 32). This all glorious gift is not only
obtained but retained in connection with obedience.
It is absolutely necessary to maintain the attitude of
complete self-surrender, for the slightest act of
disobedience —that is, the asserting of our own
will in opposition to His will—may cost us the
loss of the blessing, such as, neglecting to speak
to a man about the great salvation, or, refusing
to give a tract to someone when we knew God
wanted us to do so, or, going out when sve knew
God wanted us to stay in and to come apart,
because He had something to say to us. We
must learn to be obedient to the promptings of the


Spirit. “Mine eyes are ever toward the Lord”
(Ps. xxv. 15) must be our constant attitude.
If we possess the blessing, and desire to retain it,
there is another matter of the last importance that
must be attended to, viz., letting “the word of Christ
dwell in you richly in all wisdom ” (Col. iii. 16). The
Spirit-filled man will be a Word-filled man. A
neglected Bible is responsible for much of the lost
blessing from which many of God’s children are
suffering to-day. If we would retain the blessing in
its fulness and freshness, we must feed daily and feed
much upon Christ as He is revealed to us in
the Holy Scriptures. It is the function of the
indwelling Spirit to take of the things of Christ,
and to show them unto us (John xvi. 14).
He does not speak from Himself or of Himself,
but of Jesus, and so He will be continually
drawing us to the Word, that He may have the
opportunity of drawing our attention to fresh
beauties in Immanuel. There is much so-called
reading of the Bible that is not “searching the
Scriptures” (John v. 39), not “ delighting in the law
of the Lord,” not “ meditating in it day and night”
(Ps. i. 2), not “ letting the word of Christ dwell in
you richly. ” You cannot live a Spirit-filled life and
be content with a shallow, meagre acquaintance
with the Divine Word. The Spirit-filled man gives
God’s Book its own proud place, the premier place,


in all his reading. It is instructive to compare the
effects of the Spirit-filled and of the Word-filled life.
“Be filled with the Spirit; speaking one to another in
psalms and hymns and spiritual songs , singing and
making melody with your heart to the Lord " (Eph.
v. 18). “ Let the word of Christ dwell in you
richly in all wisdom; teaching and admonishing one
another with psalms and hymns and spiritual songs ,
singing with grace in your hearts unto God' 1 (Col.
iii. 16).
Have we then, unhappily, through disobedience
or neglect, lost the blessing which once we
possessed ? Is there one saying, “Oh that I
were as in the months of old?” (Job xxix. 2). It
may be “ all joy ’’ with you again, for if you have lost the
blessing just go back and search for it, and you will
find it where you lost it! Just there and nowhere
else. Have you found the spot where your obedience
failed ? Yield and obey just there ; pick up your
obedience where you dropped it, and there you may
obtain the blessing again as you obtained it at the
first; but just there and nowhere else. An illustration
of this is found in 2 Kings vi. The Divinity
Students of those days were going down to build a
new Divinity Hall on the banks of the Jordan, and
they asked Elisha, the man of God, to go with them.
The story tells us that as one of the students “was
felling a beam, the axe-head fell into the water ; and


he cried, and said, Alas, my master! for it was
borrowed. And the man of God said, Where fell
it ? And he shewed him the place. And he cut down
a stick, and cast it in thither; and the iron did swim.
And he said, Take it up to thee. So he put out his
hand and took it,” and having re-fixed the axe-head
on the handle, he went on again with his felling
(verses 5-7). Where was it that the student got his
lost axe-head ? Where he lost it ! in the very spot
where it fell into the Jordan's waters, it was just there
that he found it. So if -you lose the blessing, the only
spot on earth where you need look for it, if you wish to
take it up to thee again, is the very spot where you
lost it. Let us all learn by root of heart what the
student did not do. After the axe-head flew from
the handle, he did not continue at work chopping
with an axe-handle! No, but as soon as he lost
his axe-head he stopped till he got it on again. Oh
that many a Christian worker would read, mark,
learn, and inwardly digest! Then there might be
many a pulpit without a preacher some Sabbaths,
and many a Sabbath School class without a teacher,,
and many a sphere of Christian labour without its
worker! Why? where are they? Away looking
for their axe-heads! Away to the banks of that river
of disobedience, in whose sluggish waters they lost
them! Alas that there should be so many to-day
hewing with an axe-handle, trying in this way


to fell beams for the house of our God! working
with the blessing lost! Hard labour this, and very
little to show for it! If we have enjoyed and have
lost the fulness of the Spirit, let us confess, betake
us to the open fountain and obey, and He will put
away our sin; and then, let us start afresh, let us
come to Him again for the Fulness as at the first,
and we will find that “He abideth faithful: for he
cannot deny himself” (2 Tim. ii. 13). For the sake
of the Sacred Heart, for His Name’s glory, for the
sake of souls, and for our own sake, we must not,
we will not try to live and labour without being
“Filled with the Spirit.”
THE END.


AN ACT OF APPROPRIATING FAITH.
Lord Jesus, Thou hast washed me in Thy most precious
Blood ; I am Thine.
I recognize Thy command, “ Be filled with the Spirit.”
I acknowledge that it would be for Thy Glory that
I should be filled.
I come to Thee now in Thine own appointed way for the
Filling.
I trust Thee for the clean heart, to save me from my
sins, to guard me from stumbling.
I thank Thee that Thou doest it.
I surrender myself to Thee; I sanctify Thee in My Heart
as Lord ; I crown Thee Lord of all.
By FAITH I RECEIVE FROM THEE THE FULNESS OF THE SPIRIT.
I thank Thee for it; it-is mine even now.
I BELIEVE THAT OUT OF ME THIS DAY. ACCORDING TO PROMISE,
RIVERS OF LIVING WATER WILL BE FLOWING.
TO ME TO LIVE HENCEFORTH IS CHRIST.
Let all those who read what is on this page sign it, and thus make the
act their own.
“That we might receive the promise of the Spirit
THROUGH FAITH.”


Melbourne ;
Rae Bros., Polygraphic Printers,
547 & 549 Elizabeth Street.
1894.




