

PART I
PRICE FIVE SHILLINGS.
THE
WILD FLOWERS
OF
NEW SOUTH WALES.
BY
WILLIAM BAUERLEN and GERTRUDE LOVEGROVE.
SYDNEY: ANGUS & ROBERTSON, 110 market street.
EDINBURGH & LONDON:
YOUNG J. PENTLAND,
1891.




EPACRIS IMPRESSA.
Labillardiere.
THE two first species are peculiar to mountain regions, and range from Victoria to
the southern parts of New South Wales.
No. 1, Epacris impressa , belongs to the natural order Epacridece . Of the genus Epacris w r e
have some lovely species in New South Wales ; one of them (. Epacris longiflora ) is well known
under the name of “ Native Fuchsia/' and is found abundantly in the sandstone formation,
both near the sea-shore and in the gullies and sides of the mountain ranges.
It is very abundant near Sydney, —and who does not know it by its long tube-shaped flowers ?
—the tube of the flowers brilliantly red, and towards the lobes of the open calyx gradually
and softly shading into white. This species, so much loved by all natives of New South
Wales, becomes very rare as we wander southward from the sandstone into the granite
and quartz formation; yet the writer has been able to trace it to the Genoa River, within
a few miles on both sides of the boundary-line of New South Wales and Victoria.
The species ( Epacris impressa ) illustrated on our plate is not nearly so well known as the
“ Native Fuchsia ” ( Epacris longiflora ), and is more emphatically a mountain species than
the latter, though in the neighbourhood of Bermagui the writer has seen it quite near
the sea-shore ; there, however, the ridges leading down from the Dromedary Range approach
the sea-shore very closely. Amongst outcropping granite rocks and boulders, at an elevation
from 2000 to 3000 feet, Epacris impressa appears to enjoy its most favourite situation, where,
in well-favoured spots, it may often be seen in large patches, and when in flower it is
pleasing to see the mass of red it produces contrasted with the various tints of green
around it.
There is also a white variety, which is especially plentiful on the Tantawanglo Mountain,
and any one travelling from Candelo to Bombala, or any other part of the Monaro, may
see it at almost any time of the year more or less out in flower.
Though the leaves of Epacris longiflora and Epacris impressa are somewhat similar and
prickly in both species, the two are easily distinguished from each other. Epacris impressa
has the flowers always quite red, or, in its white variety, quite white, also the flowers
of Epacris impressa are always shorter than those of Epacris longiflora.
There is, however, a white variety of Epacris longiflora also, yet that too is easily
distinguished from Epacris impressa. Epacris longiflora is usually a long, straggling plant,
while Epacris impressa is erect, with a slender stem from 2 to 3 feet high only, to say nothing
of the fact, already mentioned, that the flowers of Epacris longiflora are longer than those
of Epacris impressa.


But to be positively sure, the reader may pull the tube of the flower out of the calyx;
if on the base of the tube he finds five well-marked impressions, then the species is Epacris
impressa , for from those very impressions the plant has derived its specific name.
As already stated, Epctcris impressa belongs to the southern part of New South Wales,
and to the granite formation, yet the writer has on one occasion found it on the sandstone
tableland near the Pigeonhouse in the vicinity of Milton. Whether it has ever been found
farther north or not the writer is at present not prepared to say.
The genus Styphelia , of which we have such beautiful species in New South Wales,
resembles Epacris very much in some of its characteristics and general appearance; but
when in fruit the two (. Epacris and Styphelia) are quite easy to distinguish from each
other, inasmuch as the fruit of Epacris is a dry, brown, almost globular capsule, usually
opening into five parts; the fruit of Styphelia is, in popular language, usually a fleshy berry,
edible in several species, with a small hard stone inside, as for instance the “Five Corners"
(Styphelia viridis ) and others, so well known about Sydney.
Those differences are for the present sufficient for the reader to distinguish Epacris from
Styphelia , one of its nearest relations, and the difference pointed out between Epacris impressa
and Epacris longiflora will also enable the reader to distinguish the one most readily from
the other.
In cultivation, Epacris impressa appears to be not so tractable as Epacris longiflora.
The writer has sent seeds and seedlings to friends living in different parts of the country, at
various times, but up to date he has not heard of a single instance of success.
Perhaps the most abundant species of the genus Epacris are — Epacris microphylla ,
found almost everywhere in the sandstone formation, with beautiful small white flowers, and
Epacris paludosa , which, as its specific name implies, occurs in swamps, and often grows
very tall, with the flowers so densely crowded toward the end of the branchlet that they appear
like a spike of white flowers.


PLATE I.
1. EPACRIS IMPRESSA. 2. PI M ELI A AXIFLORA.
Published for the Author.
Edinburgh and London: YOUNG J. PENTLAND.
Sydney: ANGUS & ROBERTSON.


PIMELIA AXIFLORA
F. von Muller.
Afe the reader will observe, No. 2, Pimelia axiflora, is not chosen on account of its flowers,
which, it must be admitted, are rather inconspicuous, though the genus Pimelia has
some species in New South Wales with rather showy flowers. Yet Pimelia axiflora, when
found in the rich soil of the moist gullies of our southern mountains, never fails to attract
attention by its graceful habit and the fern-like growth of its twigs. The leaves, though
very variable in length and width, are always opposite, and arranged with beautiful regularity,
while the twigs and branchlets have a graceful curve and beautiful drooping habit. The small
flowers are situate in the angle formed by each leaf and branch : such an arrangement is in
botanical language termed axillary, hence its specific name— axiflora.
Perhaps this species may yet come into notice on account of its bark, which yields an
excellent strong fibre, as does the bark of most species of the genus Pimelia. The present
species and Pimelia angustifolia are two of the few species which attain any size. Pimelia
angustifolia may, on rich mountain slopes, occasionally be seen attaining small tree size, and
yielding a good quantity of bark. Pimelia axiflora the writer has seen from 12 to 15 feet
high, but usually much branched and very shrubby, a circumstance which would make the
stripping of its bark a rather troublesome operation, unless the plant were cultivated and
pruned.
Some species of Pimelia have come into cultivation, notably Pimelia spectabilis and Pimelia
suaveotens, from Western Australia, but they are cultivated on account of the beauty of their
flowers, and not on account of their bark.
The genus Pimelia, of which we have twenty-five species in New South Wales, belongs to
the natural order Thymelea}. The flowers of the Pimelias have usually only two stamens.


PLATE II
Published for the Author.
1. BORONIA SERRULATA. 2. ACTINOTUS HELIANTHI.
Edinburgh and London: YOUNG J. PENTLAND.
Sydney : ANGUS & ROBERTSON.


BORONIA SERRULATA.
Smith.
THE two species illustrated in our second plate are two gems, rich if not rare, which
are deservedly great favourites with the public, and generally known at the first
glance.
No. 1 Boronia serrulata is known under the popular, though rather unfortunate name of
“ Native Rose/' since its resemblance to the rose is exceedingly slight, and, as the reader will
readily observe by the most superficial comparison, it does not belong to the same natural
order as the Rose.
Fourteen species of the genus Boronia are found in New South Wales, some of them ranging
from north to south into the neighbouring colonies, as, for instance, Boronia pinnata , Boronia
polygalifolia , and Boronia parviflora. Our present species, however, is peculiar to New South
Wales, and has even there a rather limited range, not being found far north or south of Sydney,
nor inland; it evidently is peculiar to the sandstone formation.
Most Boronias have beautiful flowers, chiefly varying through all shades of pink into red,
the same species being sometimes found pure white. Western Australia, however, has the
greatest number and the most showy species of the genus; some of them have become great
favourites in Europe.
The Boronias as a rule are very fragrant, the leaves as well as the flowers, as are nearly
all plants of the Rutacece , to which natural order the genus Boronia belongs. To the same
natural order belongs the orange and the lemon. If the reader will hold the leaf of an orange
tree so that the light shines well through it, he will observe a number of lighter coloured dots,
which are the oil dots giving the leaf its fragrance. Let the reader do the same with the leaf
of Boronia serrulata and he will also observe a number of dots ; this holds good not only with
every other species of Boronia, , but with all plants belonging to the Rutacece.
The leaves of the Boronias are always situated opposite to each other, and the flowers have
only four petals, and usually twice that number of stamens. The eight stamens distinguish
the Boronias from Zieria , a genus closely related, which also usually has opposite leaves and four
petals only, but instead of eight stamens Zieria has only four and the flowers are more usually
white.
Some of the Boronias have a strong tendency to produce double flowers. Last year we came
upon a patch of Boronia Rhomboidea , near Charley's Forest, in the Braidwood district, where
almost every flower was double. That locality, and the top of the Currockbilly and Ghunyenara
Mountains, are, up to date, the only localities from which Boronia Rhomboidea is known in New
South Wales, having been first found by the writer and Mr. George M‘Rae of Monga, four


years ago, on the steep declivity, near the summit of Currockbilly, at an elevation of 3800
feet. Up to that date it had only been known from Tasmania.
There can be no doubt that some of our Boronias contain medicinal properties, and
others valuable scents, offering in that respect a wide and promising field for investigation.
The same applies also to other genera of the same natural order.


PLATE III.
CLIANTHUS DAMPIERI.
Published for the Author.
Edinburgh and London: YOUNG J. PENTLAND.
Sydney : ANGUS & ROBERTSON.


CLIANTHUS DAMPIERI.
Cunningham.
OUR present species, popularly known as the “Desert Pea/' and also as “Sturt's Glory
Pea," is to many, or perhaps most, Australians better known as a cultivated plant, than
from its native haunts in and contiguous to the desert country of the interior.
Though the great explorer Sturt discovered this glorious plant independently, on his
expedition in the interior of Australia, yet it appears that the famous navigator Dampier had
already collected it near Shark's Bay in Western Australia as early as the year 1699, and it is
said that Dampier's specimens are still to be seen in the Museum of Oxford.
Fully to appreciate the beauty of this plant, one should see it in any of its native localities,
when the traveller has wandered for hours over sandy and stony tracts, destitute of water, and
destitute also of almost any vegetation, then when unexpectedly he comes to the dry bed of a
shallow creek or water-course, where the Desert Pea trails its long shoots along the sand, with
its soft, almost ashy-grey, leaves and large clusters of magnificent flowers rising up from the
level of the sand, then he will indeed behold a sight which he is not likely to forget. He will
stand, gaze, and admire, if perchance thirst does not torment him too much, so as to lose for
the time being all sense and appreciation of the beautiful. In that case, alas ! the presence of
the “ Glory Pea "is no indication of water being somewhere near at hand; perhaps rather the
reverse.
But after copious or continuous rain, when the “ Desert" is not a desert, but rather a smiling
flower-garden, then again should the Glory Pea be seen in its native haunts; then for richness,
variety, and contrast of colour, the surroundings of the Desert Pea could hardly be equalled.
At such a time the writer has seen it amongst the fantastically-shaped granite rocks near
Tibooburra, which rocks lend that far away township such a picturesque aspect.
Let the reader imagine a number of granite rocks rising out of the sandy or stony level,
some isolated and others abutting upon other rocks, now and then enclosing, or half enclosing,
as the case may be, an acre or so of sandy ground; let him further imagine that he stands
upon the summit of one of those rocks and looks down upon the space enclosed. At the first
moment he may be greatly surprised to see a sheet of the most beautiful clear blue water below
him. It is an illusion, but not a mirage ! A slight breeze fans his cheeks, and at the same time
he sees motion on the blue expanse below him, and out of the blue he sees small patches of rich
red gleaming up. The illusion is explained at once. What he took to be a sheet of clear water
reflecting the blue of the sky is a mass of the flowers of Wahlenbergia gracilis —commonly called
the Blue Bell—so densely crowded together that the flowers, themselves unusually large for
their species, look like an uninterrupted expanse of blue. The red patches he sees gleaming


through the blue expanse are the flowers of the Glory Pea, whose long shoots are trailing in all
directions.
When the beholder descends, then he finds numerous other flowers of various hues
interspersed, such as Abutilons, Asters, Brachycomes, Frankenias, Swainsonas, and many others.
On the sides of the rocks, springing out from their crevices, he sees shrubs of Indigoferas,
Cassias, Prostanthera striata, Eremophilas, and others, in full and various coloured bloom, so
that for colour the whole effect baffles description, and that in a locality where perchance a
short month previous hardly anything green was to be seen —nothing but bare sand, stones,
rocks, and leafless shrubs. In the most sheltered nooks of the rocks, even that beautiful little
fern Grammitis rutifolia can at such times be seen, attesting by its presence the magical effects
of the rain.
All kinds of animals, especially sheep and horses, appear to be fond of the Desert Pea;
therefore, in localities much accessible to them, the plant has sometimes not even a chance to
flower, much less to seed, so that it is often difficult to obtain seeds of the plant. On the other
hand, where stock has no, or little, access, such as large paddocks kept reserved for some time,
plenty of seed can be gathered, as the Glory Pea is rather a prolific bearer.
In one instance at Mount Arrowsmith, an outlyer of the Grey Ranges in the neighbourhood
of Cobham Lake, the writer, during the month of December, gathered a large quantity of
seed in a very short time, and could have gathered a great deal more had he had the wish or
the time to do so.
Clianthus Dampieri varies considerably as to size of flowers and leaves. The leaves also
are sometimes rather smooth, and at other times very soft and hairy; but, however various it
is found, it can never likely be mistaken for any other plant, therefore a description in a
popular work like the present is quite unnecessary, especially when the accompanying
illustration speaks so well for itself.
That illustration was taken from a plant grown from the seed gathered at Mount Arrow-
smith, though the size of the flowers prevented to give the full number of flowers on the
cluster.
The Glory Pea proves in cultivation hardier than one would at first expect. Seeds sent
by the writer to friends living on the high tableland of Braidwood and the Monaro, so far south
even as Bombala and Delegate, have come up freely, the plants producing abundance of flowers
during the summer, though the sharp frosts of winter eventually cut them down.
It also readily adapts itself to any soil, therefore, taking all the foregoing into consideration,
it is somewhat surprising that this magnificent flower, so exclusively Australian, is not more
frequently seen in our gardens, more especially as it endures the heat of our dry summers
so well.
The writer is assured by a friend in Sydney that when the Desert Pea commences to die
off, and is then cut back to where it is still green, covered with soil at the joints, then each
joint will spring again and make an independent plant.
It need hardly be said that Clianthus Dampieri belongs, like the culinary pea, to the
natural order of Leguminosce , and to the sub-order Papilionacece , from the supposed resemblance
of their flowers, as in the common pea, bean, and so many others, to a butterfly.
It has repeatedly been remarked by persons wearing the flowers of the Desert Pea for any


length of time, that the smell of them caused headache, and more especially irritation in the
throat. A Church of England clergyman, Mr. Wright of Marrickville, who has for some time
carried on experiments with Australian flowers, has made a tincture of the flowers of the
Desert Pea, with a view of experimenting on homoeopathic principles. Mr. Wright has
kindly presented the writer with a small phial of his tincture, three or four drops of which in
a glass of water are sufficient to cause violent irritation in the throat, and is now waiting for
the opportunity of experimenting on a patient actually suffering from sore throat. He is
also carrying on experiments with a tincture of the “ Darling Pea ” —Swainsona Greyeana.


PLATE IV.
Published for the Author.
1. LOBELIA GRACILIS. 2. ABUTILON HALOPHILUM.
Edinburgh and London: YOUNG J. PENTLAND.
Sydney : ANGUS & ROBERTSON-


LOBELIA GRACILIS.
Andrews.
THE beautiful little blue flower, No. 1 on our present Plate, is Lobelia gracilis , a species
belonging to the natural order Campanulaceae. Most of the species have blue or
bluish flowers, and the order, and more especially the genus Lobelia , contains some beautiful
species well adapted for cultivation, were it not for the fact that most of them are reported
to be poisonous to stock, on account of which it would hardly be advisable to bring them into
our gardens, whence they may “ strayout again, and come up more numerous in paddocks
and grazing land.
Certain it is that all our Lobelias have a whitish sap, which contains an acrid principle
called Lobelin, much used in medicine; in fact, the whole order is rich in medicinal plants.
Lobelia gracilis is not a rare plant, especially along the coast districts; it occurs also on the
high tableland. The reader will readily recognise it from our illustration.
Of the fourteen species of Lobelia occurring in New South Wales, we may, besides our
present species, mention Lobelia microsperma , which is readily distinguished from Lobelia
gracilis by being usually much taller, having the flowers larger and delicately pale blue, while
the stem is rather thick and soft, sometimes much bulged out or swollen, and of a most delicate
red or pink colour. Further, the leaves of Lobelia microsperma are quite different—much
longer, very narrow, almost like a thread only, and have a tendency to wither soon on the
stem, even while the plant is still flowering, in consequence of which specimens are often
found quite leafless. The stem itself is usually simple, i.e., not branched. The seeds are
exceedingly small, hence its specific name.
It delights to grow in rich soil on mountain slopes, where sometimes, when aggregated in
large number, it forms patches of the loveliest pale blue, at least so the writer has repeatedly
seen it on our southern mountains, immediately above the moist Sassefras gullies.


ABUTILON HALOPHILUM.
F. Von Muller.
NO. 2 on our Plate, Abutilon halophilmn, belongs to the natural order Malvacece , or the
Mallow tribe, which includes so many showy flowers, as, for instance, all the different
species of Hibiscus. Our present species, with others of the genus, occurs in the arid interior
chiefly, where in favourable seasons it is found plentifully enough, not only near water, as its
specific name would imply, but often on dry, stony, or sandy hills, far removed from the neigh-
bourhood of water.
The flowers can often be found much larger than those illustrated, but generally they are
quite yellow. The present variety of the species the writer found on a dry stony hill near
Wonnaminta, about 100 miles west of the Darling. The purple centre of the flower is unusual,
and gives it a more beautiful appearance.
Some squatters do not like to see the present species nor any of its congeners on their runs,
as they believe that the stems contain a very tough fibre, which, when eaten by sheep, remains
in their stomach as an indigestible mass, and so proves injurious.


