

THE ALLIED SECRET
SERVICE IN GREECE




KING CONSTANTINE OF GREECE
From a portrait by de Laszlo


THE ALLIED SECRET
SERVICE IN GREECE
by
SIR BASIL THOMSON, K.C.B.
Director of Intelligent*, 1919-1921
WITH FRONTISPIECE AND TWENTY-TWO
OTHER ILLUSTRATIONS
SECOND IMPRESSION
HUTCHINSON & CO. (Publishers) LTD.
34-36 Paternoster Row, London, E.C.4


Printed in Great Britain at
Thj Mayflower Press, Plymouth, William Brendon & Son, Ltd.


TO
ADMIRAL DARTIGE DU FOURNET, G.C.8.,
VICE-ADMIRAL DAVELUY
AND THE LATE
CAPTAIN CHAMONARD
OF THE FRENCH NAVY WHO SACRIFICED THEIR
CAREERS IN THE CAUSE OF JUSTICE AND TRUTH


“ Cherchons la viritl, quoiqu’il en coute, armons-nous impitoyablement de
difiance et d’esprit critique, car Vhistoire elle-mime se fait aujourd'hui
I’auxiliaire de la ligende. . . . Let belligirants de la Grande Guerre ne
demanderent pas aux agents de leurs services de propagande qui jou'erent le
rSle d'historiograpkes, d’etre loyaux et viridiques: ils leur demandirent
exactement le contraire.”
JEAN DE PIERREFEU




CONTENTS
PAGE
Preface 13
Introduction 15
CHAPTER
I. August 1914-February 1915. The True Story of the
“ Goeben ” and “ Breslau ” 37
11. February-June 1915. Why Greece did not join the
Allies in the Dardanelles 46
111. June-October 1915. How the Allies came to Salonica 57
IV. The Constantine and Venizelos Myths . . . - . 72
V. October-November 1915. General Sarrail ... 78
VI. December 1915 87
VII. December 1915-MARCH 1916. Troubles at Salonica . 101
VIII. April - September 1916. De Roquefeuil’s Legation
Outrage Squad 116
IX. September-October 1916. Venizelism with de Roquefeuil
as Stage Manager 137
X. October-November 1916. The Shadow of Coming Events 146
XI. October-December 3RD, 1916. The B£nazet Agreement
swept away by Venizelos’ Attack on the King’s Troops
at Ekaterini 163
XII. December 1916. The Armed Demonstration and what
BEFELL 178
XIII. December 1916. The Wrong Men are Punished . . 190
XIV. January-March 1917. The Blockade of Greece . , 201
XV. April-June 1917. King Constantine is Deposed by the
French in defiance of the London Agreement . .218
XVI. June 1917-OcTOBER 1920. Venizelos installed in Athens
under the French guns. Venizelos swept away by a
General Election 230
XVII. November 1920-NovEMBER 1922. The Disaster in Asia
Minor. The Military Dictatorship .... 242
XVIII. December 1922-February 1923. The Execution of the
Royalist Leaders. The Expulsion of the King . 263
XIX. Conclusion 275




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
King Constantine of Greece Frontispiece
FACING FACE
King George I of Greece 32
King George II of Greece 32
Translation of M. Venizelos’ Autograph Order .... 48
M. Venizelos 64
Commander de Roquefeuil 80
Admiral Lacaze, French Minister of Marine .... 80
M. Politis 96
General Sarrail, Commander of the Allied Forces at Salonica . 96
Captain Chamonard 112
Admiral Dartige du Fournet . . . . . . .112
French Secret Orders 128
Plan showing the Environs of the Royal Palace . . . 152
Bullet-proof Breast-plate found in M. Venizelos’ Room after
his Flight 168
Rifles bearing French marks found in Venizelos’ House in Athens 168
King Constantine embarking at Oropos 184
M. Jonnart 184
The Court-martial on the ex-Ministers 208
King Constantine decorating Regimental Flags after the Greek
Victory at Eski-Sehir 224
King Constantine landing at Smyrna in 1920 .... 224
Autograph Letter from M. Poincar£ . . . . . . 246
Battery of two Guns mounted by the Revolutionaries on Lycabetos
Hill 256
The Funeral of King Constantine at Naples .... 272




PREFACE
STRANGE things happened during the Great War, but
surely nothing stranger than the exploits of Commander
de Roquefeuil of the French navy which are recounted
in these pages. We can find no better illustration of the risks
incurred by a Government when it leaves an irresponsible
Intelligence officer in a neutral capital without supervision,
for by dabbling in local politics, persistently furnishing his
Government with false information and indulging in “ intelli-
gence stunts ” he fooled the Press of the Allied countries,
founded the Constantine legend, created Yenizelism, forced
the Allies to recognize the Provisional Government, deposed
the King of Greece and very nearly caused a rupture between
the Allies at a critical point in their fortunes. No one man
could have done all these things but for the fact that his
Government had unwisely allowed him to communicate
directly in code with Ministers in Paris.
Intelligence officers are as necessary to governments as
they are to banks and business houses and as long as they are
under efficient and wise control they are no more dangerous
to a State than a daily newspaper is dangerous to a household.
Through the pages of history one may see how secret service
or the absence of it, has determined the fate of nations. If
the Pharaoh Menptah had had an efficient Intelligence Service
there would have been no Exodus. When a war breaks out
Governments are wont to feed their Intelligence Service
with both hands and it is an unwritten law that it is not to be
called upon for an account of what it spends. The directing
officer is left free to engage and to dismiss his agents whose
identity is necessarily kept secret. Suddenly this officer,


often selected at haphazard, finds himself the only man in
the public service provided with ample funds and responsible
to nobody. It would be strange if he confined himself solely
to his legitimate work of furnishing truthful information
without yielding to the temptation to mould events as he
would have them. If he have any histrionic instinct—and
that is to be found in many of us—he will indulge it, for the
minor players are ready to his hand and he has no box office
to depend on for their salaries. The seamy side of the calling
in war-time is that he must depend for his information upon
the dregs of the population of the country to which he is sent.
Heaven alone knows how these informants contrive to live
when there is no war to batten on. At a hint of war they
come creeping out of their lairs, tattered and unshaven, to
hang about the offices of naval and military attaches. All
they ask is to be told what these officers most want to know
and away they go into the haunts of creatures like themselves
to pick up scraps of sensational news which they peddle to
their customers at so much an item.
Experienced Intelligence officers take steps to check the
accuracy of the information that reaches them in this way :
de Roquefeuil took none. His fixed policy was to compel
his Government to occupy Greece by force and if the facts
were stubborn against his policy he did not scruple to change
them. Some of his exploits may appear incredible, but all
are attested by documents and unimpeachable evidence
hitherto unpublished. For giving me access to these I have
to thank friends in many countries.
B.T.


THE ALLIED SECRET
SERVICE IN GREECE
INTRODUCTION
THE modern history of Greece as a separate State dates
from 1821 when a war of independence was-pro-
claimed by Prince Alexander Ypsilantis, a Phanariot
Greek in the service of Russia. Until that date Greece had
been misgoverned and exploited by the Turks. Her boys
had been stolen to form the rank and file of the Janissaries •,
her girls to enter the Turkish harems. A rising in the Pelo-
ponnesus in the same year was so successful that independence
was proclaimed in January 1822. Unfortunately the success-
ful liberators could not agree among themselves and there
were civil wars in the two succeeding years. It was in 1823
that, partly through the example set by Lord Byron, and the
thrill of horror caused by the savage atrocities of the Turks,
volunteers from France, England, Germany and the United
States joined the Greek army. But in 1824 the Sultan in-
voked the aid of Mehemet Ali, Pasha of Egypt, and a body
of well-disciplined Arabs landed in the Peloponnesus and
reconquered nearly all the territory which the Turks had
lost. In spite of the foreign soldiers and sailors, Athens was
recaptured by the Turks on June 2nd, 1827.
Foreign Governments were indifferent ; they regarded the
Greek rebellion against Turkey as another eruption of revo-
lutionary feeling fostered by the French Revolution, but
great pressure was now being brought upon them by their


peoples and a fortunate accident precipitated a change in
their policy. The fleets of England, France and Russia were
cruising about the coasts of the Peloponnesus to prevent the
Turkish fleet from ravaging the Greek islands or mainland.
Winter was coming on : the Admiral decided to anchor in
the Bay of Navarino where the Turkish fleet was lying. The
Turks mistook the object of their coming and opened fire
upon them on October 20th, 1827 ; there ensued a general
engagement in which the Turkish fleet was annihilated.
Three months later the French cleared the Morea of hostile
Turks and Greece became independent.
Capodistrias, who had been in the Russian service, was
appointed President of Greece for seven years. His notions
of government were Russian and he soon produced a state
of exasperation which ended in his assassination on October
9th, 1831. Anarchy followed because throughout the
struggle for independence, in which there were striking
examples of heroism and devotion, no single man endowed
with a talent for political leadership had emerged.
The Powers could no longer look on with indifference.
A Convention was signed in 1832 in which definite frontiers
were laid down and the independence of Greece was officially
recognized. It remained to find a King for the new kingdom.
No prince belonging to one of the Great Powers could expect
support from the other Powers. Eventually the choice fell
upon Prince Otho of Bavaria. He was little more than a
boy and what the Greeks required in the critical moment of
their fortunes as an independent State was a strong, energetic
and authoritative man. If. Otho had come to them alone
and an attempt had been made to govern with a Greek ministry
it is doubtful whether the country would have been satisfied.
As it was, King Otho came with a triumvirate of Bavarians
who divided the ministerial posts among themselves and acted
as Regents without admitting a single Greek to any important
office. Bavarian troops were sent as a bodyguard for the


King. The Regents had no understanding of the Greek
character. In one sphere only did they render real service
to the country —by developing the national defences and
forming the basis of an efficient army.
The boy king Otho set himself whole-heartedly to win the
affections of his new subjects. His love for the country was
fanatical and the tragedy of his reign was that he was never
able to acquire a real understanding of the Greek people.
He would spend days in the drafting of a Royal Proclamation
in order to invest it with classical form in wording and style,
but its contents troubled him not at all. At his magnificent
Court functions both he and his Queen adopted Greek
national dress and insisted upon the fashion they had set
being followed by their guests. The royal couple fostered
national art and spent their leisure in visiting the sick and
suffering.
Meanwhile his Bavarian Ministers were attempting to
govern Greece as if it were a petty German State, blind to
the fact that the configuration of a country broken up by
valleys, precipitous mountain ranges, cataracts and winter
torrents made centralized government impossible. There
were no roads. It was impossible for the central government
to keep in touch with the remoter districts. The administra-
tion in these districts broke down ; the increase in brigandage
became alarming. Crushing taxation imposed to provide
pay for the foreign troops and to cover the interest on loans
and the cost of administration was turning peaceful herdsmen
into marauders. In ten years the discontent became so acute
that a bloodless revolution broke out on September 15th,
1843, and compelled the King to dismiss his Bavarian
Ministers ; to accept a Cabinet of Greeks and to summon
a national assembly to draft and pass a Constitution.
For a decade the interest of the Western countries in the
destiny of Greece had been declining, for the resources of
the country seemed to be as stagnant as they were under the
B


Turkish domination. The interest on Government loans was
not paid ; nothing was being done to give an impulse to trade
or navigation ; except for a few roads near Athens no high-
ways were constructed ; brigandage was increasing and to
make matters more serious there was a growing inclination
towards piracy. Matters might have dragged on for a time
if it had not been for the Crimean War. Suddenly King
Otho plunged into the mad adventure of entering the war to
wrest Epirus, Thessaly and Crete from the Turks. Without
any preparation, without the support of any Great Power,
King Otho crossed the northern frontier at the head of a
small and ill-equipped army and Europe seemed in danger
of becoming involved in a spreading war in the Balkans.
The Governments of England and France took alarm, block-
aded the Piraeus and landed troops to maintain the neutrality
of Greece and thus they held the country down for nearly
three years. This killed the last remnant of European sym-
pathy with the Greek people whose country was regarded as
a bankrupt State without the capacity for prudent adminis-
tration. The reaction was felt in Greece itself where a
movement for deposing King Otho began to spread.
The first disturbances broke out in the early months of
1862. The garrison of Nauplia revolted, and though the
town was retaken by Government troops, the germ of revolt
had taken root. Thunder-struck at the discovery that they
had lost popularity with their people, King Otho and Queen
Amalia embarked on the steam frigate that bore the Queen’s
name to make a royal progress through the country and win
back some of the lost ground, but they had got no further
than Kalamata when tidings reached them that General
Grivas had raised the banner of revolt at Vonitza. King
Otho returned post haste to Athens only to find that half the
garrison had entrenched itself in the higher quarters of the
town while the other half defended the Palace and the National
Bank. On the King’s arrival on October 22nd Kolokotronis,


one of the heroes of the populace, led the Lifeguards against
the rebels and there were many casualties. But matters were
moving too quickly ; while the Lifeguards were holding
the Palace, the rebels overpowered the police and broke open
the prisons. The Commandant at the Piraeus held out for
a time, but at last fell riddled by bullets.
For two days the royal pair remained safe on board their
frigate, but on October 24th the foreign Ministers, including
the Bavarian Minister, went on board to present their unani-
mous advice to King Otho to leave the country, at any rate
for a time. To hear was to obey. King Otho drafted a
manifesto to his subjects agreeing to withdraw from the
country for a time in order to save her from the horrors of a
civil war; neither then nor afterwards would he consent to
abdicate.
Meanwhile Demetrios Bulgaris had succeeded in forming
a new Government which issued an appeal to all Greeks,
whether at home or abroad, to elect a new king by universal
suffrage. Only ten days were allowed for reflection. This
popular plebiscite had a remarkable result. Prince Alfred of
England, the Duke of Edinburgh, headed the poll with
230,066 votes ; next came the Duke of Leuchtenberg—
a Romanoff—with 2,400 votes. “An orthodox King,”
1,917; the Czar, 1,841; “a King,” 1,763; Prince
Napoleon, 245 ; ‘‘ a French Imperial Prince,” 246 ; a
Republic, 93 ; Prince Amadeo of Italy, 15 ; the Count of
Flanders, 7 ; Prince William of Denmark, 6 ; Prince
Ypsilanti, 6 ; King Otho, 1.
The election of the Duke of Edinburgh as King of Greece
was proclaimed throughout the kingdom ; Athens was
illuminated ; the warships in the Piraeus fired a salute of
101 guns, yet the Greeks were to learn that their political
fate was not in their own hands, but in those of the Great
Powers. The Duke of Edinburgh declined the invitation ;
France and Russia would never have consented to the corona


tlon of a British prince when they were the equals of Great
Britain as guarantors of Greek independence. The struggle
for a preponderating influence in Athens which had con-
tinued throughout the reign of King Otho, would have been
rudely brought to an end by the accession of a British Prince
to the throne : France and Russia had candidates of their
own and the Bavarian Minister joined in saying that if a king
were in question King Otho was more than ready to come
back. The Greeks formed parties, each supporting a different
candidate, and so strong became their rivalry that it came to
bloodshed.
Great Britain had proposed in succession four princes, all
Germans or Austrians ; France wanted the Due d’Aumale ;
finally Russia joined with England in supporting the candi-
dature of the young Danish prince, William, the younger
brother of Queen Alexandra, who was then a naval cadet
only sixteen years old. It was the moment when the betrothal
of the Prince of Wales to Princess Alexandra was about to
be made public. The King of Denmark favoured the pro-
posal. The British Minister in Athens was instructed to
put the Danish prince’s name before the National Assembly.
It says much for the hard practical sense of the Greek people
that they should at once have recognized the proposal as a
way out of their party disputes and should have accepted it
with enthusiasm. Unanimously the Assembly passed a decree
electing Prince Christian William Ferdinand Adolph George
Sovereign of Greece under the title of George I. Athens was
illuminated and a thanksgiving service was celebrated in the
Cathedral.
The diplomatic wheels of those days moved so slowly
that it was three months before the ceremonial acceptance of
the throne of Greece was made to the Greek Commissioners
by King Frederick VIII of Denmark on behalf of the young
prince. He announced in his speech that it had been made
a condition of the acceptance that the lonian Islands, then


administered under the British flag, should be deded to the
Greek kingdom. When the news reached Athens the deputies
rose from their seats crying “ Long live the King 1 ” and the
national enthusiasm was unbounded. For a brief moment all
the Powers of Europe seemed to have buried their differences,
with some reservation on the part of Prussia since the new
king was a Dane and the affairs of Schleswig-Holstein were
fresh in memory. Even from Turkey came telegrams of
congratulation. Then this lad of sixteen set forth upon his
travels—to Russia, to England and to France—the three
protecting Powers—to thank them for his election. It was
eight months since the Greek Chamber had elected him
before he made his entry into Athens on October 29th, 1863.
King George had with him a Danish diplomatist, Count
Sponneck, who might have been very useful to the young
King had he been amiable and tactful. Unfortunately he was
brusque and unadaptable and his repellent manner went far
towards damping the popular enthusiasm for the new King.
It was fortunate that King George himself possessed an
unusual share of the qualities lacking in his courtier. He had
come to the throne under auspices far less favourable than
King Otho, his predecessor. Otho had brought with him a
body of trained Bavarian troops : George had only the
Greek army to depend on—the very force that had rebelled
against the last King. Otho found a balance in the Treasury ;
at King George’s accession there was nothing but a heavy
debt. Otho had had the moral support of popular approval
in every foreign country.; George ascended the throne at a
moment of disillusion when the Greeks had unjustly been
judged as a half-civilized and turbulent race, almost as difficult
to govern as its former oppressors, the Ottoman Turks.
The congratulations received by King George on his journey
to his new kingdom had all contained a warning undertone
of pessimism.
Fortunately this had entirely failed to damp the young


King’s enthusiasm. From the outset he was determined to
become a Greek and to govern only for the welfare of his
people. That his first approaches were full of promise may
be judged from the fact that the people of Corfu called him
“ Hagios Georgios ” —St. George. He was only eighteen
and a half and he had a flow of animal spirits that made it
difficult sometimes for elderly diplomatists to maintain their.
gravity, but he had more than his share of simple dignity
and charm. The qualities that won his subjects were his
candour and truthfulness, his firmness and his high personal
courage. Probably the Greeks never quite realized how much
they owed to him as a link with the Courts and the Ministers
of the Western countries at a time when their goodwill was
most needed. Nevertheless, he took a common-sense view
of his position and like Leopold I of Belgium—to quote that
monarch’s jest—he let it be known to his subjects that he
“ kept a portmanteau ready packed ” for leaving them when
they had had enough of him.
There were many years of hard work before him. During
the revolutionary period the Civil Service had been invaded
by a horde of inexperienced adventurers ; the machinery of
Government had come to a standstill ; the Courts of Justice
were not sitting, for the prison gates stood open and prisoners,
those “ victims of tyranny,” were loose upon society. Taxes
remained unpaid ; the Treasury was empty.* First, the
parliamentary machine had to be set going and a Constitution
had to be framed. There was plenty of good material in the
country if it could be harnessed, but the debates on the
Constitution dragged on for a year until King George himself
stepped in to insist upon the completion of the work. Thus
Greece became the first Monarchy to abolish a second
Chamber and one of the first to adopt universal suffrage.
In view of the events presently to be related it is important
to remember that under the Constitution the King was not
responsible to Parliament ; that he had the right to appoint


and to dismiss Ministers and officials at his pleasure and that
he could dissolve the Chamber whenever it appeared to be to
the advantage of the country to do so. King George, it is
true, reigned by parliamentary methods, but on several
occasions he did use his prerogative either to dissolve Parlia-
ment or to dismiss a Ministry.
I have said that the Greeks are not, as is commonly believed,
an impressionable people prone to gusts of enthusiasm and
reactions of depression and despair, but a hard-headed,
logical race with a keen instinct for their moral and material
advantage and a high courage in moments of national danger.
They are, however, cursed with an excessive political instinct
and an itch for party polemics. When a Greek joins a party
its leader becomes in a sense his spiritual director ; he votes
as he is told to vote because in his leader’s fate his own is
bound up. The outdoor cafes frequented by all classes
resemble political clubs where politics rather than the current
topics of the day are hotly discussed. The natural eloquence
of many Greeks, their admiration for good oratory, are almost
a national demerit since often the man of slender intellectual
and political equipment has the gift of holding an audience
spellbound by his flow of words. In less than three years
and two months from the date of the King’s accession the
ministries changed eleven times : there were seven different
Prime Ministers and with every change the leading permanent
officials were changed too. When at last a Cabinet was
formed with a solid majority in the Chamber and a prospect
of existence for some years another revolt against the Turks
broke out in Crete threatening to plunge Greece into war.
There were in Crete at that time about 300,000 inhabitants,
of whom only 70,000 were Moslems, and these Moslems
also were Greeks whose ancestors had adopted the Mahom-
medan religion as a protection against persecution by their
Turkish rulers. Ever since the Greek war of independence
Great Britain had been urging the Powers to let Crete be


included in the Greek Monarchy. In February 1830 Lord
Palmerston had said, “ I venture to predict that if Crete is
not included in the Kingdom of Greece, we shall run the risk
of war on account of that island before many years have passed.”
In 1863 Great Britain had sent an envoy to Constantinople
to urge the Sultan to cede the island, but without result.
At the beginning of the revolt the Greek Government found
itself in a tight place. The weakness of its Army and Navy
placed a war with Turkey entirely out of the question, but
the popular clamour for sending help to the hard-pressed
Cretans was damaging the Ministry’s prestige. The Turkish
Commander was putting down the rebellion with barbarous
severity ; day after day British ships were bringing crowds of
homeless refugees to the Piraeus and within a year the popu-
lation was increased by 60,000 destitute refugees who had
to be cared for by funds drawn from the exhausted Treasury.
While the Greek Government observed a correct attitude
towards Turkey, private corps of volunteers were drilling
and Greek ships were being fitted out and freighted to trans-
port these corps as well as munitions and provisions, to run
the blockade in Crete.
On December nth, 1868, the Turks delivered an ulti-
matum to Greece demanding the disarmament of the volun-
teers within three days and the closing of Greek ports to
blockade-runners. Without waiting for the reply the Turkish
fleet attacked the Greek cruiser Enosis off Syra ; the Greek
Minister at Constantinople received his passports and the
Porte served expulsion orders on all Greek subjects within
its territory. The only possible reply to these measures was
for Greece to mobilize, and this brought the Powers into
action, since a minor explosion in the powder magazine of
Europe—the Balkans—would be a menace to the peace of
the world. A conference was convened in Paris and a
compromise was forced upon Greece and Turkey. Crete
was to remain within the Turkish Empire, but Turkey had


to agree to extensive reforms in its government. This tem-
porary expedient did little towards alleviating the tension.
The Turks continued to lay villages waste and to cut down
their olive trees and the Greeks acquired greater self-confidence
now that they had successfully defied the power of the Turks.
The bonds between the Greeks at home and their kinsmen'
overseas and between King George and his people were
drawn closer.
King George had now emerged from boyhood, but he was
called upon to play a part such as seldom fell to the lot of
European princes in those days. He had to train his servants
personally in the ways of Courts and household management
because there was no one else to train them. He had himself to
correct the lapses from the civilized code of which some of his
Court officials were guilty. He was oppressed by his loneliness
and it was felt on all sides that he ought to marry. In October
1867 he wedded the Grand Duchess Olga of Russia, the
daughter of the Czar’s brother Constantine. His young
queen at once became immensely popular with the Greeks
and.her popularity was doubled when on July 22nd, 1868,
she gave birth to the Crown Prince, Constantine, whom the
Greeks hailed as their first national king—Greek by birth,
by religion and by education—since the fall of Byzantium ;
the prince predestined to wear the imperial crown under the
dome of St. Sophia.
A year later an act of brigandage threatened to involve
Greece in complications with foreign countries. In April
1870 Lord and Lady Muncaster drove out with the secretaries
of the British and Italian Legations to Marathon. They had
an escort of gendarmes and the roads were patrolled by
infantry, but on the road home the entire party was captured
by Greek brigands. The ladies were liberated to obtain a
ransom fixed at £35,000. The money was actually on its
way, but the brigands, whose flight into Turkish territory
was cut off, murdered their four male hostages in cold blood.


The indignation of the foreign Press was directed not so
much against the bandits as against the Greek Government.
The newspapers had forgotten that the Powers themselves
had refused the Greeks leave to police Thessaly. King
George was astute enough to turn the agitation to advantage
by getting his Parliament to enact severer laws against
banditry ; to strengthen the gendarmerie and sweep the
northern provinces clear of brigands and to extend telegraph
lines in every direction. These measures would never have
been consented to but for the Marathon tragedy and they
were entirely successful.
King George’s services to the State were even more con-
spicuous in his dealings with foreign States, for through him
an end was put to the continual subterranean intrigues between
the Great Powers to obtain predominant influence in Greece.
There followed a few years of comparative calm until war
broke out between Russia and Turkey in 1877. King
George, who had known how to wait, now saw the moment
for action. He mobilized his army and sent it to the frontier
and the Powers, who shook in their shoes whenever a Balkan
war loomed on the political horizon, set vigorously to work
to procure the recall of the Greek troops. When threats
failed they began to hint at rectifications of the Greek frontier.
King George made note of the promises and withdrew his
army, holding in his hand good cards when the Berlin Congress
was convened.
Greece had no status in the Congress, but King George
had made so favourable an impression abroad that his repre-
sentatives were allowed to attend and put forward their
claims. Fortune favoured them. The extraordinary success
of the excavations of German archaeologists at Olympia had
predisposed Bismarck in favour of Greece. He thought that
the Greek claims might be made a bulwark against the growth
of Pan-Slavism in the Balkans. Austria-Hungary, having her
own aims to serve, was glad to welcome any extension of the


I
Greek frontier at the expense of Turkey. But it was rather
the personal esteem in which King George was held that
turned the scale when it came to the revision of the Turkish
frontier. The two Turkish provinces of Thessaly and Epirus
were awarded to Greece, but the Sultan paid small heed to
the award and two years later a dangerous spirit of unrest was
reported, not only from Greece but from Thessaly and Epirus.
Menaced by the spectre of another Balkan war, England and
Germany took the lead in settling a new frontier for Greece
and compelling the Sultan to accept it. It was a frontier that
did not satisfy the Greeks, but at the time it was the best that
could be obtained. War was averted, but the spirit of dis-
content was left to ferment beneath the surface.
For five years it did not break through, but the country
which ought to have been consolidating its prosperity was
still rent with parliamentary faction. So rapid were the
changes of government that in less than twenty years King
George had presented to him forty-two different lists of
Ministers. It was not corruption that incited the party-
leaders to struggle for power, since the poor men among
them died poor and even left their families to the charity of
their friends. Perhaps King George might have intervened
to stop this incessant change of Ministers, but he regarded
it as part of the political self-education of his country and
remained neutral.
The Powers were not left long in any doubt about the
maintenance of peace in the Balkans. In September 1885
Rumelia revolted against the Turks and claimed union with
Bulgaria and the Bulgarians took possession of Philippopolis
three days later. To the surprise of every Foreign Office
it was Russia who protested and Turkey who acquiesced,
but Serbia and Greece were in no temper to acquiesce. Serbia
mobilized. Western Europe held aloof expecting that after
a protracted struggle Serbia would emerge victorious. The
exact opposite happened. The Serbians were defeated at


Slivnitza and Prince Alexander was preparing his triumphal
march to Belgrade when the Austrians warned him that if he
moved a step further he would find an Austro-Hungarian
army facing him. As usual, the Powers exercised their
ingenuity in finding a compromise. They were on the point
of settling the Balkan question to their own satisfaction when
Greece mobilized her army and her fleet and marched to her
frontier. Turkey responded by a counter-mobilization ; war
was expected to break out within the week. On this Lord
Salisbury adopted the strange policy of warning the Greek
Government that the Powers would not allow the Greek navy
to operate at sea. It was a futile Note, for the Greek fleet,
small as it was, felt equal to sinking the Sultan’s rusted iron-
clads and the Greeks were proud of their fleet. The Allied
squadrons assembled in Suda Bay and now it was France
who hesitated to bring force to bear upon a small sovereign
State and France who found a pacific way out of the difficulty
by peaceful negotiation. Lord Rosebery, the new Foreign
Secretary, had obtained from the rest of the Great Powers
approval of an ultimatum threatening a blockade unless the
Greeks recalled their troops : the French Minister personally
persuaded Greece to give way, and though the good news was
communicated to the other Powers, Lord Rosebery’s ulti-
matum was actually delivered and the combined squadron
steamed into the Gulf of Salamis and anchored off Phaleron.
The excuse was that the Powers did not , consider the promise
of the Greek Prime Minister “ satisfactory ” and demanded
a fresh declaration the same evening. They would have by
force what had already been given under persuasion.
This time the pride of the Greeks revolted. They refused
to continue the negotiations and on May 7th diplomatic
relations were severed and the blockade was made effective.
It was maintained for three weeks when a change of Ministers
made it possible to . satisfy the Powers. This high-handed
action, taken in spite of the humane and successful efforts of


France to effect a peaceful solution, rankled deeply in the
Greek mind. It was the chief cause of the violent explosion
of popular feeling that took place in 1897.
At King George’s accession the population of Greece was
a little over a million and its area about 19,000 square miles.
By the cession of the lonian Islands in 1864 and of Thessaly
and part of Epirus in 1881 the area was increased to 25,000
square miles. It is now about 49,000 square miles with a
population of over six millions.
All through the ’nineties the financial policy of the succes-
sive Ministries had been reckless and in the incessant struggle
between the rival parties of Delyannis and Trikoupis the
popular feeling against the Turks had been freely exploited
for electoral purposes. Delyannis was one of those reckless
politicians who subordinate all interests and scruples to
winning an election ; Trikoupis’ great plan was to unite
the Balkan States in an offensive and defensive alliance. In
March 1892 King George exercised his prerogative by dis-
missing the Delyannis Cabinet in spite of its large majority
in the Chamber, purely on financial grounds. Delyannis
retorted by stumping the country against the King with so
little result that at the next election his rival was returned with
an overwhelming majority. The result of all these party
squabbles and reckless expenditure was that the Navy and
Army were starved and were quite unfit to engage in war
with a better-equipped enemy. Nevertheless, the party
leaders continued to incite the people against the Turks whose
atrocities in Crete had wrought Greek indignation to fever
heat. The news of the massacres in Crete made it impossible
for the cautious Government to resist the popular demand
for war.
The first step taken in February 1897 was to send the
Greek fleet to Suda Bay and to transport to Crete Colonel
Vassos with 2,000 men. This was provocation enough for
the Sultan to declare war. Greece could expect no support


from the other Balkan States, but as the champion of defence-
less Christians in Turkey, in spite of her inferior military
strength, she commanded the approval of sympathizers in
every part of the globe. Volunteers flocked to Athens,
enthusiastic but untrained ; the people were hoarse with
cheering, but the Crown Prince Constantine, who had been
placed in command of the Greek army, had no illusions about
the ultimate end of the war if the Turks brought their full
military strength to bear in Thessaly. His orders from the
Cabinet were to act strictly on the defensive and prevent the
enemy from turning his flank. The Greek army was short
of material and horses •, its officers and men lacked training
and its transport was defective. Moreover, General Makris,
instead of obeying orders, chose to conduct an independent
campaign of his own. The result was a defeat, and immediately
the temper of the people changed in a flash from fanatical
enthusiasm to black despair. As a personal favour to King
George the Tsar intervened with the Sultan and the Turkish
advance was stopped. Delyannis was dismissed and M.
Zaimis formed a Cabinet.
The new Ministry was compelled to open negotiations for
an Armistice. On May 11 th the Powers offered mediation
on condition that the Greeks recalled their troops from Crete
and acknowledged the autonomy of the Island. An Armistice
was concluded on May 20th and the Powers made it clear
to the Porte that they would not allow hostilities to be
resumed. Thanks to King George’s diplomatic connections
the result of the war was less disastrous to Greece than might
have been expected. Her frontier line was altered slightly
to the advantage of Turkey ; she was to pay a war indemnity
of four million Turkish pounds ; the privileges of Greek
subjects in Turkey were not to be abrogated.
There was nothing now for Greece but to set her house in
order. An International Commission to control her foreign
debt had to be accepted. There had, of course, been some


feeling against the Crown Prince at the time of* the defeat,
but this had already died down when on February 27th, 1898,
an attempt was made to assassinate King George by firing
at him when driving in the neighbourhood of Athens. This
attempt on his life greatly increased his popularity. A church
was built on the spot and Thanksgiving services were held
on the anniversary of the outrage. Two months later the
King made a tour of inspection throughout the country and
was received everywhere with enthusiasm, but the canker of
party feuds was still eating into the heart of Greece. It was
enough for a Ministry to propose a reorganization of the
Army for a rival party to arouse the country with the cry of
excessive taxation. In 1904 Delyannis was assassinated, but
the removal of one leader did not make for peace and a move-
ment was set on foot to revise the Constitution by creating
an Upper House. It did good in diverting public opinion
from party polemics and in awakening it to the real needs of
the country.
In July 1908 the world was startled by the success of the
Young Turks and the deposition of the Sultan. Bulgaria
took advantage of the upheaval to declare her independence
and the Cretans by proclaiming the union of their island with
Greece. But King George wisely kept out of the turmoil,
knowing that the Young Turks would welcome a war with
Greece as a safety valve for the unrest in the Ottoman army.
These were difficult days, for the Cretan proclamation had
given birth to a revolutionary movement among the Greek
officers and it was certain that the Cretans would elect members
to the Greek Chamber. If these were refused admittance
the indignation in Greece would be unbounded ; if they
were admitted the Turks might well declare war. Gradually
it was being realized by the people that the real enemies of
the State were the politicians. It is not known who founded
the Military League upon the model of the Turkish Com-
mittee of Union and Progress, though at the beginning it


was in no way anti-dynastic. It drew up a list of demands
and when these were refused it organized a military demon-
stration as a threat. A little later it demanded the with-
drawal of the King’s sons from the Army, because they
interfered with promotion, though the princes themselves
had never sought promotion and the Crown Prince Constan-
tine had had the position of Commander-in-Chief forced
upon him. Immediately there was a counter-demonstration
by Royalists of all classes and the Military League had to
fall back upon demands for reform in the Army and Navy.
It began to interfere with the Chamber and to force bills
through by threats of violence. It became so arrogant that
at last the public revolted and the King was implored to
have its leaders arrested. Officers serving with the colours
were allowed to stand for election to the Chamber and a
captain actually became Minister for War and issued orders
to Generals !
The position was chaotic; a man had to be found who
was capable of restoring order. The Military League had
summoned from Crete Eleutherios Venizelos to help them,
but he was not to become their partisan. It was not long
before he showed himself to be an accomplished strategist.
The remedy he proposed was to summon a National Assembly,
though this was not provided for in the Constitution. The
Chamber passed the necessary Bill, whereupon the Legislative
Assembly and the Military League were dissolved together.
The National Assembly was opened by the King on September
14th and proceeded to revise the Constitution. The King
now appointed Venizelos to be his first Minister, though he
had a following of only 80 deputies out of 358. He was
defeated five days later and he resigned. Immediately a huge
indignation meeting was convened to support Venizelos and
on the following day the Chamber, like a beaten cur, reversed
its vote and gave him a huge majority. On this he dissolved
the Chamber and proceeded to an election campaign. A


KING GEORGE II OF GREECE
KING GEORGE I OF GREECE


Ministerial warning was sent to officers not to meddle with
politics. In the election that followed Venizelos secured a
majority of 300 in a house of 364.
The new House completed its overhaul of the Constitution
within six months. The Army and the Navy were to be
reorganized by French and British officers respectively.
Money was forthcoming from the proceeds of a Government
loan for an entire equipment of the defences and for public
works, and having done that the Assembly dissolved, leaving
the future to an ordinary Chamber. There were bitter
attacks from the old party leaders, but Venizelos proved equal
to them : he returned to the Chamber with a majority of
90 per cent, of the deputies. If his place in history rested
only upon his achievements in those few pre-war years he
would well deserve the title of benefactor to his country.
Within two years of its revolution the Committee of Union
and Progress in Turkey had disappointed all the hopes that
had centred round it : it was even more hated than the
Reactionaries whom it had displaced. In 19 11 its army
was defeated in Yemen, Albania was in revolt and without
warning the Italians had attacked Tripoli. The Balkan
States were working at remodelling their armies, each bent
upon winning outlets for their produce either by rail or sea.
As early as the Autumn of 19 11 they were secretly concerting
a combined action for the Spring of 1912 and it was not long
before the Turks were warning the Western Powers of the
threat of a new war. The fear of war impelled the Powers
to restrain the Balkan States if they could, but these replied
in identical terms that Article XXIII of the Berlin Treaty
promised by all the Great Powers had never been fulfilled and
the Berlin Treaty was then a generation old. A Note was
communicated to the four Balkan States promising to make
the necessary representations to the Sublime Porte, but so
little was the imminence of the danger understood that on
October Bth, while Sir Edward Grey was assuring the House
c


of Commons that peace would be preserved, Montenegro had
already declared war and the Balkan armies were mobilized.
No one thought at that time that the Greek army would do
more than hold in check a few Turkish divisions, leaving the
Serbians and Bulgarians free to push forward. It was for-
gotten that the Greek fleet was now efficient enough to
blockade the Turkish coast and stop the transport of Ottoman
troops from Syria and Tripoli. Its performances were remark-
able. Not only did it effect the transport of munitions to its
Balkan Allies, but on two occasions it engaged the Turkish
battle fleet in action and drove it back crippled into the
Dardanelles.
The Crown Prince, Constantine, was in command of the
Greek army, but it was a very different army from that which
he had led in 1897. Never in the history of modern Greece
had so many volunteers offered themselves for service. Over
40,000 had sailed from America to enlist. The total number
of volunteers exceeded 100,000 and Greece was able to put
into the field an army of 230,000 men. Nearly 200 million
drachmas were subscribed, mostly from Greeks living abroad,
some of whom contributed one quarter of their entire fortune.
In three weeks the army of Thessaly had reached Salonica.
The Turks proposed terms, but the Crown Prince would
agree to nothing less than an unconditional surrender of
Salonica and the fort of Karaburnu. The Turkish army was
disarmed and for the first time for many centuries the Greek
flag waved over the ancient city. But the capture of the city
led to a schism between Greece and Bulgaria. The Bulgarians
entered the town as guests of the Greeks and their general
telegraphed secretly to King Ferdinand, “ From to-day
Salonica is subject to Your Majesty’s sceptre.”
Athens had scarcely finished her rejoicings over the capture
of Salonica when the news of the fall of Preveza and Nikopolis
was received and the Greek army was now pressing forward
to the siege of Yanina. In December Bulgaria, Serbia, and


Montenegro agreed to an armistice, but the Greeks declined
to sign it or to lift the blockade at the Dardanelles. Their
army pushed on until it came into touch with the Serbians.
When the Turks discovered that their line of retreat was in
danger of being cut, the Turkish army broke and fled, but
Yanina still held out until the Crown Prince took command
and pressed the attack so skilfully that the Turks surrendered
the town unconditionally. When they marched in the
Greeks found that the garrison was starving.
King George had followed his victorious army to Salonica.
The celebration of his jubilee was approaching and he let it
be known to his intimates that he intended to abdicate in
favour of his son Constantine. The date he had fixed for his
abdication was October 26th, 1913, immediately after the
festivities of his jubilee. His habit of taking an afternoon walk
unguarded through the streets of Salonica was regarded with
anxiety by members of his general staff who pointed out that
the town was full of dangerous persons.
“lam a fatalist,” said the King with a smile. “ When
my hour comes even if I stay in my house with a strong body-
guard outside, it will be useless.”
At 3 o’clock on 18 th March he went out with an aide-de-
camp for a long walk. They passed a caf£ frequented by
Turkish Albanians. It was noticed that a ragged-looking
man emerged from the cafd and stared at the retreating figure
of the King ; he sat down at a street corner and smoked
cigarettes. At 5.20 the King approached the corner on his
way home followed by two Cretan gendarmes —the only
escort he could be persuaded to take. The man sitting on
the bench had risen. Drawing a heavy pistol from his breast
he fired it at the King’s back at a distance of less than a yard.
The bullet penetrated the heart and death was instantaneous.
The assassin was seized.
Thus perished the maker of modern Greece, one of the
few men then living who could have brought the kingdom


safely through those troubled years. His honesty and courage,
his devotion to his adopted country and his far-sighted capacity
for waiting had triumphed. He died at the moment when
he had seen his territory almost doubled and his people freed
from their ancient oppressors. He was happy in being spared
from seeing the disasters that were to come.
King Constantine now ascended the throne. There was a
perfect understanding between him and his Minister, Yeni-
zelos, at that time and the two worked perfectly together.
In June 1913 after a three days’ battle he crushed the Bul-
garians at Kilkish, near Salonica, and pursued them as far as
Tjoumaya, near Sofia. But for that victory Greece would
never have kept Salonica and would have been confined to
the northern frontier of Thessaly. The nation gave him a
delirious reception in Athens and unfurled in his honour the
Byzantine standard, for the Greeks were quick to realize
the immense moral and material advantages which their King
had won for them by his victory.


CHAPTER I
AUGUST 1914 FEBRUARY 1 9 1 5
THE TRUE STORY OF THE COEBEN AND BRESLAU
WHEN Austria rejected the Serbian reply to her
ultimatum in July 1914 and so precipitated the
Great War, Greece was in a state of internal peace
which has been rare in her history. In 1913 she had emerged
victorious from two consecutive Balkan wars in which her King
had led her so successfully in the field that her territory had
been greatly enlarged. But her people were war-weary, and
since the quarrel between Austria and Serbia seemed in no way
to concern them, their feeling was for a neutrality benevolent
towards England and France. Their sympathies were with
the Allies, and if the vital interests of Greece required the
sacrifice, the great majority of the people was resolved that
their country should range herself on the side of the Allies.
Every Allied success—the Marne was a case in point —was
acclaimed with joy in Athens. Not a voice was raised in
favour of the Central Powers. No individual Greek could
have been described as pro-German, for all the material
interests of Greece were linked with one or other of the Allied
countries. The only spectres were the Bulgarians and the
Turks who were known in Athens, better informed than the
Allied capitals, to be drifting into an armed alliance with
the Central Powers. The Bulgarians were still chafing at the
conditions of the Treaty of Bucharest and the Turks obstinately
refused to recognize the Greek annexation of the islands ceded
to her under the Treaty of London. Moreover Turkey was


known to be strengthening her Navy with the ultimate aim of
recovering these islands and her ill-usage of Greek subjects
living in Turkey pointed to a future armed conflict between
the two countries as inevitable. It was these two factors that
weighed with the Greek Government in favour of neutrality
in the early days of the war, but with King Constantine there
was a third ; more than a million Greeks were settled in Asia
Minor and Constantinople and he was oppressed by the
knowledge that if Greece should range herself on the side of
the enemies of Turkey, the Turks would vent their rage upon
these helpless people.
The first move came from the Kaiser who telegraphed on
July 31st, X 914, 1 to his brother-in-law two pages of flattery
followed by the words, “ If, contrary to my expectation, you
range yourself on the opposing side, Greece will be exposed
to a simultaneous attack from Italy, Bulgaria and Turkey, and
our personal relations will be affected for all time. I have
spoken frankly and I beg you to communicate your decision
without delay with the same absolute frankness.” On August
2nd King Constantine replied that it had never entered his
head to run to the succour of the Serbs, but that it was im-
possible for him to make common cause with their enemies
owing to his treaty of alliance with Serbia and that the interests
of Greece required that she should maintain strict neutrality.
The Kaiser’s marginal notes on this telegram are characteristic.
Against King Constantine’s statement he wrote the word
“ Tosh I ” and proceeded:
“ Inform Athens that I have concluded an alliance with
Turkey and Bulgaria in view of war with Russia, and that I
shall treat Greece as an enemy if she does not join us im-
mediately. I have just said this personally to Theotoky 2
when telling him of the alliance with Turkey and Bulgaria.”
In the margin opposite to King Constantine’s remarks about
1 Kautsky Documents, No. 504;
2 The Greek Minister in Berlin.


neutrality, he wrote, “ Impossible I ” and lower down, “ If
Greece does not immediately join us she will forfeit her
position as a Balkan Power and will never again be supported
by us in her aspirations, but will be considered as our enemy.”
On August 7th King Constantine replied, “ It is
impossible for me to see how I could serve the Emperor by
mobilizing my army. . . . The Mediterranean lies at the
mercy of the combined British and French fleets. Without
being of any use to the Kaiser we should be wiped off the
map.”
The importance of these telegrams lies in the formal
announcement from Berlin that Turkey and Bulgaria were
already allied with Germany and in the implication that
Roumania was on the point of joining them. The Allies
would have been spared many humiliations if they had paid
heed to these warnings.
Everybody remembers the wave of indignation that swept
over England and France on the news that the Goeben and
the Breslau had been coaled in Greece while the British fleet
was in pursuit. Few people knew at the time who had
authorized these ships to coal in a neutral port. The estab-
lished facts are these. On August 6th, 1914, M. Venizelos,
who had been in power for four years and was at that time in
agreement with King Constantine that Greece should maintain
her neutrality, announced to his colleagues that he had been
aroused from sleep at 2 a.m. by the German Minister with a
request that coal should be given to two German merchant
ships to clear for the Cape. He said that he knew that the
coal was destined for the Goeben and the Breslau , but he added,
“ As we decided the other day to coal Allied ships of war, I
felt that we should be failing in our duty as neutrals if we did
not do the same for the Germans.” The instructions to the
Piraeus harbourmaster to dispose of 800 tons of coal to a coal
merchant named Plock for the use of a German merchant
ship anchored at the Piraeus, as will be seen from the facsimile,


was written in M. Venizelos’ handwriting on his own visiting
card. When M. Venizelos realized what his indiscretion was
to cost his country and the Allies an attempt was made to
saddle M. Streit, his Minister for Foreign Affairs, with the
responsibility, hut after the facsimile had been published in
the press he thought it better to avow his action and defend
it on the plea of the obligations of a neutral. But these are to
furnish belligerent ships with no more than sufficient coal to
carry them to their nearest port, not to add to their fighting
value by giving them 800 tons. M. Venizelos, who knew
that Germany claimed Turkey as an ally, could not ignore the
fact that the ships for which the coal was destined were bound
for the Bosphorus. The German steamer, Bogabus, furnished
with false papers for Capetown and skilfully camouflaged
under the assumed Greek name “ Odysseus,” sailed for the
island of Denousi where she had a rendezvous with the German
cruisers.
At this moment the Germans were practically in control of
Constantinople. A majority of the Turkish Cabinet was
strongly in favour of neutrality. The Sultan was for peace ;
Youssuff Izzadin, the Heir Apparent, was openly pro-Ally ;
the Grand Vizier favoured England rather than Germany,
but the Turks were incensed at the commandeering by the
British Admiralty of two war vessels ordered by them from a
private yard in England, and intended to be used against the
Greeks, and Baron Wangenheim, the German Ambassador,
had offered them the Goeben and the Breslau as “ compen-
sation.” The fiction that Turkey had purchased the ships
deceived no one. Under International law they could not
have remained in neutral waters at Constantinople for more
than twenty-four hours, but on passing through the Dar-
danelles they hoisted the Turkish flag, changed their names
and converted their officers and crews into Turks by a simple
change of uniform. Yet, in conversation with the American
Ambassador, Talaat admitted with a laugh that the ships did


not belong to Turkey, and Wangenheim always referred to
them as “ our ships ” and paid for their victualling and up-
keep. These two ships served the Germans the double
purpose of immobilizing the Russian Black Sea fleet and
bringing pressure to bear on the Turks to declare for the
Central Powers at the proper moment by threatening to
bombard Constantinople if they hesitated.
No two vessels have played so decisive a part in history as
these German cruisers. Following the incident of a Turkish
torpedo-boat, manned by German sailors, being stopped and
searched by a British patrol boat and ordered back to Con-
stantinople, Weber Pasha, the German General commanding
the defences of the Dardanelles, closed the Straits without
consulting the Turkish Cabinet and never opened them again
until the end of hostilities. Russia was bottled up without the
power to draw supplies or munitions from her allies ; her
victorious army was paralysed and the ultimate revolution
became inevitable. The safe arrival of these two ships in the
Bosphorus, five hours ahead of their pursuers, brought Turkey
into the war and prolonged it for four years at the cost of
many hundred thousand lives and treasure beyond counting.
This unpretentious visiting card of M. Venizelos was
destined to become one of the most fateful documents of the
war. His impulsive folly in writing it laid upon his shoulders
a heavier responsibility for the miseries of the nations than is
borne by any man living except the ex-Kaiser.
The first step taken by the Germans in Turkey was to
force the Turkish Government to decree mobilization which
meant forcing 1,500,000 men to join the colours under pain
of death as deserters ; to requisition animals, food and
merchandise from the Turkish farmers and foreign shop-
keepers. The German Naval even requisitioned
cargoes in the neutral waters of the Bosphorus for the use of
the German Government. Liman von Sanders and von der
Goltz were careering about the streets of Constantinople in


cars requisitioned from private owners as if Constantinople
were a conquered city.
It was not long before the restless spirit of Venizelos began
to chafe at the inaction of neutrality. On August 18 th he
assured his Council that the war would end within three weeks
by the collapse of the Central Powers, and since it was impor-
tant that Greece should find herself on the side of the victors he
proposed to offer military support to England and France.
Several of his colleagues objected and M. Streit, the Foreign
Minister, begged that the question might be deferred to a
special meeting in the afternoon. Venizelos repeated his assur-
ance that the collapse of Germany was imminent and declared
that the question could not be deferred even for a few hours.
On this M. Streit resigned. Actually, before the middle of
August, without the knowledge of the King or any of his
colleagues, he had asked each of the Allied Ministers in
Athens whether, if Greece were to go to the aid of Serbia
and attack Bulgaria, she would be regarded by the Allied
countries as one of themselves. The Ministers had under-
taken to submit the question to their respective Governments,
but no reply was made for reasons that will become apparent
later. After the Council of Ministers, M. Venizelos called
upon Sir Francis Elliot and M. Deville 1 and offered them the
services of the Greek army without conditions. On this
occasion the reply was prompt ; the Allies thanked the Greek
Government, but declined the offer because they thought it
undesirable that the war should spread into the Balkans.
Although technically Greece was still neutral, in reality she
had already thrown in her lot with the Allies. She had
allowed the Serbs to form a base and revictualling centre at
Salonica. The National Bank of Greece had opened foreign
credits for Serbia and when the great Austrian offensive of
November had pened, King Constantine had sanctioned the
1 Sir Francis Elliot and M. Deville were the British and French
Ministers.


loan of nearly all his artillery munitions to the Serbs who,
from lack of these, were retreating rapidly before the Aus-
trians. This was an important service to the Allies, who were
themselves running short of munitions. “ Seven days after
the disaster,” wrote M. Deville, “ twenty thousand shells
had reached the Serbs whose soldiers fell on their knees
and made the sign of the Cross before the lorries as if they
had been ikons.” They rallied and the Austrians were driven
back more rapidly than they had come. Thus Greece had
played an important part in the Serbian victory. It is worth
noting that when these shells were replaced by the Allies, it
was found that they were of a calibre too large for the Greek
guns. A protest made through the Greek Minister in Paris
produced the reply that all that the Greeks had to do was to
file them down! This incident was destined to have grave
results ; a few months later, when the Allies were demanding
that Greece should enter the war, they forgot that her small
force of artillery had thus been put out of action by France.
The rapid advance of the Germano-Bulgarian army in the
autumn of 1915 left them no time to make good the mistake.
Yet, fully aware of this fact, in 1916 the French officials
affected to fear an attack upon Sarrail’s rear from the Greek
army.
In the matter of munitions affairs had come to such a pass
that on November 19th, 1914, Romanos, the Greek Minister
in Paris, telegraphed from Bordeaux to say that his Belgian
and Serbian colleagues were complaining bitterly that the
French were not fulfilling their engagements to furnish war
material to their respective armies and therefore he advised
his Government, if it should contemplate joining the Allies,
not to do so without a very clear understanding about the
supply of munitions.
Although the Governments in London and Paris persisted
in declining to believe it, the fact that Bulgaria was about to
join the Central Powers was well known in Athens. In agree


ment with the Greek General Staff M. Venizelos stipulated
that Greece should join the Allies only on condition that
Bulgaria and Roumania did the same. 1
In the middle of November 1914, M. Venizelos had
obtained the King’s consent to intimating to Roumania that
if she was hesitating to join the Allies from fear of the Bul-
garians, Greece would undertake to keep them in check
provided that a force of 100,000 Roumanians were massed
on the frontier. The reply was that Roumania had no intention
of entering the war, but preferred to advise Serbia to make
territorial concessions to Bulgaria to keep her quiet.
On January 23 rd, 1915, Sir Edward (now Viscount) Grey
informed M. Venizelos that if Greece would go to the aid of
the Serbians, then threatened with a fresh Austrian offensive,
the Allies would be disposed to grant her territorial con-
cessions on the coast of Asia Minor. The promise was vague
since it concerned territory which the Allies had still to
conquer. To M. Venizelos this conditional promise seemed
to offer the means of securing the co-operation of Bulgaria and
the reconstitution of a Balkan League including Roumania.
If the Allies were ready to grant to Greece territory in Asia
Minor—territory which he chose to estimate at 62,000 square
miles—why not buy out the Bulgarians by ceding to them the
Macedonian district of Drama-Kavalla, the richest province
in Greece, and make a compulsory exchange of populations ?
He wrote two confidential memoranda to King Constantine
in support of this proposal which would have been intensely
unpopular in Greece. Not being impressed with this sug-
gestion of buying out the Bulgarians at the expense -of his
country, King Constantine took no action upon the memo-
randa. M. Venizelos’ endeavours to obtain, as a preliminary
condition of Greek intervention in the war, a promise of
“ concerted collaboration ” from Roumania had entirely failed
1 The confidential despatch. No. 42965, of November 24th to the
Greek Ministers in London, Bordeaux and St. Petersburg confirms this.


I
and therefore, when on February 16th the Allies again urged
the Greek Government to send its army to the succour of the
Serbs, M. Venizelos replied that to despatch the Greek army
more than 200 miles from its frontier would be to expose its
flank to a Bulgarian attack. “ What is asked of us is im-
possible ; it would result only in the suicide of Greece and
the ruin of Serbia.” 1
The refusal of Greece to send troops to the succour of the
Serbs excited anger in London and Paris against M. Venizelos,
who was accused of shuffling. Although the charge was
unjust it cut Venizelos to the heart and filled his mind with
projects for recovering his lost ground. He had not long to
wait for an opportunity ; the scheme of attacking the Dar-
danelles was maturing as we shall see in the next chapter.
1 Telegram of February i6th, 1915, from M. Venizelos to the Greek
Ministers in the Allied capitals.


CHAPTER II
FEBRUARY-JUNE 1 9 1 5
WHY GREECE DID NOT JOIN THE ALLIES IN THE
DARDANELLES
A T the end of February 19x5 the news that the Allies
/ % were to undertake a strong offensive against the
y % Dardanelles and intended to drive the Turks out
of the ancient Greek capital spread like wildfire through
Athens. The Greek General Staff were strongly opposed to
the plan of operations adopted by the Allies, but with his
habitual optimism M. Venizelos declared his conviction that
the Dardanelles would be forced within a few days and that
if Greece wished to find herself ranged beside the victors there
was not a moment to lose. At all costs she must join in the
expedition. Even after the British had frankly admitted their
mistakes he was found stoutly maintaining that if King
Constantine had listened to his advice in March 1915
and Greece had sent a single division to the Dardanelles,
Constantinople would have fallen, the Turks would have
been reduced to sue for terms, Russia would have been
preserved from revolution and, thanks to Greece, the Allies
would have tasted victory two years earlier. Then the
position of Greece would have been unique in the world.
Statesmen of his breed are apt to console themselves with
such dreams.
In this obsession he summoned Crown Councils on March
3rd and sth to discuss the immediate participation of Greece
in the Dardanelles expedition, M. Venizelos opened the
meeting by saying that his object in summoning to it all the


former Prime Ministers, was to advise the Sovereign in
judging between the policy of intervention in the war advo-
cated by the Government and the policy of maintaining
neutrality. He made it clear that whichever policy might be
adopted by the Council every one present “ should gather
round the Throne and give his support to a new Cabinet that
would be called upon to carry into effect the policy decided
upon—war or neutrality.” His first proposal was to send
the fleet and an army corps, but finding the General Staff
opposed to thus denuding the Bulgarian frontier, at the
second Crown Council at the suggestion of the British Military
he fell back upon despatching the fleet and one
division which, if the British and French fleets were adequate
for forcing the Straits, as he believed they were, would amount
to a formal participation. The opposition of the General
Staff produced strange oscillations in his mind ; at the first
Crown Council he urged King Constantine to sound his
German relations on the question of giving compensations to
Greece in return for her neutrality, adding that though he
himself would have to resign, he would undertake to support
his successor. He pressed the King to do this immediately
through the German Minister in Athens. He admitted “ the
unrestricted right of the Crown to choose another Cabinet,”
but since he could no longer keep his promise to give his
parliamentary support to the new Cabinet, he advised the
King that “ the corollary to his own resignation should be the
dissolution of Parliament.” 1 King Constantine intimated
that he must have time to consider the whole question and
reserved his decision until he had consulted the General Staff
on the following day.
For twenty-four hours the future policy of Greece hung in
the balance, but M. Yenizelos could not wait. He was
possessed with the fear that Greece might arrive too late for
1 Minutes of the Proceedings of the Crown Council in the Archives of
the Greek Foreign Office.


the occupation of Constantinople and he hastened to inform
the Allied Ministers that “ the Royal Government had re-
solved to abandon its neutrality ” and to participate in the
impending operations against Turkey. In a telegram to the
Greek representatives abroad he instructed them to advise
the three Governments to the same effect. Speaking to
Colonel Metaxas, Deputy Chief of the General Staff, he said,
“ I know that my proposal is rash, but I insist upon it
because I have confidence in my star.”
On March 6th M. Venizelos presented himself at the
palace to receive the King’s decision. King Constantine had
spent an anxious day and was now decided that M. Venizelos’
plans, depending as they did entirely on the assumption that
the Allied Fleets could force the Straits, must be abandoned. 1
M. Venizelos was not long in realizing that his arguments
would not prevail with his Sovereign. There were a few long
moments of dramatic silence. King Constantine was standing
at the window, gazing out upon the lawns which he had laid
out himself after the English fashion. Between the clashing
opinions of these two men the fate of Greece hung in the
balance. Venizelos was the first to break the silence.
“ Your Majesty, I see that we cannot agree.”
“ On that point we are agreed,” replied the King.
M. Venizelos immediately took his leave. He announced
to the Chamber the resignation of the Cabinet as a fait accompli.
The questions discussed at the two momentous Crown Councils
had not been brought before Parliament at all.
Since many attacks have been made upon King Constantine,
both during and after the war, for not having joined the
Allies in the Dardanelles expedition, it may be well to recite
what actually happened. By a curious coincidence, on the
very day when Venizelos’ offer of Greek co-operation reached
1 The fact that Venizelos was aware that the British fleet only was to
be used seems to show that there was an improper leakage of information
to Venizelos f om some source, either in London or in Paris.


TRANSLATION OF M. VENIZELOS’ AUTOGRAPH ORDER WHICH ENABLED
THE GERMAN SHIPS, GOEBEN AND BRESLAU , TO ESCAPE
PURSUIT AND BROUGHT TURKEY INTO THE
WAR AGAINST THE ALLIES
“ELEUTHERIOS K. VENIZELOS
begs the Master cf the Port of Piræus to allow the coal merchant Plok to dispose out of
the coal in his possession eight hundred tons in favour of the German
steamers actually in the Port of Piræus."


the Allied capitals (March 6th, 1915) the representatives of
the three Allied Powers were signing a secret treaty in London
assigning Constantinople to Russia. 1 According to the French
documents, Russia had gone so far as to intimate to the French
Government that unless the Russian armies could have
Constantinople as their objective, they could no longer be
counted upon. It was a kind of diplomatic blackmail.
Thenceforward Russia became the supreme arbiter on all
questions affecting Constantinople and she opposed a deter-
mined veto to the Greek offer of participation. The treaty
being secret the Powers were constrained to reject the offer,
using diplomatic phrases that were described as lukewarm.
At a later date Captain Cardale, R.N., Second to Admiral
Mark Kerr, Chief of the British Naval Mission in Greece,
wrote a private letter to his chief from which the following
interesting passage is quoted :
“ When Lord Kitchener was at Mudros in November
1915, Admiral de Robeck, commanding the British fleet,
asked me on board the Lord Nelson to see Lord Kitchener.
Kitchener enquired whether King Constantine was pro-
German or pro-Ally. I replied that he was neither, but
was doing his best for his country and I persuaded Lord
Kitchener to go to Athens to see the King and to discuss
the position with him, especially with reference to the
Dardanelles, as I had expressed the opinion that King
Constantine’s policy was correct. I saw Lord Kitchener
immediately after his interview with the King and the Field
Marshal said, ‘ Cardale, what you said was correct. That
man is right. I spoke to him as one soldier to another,
and when we want them we can have them on our side,
but I told him that I would come back again to see him
in 19x6.’ ”
When Admiral Kerr was asked for his opinion on the
wisdom of Greece sending a division to the Dardanelles, he
Secret Treaties of the Russian (Tsarist) Government.” Hanson.
Diplomatic Secrlte.
D


replied that it was all-important for the Allies that Greece
should remain out of the war until they could support her
against Bulgaria who would have Austria and Germany behind
her; that if Greece were to join the Allies at once Salonica
would be in the hands of the Germans within two months
and the rest of Greece a little later. The British com-
munications in the Mediterranean would then be cut by
German submarines operating from bases in Greek harbours.
The knowledge possessed by King Constantine of the real
intentions of the Bulgarians had been confirmed in a curious
way. Before the end of August 1914, the German Military
Attache in Athens called upon Colonel Metaxas, the Greek
Deputy Chief of Staff, and asked him what action Greece
would take if Germany, Austria and Bulgaria were to attack
the Serbs. Metaxas replied, “We should mobilize imme-
diately.” Forgetting to salute, the German officer caught up
his cap and left the house. Colonel Metaxas saw him running
down the street to the German Legation. A few days later
the Bulgarian army began to hold its military manoeuvres
close to the Serbian frontier. King Constantine telegraphed
to the German Emperor that if the manoeuvres continued he
would mobilize his army. The very next day the manoeuvres
were suddenly cut short and a day later the troops were
demobilized. King Constantine showed the telegrams to
Admiral Kerr, saying, “ Here is the proof that the Bulgarians
get their orders from Berlin.” Admiral Kerr did not fail to
inform the British Minister and Mr. Asquith. These facts
make it clear that if Greece had joined the Allies at that period
she would have had Turkey, Bulgaria and the Central Powers
marching upon Athens and the Allies could have spared no
men to hold them back.
The opinion of King Constantine and his General Staff was
that the Dardanelles could be forced only by a simultaneous
attack by a fleet and strong land forces equipped with the
heaviest artillery. He proved his pro-Ally sentiments by


giving to Admiral Kerr a detailed scheme drawn up by the
Greeks in 1912. He declined to participate in the Dar-
danelles adventure because he was convinced that it must fail
and he could not sanction the useless sacrifice of Greek lives.
The scheme of 1914, which had been worked out by Colonel
Metaxas, was substantially the same as the Anafarta scheme
which was adopted by Sir lan Hamilton with General Stop-
ford’s troops in August 1915.
Nevertheless, on April 14th, as will be seen, King Con-
stantine did offer the whole of the Greek naval and military
forces for service against Turkey, on certain conditions.
Had this offer been accepted, although the result of the
Dardanelles adventure might have been the same, all the
subsequent troubles and the crimes committed in Greece
would have been avoided.
The facts of the Dardanelles failure are well known. The
British Royal Commission of Enquiry laid not a shadow of
blame upon Greece for having failed to participate. Yet M.
Venizelos’ optimism still counted upon a triumph in the
Dardanelles, but day followed day, each bringing a refutation
of his predictions. l His pride was wounded by the growing
popularity of King Constantine.
It is melancholy to look through the files of the Allied
newspapers at this period. The word had gone forth from
the Press Censor : M. Venizelos was to be lauded as “an
illustrious and eminent statesman ” while, on the other side,
there were to be discreet hints at German influences at the
Court in Athens. We may search the files in vain for any
discussion of the military aspect —the one and only cause of
1 It is worth recording that on the day following Venizelos’ resignation
long before Sir Edward Grey had requested the Gounaris Government
to join the Allies—Prince George of Greece came to Sir Francis Elliot
and said : “It is most unfortunate. Venizelos has been trying to rush
the King. His Majesty will consult with the General Staff and make
plans in accordance with the requirements of the military situ-
ation. ’ This was duly reported to London.


the breach between the King and his Minister. Still reluctant
to use his constitutional prerogative of dissolving Parliament,
as M. Venizelos had recommended just before his resignation,
the King sent for M. Zaimis, a man who had kept outside
party politics.
Zaimis accepted the request to form a Cabinet, subject to a
promise from M. Venizelos to support him in the Chamber.
The promise was given, but before the new Cabinet was formed
he withdrew the promise, and M. Zaimis declined the in-
vitation. After calling upon M. Skouloudis, who was unable
to accept on account of illness, King Constantine sent for M.
Gounaris, who had the largest following in the Chamber after
Venizelos. Gounaris formed his Cabinet on March 10th, and
announced that no change would be made in the foreign
policy of Greece. On April 12th, 1915, the Ministers of the
three Powers handed to the Greek Government a note con-
firming their promise of territorial concessions in Asia Minor
if Greece should join them. M. Gounaris immediately asked
for a definition of the promised territorial acquisitions in Asia
Minor. Sir Francis Elliot replied that it meant the town of
Smyrna and a portion of its hinterland. Having received no
instructions the French and Russian Ministers could not
reply. 1
The first task of M. Gounaris* Cabinet was definitely to
settle Greece’s attitude towards the war, and after full con-
sideration it was decided in agreement with the King to enter
the war immediately provided that the Allies would guarantee
Greece against the menace from Bulgaria. On April 14th M.
Gounaris made a formal offer of intervention with the proviso
that the Allies should guarantee the integrity of Greece’s
continental and insular territories including Northern Epirus,
1 “ Archives of Greek Ministry for Foreign Affairs.” Ever since the
Balkan Wars the hope of the Greek Government had centred in opening
a land route towards Constantinople: this aspiration had made it
peculiarly sensitive to encroachments upon its Macedonian frontier.


which was then in Greek military occupation. This document
in the archives of the Allied Foreign Offices makes it clear that
the Cabinet had a twofold apprehension—distrust of Bulgaria
and fear of the dismemberment of Greece, a plan that had
been openly discussed in the Allied capitals. No sooner
did the news of this offer leak out than the German Minister
demanded explanations. M. Gounaris replied frankly, that
if the Ottoman Empire was to be broken up Greece could not
afford to lose the opportunity of sharing in the enterprise.
At that date the Allies were persistently “ backing the
wrong horse.” In spite of every indication that Bulgaria was
pledged to the Central Powers, the Foreign Offices in London
and Paris still clung to the belief that she could be bought off.
Unhappily, M. Venizelos, now out of office, chose this moment
for publishing the text of the two confidential memoranda he
had addressed to the King while he was in office, suggesting
the cession of Greek territory, Kavalla and Drama, to the
Bulgarians, the very territory which was to Greece the prize
of her victory over Bulgaria in 1913. The Allied Cabinets
could no longer treat seriously any offers from the Gounaris
Cabinet based on a guarantee of territorial integrity, now that
a leading statesman of Greece had suggested a cession of
territory to her historic foe. Had not the Bulgarian declar-
ation of war intervened at a later stage, it is probable that the
Allies would have forced Greece to cede that territory. At a
secret meeting of the French Chamber on June 16th, 1916,
M. Delcassd used M. Venizelos’ memorandum as a justi-
fication for his policy of dismembering Greece. “M. Veni-
zelos had recommended to the King certain concessions to
Bulgaria in a document which, so far from feeling embarrass-
ment, he took pains to make public.” 1
The Censors in England and France took good care that
their people should know nothing of the Greek offers of
intervention made after the resignation of M. Venizelos. On
1 Journal Official of October 24th, 1919.


April 25th the Greek Minister in Paris reported an interview
in which M. Delcassd said : “ You contend that Bulgaria is
awaiting an opportunity to invade Serbia, and that if Greece
marches against the Turks nothing can prevent her from
doing so. My Information does not agree with yours. Bul-
garia will never commit such an absurdity. ... In spite of
all the German efforts at Sofia, we believe that Bulgaria will
not abandon her neutrality except in our favour.”
It is difficult to explain how the Allied Governments came
to be so badly informed, unless their secret services were
incompetent, or why they should have treated the warnings
they had received from Athens as coming from a tainted
source. Actually, on April 26th the British Minister called
upon M. Zographos, the Foreign Minister, to caution him
against provoking Bulgaria, since, in the event of dissension
between the two countries, those responsible for the trouble
would forfeit British sympathy.
On April 29th the Greek Minister in Paris telegraphed that
the Allies were at one in declining to accept the Greek offer
with the conditions attached to it. The Greek Minister in
London was not more successful with Sir Edward Grey, who
complained to him of the provocation that Greece was giving
to the Bulgarians.
It happened that the French delegate to the Danube Com-
mission, M. Guillemin, of whom more anon, was passing
through Athens. He was received by the King and his
Ministers, and he urged strongly that Greece should renew
her offer to join the Allies without attaching the condition of
a territorial guarantee against Bulgaria. 1 Believing that M.
Guillemin was in the confidence of the French Government,
the King made a fresh offer of intervention in which Greece
would co-operate with her naval forces and place her territory
and ports at the disposal of the Allies, but would not employ
1 Memorandum of April 17th, 1915. “ Greek Foreign Office
Archives.”


her land forces until the Bulgarian menace was removed.
During the next few days it became evident that in the eyes
of the Allies Greece could do nothing right. On May 4th
M. Delcassee informed Prince George, the brother of King
Constantine, who resided in Paris, that probably this fresh offer
would be declined since it was a partial withdrawal of the
former offer ; that what the Allies wanted was soldiers, not
ships. Two days earlier the German Government had com-
plained that the Gounaris Government was even more hostile
to Germany than M. Venizelos’ had been. On May 6th a
decisive telegram was received from Berlin. Von Jagow had
announced to the Greek Minister that a solid bond had been
concluded between Bulgaria and Turkey, and that if the
Greeks joined the war against Turkey, they would run the
risk of losing Macedonia. Incredible as it seems in the light
of after events, not one of the Allied Governments would
accept the warning. Two treaties had been signed between
Turkey and Bulgaria, the first on August 6th, 1914, and the
second in April 1915. The Allied Governments did not
believe in their existence. In the negotiations that followed
the Allies made it clear that they would accept the co-operation
of Greece only if she joined them unconditionally, and she
was in the tragic position of knowing that Bulgaria had joined
the enemy and that the Allies were trying to bribe her with the
promise of Greek territory.
King Constantine now made a personal appeal to the
French President, M. Poincard, that in exchange for her
co-operation in the war the Allies should guarantee the terri-
torial integrity of Greece. His telegram was delivered
personally to the President by Prince George on May 10th.
The reply was that to guarantee the territorial integrity of
Greece would prevent Bulgaria from joining the Allies ; it
might even lead the Bulgarians to attack Greece forthwith for
fear that such a guarantee would entail the loss of the coveted
province of Kavalla for ever. M. Poincard added that he


would not be surprised to see Bulgaria come into line in two
or three days, and he complained of the Greek Government’s
lack of confidence in the Allies.
At this juncture King Constantine had an attack of pleurisy
which prevented him from taking any part in public affairs
for some weeks. His Government, however, telegraphed to
the Greek Minister in Paris instructing him to inform M.
Delcasse that since the Allies hesitated to give the guarantee
asked for, Greece must remain neutral, but maintain a neutrality
benevolent towards the Allies. On this the Allied Govern-
ments adopted a policy which it would be difficult to defend.
On June 2nd the Greek Minister at Nish reported that the
Allies had asked Serbia to cede Serbian Macedonia to the
Bulgarians if they would immediately enter the war against
Turkey—a suggestion which had been indignantly repudiated
by the Serbian Prime Minister. A similar policy was adopted
towards Greece, culminating on August 3rd in a formal offer
of Kavalla and its hinterland by the Allies to Bulgaria. The
reprobation of this offer was general and outspoken through-
out Greece, but the Allied Censors took good care that none of
these facts should be revealed to the public.
It will thus be seen that the rock on which Greek inter-
vention on the side of the Allies suffered shipwreck was their
refusal to guarantee the territorial integrity of Greece because
they hoped to bribe Bulgaria to join them by the promise of
Greek and Serbian territory.


CHAPTER III
JUNE- OCTOBER 1915
HOW THE ALLIES CAME TO SALONICA
FROM June 1915 the Allies began a policy of pin-
pricks against Greece. In exercising the right of
search of neutral shipping, they began to treat Greek
vessels less favourably than those of other neutrals. The
British fleet intercepted Greek military equipment ordered
from America and compelled Greece to sell it to the
British. On the other hand the Bulgarians were permitted
to import through Dedeagatch as much war material as
they pleased, afterwards destined to be used against the
Allies.
Throughout the late spring King Constantine had been
warning the Allied Ministers in Athens of the secret under-
standing that existed between Bulgaria and Germany, of
which he had private confirmation from Berlin. In London
and Paris these warnings were regarded as a German manoeuvre
to “ bluff” the Allies. On August 3rd, 1915, the Note call-
ing upon Greece to cede Eastern Macedonia to Bulgaria with
the promise of compensation in the region of Smyrna after,
the war, was presented. It was a remarkable procedure in the
history of cynical diplomacy, since it was resorted to at a time
when the Turks had been victorious in the Dardanelles, the
Russians defeated in Poland and the confidence in ultimate
victory severely shaken both in London and Paris. Eastern
Macedonia was the richest agricultural province in Greece
and Greece was friendly to the Allies. The offer to Bulgaria


was an eleventh-hour bribe, because the Allies were still
fatuous enough to believe that Bulgaria could be trusted. M.
Gounaris protested hotly. The Allied Ministers had allowed
it to be known that if Greece refused to part with Kavalla
pressure would be brought to bear upon her. There was a
wave of indignation throughout the country. The German
propaganda service could not afford to neglect so favourable
an opportunity. It now made the most of the injustice done
by nations that had always professed friendship for Greece.
In his memoirs Lord Grey suggests that the reason that led
the Allies to reject the Greek offers to undertake land oper-
ations against Constantinople was the fear that if Greek troops
should enter their ancient capital, Russia might make a
separate peace with Germany. 1 He admits the impropriety
of requiring Greece to cede territory to the Bulgarians. This
being so it is curious that he should have asked the new
Greek Government to offer to participate in the Dardanelles
expedition.
It is not now pleasant to remember how the Allies truckled
to Bulgaria in the hope of winning her to their cause ; how
they tried to bribe her with the promise of territory belonging
to other people and how they remained blind to the last. A
strange commentary on the motives of King Ferdinand has
been given to me by a French deputy who held the important
offices of Rapporteur on the French Budget and chairman of
the Army Committee of the Chamber. At the close of the
Balkan war in 1913, he had occasion to visit King Ferdinand
who, among other marks of favour, presented him with
a casket containing cigarettes each marked with a portrait of
the royal donor. The King said, “ Who knows that I may
not have occasion to seek your help ? If my messenger
should present himself saying that he comes from the person
who gave you this box, will you do what you can to further
the request that he brings ? ” This conversation had been
1 Twentj-five Years, 1892-1916, by Viscount Grey of Fallodon.


»
almost forgotten, when in 1915 a visitor giving a French-
sounding name, rang the bell at the deputy’s flat in Paris and
said that he was the bearer of a message from the personage
who had given him cigarettes two years before. The deputy
received him in private. The visitor said : “ His Majesty
has charged me to confide to you the fact that the whole of
his private fortune amounting approximately to 37,000,000
francs, is lodged in Austrian banks. If he joins the Allies all
this money will be confiscated by the Central Powers. Will
your Government guarantee that if it is victorious in the war,
that sum will be made good to him ? ” He asked for a reply
within twenty-four hours. Upon this the deputy sought an
interview with M. Delcass£, who flouted the idea of bargaining
with King Ferdinand, who was already pledged to join the
Allies in his own interests and would certainly not dare to do
otherwise. When the mysterious messenger was told next
day that the Government must take time to reflect upon the
proposal, he shrugged his shoulders and departed. Within
eight days Bulgaria had joined the enemy, and Delcass£ was
forced to resign. How far the message was genuine, how far
it was designed as an excuse for what Ferdinand knew would
be regarded in the West as an act of treachery, cannot be
determined.
It was represented in the Allied press that the German
propaganda in Athens was formidable ; that it was directed
by a person of extraordinary ability and resource, Baron von
Schenk. This personage went to Athens as a commercial
traveller from Krupp. It must have astonished those who
knew him to read such a description of him ; if the news-
papers had described him as a person of overweening assur-
ance—a useful quality in commercial travellers—they would
have admitted the justice of the description. At first he con-
trived to influence certain Greek newspapers, but the Anglo-
French propaganda service which followed his is believed to
have spent fifteen times more money than he did, and having


bought up all the newspapers that were still in the market,
they speedily put Baron von Schenk out of action. If the
Greeks did not respond to the Allied propaganda it was not
“ German gold ” that had seduced them, but the fact that the
Allies, while preaching war to the Greek people, made it all
but too clear that it could only result in the spoliation of
Greece in favour of Bulgaria, and this at a time when the
Allies had no notable victory to their credit and the issue of
the war seemed doubtful. During the war we learned by
hard experience that the only effective propaganda is fact ;
that to circulate grotesquely exaggerated accounts of minor
successes as great victories, as the French Radio Agency did,
covers the propagandist with ridicule. The Greeks began to
ask why, if the Allies were as sure of victory as they declared,
they wanted to drag Greece into a battle of Titans in which
her little army would count for nothing ; that perhaps despair
of ultimate victory was the reason. Prince Demidoff, the
Russian Minister, telegraphed on May 20th about the British
and French propaganda.
“ They are spending unimaginable sums in buying up
papers and subsidizing special editions. They have even
gone so far as to found a French Radio Agency which is
trying by wildly imaginative news to influence opinion in
favour of the Entente.” 1
Baron von Schenk saw his way to making personal capital
out of this mistake. He filled the German press with the
news that owing to his ingenious manipulation, Greek opinion
was running strongly against the Allies ; that the neutrality
of Greece, so valuable to the German cause, was his achieve-
ment. On this a vicious circle was formed ; von Schenk’s
lucubrations in Germany were widely quoted in the. Paris
press and public opinion swung gradually to the belief that
Greece, under the influence of her King, was drifting to the
side of the Central Powers. It is amusing to find that while
1 Russian White Book. Moscow, 1922.


von Schenk was the bogey of the Paris press, Count’Mirbach,
the German Minister in Athens, reported on September
3rd, 1915, that the Baron had been trying to induce King
Constantine to appeal to the Kaiser for help, but that the
King had naturally taken no notice of the advice. Count
Mirbach added that the incident went far towards revealing
von Schenk’s character ; that he had always had pathological
symptoms and that without any doubt these were gaining
ground. 1 Perhaps the Minister had heard that the Baron
was constantly indulging in secret carousals with the head of
the French Secret Police, during which they communicated
to one another as good comrades the names of informants
who had swindled them. Nor were the negotiations with
the Greek journalists at this period without their comic side.
The war was their harvest time. Early in 1916 the French
propagandists decided to buy the Embros and make it a
French propaganda newspaper allied with M, Venizelos’ official
organ, the Patris. As soon as the directors of the Patris
heard of this they went to the French Legation and threatened
to change camps that very night unless the money was paid
to them instead of to the Embros. On April 23rd, 1916, the
French Legation telegraphed to the Quai d’Orsay :
“ The Venizelist newspapers are very much disturbed at
our acquisition of other newspapers. They will need to be
pacified with 200,000 or 300,000 francs.”
A week later there was a second telegram :
“ The Embros business has been checked by the threats
of the Venizelist journals which are enterprises de chantage
(blackmailing enterprises). They have threatened to attack
the Entente if it buys the Embros.”*
These telegrams were signed by the late M. Henri Turot,
a personal friend of M. Briand, who had been sent out to
direct the French secret propaganda and the French Radio
Agency.
I La Grice et La Crise Mondiale. A. F. Frangulis. Vol. I, p. 261,
2 Archives of the French Ministry for Foreign Affairs.


On August 17th, 1915, M. Gounaris resigned and M.
Venizelos was recalled to power. Gounaris was an able
lawyer and a man of high moral principle besides being a
mine of accurate information on a wide range of subjects and
a brilliant and persuasive speaker. He was too honest to make
a successful politician in days when oratorical gifts are used to
conceal the shifts and tricks to which the modern demagogue
permits himself to resort in the pursuit of power. On his
accession to power M. Venizelos was still in agreement with
the King that neutrality should be maintained. He was in a
difficult position. The notification of the Allies’ decision
that Kavalla should be made over to Bulgaria was in accord-
ance with the very policy which he had outlined to King
Constantine in the previous January ; now he dared no
longer endorse it. If he were to accept the Powers’ demand
he would find the entire nation arrayed against him ; if he
rejected it he would lay himself open to the damaging charge
that the Allies were only following his own lead. He took
the middle course of not committing himself and explained
that for the time being “ he was feeling his way.”
Meanwhile the Bulgars, these spoilt children of the two
belligerent groups, were negotiating with both sides at the
same time and not until they had obtained the Demotica
enclave from Turkey did they throw off the mask by mobilizing
on 21st September. A week later Sir Edward Grey sent them
a warning, declining to believe that after all their protestations
they would range themselves with the enemies of the Allies,
and on October 4th Russia handed them an ultimatum giving
them twenty-four hours to come out into the open. They
protested their good faith with vehemence, but on October
12th they crossed the Serbian frontier. The Intelligence
Services of the Allies had failed them at a crisis in their
fortunes.
On the news of the Bulgarian mobilization King Con-
stantine decreed the mobilization of the Greek army—a


strange proceeding if he had the pro-German proclivities
which were to be laid to his charge a little later. King Con-
stantine made it clear to M. Venizelos that mobilization was
merely a precautionary measure which entailed no departure
from neutrality and resisted the attempts made by his Minister
to induce him to commit himself to an aggressive policy
against Bulgaria. With 450,000 Austro-Germans, 45,000
Bulgars and 100,000 or more Turks to face, King Constantine
felt that the odds were too heavy against Greece, especially
in view of the inadequate equipment of the army—a state
of affairs which could not have been quickly remedied by the
Allies even if their own huge requirements in war material
had allowed them to do so.
The real crux of the situation, however, lay in the fact that
Serbia was powerless to carry out her contractual obligations
towards Greece which were the foundation of the Greco-Serb
military alliance—namely, to concentrate “ at the commence-
ment of hostilities ” on the Greco-Bulgarian frontier zone
150,000 combatants (say) about 250,000 men. These
figures, it should be noted, at the time when the Treaty was
concluded (May sth, 1913), represented the entire Serbian
army. In 1915, owing to the accretion of territory and the
increase of population since the Balkan wars, they corre-
sponded to about three-fourths of the Serbian army then so
heroically holding its own against the Austrians on the
Danube. The Greek General Staff was adamant on the point
that Serbia must do her share and King Constantine’s own
military experience convinced him that one cannot afford to
make light of its opinion in such matters.
Since King Constantine and his General Staff were charged
with leaving the Serbs in the lurch, it may be well to examine
the conditions of the oft-quoted treaty between Greece and
Serbia. The casus foederis turned upon the annexe to the
treaty drawn up in 1913 under which the two armies were
to form a line facing north-east, the north flank being under


taken by the Serbs ; the south flank by the Greeks. If one
of the two signatories failed to perform her share the stipu-
lations fell to the ground. The treaty was patently inapplicable
to a world war. There was, however, a clause providing for a
change to meet altered conditions if agreed to by the chiefs
of the General Staffs of both nations acting in concert. In
1913 the Greeks had sent a military mission to Serbia to dis-
cuss this enlargement of the original treaty, but as soon as
the threatened pressure on the Serbs from Austria was relaxed,
the Serbs lost interest and nothing was done.
On the outbreak of the Great War M. Venizelos, in agree-
ment with the Greek General Staff, notified Serbia that the
treaty arrangements must be modified into an obligation
upon Greece to remain ready to mobilize in order to restrain
Bulgaria from mobilizing. There was to be no obligation
upon Greece to declare war even if the Bulgarians mobilized.
The question should not have been left, so to speak, in the
air, but for this M. Venizelos was as much responsible as
anybody else. The Greeks tried again to come to a definite
arrangement with the Serbs, but without effect because the
Serbs had twice driven out the Austrians single-handed and
thought that they could do without help.
Throughout the winter of 1914 and in January 19x5, the
Allies were trying to induce the Greeks to march to the aid
of the Serbians and were offering them territory in Asia
Minor as an inducement, but the Greeks pointed out that
they could not march northward leaving Salonica exposed to
hostile attack, and maintained that as long as their army
remained intact the Bulgarians would not move. When the
Greek offer to join the Allies in the Dardanelles was rejected,
the Greek General Staff again approached the Serbs, urging
them to abandon the Danube line in which they were in grave
danger, and join the Greeks in concerting measures against
their common foe, the Bulgarians. Neither M. Venizelos
nor the Allies were in favour of this move. Sir Edward Grey


M. VENIZELOS


deprecated “ all action calculated to alarm or disturb the
Bulgars.” When the Bulgars did mobilize the terms of the
secret treaty were clearly inapplicable, for the Serbians were
still on the Danube line and the Germans had appeared in
force. The Greeks quite logically declined to march and leave
their territory exposed to the enemy, for they could do nothing
to save Serbia and could only perish with her. They had
done their best to induce the Serbians to adapt the treaty to
the new conditions and the Serbians had not responded.
In the winter of 1914 the Balkan roads were impassable.
The Serbs had twice repelled invasion and the Allies were too
intent upon their adventure in the Dardanelles to think of her
peril from the Bulgarians. They fell back upon an attempt
to buy off Bulgaria at the expense of Serbia and Greece, and
clung to this vain hope throughout the months when the
Germans and Bulgarians were maturing their plans. Mean-
while the efforts of Greece and Serbia to make plans for a
common action were discouraged. All charges against the
Greeks of unfaithfulness to treaty obligations were therefore
untenable.
But M. Venizelos’ brain was fertile in resource. True the
situation was pressing, but so long as Bulgaria did not actually
attack the Serbians a casus foederis had not yet arisen for
Greece. M. Radoslavoff had been emphatic in his pro-
testations that his mobilization was due only to his desire to
protect Bulgaria against dangers that might develop closer to
her frontier. “ Henceforward,” he said, “ armed neutrality
would be her attitude.” Therefore Greece had a breathing-
space. Without committing herself to a definite policy she
could explore the course that would serve her best. M.
Venizelos fell back upon his fetish—the procedure already
put forward by him at the Crown Council of March 3rd —
that soundings should be taken in both the belligerent groups.
On September 21st he proposed to the King that in order to
meet the objection of the General Staff regarding the inability
E


of Serbia to carry out her obligations to Greece under the
Treaty, that the Allies should be asked whether they could
make up the Serbian deficiency by themselves supplying
150,000 combatants should the necessity arise. He (M.
Venizelos) would attend to this part of the business while the
King would ascertain through the German Minister what
guarantees and advantages Germany would be prepared to
offer to Greece in return for her continued neutrality if the
war spread further into the Balkans.
Paradoxical though this will appear to those unacquainted
with the ways of the Cretan statesman, it goes to show what
tricks war psychology will play with the subtle mind of
politicians. The King promised to do his share, but no
sooner had M. Venizelos left Tatoi, the summer palace, and
returned to Athens that he had changed his mind. He sent
a message to the King asking him not to proceed with his
overtures to the German Minister. The whole diplomatic
edifice so lately reared had crumbled to ruin in a three-mile
drive. The King, being in bed with a high temperature,
telephoned to Count Mercati, the Court Marshal, directing
him to tell M. Venizelos that on his side he must refrain
from approaching the Allied Ministers until they met again.
Mercati found Venizelos closeted with the Allied Ministers,
and when they had left and he was admitted he learned that
the Ministers had already been approached. M. Venizelos
appeared to be greatly embarrassed, but he urged that the
King should be reassured ; his demarche , he said, could do
no harm since he had made it only in order to elicit informa-
tion which he needed personally ; that it was of a strictly
personal character and did not commit the State. It transpired
later that he had telegraphed to the Greek Ministers in the
Allied capitals on September 21st, as follows :
“ The news of the signature of the decrees establishing
partial mobilization in Bulgaria is a matter of grave concern
to the Royal Government who, in view of a Bulgarian attack


upon Serbia, have resolved to propose to the King to decree
a similar mobilization in order to go to the succour of
Serbia in accordance with the spirit of our alliance and the
interests of Greece. But as the General Staff points out,
against the realization of the spirit of the treaty, the inability
of Serbia joining in a common war against Bulgaria with the
150,000 men which our treaty requires them to supply, I
have urgently approached the Ministers of France, England
and Russia to explain the position to them, requesting them
to telegraph to their Governments to say that if they are
prepared to make good the deficit in Serbian troops by
despatching their own troops to Salonica, our Government
would find in their assurances a strong argument which
would perhaps influence the decisions of the Crown.”
The text of this telegram shows that it was sent without
the knowledge of the King and that the Minister was bar-
gaining with Foreign Powers to supply him with material for
bringing pressure to bear upon his Sovereign in whose name
he was supposed to be acting and whose interests he was bound
to defend. That this was no accidental lapse from the duty
of a responsible Minister is shown by the telegram sent by the
British Minister four days later :
September 25th, 1915.
“ M. Venizelos states that so far as he can see everything
will go well, but that it would be unwise to send troops until
he has obtained the King’s consent. On the other hand
M. Venizelos sees no harm in the landing at Salonica of
supplies, material and horses, led by men in mufti, which
ostensibly would be destined for Serbia. The troops
would be kept at Mudros or Mitilene.”
Next morning M. Venizelos repeated personally to King
Constantine the assurances he had given overnight to Count
Mercati. The King replied that the overtures must imme-
diately be cancelled by informing the Ministers that a landing
of foreign troops on Greek soil would constitute a violation
of Greek neutrality. This M. Venizelos undertook to do.
Immediately afterwards M. Guillemin, the French Minister,


sought an audience of the King and told him that the incident
was closed, whereas in fact, as was afterwards learned from
the revelations made by M. in the secret session of
the French Chamber in June 1916, it was not. M. Delcasse
stated that on September 23rd, 1915, the French Government
had promised M. Venizelos, with the co-operation of Great
Britain, to supply the troops he had asked for. After dilating
on the danger of depleting the Western front he continued :
“ But since M. Venizelos had asked the question some
answer had to be given. A reply in the affirmative gave us
the opportunity of putting the King of Greece to the test.
With the approval of the Government I sent the following
telegram to our Minister in Athens ;
‘ You may tell M. Venizelos that the government of
the Republic, in its desire to enable Greece to fulfil her
treaty obligation to Serbia, is ready on her side to furnish
the troops asked.’
This telegram was immediately communicated to Sir
Edward Grey who approved of it.” (Murmurs)
M. Groussier, “ Was this done in the name of France ? ”
M. Lauche, “ In the name of France you set this trap ? ”
M. Goussier, “You said just now that you did not think
that we could spare any troops ; now you say the opposite.
In the name of France 1 It is a scandal 1 ”
M. Renaudel, “You spoke in the name of France. That
is the kind of diplomacy we practise. It is well that this is
a secret sitting ! ” 1
The significant point in M. Delcassd’s speech was the
admission that the invitation came from Venizelos and not
from King Constantine, who was known to disagree and for
whom a trap was to be set —in the name of France. It was
the starting-point of the Constantine myth.
Therefore, while the French Minister in Athens was
assuring the King in the name of the Republic that the matter
was ended, he knew that M. Venizelos’ offer had been
1 Journal Official, October 28th, 1919. (Secret Sitting of June 16th,
1916), pp, 77-88,


definitely accepted; in fact, he had informed M. Venizelos
privately that this was so.
Of all this King Constantine knew nothing. On Oc-
tober ist M. Venizelos arrived at the palace and with every
semblance of excitement told the King that a British General
had arrived at Salonica on September 29th and was making
preparations for a landing. Simultaneously, a deputation
of three French naval officers, headed by Captain Dumesnil
and accompanied by the French Consul, called on General
Moschopoulos, who commanded at Salonica, and informed
him by order of the British Admiral de Robeck that “ fol-
lowing an agreement between the French Minister and the
Greek Prime Minister ” they were to take all the necessary
steps to prepare for a landing of Allied troops at Salonica and
for organizing the defence of the place against the enemy.
Public opinion in Athens became greatly alarmed at the
news. M. Venizelos, to whom General Moschopoulos had
applied for instructions by telephone, would not commit
himself one way or the other. He kept telling the General to
“ temporize ” and assured him that “ everything would
come out well in the end.” His uneasiness was compre-
hensible ; the impending trouble was entirely of his own
hatching.
“ I shall protest with the greatest energy against this
unspeakable violation of our territory by the Allies,” he said
to the King.
Whatever may have been his intention his protest of
October ist was almost equivalent to a renewed invitation :
“ There is danger of a grave misunderstanding develop-
ing between the Entente Powers and Greece. When I
suggested sending 150,000 men in order to complete the
Serbian contingents in case of a common struggle against
Bulgaria I did not demand this assistance for Greece but
for Serbia, in order to overcome the objection raised against
our alliance which was rendered obsolete, it was said, by
the inability of Serbia to fulfil her engagements. This led


me carefully to specify that so long as Greece remained
neutral the disembarkation of international troops at
Salonica could not receive our official assent. Our neutrality
would necessitate our protesting as a matter of form, after
which matters would proceed as at Mudros. ...”
On October 2nd, the “ vigorous protest ” of M. Yenizelos
notwithstanding, the French Minister had “ the honour to
notify His Excellency of the arrival at Salonica of the first
detachment of French troops ” and to state that “ France
and England counted upon Greece, who had already given
them so many proofs of friendship, not to oppose measures
taken in the interest of Serbia of whom she is also an ally.”
There followed on the same date the pro forma protest of
M. Yenizelos : “ The Royal Government cannot authorize
acts which entail a violation of the neutrality of Greece, the
more flagrant ( caracterisee ) as they emanate from two great
belligerent powers. Therefore, the Royal Government has
a duty to protest against the passage of foreign troops through
Greek territory.”
Sir Edward Grey had tried in vain to prevent even this
pro forma protest being made ; it bore too suggestive a
resemblance to the German excuses for the violation of
Belgium to be to his liking. As for the stage-manager and
producer of this drama by which in the space of a few fateful
days he had plunged his country into the throes of the
European turmoil, he felt that he had reached the end of his
resources. “La commedia h finita ”M. Yenizelos may well
have been saying to himself, since it now became obvious
that he was playing for a fall. If he fell he was resolved that
in the eyes of the Allies he should be wearing the martyr’s
crown in their cause. Accordingly, on October 4th when
protests were raised in the Chamber against the landing of
foreign troops on Greek territory, without the consent of
Parliament and the sacntion of the King, to the astonishment
of the House, M. Yenizelos declared that the Greco-Serbian


secret treaty of alliance—a compact of which he was not at
liberty to disclose the terms —laid upon Greece an obligation
to declare war on Bulgaria and Turkey. Before a bewildered
audience he delivered a speech so bellicose that in Berlin it
could be taken only as a casus belli.
Next morning he called at the palace to report the debate
to the King who was greatly disturbed by the public state-
ment of his Minister, that if the Bulgarians attacked Serbia
and were found to be backed by German and Austrian
bayonets, Greece would go to war and fight them too. This
was little less than a declaration of war which, coming from a
Minister, was entirely unconstitutional seeing that the Greek
Constitution laid it down that the declaration of war and the
conclusion of peace were prerogatives of the Crown. The
King told him plainly that he could not sanction the ulterior
ends to which his speech was leading the country. With a
sigh of relief echoed by the whole country, including even
his own supporters, M. Venizelos tendered his resignation.
He went straight to the Chamber, where amid tense silence
he mounted the tribune, very pale in the face, and announced
that “ following a disagreement that had arisen between the
Crown and the Government the Cabinet had tendered its
resignation to the King.” 1 Once more the nightmare of an
unnecessary war for Greece seemed to be dissipated.
Now the Allied press was unmuzzled. Venizelos had
fallen, a martyr to the cause of the Allies. King Constantine
figured thenceforward as an agent of his brother-in-law, the
German Kaiser. And yet, while the newspapers in London
and Paris were declaring quite truly that the Allied troops
were in Salonica on the invitation of M. Venizelos, he himself
was denying this with heat as long as the denial could avail
him, and this he did publicly in the Chamber.
1 M. quotes a telegram from Guillemin on the impending
resignation. “If he goes it will be a disaster, for with him would
crumble the whole edifice of his policy which he alone can support
against the opposition of the Sovereign.” Vol. 7.


CHAPTER IV
THE CONSTANTINE AND VENIZELOS MYTHS
IT will be useful here to consider the origin of the myth
that King Constantine was an autocrat who deliberately
violated the Greek Constitution. Public and even official
opinion abroad, was adroitly misled into accepting the fallacy
that the Crown in Greece was limited to the powers enjoyed
by the British Sovereign, or the President of the French
Republic ; whereas, in fact, the written constitution of
Greece gave the Sovereign far wider prerogatives than the
Head of the State enjoys in either of these two countries.
Never once during the troubled years of the Great War did
King Constantine overstep his constitutional prerogatives:
that is a statement which cannot be contraverted by his
enemies. On the other hand his Minister, Venizelos, who
was hailed by the Allied press as a democratic statesman,
proved himself to be a man of autocratic and impatient temper
and failed altogether to appreciate the limitations prescribed
for a Minister of the Crown.
The resignation of Venizelos was the signal for the Intel-
ligence officers, both Allied and German, to unite in represent-
ing King Constantine as imbued with Prussian autocratic
methods—the Allied agents in order to support their chosen
friend Venizelos ; Baron von Schenk in order to show his
masters in Berlin how efficient he had been in promoting the
German interests.
As related in Chapter 11, Venizelos, on January 24th and
30th, 1915, in his capacity of Prime Minister, had submitted


to the King two lengthy confidential memoranda advocating
the cession of Greek territory in Eastern Macedonia to Bulgaria
as a bribe. The personal friction between King Constantine
and his Minister dated from these memoranda : the King
foresaw that the cession of territory in Asia Minor would
strain the resources of Greece to breaking-point if it was to
be developed and defended. When the Gounaris Ministry
had accepted office in March, hints of the proposal had found
their way into the press and had given rise to a dangerous
ferment. Accordingly, M. Gounaris issued a communique
that the Government intended to protect national interests
without impairing the territorial integrity of the country.
Venizelos was furious ; he took it upon himself to publish
the text of the secret memoranda and to state that his proposal
had been sanctioned by the King. M. Gounaris at once went
to the palace to show the statement to King Constantine and
on the evening of April 6th, 1915, published the following
statement :
“ The Government with full knowledge of the events
since it came into office, authoritatively declares that His
Majesty the King has never given his approval to the
opening of negotiations for the cession of Greek territory
to a foreign power and has never agreed to such a proposal.”
On the same day Venizelos sent to the King a letter which
must surely be unique in the history of constitutional govern-
ment.
“ Your Majesty,
The evening papers to-day published a communique which
denies the statement I made to the effect that you had
approved the proposal contained in my memorandum of
30th January, 1915, and had empowered me to take any
steps I should deem necessary for carrying it into effect.
How the Government has dared to make public such a
communique of course I am not aware, but Your Majesty


will admit that my direct recourse to you is justified in
order that I may request your intervention to obtain a
redress for the terrible insult which this mendacious state-
ment has inflicted on me. Your Majesty cannot allow that
a man who until the other day was your Minister should
remain exposed to such an insult, even if he had not been
the man who in historical circumstances was able, I believe,
to render during four and a half years some noteworthy
services. . . . Should Your Majesty refuse to grant me
the justice I ask for, there would be but one way left open
to me—that of withdrawing from the political stage and
putting an end to my political career. This service, how-
ever small, would be the last that I should offer to the
Fatherland and the Throne ; yet it would be an imperative
service since otherwise my presence in the political arena
would become a factor placed in such personal antagonism
to the Crown that its further activity would result in a
momentous political crisis for which I do not desire to take
the responsibility. Should Your Majesty refuse me the
satisfaction I request and prefer the alternative of my
retirement from public life, I can only wish that the Father-
land and the Throne may soon find other servants as
devoted to the national interests as myself.
Your Majesty’s obedient servant,
E. K. VENIZELOS.”
King Constantine very properly handed this letter to M.
Gounaris who sent the following reply :
“ The Government, to whom the letter you addressed to
His Majesty the King has been forwarded, and upon whom
under the constitution devolves the duty of replying to it,
have the honour to bring to your notice the following
considerations. The object of the Government’s com-
munique was to dispel an error under which you were
labouring as to the opinion held by the Crown on the policy
of ceding Greek territory to a foreign State—an error
which, if it had been allowed to spread, might have become
very harmful. . . . The personal antagonism of a poli-
tician to the supreme authority of the State is precluded
in our country by a sincere adhesion to the constitutional


form of government. This gives adequate play for political
antagonism between political parties without involving the
Sovereign whom the constitution has placed above it.”
On receiving this letter Venizelos assembled the members
of his party and told them that as forty-eight hours had passed
without satisfaction being given to him, he would have no
alternative but to carry out the decision that he had already
communicated to the Crown. He went on to speak in the
sense that he still represented a majority of the Greek people,
forgetting that his majority had been obtained in 1910 ; that
since that date the Kingdom of Greece had been nearly
doubled In area and population, and that his majority in the
Chamber had been steadily dwindling in the intervening
years. In the election of 1910 his party was returned with a
majority of a little over eighty-one per cent. This over-
whelming majority fell in the election of June 1915 to a little
over fifty-seven per cent, and the vote of confidence which
he challenged on October 4th, 1915, was supported by less
than forty-five per cent, of the total complement of the House.
Yet it was this vote that was cited as a proof that the Greek
nation was eager to enter the war. Would Mr. Asquith’s
Government have felt constrained to declare war upon the
Central Powers if it had received a vote of only forty-five
per cent, on a vote of confidence in 1914? And while
Venizelos’ majority was crumbling in the Chamber the current
was running fast against him in the country. Out of some
sixteen daily newspapers published in Athens, of which the
majority supported him, all but four or five went over to the
opposition, most of them on the morrow of his bellicose
speech of October 4th, 1915.
The fact was that Venizelos had come to think that any
policy that commended itself to him would automatically be
endorsed by the nation. He was improving upon the famous
exclamation of Louis XIV : with Venizelos it was, “Le
Peuple , c'est moi! ” It is amusing to find how entirely the


Allied Governments had been hoodwinked by their Intel-
ligence officers into believing that their protege was a demo-
cratic statesman with the body of public opinion behind him,
while King Constantine was an irresponsible autocrat. It
will be related in its proper sequence how in June 1917, M.
Jonnart, who dethroned King Constantine, told the Premier,
M. Zaimis, that an election should be held before Venizelos
could return to power. To the French Government he
telegraphed, urging an election or the recall of the dissolved
Venizelist Chamber. Lord Cecil also “ preferred that fresh
elections should be held as soon as possible.” To these
representations Venizelos replied from Salonica on 16th
June, 1917 :
“ Though I am confident of the success of the Liberal
Party in an election, passions would be roused by it and it
would take a long time to bring about the appeasement
necessary for carrying out a general mobilization. . . .
For this reason I consider an election to be absolutely
undesirable.”
Knowing as everybody in Greece knew, that he would be
defeated, he preferred to govern as an autocrat under the
protection of foreign bayonets. Even when the Venizelist
Chamber, elected in 1915, had outrun its span and the
Constitution prescribed a General Election, he shunned the
ordeal of facing the electorate for a further eighteen months,
and it was only because the French and British statesmen had
become uneasy about his conduct of affairs, which Clemenceau
had qualified in conversation with the Greek Minister in
Paris as a “ gachis tyrannique ” (a tyrannical mess), that he
ventured to put his popularity to the proof with the result
we know. Even with shameless manipulations of the ballot,
as will presently be described, he was swept out of office.
Nevertheless, in foreign countries the legend of his unabated
popularity had been kept alive for five whole years.
Throughout the critical days of the war the Allies had


been backing one of the antagonists in a private and personal
quarrel, and had been deceived into thinking that their
champion represented democracy pitted against a deceitful
autocrat. When their champion was in danger of being
knocked out they broke through the ropes and swept his
antagonist out of the ring. This was the work of an Intel-
ligence officer who deliberately deceived them as will be
described hereafter.


CHAPTER V
OCTOBER-NOVEMBER 1 9 1 5
GENERAL SARRAIL
A S soon as Bulgaria had definitely joined the Central
/A Powers the word went forth from the Press Censor
1 m. that nothing more was to be said about despoiling
Greece for the benefit of Bulgaria ; that King Constantine,
whom the newspapers had been abusing a fortnight before,
was now to be “ written up.”
King Constantine was greatly embarrassed at having a
ministerial crisis on his hands at such a moment. In normal
times the solution would have been easy. He would have
dissolved the Chamber ; a General Election would have been
held and the leader of the majority would have been called
upon to assume office, but the crisis had come at the moment
when a large number of the electors were serving with the
colours. The best solution seemed to be to summon a non-
party man to take office and to persuade Venizelos to support
him in the Chamber. M. Zaimis seemed to fulfil the necessary
conditions and Venizelos gave the undertaking asked for.
Zaimis formed a Cabinet which included all the former
Prime Ministers. The Greek authorities in Madeconia
were instructed to render all possible help to the Allied troops
and it was resolved that Greece should continue to observe a
benevolent neutrality.
Soon after the Bulgarian mobilization the Serbs enquired
whether the Greek army was ready to join them in resisting
Bulgaria in accordance with the secret treaty of alliance
between the two countries. The terms of this secret treaty


have been hotly debated : the Greek view was that the
obligation of mutual assistance referred only to a Balkan war,
for which contingence the alliance was concluded in 1913,
not to an European war. The Greek reply, dated September
29th, 1915, began, “ The Royal Government greatly regrets
that it is unable to accede to the demand formulated by the
Serbian Government.” It proceeds to give reasons why the
maintenance of an armed neutrality by Greece would be of
greater service to both nations than if Greece were to join
Serbia ; that in the event of a combined attack by Bulgaria
and other belligerents in this war Greece would perish without
the least hope of being able to save Serbia.
Meanwhile the Bulgarian mobilization had produced a
panic in Paris. There was a popular demand that France
should take over the direction of the Allied policy in the
Near East. The supporters of the Salonica adventure won
the day in spite of the opposition of M. Clemenceau who was
strongly opposed to any “ side show ” that would weaken
the army on the Western front. According to M.
statement in the Secret Sitting of the Chamber on June 16th,
1916, the Russians had declined to take any part in the
Salonica expedition on the ground that no further effort must
be expected from them. Italy too had refused on the plea
of lack of men and materiel. General Joffre also was against
the adventure at that date (October 4th) saying, “ In the
present state of our resources, when the reduced strength of
our depots is compelling us to consider the reduction of our
first line effectives, to disperse our forces in Serbia would be
madness.” The British Government was lukewarm for the
same reason. A little later Joffre’s opinion changed and he ad-
vised the expedition even against the hesitation of the British.
In his telegram of October 16th, 1915, Sir Edward Grey
assumed that the Greco-Serbian treaty bound Greece to go
to the aid of her ally, but ten years later he showed a more
true appreciation of the facts.


“ The letter of the treaty might require Greece to fight by
Serbia’s side against Bulgaria, but did the spirit of the treaty
require Greece to take part in a war in which the conflict
between Serbia and Bulgaria was only a secondary matter ? ” x
Whether the Salonica Expedition furthered the ultimate
victory of the Allies, or retarded it, is a question for strategists :
that it had the worst political effect in Greece and on the
morale of the Allied Intelligence Services is unquestionable.
As events proved those who opposed the expedition had
been right : it needed nearly three years and the entry of
the United States into the war before the Salonica army was
strong enough to take the offensive. The expedition was in
reality a political gesture to reassure the French public.
As M. Delcass£ told the secret committee of the Chamber
in 19 16 it was hoped that it would have the effect of bringing
Greece into the war, though no enquiry had been made about
the fitness of the Greek army to take the field. Lord Grey’s
opinion about the question of Greek participation may be
gathered from the following passage in his Memoirs :
“The help of the Greek army, operating in a field so far re-
moved from the main theatre of war, could weigh but a straw
in the scales in which the fate of the world was at stake.”
The fact was that the reputation of many public men in
France was involved in the Salonica expedition and a thick
veil of censorship was stretched over it. In order to divert
public attention from their own blunders these men set in
motion the first suggestion that the retreat of the Serbians
before the advancing Germano-Austrian and Bulgarian troops
was due to the Greeks because they had failed to go to the
aid of their ally and there could be but one reason for this—
a secret compact with the Germans. Thus Salonica came to be
the seed-bed for all the myths about King Constantine, whose
attitude, as already related, had been fully endorsed by Lord
Kitchener and the British naval and military experts in Greece.
1 Twenty-five Years, by Viscount Grey of Fallodon. London, 1925.


ADMIRAL LACAZE, FRENCH MINISTER OF MARINE
AND DE ROQUE FEU IL’S PATRON
COMMANDER DE ROQUEFEUIL


The Salonica expedition was placed under the command of
General Sarrail who had been relieved of his command in
France on July 22 nd, 1915, for acting without orders in
the Argonne. He was a quarrelsome and overbearing person,
a politician by nature rather than a soldier, and his presence
in Paris while under a cloud was an embarrassment. He
himself complained that he had been sent to Salonica “ without
official instructions, knowing nothing of the country, or of
the people, or of the events that had taken place since the
beginning of the war. ... I took as my directives my
frankly republican views (sic)." His “ frankly republican
views ” meant intolerance of crowned heads and churchmen.
He persecuted the clergy and monastic orders, turned churches
into stables and congratulated himself on having “ humiliated
Greek clericalism, le Bon Dieu and the King of Greece.”
It was characteristic of the man to decline the services of the
military Intelligence—the “ Deuzi£me Bureau ” —and to
establish a kind of political intelligence of his own, first under
Captain Matthieu and later under M. Benoit, afterwards
Chief of the Police Judiciaire in Paris. It was he who invented
the excuse of “ the Constantine menace in my rear ” whenever
he was criticized in Paris for his inactivity. He was detested
by most of the officers and men who served under him and
this alone was a serious defect in a commander. He contrived
to quarrel with all the Allied officers in turn and months were
spent in trying to persuade the French Government to recall
him. For a time he was hand in glove with M. Venizelos,
but later, finding that the Cretan statesman did not sufficiently
requite the services he had rendered him by helping him to
power, first at Salonica and afterwards in Athens, he charged
him with “ duplicity and bad faith.” Only Clemenceau
had the courage to recall him, but that was not until December
7th, 1917, when, as he said, a Germano-Bulgarian offensive
against Salonica would find disunited armies whose leaders
declined to know one another : with Sarrail in command no
F


stand could be made. The inability to work amicably with
others was not his only fault as a commander. He was
suspicious and credulous and was prone to the manie de
•persecution, believing that anyone who disagreed with him
must be plotting against him. Such a man was bound to
swallow every fiction of the Secret Service who now began
systematically to work upon his prejudices. Sarrail’s third
disgrace can be dismissed in a few words. When appointed
Governor of Syria he was cautioned to be careful not to
disturb a situation already delicate and now doubly so that his
British allies were to be his neighbours. Within a few months
his high-handed action had stirred the country to revolt and he
proceeded to bombard Damascus, his own capital. He was re-
called only just in time, but not before his guns had reduced
the palace, a gem of Damascene architecture, to a heap of ruins.
The motive of Great Britain for pressing for Greek aid
to the Serbians was that she could not spare many men for
Salonica and on October 16th she went so far as to offer to
cede Cyprus to Greece as an inducement. Tempting as this
offer was prudence prevailed. To accept Cyprus under such
conditions might well entail the loss of Athens. The Germans
and Bulgars were sweeping through Serbia without striking
a blow and the intervention of the Greek army could have
done little more than delay their advance for a few days.
The combined French and British forces were at that time
far too few to stay the enemy’s advance. It was the moment
when the propagandist and the censor came into their own.
The press responded to the inspired cry that the Greek army,
in connivance with the Germans, was being held in reserve
to attack the rear of the Salonica army as soon as it began to
move. The Greek Government protested in vain against
this calumny, but the censor saw to it that the protest should
be strangled at birth. Nevertheless it became evident that
the Salonica “ side-show ” must be condemned to failure
unless there was an outstanding victory on the Western front.


, On November 4th a hostile vote in the Chamber arising
from a minor incident on a point of order forced M. Zaimis
to resign and the King summoned M. Skouloudis. He
retained all the members of the Zaimis Cabinet as an indication
that he did not intend to change the Greek policy towards
the Allies. Both from tradition and personal inclination
M. Skouloudis ardently desired an Allied victory, but he
shared King Constantine’s belief at that period that neutrality
was the only policy that could save Greece from being over-
run by the advancing victorious armies of the Central Powers
and Bulgaria. The great majority of the Greeks were in
favour of remaining neutral. That was enough for the Allied
Press to launch a violent attack upon M. Skouloudis as a pro-
German. The French Cabinet resolved unanimously to call
upon Greece to state publicly that under no circumstances
would she attempt, as it would have been her duty under
the Hague Convention, to disarm and intern the Serbian
troops which were retreating towards the Greek frontier,
and to state clearly whether she was for or against the Allies.
A proposal made by General Joffre to apply compulsion was
to be held over until she replied : failing a satisfactory reply
compulsion was to be applied.
If the 150,000 men which the Allies proposed to send to
Salonica to supply the, Serbian deficiency had arrived in time
to take the field the history of the war might have been
profoundly modified, but the month of October slipped
away and by that time a combatant force of not many more
than 50,000 men had been landed. The newspapers became
critical ; the public in England and France was showing
signs of alarm, for on October 28th the German and Bulgarian
forces were reported to be on the point of meeting. Five
precious weeks had been squandered : the enemy had used
them well. All hope of an attack by surprise by the Serbians
before Bulgaria had completed the concentration of her army
was now lost and in that respect the Salonica expeditionJiad


done nothing beyond weakening the Western front of the
Allies. Of course it was drawing off a small force of men from
the German front in the West, but it had failed in its original
aim of saving Serbia from invasion. Something had to be
done to save the faces of those in France who had planned
the expedition. It took the form of hinting that the Greek
army in Macedonia was being used to keep the expeditionary
force inactive for fear lest its communications should be cut
by the Greeks if it advanced.
That November was heavily charged with fate for the
Balkan countries. The Germano-Bulgar forces seized and
occupied the whole of Serbia and marched victoriously
towards the Greek frontier, driving Sarrail’s weak contingents
before them. For Greece to have entered the war at that
moment would have been suicidal : to remain out of it was
to incur the enmity of the Allies.
The new French Minister, M. Guillemin, who had arrived
in Athens in September, pressed M. Skouloudis in his first
interview to say what he would do if the Serbian army crossed
the Greek frontier and wrung from him an admission that in
theory Greece as a neutral would be bound by the provisions
of the Hague Convention. That was enough for M. Guille-
min. He telegraphed to Paris that the Greeks intended to
disarm and intern the Serbian army. The censor and the
Paris Press again turned on the poison gas tap. They chose
to ignore the fact that Switzerland and Holland had both
applied the provisions of the Hague Convention to Allied
detachments that had crossed their frontiers. Greece alone
was to be treated as an enemy if she dared to do her duty as a
neutral. In point of fact, however, Greece had no intention
of doing anything of the kind. On the contrary, in this
instance she approached the Allied Ministers with an offer
to use the whole Greek army to cover the retreat through
Greek territory and the re-embarkation of the Allied con-
tingents for which, thanks to M. Venizelos and the high


handed action of the Western Powers, Greece had allowed no
more than a free passage on sufferance to enable them to help
Serbia. The transformation of Greek territory into a war
area was quite a different matter. The venom of the Paris
Press was the direct result of the mischievous telegram
from the French Minister. From that date onwards the
Allies adopted the policy of “ frightfulness ” employed by
the Germans in Belgium, using printer’s ink and diplomatic
ultimata in place of explosives.
Serbia was suffering the fate of Belgium. Again the
Allies had proved to be too slow and too weak in numbers
to save their small ally. The Germans were asking Greece
what she intended to do if the Serbians retired into Greek
territory. They pointed out that they had tolerated many
lapses from neutrality, but that their patience had limits
and they warned M. Skouloudis that they could no longer
restrain the Bulgarians from breaking into Greek territory.
To this M. Skouloudis replied firmly that if they did so they
would have to try conclusions with the Greek army.
On November 10th Sir John Stavridi, Greek Consul in
London, arrived in Athens in an Allied destroyer carrying a
message from Mr. Lloyd George—a message that had been
intended for the Cabinet of M. Zaimis. It was to the effect
that the British Cabinet must know definitely whether Greece
was for or against the Allies ; that they must also have a
clear statement whether Greece intended to use her neutrality
as justifying an intention to disarm and intern the Allied
troops, including the Serbians; that already two promises
made by the Greek Government had been broken and there-
fore it was necessary that a declaration should be made with
the approval of the King and be made public. Failing this
he was to say that compulsion would be applied since the
Allies were not prepared to allow their troops to run any
danger from the Greeks. In the course of the conversation
he let fall an observation—indicating that either Mr. Lloyd


George’s studies in English history or his knowledge of
Greek affairs were at fault —that it would be well for the
Greek Government to consider and to remind Kind Constantine
of the fate that befell King Charles lof England. This was
too much for Sir John Stravidi’s uncle, M. Rhallys, a former
Prime Minister and a member of the Cabinet, who conducted
Sir John to the door of the Council Room and dwelt on the
gross impropriety of a high Greek official coming to Greece
to convey such a message from a foreign Power.
M. Skouloudis had no majority in the Chamber. As
democracy is understood in Greece candidates regard them-
selves as elected blindly to follow a particular leader into the
lobby and the voting power remained with Venizelos who
was openly hostile to the Cabinet in a Chamber that was no
longer representative of the people. The only solution was a
fresh appeal to the people, and Skouloudis advised the King
to dissolve Parliament and hold a general election. This
decision was bitterly criticized by the Venizelists. It was
true that mobilization had involved the absence of some
250,000 voters, but Skouloudis proposed to meet this difficulty
by giving leave to would-be electors to return to their con-
stituencies and record their votes. On this the Allies protested
that if this were done Sarrail’s flank would be left unprotected
and so the elections were held without the soldiers. M.
Venizelos protested volubly that it would be a travesty of an
election to deprive 380,000 (!) electors of their vote and
instructed his followers to abstain from voting, knowing as
no doubt he did that the result would show a vast majority
in favour of neutrality. The Paris newspapers fastened upon
this as an excuse for an attack upon King Constantine and
M. Skouloudis, accusing them of violating the Constitution
and defying the wishes of the Greek people. The absurdity
of this charge was shown at the next election in 1920 when
Venizelos and his party were heavily defeated at the polls.


CHAPTER VI
DECEMBER 1915
IATE in December 1915 a stranger character than any
of the Secret Service officers that decorate detective
<Ji fiction stepped on to the Athenian stage. Commander
de Roquefeuil had been chief of staff to Admiral Lacaze, the
French Minister of Marine, whom he had hypnotized with
his activity and his original suggestions. He was let loose
upon Athens without any definite instructions and with a free
hand to further the interests of France and her Allies in any
way that seemed good to him. Lacaze believed in him and
was ready to support him through any difficulty and, as I
shall show later, Lacaze had access to President Poincar£
who interpreted literally his titular position as head of the
French army and navy.
De Roquefeuil’s substantive appointment was that of Naval
Attache, but he had the privilege, unusual in Naval Attaches,
of corresponding directly in a special cypher with the Minister
of Marine, and with four other Ministers and officials, instead
of sending his reports only through the French Minister,
his titular chief. His obvious duty was to collect accurate
information on naval matters ; his mission to counteract
German propaganda prescribed the duty of cultivating good
relations with the Greek officials : neither of these two duties
did he attempt to fulfil.
He took up his official quarters in the buildings of the
French School of Athens and immediately set to work to recruit
a Secret Service, later converted into a Secret Police, from


the scum of the population : a large number had already
been in the pay of the Germans.
He was a slave of the dossier system. It is said that whenever
a new Prefect of Police is appointed in Paris his first care is
to go to the pigeon hole labelled with his initial, to see what
his predecessors had said of him ; that he pores over it with
blanching cheek. I may therefore be allowed to attempt a
sketch of de Roquefeuil in the dossier form to which he was
addicted :
“ Commander de Roquefeuil.
A French naval officer, growing bald and stout, clean-
shaved except for a ‘ toothbrush ’ moustache, with a suggestion
of hasty temper and cruelty. Nature has endowed this
officer with a fund of restless energy and a histrionic instinct
that would have made him invaluable at Hollywood. She
has also given him a captivating manner which appeals
especially to the other sex. There she stopped short, with-
holding from him sound judgment, a sense of fitness and any
nice feeling about honour.
Sprung from a noble family in Brittany he was reared in
the atmosphere of the Church, but this serves only to give him
a kind of ecclesiastical sanction for every lapse from the code
of honour imposed upon gentlemen. Under the strictest
discipline he might become a useful officer, since he is keen
and active, but if he were allowed to act upon his own respon-
sibility he would be a serious embarrassment to his country.
His judgment in a moment of crisis would always be fallible.
He is, moreover, credulous and a very poor judge of
character.”
The card index which de Roquefeuil compiled grew
rapidly to 25,000 cards covering every person of note in
Greece. It was a monument of misdirected energy. The
lower type of agent is generally an adept in divining what
kind of information will please his chief and he panders to it.
Every kind of slander that reached de Roquefeuil’s ears was


recorded on the cards without discrimination. This was not
all. He established in the French School of Athens a magazine
of arms and explosives, with a reserve magazine in the Piraeus,
to be used when the time came in a popular rising against
the King. His policy was action. The Greeks, always
excepting the partisans of Venizelos, were in his view pro-
Germans, from the King downwards, and it was his business
to harry them until a military occupation of the country
should be recognized as the only remedy. In order to achieve
this he was quite ready to stage theatrical incidents to deceive
his own Government. On the naval side of his duty he was
crassly ignorant : he could retail scandalous gossip about
everybody connected with the Court, but when the French
Admiral, du Fournet, called on him for precise information
about submarines and mines he could only repeat fantastic
fictions of his agents which could at once be disproved by
inspection.
His first official act was to persuade the French Minister
to summon all the French Consular officers to a meeting,
ostensibly that he might appeal to them for help in organizing
his service, but in reality to lay down a course of policy
designed to undermine the authority of the Greek Govern-
ment and prepare the way for assuming control of the country.
He had been only six weeks in Greece when he was sum-
moned to attend a conference of naval officers at Malta.
Here he was emphatic that the only possible course was to
occupy the country by force of arms if the army at Salonica
was to be saved from disaster. “ With the Greeks one can
do anything,” was the refrain of his remarks. When the
Allied squadron, under the command of Admiral Dartige du
Fournet, dropped anchor off the Piraeus he telegraphed to
Paris, “ No reason for being concerned about sovereignty of
Greece since there is nothing left inviolate in the country.” 1
This was little more than the truth : his unauthorized secret
* Telegram No. 1197 of September Ist, 1916,


police had openly been making arrests of enemy subjects
and even Greeks whom he suspected of enemy sympathies.
When the Greek Government objected to the arbitrary arrest
of Greeks who were highly placed he telegraphed :
“ The war conditions require energetic measures before
which Greek legality must give way, especially as it is
being daily violated.”
He went on to press for a landing since the presence of the
fleet was not sufficient.
The dining-room in the Hotel de la Grande Bretagne in
Athens must have been a diverting spectacle at this period,
since all the fomentors of mischief in Greece were sitting
cheek by jowl at contiguous tables. At one M. Henri Turot
who had been sent by M. Briand to lavish subsidies upon
Greek newspapers, and to counteract, by means of the French
Radio Propaganda Agency, the pro-German propaganda of
Baron von Schenk ; at another Commandant de Roquefeuil
—homely but engaging—entertaining some guest who was
to be turned to account ; a little beyond them Baron von
Schenk—bald, bland and stout ; at the lower end of the room
the members of the various Allied Missions, not fully aware
of all that the actors of the star parts were doing—not aware,
for example, that the arch-protagonists, de Roquefeuil and
von Schenk, were often closeted together in a villa rented by
von Schenk in a deserted summer resort near Athens, osten-
sibly to exchange confidences about the personnel of their
respective secret services, actually to weave fantastic con-
spiracies, in which each believed himself to be worsting the
other, to bring about a separate peace between France and
Germany as related by Admiral Dartige du Fournet. We
may guess that this little entr'acte germinated in the brain of
the bland German baron.
This dabbling in high politics, dear to both these adven-
turers, this pooling of resources, had surprising results. Both
were employing the same agents, not, as sometimes happened


elsewhere, agents discredited and dismissed from the rival
service, but trusted men drawing pay from both sides at the
same time with the knowledge of their employers. In the
summer of 1916 the Greeks arrested on their frontier ten
men whose movements had given rise to suspicion. In their
defence they exhibited a button which they were wearing
in the lapels of their coats which marked them as agents in
the service of the French. The Greek officer, wishing to
examine the button more closely, had it removed. It was
then discovered that the button was double-headed; that
the reverse bore the device of the Imperial German service
and marked the bearer as an of von Schenk. They
were searched. Each man had two passports —one from either
belligerent—and to crown all, some of the men were carrying
two sets of reports in their pockets, the one addressed to
de Roquefeuil and the other to von Schenk, These reports
were instructive : they related to the same incident, but the
details were cunningly edited to please the taste of the
recipient. 1
We shall never know how many millions of francs were
wasted by de Roquefeuil in the payment of worthless agents.
He had recruited a corps of light ladies to extract confidences
from the men with whom they consorted. Naturally these
women would not admit failure : they invented confidences
to suit the taste of their employer. De Roquefeuil had the
impudence to boast on one occasion that he had recruited a
lady whom he was keeping specially to win confidences from
King Constantine.
All this was known to the Allied Ministers in Athens and
it is almost incredible that the British, Russian and Italian
Governments should have left the direction of their interests
in such hands and should have allowed a weaker nation
pleading for its rights to be treated like a prisoner before a
1 Related to the author by a military officer in the Greek Intelligence
Branch of the General Staff.


court-martial. M. Guillemin, the French Minister, coming
new to the country and being apparently incapable of taking
a firm stand of his own, came quickly under the influence of
his Naval He was himself naturally prone to take
sides. In official circles in Athens de Roquefeuil was a by-
word, yet for many months not a hint of his activities seems
to have reached the ears of the Allied Cabinets. The work
of organizing Intelligence “ stunts ” caused him to delegate
the direction of collecting information to Rigaud, a French
Naval Engineer officer who worked closely with a certain
English novelist who had been given temporary rank as
lieutenant in the British army and appointed local head of
the British Intelligence. The vaudeville antics of the British
service were less politically dangerous than the proceedings
of de Roquefeuil, but when the Athens police reported to
King Constantine that British officers were mobilizing Greek
cabaret girls as intelligence agents and had publicly driven
them about in official cars the harm done to British prestige
among the Greeks was not negligible. Rigaud remarked to
Captain Chamonard on one occasion, “ If anyone came to
know all that we are doing and the means we resort to there
would be a hullaballoo (un tolle ).” Probably de Roquefeuil
knew nothing of the art of propaganda, but instinct must
have told him the elementary truth that the only effective
propaganda is fact, and whenever the facts failed to fit in
with his policy, he proceeded to manufacture them. In war-
time it is always the temptation of Intelligence officers to
influence their Governments in the direction they think they
should go, but it is seldom that they are allowed an oppor-
tunity to meddle in the local politics of the country to which
they are sent. They may on occasion furnish tendencious
reports to their chief at headquarters and may try to influence
him in the direction of the report, but in the British service
there are so many checks that the mischief that can be done
is small. In Greece the only checks upon de Roquefeuil’s


activities were Guillemin and Lacaze, both of whom he had
in his pocket, and the officer in command of the Salonica
army, Sarrail, was an encouragement rather than a check.
As a measure of de Roquefeuil’s value as a Naval Intelligence
officer one instance only need be given. Admiral Dartige du
Fournet asked him in his first interview for the names of
the Greek Minister of Marine and the Greek Admiral, for
the armament of the Greek ships and the nature of the barrage
between Salamis and Keratsini. He could not answer any
of the questions, but he treated the Admiral to a mass of
unsavoury backstairs gossip from the Palace. The Admiral
found himself doubting the accuracy of everything he said,
and this impression was strengthened later. He was greatly
disturbed when he came to know that Lacaze, the French
Minister of Marine, accepted all his statements as authentic.
In order to understand how a Naval Attache in Athens
could distort the policy of the French Government and even
imperil her relations with her allies one must know something
of the French Constitution. The President of the French
Republic, at that time M. Poincare, is ex officio chief of the
sea and land forces. In peace time this part of his power is
nominal : in war time, if the President is a forceful person-
ality, it means that the Ministers of War and Marine have
almost daily access to him independently of the Prime Minister.
As Minister of Marine, Admiral Lacaze paid frequent visits
to the Elysdes. He was a Creole from the Isle de Bourbon
with a full share of the French Creole characteristics —pride,
self-confidence, physical courage and limited intelligence.
He had never seen war service : if he had he would doubtless
have acquitted himself with dash and courage, though probably
his decisions would have been faulty. He strutted into history
for this brief space during the war and then vanished from
the page. It is worth noting that while he had blindly sup-
ported de Roquefeuil throughout the disastrous policy in
Greece, for which he himself was largely responsible, he


repudiated his protdgd as soon as the Naval Committee of
the Chamber condemned him, even, it is said, going so far
as to refuse to accede to his entreaty to visit him on his death-
bed. But at this period he believed de Roquefeuil’s men-
dacious reports about King Constantine and carried them to
the President.
It may be doubted whether de Roquefeuil’s reports would
have continued to influence French policy if he had not
been allowed a licence never before accorded to an Intelligence
officer of telegraphing direct, not only to the Minister of
Marine, but to M. Clemenceau and M. Leygues as well.
Every report was made in quintuplicate.
(1) to M. Guillemin for transmission to M. Briand, Minister
for Foreign Affairs.
(2) to Admiral Lacaze, Minister of Marine ; who, as
already said, showed it to the President, M. Poincard ;
(3) to M. Clemenceau as President of the Commission on
Foreign Affairs in the Senate ;
(4) to M. Leygues, as President of the Commission on
Foreign Affairs in the Chamber.
(5) to the French Commander-in-Chief, Admiral Dartige
du Fournet, G.C.8., until that officer made it clear that he
could no longer place any reliance upon the judgment of the
Naval Attache. De Roquefeuil’s opportunity for misleading
official opinion was thus complete, since his view of King
Constantine was communicated to the Press through the usual
official channels. At the Quai d’Orsay M. Briand was
pursuing the pacific course of coming to an understanding
with the Greek Government. Probably he was not fully
aware of the forces ranged against him and so it came that
there were two opposed policies operating in the French
Cabinet at one and the same time and that the influence of
the President was cast on the side of violent action.
At the moment the position in Greece was this. The
great majority of the people was against entering the war and


King Constantine was at the height of his popularity. His
neutrality was nominal. The Allies had declined his open
co-operation with them because conditions were attached to it,
but he continued to allow the Allies every facility for operating
from a base within his territory. He intended to resist any
invasion by the Bulgarians, though his army was ill-equipped
for taking the field. Beyond this he would not go. At first,
no doubt, like many of the neutrals who watched the invasion
of France by the German army, he may have thought that it
would sweep to Paris before it could be checked, but after
the Battle of the Marne his idea was that the war would end
in a stalemate ; that Germany would not have the strength
to drive through to Paris, nor the Allies the men and munitions
to break through the German defences and march to Berlin.
Moreover, his own experience of the lack of cohesion in the
Allied policy in Greece had given him reason to doubt whether
the alliance itself would last long enough to achieve a com-
bined victory. In a conversation with a French friend of the
writer in Switzerland in 1920 King Constantine put the
pertinent question, “ How many of your countrymen believed
in the ultimate victory of the Allies even as late as the spring
of 1918?” The Frenchman was obliged to confess that
there were many who did not. “ Then,” said the King, “ can
you blame us in Greece for doubting it ? If we had joined
the Allies and found ourselves at the end of the war on the
side of the losers what would have been our position ? ”
This gentleman spoke of King Constantine as a frank and
straightforward man, quite incapable of double-dealing. The
fact that M. Venizelos, his former Minister, now in almost
open rebellion against him, was currying favour with the
Allies in the hope that they would restore him to power, did
not predispose him towards this doubtful adventure.
The problem as de Roquefeuil saw it, and as the credulous
and suspicious Sarrail was easily persuaded to see it, was to
change all the facts that did not suit him. King Constantine


must be transmuted into an autocratic tyrant ; his people
must be represented as straining at the leash for war and
groaning under his tyranny : their King must be in secret
relations with the German Court and his Ministers as well.
Lulling the Allies to slumber by soft speeches they must
secretly be preparing some devilish trap to engulf the troops
at Salonica. They must be aiding the Germans by secretly
revictualling their submarines. On the other side Venizelos
must be paraded as a brave patriot voicing the aspirations of
a down-trodden people. To alter facts to this extent was
beyond human power, but it was not beyond the ingenuity
of a born stage-manager to produce an illusion to take the
place of fact. That is what de Roquefeuil, with the willing
aid of the arch-blunderer Sarrail and his complacent dupe,
Lacaze, set himself to do.
The first fable was contained in a despatch from Guillemin
who telegraphed to the Quai d’Orsay that he had evidence
that the Greeks were about to close some of their ports by
mines and that a squadron should be despatched to the
Piraeus immediately. Apart from the absurdity of attempting
to defend a coastline such as that of Greece by mines the
Greeks possessed no mines : those they had ordered from
France had been countermanded. Nevertheless, the telegram
achieved its object : warships were sent to Athens. It is
fair to say that there was panic at the time. To find an excuse
for his inaction Sarrail had been insisting that his rear was
in danger from the Greek army. Even M. Briand shared the
prevailing fear for the safety of the Salonica force. When it
was proposed in the secret sitting of the French Chamber
that the Greek fleet should be destroyed, Salamis and the
Piraeus bombarded and later, if necessary, Athens attacked
with due avoidance of injury to ancient monuments, he
declared that since the Greeks were ready to allow Allied
troops to occupy such territory as they required, extreme
measures were unnecessary. “ The Greek Government


GENERAL SARRAIL, COMMANDER OF THE ALLIED
FORCES AT SALÓNICA
M. POUTIS, WHOSE TELEGRAMS COUNSELLED THE
EXECUTION OF THE ROYALIST LEADERS BEFORE
THEY HAD BEEN TRIED AND ASSAILED ENGLAND
FOR ATTEMPTING TO SAVE THEM


reserves the right to protest : we reserve the right to ignore
its protests.” The Chamber rocked with laughter.
M. Venizelos had secretly been urging the Allies to blockade
his country as a lever for forcing her into the war. On
November 19th, 1915, the British Minister announced the
blockade and the Greeks awoke next morning to find that
they had no more than a week’s supply of corn. The Ger-
mans were not slow to make capital out of the popular indig-
nation excited by this high-handed action. On November
23rd the Allied Ministers handed Greece an ultimatum
demanding the withdrawal of Greek troops from Salonica,
the surrender of roads and railways as far as the frontier, the
right of search for and of destroying enemy submarines and
supply bases in Greek territorial waters. For several months
the Athenian newspapers had been displaying in a prominent
place a notice published by the British Legation promising
a reward of £2,000 —a fortune to a Greek fisherman or
peasant —for the discovery of an enemy base or submarine.
It should be said here, on the evidence of Admiral Dartige
du Fournet, that no trace of an enemy submarine base was
ever found ; indeed, with Austrian and Turkish ports on
either side it would have been rank folly in the German
Admiralty to establish supply bases in Greece, but the Allies
having submarines on the brain and de Roquefeuil being
ready to pay for information, it was not surprising that the
submarine myth was worked double shift. According to
the French Admiral all kinds of innocent craft not even
belonging to the Central Powers, were reported as submarines.
French bluejackets were sent by night to the town of Argos,
seven miles from the coast, to set on fire 480 cases of pitch
belonging to the Greek Ministry of Agriculture and intended
for the destruction of locusts. 1 This had been reported to
de Roquefeuil as a submarine base I
1 Though they had removed their cap ribbons the articles they left
behind proved them to have been French.
G


Admiral Argyropoulos who throughout the year 1915 was
entrusted by the Greek Government, when he commanded
the destroyer Nea Genea , with policing Greek waters, especially
in respect of submarine supply bases, reported that during
that year only three cases were brought to his notice ;
(1) In April the appearance of a submarine was reported
from the harbour of Corfu where it remained for forty-eight
hours. On hearing the rumour the French Consul remon-
strated and asked Captain Argyropoulos what, measures he
proposed to take against the intruder which he assumed as a
matter of course to be a German submarine. The Admiral’s
reply was brief. It ran, “ None, since the intruder which was
violating Greek neutrality is the French submarine, Papin .”
In reporting the incident he added, “ In fact, I failed in my
duty by not tackling the submarine, but I did this in order
to avoid giving cause for fresh accusations against the Greek
Government.”
(2) In August a submarine was sighted at the islet of
Madouri, opposite St. Maura. “ I proceeded thither at full
speed and found that a German submarine had anchored near
the shore ; that the officers had bought some new-laid eggs
from the peasants and that the submarine had sailed after a
stay of four hours.”
(3) He proceeds, “ In June I learned from several coast-
guard stations that a suspicious ship of about 300 tons, flying
the Greek flag, but whose officers and crew apparently were
not Greeks as they were all clean-shaven, had been calling at
various points on the coast and that the officers had been
asking the inhabitants about the arrival of a German sub-
marine which they were to supply with petrol on the instruc-
tions, they said, of the Greek Government. After having
chased the ship for several days without sighting her, in the
end I captured her outside Parga. I was about to send an
officer to examine her when I was startled by seeing the
Greek flag hauled down and the Italian flag hoisted in its


stead. At the same time I saw the Commander approaching,
wearing the uniform of a First Lieutenant of the Royal
Italian Navy. He requested me not to proceed with the
examination, which, however, was duly carried out. I ordered
the vessel to follow me to Corfu where I refused the request
of the Italian Consul to set her free without instructions from
my Government. Next day the ship divested herself of her
disguise and emerged as an Italian war-vessel. She hoisted
the Royal Italian ensign and the officers and crew donned
their uniforms. Two days later two big Italian destroyers
appeared on the scene. They had been sent by the Duke
of the Abruzzi to bring back the vessel. Having cleared for
action I received them and informed the Commodore that
I would oppose the removal of the ship by force until I
received instructions from my Government. Thereupon the
two destroyers left. Count Bosdari, the Italian Minister,
explained afterwards to the Greek Government that his
Government had no knowledge of the matter and I received
orders to let the ship go. Shortly afterwards her Commander
was decorated by his Government.” Admiral Argyropoulos
adds that the mischievous activities of this ship gave rise to
many of the reports on which the accusations brought by the
French and British against the Greek Government of allowing
German submarines to be supplied with fuel were based
No explanation of the eccentric behaviour of this Italian
war-vessel has ever been forthcoming. She may have been
sent to trap and sink enemy submarines, hoping to be mis-
taken for a boat carrying supplies.
The Greek Government had good reason for apprehension
if the Germans and Bulgars found Allied troops entrenched
on the neutral soil of Greece. In international law they would
have had a clear right to treat Greece as an enemy. But they
were astute enough to admit that she had been compelled to
violate her neutrality by force majeure. The British view was
that even during neutrality the Greek army was a protection


to the Allied troops at Salonica. Sir Thomas Cunninghamc,
the British Military Attache, told the Military Governor of
Salonica that it assured “ the security of the flanks and rear
of the Allies ” and that he did not wish a single Greek soldier
to be withdrawn from Macedonia.


CHAPTER VII
DECEMBER 1915- MARCH 1 9 1 6
TROUBLES AT SALONICA
A FFAIRS were not running smoothly at Salonica.
/ % General Sarrail reported that the Greeks were
i m obstructing his use of the telegraph ; that they
had withdrawn from the central depot 70 wagons greatly
needed by the Allied armies ; that they had refused to allow
a Serbian engine to run on the Greek line and that the Greeks
were disarming Serbian soldiers who had fled over the Greek
frontier. On December 15th the Allied Ministers visited
M. Skouloudis to present a Note on the subject of Sarrail’s
complaint accusing the Greek Government of bad faith.
To this Note Skouloudis replied point by point. It was
not true that Sarrail had been restricted in the use of the
telegraph. Since the safety of the trains would be com-
promised if he used the wires during working hours, he had
agreed to use them outside those hours, but he had broken
that agreement by rigging private connections to the railway
telegraph wires. Moreover, the Greeks had granted him
leave to affix a wire of his own to their posts and he had fixed
an entire set. So much for the first complaint. As to the
wagons—not 70, but 50 had been removed because they
were required for victualling the Greek Fifth Army Corps
which had been transferred to the east of the Struma at the
desire of the Allies themselves for the protection of the
Allied flank. Guillemin objected that leave should have
been obtained from Sarrail before the wagons were moved
and provoked the retort, “ Your Excellency overlooks the


fact that you are in our country, in our home ; that the
railway stock is ours and that we are under no obligation to
seek permission from anyone for victualling our soldiers.
You forget that outside those 50 wagons you have at your
disposal all the rest of our rolling-stock—more than 400
wagons. As regards the Serbian engine the refusal to allow
this to run was in accordance with the agreement that pro-
hibited the employment of any but Greek Nationals on the
Greek lines. The Serbian soldiers who were disarmed were
disbanded, or fugitive soldiers separated from their units.
They had been disarmed as a measure of public safety. The
Greek authorities would never think of disarming Serbian
troops who crossed the frontier with their officers.” M.
Skouloudis then pursued his advantage, pointing out that on
this baseless ground the Allies had despatched a Note such
as Greece had never before received from a friendly nation
and he refused to accept it.
As everyone knew, the text of diplomatic agreements were
nothing to Sarrail. He was irascible, suspicious and over-
bearing ; in his eyes even the highest Greek officials were
potential spies. With reckless disregard for the feelings of
the people he commandeered houses, offices, shops, vehicles
and draught animals. He claimed the use of most of the
rolling-stock on the Macedonian railways and when the
Greek Government protested he took it to mean that it had
been suborned with “ German gold.” He commandeered
practically all the stocks of coal as well as the Greek hospitals.
His final step was to requisition provisions and fodder which
the Greeks had to import from abroad and which were now
rationed by the Allies. The more the Greeks groaned under
his exactions the better he was pleased.
The Germano-Bulgarian forces had now overrun Serbia and
were threatening to cross the frontier and expel Sarrail’s
army. Both M. Cochin and the British Military Attache
in Athens had sounded the Greek Government as to whether


the Greek army could be relied upon to hold back the enemy
while Sarrail’s army was re-embarking if it should be decided
to withdraw it, but when the Greeks gave this assurance in
all good faith M. Briand and the Paris Jingo Press described
it as an insult. According to General Sarrail General Munro,
commanding the British forces, informed him on December
Bth that the British Government had decided to evacuate
Salonica. 1 However this may be the landing of troops was
suspended for several days. M. N. Politis, at that time
Permanent Under-Secretary of the Greek Foreign Office,
reported to M. Skouloudis an interview he had had with
Colonel Sir Thomas Cunninghame, the British Military
who asked him whether the Greek Government could
obtain a promise from Germany not to invade Greek territory,
since it was believed that the Allies intended to evacuate
Salonica ; that he had replied that the Germans would listen
to no such request unless the Allies themselves published their
intention to evacuate. Colonel Cunninghame answered that
though Great Britain could do this he doubted whether France
could do so at the moment in view of her internal situation.
This report of M. Politis is an example of the mischievous
tendency to distortion which characterized that gentleman.
The question put was simply whether in the event of an
evacuation of Salonica by the Allied contingents, the Greeks
would prevent pursuit by the Germano-Bulgar forces during
the process. The references to French action made by Politis
were gratuitous additions of his own which not unnaturally
disturbed the French when they came to hear of them.
The question of Greek resistance to any violation of their
frontier by the forces of the Central Powers was first raised
by Lord Kitchener on November 18 th in an interview with
Sir Thomas Cunninghame, the British Military
who happened to be passing through Paris on his way back
to Athens on that day. Lord Kitchener, who had been
1 General Sattail’s Memoirs, p. 49.


present at the meeting of the War Council of the last days
of September when the decision to send troops to Salonica
had been agreed to, hotly opposed all suggestions of remaining
there after the situation of the Serbs had manifestly become
hopeless. He told the Military Attache that he had been re-
quested by Marshal Joffre to send 90,000 men (seven infantry
divisions) to Salonica at once, but that nothing would induce
him to do it. The most he would do would be to send them
to Egypt in readiness for such further action as events might
require. He stated further that he had made up his mind
to evacuate Salonica at the earliest possible moment and he
wished to know whether he could count upon the Greeks to
hold their frontier and cover the processes of retirement and
embarkation. On his return to Athens the Military Attache
was to assure himself of the acquiescence of all the responsible
organs of government, including the King and the General
Staff, so as to prevent our being misled by the further flying
of Venizelist kites. When the Military Attache saw King
Constantine on November 27th the King at once fell in with
Lord Kitchener’s suggestion and subsequently put it forward
to the Allied Powers formally. The French, however, chose
to regard the offer as derogatory and declined to accept it.
On December 14th General Sarrail retreated into Greek
territory with the enemy at his heels. It was a bad day for
the politicians in Paris who had promoted the Salonica
adventure. Would Sarrail’s army have time to re-embark
before it was overwhelmed ? A few days earlier the German
Military in Athens had handed to the King a telegram
from von Falkenhayn threatening to cross the Greek frontier
unless Sarrail’s army were disarmed and neutralized. For
Greece this telegram threatened to be decisive and to the
Ministers nothing seemed possible except a direct appeal
from King Constantine to his brother-in-law, the Kaiser.
On their advice the appeal was sent on December 10th with
the result that the Kaiser ordered his army to stop short at


the Greek frontier. This action of King Constantine not
only saved the Allied armies which were in full retreat, but
materially affected the history of the war, besides sparing
France a profound national humiliation. Yet not a voice
was raised in Paris in recognition of this service and Sarrail,
who had most reason to be grateful, persisted in his hostility
to the man who had probably preserved him from disaster.
The following extracts from General Moschopoulos’ diary
throw a vivid light upon the events related above. On
December Bth the Greek Commander-in-Chief at oalonica
sent the following telegram to the Minister for War at Athens :
“ I ordered one regiment and a section of mountain guns
to reinforce the frontier guard and also to inform the
Commander of the Germano-Bulgarian army that he must
respect Greek sovereignty.”
The General made the following comment on the telegram
in his diary :
“ I did this not because I believed that the Germans and
Bulgars could be prevented by our small frontier detach-
ments from pursuing the Allied armies to Salonica, but
because, after weighing the position ... I was absolutely
confident that the personal intervention of King Constantine
with the Kaiser would stop their advance, and that is what
actually happened.”
“ 'December 2 xst. I called upon General Sarrail to express
my grief at his set-back, which, after all, was nothing
unusual in the fortunes of war, and I was glad and proud to
tell him about the personal intervention of King Constantine,
without which the position of the Allies in Salonica would
have been precarious and the whole Eastern expedition
would have failed. General Sarrail replied that he appre-
ciated the King’s intervention and was grateful for it.
“ . . . About twenty days later, on January 13th, 1916,
the blowing-up of the Demir-Hissar bridge by a French
company of engineers was officially reported to me. 1
1 This bridge was the only means of access to and revictualling of the
Greek forces in Eastern Macedonia which now found themselves entirely
cut off.


“ On the following day, the Serbian New Year’s Day, I
went to the Serbian Consulate to present my respectful
good wishes to King Peter of Serbia. I encountered
General Sarrail in the garden and after the customary
salute and greeting, the following conversation took place.
“ General ‘ Well, General, I regret to see
that you have no intention of fighting.’
“ General Sarrail , ‘ Why do you say that, General ? ’
“ General Moschopoulos , ‘ Because a General who intends
fighting does not destroy his means of communication.
On the contrary he multiplies them.’
“ General Sarrail , ‘ I had definite information that the
Germans were transporting heavy artillery.’
“ General Moschopoulos , ‘ Yes, General, but the Germans
would have to traverse Greek territory.’
“ General Sarrail , ‘ And who would stop them from doing
that ? ’
“ General Moschopoulos , ‘ The same man who stopped
them after the battle of Krivolak.’
“ General Sarrail (flushed with anger, with a shrug of the
shoulders), ‘ I have the means of reconstructing the bridge
in a very short time.’ ”
The General continues :
“ I consider this wanton and unjustifiable acf of General
Sarrail as the grossest ingratitude towards King Constantine,
who, after the battle of Krivolak, contrived to save the
honour, not only of the Chief of the Allied armies, but that of
the French nation, because there is no doubt at all that but for
the intervention of the King, the Salonica expedition would
have been doomed to an inglorious end, which would have
left a stain upon the military history of the French army.” 1
Von Falkenhayn chafed at the orders from Berlin that
restrained him from pursuing his advantage : in his opinion
Sarrail should be “ thrown into the sea.” But Greece had
given a plain warning that if the Bulgars crossed the frontier
she must abandon her neutrality unless Germany would
guarantee the integrity of her soil, undertake to keep the
1 The Kathimerini of April 15th, 1930.


Bulgars out of towns and villages and make other important
concessions to Greece. Apparently these undertakings could
not be given and since, in the view of the German General
Staff, no great military advantage was to be gained by attacking
Sarrail and setting free a large body of troops for the Western
front it was thought better to stop short at the Greek frontier.
On March 24th, 1916, von Falkenhayn telegraphed a
reply to M. Skouloudis through the German Military
in Athens :
“ The Greek Government must understand that in
making war with the support of Allies, we cannot undertake
to exclude them partly or wholly from certain war operations.
Such undertakings are, moreover, impossible to apply in
practice. Accordingly we are desisting for the time being
from our intention of crossing the Greek frontier. ...”
In his book Le Commandement Supreme de I'Armee Allemande
en 1914 —1916 he gives the true reason for stopping short
at the Greek frontier :
“ The plan of attacking Salonica was abandoned in
March. ... It remained of greater advantage to the
general conduct of the war to have some 200,000 or
or 300,000 of the enemy immobilized in this distant region
rather than throw them back on the French theatre of war.”
A telegram from Isvolsky of December 2nd, 1915, indicates
that M. Briand was urging Great Britain to consent to
coercive measures against Greece ; that in his view Lord
Kitchener ought not to have divulged to the King the project
of evacuating Salonica, since it indicated a disagreement
between the Allies ; that the King’s offer to protect the
Allied army during evacuation was humiliating. They must
now “ shake their fists at Greece.” 1 This was not at all
Lord Grey’s view. He thought that in return for the evacu-
ation Greece should be asked to undertake to defend her
frontier. This coincided with King Constantine’s offer.
1 Russian White Book.


On December 3rd Isvolsky sent a second telegram reporting
that Lord Kitchener had threatened to resign unless Salonica
were evacuated and that this would bring about the fall of
the British Cabinet ; but that M. Briand was equally deter-
mined to develop the expedition. There followed the confer-
ence at Calais when Briand insisted on raising the troops at
Salonica to 350,000 in order to undertake a general offensive
in the spring : the most that Lord Kitchener would consent
to was a postponement of the evacuation for four or five
weeks. M. Briand afterwards admitted to Isvolsky that if
Lord Kitchener remained obstinate Salonica must be evacu-
ated, but if so the French troops would retire to the Greek
islands and be ready to seize the first favourable opportunity
for a fresh incursion into the Balkans.
On December 28 th Demi doff telegraphed an account of
an audience given to Sir Francis Elliot. “ The King’s
grievance is entirely against the French—Briand and Guille-
min. He attributes the pressure put upon Greece solely to
French inspiration. . . . The foreign policy of Greece,”
said the King, “is dictated by my people. Greece is thinking
of her territorial integrity which the Germans have guaranteed
as long as we remain neutral.”
“ Then why mobilize ? ” asked Sir Francis.
“ From fear of Bulgaria. If the general situation of the
Allies improves, Greece will be able to join them.”
In this conversation we have an epitome of King Con-
stantine’s consistent attitude towards the war. In making
conditions before joining the Allies Greece was asking no
more than had already been accorded to Italy and Roumania.
But Italy was one of the Great Powers and Roumania had no
seaboard, whereas Greece lay open to pressure from the
Allied fleets, either by blockade or by direct attack. That
King Constantine was never pro-German, as his enemies
asserted, is shown by the following incident related in General
Moschopoulos’ diary. In the early spring of 1916 the


General was invited by General Sarrail to inspect the forti-
fications of the entrenched camp of Salonica with a request
that he would report to Athens, as Sarrail put it, “ that it
will not be easy for the Germans and Bulgars to throw us
into the sea.” When these fortifications were completed
General Moschopoulos reported fully to the King as he had
been asked to do. His report of April 28th, 1916, ended
as follows :
“ With such an army, Your Majesty, and with such
defensive preparations, the defence of Salonica may be
considered as assured. So far as we are concerned we
should welcome a Germano-Bulgarian attack ; I say pur-
posely, ‘ as far as we are concerned,’ Your Majesty, because
since the annihilation of the Serbian army the Bulgarian
army has remained unimpaired and is resting on its laurels
in the hope that a German victory will provide it with a
propitious opportunity for falling on us with the whole of
its fighting resources.
“ But a Germano-Bulgar attack will not materialize be-
cause the Bulgars . . . know that the field before them
would become for its assailants a vast cemetery.”
In reply to this report the General received from King
Constantine the following telegram :
“ I agree with you entirely. Many thanks. Compli-
ments to Mrs. Moschopoulos. — Constantine, R.”
It should be noted that this was entirely a private telegram
in which King Constantine could disclose his inmost thoughts
without fear of committing an indiscretion. It shows that
his desire for an Allied victory was not less ardent than that
expressed by his Commander-in-Chief at Salonica.
From the middle of November 1915 M. Venizelos began
almost openly to take sides against his country. From
unpublished documents at the Quai d’Orsay it is clear that
he was embarrassing the French Government with accusations
against Greece, and here we may detect the hands of Guillemin


and de Roquefeuil. On December 18th Guillemin tele-
graphed that he had seen M. Venizelos “ after an interval of
four weeks so as not to compromise him at the moment when we
must take against Greece measures of which he must not seem
to be the instigator.” He goes on to report Venizelos’ words:
“ You have nothing to explain to me. I understand
everything. You are dealing with rascals who are laughing
at you. Your presence at Salonica embarrasses them. If they
could they would hand you over to the Germans. Only by
fear and the threat of famine will you hold them. That is your
greatest asset. Above all admit corn only a little at a time.”
On December 23rd M. Briand telegraphed to Guillemin
that he would send 350,000 francs to support Venizelos’
campaign against the Royal family. A few days later he
announced the offer of Sir Basil Zaharoff of several million
francs for Allied propaganda in Greece. Sir Basil was not
sure whether the money would be accepted, but Venizelos
lost no time in reassuring him on that point. He seized
the opportunity for reiterating his advice that only driblets
of corn should be admitted into Greece and no money at all,
and he offered “ to raise a terrible revolution in Athens and
to shatter the King.” 1 In the course of a speech delivered
by M. Abrami, a Deputy, before the Commission of the
Army on September 27th, 1916, —a speech full of ridiculous
misstatements of fact and reflections upon M. Briand and the
British Forces serving under General Sarrail—Venizelos is
described and quoted as follows :
“ To all those, especially to all Frenchmen, who have had
the honour of speaking with him, this great statesman,
whose soul transcends by a hundred cubits that of his
countrymen, has never ceased to use the same language.
* Give nothing more to Greece, neither corn, nor coal, nor
flour, nor maize, nor money. A sustained blockade, a
continued pressure alone will show them that you are Great
Powers and that you are determined. If you maintain the
1 Telegram signed Henri Turot, December 15th, 1915.


pressure long enough, despite all official outcries, very
soon this nation of merchants, shipbuilders and business
men, feeling their interests at stake, will understand who
is at the bottom of the trouble and will take action’.’! 1
Venizelos had travelled far from the humble, ill-dressed
Cretan lawyer who had bitterly opposed the High Commis-
sioner Prince George’s scheme of including Crete in the
Greek dominions and had cringed to King George with
Oriental subservience when he came to Athens at the behest
of the Military League.
We may pass lightly over the protests of the Greek Govern-
ment against the occupation of Corfu by the Allies as a rest
camp for the Serbian army. From the point of view of
International law and the text of the Treaty of 1864 by which
the Powers had guaranteed the “ permanent neutrality ” of
Corfu, the protest was justified and the forcible occupation
of the island, on which the Kaiser owned an estate, was
undoubtedly a violation both of Greek neutrality and the
guarantor Powers’ pledges, but it was one of those crises that
occur in war-time when the Allies could have pleaded necessity.
In theory the Serbians were allies of Greece ; their army was
beaten and demoralized by the ravages of disease and there
was no other convenient place to which they could be taken,
since Italy had refused hospitality to the troops of her stricken
ally. What was a danger to the Italian population need not
be considered a danger to Greeks. Of such is political morality
in war-time 1 The German Press made the most that it
could of the incident and asked why, in the face of this viola-
tion of neutrality, Germany was condemned for having
violated the neutrality of Belgium. It was unfortunate that
in casting about for an excuse the French propagandists
should have fallen back upon the lying reports of de Roquefeuil
that Corfu was a base for German submarines.
I Le Silence de Sarrail. Coblcn.


When the Allied fleet took control of Corfu it had infor-
mation from de Roquefeuil that a fully-equipped station for
supplying submarines with fuel by a pipe line would be
found at the German Emperor’s villa Achilleion, together
with underground chambers in which the machinery was
installed to carry the fuel into the sea. A thorough search
was made and all that was found was a garage for the Kaiser’s
cars, three or four tins of petrol spirit (a fuel not used in
submarines) ; and the alleged machinery proved to be a
drainpipe running out into the sea to convey sewage from
the villa.
Another story circulated by de Roquefeuil’s agents dealt
with Phalerum, the fashionable bathing-beach of Athens.
It found its way into a Paris newspaper. In a workshop at
Phalerum (of all places) machinery was installed by which
petroleum was pumped into a submerged pipe, 500 yards
long. Submerged craft could attach themselves to this pipe
and take in their supplies without coming to the surface.
Queen Sophia, it was gravely added, often drove out to
Phalerum about tea-time to watch this operation ! No one
seemed to reflect that Greece produced no petroleum, or that
her supplies of the fuel were strictly rationed.
There were acts of aggression by the French. On December
28th they occupied the island of Castellorizo where a rising
against the Greek Government had been fomented by one
Lacardis, who was in the pay of the French Secret Service. 1
At the Peace Conference the island was allotted to Italy.
After the air raid on Salonica on December 30th Sarrail
arrested the four enemy consuls, their families and staffs
without authority from the Allied Governments. The Greek
Government protested vigorously without effect. In
of a pledge given only shortly before by the Allies Sarrail’s
next step was to seize the fortress of Karaburnu which the
Greeks occupied with a weak garrison and a few light guns.
1 Confirmed by Prince Demidoff. Russian White Book.


ADMIRAL DARTIGE DU FOURNET, WHO COMMANDED
THE ALLIED SQUADRON IN GREECE
CAPTAIN CHAMONARD, WHOSE COURAGEOUS
EVIDENCE BEFORE THE NAVAL, COMMISSION
COST HIM HIS CAREER


The pretext was the old scare about German submarines.
The Greek protest fell on deaf ears : in the view of the
Allies Sarrail was the only judge of the measures necessary
for the safety of his army.
Meanwhile the German Government was not content to
remain passive. On January 6th, 1916, von Jagow informed
the Greek Government that von Falkenhayn was restive :
that Germany was prepared to guarantee Greek territorial
integrity after the expulsion of the Allied armies and to
compensate for any damage done. He would require the
Greeks to withdraw their Macedonian army to a fixed line
without delay. Skouloudis’ reply was firm. To comply
with the German demand would bring a declaration of war
by the Allies and Greece was determined to maintain her
neutrality. For a time this reply put an end to the German
plans, but Greece realized once more that she was between
the devil and the deep sea.
In January 1916 King Constantine was heard for the first
time in his own defence. He granted an interview to Mr.
Paxton Hibben, of the Associated Press, in which he set
forth the infringements of his neutrality committed by the
Allies and appealed to public opinion in the United States.
Hibben’s telegram was stopped by the French and British
censors, but when he threatened to take it personally to New
York the two Governments thought it wiser to let the message
go and to reply to it semiofficially. It must be confessed
that the reply failed to carry conviction. The distinction,
drawn between the behaviour of the Germans in Belgium
and the Allies in Greece was lamentably weak. King Con-
stantine stated in the interview that the British Legation had
offered a reward of £2,000 for information leading to . the
discovery of a submarine base in Greece and that none had
been forthcoming. The French reply stated that the failure
to localize any base proved the astuteness of the Germans
and that their anger at the Allied occupation of Corfu and
H


other points, known to be nests of submarines, proved the
existence of these bases. It went on to say that the papers
of the enemy consuls seized at Salonica, Mytilene and Corfu
would prove this, though in fact, though these papers were
closely examined, not a word was found in any of them to
support the fable.
Mr. Paxton Hibben’s experiences during his mission in
Athens are illuminating on the processes by which public
opinion was formed in the Western countries. He sent
frequent circumstantial reports to his newspaper in America,
but the version that reached the editor was so meagre and so
colourless that the Associated Press found the luxury of
keeping a special correspondent in Greece too costly if he
could make no better use of his opportunities, and Hibben
was recalled. His journey home to the United States was a
protracted Odyssey owing to the war conditions prevailing
in the Mediterranean. Having to stop in Malta to await a
boat he made enquiries and found that many of his despatches
were still piled up in the censor’s office untouched ; that
others had been so thoroughly expurgated of the truth by
the British and French censors in turn that what was left
was not worth reading. He was indignant and then and there
declared his intention of writing a book setting forth the facts
about Greece as he knew them. The book was ready in
1917, but watchful eyes were on him. The United States
were now moving into the war ; the Intelligence Services
began to pull the strings and Hibben was prevailed upon to
postpone the publication of his book. He volunteered for
the American army and fought in France until the end of
the war. His book —Constantine I and the Greek People—
appeared in 1920. It was the first independent exposition
of what had been going on behind the smoke screen of an
over-zealous war propaganda. The author is now dead and
the book is out of print. It was becoming rare in 1921
when a friend of the writer, who was interested in Greek


affairs, obtained a copy in a bookshop in Piccadilly and was
told that there were still fifteen copies unsold. A few days
later he returned for another copy and was told that the
book was sold out —that M. Venizelos, who was then in
London, had come in on the previous day and bought up
the lot 1 . . .
There was now talk at the Quai d’Orsay of an Allied
occupation of Athens, of expelling King Constantine and of
forcibly setting up M. Venizelos as Dictator of Greece.
M. Briand discountenanced the suggestion in view of certain
opposition from England and Russia. He did, however,
succeed in persuading the British Government to renounce
the evacuation of Salonica.
All this time M. Skouloudis must have been spending most
of his working days in formulating protests against the
unlawful acts of the Allies who had set up a police force of
their own. The excuse given by M. Briand was the police
force alleged to have been organized by Baron von Schenk.
Skouloudis asked for evidence of this German organization,
but none was forthcoming. Scarcely a day passed without
the arrest and search of Greek subjects by these unauthorized
police. Since the censor would never allow the newspapers
to publish the Greek side to the dispute, French and even
British opinion became more and more prejudiced against
King Constantine and his Government.
On March 14th von Falkenhayn warned the Greek Govern-
ment through the German Military that he intended
to advance purely as a defensive measure. Skouloudis pro-
tested as before and the question was again dropped.
So far from there being a good understanding between
Athens and Berlin there was a continuous exchange of sharp
protests—on the one side against the air raids over Greek
territory ; on the other against Greek toleration of the Allied
army in Salonica and of the hostile action taken against the
German and Austrian consuls in neutral territory.


CHAPTER VIII
APRIL-SEPTEMBER 1 9 1 6
DE ROQUEFEUIL’S LEGATION OUTRAGE SQUAD
ON April sth, 1916, the French and British Ministers
intimated to M. Skouloudis that the Allies intended
to transport the Serbian army of 100,000 men by
sea from Corfu to Patras, thence by rail to Athens and from
Athens to Larissa and Salonica. M. Guillemin was peremp-
tory and even rude—he had often been assured by his Naval
that the Greeks could be bullied into any concession,
but M. Skouloudis was quite firm. To allow a hostile army
to pass to the front on neutral railways would be to invite a
declaration of war from the Central Powers, quite apart from
the fact that the passage of so large a body of troops with
its equipment would deprive the Greeks of the use of their
railways for months and perhaps even for the duration of
the war. Moreover, the Serbian army had introduced
.epidemics of typhus and cholera into Corfu. M. Skouloudis
replied that rather than comply with this new demand he
would order the lines to be torn up. A few days later the
Ministers announced their intention of occupying Argostoli
which was the first step towards landing the Serbs at Patras.
The refusal to allow the Serbs to pass through Greece
greatly incensed M. Briand. A fresh newspaper campaign
against the Greek Government was launched in Paris and
there was a talk of bringing the Greeks to reason by means
of a more stringent blockade. More important was the
refusal of the Allies to fulfil their promise of a loan of
150,000,000 francs. The Germans were not slow to make


capital out of the popular indignation excited by the high-
handed action of the Allies. The German Minister offered
to lend the Greeks the 40,000,000 marks for which they
had applied to the Allies in vain. M. Skouloudis enquired
whether any political condition was attached to the loan and,
being assured that there was none, he accepted it.
A week earlier M. Turot had telegraphed to the Quai
d’Orsay. “ The King is a madman who ought to be in
confinement. He is a dangerous lunatic. The following
from Venizelos. ‘lf you are attacked by the Greeks I will
launch a revolution. With me are 80 per cent, of the soldiers,
the majority of the officers and nearly all the people.’ ” -As
the event proved Venizelos had at the time a quite insig-
nificant following.
A telegram from M. Guillemin, not as a rule the most
discerning of men, on this subject is worth quoting :
“ It is the momentary aberration of a man deprived of
power and living removed from realities in the midst of a
group of adorers rather than friends, who little by little
imbibes their illusions and loses sight of self-evident facts.
. . . The King will take no action against the Bulgarians
until they are worn out. The Government, the army and
the majority of the people entirely approve this policy.”
On February 21st, 1915, Prince Demidoff had telegraphed
to his Government :
“ I learn confidentially from an unimpeachable source that
the French Government has put 2,000,000 francs at the
disposal of Venizelos for propaganda in the army.”
According to the telegrams from Isvolsky in Paris 1 the
French were resolved upon a blockade, but the British were
against it lest it should cause the Greeks to demobilize. They
proposed as a compromise that the Serbians should pass to
Salonica by the Gulf of Corinth and the canal, and to this
Skouloudis made no objection. The Russian Government
took the same line and advised the French to accept the
1 Russian White Book, 1922.


compromise. This caused great irritation in Paris. M.
Briand warned the Greek Minister that if any ship carrying
Serbian soldiers to Salonica should be torpedoed the result
would be disastrous for Greece. He had been fed upon
the secret despatches of de Roquefeuil who was suffering
from “ submarinitis.” Nevertheless, by May 29th, 100,000
Serbian soldiers with all their equipment were transported to
Salonica without the loss of a man or a single bale of baggage.
This successful operation was a slap in the face for de Roque-
feuil who had been deluging the French Admiralty with reports
on the activity of German submarines in Greek waters. He
tried to save his face by advancing an explanation —that the
Kaiser had given orders that the Serbs were not to be attacked
because he had a secret arrangement with them that they
were to desert as soon as they were, landed at Salonica 1 “ As
for our Intelligence Service,” writes Admiral Dartige du
Fournet who was responsible for this successful operation,
“ trawlers, barges, tankers, everything were reported as
submarines. It was an unending stream of the most naive
canards .” 1 The Admiral attempted more than once to open
the eyes of his Minister, Admiral Lacaze, to the lack of
judgment shown by his Naval but the only response
was that his association with de Roquefeuil was not close
enough.
It was at this juncture that M. Venizelos came out into
the open. It was becoming clear that by his attitude he had
estranged himself from the large majority of his countrymen
and that his only hope of returning to power was by using
the Allies to compel the Greeks to restore him to office. He
had founded his own newspaper in Athens—the Kyrix—
whose articles were read by the Greeks with indignation,
but were greedily swallowed and quoted by the Allied Press.
He used de Roquefeuil for transmitting his views to the
Quai d’Orsay. Here is a specimen despatched on April 3rd :
1 Admiral Dartige du Fournct, p. Bj.


“ Venizelos maintains that the Allied policy in the East
will come to grief if it is doubted for a moment that the
King, the Greek Government and the Greek General Staff
are the allies of Germany. It is necessary to bring intimi-
dation and force to bear on them.”
And yet within a fortnight we find Venizelos writing to his
friend de Maizi£re, “ If I were to launch a revolution which
deprived the country of its Sovereign and its dynastic insti-
tutions I would not give myself a year before a counter-
revolution came to drag my body through the streets. If
circumstances call me to resume office it will only be with
the King and on his side.” 1 This shows conclusively that
Venizelos was now fully aware that the country was against
him and that he dare do nothing without the military help
of the Allies.
The Paris Press was now filled with accounts of Venizelist
demonstrations in Athens. The demonstrators came into
collision with the people and the police were called in to
restore order. The version of these incidents published by
the Temps was that the attacks on the Venizelists were made
by the myrmidons of Baron von Schenk and these being
worsted, the police were called in by the Germans to smash
the demonstration. In the Quai d’Orsay there is a curious
commentary in a telegram signed by M. Turot dated April
nth, 1916: “The recent Venizelist demonstrations in
Athens did not cost us much—only 10,000 francs.”
The younger brother of Admiral Dartige du Fournet
happened to meet Admiral Lacaze in Paris about this time.
The conversation turned upon Greece. “ I wish that you
would write to your brother and urge him to bring greater
energy to bear on his work,” said Lacaze.
“ I would rather that you did that yourself,” replied the
younger du Fournet drily.
Early in May occurred the incident of Fort Rupel which
I Vlnformation, May nth, 1916.


was destined to have a sinister bearing on the relations between
Greece and the Allies. Rupel was a little frontier post—not a
fortress as was represented in the Allied newspapers—-in the
Strymon Gorge established for checking a Bulgarian surprise.
Some weeks earlier the Greek General Staff had sent officers
to General Sarrail to remind him of the importance of this
post in the defence of Eastern Macedonia, but he chose to
regard the warning as a trap and defended himself from the
charge of inactivity by saying that his effectives were too
weak for occupying Rupel. 1 On May 9th the German
Military announced that the Germans would seize
Rupel in order to check the advance of British troops on the
east bank of the Strymon. Skouloudis protested vigorously,
urging that no Allied troops had crossed the Strymon ; that
an advance by the Bulgarians across the frontier would
infuriate the Greeks and that there would certainly be counter-
measures taken against the Greeks by the Allies. 2 The
Greek Minister in Berlin did his best, but von Falkenhayn
was obdurate. In view of her tolerance of the Allied troops
at Salonica he was inclined to treat Greece as an enemy.
On May 23rd the German Minister handed to M. Skouloudis
a note containing a guarantee of territorial integrity and
announcing that Rupel would be occupied, as a defensive
measure, due solely to the movements of the Entente armed
forces. Both the German and the Bulgarian notes were
marked “ Secret ” : it was explained that this was an order
from the German G.H.Q. who did not wish the Allies to
know that the occupation of Rupel was a defensive measure.
The Greek garrison had long had orders not to resist an
overwhelming force, but to retire to positions at a distance,
since resistance would have been futile and would have
involved Greece in the war. But on May 26th the garrison
opened fire on the first approaching detachment. The
1 Sarrail, p, 104.
2 Telegram, May 10th, to Greek Minister in Berlin.


enemy halted without returning the' fire and warned the
Greek commander that unless the fort was evacuated during
the night it would be occupied by force. The evacuation
took place that night after the stores had been removed and
the guns rendered unserviceable.
It should not be forgotten that at the time of this occurrence
none of the neutrals believed that the Allies could win the
war. Only a week before President Wilson had announced
that since the United States had had nothing to do with the
quarrel, they should keep out of it. If the Central Powers
had found the Greeks in arms against them an end might
have been made of the Greek kingdom. Nevertheless, by her
inability to prevent the occupation of Rupel by the Germans
Greece involved herself in fresh troubles since the surrender
of the fort was held' by the Allies to justify the measures
which they afterwards adopted against her. The incident
gave fresh impetus to the campaign in the French Press.
M. Briand was for extreme measures : the other Allies hesi-
tated. They would not even consent to forcing the Greek
Cabinet to resign : all they would tolerate was a protest that
the surrender of Rupel was a menace to their armies at
Salonica and a demand that certain police officials should be
dismissed. M. Skouloudis himself forestalled their action
by taking the first step towards the general demobilization of
the Greek army, but this, though it satisfied the Allied
Cabinets, provoked a fresh outburst of malice in the French
Press, since the object of the French was to draw Greece
into the war. We know from the telegrams contained in the
Russian White Book that the British Government was acting
as a drag upon French Chauvinism. But on June 14th
Skouloudis made a protest to all neutrals, including the
United States, against the interference of the Allies with
Greek shipping. This served only to heap fuel on the fire
and it was resolved to work for a change of Ministry.
It must not be imagined that de Roquefeuil was sitting


idle. A telegram from Isvolsky in Paris dated June 15th
shows that M. Briand had accepted as authentic a report that
manifestations against the Allies were being organized,
probably by the Greek police. Worn out with the fruitless
struggle against calumny M. Skouloudis resigned on June
19th. He was now past eighty and he had lived a strenuous
life. Starting from quite modest beginnings he had amassed
a fortune as a banker in Constantinople ; indeed he was
rumoured to have founded the fortunes of Sir Basil Zaharoff.
He spoke English and French with equal fluency.
Two days after his resignation on the 21st June the British,
French and Russian Ministers handed an ultimatum to the
Under-Secretary containing a number of false accusations
which the British Foreign Office had been induced to believe.
At this time the British Intelligence officers seemed to have
come entirely under the influence of de Roquefeuil who had
informed them of an alleged plot among the Athens police
to implicate two members of the British Legation staff in a
bomb incident at the Bulgarian Legation and to arrest certain
British subjects. On June 14th Lord Grey had sent for the
Greek Minister and told him that the British Government
was now convinced that the Athens police were acting under
enemy influence and that a Greek officer had publicly accused
the British Legation of lying ; that an anti-British demon-
stration had taken place in Athens and the crowd had shouted
insulting cries before the Legation windows without inter-
ference from the police ; that highly-placed personages were
acting on the instigation of the enemy and allowing Germans
and Bulgarians to establish themselves in Greek forts ; and
that if the Greek Government had not the power or the will
to protect the British Legation, the British Minister would be
recalled from Athens. Naturally Skouloudis had asked for
particulars of these vague rumours, but none had been forth-
coming. The fact was that de Roquefeuil had just perfected
his “ flying squad ” for street demonstrations and that when


ever one or other of the Allies seemed to be growing more
friendly to the Greeks his squad was directed against its most
vulnerable point—its Legation.
In their ultimatum the Allies now demanded complete
demobilization, a change of Ministers, a dissolution of the
Chamber and fresh elections as soon as demobilization was
complete. This Note had been drafted by Venizelos himself
and had been transmitted to Paris by Guillemin with the
support of Prince Demidoff, the Russian Minister who was
personally hostile to Skouloudis. Sir Edward Grey and even
M. Briand hesitated long before instructing their Ministers
to present it. When read with a full knowledge of the facts
in the calmer atmosphere of peace it is a document which
all historians will describe as disgraceful. On May 30th
Guillemin had telegraphed to Paris that M. Venizelos had
assured him that the King was in league with Bulgaria and
Germany ; that action was imperative and that he was ready
to go to Salonica to raise a mutiny in the Greek army and
set up a Provisional Government. A month earlier Sarrail
had written, “ The King believes in the strength of Germany :
he is moreover probably bound by a convention with the
Kaiser. He is a German, whatever may be said.” In his
memoirs Sarrail goes so far as to allege that the British were
conspiring against him because General Milne had declined
to join in proclaiming Salonica in a state of siege without
orders from home.
The King now called upon M. Zaimis to form a Ministry.
Zaimis accepted the terms of the ultimatum and took the
first steps towards demobilization in preparation for the
general election on which the Allies had insisted. Suddenly
the Allies changed their minds and M. Guillemin demanded
that the elections should not take place. The fact was that
M. Venizelos had taken alarm. The reservists who were
returning home were discovered to be strongly pro-Con-
stantine and anti-Venizelos because they felt that Venizelos


was responsible for all the sufferings and humiliations to
which the country was subjected by foreign Powers. Yet the
French newspapers were describing the Greek nation as
straining at the leash for battle while their King held them back.
On August 2nd General Sarrail launched his Macedonian
offensive and the Bulgarians replied with counter-offensives
on his right and left flanks. On his left the Serbians held
attack successfully ; on his right the position became more
serious. There General Froti6 was watching the Bulgarian
frontier towards Brody with a mounted force of ten squadrons
and a battalion of Zouaves ; a Greek Army Corps was spread
out between Demir Hissar and Kavalla. General Froti6
was forced back and the Greek Corps, a detachment of a
demobilized army with its communications running through
territory occupied by foreign armies, was obviously unable
to resist the invading force.
To the great alarm of General Sarrail, the enemy was not
stopping short at Rupel, but had begun to overrun Eastern
Macedonia. The Allies were hoist with their own petard :
they had demanded demobilization and now they wanted
Greece to resist the invaders who were advancing towards
Kavalla, then held by what remained of the Greek Fourth
Army Corps—about 6,000 men. Kavalla was then block-
aded by a British fleet under Admiral Thursby who refused
to allow the transports required for the Greek soldiers to
approach the harbour. One battalion was commanded by
an officer with Venizelist sympathies. A transport was
allowed to enter the harbour and this battalion was embarked.
The remainder of the troops was beginning to crowd on
board when suddenly it became known that the destination
of the ship was not Athens, but Salonica. Thereupon as the
steamer was casting off, rather than break their allegiance to
their country, soldiers jumped into the sea with their arms
and swam ashore, leaving only the rebel battalion to proceed
to Salonica. They soon found themselves surrounded by the


Bulgarian troops that were marching into the town. The
Germans did not choose to treat them as prisoners of war,
but removed them into Germany, allowing them to retain
their arms and treating them as honoured guests. The guns,
after being rendered useless, and the ammunition fell into
the hands of the Bulgarians. There was a curious sequel.
The Greek Government applied to the Germans to allow
these officers and men to be conducted with their full equip-
ment to the Swiss frontier in order to return to Athens. No one
supposed that the application would be granted, but it was.
Yet the Allies became suddenly reluctant to give their safe
conduct for the return to Greece of troops who had shown
devotion to King Constantine and they ignored the application
from the Greek Government. In Paris they appeared to
believe that the weakening of the King’s followers was the
best means for building up Venizelos’ force. This, of course,
was described in London and in Paris as a “ new betrayal.”
Seeing that the Allies refused to allow the Greek troops
to be taken off by sea and threatened to resist their retirement
into Thessaly, it is difficult to maintain that the Greek Corps
Commander could have avoided surrendering. Venizelos
improved the occasion by informing Sir Francis Elliot that
the surrender of Kavalla was the opening move towards
placing the whole of Greece in enemy hands ; that the
Bulgarians would shortly instal themselves at Ekaterini and
on the lower slopes of Mount Olympus whence batteries of
heavy guns would command the whole of Salonica Bay.
Simultaneously the Austro-Germans would march south,
join hands with the Greek troops at Larissa and occupy
Athens. De Roquefeuil elaborated this ridiculous forecast
by reporting that the Greeks were assembling rolling-stock
at Ekaterini. This news was discussed by the British Govern-
ment on August 23rd. Its military experts had no difficulty
in showing that the danger was quite imaginary as long as
the Salonica force remained in being even if there should be


an understanding between the Greek Government and the
enemy, which was in no way proved. 1
De Roquefeuil now indulged his undisputed talent for
theatrical production in organizing a “ national ” Venizelist
demonstration in Athens. On August 27th his staff mar-
shalled a procession past the house of M. Venizelos who
delivered an inflammatory speech accusing the King of
desiring a German victory and of trampling on the Con-
stitution ; “ authorizing ” King Constantine to enter the war
immediately and threatening consequences if he did not.
In the state of feeling prevailing in Athens he was well aware
that he could do nothing, but he was paving the way for a
coup in Salonica under the protection of General Sarrail.
Sarrail’s comment was, “ I could have left Venizelism in the
void or crushed it before it was born.” 2
The plans of the French Government were to induce the
British Cabinet to consent to send British ships to co-operate
in the pressure which it intended to bring to bear upon
Greece, even to the extent of landing and occupying Athens.
When the question was discussed in Downing Street several
of the Ministers were for rejecting it outright on the ground
that it would be most unwise to place M. Zaimis in difficulties
and that the proposed action was provocative and easy to
misrepresent. The result of the discussion was a carefully
worded telegram to the British Ambassador in Paris agreeing
to send British ships to the French fleet to “ support the
demand for the control of the Greek posts and telegraphs,”
but objecting to a landing since British Ministers “ were loth
to meet the friendly attitude of M. Zaimis’ Government with
severe measures.” This gave the French what they required.
The presence of British ships in the French squadron made
the British Government jointly responsible for the policy
on which the French Ministers, misled by de Roquefeuil,
1 Naval History of the War. Chapter V.
2 “ La Grfcce Venizelistc.” Revue de Paris, December 15th, 1919.


were about to embark. They intended to replace diplomats
by soldiers and sailors supported by a formidable squadron
of warships.
On the very day that the Franco-British squadron anchored
at Salamis King Constantine told Sir Francis Elliot that he
was convinced that the time had come for him to declare war
on Bulgaria, but that he could not act until there had been
time to mobilize his army, the two divisions in Macedonia
being surrounded ; that he had to think too of the Greek
population in Asiatic Turkey which would be exposed to
massacre as soon as it became known that he had joined the
Allies. He desired first to know whether the Allies were
prepared to equip his army and put it on a war footing.
Sir Francis Elliot was satisfied that if the pressure of the
combined fleet could be withdrawn Greece would enter the
war. He felt that the demands for control of the postal and
wireless services in particular should be dropped, urging the
right of a neutral to use the radio if it had no other means
of communicating. Unfortunately, at the moment when the
King was talking to Sir Francis Elliot General Sarrail was
perpetrating a high-handed folly in Salonica which entirely
changed the situation by giving evidence to King Constantine
that, the Allies had made common cause with rebels among
his own people. On August 30th General Sarrail had arranged
for the distribution by French cars of thousands of leaflets
informing the Greek population at Salonica that they had
risen in revolt against their Government. The leaflets were
signed by a few Venizelists who constituted themselves a
“ Committee of Public Safety.” They authorized the seizure
of civil and military power and declared war on the Central
Powers, mobilization in Macedonia and the “ relentless
punishment of all traitors to the country.” The same after-
noon the rebels paraded before Sarrail’s headquarters and
placed themselves under his command. The Greek Third
Army Corps took prompt steps to suppress the insurrection,


but Sarrail interfered and compelled the corps to leave for
Athens. All this was done behind the back of the French
Minister who telegraphed to Paris that he had tried in vain
to induce Venizelos to await the result of the elections—the
very thing that he dared not do, knowing that they would go
against him. The Venizelist insurrection provoked a counter-
demonstration in Athens so considerable that it showed that
the attacks upon King Constantine had served only to increase
his popularity.
On September ist the combined French and British fleet
anchored at Salamis with orders to demand control of the
Greek posts and telegraphs ; the expulsion of Baron von
Schenk and his staff and the surrender of the interned enemy
ships. The fleet arrived at Keratsini without incident and no
resistance was offered when the thirteen Austro-German
vessels were seized. The expedition was French in its incep-
tion : on the day of the fleet’s arrival Isvolsky telegraphed
from Paris that he had asked M. Briand what he intended
to do and that Briand had replied that owing to British
opposition he had abandoned the idea of effecting a landing,
but that the control of the Post Office and the expulsion of
enemy agents was essential. 1 On September 9th Prince
Demidoff telegraphed from Athens, “We agree with Sir
Francis Elliot that the French are pursuing unwarrantable
aims. There will be continuous trouble now that their fleet
has arrived.”
No sooner had the fleet anchored than de Roquefeuil asked
that orders should be sent to the Admiral to furnish a brigade
to occupy Athens and the Piraeus. M. Briand had tried
unsuccessfully to obtain British assent to this, but on this
occasion the British Government was firm : early in Septem-
ber, to mark its disapproval of interference in the internal
affairs of Greece, it recalled some of the British ships from
Keretsini. When the Greek Admiral came on board the
1 Russian White Book, 1922.


FRENCH SECRET ORDERS ON DECEMBER 1ST, 1916, WHICH DISPROVE
THE ALLEGATION THAT THE LANDING PARTIES WERE “AMBUSHED”


French flagship he remarked to the Admiral that very soon
they might find themselves fighting side by side. Next day
Admiral Dartige du Fournet received a visit from de Roque-
feuil fresh from dabbling in high politics with his friend,
Baron von Schenk. The two adventurers had been closeted
together for some hours on the preceding night before they
were able to come to an agreement that was to leave its mark
on history. Alsace and Lorraine were to be given back to
France : the German submarine fleet was to be ceded to the
British. De Roquefeuil was excited. He demanded from
the Admiral a fast destroyer to carry the great news to Paris.
The Admiral took a more temperate view of the proposal
and flatly declined to expend good French fuel on transmitting
the news ; for such a proposal he thought the ordinary mail
quite rapid enough. One of the wildest of de Roquefeuil’s
schemes at this period was secretly to abduct the King and
Queen.
Among the tasks prescribed for Admiral du Fournet was
the seizure of an Austrian crew alleged by de Roquefeuil to
have arrived in Athens to take charge of a Greek submarine.
He failed to obey this order, not from lack of will, but because
the Austrian crew was a figment of de Roquefeuil’s imagina-
tion. The order was cancelled as soon as this became known
in Paris.
During the month of September 1916 three Greek vessels
were blown up and sent to the bottom near the Piraeus.
Steps were immediately taken to drag for mines and examine
the hulls under water with the result that the explosions
were found to have taken place inside the holds and not from
mines or torpedoes. No doubt was felt in the fleet that these
explosions were a “ stunt ” of the Intelligence Service which
was smarting under the scepticism of the Fleet officers about
the submarine activity reported by de Roquefeuil. On the
occasion of the explosion on the Angheliki de Roquefeuil “ went
one better.” The steamship arrived at the Piraeus under her
1


own steam and reported that she had been torpedoed at the
entrance to the harbour. The French Press reported the
number of persons killed as “ considerable ” which was
strange in view of the fact that the vessel steamed into port
apparently uninjured. Practically the whole of the French
Press showered abuse on King Constantine for remaining
neutral. De Roquefeuil organized an impressive funeral
procession. The coffins of the alleged victims were covered
with wreaths and sympathetic messages : all the Allied
Ministers except Count Bosdari attended. It was not until
later that it became known that some of the bodies in the
coffins had been purchased from a Greek hospital ; that
other coffins were filled with earth and the torpedoing had
been devised by the French propaganda to shock Greece
out of her neutrality. Unfortunately the joke was too good
to be kept secret. One after another of the agents engaged
in the fraud boasted of it to their intimates under a promise
of secrecy —the kind of promise which is a guarantee that
the imposture will come to light.
On September 2nd the Allied Ministers presented a
demand for the expulsion of enemy agents and the punish-
ment of their Greek associates. Among the agents was a
couple named Hoffmann who were of special interest to the
British service. They were carried to Malta in a ship of war
and interned there. The list of names had been drawn up
by de Roquefeuil from his famous card-index. It had never
been checked by any of the Allied Ministers. Such distin-
guished names as Streit, Dousmanis, Metaxas and Mercouris
headed the list, which also included the names of men who
had been dead for several months besides those of a number
of Greeks who were described as Germans. So tame a pro-
ceeding as to demand the control of the Post Office and the
expulsion of his friend, von Schenk, fell far short of the
programme sketched by de Roquefeuil. He had long been
clamouring for Allied control of the public services, but


when the Admiral received instructions from Paris to instal
these and he turned to de Roquefeuil for his detailed scheme,
he found to his surprise that no scheme had been drawn up
and that the Naval Attache was greatly embarrassed.
The Allied fleet was at Athens, but there was no reason
why it should remain there unless something could be done
to impress the imagination and force the hands of reluctant
Governments. In de Roquefeuil’s view an “ intelligence
operation ” was necessary. The newly constituted League
of Reservists was anti-Venizelist and strongly opposed to
entering the war ; as a set-off the Venizelists began to enrol
a rival league—the “ Central League of Greek Reservists ”
—directed by the Venizelist deputy, Miltiades Negreponte.
Prominent in this league was Z. Franghias, a Greek member
of de Roquefeuil’s organization, who was in the confidence
of his chief and fully posted in the intrigues conducted by
de Roquefeuil and his British opposite number, Mr. Compton
Mackenzie. The following account of the attack upon the
French Legation is taken from his “ Letter of repentance ”
published in the Athenian newspaper Kathimerini of June
23rd, 1930.
On September 7th, 1916, he was called to the house of
M. Negreponte, who addressed him coldly as follows : “ M.
Franghias, you will receive a visit from M. Eustratios Bolanis,
a person in the confidence of M. Venizelos. You will do every-
thing that he asks. I should explain that he wants a number
of men whom you will put at his disposal without hesitation.”
“ I must know M. Bolanis* intentions if I am to choose
the right men,” replied Franghias. “ I should also like to
know whether M. Venizelos approves of the proposal.”
“We are going to make an attack upon the French
Legation,” replied Negreponte gravely. “ Sophocles, M.
Venizelos’ son, knows all about it.”
Franghias went to his office at 8 Lycabete Street and at
midday he met M. Bolanis for the first time. Bolanis asked


for eighty men from the newly-constituted Venizelist League,
saying that he must have them at 2 p.m. the same day in order
to arm them with pistols. Franghias asked where so large
a number of revolvers was to be found. Bolanis replied,
“ At the French School annexed to the French Legation.”
“ Very well,” replied Franghias, “ in that case the men
had better go in small parties to Commander de Roquefeuil’s
office in order to put the police who arc watching us off the
scent.”
During the course of the afternoon the men assembled at
the French School where Bolanis was awaiting them. Frang-
hias went to Venizelos’ house to report that his orders had
been carried out. He met Sophocles Venizelos at the door.
“ Is your father aware of the business we are engaged
upon ? ” asked Franghias.
“ My father must know everything,” replied Sophocles, but
he added, “ Still, this time let us do something without telling
him beforehand.” This struck Franghias as a strange answer
to give to one who knew the despotic temperament of the
father. However, he went off to the French School to see
his men. There he found them assembled, silent and ill at
ease. A few minutes later Captain Champsaur, a Paris
journalist of whom we shall hear more, arrived followed by
Vincent, Laffont and Holland, all officers of de Roquefeuil’s
organization, and Bolanis. They proceeded to break up the
band into groups of ten, armed them and gave them the
following orders. “ To-morrow, August Bth, at 7.5 p.m.,
when all the Allied Ministers will be holding a meeting in the
French Legation, you will run into the garden firing shots
into the air and shouting * Down with France ! Down with
England 1 Long live Constantine !’ ”
Next morning, however, the newspaper Esperini reported
that something of the kind was on foot and that a Greek
infantry company had been detailed to mount guard in front
of the French Legation. The project therefore was deferred


until the following evening. According to Count Bosdari
the German Minister had heard of it and had warned M.
Zaimis, but the Prime Minister declined to believe that a
French naval officer would stoop to such a trick. 1
At 7.45 bn the evening of September 9th a number of
men rushed into the garden' of the French Legation, shouting
and emptying their revolvers into the air. Some of the
demonstrators were arrested by Greek policemen, but these
were hustled by men in French uniforms and loosed their
hold : all escaped into the darkness. Such an insult provoked
extraordinary passion in France and seriously disturbed
moderate opinion in England. De Roquefeuil sent a lurid
account of the outrage to Admiral Lacaze and pressed upon
Guillemin the need for reprisals. The Allied Ministers
deputed their doyen , Sir Francis Elliot, to call upon M. Zaimis
and demand the exemplary punishment of the demonstrators,
the soldiers and police who had failed to prevent the outrage,
and a written apology to France from the Greek Government.
When the Ministers met to decide upon this course of action
Elliot asked his French colleague to send for de Roquefeuil.
As soon as this officer presented himself Sir Francis told him
bluntly that his chauffeur professed to have recognized among
the demonstrators a man whom he knew to be employed in
the French Secret Service. De Roquefeuil struck an attitude
of astonishment and exclaimed “ Impossible ! ” One or two
of the Ministers, however, seemed unconvinced by his assur-
ances. Immediately after the outrage Count Bosdari entered
the Athenian Club smiling and remarked that clearly it was
the result of a plot between Guillemin and the Venizelists.
The Italian Press took the same view. 2
On the day following the outrage one of the demonstrators
named Canelopoulos, who was dissatisfied with the payment
1 Bosdari, p. x 66,
2 The Temps of September 14th stated that the attack on the French
Legation had been organized by the German Minister.


for his services, went to the Athens police and furnished them
with a complete list of his accomplices. Next day the head
of the police encountered Franghias at the door of Venizelos’
house where he was talking to a friend—a M. Vicakis. He
stopped and asked M. Vicakis pointedly to tell Bolanis to
report himself at Police Headquarters. Franghias took
alarm and ran off to Negreponte to warn him of the danger
of arrest. Negreponte sent him straight to de Roquefeuil’s
office for protection and there he found the entire band.
They waited until midnight when Champsaur and Holland
arrived with French naval uniforms into which they changed.
They were then driven in motor-cars to the Piraeus and put
on board the yacht Resolu. Bolanis complained that Champ-
saur had compelled him to sign a document certifying that
he had received 10,000 francs from von Schenk for committing
the outrage. The yacht sailed immediately for Salonica with
Holland in charge. He was carrying orders from the French
Legation to the French General Staff. Two hours later the
men were landed and taken to the headquarters of the French
police where they were told that they must not be seen in
Salonica lest stories hostile to the French should get about.
They were taken in motor-cars to the French camp at Zeindlik.
When it became evident that the Greek police were hot upon
their trail de. Roquefeuil took alarm. On September 25th
he had them arrested and conveyed to Marseilles for intern-
ment, warning the Competent Military Authority that they
must not be allowed to communicate with any person outside
the camp.
Against one risk he had not provided. The gendarmerie
in Marseilles had the right to inspect the detention camp
and take statements from any prisoner who had a grievance.
The story told by these Greek prisoners reached the ears of a
Lieutenant de Mandols, who decided to visit the camp and
investigate their complaints. On November 3rd, 1916, he
insisted upon taking separate statements from each of them.


These statements were in substance identical, but since the
incidents complained of lay outside the province of the
gendarmerie, de Mandols contented himself with sending
the statements without comment to his official chief, the
Minister of the Interior, and the men, with the exception of one
who had contrived to make his escape, were kept in internment.
On July nth, 1917, the leader of the band of rowdies,
the Cretan Bolanis, sent a written appeal to M. Jonnart, then
engaged in Greece in engineering the abdication of King
Constantine, to obtain the release of the band from the intern-
ment camp. The letter opened with the boast that Bolanis
and his confederates “ belong to the Liberal (Venizelist)
Party and are personally acquainted with M. Venizelos.”
It continued, “ The undersigned members of the Venizelist
Party desire to be released by the French Government by
whose orders we acted ... in order to return to our dear
Fatherland and fight for the triumph of the principles of the
great statesman, M. Venizelos.” It is signed “ Mandatory of
the signatories, Chief of the Band, Stratis Bolanis, Bodyguard
of M. Venizelos.” In 1918 M. Venizelos was in power :
the men had served his purpose ; the clock had moved on.
He instructed the Greek Minister in Paris to apply for their
release and they returned to Athens in January 1919. But
de Mandols’ report was on record and was produced before
the Committee of the French Chamber in 1919. For obvious
reasons this report was never published. Among the findings
it contains this : “ Some time later, however, it was learned
from the persons arrested that the demonstration had been
planned in every particular by the Naval Attache with the
intention of securing the approval of the French Government
for the coercive action which he had constantly been advo-
cating.” 1
It was generally believed in Athens that the outrage had
been a “ stunt ” of de Roquefeuil and it may seem strange
1 Report of the Naval Commission of the French Chamber. 1919.


that the Greek Government did not publish the truth, but
it was not until September nth that Zaimis learned the
truth from the judicial enquiry that he had set on foot. It
was then too late ; the lie had got the start; the Paris Press was
foaming ; the censor would never have passed the statement.
M. Guillemin seized upon this incident as a pretext for
landing a guard of Marines to protect the Legation. M.
Zaimis decided to resign. He had accepted office pledged
to carry out the general election demanded in the Ultimatum
of June 21 st, 1916, and Guillemin, who had presented the
ultimatum in common with the other Allied Ministers, had
vetoed the election.
It is significant that Guillemin reported on September nth
that M. Venizelos had called to express his deep indignation at
the insult to the French Legation by some of his compatriots
“ led astray by German propaganda.” Yet it was M. Venizelos
who applied for the release of the demonstrators.
Count Bosdari makes suggestions about the forest fire at
Tatoi, the summer palace, in which King Constantine narrowly
escaped death. The fire broke out on July 13th in three
separate places equidistant from one another and spread
downwind towards the palace. He calls it “ a very singular
fire ” and suggests that it was the work of Franco-Venezelist
agents. That mystery has never been solved. It is said that
important documents were removed from the dossier of the
fire by the Minister of Justice in the Venizelos Cabinet.
Whether de Roquefeuil was concerned in it or not the fire
was certainly incendiary in origin. l
As the Naval Commission of the Chamber expressed it,
“ The provocative and dishonest practices of the Secret
Service under the French flag knew no restraint or law.”
It went on to admit that it was only Admiral Dartige du
Fournet who prevented collisions from occurring earlier and
he paid for his firmness by the loss of his post.
1 Bosdari, op. cit, p. 159.


CHAPTER IX
SEPTEMBER-OCTOBER 1916
VENIZELISM WITH DE ROQUEFEUIL AS STAGE MANAGER
ON M. Zaimis’ resignation the King had to look for
a successor whose sympathies were known to be
pro-Ally. He sent for M. Dimitracopoulos, a
former Minister of Justice in the Venizelos Cabinet, a man
of political integrity and strong will. Before accepting the
invitation M. Dimitracopoulos sought an interview with
Sir Francis Elliot and after weighing his chances of success
against the certainty of Venizelist intrigues against him, he
declined the offer. The King then summoned M. Calogero-
poulos who was known to be pro-Ally and had already held
office without being drawn into party intrigue. This did not
appear to suit M, Venizelos since it might result in Greece
joining the Allied cause without his intervention. He
denounced the new Cabinet to the Allied Ministers and the
Press as being “ secretly pro-German.” Nor did it suit
de Roquefeuil, who had created and circulated the myth that
no one in Greece except Venizelos was pro-Ally. Guillemin
was not completely under his influence. On September 16th
de Roquefeuil telegraphed, “ The Streit-Dousmanis camarilla
will still pull the strings. The new Ministry’s game is to put
on a smiling face when dealing with the Allies.” Two days
later Isvolsky telegraphed from Paris that M. Briand regarded
the new Cabinet as deplorable since it was composed of anti-
Venizelists and therefore of declared enemies of the Allies ;
that finally the new Minister proposed to proceed with the


elections, “ which is unthinkable since the result would be
unfavourable to the Allies.” On the margin of this telegram
the Tsar wrote, “ I call this intervention in Greece’s domestic
affairs. It is a dangerous course.” 1
The new Ministry now made a definite offer to join the
Allies, but this time it was Great Britain who stood in the
way. The late Lord Hardinge seemed to have pinned his
faith to everything M. Venizelos said and to have, in conse-
quence, a strong prejudice against King Constantine. Accord-
ing to a telegram from Isvolsky on September 21st M. Briand
was favourably impressed by the Greek offer even though
secrecy was enjoined, but Lord Hardinge declined to believe
that the offer was genuine. The Allied Ministers refrained
from official intercourse with the new Cabinet with the result
that on September 23rd a Note was agreed upon demanding
the formation of a Ministry that enjoyed the confidence of
the Allies.
Venizelos had now become seriously alarmed lest he should
be left out of the picture. Among the French officials in
Athens at this period was a man named Maurice Champsaur,
a Captain in the Reserve, employed as head of the French
secret police force in Athens, to whose indiscretions we owe
our knowledge of the birth of Venizelism as a disruptive force
in Greece. On his return from a tour of the Cyclades he
was sent for by de Roquefeuil, who told him that the surrender
of Fort Rupel to the Germans was an act of treason (sic) on
the part of the King; that the Greek people seemed indifferent
but that the Venizelists, “ who formed the majority,” were
on the point of rising ; that Colonel Christodoulos of the
army in Eastern Thrace, had gone to Salonica against orders,
at the head of a few troops ; and that the moment had arrived
for taking action. 2 He said, “ You ought to profit from your
1 Russian White Book, 1922.
2 Chdstodoulos was the officer who embarked in a transport for
Salonica under Allied protection. Vide supra.


good relations - with Venizelos to get him to leave Athens
where he is virtually a prisoner of the Royalists and can do
nothing.”
Taking with him a Greek officer, Champsaur went to see
Venizelos and urged him to follow the example of General
Christodoulos and go to Salonica, assuring him that as long
as the dynastic question was not raised, the Allies would
hasten to recognize any Government that he might set up ;
that de Roquefeuil had been assured of this by the French
Minister. Venizelos hesitated. He admitted that the advice
was sound, but he asked for several days to make preparations ;
to consult his supporters and make sure that the plan should
not miscarry. During the days that followed, the rumour
spread that Venizelos intended to leave : only the day and
the hour were uncertain. De Roquefeuil had planted spies
in Royalist circles to keep him informed of any Government
plan to frustrate the plot. Still Venizelos hesitated. Seeing
that something must be done to move him, de Roquefeuil
struck a blow in his tenderest spot ; he announced that he
had received information that a non-commissioned officer —
an expert in assassinations—was on his way from the Cyclades
to murder him. He went in person to call upon him at
night and insisted upon having him awakened and brought
down to him. “ Excellency,” said de Roquefeuil, “ they are
going to assassinate you. We have the proof of what I say
in our hands. If you do not leave immediately, you may
never be able to do so.”
“ That does not surprise me,” replied Venizelos : “my
opponents have been threatening me for the past three years.
Since you wish to hasten my departure, I accept and place
myself in your hands.”
If Venizelos had embarked openly for Crete it is not at all
certain that any obstacle would have been put in his way by
the Greek Government, though his mentor, de Roquefeuil,
might have lost a notable opportunity for his peculiar talent.


He would not have been able to write a serio-comic despatch
to the Minister of Marine in which Yenizelos was pitilessly
held up to ridicule. This report was read aloud at a meeting
of the French Cabinet : it provoked loud laughter.
In his report of September 28 th he wrote, “ There is such
a lack of discipline, of discretion and of method among the
Venizelist chiefs that we have had to abandon them to their
own devices.” He went on to describe the embarkation at
Phalerum. Forty Venizelist officers came to the Intelligence
Headquarters at the French School to don their disguises.
“ They gave me the impression of a flock of sheep.” This
accomplished actor-manager was not devoid of humour in
his description of M. Marcatonaki, Yenizelos’ private secre-
tary, disguised as “ Commander de Roquefeuil,” and of
Admiral Miaoulis in the uniform of a French quartermaster.
De Roquefeuil had guessed shrewdly at the weak spot in
the armour of demagogues to whatever nation they belong—
physical concern for their own skins. He was now in the
element for which he was intended by nature, that of a
theatrical producer. The first step was to deceive the Greek
authorities about the place of embarkation. Since these
chose to believe that Yenizelos would embark at the Piraeus,
their belief should be confirmed. During the morning of
September 25th, 1916, —the birthday of all the misfortunes
that followed—about a hundred Venizelist officers and non-
commissioned officers and men were despatched to the
Piraeus. Among them was Major Pangalos, who afterwards
made himself notorious as the Dictator of Greece. The
effect produced by their appearance was almost instantaneous.
The watch kept on Phalerum by the police was relaxed ;
two companies of infantry and a body of police made their
appearance at the Piraeus and picketed the quay. An armed
party boarded the Greek steamer Hesperia , on which the
fugitives were expected to embark, but on reaching the
deck, instead of the Greek captain, they found a French


lieutenant, de Verthamont, one of de Roquefeuil’s most active
henchmen, who addressed the Greek officer as follows : “ I
am here to keep order and I have no need of you. I must
request you not to disturb the people already on board : they
are under my protection. If you do not leave the ship before
she gets under way, I shall carry you along with your friends,
the Venizelists.”
Throughout the day quantities of luggage were brought
down to the ship, which confirmed the impression that the
fugitives intended to embark at the Piraeus. During the
afternoon preparations were being made for a masquerade
on shore. At five o’clock Yenizelos’ pair-horse carriage, which
everybody in Athens knew by sight, drove him through the
town to a tea-party at the Theocharis’ house, whither one of
his kinsmen, who bore some resemblance to him, had pre-
ceded him. As soon as the other guests had left, the process
of making-up the kinsman as Yenizelos’ “ double ” was
begun. The poor man complained plaintively when he was
made to put on Yenizelos’ second pair of spectacles that he
could not see, but no one listened to him. The carriage
returned ; the “ double ” entered it and was driven to
Yenizelos’ house in the Rue de I’Universite, which immedi-
ately became a very close point of observation for the police.
Following his instructions, the “ double ” turned on all the
electric light, showed himself at the open windows of the
first floor and then retired to the little study where he could
be seen by people across the street apparently reading the
newspapers. Mounted police were in waiting at the corner,
and unmounted men were on patrol in front of the house.
At 2 a.m., the hour fixed for the hegira , a car drew up at
the Theocharis’ door and took up Yenizelos, Admiral Condour-
iotis, who had also been disguised, and Majors Mavroudis
and Theocharis. With headlights extinguished, it drove off
to Phalerum. A few minutes earlier a second car had left
the Panhellinion Restaurant in charge of Champsaur himself,


who had had assigned to him the duty of clearing the road
for Venizelos’ car. This was necessary since barriers were
reported to have been constructed on the road. A third car
carried a Greek non-commissioned officer disguised in a
French uniform who was carrying Venizelos’ papers to a
launch which was awaiting him at Phalerum.
The cars were not held up : the French uniform opened
every gate to them ; they drove straight to the Platon Res-
taurant in Phalerum. Here a French officer had reserved part
of the restaurant for a dinner to be given to a party of friends
and courtesans, warning the proprietor that the carousals would
be kept up into the small hours. A second dinner was to be
served in an arbour in the grounds which reached down to
the sea-shore. It had been arranged that the car carrying
Venizelos should sound its horn as it approached and that
the diners should make a signal to the boats by turning on
and off the electric lamps illuminating the dinner-table. All
went according to plan. A boat reached the steps just as
the cars drew up. The Hesperia , which had sailed from the
Piraeus at i .30 a.m., was lying a few cables off. The restaurant-
keeper ran down to the arbour to enquire what was
happening. “It is too late to answer questions, my friend.
You want to know what is happening ? Venizelos and
Condouriotis have said good-bye to Constantine.”
According to Champsaur, an untrustworthy witness, the
man cried “ Vive Venizelos 1 Since his name belongs to
history, let me offer you some of my French wine. The
pilgrims who come to this restaurant in the future shall pay
for it.”
The artless Champsaur recommends tourists to visit this
historic spot. He adds a word of tribute to his intrepid chief,
de Roquefeuil, for having brought “ Nationalist ” Greece to
the side of France. He rises to poetical flights in his admir-
ation for the man who stage-managed Venizelism. Admiral
Dartige du Fournet’s comment was, “ The Intelligence


Service organized this departure like the scenario of a Carnival
of which the sordid details would better have been buried in
silence instead of being related afterwards with gusto."
On September 27th General Danglis, who had wished to
accompany Yenizelos, applied to de Roquefeuil for facilities
to desert and Champsaur was sent to arrange for taking him
under the protection of French uniforms to the Piraeus and
to put him on board the French Minister’s yacht, the Resolu.
When Champsaur returned to report his success, de Roquefeuil
said, “ Two days have passed since Yenizelos left. A number
of volunteers went with him and others are getting ready to
follow. Why is the fleet standing aloof? I expected to
hear from you that the sailors were on the point of imitating
the soldiers.”
“ I understand what you mean, Sir,” replied Champsaur ;
“ you want me to contrive that the naval officers should
surrender their vessels to us. Very well. As you seem to
think that I am responsible for the delay, I shall arrange for
the cruiser Hydra to be at Salamis to-morrow night.”
It happened that at that moment a Greek naval officer,
Captain Cacoulidis, had found asylum in the French Legation
after escaping from the military prison. While still serving
in the Navy he had written an open letter to the King accusing
his sovereign of various misdemeanours and ending with a
phrase quoted by Champsaur with admiration. “ The
people call you their Light, O Great King, but there is so
much alcohol in this light that it no longer illumines.” This
insult was based on one of the calumnies circulated by de
Roquefeuil ; King Constantine was one of the most moderate
of men. Cacoulidis might properly have been tried by
court-martial and shot, but King Constantine chose to treat
the insult with contempt and the man was lodged in the
Singros prison. Thence he had made his escape and came
straight to de Roquefeuil for protection. If M. Guillemin
hesitated about the propriety of allowing the French Legation


to be used to harbour a fugitive from justice, it was not for
long.
To this man Champsaur applied for advice upon his
project.
“ Take the Hydra ? Nothing easier,” replied the man.
“ I know every corner of the ship. All you have to do is to
make sure of the captain, Bratsanos. The King has lately
put him in his place for being too Venizelist. You know
where he lives. Go and see him and bring him here. Here
are the names and addresses of some Venizelist petty officers
who used to serve under me and know the ship. They will
be indispensable to us.”
Next day Champsaur returned bringing Captain Bratsanos
with him. De Roquefeuil was present at the interview. When
the question of violating his oath was put squarely to him,
Bratsanos refused. De Roquefeuil had not forgotten his
ruse practised on Venizelos to hasten his departure. He
produced a paper from his pocket and told Bratsanos that it
was a warrant for his arrest which would be executed within
twenty-four hours unless he consented to surrender his ship
to Venizelos. The warrant, of course, was a forgery. The
poor man knew from report how prisoners arrested by the
French police in Athens were treated, and he gave way.
Champsaur is discreetly silent about this incident : we have
it from the boasting of de Roquefeuil to some French officers
of whom Captain Chamonard was one. When Chamonard
protested that such conduct was unbecoming an officer in
the French navy, de Roquefeuil drew himself up and said
stiffly that he had the sanction of his conscience and of his
spiritual adviser and that that was enough for him.
The cruiser Hydra was moored to the quay in the Piraeus
harbour between the French cruiser Bruix and the French
Minister’s yacht, the Risolu. She carried a crew of 250
officers and men—all tried Royalists. The problem was to
seize the ship with ten deserters. It was decided to do this


in the small hours of the morning. Two tugs were warned
to approach the ship on a signal from the Risolu. At 2.30 a.m.
two boats from the yacht carried the conspirators to the
ladder. Seeing the uniforms of Greek naval officers, the
sentry gave no alarm. All the arms on deck were flung into
the sea. An armed party went down to the first lieutenant’s
cabin and ordered him and his officers to leave the ship.
There remained the crew to deal with. Cacoulidis, with
an armed escort, entered the battery and shouted “ Attention 1
In the name of the Revolution and of our glorious Admiral
Condouriotis, we have taken possession of the Hydra to carry
her to victory! Those of you who prefer to serve under the
Constantine flag must leave the ship. We will take no one
with us but patriots who have the heart to repair the abominable
outrage done by our sovereign to the national honour 1 ”
Practically the whole crew left the ship, and at 6 a.m, she
was towed to a berth alongside the French flagship, Provence.
The crowning infamy of de Roquefeuil in this affair was to
consent to forward a letter written by Cacoulidis :
“ To H.M. Constantine 11, King of the Hellenes.
The Hydra is ready for sea and awaits your orders for
handing her over to the Bulgarians.— Cacoulidis.”
“ How was the defection of this ship contrived ? ” asked
Admiral du Fournet. “It must, alas, be confessed that the
Chief of our Intelligence Service boasted of having used an
artifice on Captain Bratsanos of which France has cause to
blush and which she would be compelled to disavow if an
official enquiry brought it to light. 1,1
1 Souvenirs de Guerre d’un Amiral, p. ij6.
K


CHAPTER X
OCTOBER-NOVEMBER 1 9 1 6
THE SHADOW OF COMING EVENTS
IN order to understand the confusion that resulted from a
triple diplomatic control in Greece a few words upon
the Ministers of the different Powers is necessary. The
doyen of the diplomatic corps was the British Minister, Sir
Francis Elliot, who had been in Athens for more than fifteen
years and possessed an intimate knowledge of the country
and of the people on whom in the earlier stages of the war
he had considerable influence. He had a genuine belief in
the genius, disinterestedness and patriotism of M. Venizelos,
but while.he was supporting the Yenizelist cause he allowed
himself to drift to an unwise extent under the charm and
influence of the Cretan statesman with the result that he
overassessed his abilities. As all the world knows Venizelos
is gifted with remarkable powers of persuasion and his
relations with the British Minister are suggestive of a python
in the act of mesmerizing a rabbit. Being himself a man of
the strictest probity it is astonishing that the British Minister
should have condoned in his protegd faults of attitude and
good taste which he would have been the first to condemn in
one of his own compatriots in relation to his Government.
The process of change from loyalty to flat treason in Venizelos
was doubtless slow and successive, but even in its earlier stages
it took the form of allusions to the King and the Royal Family
in terms that should have been distasteful to an educated
public servant. Sir Francis Elliot might usefully have
remembered the French proverb, “ Le mauvais gout mene au


crime." He allowed himself to be influenced by the false
evidence brought against the King and the Greek military
experts and caused them to become suspect in England and
in France. When they declined to engage in military adven-
tures proposed by Venizelos they were accused of doing
so out of sympathy with our enemies : when they offered
co-operation with the Allies their honesty was suspected.
To a large extent this was the result of a too close association
between Elliot and Venizelos and in the end neither gained
anything from it. If the British Minister had given the
same helpful sympathy to the Gounaris Government that he
had given to Venizelos he might have solved the Eastern
military problem. Inasmuch as he failed to do this owing
to his partisan sympathies he cannot altogether be absolved
from blame for the disasters that followed. It is certain that
he never appreciated that the issues at stake were purely military
and not in any way political. Acting with the best intentions
in 1914 he paved the way to Hell for Greece.
In 1915 he had organized a British control of the impor-
tation and distribution of petrol and cereals which gave him
the power to exercise pressure on the Greek Government.
He used this power with great discretion. He was courteous
and restrained in his relations with his colleagues—qualities
that gave him a preponderating influence in the meetings of
Ministers. Gossip said that the arrival of a French admiral
in command of a combined fleet was distasteful to him and
added that he had been heard to say that he did not intend
to be taken in tow by any foreign admiral. The story must
have been invented since Admiral Dartige du Fournet found
him pleasant to work with for all that his manner struck him
as being rather cold and formal. He was strongly opposed
to a policy of violence or of interference with the Greek public
services, nor would he listen to any suggestion of military
action or of the arbitrary arrest and expulsion of Greek sub-
jects from Greece. On the other hand he cannot be acquitted


of responsibility for the mischievous antics of the British
Intelligence officers who were under de Roquefeuil’s influence,
though he disapproved of them, nor for the support he gave
to Venizelos until he found him out. It was then too late.
M. Guillemin, the French Minister, was a man of a different
stamp. When he relieved M. Deville he was instructed that
French interests were suffering severely from the machinations
of Baron von Schenk and it was owing to his representations
that Commander de Roquefeuil had been sent out to Athens
to create an intelligence and propaganda service. He had
almost every defect that should disqualify a man for ■ the
profession of diplomacy. He was excitable, impatient,
credulous, inconsistent and short-sighted. He had the
restless itch to make his presence felt which is said to come
from an “ inferiority complex.” He was a bad judge of
character and incapable of disentangling truth from falsehood.
Having no natural power of command and being unequal
to the task of restraining the unwise zeal of his subordinates
he found himself obliged to run with them instead of asserting
himself ; consequently as the policy for which he was respon-
sible was not his, he never knew to what lengths it would
lead him. Undoubtedly foolish, he was not so much a knave
as the tool of knaves. His remarkable incompetence brought
French diplomacy into contempt ; the record of his blunder-
ings in Athens will serve as a warning against putting a man
of inferior ability into a position of importance at a critical
juncture. Admiral du Fournet found him a curiosity among
diplomatists. His hours of work were irregular ; he did not
receive the Naval Liaison officers with the courtesy to which
they had been accustomed ; in fact, these officers made
formal complaints about him to the Admiral. Whereas
du Fournet, with his usual frankness, furnished him with
copies of all his official correspondence, there was no reciprocity
even when Guillemin received despatches in which the
Admiral was referred to. Moreover, Guillemin was no


longer received by the King and he objected strongly to the
Admiral visiting the Palace. Accordingly, Guillemin’s one
dominant idea was armed intervention whatever the conse-
quences : with a French fleet at the very doors of Athens
he thought that his opportunity had come ; that coercion
would be applied almost daily by the fleet. One small incident
will serve to show what kind of man had been selected
by the French Government to maintain the dignity of the
Republic in a delicate crisis. That autumn a play representing
the Battle of Navarino was being given in one of the theatres.
Guillemin went to see it. As he came out derisive whistles
followed him down the street. He went straight to - the
Admiral and asked what action he proposed to take to stop
the play and vindicate his dignity. The Admiral found that
he could count upon nothing from Guillemin but advice to
use force. He found it impossible to see eye to eye with him
on any subject. From the first, Guillemin showed an extra-
ordinary misconception of his powers : he wanted to direct
the Admiral where to anchor his ships.
Russia was represented by Prince DemidoflF, of whose
competence as a diplomat our knowledge is greatly extended
by the publication of his despatches by the Russian Soviet —
a test to which the other Ministers, fortunately or unfortun-
ately as the case may be, were not subjected. If on the one
hand these despatches prove him to have been a more serious
person than people at the time were inclined to believe, they
reveal a disconcerting inconsistency which must have made
him a puzzling guide to his superiors. As a member of the
Russian aristocracy accustomed to move in Court circles,
his sympathies were on the side of King Constantine, at any
rate when Russian interests were not in conflict with Greek
aspirations. For this reason Sir Francis Elliot always found
him a supporter of temperate measures and there is nothing
to show that he worshipped blindly at the shrine of Venizelos.
But people never seemed to take him seriously. They


regarded him as a dilettante and a courtier. In the critical
days of 1915 his strong objection to having the Greeks at
the Dardanelles may have influenced King Constantine and
strengthened his dislike to participation in the Dardanelles
adventure. His position was certainly delicate and difficult,
but he cannot escape the reproach of blowing hot and cold.
Up to June 1916 he was often misled, but from that date
onward he was well-informed. His despatches show that he
took .a very sensible view of the situation and kept his Gover-
ment fully informed without adding criticisms or suggestions
of his own—a useful quality in a diplomatist.
Count Bosdari, who represented Italy, was the only Minister
in Athens with any right to be called a diplomat at all. A man
of fine intellect he had the power of gripping instantly the
real meaning of passing events without losing sight of basic
principles. Bred in the traditions of Italian diplomacy he
possessed all the qualities that have been of such signal service
to Italy in recent years. He saw through the Venizelist
pretence, assessed correctly the sentiments of the Greek
people and never attempted to ascribe to them enthusiasms
which they would have been the first to repudiate. Pragmatic
to a degree and endowed with a subtle sense of humour he
preferred to stand aside and benefit from the mistakes of his
more impulsive colleagues. The fact that his country entered
the war late and was not one of the “ Protecting Powers ” of
Greece gave him a position of aloofness which was not uncon-
genial, and whenever circumstances compelled him to join
his colleagues in a concerted diplomatic demarche he contrived
almost invariably to do so with a gesture that showed that
neither he nor his chiefs were acting from any sense of con-
viction. Prudent in speech, no one knew better than he the
devastating effect of calling a spade a spade at the right
moment, and of refusing to play a clown’s part when serious
issues were at stake. When asked to explain how it was
that there were no casualties in the Italian contingent on the


fatal December ist, 1916, he replied simply, “ We were not
fired upon because we did not fire ! ” And when the other
Ministers and their staffs left their legations to live on war-
ships in the harbour to call attention to the supposed danger
from Royalist Greece, Bosdari remained quietly in his house
in Athens as an object-lesson of the insincerity of the pretence.
At critical moments his ripe judgment was always placed at
the disposal of King Constantine and his Ministers. M. Zaimis
in particular made effective use of it. He was much liked
and respected in Athens and deservedly so. When he saw
that wrong was being done he said so in no measured terms;
when it was proposed to bombard Athens he is said to have
broken his walking-stick on the French Admiral’s table.
The ferment created in Crete by the arrival of Venizelos’
band greatly alarmed the Athens Government. Once more
Greece offered to declare war on Bulgaria provided that the
Allies would give her military and financial aid and support
her claims at the Peace Conference. 1 On September 29th
Prince Demidoff telegraphed that General Sarrail “ did not
want the Greek army at the present juncture : he did not
consider that itwas in fighting trim,” and two days later,
that the Ministers had informed their Governments that
they considered the entry of Greece into the war to be inoppor-
tune and undesirable. Count Bosdari had worked hard to
bring his colleagues to this decision. The Ministers proposed
that Admiral Dartige du Fournet should send the Greek
Government an ultimatum about the prosecution of the
authors of the outrage at the French Legation on the assump-
tion, of course, that these had been in German pay, and
demanding the closing down of the Reservists’ Clubs, which
were frankly anti-Venizelist. When this was reported to
Petrograd the Tsar wrote in the margin, “ The French
Government is carried away by Sarrail and Guillemin. Efforts
should be made to check their impulsiveness.”
1 Romanos’ telegrams. Paris, September 27th and 28th, 1916,


It was de Roquefeuil’s hour of triumph. He had recruited
an Inter-allied Secret Police, of whom those in British pay were
furnished by the British with identity cards and armlets to
render them immune from the Greek police. One such
patent of British protection was issued to an ex-spy of Sultan
Abdul Hamid who had afterwards spent six months in the
pay of the German Secret Service. Besides the certificate
he had been given a brassard to protect him from arrest when
breaking the Greek laws on British account. 1 Of the 162
individuals who served in the Franco-British Secret Police of
Athens only about 60 were natives of old Greece. An
analysis of the official list, signed by the Prefect of the Greek
Police, reveals the following antecedents : eight murderers,
nine ex-brigands, seven pickpockets, ten smugglers, eleven
thieves, twenty-one gamblers, twenty white slave traffickers.
The balance is made up of men with no visible means of
subsistence.® They motored up and down Athens, arresting
persons at will, interrogating and even imprisoning them,
and since the Allied control over them was loose and they
belonged to the least responsible class of society, they had
ample opportunity for avenging private injuries. Much of
their kidnapping was done by night. In the end, in common
decency, the British themselves were compelled to restrict
their activities.
An incident that occurred about this time must have
tended to disturb King Constantine’s faith in the fairness of
British officers. The vessel in which Colonel Napier was
travelling from Athens was stopped in the Mediterranean
by an enemy submarine which must have had secret inform-
ation that Colonel Napier was on board because when she
hailed the ship she asked for him by name and did not interfere
with any other passenger. The letter bags were thrown
overboard, but they were picked up by the submarine and
1 Greece and the Allies, by G. F. Abbott, p. 128.
* Ibid., p. 90.


PLAN SHOWING THE ENVIRONS OF THE ROYAL PALACE
AND WHERE THE FRENCH SHELLS FELL
One struck the Italian Legation. Fortunately none exploded.


seat to Berlin. In them were private letters from the British
Intelligence officers referring to King Constantine in most
unflattering and even opprobrious terms. This was an
opportunity too good for the Germans to miss. Copies were
sent from Berlin to the King who read extracts from them to
the British Military “You see what your officers
call me ? ” he said, selecting the most opprobrious passages.
De Roquefeuil had constituted himself Venizelos’ recruiting
officer in Athens, and, with his customary itch for theatrical
display, he chose the hour when the streets were most crowded
—5 p.m.—for marching about a hundred of these recruits to
his office in the French School under an officer and a French
naval escort in uniform. This was too much for the Allied
Ministers, who protested so energetically that Guillemin was
compelled to recall his Naval to a sense of decency.
There was now serious alarm in Rome and St. Petersburg
about the anti-dynastic movement that the French were
encouraging in Greece. Both Governments made their un-
easiness so clear to M. Briand that on September 24th he
telegraphed to Guillemin :
“ Your attitude seems to me unfavourable to an effective
solution of the delicate situation of the Allies in regard to
Greece. In the present issue you are subordinating our
action in Athens to the Venizelist political interests. I
must repeat once again that you must be above all schemes
of parties and persons and must never forget that the
enemy propagandists are representing us as continual
fomentors of disorder and revolution.”
A man of action in the French Ministry for Foreign Affairs
at that moment would have insisted upon the recall of those
who were damaging the reputation of France in the Near East
and working against her interests and would thus have saved
the Allies from many humiliations. Unfortunately, M. Briand
seems to have thought of no remedy but mild remonstrance.
The fact was that the French policy in Greece was directed


almost entirely by the Minister of Marine, with Admiral
Lacaze, de Roquefeuil’s patron, at its head.
In dealing with the Greeks in the outlying parts of the
kingdom the French made use of Senegalese troops, whose
conduct towards the civilian population speedily became a
byword. Two examples may be cited from the island of
Cephalonia. In Argostoli, the capital of the island, lived
M. Inglesis who was consul for Roumania as well as president
of the local Reservist League. He was a strong Royalist
and anti-Venizelist. In the autumn of 1916 he received a
nocturnal visit from a French aviation officer in command of
a party of Senegalese, who forced his way into the house and
arrested him. When M. Inglesis protested that the house
was the Roumanian Consulate the officer said that he cared
not a snap of the fingers for Roumania and had him marched
on board a French warship. He was conveyed to the intern-
ment camp near Marseilles in which de Roquefeuil’s gang
who had invaded the French Legation garden were interned.
Another active member of the Reservist League at Argo-
stoli was M. Blessas, a man of seventy-five, whose action
had greatly incensed the Venizelists. It chanced that his
door adjoined that of another man of the same age, M. Gentilini,
who had nothing to do with politics. Having indicated the
door to the Senegalese officer the Venizelist informer took
himself off and the officer, having knocked in vain at the
wrong door, ordered the Senegalese to throw a rope ladder
over the balcony. Up this they climbed, burst into Gentilinis’
bedroom and ordered him to rise and dress himself. The old
man very naturally expostulated and received a heavy blow
in the face. He was carried bleeding to the French warship,
where the mistaken identity was discovered. Incidents such
as these, committed by French soldiers upon neutral citizens,
are not easily forgotten.
From the evidence of Captain Chamonard at the enquiry
afterwards held by the French Chamber, it is clear that


M. Venizelos* hegira was engineered by de Roquefeuil and
the French Minister acting in concert and that though the
other Allied Ministers may have known of it, they took no
part, nor was the Admiral informed. All he knew was that,
on September 21st, M. Guillemin requested him to send the
Jurien to Suda Bay to watch events. On his arrival the
Commander of the Jurien found that the British had landed
a naval detachment and that there was no disturbance.
The fact was that British agents had already prepared the
ground by enlisting a handful of adventurers to welcome
Venizelos on his arrival. 1 Crete was M. Venizelos* birth-
place, and therefore no resistance was to be expected from the
Cretans : his real difficulties were to come. According to
the evidence of Captain Chamonard, “ the majority of the
people, in old Greece at any rate, was indifferent to the Allies,
but markedly hostile to M. Venizelos, knowing that if he
returned to power, war would not long be delayed. As soon
as it became known that he was about to try consequences
openly with the King and that the Allies were supporting
him, all the indifference of old Greece changed into hostility.
The people, who had, until then, been merely anti-Venizelos,
became anti-Ally. That was the first result of the policy of
1 A frank account of this infringement of neutrality by British agents is
given by Mr. J, C. Lawson, a Cambridge don with a temporary com-
mission as Naval Intelligence officer in Crete, in his Tales of Aegean
Intrigue (Chatto and Windus, 1920) —a book that should make every
English reader blush. Like de Roquefeuil he conceived his duty to be,
not merely to keep his department supplied with information, but to
interfere in the internal affairs of a neutral State in furtherance of a policy
of his own. His ignorance of the real state of affairs in Greece is shown
in his absurd assumption that every Royalist officer who remained true
to his oath of allegiance had been suborned by “ German gold.” He
confesses several grave blunders leading to the kidnapping and internment
of innocent persons contrary to orders and boasts of his share in what he
terms “ The Conquest of Cerigo ” for Venizelism, though when his
book was going through the press in 1920 the Royalist candidates in
Cerigo swept the election in favour of King Constantine. His book
shows conclusively that the British naval force would have done better
without any Intelligence officer and especially without one who, lika
de Roquefeuil, was suffering from “ submarines.”


Commander de Roquefeuil and the French Minister whom he
had won over.”
Admiral Dartige de Fournet records a singular instance of
de Roquefcuil’s disloyalty to him. The Greek Government
did not oppose the closing of the wireless transmitters and
the control of the telegraphs beyond the usual protest.
Indeed, the Greek Admiral voluntarily pointed out to him
that there would be a possible leakage unless the antennas
of the light craft were dismantled. The Russian Minister
applied to him for leave to send an urgent message to the
American Ambassador at Constantinople and since the
Greek Government had given its approval, the message was
sent as an act of courtesy to an Ally. Forty-eight hours later
the Admiral received a telegram from Lacaze in Paris com-
plaining that the control of the telegraphs was incomplete.
De Roquefeuil had intercepted the Russian Minister’s
message and instead of informing the Admiral of the supposed
leakage, had telegraphed a complaint to the Minister of
Marine.
On September a 7th the Times published what it called
“ an historic message ” from Venizelos saying that he had
been “ forced to respond to the call of the people ” (sic) ; that
he was not a revolutionary. “My action is not in any way
directed against the King or the Dynasty.” And yet the ink
was scarcely dry when he telegraphed confidentially to
Guillemin, “ If I have had to declare that my action was not
directed against King Constantine, I have done so purely to
avoid displeasing the Allied Powers, for I am convinced that
the King has definitely and irrevocably gone over to Ger-
many.” 1 He went on to say that he would send against
Athens “ some of the Army Corps ” which he was about to
recruit. General Sarrail is the best witness on the subject of
his failure as a recruiting officer.
1 This telegram is in the Quai d’Orsay. Isvolsky copied it and tele-
graphed the text to Pctrograd.—Russian White Book.


On October sth, Venizelos was escorted to Salonica by
Allied warships and there “ in the name of the Greek people ”
(sic), but under the protection of Sarrail, he set up his
provisional Government. Sarrail’s comment deserves to be
quoted. u He arrived at Salonica on October 9th. King
Constantine could have had him arrested. He let him go.
Why ? ” The reader may well ask the same question. The
intended hegira had leaked out before the comedians had had
time to gum on their false beards and indignant officers had
asked the King’s permission to deal with Venizelos. King
Constantine refused to allow any action to be taken.
General Sarrail gives interesting details of the resistance in
Macedonia to the Venizelist mobilization. “ How many
villages had to be invested before the required contingent
could be furnished ? How many shots were exchanged to
prevent recruits from taking to the sea ? It was a tedious
process to form the Venizelist units whom we furnished with
clothing, equipment and victuals. To succeed in mobilizing
1,000 men when an appeal had summoned all volunteers in
Greece to enrol is not the kind of thing that inspires enthusiasm.
In March 1917 there were still but three infantry battalions
with an embryo artillery. ... In some of the islands the
reservists shouted that they would respond only to an appeal
from the King. ... A Venizelist Minister telegraphed,
“If necessary, terror must be resorted to.” And when it
became a question of forcing King Constantine to abdicate,
700 men of the Archipelago Division deserted.”
The Calogeropoulos Ministry resigned on October 4th
and was succeeded by that of M. Spiridion Lambros, a
University professor, who filled his Cabinet with brother
professors. The Paris Press described it as “ a Cabinet of
anthologians.” M. Lambros’ first pronouncement was that
he would continue the policy of his predecessor, who had
offered to join the Allies, though the offer had remained
unanswered. To this the Allies replied that until Greece


declared war on Bulgaria without conditions they could not
consider the offer ; that this was the only way in which their
confidence could be restored.
The French were now in favour of taking over control of
the Greek Police, but Lord Grey demurred on the ground
that such a measure could be justified only if there had been
attacks on foreign subjects. De Roquefeuil had a short way
for dealing with Allied diplomats who happened to disagree
with him. On October Bth he telegraphed to the French
Admiralty, “ The only way out of our difficulties is to ignore
the foreign Ministers and pursue unhampered a French policy
in Greece.” 1 To this, Lacaze replied that he had informed
the Admiral that the measures “ aimed at securing the safety
of our fellow-countrymen, the dissolution of the Reservists’
Leagues and the police, etc., need not be submitted to the
Allied Ministers in Athens.” 2 It may be doubted whether
the text of this telegram was ever submitted to the Quai
d’Orsay. M. Briand, however, yielded to his colleague,
Admiral Lacaze, in so far as to telegraph to London and
Petrograd that in the opinion of the French Government,
“ the cautious instructions sent to the British Minister no
longer meet the situation.” On October Bth he received an
“ Urgent and Personal ” Note from the British Embassy,
saying that Lord Grey regarded it “ as essential that he should
be informed of all measures proposed by the Admiral before
they were carried out, so that the British Government may be
in a position to discuss them beforehand with the French
Government.” On the very next day the Admiral received
from the Minister of Marine the telegram giving him leave
to act without the consent of the Allied Ministers. These
divided counsels need no comment : de Roquefeuil’s intrigues
had gone perilously near to breaking solidarity between the
Allies. Herein lies the danger of a Secret Service uncontrolled.
1 Telegram No. 1487.
2 Telegram No. 1868 a.


The proceedings of de Roquefeuil had now become so grave
a scandal in Athens that when he was going to Paris in October
1916 the Admiral wrote a private letter about him to Lacaze
and, with his usual frankness, showed it to de Roquefeuil
before sending it. To this he received no reply, but de Roque-
feuil returned to Athens in a few days with extended powers.
Without any consultation with the Allies, Admiral Lacaze had
promoted him to the Directorship of all the Controls over the
public services which had been exacted from the Greeks.
De Roquefeuil had been feeding the Admiral with fables
about the disposition of the Greek navy and the coastal
batteries ; about the police and the railways, which Admiral
du Fournet afterwards described as “ puerile and hypo-
critical.” 1 In consequence, the Admiral was ordered to seize
the Greek light vessels, land the guns of three armoured ships,
dismantle the coastal batteries and impose Allied control over
the Piraeus, the police and the railways. The ships were
seized on October 10th. De Roquefeuil had been at pains to
persuade his superiors that the crews were eager to join the
soldiers and sailors who had deserted to Venizelos and that a
show of force by the French would secure the ships for the
Venizelists. When the French naval detachments were about
to take possession of the ships the Greek officers and men were
informed that they were free to make their own choice —to stay
in the ships or remain true to their oaths. A moving scene
followed ; taking their flags and holding their holy ikons
in their hands officers and men to the last stoker filed down the
gangway to their boats, silent and determined. The tears
in their eyes when they landed showed the despair that filled
their hearts. He who knows what his ship means to a sailor
will understand the poignancy of this silent drama enacted
under the rock of Salamis which may have re-echoed to them
the words of their forefathers twenty-five centuries ago:
“ There is but one good omen —to stand by your country.”
1 Dartige du Fournet, pp. 138-9. Count Bosdari, pp. 171-2.


The Admiral placed the ships under the French flag in order
that he might have a reply ready for the continual demand of
Venizelos for light armed craft, which he required for pursuing
deserters from his force.
The whole business filled the Admiral with disgust. He
had many friends among the Greek naval officers, and he was
compelled by his orders to use force against a weak neutral
State which had repeatedly offered to join the Allies and had
no relations with the enemy. But du Fournet’s misgivings
were as nothing beside those of the British Government when
it learned the Admiral’s instructions. The attention of the
French was immediately called to the fact that there were
British ships under Admiral du Fournet’s command. Lord
Grey called upon the French Government to delay action until
it had given an explanation. M. Briand’s reply was not
conciliatory. He reminded his ally that French troops had
accepted British direction without remonstrance and that
Great Britain could not dissociate herself from French action
in Greece without provoking serious complications. If the
Greeks had resisted the French on October i ith, the Alliance
would have been seriously strained.
The result of this high-handed action evoked passionate
demonstrations in Athens. The crews of the sequestrated
ships paraded in mourning ; they were reviewed by the King
in the presence of a huge crowd which received him with
acclamation. Many of the spectators, as well as the sailors,
were in tears. M. Guillemin having informed the Admiral
that the demonstration was alarming, du Fournet despatched
two companies with machine guns to the centre of the town.
Crowds blocked the way, shouting, “ Why do you come here ?
This is not Berlin ! ” In the end, Greek infantry and cavalry
had to be called out to protect the French sailors from molest-
ation by the civilian crowd, and the French troops were
removed to the Zappeion—an exhibition building standing in
gardens. Prince DemidofFs comment in his telegram of


October 18th is instructive. “In my opinion this landing
was provoked by entirely imaginary causes. I venture to hope
that the calmness of the town will lead the Admiral to recall
his men. My English colleague has confessed to me in
confidence his distress at being forced to yield on this point
to Guillemin’s tenacious insistence.” 1 But the comment of
Sturmer, the Russian Prime Minister, was even more out-
spoken when he reflects upon the confusion arising from
military chiefs dabbling in politics. “If this state of things
continues the time must come when it will become impossible
for us to co-operate with the Allies. Sarrail is most to blame:
leaving his proper duties he is busying himself with political
schemes to the great detriment of the military interests
entrusted to him.”
One of de Roquefeuil’s agents had brought in a report that
Uhlans had occupied Larissa. The strength of this German
force rose day by day until it mounted to 4,000 men. Here
was a menace that touched not only the credulous Sarrail, but
the British forces as well. It was the principal document that
M. Briand took to his conference with Mr. Lloyd George at
Calais. It was to be the crowning argument in favour of
military intervention in Greece. Nobody in Mr. Lloyd
George’s party had heard of these Uhlans and his military
advisers were sceptical about them, but they were ready to
make enquiries. Within twenty-four hours, Mr. Lloyd
George was able to convince M. Briand that not a single
Uhlan had ever been seen in Larissa and yet Guillemin had
reported their existence as a fact. In the British Service a
mistake so flagrant, a false statement that humiliated the
Government before one of its Allies, would have cost a Minister
and an Intelligence officer their jobs : in France it evoked a
mild remonstrance from M. Briand to Guillemin that he
hoped that greater care would be taken in future.
Early in October Admiral Lacaze ordered Admiral Dartige
1 Russian White Book, 1922.
L


du Fournet to take a step that definitely convinced the King
that the Allies had taken sides with his enemies against him.
Certain Greek naval officers who had declared themselves
Venizelists and had repudiated loyalty to their sovereign had
been dismissed : the Admiral was instructed to demand their
reinstatement and also the dismissal of certain naval and
military officers who had been reported by de Roquefeuil as
hostile to the Allies. He was also to demand control of the
Piraeus and the Greek railways. The Admiral communicated
his instructions to the Allied Ministers and told them that he
proposed to land 300 French marines to reinforce the police.
On learning this Sir Edward Grey put his foot down and
objected very strongly to the proposed action taken without
consultation between the two Governments. From this point
the French, or at any rate Admiral Lacaze, the Minister of
Marine, decided to ignore the diplomatic officers and to act
directly through the Admiral. Two factors combined to
prevent a protest from Great Britain. The new Greek Prime
Minister, Professor Lambros, was not yet firm in the saddle ;
the British Cabinet, preoccupied with the disasters in Rou-
mania, had no time for considering the tangle in the affairs in
Greece. Lacaze had his way and in return for the use of
nineteen torpedo boats and two submarines the Allies lost the
friendship and respect of every loyal Greek. The immediate
effect took the form of reprisals by the royalist Greeks upon
the Venizelists, not only in Athens, but in every town and
hamlet in the kingdom. For this state of things the Allies
had only themselves to thank. They had chosen to espouse
the cause of the Venizelists who were in rebellion against their
king, not because they were partisans of the Allied cause,
but because of a private feud between their leader and his
sovereign. So far from helping them to victory de Roquefeuil
had hindered it in his espousal of Venizelos by creating
another “ front ” and dragging the honour of his country in
the mire.


CHAPTER XI
OCTOBER-DECEMBER 3RD, 1 9 1 6
THE BÉNAZET AGREEMENT SWEPT AWAY BY VENIZELOS' ATTACK
ON THE KING’S TROOPS AT EKATERINI
ON October 15th, 1916, Isvolsky telegraphed from
Paris to Petrograd that he had been shown con-
fidentially a telegram from Yenizelos to Guillemin,
the French Minister in Athens, despatched at the moment
when he had failed to raise more than a single battalion.
He telegraphed that if the Allies would furnish him with
material aid he would put into the line not one, but several
Army Corps, some of which he would send against Athens
where the King’s Government could easily be overthrown.
“ His ultimate aim,” adds Isvolsky, “ is certainly the removal
of the King. ... It is into this intrigue that Briand is
seeking to draw Grey.” On the following day he announced
that Venizelos had demanded official recognition of his
Government and that the French were about to grant him a
first credit of six million francs. 1
The diplomatic telegrams published in the Russian White
Book, 1922, make it clear that the British Government was
seriously alarmed by Venizelos’ anti-dynastic attitude. It had
remonstrated with Venizelos himself and he had disclaimed
any design against the throne. It believed the only solution
to be a reconciliation between the King and Venizelos, but it
recognized that newspaper propaganda had produced a state
1 These loans were not forgotten. After the Armistice, Greece was
called upon to reimburse the French Treasury.


of public irritation that could not easily be allayed. The
British Foreign Office was becoming deeply concerned about
the intrigues of Guillemin. Evidently at that period they were
not aware that de Roquefeuil was pulling the strings to which
Guillemin danced. In conversation with a friend Count
Bosdari, the Italian Minister, confessed that he had never
been able to satisfy himself whether, in his official dealings,
M. Guillemin was more fool than knave ; the succession of
misapprehensions and mistakes he made resolve all doubt on
this point. He was entirely under the spell of his Naval
Attache, who was both.
The Greek Government, better informed than the Allies
about Venizelos’ plans, now took precautions in Thessaly
against a sudden raid by the troops supposed to have been
raised to fight for the “Provisional Government against
Bulgaria.” It began to move troops and munitions towards
Ekaterini. That was enough for de Roquefeuil. He asserted
in his telegrams to Paris that this was no precaution, but the
first stage in a plan concerted with Germany to attack and
destroy Sarrail’s base. Notwithstanding the fact that General
Rocques, the French Minister for War, who visited Salonica at
this period, had told Admiral du Fournet that “ in present war
conditions the Greek army could not fight for more than three
days ; after that its rifles would be as useless as so many
sticks,” suddenly the Admiral received a telegram from
Sarrail, requesting him to seize 1,500,000 rifle cartridges
stored in Athens as compensation for the cession of Fort
Rupel and- Kavalla and the ammunition and war material
which had fallen into the hands of the Bulgarians. Such a
seizure would have required a powerful landing force. The
Admiral asked de Roquefeuil whether he knew where this
ammunition was stored and it then transpired that Sarrail’s
message was based upon a telegram from de Roquefeuil
himself and that he knew nothing beyond what he had
gathered from vague rumour. The underlying idea was that


by working upon Sarrail’s fears, the King’s army could be
disarmed by easy stages and the Venizelists could then walk
into Athens without firing a shot.
Admiral du Fournet had been pressing the Allied Ministers
to allow him to expel the Ministers of the Enemy Powers,
their staffs and families from Athens, but they had never been
able to agree among themselves. He won a trembling con-
sent from them at the beginning of November. Feeling sure,
from the excellent relations he had established with the palace,
that the King would not oppose him, he sent a written order
to the Ministers of Germany, Austria and Bulgaria, that they
must leave Greece within forty-eight hours with the entire
staff of each Legation and offering them sea transport to any
place they might choose. Naval officers handed the orders
personally to each Minister ; the German and Austrian
received theirs with disdain ; the Bulgarian protested volubly.
All sent indignant protests to King Constantine, who replied
that he could do nothing to oppose the execution of the
Admiral’s ultimatum and that if the Admiral should resort to
force he could do nothing to protect them. On this they
decided to embark on the vessel provided for them and to be
landed at Kavalla. As a parting signal of defiance they hoisted
their three flags at the fore until a boat from the flagship went
alongside and ordered the flags to be hauled down. There
must have been a storm of objurgations in guttural German
on board, but in other respects their crossing to Kavalla was
uneventful.
It was at this juncture that M. a member of the
Committee of the Chamber of the French army, arrived in
Athens on his way to Salonica to gather first-hand information
on the state of Sarrail’s troops. He had had a remarkable
career for a man little over thirty. He had qualified as a
military officer, had served as rapporteur on the Budget, and
had been entrusted with several important missions abroad.
Energetic, honest and resourceful, it was not surprising that


M. Briand, the Prime Minister, should have asked him to do
what he could to disentangle the mess that had been made of
Greek affairs. As soon as the news of his arrival reached the
palace, the King invited him to an interview. Before accepting
the invitation he telegraphed to M. Briand for approval. The
audience took place on October 21st. The King spoke to him
without reserve about the attitude of the Allies towards him
since the beginning of the war, and made bitter complaints
about the conduct of Guillemin and de Roquefeuil. He showed
him a list of French agents who had formerly been on the
pay-roll of the German Secret Service. It was clear to M.
that King Constantine was anxious and unhappy, and
that he was in hourly fear of some outrage on the part of the
Venizelists. Nor was he convinced of the ultimate victory of
the Allies. M. Bdnazet pulled out a map and showed him, as
one soldier to another, what had been achieved on the Somme.
The King pored over the map and agreed that Germany was
then in the position of a country invested on every side, but he
was still manifestly uneasy about the French support of
Venizelos. “ All that I want,” he said, “is for France to state
her demands, leaving me to understand that they are the price
I must pay for my neutrality which I shall be left absolutely
free to observe.”
M. Bdnazet formed the impression that the King was a
sorely tried, but a perfectly honest and sincere man with whom
it was possible to settle every outstanding question. The King
insisted only on the condition that there should be no curtail-
ment of Greek territory at the end of the war, and that if
he removed his army to the Peloponnesus, France should
guarantee the safety and integrity of the State, then threatened
by the Venizelist sedition. On October 23rd, two days after the
audience, M. Bdnazet received a letter from the King stating
that he agreed with the terms of the telegram sent by M.
B£nazet to M. Briand, and these two documents, coupled with
the telegram of approval from M. Briand, undoubtedly con


stitutcd a written agreement between France and Greece which
would have saved the Allies from countless losses in men and
prestige, if the French officers on the spot and the French
Ministers in Paris had adhered to it. M. Benazet carried the
document to the French Legation and showed it to M. Guille-
min, who declared it to be of the highest importance, and asked
leave to have it photographed. An named de Castillon
was, he said, a competent photographer and would make the
copy himself. Naturally, M. Bdnazet had no reason for doubt-
ing their good faith ; he left the document in their hands. But
when he called for the agreement next morning and asked for
M. de Castillon, Guillemin was evasive. He said that the
attache was not at the Legation at the moment, and he handed
the original back to his visitor. From a member of the
Legation staff, however, M. Bdnazet learned that de Castillon
had been despatched by the night train to Salonica with a
photograph of the King’s letter. It is permissible to ask what
could have been the object of that secret journey to Salonica
if it was not to post both General Sarrail and M. Yenizelos in
the latest development in Athens, and whether the subsequent
incident at Ekaterini was concerted between Yenizelos and his
confidant, Nicolas Politis, as a counterblast to an agreement
that would have left them high and dry.
M. Benazet’s telegram to the Quai D’Orsay ran :
“ I pledged myself on behalf of the French Government
that Greece shall under no circumstances have to suffer in
consequence of this arrangement. . . . The King desires
that absolute secrecy shall be observed as to his intentions.
» , . He declares his readiness to make the utmost con-
cessions to us as a proof of his good faith, but he does not
wish to expose himself to the risk of a declaration of war
from Germany.”
In his autograph letter written on October 23rd, King
Constantine confirmed his concurrence with the report M.
Benazet had sent to M. Briand and this letter was transmitted


to M. Briand. On October 26th M. Briand telegraphed,
“ Every congratulation, my dear friend, oh your skilful
negotiations and the good results they have procured.” The
strained relations between the palace and the French Legation
were at once relieved. M. Guillemin, who had not been
received by the King for some weeks, was invited to an
audience. But the seeds that had been sown by M. de
Castillon at Salonica were already germinating.
On October 31st, Guillemin telegraphed, “ The Venizelists
are showing great discontent with the Benazet arrangement,”
and four days later, “ Venizelos is very sceptical about the
engagement entered into by the King. He considers that the
French and British Ministers went too far in affirming the
moral obligation of the Allies not to permit Venizelists to take
possession of Thessaly.”
At first all went according to plan. Admiral Dartige du
Fournet made a formal demand for the surrender of the
Greek warships and the right to make use of the arsenal at
Salamis in return for an indemnity. The Greek Government
made a pro formd protest and the next day the French flag was
hoisted on the vessels and the arsenal was taken over, though
the British Minister made it clear by his demeanour that this
high-handed action was exclusively a French decision. The
King had also begun to carry out the other pledges he had
made to M. Bdnazet; the transfer of troops to the Pelopon-
nesus under the supervision of French officers was in process.
Suddenly the news reached Athens on November 23rd that
the Venizelist troops in Salonica, instead of attacking the
Bulgarian enemy—the ostensible object for which they had
been recruited—had crossed the southern border and attacked
the King’s troops at Ekaterini, the gate of Thessaly. Athens
was in a ferment. At last the Venizelists had shown them-
selves in their true colours—as a rebel force; civil war had
come. There could no longer be any question of moving
troops to the Peloponnesus in the face of this new enemy.


RIFLES BEARING FRENCH MARKS FOUND IN
VENIZELOS’ HOUSE IN ATHENS
BULLET-PROOF BREAST-PLATE FOUND IN
M. VENIZELOS’ ROOM AFTER HIS FLIGHT


The reason for this unprovoked attack was obvious. It
was the Bdnazet agreement. If that were to pass unchallenged
and the tension between King Constantine and the Allies
removed, all Venizelos’ plans would be defeated ; therefore
the Allies had to be faced with a new situation. The pledge
which M. had given to the King in the name of
France only ten days before was already broken. Had King
Constantine withdrawn his troops from Thessaly during those
ten days, the Venizelist rebels would have marched unim-
peded into that province. The news disturbed the French
Admiral scarcely less than the Greeks. He telegraphed to
General Sarrail that the incident reflected on the French
honour ; Sarrail replied that he would restore order. The
Admiral sent a personal telegram to N. Politis, who had
deserted his post at the Greek Foreign Office to become
Venizelos’ Minister for Foreign Affairs, pointing out that the
attack was a serious blow to the interests of the Allies ; to
this telegram he received a mendacious reply that the Royalist
forces were marching against Macedonia. Whenever any
Royal troops were moved at all, de Roquefeuil declared that
they were part of the 80,000 men who were being concen-
trated for an attack on Sarrail’s rear. It transpired later that,
on the very eve of the incident, Politis himself had informed
M. Benazet that a telegram was to be sent to the Venizelist
troops ordering them to march on Ekaterini and “ not to
hesitate to come to blows.” 1
M. Bdnazet had scarce begun his enquiry into the state of
the Salonica army when General Rocques, French Minister for
War, who had come to Salonica direct from Paris, invited him
to come on board his vessel to receive from him the congratu-
lations of the French Government on his success in concluding
the agreement with the King ; at the same time he told him
confidentially that intrigues were on foot to upset all that he
had achieved and that consequently the Government desired
1 Benazet’s reports and Le Matin of August 26th, 1923.


him to break off his enquiry and leave immediately for Athens
in a fast destroyer which had been put at his disposal. On
arriving in Athens he saw at once how much havoc had been
wrought by the Venizelist coup at Ekaterini, and despite all his
efforts he found it impossible entirely to regain the confidence
of the King, who was now possessed by the fear that some new
plot was being hatched by the Venizelists. He did his best
when he saw the King on the following day, but he found
that the Venizelist attack on his troops had deprived the
King of control; that the Royalist public, that is, the great
majority of the Greek people, would never consent to the
surrender of munitions at a moment when the Venizelists had
declared their intention of marching on Athens. In face of
the hostile attitude of M. Guillemin and the loss of French
prestige in consequence of his foolish policy, M. Bdnazet knew
that the agreement was in danger of coming to nothing and he
resolved to leave immediately for Paris in order to place the
Foreign Office in full possession of the facts. Nevertheless,
in his conviction that Guillemin and de Roquefeuil between
them were capable of committing some foolish act of violence,
he asked the Admiral to forward a telegram in cypher to the
French Government—a telegram which would have affected
the whole current of the after-events if it had been allowed to
reach its destination in time.
“ In spite of the regrettable incidents at Ekaterini I
believe that I have found a basis of agreement and a formula
which will permit the King and Prime Minister to obtain
from the royalist party, which constitutes the great majority
of the nation, acceptance of the total disarmament to which
the King had solemnly engaged himself.
“ It must not be forgotten that though it is easy for< our
naval forces to seize the Greek fleet and its arsenal, it would
be practically impossible without a preliminary agreement
to take possession of a large quantity of war material which
is scattered about in a country of which many parts are
difficult of access. Unless we are resolved, and this we


cannot be, to send into mountainous regions a real force of
occupation which would have to be withdrawn from its real
mission, it is absolutely necessary—and this must be our
directing idea—to engage in friendly negotiations with the
owner of the military material which we desire to use.”
It was here that M. Bdnazet made his only miscalculation.
He dictated his telegram to the Admiral, to be sent on his own
responsibility, without reflecting that the only channel open
to the Admiral was through the Minister of Marine—Admiral
Lacaze, the patron of de Roquefeuil, who viewed the situation
only through the eyes of his Intelligence officer. The only
possible explanation of the events of the next few days is that
this telegram was held up by Admiral Lacaze and that Guil-
lemin, de Roquefeuil, and their staff and satellites, received
no instructions and were left to act on their own devices —that
is to say as ineptly as possible. Hence the hastily planned and
dangerous demonstration of December ist with its consequent
disaster.
M. Bdnazet had suggested the following conditions:
“ The Allied Powers undertake to bring to an end the
measures of pressure which they have adopted hitherto and
never to tolerate Greek armed groups which, having
declared that their only purpose is to fight for the defence
of their country, are turning from this ideal to engage in
acts of sedition.”
That should have been sufficient to avert the impending
catastrophe, but M. Bdnazet left for Paris deeply depressed,
feeling sure that the jealousy of the professional diplomatists
of the success of an amateur where they had failed, and the
extraordinary lack of consistency in the French policy at
home, would undo his work. It was a significant fact that
de Roquefeuil quitted Athens on October 20th and arrived in
Paris before M. There can be little doubt that he
took a hand in the sabotage of the agreement, and yet M.
Bdnazet had come nearer than anyone else to dispelling the
cloud of poison gas spread by the Secret Service of the Allies.


His depression was justified. No sooner had he left Athens
than Guillemin despatched an apologetic telegram to Venizelos
saying that the rapprochement effected by M. Benazet was
necessary “ on account of our Allies ” and softening the
apology by informing him that five million francs had been
paid into his account.
M. Benazet had just left Athens when General Rocques
arrived from Salonica. In order to prevent further incidents like
that of Ekaterini he had prescribed a neutral zone three miles
wide from Epirus to the Aegean. This neutral zone was also
expected to dispose of the menace to the rear of Sarrail’s army
which he was constantly quoting as an excuse for his inactivity
against the enemy. On the other hand its creation carried the
obligation of respect for Greek territory lying south of the
neutral zone. But Sarrail, like de Roquefeuil, took little heed
of obligations assumed by the Allied Governments towards
Greece. He was at Salonica to defend “ French interests ”in
his own way. No sooner was the neutral zone in operation
than detachments of French coloured troops, sent to police
the neutral zone, took to raiding Greek territory to the south,
spreading terror among the inhabitants. Monasteries were a
special attraction to such raiders on account of their reputed
wealth in loot. I shall relate in due course the treatment
inflicted on the Isdami monastery in one of these raids..
Let me now revert to the question of the delivery of the
arms. In point of fact General Rocques attached but little
importance to this part of the agreement. He told Admiral
du Fournet that it ought to be a matter for negotiation ; that
any action should be pursued with prudence and without
undue haste. That was the advice of the Minister for War,
who was primarily concerned, but the distracted Admiral
received quite different instructions from his chief at the
Admiralty, and neither Minister made any reference to
the promised guarantees which formed the counterpart of the
agreement. In war time an Admiral is left freedom to act


on his own responsibility subject to general instructions, and
the instructions sent to him are clear, reasoned and sensible.
This had been so throughout the war until Admiral Lacaze
took over the Ministry of Marine. From that moment
Admiral Dartige du Fournet found his hands tied. Peremp-
tory telegrams bearing internal evidence that they were based
on false information, poured in upon him. He was ordered
to protest to the Greek Government that the telegraph had
been used to convey military information to the enemy and
yet he was never given an example of the alleged abuse to
show to the Greeks when they repudiated the charge. The
Admiral had no choice but to obey the orders he received
from his own Minister. He began on November 16th by
making a formal demand upon the Greek Government. On
November 19th the King asked him to come to the palace and
complained bitterly that such a demand should have been
made when he had been wantonly attacked at Ekaterini and
arms in large quantities were stored in Athens by de Roque-
feuil. The Admiral thought that his real grievance was that
the guarantees agreed to by M. Bdnazet had been forgotten,
but the fact was that public opinion in Athens was at fever
heat and that if the King tamely submitte 1 to the demand, a
revolution might break out at home, so bitter were the Greeks
against Venizelos and his adherents. On November 21st, the
official reply to the demand was received by the Admiral.
After reciting the demands in the Admiral’s Note M. Lambros
continued :
“As I do not wish here to discuss the reasons why the
Greek Government was compelled to offer no opposition to
the surrender of those forts (Rupel and Kavalla) and to the
capture of the war material in them, I shall confine myself
to letting you know that the Greek Government then in
power could not act otherwise without abandoning neutrality;
that it protested in the strongest terms ; and that it let the
Entente Governments know both the terms of its protests
and its own point of view upon the matter.


“ As to the equilibrium between the powers at war I can
assure you that your information is not correct. As you
will sec from the table annexed hereto, the naval and
military authorities of the Entente have 191 Greek guns of
various calibres in their possession, most of which are
quick-firers of the latest model ; the Germano-Bulgars, on
the other hand, have only 124, most of which are old and
useless. Also you have in your hands more Greek machine
guns and rifles than your enemies,
“ After being so conciliatory since it came into power
and after giving you so many proofs of goodwill by settling
in a friendly way the questions raised in the Notes which
you have sent to it on several occasions, the Greek Govern-
ment had the right to hope that it would not in future be
presented with demands which, by their very nature, cannot
possibly be accepted.
“ If it were to surrender its war material the Greek
Government would be committing so flagrant a violation of
its neutrality that the Central Powers, which have already
protested forcibly against the seizure of the light craft in
the Greek Navy, would without doubt regard it as a hostile
act. Besides this, public opinion in the country, which is
expressing itself clearly on the present issue, would not
tolerate Greece being disarmed and left without the means of
defending her vital interests should they ever be in danger.
“ For these reasons, Monsieur I’Amiral, I am com-
pelled on behalf of the Greek Government to decline
absolutely to accede to your demands dated November 16th,
and I have every hope that you will agree that my refusal
is well founded.
SPYRIDION LAMBROS.”
The Bdnazet agreement was brought to the notice of the
British Government at the Inter-Allied Conference which met
in Paris on November 15th, but it was mentioned by M.
Briand only in conversation and the text was not produced.
M. Briand suggested that it would be better to await further
developments which could not long be delayed and the Con-
ference agreed to leave matters where they stood. It was the
most momentous of the many mistakes made by the Allies in
dealing with Greece during the war. France had been well


served by M. Bdnazet. King Constantine proceeded at once
to carry out his side of the agreement by recalling the 3rd and
4th Corps to the Morea and agreeing to move no more troops
without previously consulting the Allies. All the advantages
gained were sacrificed wantonly by the Ministers at home.
By their support of Venizelos, now in armed rebellion
against his King, the Allies had involved themselves in fresh
difficulties. The Greek Government began to round up the
Venizelists in the army, the navy and the civil service. Officers
who had deserted to Venizelos were cashiered. Magistrates,
civil servants and mayors of towns were arrested and im-
prisoned. The Venizelist newspapers were suppressed and
their editors imprisoned. In some cases their houses were
looted by soldiers, and in one a prominent Venizelist was
bayoneted on his way to the magistrate. In the towns and
villages the Reservist Leagues made themselves accusers and
judges of all who disagreed with them. This petty reign of
terror was the direct result of de Roquefeuil’s most notable
achievement—the smuggling of Venizelos to Salonica.
On November 23rd, very much against his better judgment,
the Admiral presented a fresh demand for the surrender of
the arms, saying that he was acting under orders. I have it
from Admiral du Fournet himself, that there was never any
question of seizing the munitions by force ; that the sole
object of the demonstration was to bring pressure to bear on
the Greek Government. Three days later he received the
approval of the French Government for a pacific demon-
stration of his troops on shore. This was fixed for December
Ist. It was to be a naval demonstration by three thousand
men under arms. A child could have foretold that in the
ferment of excitement among the Greek troops and civilians
to land an armed force in a neutral country with the object of
disarming it was to set a match to powder. On November
27th Admiral Dartige du Fournet made his last visit to the
palace. He told the King that the Venizelists were complaining


that their lives were in danger and that their houses were
marked with a red cross, but that after enquiry he had failed
to find confirmation of the second complaint. He would,
however, be glad to receive the King’s assurance that the
Venizelists would not be molested. The King undertook to
consult the Prefect of Police and send a reply. Next day the
Admiral received the following letter from the Court Marshal;
“ By order of His Majesty I have the honour to transmit
to you the King’s assurance that neither the persons nor
the houses and property of the Venizelists will have any-
thing to fear, as the police and the authorities charged with
the maintenance of public order will strictly discharge their
duties and guarantee their security. These assurances are
given, needless to say, on the express condition that neither
the secret police in the service of the Entente Powers, nor
the landing detachments will indulge in arrests, disappear-
ances, or the deportation of Greek subjects and that the
Venizelists will abstain from any act of violence or abuse
that may provoke reprisals.”
This letter, of course, had nothing to do with the formal
replies of the Greek Government of November 21st and 30th
which informed the Admiral officially that his proposed
intervention to enforce the demand for the cession of arms
would be regarded by the Greek Government as a hostile act.
At their last interview he had found King Constantine
“ absolutely courteous and indeed almost cordial,” though
since the affair at Ekaterini there had been a change in his
manner. He asked how he could overcome the opposition
of his people when the guarantees promised by M. Benazet
were still withheld. He referred to the well-known fact that
arms were stored in de Roquefeuil’s office for the use of the
Venizelists, and ended by saying that in the state of public
opinion an order from him to surrender the munitions would
not be obeyed. The impression left on the Admiral, who had
throughout displayed great shrewdness, was that the King
had discovered that the Royalists would not endorse the


promises he had made to M. unaccompanied with the
guarantees that had been promised. The Admiral assured
him that the demonstration would be a pacific one ; that there
would be no fighting. Knowing from General Rocques that
the surrender of munitions was quite a secondary matter and
hoping that even at the eleventh hour the demonstration would
be postponed or abandoned, he telegraphed to the French
Admiralty the same evening that the King’s new attitude was
due. to the absence of the guarantees which were part of the
agreement. The reply was a curt intimation that his
message was not understood. “ Have you not every latitude ? ”
It was the old trouble in France ; Ministers were working in
water-tight compartments. In the absence of General Rocques
Admiral Lacaze was responsible for the War Office as well
as the Admiralty and he had ready access to President Poin-
care, the titular head of both. At the Foreign Office M. Briand,
the Prime Minister, was placidly pursuing his wonted quest for
the line of least resistance, was congratulating M. Bdnazet on
his settlement while his colleague at the Admiralty was being
incited by de Roquefeuil to eat fire. In such a ministry of cross-
purposes it is always the man of action who has his way.
An attempt has since been made to explain that the French
Government did not ratify the B&iazet agreement because it
was made by the King and was not confirmed by the Greek
Cabinet, but if that were so why were the French Minister,
Guillemin, and the Admiral, Dartige du Fournet, left in
ignorance of the fact ? The excuse was palpably an after-
thought. The King himself assured M. Benazet that his
Ministers would endorse any agreement that he made. He
said with a smile, “ Why, M. Lambros was my old tutor,”
implying that his formal approval was assured in advance.
The change in the Greek attitude was due solely to the attack
made by the Venizelists on the Royal troops at Ekaterini, and
the fear that an order to the Greek army to surrender their muni-
tions would not be obeyed and might cost the King his throne.
M


CHAPTER XII
DECEMBER 1 9 1 6
THE ARMED DEMONSTRATION AND WHAT BEFELL
ON the morning of November 30th the King begged
General Bousquier, the French Military
to explain to the Admiral how serious the situation
had become ; that the army would not yield to the humiliating
demand for the surrender of its guns and that public opinion
supported it. On the 29th the Admiral called a conference of
naval officers on the flagship. As Chief Intelligence officer,
Commander de Roquefeuil was in attendance. He was asked
whether in his opinion the Greeks would resist. “ No,” he said,
“ the Greeks are bluffing. You have only to stick to your
guns, Admiral, and they will bring out their munitions on
a tray.” That evening he telegraphed to Paris that the
Greek military preparations, which were everywhere to be
seen, were too open to be dangerous. I have searched
the documents diligently for any instance of correct informa-
tion furnished by this Intelligence officer, but I have failed
to find any. At de Roquefeuil’s last interview with
the Admiral, he made a serious proposal that the Allied
Legations should be blockaded. The Admiral refused to see
him again.
On the evening of November 30th, the Admiral attended
the daily conference of the Allied Ministers. He found them
very uneasy. They asked him whether the surrender of ten
batteries would not satisfy him. He replied that he could
only obey the orders he had received from Paris ; it was for


them to move their Governments to get these orders revoked,
While he was still at the conference the King’s Marshal,
Count Mercati, called to ask him the same question. He
brought a message from the King that since he had seen
General Bousquier the situation had become worse and that
he felt himself “ overridden.” The Admiral replied that
personally he was much embarrassed as he had never been
consulted about the demand for the arms and was deprived
of all initiative. He could only obey orders and enforce the
ultimatum that expired at midnight ; that six batteries had
already been delivered in Corfu ; and that the King should
be told that the landing-parties would be composed, not of
black Colonial troops, but of French territorials. He received
the same answer. At the close of the conference M. Guillemin
conducted the Admiral to the door and said, “ Thanks, to
you, Admiral, we are quite reassured.”
“ Alas 1 ” replied the Admiral, “ I see no reason to be
reassured.” It seemed to be the prevailing impression among
the Ministers that the Greeks would give way as they had
done so often before. If the demonstration failed in its object
the Admiral had resolved to resort to a stringent blockade two
days later.
jThe demand that the Greeks should surrender their arms
originated as already mentioned with General Sarrail, on
whose fears de Roquefeuil had been working. At that time
no less than sixty per cent, of his troops at Salonica were pros-
trated with marsh fever, and no doubt his irritation over this
fact and his fear of criticism in France at his inaction, had
made him more than usually credulous. Probably he did
believe that King Constantine was in league with the Kaiser
and that he intended to seize the first favourable opportunity to
attack the rear of the Allied forces. This ridiculous obsession
was sedulously cultivated by Venizelos who had everything to
gain from the total disarmament of the Royalist troops, since
there would then be nothing to prevent him from entering


Athens with a handful of men and seizing power without firing
a shot.
- On the evening of November 30th General Callaris issued
orders to his troops that arms were not to be used except in
self-defence, that is, if the Allies should be the first to open
fire. In order to minimize the danger of a conflict he had
removed part of the regular garrison of Athens to a distance.
Everyone felt the tension in the air that evening ; the people
in the streets were restless ; troops were observed to be on
the move. It was the kind of atmosphere in which “ pacific
demonstrations ” should be avoided.
The order issued by the Admiral, which afterwards fell into
Greek hands, ran as follows (translated from the French) :
Secret.
Naval Army. Order No. 13.
Squadron A. Demonstration before Athens.
Landing Force. Operations Order.
General Objective. The landing force will establish itself,
by force if necessary, in positions of which the occupation
■ by our troops will constitute a menace to Athens and will
take possession of Military Establishments, or establish-
ments of military use that may be found in the zone of
operations.
There followed a list of these. It is worth noting that
although the order contemplated using “ force if necessary,”
no provision was made for ambulance services. The force
consisted of about 3,000 men, including small detachments
of British and Italians. The landing was effected without
incident, but a change in the demeanour of the people was
observed ; they looked sullen and hostile. One battalion was
left to guard the Piraeus ; the rest marched in column towards
the positions they were to occupy. They had water and
rations for two days ; they had a fairly ample provision of
cartridges, but it was obvious that if the Greeks were to meet
force with force, 3,000 men were quite inadequate to the task


assigned to them. The Greek Government had given the
French formal warning that it would not surrender its muni-
tions, and therefore it is idle to protest, as the French did at
the time and afterwards, that they were led into an “ ambush.” 1
This word was used indiscriminately by Paris journalists and
it may therefore be well to quote here newspaper articles
published in England, France and Italy before the armed
demonstration took place showing that resistance by the
Greeks was expected. The Times of November 27th stated
that the Greek officers had resolved to resist the surrender of
munitions whatever the orders of the King might be, and that
citizens and students were banding themselves together to
defend their country against the intended outrage. The
’Journal des Debats of November 30th published an article
signed “ M. A. Gauvain ” which contained the following
passage, “ The Germanophils and anti-Venizelists are counting
upon the Allies flinching at the eleventh hour from resorting to
force. This time they must receive a salutary lesson.” The
Corriere de la Sera confirmed the news published in the Times.
Lastly, the Commission of the French Chamber, in reviewing
the events that led to the armed demonstration, threw the
entire responsibility upon de Roquefeuil and the French
Ministry of Marine. The armed demonstration was an act of
war against a neutral State and nothing else.
The advancing columns encountered a few Greek patrols
on the way to their stations, but these withdrew on their
approach. About eight o’clock the Admiral left the flagship
and drove in a car to the Zappeion, where French marines
were quartered and which was in telephonic and radio
communication with the fleet. He was much criticized after-
wards for leaving the flagship ; his defence was that it was
essential that he should see what was happening with his own
eyes. He was adequately guarded by detachments from the
fleet. The only incident before eleven o’clock was a wordy
1 Bosdari, op. cit., p. 177.


conflict with two Greek officers and sixty men who disputed
the Admiral’s right to mount the tomb of Philopappos in
order to get a better view of the surrounding country on the
ground that they had orders to protect ancient monuments.
While he was parleying with them a French officer arrived
with the news that the baggage of the contingent from the
Republique had been carried off. At eleven o’clock came the
first exchange of shots at the Theseion. It will never be
known who fired the first shot. The French maintain that
irregular Greek troops fired on the detachment that was trying
to recover its stolen baggage ; the British that it was a con-
certed attack ordered by the Greek High Command ; 1 the
Greeks that the French attacked the troops guarding the
Rouf barracks, an action that would have been in accordance
with the secret order of the Admiral quoted above, in which
the words “by force if necessary ” occur ; but there were
three discordant elements concerned —the landing party, the
Greek regulars and a number of armed Venizelists (to say
nothing of de Roquefeuil’s horde of armed agents provocateurs )
who had a strong motive for provoking a conflict between the
other two. I have it from a Greek commanding officer who
was on duty that day, that he had strict orders to abstain from
firing until he was attacked and that similar orders had been
issued to every commander ; that it was only when the firing
became general that he took any part in the fighting. At any
rate the firing became general ; there was fighting in the
streets. The Greek contingent guarding the tomb of Philo-
pappos were made prisoners after some of the men who were
sitting about the monument had been killed by French
bullets ; violent machine-gun fire was opened on the Zappeion
and men fell wounded beside the Admiral. The King sent a
message to the flagship begging the Admiral to stop the
firing, but had to be told that he had left the flagship and was
to be found at the Zappeion. At 11.45 Admiral tele-
1 Naval History of the War. Chapter V.


phoned an order to the ships to open fire on the Stadium
Hill. There was some delay and before the order was obeyed
Prince Demidoff, the Russian Minister, brought a message
from the King that in order to stop the bloodshed, he would
surrender six batteries. The Admiral agreed on the condition
that the promise of the six batteries was confirmed by the
Greek Cabinet. He was afterwards bitterly criticized in Paris
for accepting the offer. According to Admiral Fournier he
ought to have shelled the town. The Minister of Marine,
Admiral Lacaze, went further in an interview with Admiral
du Fournet on his return to Paris. “You ought,” he said,
“ to have imposed your will upon the King by reducing
Athens to ashes, I would have supported you as I have
supported others.” In his memoirs, Admiral du Fournet is at
pains to justify himself against these armchair critics. His
guns could not have laid the town in ashes, and if they had
attempted the feat they would have sacrificed the lives of the
staffs of the Allied Legations, of hundreds of foreigners of
every nationality, including his own, and of countless women
and children. Moreover, his handful of troops would have
been at the mercy of the Greeks.
The firing had ceased, but de Roquefeuil did not come near
the Admiral at the time when information was most needed.
No one had seen him. When questioned later about this he
said that he was besieged in his office, though the Ministers,
Allied officers in uniform, and even ladies, were passing safely
from the town to the Zappeion all day. Actually he was
employing his time in sending fantastic telegrams to the
Minister of Marine, exaggerating the importance of the
conflict and even going so far as to report that the Admiral
had been taken prisoner by the Greeks. The probable origin
of the fable was that a detachment from the "Justice had its
officer killed and a quartermaster named Bragard hoisted the
white flag. The Greeks ran forward and took them all
prisoners.


At a few minutes after 3 p.m. there was a sudden recrudes-
cence of the firing, not only in the town, but at the Zappeion
where French sailors standing close to the Admiral were
wounded. Who was responsible for the new outbreak has
never been actually proved. General Callaris, the commandant
of the Athens garrison, said that it began by Venizelists firing
upon the Greek troops and that the French replied, which may
have been the case; but at a time when nerves were on edge
either side may have been the first to fire. According to a
telegram addressed to King George V by King Constantine on
December 6th there were “ irrefutable proofs in the hands of
the Greek Government that the Venizelists, profiting from the
Allied landing, intended to make themselves masters of the
town and bring M. Venizelos back in triumph ” ; that two
automobiles belonging to the Anglo-French Intelligence
Service were “ to give the order for revolt,” and that the
movement broke out at about 3 o’clock in the afternoon.
Documentary support for this was found in a memorandum
left behind by a French officer at the Zappeion containing
the words ; “At 2.30 the Reservists will concentrate at the
Pnyx hill ” —referring to the Venizelist reservists who had
been crowding into Athens. This explanation is quite in
accordance with what we know of de Roquefeuil’s secret
intrigues and accounts for the secret arsenal which he had
established in the French School. It accounts, moreover,
for his failure to report himself to the Admiral that fateful
afternoon. The Admiral immediately ordered his ships
to open fire on the Stadium Hill. The accompanying scale
plan made after the bombardment shows that if the fire
was directed only on the Stadium it was singularly erratic.
The black dots on the plan indicate some of the spots on
which the shells fell—three in the garden of the Royal
Palace, of which one exploded against the palace wall, six
just outside it and fifteen within a few hundred yards
beyond. If these shells had all exploded there would have


M. JONNART, FRENCH SENATOR, WHO INDUCED
KING CONSTANTINE TO LEAVE GREECE
KING CONSTANTINE EMBARKING AT OROPOS
WHEN EXPELLED BY THE FRENCH


been great damage and loss of life. The King had sent his
children down to the palace cellars. No shell reached the
target of Stadium Hill, but the palace and the Russian and
Italian Legations were endangered and Prince Demidoff and
Count Bosdari had narrow escapes from death at the hands of
their Allies. It is curious to compare the comments of the
Allied Press upon the German treatment of Louvain with
our own treatment of Athens, yet Louvain belonged to a
belligerent hostile state and Athens, an open undefended
town, to a neutral state from which France boasts of having
drawn her culture.
As the daylight faded the firing died down. At 6.45 the
Allied Ministers and the King’s A.D.C. called at the Zappeion
to beg the Admiral to stop the shelling, and at 7 p.m. he gave
the necessary order. Sixty shells had been fired by the light
vessels and four by the Mirabeau. Later in the evening the
Admiral informed the Ministers that he intended to repeat
the bombardment as an act of reprisal. They protested so
vigorously that he agreed to postpone the bombardment for
three days, which they could employ in getting their nationals
out of the city. On reflection, however, he thought it better
to telegraph for sanction from Paris for bombarding the
Royal palaces, the arsenals and barracks, and those parts of
the city reported to be hostile to the Allies, even after the six
batteries had been surrendered. When Major Antoniadis
was told of his intention, he said that in that case the Court
and all the better class would leave the city at the mercy of the
scum of the population and the peasants, who would plunder
it. But the Allied Ministers were determined to prevent the
bombardment, and here even Guillemin was at one with his
colleagues. The wires hummed with messages to London,
Rome and St. Petersburg. None knew that de Roquefeuil
had secretly telegraphed to the French Admiralty demanding
instant and bloody reprisals. On December 3rd he tele-
graphed, “ It is necessary that severe measures of repression


be taken at once ; the only possible measure is a regular bom-
bardment of Athens ” ; and a few hours later, “ Believe that
the delay in taking such measures will produce a fresh catas-
trophe. French Athens school practically evacuated. We are
packing our trunks. If we do not use severe measures we shall
soon be the object of reprisals.” Although throughout the
crisis no Allied citizen or official had been molested in any way
he invented the phrase “ Athenian Vespers,” a phrase which
was shamelessly disseminated by the Paris Press. In one of
the three telegrams despatched by him on December 4th, he
described the Allied Ministers as “ highly-placed half-wits
who believe that reconciliation is possible and deny the facts
I have communicated. On the sth and 6th he kept the wires
busy with variants of the assertion that war must be declared
on Greece without delay. He too seemed to have lost the
little head that nature had endowed him with. A telegram
from M. Briand to Guillemin on December 2nd, showed that
the Quai d’Orsay had been kept in ignorance of what had
really happened. M. Briand protested against accepting a
few guns in compensation for what he regarded as a treacherous
ambush. We may judge the accuracy of de Roquefeuil’s
reports to Paris from the following incident. A retired French
Admiral called upon Admiral Lacaze on December 3rd in
order to learn the truth about the wild rumours that were
circulating in Paris. Lacaze said, “ Dartige let himself be
taken prisoner at the Zappeion like a sub-lieutenant. He
hoisted the white flag and signed a capitulation of which we
do not now even know the terms.”
The day’s fighting had cost the French 57 killed and 154
wounded. The British had 5 killed and several wounded.
The Italians had withdrawn as soon as the firing began on
the advice of Count Bosdari who was opposed to the entire
operation. The Greek losses were 30 killed and 52 wounded
by the French ; 11 killed and 12 wounded by the Venizelists
who had 3 killed and 2 wounded. It was a substantial list of


casualties for a “ pacific demonstration.” The prisoners taken
by both sides—Bo by the French and 60 by the Greeks —had
to be exchanged. The wounded had to be found and cared
for. The Greeks themselves furnished transport and am-
bulances, and placed beds in their hospitals at the Admiral’s
disposal, besides recovering and restoring the arms and
baggage that had fallen into their hands. After the fighting
Queen Sophie, who is accused by the French of being violently
opposed to the Allies, befriended one of the wounded French
sailors and had him nursed back to health. She continued
to keep in touch with him after his return to France. This
young man owes his life to her. The belief that because of
her near kinship to the Kaiser she was blindly pro-German in
her sympathies and hostile to the Allies was fallacious. She
had imbibed from her mother strong English sympathies and
English was the first foreign language taught to her children.
Instead of the fresh bombardment proposed by the Admiral
the Allies had compromised in favour of a punitive blockade,
which was proclaimed by the Admiral on December 8 th. It
was his last official act, for on the I ith he was relieved of his
command and recalled to Paris. De Roquefeuil, however,
was left at his post.
One serio-comic interlude in the tragic business was the
arrival of General Sarrail on a telegram from de Roquefeuil.
He came “ to throw his sword into the balance.” 1 His
troops had never been sufficient to hold back the Germans and
the Bulgars, but he had entire divisions to spare for winning
laurels in Athens against an army destitute of munitions. As
an illustration of Sarrail’s methods we may quote General
Cordonnier, his Second-in-Command, whom he sent to
General Milne to ask for the co-operation of British troops in
an offensive. General Milne received the request with
astonishment, and told General Cordonnier in confidence that
he had received orders from his Government to make no
1 Sarrail’s Memoirs, p. 193.


attack against the Bulgars, because at the moment it was
negotiating with them. “ General Sarrail is aware of this and
he sends you to ask my help, knowing that I cannot give it ! ” 1
General Cordonnier relates that in leaving Fiorina he came
upon the bodies of three Greeks, tied together and killed by
the same volley. “It was another instance,” he says, “of
the work of our army on the Mathieu model ” (alluding to
Captain Mathieu, Sarrail’s Intelligence officer, who worked
in close association with de Roquefeuil). “ Since I was in
command in the eyes of the Greeks, it was I who had ordered
these murders.” 2 “ Sarrail has no reserve, no energy, and
very little talent,” 3 wrote Cordonnier, and when making
his report to General Headquarters in Paris, he said :
“ Finally I insisted on the notorious incapacity of Sarrail
and wrote in my report, ‘ Send a soldier to Salonica and you
will win victory.’ ” 4
On December 3rd Athens had become outwardly calmer.
The wealthier Greeks had begun to leave the town, but in
proportion to the quietude of the streets de Roquefeuil’s
excitement increased. During the day he reported both to
Paris and to the Admiral, that bands of Greek reservists were
pouring Into Athens to set fire to the city ; that batteries were
being masked behind the hills dominating the Piraeus ; that
two regiments were marching down to the harbour, and on
the following day, that troops were being brought back from
the Peloponnesus to Athens. The Greek Commander-in-
Chief, General Callaris, called upon the Admiral and was able
to disprove all these mendacious reports. He offered to take
a French officer to the spot indicated by de Roquefeuil as the
site of the masked batteries, or to any other place in order that
he might judge with his own eyes whether the Greeks were
making warlike preparations.
The Admiral had fixed 3 p.m. for the funeral of the French
1 Ai-je TrahiSarrail? by General Cordonnier, 1930, p. 122.
* Ibid., p. 277. 3 Ibid., p. 142. 4 Ibid., p. 341.


killed. He had received an offer - from the Archbishop of
Athens to conduct the funeral ceremony at the cemetery, but
in view of de Roquefeuil’s alarmist reports he declined the
invitation. Unfortunately his reply reached the Archbishop
too late, and he learned that the prelate waited at the cemetery
for more than an hour. The funeral passed off without
incident. The Greek troops turned out to salute the dead.
The Admiral’s boat was alongside to take him on shore to
join his British colleague in the procession when the Allied
Ministers arrived at the gangway urgently desiring to see him.
They kept him for two hours discussing the effect that a new
bombardment would have and declared their conviction that
Greece would declare war on the Allies. The Admiral was
afterwards strongly criticized for his failure to attend the
funeral.
After the bombardment, the houses of the Venizelist
fugitives were searched, with the surprising result that a large
quantity of rifles, bombs and fuses, all of French army model,
were discovered on the premises, together with a steel bullet-
proof garment which presumably Venizelos was to wear when
the moment came for turning the arms and explosives against
his fellow-countrymen.


CHAPTER XIII
DECEMBER 1 9 1 6
THE WRONG MEN ARE PUNISHED
IT was not until December sth that Admiral du Fournet
received his first instructions from Paris since the catas-
trophe. These placed him under the general orders of
Sarrail. He was to stop movements of troops between Attica
and the Morea without, however, destroying bridges, except
upon Sarrail’s request ; he was to guard against having his
flagship bottled up in the Piraeus ; to arrange with the Allied
Ministers for the evacuation of their nationals as soon as
possible ; and to render the Greek fleet innocuous, but in
such a way that it would remain fit for use by the Allies at a
later stage. These orders made confusion worse confounded.
The unfortunate Admiral was to come to an agreement with
Ministers who could not agree among themselves. He was
to acquire accurate information on the Greek munition depots
about which de Roquefeuil, his country’s own Intelligence
officer, had to confess that he knew nothing. In the end he
had to go to the British Service for the information. The
remainder of the orders implied that a new war front was to
be formed against Greece, and yet the Allied Ministers,
including the French Minister, were dead against reprisals
or coercion. The British Admiral had received orders to
dissociate himself from any hostile acts that might be ordered
by the French Minister of Marine.
Admiral Dartige du Fournet was not long left in this state
of confusion. On December nth, Vice-Admiral le Bon


arrived from the Ministry of Marine to hold an enquiry into
the events of December ist. Admiral le Bon had been at the
Dardanelles and knew the ineffectiveness of bombarding land
positions from the sea. He was curiously reticent about the
state of affairs in Paris, and it was not until the next day that
he produced a telegram informing du Fournet that he was
relieved of his command. This telegram had been despatched
before any report from le Bon could possibly have reached
Paris, which showed that Lacaze had acted on the mendacious
reports of de Roquefeuil and preferred to pass judgment first
and hear the evidence afterwards.
The Admiral had asked for the Legion of Honour for his
officers. Not one decoration was awarded, but de Roquefeuil’s
officers were decorated.
As soon as the news of the Admiral’s recall reached the
British flagship, Admiral Hayes-Sadler came on board to
express his sympathy. He took leave of du Fournet in the
presence of Admiral le Bon. He was evidently suffering under
strong emotion when he rose to go, and du Fournet embraced
him with tears in his eyes. “ I should like to embrace that
Englishman too,” murmured le Bpn.
A digression from Greece in order to follow the subsequent
treatment of Admiral Dartige du Fournet is justified. On
arriving in Paris he reported himself to Admiral Lacaze at the
Admiralty. From the demeanour of his political chief, he saw
at once that all his former services had been forgotten and
that he had been condemned unheard. The Minister for-
mulated three charges : (i) not having reduced Athens to
ashes ; (2) having abandoned his wounded ; (3) having failed
to attend the funerals of his men ; and intimated that he
would be retired. The Admiral asked leave to appeal to the
President of the Republic and to the Prime Minister. The
reply was, “ See whom you like. What do you want ? To
step into my shoes ? Well, I’m quite ready to turn out.”
This was a favourite phrase with Lacaze ; he had used it


before with the Naval Commission of the Chamber. Admiral
Lacaze’s only allusion to M. Benazet was a complaint that he
had failed to call upon him. Doubtless he had begun to see
how deeply he was involved in the Greek imbroglio and knew
that the Admiral would cite his preposterous orders in his
defence. He thought that it was to be war to the knife
between them.
“ Adieu 1 ” said du Fournet at the door.
“ No,” replied Lacaze, “ only au revolt."
As an illustration of the manner in which French Ministers
were selected in those days, it is worth noting that Admiral
Lacaze had himself been relieved of his command in 1915
and ordered to Marseilles. This had been his only experience
of active service. Within a few months the vicissitudes of
French politics had placed him in control of the Navy. This
put him in charge of the War Office during the temporary
absence of the Minister for War. When Admiral du Fournet
represented the injustice of his treatment, Lacaze, by way of
soothing him, remarked, “ These things happen. At the
War Office the other day I had to relieve Foch of his com-
mand.” There we have the measure of the Creole character;
clothed in a brief authority, he could not wait a few days until
his colleague returned. “ Happily,” remarks du Fournet,
“ Foch came back. In these days Ministers enjoy more
than the powers of Louis XIV or Napoleon. It may be
a necessity of the time, but it is a great danger to everyone
concerned.”
Deeply wounded by the Injustice of his treatment as he was,
Admiral du Fournet went into retirement without further
protest, but in January 1917 he received a curt message from
Lacaze that Admiral Fournier desired to see him at six o’clock
the same day. Fournier at that date was seventy-five and old
for his age. His last experience of active service had been
in 1870. He had been retired for fifteen years and was a
candidate for election to the Academy. His naval career in


China and Indo-China had not crowned him with laurels.
This was the man chosen to act as du Fournet’s judge. He
kept him a long time waiting before he tottered into the room
apparently broken with fatigue. He was courteous, but it
was plain that his mind was already made up, for a formidable
pile of papers was stacked on the table before him, and he did
not glance at any of them. He asked a few questions ; he
jotted down a note or two, he admitted that the Admiral had
done everything possible for his wounded, and had a sufficient
reason for not attending the funeral, but he asked why he had
not continued the bombardment “ to bluff the Greeks as one
does at poker instead of firing a single shot (sic). The
Greeks would have been terrified.”
Du Fournet explained the circumstances, but the old man
was scarcely listening. When he complained of the calumnies
that had been circulated about him, Admiral Fournier pro-
mised to see that they were put right. He admitted in the end
that du Fournet had been superseded too hastily. “ But,” he
added, “ you did not do what was expected of you.”
After the Admiral had retired, Fournier questioned other
officers and remarked to one of them that Admiral Dartige
du Fournet’s only mistake had been to listen to the Allied
Ministers and to stop the bombardment, but that he had been
sufficiently punished to serve as a warning to other officers.
When his report saw the light of day it proved to be quite
short—a mere summary of Admiral le Bon’s. It charged du
Fournet with a lack of foresight, energy and a high sense of
duty, and found him disqualified for further employment.
But its author was good enough to say that he did not recom-
mend a trial by court-martial. This seems to make it clear
that he had been brought in to save Lacaze from the dis-
closures that a trial by court-martial would have involved and
to enable him to face the secret session of the Chamber later
in the month. At this session the Admiral was not given a
hearing, but immediately after it he was ordered to remove
N


from Paris and reside at Dinan, no doubt to prevent him from
agitating for an impartial enquiry. It is refreshing to know
that while in this enforced retirement he received a visit from
the British Naval in Paris, who brought with him the
insignia of the Grand Cross of the Bath and invested him.
“ This great courtesy,” wrote the Admiral, “ is characteristic
of this nation of gentlemen. What a contrast with my own 1 ”
The French censor forbade any mention of the little ceremony
even in the newspapers of Toulon.
Meanwhile, the Admiral’s officers were not neglectful.
Two in particular, Vice-Admiral Daveluy and the late Captain
Chamonard, were courageous enough to publish the truth—
that de Roquefeuil had been at the bottom of the trouble
—and they paid dear for their courage. They were forced
to retire.
The secret session of the Chamber in January 1917,
appears to have accepted what Lacaze declared to be the
facts. M. Leygues, one of the recipients of de Roquefeuil’s
telegrams, who was to succeed Lacaze later, was very strongly
against the Admiral. In the short public sitting that fol-
lowed, a few deputies demanded the condign punishment of
the Admiral without suggesting that he should be heard in his
own defence. In any other country the facts disclosed in such
an enquiry would have cost both the Minister and de Roque-
feuil their posts, but the air in Paris had been so poisoned by
lying propaganda that an impartial enquiry was practically
impossible. It was not until September 1919 that the
Naval Commission of the Chamber was moved by a new
Minister of Marine to reopen the entire question. M. Briand
himself volunteered to give evidence ; the Ministry of
Marine was called upon to produce de Roquefeuil’s telegrams;
de Roquefeuil declined to appear, though twice cited, but
evidence was taken from senior officers employed under the
Admiral, notably his Chief of Staff, the late Captain Cha-
monard. The report of the Commission has never been


published, but I have had access to the summary of the
rapporteur which was adopted unanimously. It begins by
pointing out that there were two irreconcilable policies in the
French Government in force at the same time —the one—that
of the Foreign Office—to maintain cordial agreement between
the Allies ; to abstain from meddling in the internal affairs of
Greece, except in so far as might become necessary to maintain
the security of Sarrail’s army ; and above all, to countenance
no movement against the Greek Dynasty ; the other —that of
the Minister of Marine, inspired by de Roquefeuil—to usurp
control of all the public services, in fact to bring about a
military occupation of the country. Not a word of criticism
of Lacaze, the Minister of Marine, as having been primarily
responsible for the gross mistakes that led to the enquiry is to
be found in the report ; it is against de Roquefeuil that all
its criticism is directed, and though it acquitted Admiral du
Fournet of most of the charges against him, it admitted the
justice of removing him from his command. It found him
at fault in having allowed the Allied Ministers to intervene in
a military operation and having failed to attend the funerals
of French sailors. Nevertheless, it considered that his com-
pulsory retirement was too severe a measure o£ discipline and
recommended that this should be reconsidered by the Govern-
ment. It blamed the French Minister, M. Guillemin, for
having allowed himself to be influenced by de Roquefeuil and
it concluded by demanding a severe penalty against de
Roquefeuil for inefficiency in his duties as a Naval Intelligence
officer, and for conduct unbecoming an officer in his political
activities.
The Commission protested strongly against the practice of
allowing a Naval Attache to send cypher telegrams to the
Minister behind the backs of the Legation and the Com-
mander-in-Chief, and it condemned de Roquefeuil for pur-
suing personal aims opposed to those of the Government.
Finally, it censured him for having “ disloyally and


consciously misrepresented the action of his Admiral by
reporting officially that he had shamefully capitulated.”
The reason why this report was never laid on the table of
the Chamber, and therefore was never published, sheds a
curious light upon political life in France. It had chanced
that in October 1916, M. Chaumet and other deputies visited
the French fleet and M. Chaumet became the guest of Admiral
Dartige du Fournet on board the flagship, and was present
when the Greek light vessels were seized. He left the fleet
with a high sense of the ability and discretion of its Com-
mander-in-Chief. The after-events, the punishment inflicted
on the Admiral and Vice-Admiral Daveluy, had not left him
indifferent, and on the day when he replaced Admiral Lacaze
at the Ministry of Marine, he requested the Naval Com-
mission of the Chamber to hold an enquiry into the events in
Greece during the war. The Commission delegated the task
to a sub-commission, to which M. Boussenot was rapporteur.
Unfortunately, the enquiry took so long that its report was
not ready until after M. Leygues, who will be remembered as
having been a violent supporter of Admiral Lacaze in the
secret session of the Chamber in 1917, had replaced M.
Chaumet as Minister. Though the report had been unani-
mously approved by the Naval Commission and in ordinary
course should have been laid on the table and discussed, M.
Leygues seems to have prevented this, and to have appointed
instead a committee of three admirals to consider the charges
brought by Vice-Admiral Daveluy and Captain Chamonard
against Commander de Roquefeuil and judge between them.
If this Committee had been bent upon whitewashing de
Roquefeuil, it found it impossible to do so, and M. Leygues
was compelled to call upon him to retire within twenty-four
hours ; otherwise he would be cashiered.
Though de Roquefeuil had been relieved of his Intelligence
duties, he remained in Athens until April Ist, 1917, when he
left for the Baltic to take command of the Montcalm. He had


been promoted to Post Captain on October 9th, 1916. When
he fell out with Admiral Daveluy, Chief of Staff to Admiral
Dartige du Fournet, he was recommended for a decoration
by Admiral le Bon, Chief of the Naval Staff, but the new
Minister of Marine declined to put his name forward.
Thus was partial justice done, but the man who had been
responsible for the tragedy on December Ist, 1916, and for
the loss of French prestige in Greece for a generation, Admiral
Lacaze, was left unscathed.
The Commission touched very lightly upon the conduct of
the Censor in allowing monstrous calumnies against Admiral
du Fournet to circulate in the press ; it is silent about the
calumnies published against King Constantine and his
Ministers and his action in suppressing their justifications.
The editors of the Paris journals who were vociferously
denouncing the Greek resistance as a treacherous ambush,
appeared to have forgotten the lines in their national anthem,
the Marseillaise :
“ Quoi I des cohortes itrangeres
Feraient la lot dans nos foyers ! ”
Nor did they reflect that to bombard a neutral capital and an
open city without notice, was a proceeding as difficult to
justify in international law as that of the Germans in Belgium
which was rightly denounced in the press of the Allied and of
neutral countries. Unfortunately, modern war is waged by
the printing-press as well as by the gun and the munition
factory, for the press is the propaganda organization in which
falsehood is one of the chief explosive ingredients.
Greece was not the only neutral country in which the
French Secret Service during the war brought discredit to
the French name. lam writing now, not of the military
Intelligence—the Deuztime Bureau —with which no fault can
be found, but of the unprofessional agents engaged in quasi-
political work. During the latter part of the war, the head of


the French Secret Service in Switzerland was an ex-journalist
named Cassela, who had been on the staff of the Matin. He
had won his post by his work in connection with the 8010
trial, it was he who discovered in Switzerland and produced
to the court-martial what were held to be convincing proofs of
Bolo’s treason. The conviction and execution of 8010 were
his work and it was considered that no better man could be
found to take charge of espionage, counter-espionage and
propaganda than he. We know now that 8010 was merely a
dishonest adventurer who cleverly cheated the Germans to the
actual profit of the French. He had bought the 'Journal
newspaper with German money, but instead of using it for
defeatist propaganda, as he had promised the Germans, he
had used it to conduct a patriotic campaign in favour of pro-
ducing more guns and munitions, which was a breach of faith
with his employers. His execution, therefore, had no relation
with pure justice, but something startling was wanted to
restore the morale of the country, and 8010 was sacrificed,
some will say quite properly.
On the morrow of the execution, Cassela found himself
nominally an of the French Legation at Berne ;
actually the head of a Service provided with almost limitless
funds. He was an insignificant-looking little man with a
toothbrush moustache, and an unprepossessing expression
which the eyeglass he always wore did nothing to soften.
The behaviour of the French Secret Service agents during
the war bore a strange resemblance to that of the Russian
Ogpu which, in these days, bears so unsavoury a reputation.
This was especially the case when the duties of espionage
were confided to persons of doubtful integrity or of a credulous
disposition. Cassela had both these defects. As a journalist
conversant with the French methods of journalistic blackmail,
greedy for money, destitute of morals and with a patriotism of
necessity rather than conviction, he played a disreputable
rfile in Switzerland, which would have become a public scandal


throughout the Allied countries had it not been for the Press
Censor and the subvention paid to the Swiss newspapers. Like
de Roquefeuil, he was an untiring worker. He recruited a
veritable army of spies of every nationality and spent millions
of francs on the most futile enterprises. M. Clemenceau had
prescribed his first task—to find proofs in Switzerland of
secret relations between Caillaux and enemy subjects. He
wasted enormous sums on this enquiry. The entire gang of
international adventurers who swarmed in Switzerland flocked
to him to offer incredible information supported by forged
documents. All this he paid for and despatched to Paris
indiscriminately to the hopeless confusion of the judicial
officers. Not only did he contribute a mass of false informa-
tion, but in his overweening zeal he used his agents to
kidnap people on the Franco-Swiss frontier in the hope of
extorting from them some proof against Caillaux. The
dossiers he furnished must have been very unconvincing for so
bitter an adversary of M. Clemenceau as Caillaux to have
escaped the firing-party.
Side by side with his anti-Caillaux activities, Cassela waged
merciless war against Swiss merchants suspected of exporting
merchandise to the Central Powers. Their names were
immediately entered on the Allied Black List and they were
prohibited from importing anything from the Allied countries.
Nevertheless, Cassela seemed to be subject to strange caprices
of leniency in particular cases. The export of large quantities
of cocoa to Germany was afterwards proved to have taken
place—cocoa manufactured from raw material grown in the
Allied countries. One can only guess at the sum that Cassela
made out of it. Another source of profit to him was in the
issue of passports for France. One of the most suggestive
cases was that of a rich Levantine ship-owner who applied for
a passport to Paris to negotiate the sale or charter of his fleet.
Cassela demanded a sum so exorbitant that the ship-owner
declined to pay it. In Cassela’s temporary absence, the


Levantine sounded one of his subordinates, who agreed to
grant him a visa for a very much lower fee; the ship-owner
paid it and left for Paris. When Cassela learned what had
been done, he took his revenge by denouncing the Levantine
to the Paris police. The wretched man was immediately
arrested and thrown into prison. There he remained for
many weeks and counted himself fortunate in at last obtaining
his liberty.
Cassela paid a subvention out of public funds to the Kursaal
in Geneva to save it from closing on the pretext that this place
of amusement was necessary for his work in keeping an eye
upon the undesirables of the town. He recruited from among
the dancers of the establishment a girl called Raymonde, whom
he employed in delicate missions. The girl soon became
involved in serious difficulties with the Geneva police. Cassela
obtained her release on heavy bail. When the facts were
reported to the Federal Council, his continued presence in
Switzerland was felt to be intolerable. The Council made
very strong representations to the French Government, and
Cassela was recalled. He left Switzerland with Raymonde
and her bail was estreated. After the Armistice Cassela
became editor of the theatrical journal, Comaedia , a post which
he held until his death a few months afterwards.


CHAPTER XIV
JANUARY-MARCH, 1 9 17
THE BLOCKADE OF GREECE
IN recording the treatment meted out to Admiral du
Fournet in the preceding chapter—a treatment directly
due to the malpractices of de Roquefeuil—l have
anticipated events. Although the most wilful misrepresenta-
tions of affairs in Greece are to be found in the files of the
French newspapers, the British Press cannot be acquitted of
blame. In reply to a question in the House of Commons on
November yth, 1916, Lord Robert Cecil said, “ The Allied
Governments have no reason as yet to be dissatisfied with the
manner in which the Greek authorities are carrying out their
pledges.” Yet in an editorial published the same day, the
Times , on the authority of a “ well-informed correspondent in
Athens,” maintained the exact opposite. If this correspondent
was not Venizelos himself, it was one who accepted every-
thing that Venizelos told him. At that time the Salonica
Government had been employing as its unofficial agent in
London, a certain English professor, who lent his authority
with the leading English newspapers to all the reports with
which he was fed from Salonica. The fact was that in those
darkest days of the war, the critical sense of journalists
and their readers was paralysed. It was the heyday of
the propagandist, for people were ready to swallow any
wild story.
At the Lord Mayor’s Banquet in November 1916, Mr.
Asquith said, “ M. Venizelos has assured us, and we do not


doubt him, that his efforts and his organization are in no sense
directed against the throne of Greece.” Two days later, Lord
Robert Cecil replied to a question in the House of Commons,
“ I do not understand that M. Venizelos regards himself as
revolting from the Government of the King.” When asked
on November 18 th whether Venizelos was not raising an
army in defiance of his Sovereign’s authority, he replied,
“We have M. Venizelos’ own account of it.” In a leading
article on November 21st, the Times quoted Venizelos’ reply
to the “ base calumny ” that he was disloyal to the King.
It is right to say, however, that neither these statesmen nor
journalists had seen the private letter written on November
30th by Venizelos to Dr. Burrows, which was afterwards
published in his memoirs. In this, after much abuse of his
Sovereign, Venizelos wrote, “ I consider that every dictate of
political morality, the interests of the Allies and those of the
Greek nation—all demand that the Powers should withdraw
their protection from the Royal traitor.” The letter proceeds to
enlarge upon the strength of Venizelos’ military forces and
the eagerness of the islanders to join them ; to inveigh against
the establishment of a neutral zone which barred his way to
Athens, and ends, “ You can make use of anything I have
said about the King provided that you do not mention my
name, for I do not wish to estrange any of the Allied Powers.”
If the grim and quarrelsome Sarrail could have read this
letter even he would have laughed loud.
A few days after the events of December Ist, the French
General Cauboue was appointed to take charge of the Allied
Commission of Military Control.
The British General, General Phillips, had been appointed
to this post, but the French, being unwilling to allow so
important an appointment to pass out of French hands,
selected General Cauboue, an officer senior in service to
General Phillips, as their representative, and this automatically
gave him the command. The wits in Athens maintained that


Cauboue had been specially selected for the post on account of
his truculent and unpolished manners. His first meeting
with M. Lambros, the Greek Prime Minister, was character-
istic. Barely nodding to him he halted in the centre of the
Prime Minister’s office trembling with anger, with his fists
clenched, and shouted, “ I have you by the throat 1 I can
strangle you when I like ! ” Then he turned and stumped
out of the room, leaving M. Lambros standing astonished
before his writing-table wondering whether the man was
mentally deranged. Cauboue made great play with the Paris
newspapers about a secret cache of arms which he professed to
have discovered, describing it as a real menace to the army of
Salonica. This proved to be a heap of worn-out rifles sold as
old iron to a Belgian firm before the war. After many months
of intensive searching Cauboue had unearthed no more than
500 rifles, for the most part unserviceable arms of ancient
pattern.
The task of the Commission of Control under General
Cauboue was to obtain the total disarmament of Greece by the
transfer of all the war material and troops to the Peloponnesus
in order to secure Sarrail against the “ menace in my rear,”
France was thus paving the way for M. Jonnart’s mission.
When once the Greek army was bottled up in the Pelo-
ponnesus, it would be quite easy to blow up the bridge over
the Corinth Canal and isolate the King in Athens. As an
illustration of the manners of General Cauboue it is on record
that he was one day discussing the transfer of Greek troops
to the Peloponnesus with a Greek major of Lilliputian stature
who had been deputed by the Greek staff to settle the details.
As was his wont Cauboue made a slighting remark about the
Greek nation. “ Mon General ,” replied the diminutive
major, drawing himself up, “ I have been sent to you to
discuss a service matter and not to listen to insults to my
country, and I will ask you not to forget that though France
may be the stronger nation, I hail from a country which was


in the forefront of civilization when your forefathers were still
feeding on wild game and dressing in goatskins.” Caboue’s
reply is not on record, which is perhaps as well. Nothing
further need be said about General Cauboue than that he was
one of the very few men of whom Sarrail had a good word
to say.
One month after the blockade was decreed (January Bth,
1917) its object was defined. It was to be raised as soon as
General Cauboue’s Mission was satisfied that the evacuation
of Greek troops and material to the Peloponnesus “ had been
partly effected, with adequate guarantees for its completion.”
The Note of January Bth specifying these conditions, inti-
mated that the Allies would lend their naval forces ( moyens
maritimes) to facilitate the transfer and that then “ the blockade
would be raised within the space of a fortnight.” As a
counterpart of this imposed bargain “ the Allied Powers re-
affirmed towards Greece their set purpose of respecting
entirely her resolution definitely to keep out of the European
war,” and ” they pledged themselves not to allow the with-
drawal of the Greek troops into the Peloponnesus to be taken
advantage of by the partisans of the Provisional Government
of Salonica, to occupy any part of Greek territory which would
thus be deprived of all means of resistance.” We shall see
how this solemn undertaking was kept.
One morning the Greek Government received a telegram
reporting that the Allies had taken possession of the island
of Cythera (Cerigo) and had removed the Royal officers for
internment in Crete. Neither the British nor the French
Minister could explain it; both promised to make tele-
graphic enquiry in London and Paris. The replies showed
that nothing was known of the occurrence at the Foreign
Offices or the British Admiralty. It transpired afterwards
that it had been a “ stunt ” of a British Naval Intelligence
officer, a Mr. Lawson, in private life a Fellow of Pembroke
College, Cambridge, whose irresponsible action had jeopard


ized the honour of his country. His proceedings were very
properly condemned by the Allied Prime Ministers at their
meeting in Rome and he was ordered by his Admiral to repair
the damage he had done by restoring the Royal officers to the
island and withdrawing the arms that he had secretly sup-
plied to the Venizelist minority. Under the heading “ The
Conquest of Cerigo—An Unauthorized Stroke ” he boasted
afterwards of his ingenuity in evading the order by playing
upon the fears of the Royalist officers after the tortuous manner
of de Roquefeuil. It was irresponsible and foolish meddling
of this kind that complicated the difficulties of the Allied
Governments and injured their prestige in Greece. 1
If the blockade played havoc with the defenceless civilian
population, its moral effect was even more severe. The
country was now entirely cut off from the outside world. All
postal communications to or from Greece were intercepted.
Private correspondence, especially correspondence from other
neutral countries, when not detained or destroyed, was re-
turned to the senders, many weeks later, stamped with the
name of one of the French warships anchored at Salamis, on
which some naval officer had been assigned the novel duty of
a postmaster. The rubber stamp impression bore the fol-
lowing inscription : “ Retour pour cause du Hocus ” —a reason
which is new to international law. Official correspondence did
not fare much better. Government despatches and telegrams
to the Greek representatives abroad were either stopped or
detained for an indefinite period.
De Roquefeuil found free scope for his activities. A stream
of false and calumnious reports, issued from Salonica and
Salamis, his new headquarters, were readily accepted at their
face value by the newspapers in London and Paris. The
facts were simple enough, the newspapers said. King Con-
stantine had offered the whole of his army material to the
Allies, and had arranged with the French Admiral to send
1 Tales of Aegean Intrigue, by J. C. Lawson. London, 1920.


marines on shore to accept delivery. He had then ordered
his troops to fire on them as they were marching to Athens on
a friendly errand and had killed them by the dozen. This
was the “ ambush ” of December ist, 1916, and the public
abroad, who knew nothing except what they were given to
read, cannot be blamed for demanding reprisals against
Greece. They were never told that the Greek Government
had twice written formally to the French Admiral, in reply to
his demand for the delivery of the munitions, that “ the
Greek Government must give the most categorical refusal ”
and again that “ the Admiral’s demand was inacceptable and
that the contemplated measures of coercion ” would be in-
compatible with the traditional friendship between France
and Greece, such as would be justly regarded by the people
as hostile acts.” They were not told of the Admiral’s secret
order to his troops “ to occupy, if needs be by force , all vantage
points the possession of which would place Athens at their
mercy ” ; that “ they should resort to force after summoning
the Greek troops to withdraw and open fire if they felt them-
selves distinctly under menace.”
Thus was public opinion in the West enlightened about
what was passing in the Near East. Thanks to the blockade
Greece was cut off from the world as it were in an air-tight
compartment. The French and English newspapers contain-
ing de Roquefeuil’s perversions were admitted to Athens ten
or twelve weeks later. The Censor took good care that the
Greek version of the affair should never see the light of day.
Sentence was passed on Greece when only a lying witness
had been heard.
It was this crucial moment that Romanos and Gennadius,
the Greek Ministers in Paris and London, chose for going
over to the Venizelists at Salonica.
The news of the events in Athens filled Salonica with elation.
The Yenizelist Government now saw the prospect of a definite
break between Greece and the Allies and it did everything in


its power to bring this about. On January 29th, 1917, Gen-
nadius informed Venizelos that he had consultations with the
British Foreign Office on the subject of “ the attitude of the
British authorities towards Greek subjects in the event of
hostilities against the Government of Athens.” He added,
“we shall invite those who declare themselves to be our
adherents to enter their names to be sworn as our comrades.
Those who abstain will be informed that they will not be able
to invoke our protection in the event of war, and that we shall
not accept applications to be inscribed after the declaration of
war.” In other words Greek subjects living in England were
to choose between repudiating their country and the prospect
of an internment camp. When Gennadius pressed the
Foreign Office to agree to the issue of certificates to the
partisans of Venizelos in the event of a declaration of war upon
Greece, it is fair to say that he met with a polite rebuke to the
effect that the case had not arisen.
De Roquefeuil had now been withdrawn from his official
functions, but he remained in Athens and was, according to a
telegram from Prince Demidoff, always at Cauboue’s elbow,
for this General had been condemned by nature to rely upon
the brains of others. According to Count Bosdari the mis-
chief done by Cauboue’s intrigues was intolerable. “ His
obstructiveness and insolence reached such a pitch that they
became the subject of dismayed exchanges of views between
the Italian, British and Russian Cabinets.” 1 Whenever he
had an ultimatum to deliver —and this was almost daily—he
did not condescend to call upon the Minister ; he pushed it
under the door of the Foreign Office. One night after he had
gone to bed, M. Streit, a former Foreign Minister and a
professor of International Law at the Athens University,
received a telephone message asking him to come at once to
the Foreign Office, where the Council of Ministers was
assembled. They wanted his advice and the matter was
1 Count Bosdari, p. 188.


urgent. He dressed in haste and reached the Foreign Office
soon after i a.m. In anxious tones the Prime Minister told
him that the meeting had been called to consider a new
ultimatum from General Cauboue. M. Streit asked to see it
and learned that it had not yet been presented, but from
rumours they had heard in the town that afternoon, they
knew that it was coming and that it would demand a
reply before 6 a.m. “ Well,” said Streit, “in your place
I should go to bed and if it does come, you will be able to
consider it calmly after a good night’s rest.” As he left the
room he noticed the old office messenger, whom he knew
well, sitting on a stool at the head of the staircase and peering
down towards the closed front door.
“ What are you looking at ? ” he asked.
“ I’m watching for the ultimatum. They all come like that
—pushed under the door.” This was the state of mind to
which the French officials had reduced the Greek Cabinet. 1
The effect of the blockade imposed by the Allies on the
December 8 th, 1916, was felt almost at once, for the reserves
of food in the country were exhausted; The people were
living on figs, dried raisins and locust beans. Before the end
of February 1917, fifty deaths from starvation had been re-
ported, chiefly among young children. Flour being unobtain-
able, the people had to fall back upon unwholesome food, with
the result that cases of death from food-poisoning and from
an epidemic of enteritis became frequent, especially in the
lonian Islands. In Cephalonia and Zante the French black
troops encamped in the islands commandeered all the slender
stocks that remained. Navigation and industry came to a
standstill and large numbers were thrown out of work. In
the larger towns some relief was given by the opening of
public kitchens, but nothing of that kind was possible in the
islands. Agents of the Allies were dangling promises of
cargoes of wheat before the eyes of the starving people on
1 Related to the author by M. Streit.


THE COURT-MARTIAL ON THE EX-MINISTERS
The accused men are shown in the front row. From left to right: M. Goudas, M. Baltazis, M. Stratigos, M. Gounaris,
M. Stratus, M. Theotokis, M. Protopapadakis [standing).


condition that they would join the Venizelist rebellion, but
the islanders remained stolidly firm in their allegiance to
their King. The more they suffered the stronger grew their
detestation of Venizelos.
As food became scarcer, the people began more and more
to rely upon fish. It demanded courage on the part of fisher-
men to take out their boats in those days, for they were liable
to be seized by the French fleet unless their owners were pre-
pared to join Venizelos, and when their boats were confiscated
they lost their only means of livelihood, to say nothing of the
danger to their lives when their boats were sunk under them
by gunfire. In one case, when shellfire was opened on one of
these harmless fishing-smacks, a shell took off the arm of one
of the fishermen. “ Send your King away, then we will leave
you alone,” was the taunt used by some of the French officers.
Perhaps the cruellest feature of the blockade was the know-
ledge that the cargoes of wheat purchased by the Greek
Government in America were not merely retained until the
blockade should be lifted, but were sent to Venizelos in
Salonica with the double object of starving out the Royalist
Greeks and of reducing the cost of victualling the Salonica
forces.
When this became known in London, there was a lively
exchange of views between the British and French Govern-
ments. On February 25th, Isvolsky telegraphed to St.
Petersburg that the British had proposed to lift the blockade
and that M. Briand had replied that while France would
accept the temporary relief proposed by Mr. Balfour, she
refused to agree to lifting the blockade on the pretext that
Greece had not yet fulfilled her engagements. In March
1917, there was a series of questions in the House of Com-
mons ; the replies made it clear that the French stood in the
way of relaxing the blockade and that the consent to lift it
must be unanimous.
Great changes were impending. In March 19x7, the Czar
o


abdicated and a month later the United States entered the
war. These two factors removed the moderating influence of
Russia, together with the fear of American criticism. Thence-
forward, the French Government had only British opposition
to deal with. There was also a change of ministry in France.
M. Ribot came into power and with him the tradition that
King Constantine was an enemy who denied his people the
right to show their real feelings by joining the Allies.
As early as February 1917, the question of sending the
French Senator, M. Jonnart, to Athens to instal Venizelos in
power had been discussed, but the proposal was temporarily
dropped on receipt of the following telegram from Guillemin :
“ M. Venizelos will not at any price have M. Jonnart in
Athens, for he feels sure that a man of his perspicacity will
not be long in discovering the truth.” 1
During the month of April efforts were made in Athens to
bring about a reconciliation between King Constantine and
Venizelos, and the former appealed once more to M. Zaimis
to make the first approaches on account of his well-known
sympathy with the Allies. But on April 12th, Politis tele-
graphed to Paris and London :
“ According to information that reaches us from Petro-
grad certain political circles in Athens are moving towards
bringing about a reconciliation with Venizelos and the
King is inclined to favour the suggestion. I beg you to
seize the first opportunity for declaring that no compromise
is possible with the Royal Family ... a compromise which
would inevitably result in an absolutism whose roots would
later throw off dangerous shoots. Since a new world will
be born from this war it is essential that from the unhappy
conflict to which a treasonable policy has reduced us a
regenerated Greece should arise once and for all relieved
from the perils which have been weighing so heavily on the
liberties of the country.”
London again proved to be the stumbling block in this new
1 Frangulis, Vol. I, p. 516.


Venizelist intrigue. In a telegram of 17th April Gennadius
reported to Venizelos the impression his suggestion had made
on the British Government :
“ Lord Hardinge remarked that though M. Venizelos
had declared that he had no anti-dynastic intentions, the
‘ Royal Family ’ was now mentioned in his telegram.
‘ You know,’ he said, ‘ that we are devoted to our con-
stitutional monarchy. . . . We do not like revolutions and
we do not want see thrones collapsing all about us.’ ”
After what we may fairly call the “ de Roquefeuil manner ”
Gennadius replied ;
“ During these last two years the Constitution has
ceased to exist in Greece. We are living under a regime of
absolutism.”
In a later telegram he “ went one better ” than de Roque-
feuil when he referred to Gounaris, Stratos and Streit as “ men
without a country, sprung from nowhere, infamous poli-
ticians,” a gratuitous insult seeing that at this time these men
held no post in the Greek Government. But de Roquefeuil’s
poison had spread wide.
Venizelos now set to work to circumvent the opposition of
the British Government by playing off France against it. On
April 22nd he telegraphed to Romanos, his Minister in Paris :
“ In view of the assurances given at the outset of our
movement we must not appear to friendly Powers officially
to be rejecting all solutions that lie within the limits of the
present dynasty. , . . Unfortunately a radical solution
appears not to find favour in England. If Constantine
would agree definitely to quit Greece, leaving to his son the
task of applying the national policy, it is to be feared that
England would not find the solution acceptable and it
might be difficult for us to go back on it. I hope that
Constantine will not make up his mind in time and that if
in the future he should decide it may be too late ; that the
idea of the removal of the whole dynasty will have definitely
ripened. In your conversation with M. Ribot I beg you to


try to ascertain the real views of the French Government and
convince him that it is in the interest of even the Western
Powers to assist in a quick solution of our Home affairs
and that from now onward we expect, not only that they
shall not impede the ulterior object of our movement, but
that they shall favour it by every means in their power.”
Sarrail was now excusing himself for inaction by the plea
that he was compelled to keep two entire divisions to protect
him from a Greek attack on his rear. This idee fixe , if it was
genuine, was one of the results of de Roquefeuil’s propaganda,
though it is to be remembered that Sarrail was always sensitive
about the real reason—the high proportion of sickness in his
army, and was careful not to refer to it even in conversation.
In M. Ribot’s eyes, the only remedy was to dethrone the King
and throw the entire weight of the Allies in support of Veni-
zelos. On April nth, 1917, the Temps published a semi-
official article—“ Le Dossier du Rot Constantin ,” which would
have been a disgrace to any newspaper. Count Bosdari speaks
of it with indignation. 1 The article was reputed to have been
written by the French deputy who afterwards drafted the
Treaty of Versailles. This fresh mass of calumny was the
reply to the manifestations in favour of King Constantine on
the occasion of the Greek National F £te on April 7th. Nothing
but the strict censorship in England and France could have
kept the truth from the public. The article was followed
almost daily by announcements of islands having shaken off
the yoke of the “ tyrant Constantine ” in favour of Venizelos,
the fact being that French ships of war cut off the food supply
from island after island, and when the people were starving,
landed black Senegalese troops, who arrested the island
authorities and invited a handful of local Venizelists to take
over the administration under the protection of the black
troops. The Venizelists then proclaimed the dethronement
of King Constantine. Count Bosdari is emphatic about these
1 Op. cit., p. 189.


outrages. He says that when the French seized the islands
of Cephalonia and Zante, M. Guillemin requested him to
sign a note declaring that the islanders had “ spontaneously
revolted against King Constantine—a shameless lie which
I refused to sign.” 1
. In all this welter of mendacity it is refreshing to read a
telegram from Prince Demidoff to his Government, dated
April 19th, 1917 :
“ Everyone here is asking what France wants. The
Greeks, I believe, are ready for further capitulations pro-
vided that the King is left untouched. My British col-
league and I are convinced that as long as France is in
command here normal relations with Greece are impossible.
Elliott has suggested to London that Britain should take
control of Greek affairs ; that General Sarrail, whose every
move is to be distrusted, should be recalled, and that the
British Admiral should assume command of the Allied
Fleet. The effect would be very favourable for our cause
both here and in the Mediterranean in general.” 2
A telegram of April 19th informed the Russian Government
that the King had sent for the British Minister and had offered
to change his Government if he was assured that “ the French
are not aiming at his dethronement or an invasion of his
territory ” ; in either case he would be compelled to resist.
Isvolsky telegraphed from Paris on April 21st that Ribot had
at last succeeded in obtaining from Lloyd George and Son-
nino “ liberty of action for France which did not exclude the
possibility of the dethronement of King Constantine,” but he
did not mention the fact that consent to the dethronement was
to be assumed only if there were a massacre of Venizelists in
Athens.
Ever since April 9th Sarrail had been urging the French
Admiral to bombard Athens “ without warning and without
evacuating the population. Open fire,” he said, “on the
1 Op. dt., pp. 189-191.
* Russian White Book, 1922,


royal palace and the barracks, and cease fire only when the
King and the Government have come to surrender to you at
Salamis.” When the Admiral declined, Sarrail became
obsessed with the conviction that the French navy too was
conspiring against him. 1
On April 24th, Isvolsky reported a conversation he had had
with M. Ribot, ending his telegram with a remark of Jules
Cambon, “ Nothing serves us better than to accumulate
grounds of ill-feeling and friction with Greece in order to dis-
embarrass ourselves of all moral obligations towards that
country.” From this it may be gathered that M. Venizelos
was to be made to serve his turn and then be thrown overboard.
As the weeks of the blockade wore on the Venizelists at
Salonica became alarmed about bands of armed irregulars in
Thessaly and played upon Sarrail’s fears by representing them
as a formidable threat to his base. The facts about these
irregulars are interesting. The blockade applied to mails and
telegrams as well as to provisions and merchandise. The
Greeks were cut off from communicating with their friends
abroad ; the Government from corresponding with its
Legations in foreign capitals. The only news that reached
Athens from the outside world was furnished by the ten-
dencious war communiques emanating from the French Radio
Agency. The paralysis was complete. In order to relieve
the tension the royalist General Metaxas recruited a body of
faithful mountaineers, never exceeding a few hundreds, who
knew every mountain path and could traverse the passes as
easily by night as by day, carrying mailbags. In this devious
way the Greek Foreign Office was able to keep in touch with
its representatives abroad, and urgent private letters to and
from the beleaguered country reached their destination.
Nevertheless, the existence of these irregulars was one of the
pretexts of the French for deposing King Constantine on the
ground of their danger to the Salonica army.
1 Sarrail, pp. 238 and 392-3.


In April 1917, the French proceeded to act upon the under-
standing concluded at St. Jean de Maurienne by authorizing
Sarrail to invade Thessaly and seize the crops. For the
moment it seemed to have been forgotten in France that the
object of the war was to defeat the Central Powers rather than
to crush the small neutrals. Alarmed by this new turn of
affairs, the King requested the Lambros Ministry to resign
and called upon M. Zaimis for the third time in two years to
form a Cabinet, he being the only non-Venizelist politician
not yet charged with being pro-German. Early in May,
Zaimis had outlined his policy as one of vast concessions to
the Allies. “I am prepared to tire out France with conces-
sions,” he said to the Russian Charge d’Affaires, but he com-
plained that only the British Minister had undertaken to
support him. He seemed to be aware of the French design
to dethrone King Constantine. On hearing this, M. Venizelos
took alarm ; the prospect of an understanding between the
Greek Government and the Allies would have been fatal to his
plans. M. de Billy, the French Minister accredited to his
party, telegraphed to Paris that Venizelos had begged him to
enquire whether the French Government approved of M.
Guillemin’s efforts to effect a reconciliation with the King.
Lord Granville, who represented Great Britain with the
“ Provisional Government,” had instructions to feel the way
towards a reconciliation, but he found M. Venizelos im-
practicable ; he would agree to nothing short of the abdication
and expatriation of King Constantine. He was good enough
to say that he would tolerate the Crown Prince on the throne,
but that he would infinitely prefer to have a British prince.
His fear of estranging the Allies became evident when he told
Lord Granville that he might give way “ if his friends, the
Powers, insisted.” When Lord Granville hinted that if he set
his face against a reconciliation the Allies might lose their
interest in Venizelism, he replied that he refused to believe
that they could break their solemn promises to him. “If they


should do so I should have to admit defeat. ... In any
case, I could not accept a reconciliation which would be
immoral and disastrous for my country.” This statement
made it clear that the Allies had been inveigled into taking
sides in a personal quarrel in which they had no concern ;
that owing to the false picture of the situation presented by
de Roqucfeuil’s reports, they had “ backed the wrong horse ”
with all the disastrous results that follow such mistakes on the
turf.
Early in May, however, M. Venizelos became uneasy at
the growing coldness of the British Government towards
him, and he thought it prudent to smother his personal
acrimony against King Constantine, and accept a reconcili-
ation “ for the duration of the war.” It must be confessed
that his propaganda against the King was cunningly manipu-
lated. He had, of course, an advantage in possessing the
ear of the foreign press censors who had denied the King a
hearing, but he knew to a fraction the lies that they could be
trusted to swallow. The French newspapers relegated news
from the Western Front to their inner pages and gave their
front columns entirely to King Constantine and Venizelos,
declaring that the Zaimis Cabinet was a trap set for the Allies
by the King acting under the Kaiser’s orders. Even the
Times and the Daily Mail went so far as to suggest that the
King intended to attack the Allies as soon as the harvest in
Thessaly had been reaped. 1
It is a strange reflection that two great nations should have
been distracted from the war during one of its most serious
crises by an Intelligence officer with a schoolboy’s itch for
meddling in matters beyond his competence, and by a wrong-
headed general who was in command at Salonica because nobody
wanted him in Paris. If France had been combed for men
who could have been pronounced in advance as being the most
1 The Times, May Bth and zoth, 1917. The Daily Mail, May 9th and
30th, 1917.


likely to involve their country in complications and discredit,
none better could have been found than Admiral Lacaze,
General Sarrail, M. Guillemin and Commander de Roquefeuil.
It would be unjust to General Cauboue not to add him to the
list, but he came upon the scene a little later.
The inaction at Salonicawas forcing the French Government
to use any kind of compulsion to bring Greece into the war
and supply man-power to Sarrail’s army depleted to the extent
of sixty-five per cent, by malaria. Accordingly, on May 28th,
MM. Ribot and Painlevd crossed to London to obtain British
sanction for a radical solution to the Greek question. There
they encountered scruples and opposition, but they had
provisioned themselves with a choice selection culled from the
files of the French Admiralty, and though they admitted
that scruples might be legitimate, they maintained that the
interest of the Allies must be paramount. The British Govern-
ment surrendered its first line of defence, but stood firm on one
point—that if the King were to be dethroned it must be
without bloodshed. M. Ribot was reassuring on that point;
there should be no military operation except the occupation of
the Isthmus of Corinth in order to prevent the Greek army
bottled up in the Peloponnesus from rallying to the King. It
remained for the Russians to comment on the political im-
morality of the proposed action. On June 4th Teretchenko
telegraphed to London and Paris, “ I think the Anglo-French
plan for a change of regime in Greece is inopportune and dan-
gerous,” and Prince Demidoff telegraphed, “ France’s action
in Greece is not in accord with my conception of political
morality. . . . The Allies are flouting the idea of liberty and
the free self-determination of small nations which they have
proclaimed throughout the world.” 1
1 Russian White Book, 1922.


CHAPTER XV
APRIL-JUNE 1917
KING CONSTANTINE IS DEPOSED BY THE FRENCH IN DEFIANCE
OF THE LONDON AGREEMENT
IN its determination to get rid of King Constantine by
peaceful means, since any other would have been distaste-
ful to its Allies, the French Government turned to M.
Jonnart, a French Senator. M. Jonnart was placed in a
false position from the outset. He announced himself as
“ High Commissioner of the Protecting Powers of Greece,”
whereas in fact he was no more than “ High Commissioner
of the French Republic ” since the British Government had
firmly declined to grant him powers and had reserved the
right to disavow his action in the event of complications.
It had done more : in Notes of June Bth and 9th it had
requested M. Ribot to suspend taking any action through
M. Jonnart in the direction of dethroning King Constantine
—a request of which M. Ribot took no notice. The other
protecting Power, Russia, opposed his mission from the first
and protested against the unauthorized use of her name.
In allowing herself to be dragged at the heels of France
instead of washing her hands of the business England pleaded
that the French Government would have acted alone, which
would have been worse for Greece than if the French felt
that they were restrained by some moderating influence.
M. Jonnart went first to Corfu to confer with Admiral
Gauchet ; then to Salamis, and afterwards to Salonica to
consult General Sarrail before visiting Athens. His plan


had already been formed in concert with M. Venizelos.
The invasion of Thessaly, for which Sarrail had been clamour-
ing, was to take place at the moment of his action. Sarrail
was suffering from an unusually severe attack of the mania
of persecution. Not content with deluging Paris with stories
of Greek conspiracies against him ; of vast supplies of
munitions stored in Thessaly ; of the imminent danger of
an attack upon his rear, he now declared that he had been
betrayed by his British Allies. Their Chief of Staff had been
attempting to elicit his plan of action in order to telegraph it
to London and so bring about its failure. He accused the
British Minister of having “ gratuitously divulged to the
King of Greece what had been decided in regard to him.” 1
On June nth M. Jonnart presented an ultimatum to
M. Zaimis which contained the following paragraph :
“ His Majesty, King Constantine, having manifestly
violated the Constitution of which France, Great Britain
and Russia are the guarantors, I have the honour to declare
that the King has lost the confidence of the Protecting
Powers who consider themselves released from the obli-
gations towards him arising out of their rights of protection.”
Seeing that there had been no violation of the Constitution ;
that two out of the three Protecting Powers disapproved of
M. Jonnart’s mission, and that the guarantee of the Three
Powers in no way entitled them legally to interfere in domestic
politics, M. Jonnart’s ultimatum was a curious document.
On June sth Prince Demidoff had telegraphed to his
Government that the British Minister had received instructions
to urge Jonnart to persuade Sarrail to abandon his proposed
nvasion of Thessaly and to take no action against King
Constantine beyond persuading him to withdraw from Greece
until the end of the war. Two days later M. Teretchenko,
the Russian Foreign Minister, telegraphed to London and
Paris objecting strongly to a change of regime in Greece
1 Sarrail, pp. 230-44.


and pointing out that the two Governments had no right to
take action as Protecting Powers without first receiving the
approval of Russia. “ This fact, in our view, violates the
principle of solidarity which, in the common interest, Russia,
France and Britain should observe.”
On the same day Demidoff telegraphed an account of his
first interview with Jonnart in which he told him plainly that
fanatical French agents had intentionally falsified the facts :
that there would be grave danger of civil war and anarchy if
so popular a King were deposed. M. Jonnart confessed to
him that the absence of proper credentials placed him in a
delicate position in regard to the Greek Government.
On hearing of M. Jonnart’s proposed action on June Bth
Lord Robert Cecil sent a telegram to the British Ambassador
in Paris marked “ very urgent.” “ His Majesty’s Govern-
ment must, if the report be true, protest most strongly against
any such action.” 1 This was followed next day by another
telegram declaring that if the British Government were to
allow itself to be drawn into fresh military complications in
Greece it would be impossible to underestimate the serious
character of the results that might ensue. 2 Probably at no
period of the war was the alliance with France so severely
strained.
As High Commissioner without credentials M. Jonnart
began to tread with caution. He took up his quarters on
the French cruiser Justice and met M. Zaimis for the first
time in the Piraeus on the evening of June 10th. At this
interview he spoke only of the necessity of securing the
Thessalian crop and hinted at the proposed occupation of
the Isthmus of Corinth and he made an appointment to see
him again on the following morning. At this second inter-
view he handed him an ultimatum saying, “ In order, there-
fore, to re-establish the Constitutional verity my mission is
to demand the abdication of His Majesty the King, who will
1 Archives of the French Foreign Office. 2 Ibid.


himself, in agreement with the Protecting Powers, nominate
a successor from among his heirs.” He added that the
Crown Prince 1 would be excluded as “ not presenting the
guarantees which France, Great Britain and Russia were
bound to demand from the Constitutional Sovereign of the
Hellenes.” M. Jonnart’s choice was Prince Alexander, the
King’s second son, just turned twenty-one. One can surmise
how M. Jonnart had profited from his interview with
Venizelos.
On the same day M. Ribot was disturbed by an urgent
telegram from the French Ambassador in London, who had
just learned about Jonnart’s excursion from the British
Admiralty.
“ If the ultimatum is delivered it seemed to me difficult
to justify so inexplicable an act and one calculated to arouse
suspicion of our good faith. I should be obliged if you
would urgently send me instructions. 3
To this Ribot replied the same day :
“ I hope that Lord Robert Cecil will understand that a
disavowal of Jonnart would be of the utmost danger to our
prestige and the security of our nationals.” 3
Jonnart had allowed twenty-four hours for the acceptance
of his ultimatum. Failing acceptance he threatened to
bombard Athens and occupy the whole of Greece, which
would involve proclaiming a republic. He disclaimed any
intention of bringing Venizelos back to Athens, but he
added, “ If the people attempt to resist us, we shall no longer
allow ourselves to be restrained by compassion. I have seen
Arras, my native town, where not one stone rests on another.
If it becomes necessary I shall treat Athens as the Germans
have treated Arras.”
One cannot help regretting that it did not occur to M.
1 King George II of Greece,
2 Archives of the French Foreign Office.
2 Ibid.


Zaimis to ask Jonnart to produce his credentials as is usual
when a High Commissioner acting for more than one Power
has occasion to present an ultimatum. Jonnart’s telegram
to M. Ribot showed that he was not altogether easy in his
mind, for that morning he had learned for the first time
from the British Minister of the British Note of the Bth
objecting very strongly to his action as being contrary to the
London Agreement. Count Bosdari, the Italian Minister, a
dispassionate observer of these scenes, said that in his first
interview with Jonnart he was struck with his blank ignorance
of Greek affairs and his absurd misjudgments.
M. Zaimis immediately sought an interview with King
Constantine. He found him exhausted by moral and physical
suffering due to his long struggle against misrepresentation
which he was denied the power to contravert. A Crown
Council, composed of all the former Prime Ministers and
Party Leaders in the Chamber, was at once convoked at the
Palace. To them Jonnart’s ultimatum was read, and strangely
enough not one member of the Council thought of asking
whether Jonnart had produced credentials. The King asked
each member for his views. More than one advised resistance.
M. Skouloudis was emphatic on the point that the King
and the Crown Prince should refuse to sign abdications.
The Council sat for more than two hours and when the
King announced his intention of leaving the country with the
Crown Prince in order to save it from worse calamities, every
member was in tears. By a curious coincidence this decision
was taken on the anniversary of the day on which the last
Emperor of Byzantium, Constantine Palaeologos, fell on the
ramparts of Constantinople, an anniversary still kept in
Greece as a day of national mourning. This coincidence of
dates (May 29th, 1453 —May 29th, 1917) five centuries
apart, was read by the Greeks as an omen of disaster, yet as a
portent of hope and faith, because tradition has it that the
last Emperor, whose body was carried to Heaven, was some


day to reappear and take up the thread of national existence
which the invasion of barbarians had broken.
“ May 29th is inscribed by Divine Providence in the
history of our nation as a day of resurrection, not of enslave-
ment. And the resurrection shall come.”
These arc the words of farewell a humble citizen wrote at
that time to the King whom Jonnart had deposed, and they
voiced the feelings of millions of loyal Greeks.
As soon as the news spread to the town the people ran in
multitudes to the Palace gates. There were ugly cries:
“ The King is being taken by force 1 ” “ Vengeance 1 ”
There was panic in the streets ; the shops put up their
shutters. Then came a report that the King was dead. A vast
crowd filed past the Palace gates staring at the windows which
were brilliantly lighted. Athens was plunged into mourning.
The churches sounded the passing bell and as the night fell
the crowds began to chant “He shall not go I ” The night
was moonless ; the Acropolis, showing black against the
nocturnal sky, looked like a funeral bier. As the night
advanced the popular anger grew fiercer. A huge crowd
blocked all avenues to the Palace. The gate was thrown
open ; the crowd filed in and passed in tears before the King.
Its spokesmen implored him to reconsider his decision;
officers came to offer their lives in defence of his person.
His reply was that they must restrain their grief in the interests
of their country. At 4 a.m. a car pulled up before the Palace
and the Royal Family moved out to it, but the guards as
well as members of the crowd flung themselves before the
wheels and the Royal party had to go back. Two more
attempts were made, but when the day broke the crowd was
still compactly massed at the Palace gate. It was while
waiting for his people’s permission to leave them that King
Constantine drafted the proclamation which was published
on the morning of June 12th, 1917.


Proclamation.
Bowing to necessity, and accomplishing a duty towards
Greece, concerned at all times only for her interests, I am
leaving my beloved country with the Crown Prince, leaving
my son Alexander on the throne. . . .
In order that my sacrifice for the country may not be in
vain I appeal to you all, if you love God, your country and
myself, to submit without any disturbance. The smallest
disorder, even if prompted by an elevated sentiment, may
lead to-day to great evils.
At this moment the greatest consolation for the Queen
and myself lies in the affection and devotion which you have
always shown me in happy and unhappy days alike. May
God protect Greece !
CONSTANTINE R.
The proclamation did not allay the popular excitement ;
the King was still confined to his Palace by a vast crowd.
There were many who' reproached him in their hearts for
having been too weak in dealing with the French and in
accepting their ultimata at a time when the Salonica army
lay at his mercy.
On learning the state of affairs at the Palace Jonnart took
alarm and had troops landed at the Piraeus on the pretext
that they required exercise on shore. This was a second
violation of the London Agreement. As soon as they were
debarked he notified M. Zaimis that if the Greek police were
unequal to the task of dispersing the crowd he would send
French troops, armed with machine-guns. Fortunately
before any action was taken the King had contrived, by a
feint, to leave with his family unseen by the crowd and to
reach the summer palace at Tatoi. On the following morning
they embarked at Oropus for Italy amid a crowd of peasants
who had come from near and far to take leave of them. As
the King entered his boat they knelt sobbing on the shore,
crying, “ Come back to us 1 ” It was thus that King Con-
stantine passed temporarily out of the picture.
Jonnart had succeeded through sheer bluff. On June 12th


KING CONSTANTINE LANDING AT SMYRNA
IN 1920
KING CONSTANTINE DECORATING REGIMENTAL
FLAGS AFTER THE GREEK VICTORY OF ESKI-SEHIR


he received a congratulatory telegram from M. Ribot ending
with these significant words, “ It is a fortunate conclusion
which will make an end of the British protests. You have
understood from my telegrams that I should have covered
you whatever happened, but it was impossible for me to let
the British Cabinet suppose that from the moment of your
departure from Paris you had agreed with us that the engage-
ments entered into in London should not be kept. After
taking stock of the situation you decided to take it upon
yourself to modify your instructions. Success had justified
you and the British Government owes you acknowledgments
which it will not fail, I hope, to add to ours.”
M. Ribot’s hopes regarding the British acknowledgments
were not fulfilled, since the British Ministers had a nicer
feeling about straight dealing and the sanctity of agreements
than M. Ribot and his colleagues. To crown this inglorious
page of history it should be recorded that Venizelos sent
M. Ribot a telegram of congratulation, thanking him ‘‘ in
the name of Hellenism, of civilization and of liberty ” (sic),
and the Allied Press, which had been justly vocal about the
treatment of Belgium by the Germans, sang a paean of adula-
tion on the success of the French treatment of the other
neutral, Greece.
On June 15th Jonnart celebrated his triumph by pro-
claiming that the blockade was lifted ; that any reprisals
against Greeks, to whatever party they might belong, would
be ruthlessly repressed ; that a new era of peace and work
was about to open and that the Protecting Powers would not
call for a general mobilization. This he signed as “ High
Commissioner of the Protecting Powers,” which he was not.
Nor did he adhere to the terms of his proclamation. De
Roquefeuil had furnished him with a black list of victims,
among them M. Gounaris, General Dousmanis and Colonel
Metaxas who were deported to Corsica. A second list con-
tained about 130 names—among them those ,of Skouloudis
p


and Lambros, ex-Prime Ministers, who were placed under
surveillance, together with a number of less important people
who chanced to have offended one or other of de Roquefeuil’s
myrmidons. The King’s brothers were exiled. Since Jonnart
had disclaimed any intention of interfering in internal affairs,
M. Zaimis was made to sign the decrees of banishment which
was a direct violation of Article 4of the Constitution. It is
difficult to acquit M. Zaimis of an almost criminal weakness
in this matter. The fact was that Jonnart had skilfully worked
upon his fears through a friend common to them both—a
Frenchman named Robert David.
The first of the Allied Powers to protest was Russia, whose
Foreign Minister telegraphed on June 15th, “ Jonnart’s
action having taken place without our assent we consider it
unauthorized and we request you to bring this fact to the
notice of the French Government.”
On June 17th M. Rentis, who had been sent from Salonica
to Salamis, telegraphed to M. N. Politis, Venizelos* Foreign
Minister, an account of an interview that he had had with
Jonnart on board the Justice. Jonnart told him that he had
no mandate to undertake a military occupation of Athens,
without which Venizelos admitted that he dared not return
to the capital ; that he, M. Venizelos, must not underestimate
the importance of the work he had accomplished in dethroning
the King of a monarchical country, a powerful King beloved
of his people, a fact of which he was not aware before his
arrival in the country ; that if this had been known in England
the decision to dethrone the King would never have been
taken. Jonnart added that before he had actually delivered
his ultimatum to Zaimis, he had received a telegram stating
that Great Britain, Italy, and Russia had protested against
the proposed dethronement, but that he had hastened to act
without waiting for instructions from his own Government ;
that Great Britain had demanded his recall and that Ribot
had telegraphed to him that only success had saved him.


On the same day this frank and engaging Senator tele-
graphed to M. de Billy, the French representative at Salonica :
“ The King leaves strong sympathies behind him and
unless there is to be a series of resorts to force, which might
not be appreciated by the Allied Governments, M. Venizelos
must not dream of an immediate return to Athens.”
Subsequent telegrams make it clear that Jonnart’s black list
included a contribution of names from M. Venizelos himself.
At last Jonnart felt himself strong enough to instal Venizelos
in Athens by force. Sarrail had now reached that phase in
all his friendships when the friend became the enemy and
was pressing to have Venizelos removed from Salonica. It
was now Venizelos himself who hesitated: the Greeks had
begun to refer to him as “ The Senegalese ” and he did not
care to face his fellow-countrymen in the capital under the
protection of foreign bayonets. But Sarrail had a short way
with hesitants. He had Venizelos bundled on board a French
warship which brought him to Jonnart’s headquarters on
June 21 st. Even then he was loth to assume power. He
recommended a coalition ministry. M. Ribot, however, had
already taken his decision. Venizelos must be made to
assume power by summoning the dissolved Chamber of 1915
in which Venizelos had had a majority—a strange perversion
of the principles of democracy. The Allies had by their
ultimatum of June 1916 refused to allow the Chamber
of 1916 to assemble because (though that reason was not
avowed) it was known to have a majority in favour of main-
taining neutrality. M. Zaimis resigned and King Alexander
was induced to consent to receiving Venizelos as his Prime
Minister.
On the day that this became known in Athens the yacht
which had carried King Constantine to Italy returned. Crowds
collected shouting “ Long live Constantine 1 ” The French
General, Sarrail’s nominee, Regnault, seized upon this oppor-
tunity. On the morning of June 25th he landed a division


with artillery and occupied the heights commanding the city
and issued a proclamation that any person found armed, or
demonstrating against-the Allies (i.e. Venizelos) would be
shot. To that pass had the neutrality of Greece been reduced.
On June 26th M. Venizelos constituted his Ministry, not in
Athens, but on the deck of a French warship.
General Sarrail does not trouble to conceal his contempt
for the behaviour of the Ministers of the Provisional Govern-
ment at Salonica. After relating the violence that had to
be resorted to for compelling people to serve in the Veni-
zelist army he mentions the desertions that took place almost
daily, either to the forest or the sea, and the rage of the Veni-
zelists when British patrol boats refused to allow pursuit.
Some of the deserters had taken refuge in monasteries whither
they were pursued. It was probably with this excuse that
the massacre at the Isdani monastery by a detachment of
French cavalry took place. This little monastery is situated
about one and a half hour’s march south of the neutral zone
established by the French themselves to separate the territory
of the Venizelist Government from that under the control of
the King’s Government in Athens. When French troops
occupied the town of Servia the mayor, the town clerk,
Socrates Kuyumtzopoulo, and the notary-public, Charalambos
Katsouras, moved to the monastery, as being the nearest point
in unoccupied territory within their jurisdiction.
On March 6th, 1917, a detachment of French cavalry,
consisting of an officer and forty men, penetrated into Greek
territory and arrived at the monastery at 9 a.m. The gate
was still shut. Katsouras, the Notary, went down to see who
was knocking. The French officer in command told him
through an interpreter named Karolos, who had just been
appointed Chief of Police at Servia by the Venizelist Govern-
ment, that he had orders to execute every inmate of the
monastery, and he gave them twenty minutes to prepare for
death. The Notary protested, but the officer declined to


give any reason for his action. Seventeen troopers pushed
past the Notary into the buildings ; seized the Father Superior,
Callinikos, a man of seventy, whom they found making tallow
candles in his cell for the chapel, and searched and looted the
whole building. The only object of value that escaped the
pillage was a cross set with precious stones, which they over-
looked. They also carried away with them two old Martini
rifles, relics of the Turkish occupation and quite unserviceable,
and two sporting guns for small shot. Everyone found in
the building, except the Superior’s mother, an old woman
of ninety-three, was taken down to the yard and lined up—
the Notary, the monastery clerk, a lad of sixteen, the Father
Superior, the Town Clerk of Servia, and four monastery
servants, among whom was Contalexis, the only survivor
of the massacre. An order was given that they should pass
out of the gate one by one. Four troopers were posted just
outside the gate. The Notary was the first to obey the
order ; he was killed by a volley from the carbines. On
hearing the reports of the carbines the lad, Charisios, was
seized with panic and refused to leave the yard. A shirt
was thrown over his head and he was pushed out of the gate
and killed instantly. One by one the others went to their
death. The last to leave was the servant, Contalexis, who
ran past the execution squad at top speed and received a
bullet through both cheeks, but escaped with his life. The
aged mother of the Superior witnessed the whole tragedy.
The detachment then rode off leaving the bodies unburied.
The people of the neighbourhood were too terrified to visit
the place, and the bodies were found lying there by the Greek
authorities forty-eight hours later. The body of the Superior
bore wounds on the face, showing that he had been beaten
with carbine-butts and hacked with sabres. 1
1 Summary of the Report of the Judicial Enquiry held by the Greek
Government.


CHAPTER XVI
JUNE 1917-OCTOBER 1920
VENIZELOS INSTALLED IN ATHENS UNDER THE FRENCH GUNS.
VENIZELOS SWEPT AWAY BY A GENERAL ELECTION
IT was obvious that the new head of the Greek Govern-
ment could not continue indefinitely to govern the
country from the quarter-deck of a French cruiser. The
time had come for his entry into the capital. The French
authorities charged themselves with all the details of stage-
management. Only the hour remained to be fixed and the
chief actor seemed suddenly to be stricken with stage fright.
General Regnault went in search of him and found him in
his cabin.
“ Well, Monsieur le President,” he said, “ here you are
in power. The moment has come for you to assume respon-
sibility. I have the necessary force for installing you in
Athens.” Venizelos thanked him effusively, seizing his
hands, but he added that after all it would always be said that
he re-entered Athens only with the support of the Allies.
He appeared to have little stomach for the adventure. 1
On June 27th the French troops marched into Athens
with machine-guns and closed a number of streets, not even
allowing wayfarers caught in the net to return to their homes.
A fast car dashed from the Piraeus into the town. It was
filled with French officers half concealing M. Venizelos from
the gaze of the crowd. He was driven straight to the Palace
to take the oath.
1 General Regnault. La Cmj&ite d'Athents, p. ioz.


M. Jonnart’s work was finished and he left Athens hur-
riedly on the plea that he had urgent questions to settle about
the food supply and the loan from the Allies, but in fact he
had good reason for haste. He had been recalled by his
Government on the insistence of the Allies whom he had
falsely claimed to represent and he did not want the world
to know it. According to a telegram from Prince Demidoff
on June 2ist Sir Francis Elliot had been instructed to call
upon him daily and to watch and report his movements. He
left behind him a deputy, M. Clausse, who reported to the
Quai d’Orsay on July 13th that Venizelos was becoming
difficult to manage ; that he had attempted to get the young
King, Alexander, to sign a telegram addressed to King Peter
of Serbia in which King Constantine was referred to in
disrespectful terms and that King Alexander had firmly
refused to sign it. On July 30th Jonnart telegraphed to
Clausse instructing him to express strong disapproval of
Venizelos’ action. That Jonnart himself was a prey to heart-
searchings is shown by a confidential letter which he wrote
to M. Ribot on July 22nd. It is preserved in the secret
archives of the Quai d’Orsay :
“ When I had to draw up my report on the Allied policy
in Greece and had read through the formidable dossier
compiled at the Ministry of Marine, I found that the
telegrams of the Naval were full of inexactitudes
and almost always tendencious and that they had con-
tributed in no small measure to mislead the Government
and the Chamber in regard to Greek affairs. lam justified
in stating that matters might have turned out very differently
if M. Guillemin had had the necessary authority or the will
to call to book the military and naval officers who swarmed
in Athens, all meddling in politics. The result was that
when I reached Athens I found everyone giving orders
and no one responsible. The various controls contributed
greatly to the creation of the difficulties with which the
Government has had to contend for a year past. They had
compromised our prestige in Greece, and the British,


Italian and Russian Ministers had reported many times
that French opinion had been misled by the continual
despatch of tendencious telegrams from the French agents
who had entirely escaped from the control of the French
Minister. This has been a far from glorious page in the
history of France. I hasten to end it.
JoNNART.”
Within three weeks Venizelos was urging M. Ribot to
send M. Jonnart back to Athens with a foreign force to
support him, but Jonnart declined. Jonnart’s letter of
July 30th is preserved in the Archives of the Quai d’Orsay.
“ I returned home because I was not qualified to re-
present the Protecting Powers, having no credentials. . , .
I must point out that I have received from London and
Petrograd nothing but telegrams formally disavowing me.”
The evil wrought by de Roquefeuil and his agents lived on.
Their fiction that the restoration of Venizelos to power would
hasten the victory of the Allies was still accepted, but Veni-
zelos had more pressing preoccupations at home. His party
was a minority of the nation and he could no longer count
upon foreign bayonets to support him by daily parades through
the streets of Athens. For practical purposes he divided his
fellow-countrymen into two classes—“ patriots ” which meant
his own supporters and “ traitors ” which meant all the
others. If he was to remain in power at all a terror must be
initiated. It was not long before he discovered that every
anti-Venizelist was guilty of high treason. The Bench, the
Army, the Civil Service and even the Church were drastically
purged. He found judges who were ready to convict his
opponents upon his instructions, but the mobilization of
Greece as a belligerent ally hung fire and it was more than
three months before the first steps were taken to mobilize
classes by territorial districts after massing gendarmes in each
place to deal with recalcitrants. Even so there were mutinies
of reservists who refused to recognize their call to arms


as legal. The mutinies were mercilessly repressed : there
were numerous executions ; the prisons were filled with
political suspects ; barren islands were transformed into
detention camps, in which hundreds of suspects were interned,
and throughout this petty reign of terror the British and. French
Press continued to represent Greece as happy and prosperous.
It is a remarkable fact that up to the date of the elections
in 1920 the smoke screen spread over the doings of Venizelos’
dictatorship had sufficed to keep every newspaper in England
and France ignorant of the position of the number of persons
exiled or kept in custody for their political views. Venizelos
had continued to employ the methods in which he had been
trained by de Roquefeuil. He had an army of well-paid spies
who furnished him with incredible information of plots against
his Government. He had a body of Praetorians called the
“ President’s Guard ” to ensure his personal safety whenever
he should feel compelled to revisit his country. Among the
notable persons imprisoned or confined to their houses under
surveillance were four ex-Premiers—Skouloudis, aged over
eighty, Rallis, Dragoumis and Lambros ; thirteen ex-
Ministers ; four Generals, Prince Ypsilantis, King Constan-
tine’s Master of the Horse, and his Marshal, Mercati.
Among the churchmen placed under an order for seclusion
in a monastery were the Archbishop of Athens, a man of
over eighty ; the Metropolitan of Calavryta, who was over
ninety, besides five other Metropolitan bishops. The number
of civil servants and private citizens arrested was past counting.
M. Gounaris, Generals Dousmanis and Metaxas, former chiefs
of the General Staff, M. Mercouris, a former Mayor of
Athens, and a few other notabilities were handed over to the
French for internment in Corsica. Several of the ex-Ministers
were under process of trial for high treason and three died
as the result of the treatment they had undergone. The
number of civil servants and officers cashiered by Venizelos
was 9,657, to which must be added about 3,000 dismissals


from the Army. During the three years of dictatorship
83 persons were sentenced to death and shot, of whom five
were civilians and the remainder soldiers from the rank of
colonel downwards.
At Naxos the number of persons shot down by Venizelist
agents in January 1917 was over 200, among whom were
killed, 20 men and 10 women (of whom three were enceinte
at the time) ; wounded, about 170, of whom half were women.
The Royalist officers were exiled to the remote islands of
Santorini and Milos.
At Naxos, Lamia, Thebes and the Chalcidic peninsula, as
well as in many other places, prominent citizens and peace-
able peasants were shot down by the Venizelist troops and
agents who did not even spare the women. In Naxos alone
more than 200 were killed and wounded. And yet we find
a newspaper with the reputation of the Daily Telegraph
describing Venizelist martial law as being nothing more than
D.O.R.A. in England.
The Allies were now preoccupied with the events fore-
shadowing the Armistice. They could no longer concern
themselves with internal abuses in the country of their new
ally, where the unclean swarm of spies and informers, who had
fed from the hand of de Roquefeuil, were now making life
unendurable for decent citizens in the interests of Venizelos.
The Armistice brought a rude awakening to that versatile
statesman. King Constantine had stipulated for conditions
if his country were to join the Allies : Venizelos had joined
them without conditions. In the Peace Conference he was
to learn a fact that he ought to have known from past history
—that the victors in a great war are realists before all else
and have no room for sentimental attachments to their small
allies. The Greek army was almost intact ; Venizelos believed
that he could use it for bargaining purposes. He offered an
Army Corps to join the ill-considered Allied expedition
against the Bolsheviks in the Ukraine. The Allied expedition


failed ; the Greek contingent was decimated and the Bol-
sheviks wreaked vengeance upon the Greek colony in Southern
Russia which numbered about 100,000 people.
The Peace Conference dragged on for month succeeding
month. In May 1919 M. Venizelos suddenly appeared in
Paris and demanded a hearing from the triumvirate—
Clemenceau, Wilson and Lloyd George. Jde was admitted.
With a dramatic gesture he produced what purported to be a
Turkish proclamation containing a ferocious summons to the
faithful to massacre the enemies of the Prophet in Smyrna.
Venizelos knew how to turn the document to oratorical effect.
He declared to the Council of Three that they would be
responsible before history if they allowed the horrors of a
Turkish massacre to come to pass. He knew that their
armies were being rapidly demobilized ; that nothing could
be done without an armed force to save Smyrna. Then came
the solution. Let them confide the task to Greek troops and
all would be well. Possibly not very clear in their minds
about the geographical position of Smyrna, they agreed on
the condition that the Greek occupation should be temporary,
pacific and restricted. One would have thought that the events
of December Ist, 1916, at Athens would have taught the
Allies that the landing of armed troops with avowedly pacific
objects cannot take place without results infinitely worse
than the evils which the landing was intended to remedy.
On debarking at Smyrna the Greek troops were fired upon
by snipers hiding in houses and returned the fire ; there
were so many casualties that the Triumvirate was compelled
to send out a Commission of Enquiry. The Commission
presented a confidential report of 300 pages which is pre-
served in the Allied Chancelleries. 1 It seemed to be satis-
fied that the Turkish proclamation on which the Smyrna
expedition had been authorized, was a forgery.
On receiving this report M. Clemenceau, who saw that
1 Conference de la Paix, 19x9-1920. Parts 4 and 5 'with appendix.


the interests of France were in no way served by the presence
of Greek troops in Smyrna and thought it probable that
Kemal Pasha would not long remain inactive, urged Venizelos
to withdraw his troops. In order to save the face of the
Greeks he was disposed to adopt the suggestion of the Com-
mission that each of the Allies should send a contingent
and that all should evacuate the town together. Had Veni-
zelos accepted this suggestion Greece would have been
spared the greatest disaster in her modern history, but he
thought first of his own position in the eyes of his countrymen.
He knew that the adventure was far beyond the strength of
the Greek army, but to abandon it would be the ruin of such
prestige as he still enjoyed.
In November 1919 the Supreme Council warned Venizelos
that the occupation of Smyrna must be temporary. The
French Press was protesting against it on the ground that it
conflicted with French interests ; that Turkey must be allowed
to exist as a State if peace was to be preserved and that she
must be left in possession of Adrianople and Anatolia.
Kemal’s forces were reported to amount to 50,000 men.
Early in 1920 the Millerand Cabinet was formed. One
of its first acts was to modify the French policy in regard to
Turkey. Probably Venizelos would have yielded to the
pressure put upon him if the Allies had been united, but,
according to his account, one member at least of the British
Cabinet had now succumbed to the spirit of adventure. In
February 1920 Venizelos was in London where he found Mr.
Lloyd George more favourably disposed towards him than
the French. On February 16th he telegraphed to Athens
his version of a conversation which he had with the Prime
Minister who complained to him that he had not only to
contend with the French Prime Minister, but with his own
Foreign Secretary as well. 1 A month later he reported that
1 Greek Diplomatic Documents, revealed by the Matin, December
2nd, 1922.


the British Minister for War, acting upon instructions from
Mr. Lloyd George, had asked him whether, in the event of
Turkey refusing to accept the Peace terms, Greece was equal
single-handed to imposing these terms upon her in Thrace
and Asia Minor, since Greece must not count upon help
from either France or Italy and there were no British troops
available. “ I replied,” wrote Venizelos, “ that so far as the
districts assigned to us were concerned, we would undertake
to impose the Peace terms.”
Meanwhile Kemal was not idle. He made a few indecisive
attacks upon the Greeks with the promise of more to follow.
The French Press had now definitely turned against Venizelos,
its former hero, whom their Government had set up as Dictator
in Greece. The Constitutional liberties with which so much
play had been made by M. Jonnart no longer concerned it
and no protest against his postponement of the elections found
its way into the French newspapers. Venizelos was driven
to seek in England the support denied to him by the other
Allies, but this support came not from the Cabinet as a whole,
for the Foreign Secretary and the British Military Staff
shared the view of the French. Italy was believed to be
secretly urging the Turks to resist the Greeks : France was
resolute against sending forces against them. Mr. Lloyd
George, whose motive was to keep the Turks too much
occupied to turn against the newly created Kingdom of Iraq,
alone encouraged him. His optimism took no account of
the factor that the Greek army, operating far from its base,
might collapse with results infinitely more disastrous than
those from which he hoped that Venizelos might preserve
him. A civilian ignorant of military questions and unversed
in the affairs of the Near East, who takes upon himself the
direction of the military plans of a foreign country, is, as the
event proved, inviting disaster.
The Greek offensive launched against the Turks in June
1920 seemed at first to promise well. The Greeks advanced


rapidly. They were within striking distance of Kemal’s
main body when France and Italy became alarmed and
demanded from Venizelos an immediate suspension of opera-
tions on pain of the withdrawal of their mandate. In the
French view the partition of Turkey would have been damaging
to their interests. Venizelos bowed to the inevitable : he
was not in a posture to defy the French while his power at
home was so unstable.
On August 10th the Treaty of Sevres was signed. It was
inoperative from the first owing to the dissent of France
and Italy, and was neither submitted to nor approved by the
Parliaments of any of the Allied countries. That France
should have repudiated a treaty which she had signed was
remarkable seeing that she had become the champion of the
inviolability of treaties {intangibilite des traith de paix). She
was presenting her late enemies with what, to say the least,
might become an awkward precedent in any discussion of a
revision of the Treaty of Versailles. But Venizelos chose to
regard it as a personal triumph and plucked up courage to
face the electorate. On the morrow of its signature an attempt
was made on his life by two young Greek officers in Paris.
He escaped with a slight wound, but the attempt was made
the excuse for a reign of terror by his adherents in Athens.
They assassinated the deputy Dragoumis and looted the house
of M. Skouloudis, destroying its priceless art treasures.
On October 25th, 1920, King Alexander died and Venizelos
offered the crown to King Constantine’s third son, Prince
Paul, who was barely out of his 'teens. The young prince
very properly declined the offer and Venizelos, who had now
imprisoned or exiled the more dangerous of his political
opponents, thought it safe to proceed with the elections.
A week before the polling day he abolished the censorship
and the military control and treated the election as a referen-
dum—“ Myself or Constantine ? ”
The question of obtaining a majority for Venizelos in the


Chamber had been the anxious concern of many of his sup-
porters, it being clear to them that a very large majority of
the voters would declare themselves for King Constantine.
They drew up lists of the doubtful constituencies together
with an estimate of the votes that would be required for
returning Venizelist candidates. With a fine gesture of
impartiality Venizelos declared that the army in Asia Minor
and Thrace would be allowed to take part in the election,
but in point of fact this privilege was to be used as a means
of supplementing the Venizelist vote in the constituencies of
Greece itself. Orders were issued that the men should be
marched to the divisional polling-booth and should there
record their votes under the supervision of trusted officers.
These orders were not carried out in a manner that would
pass the scrutiny of a purist among returning officers, for
after the election in most cases the voting papers were found
in the ballot boxes neatly tied up in bundles. The rank and
file were known to be anti-Venizelist almost to a man and
probably it was thought more convenient that their voting
should be done for them collectively by their officers 1 If the
election results in Greece, which had become known at once,
had been less disastrous to Venizelos and had allowed the
Government time to publish the “ army vote,” this little piece
of finesse might never have come to light : the “ votes ”
thus recorded at the front would have been counted and
would have sufficed to secure a majority for the Venizelist
candidates who were defeated in their own constituencies in
Greece.
Polling took place on November 14th, 1920. This time
M. Venizelos’ calculations were grossly at fault : by a huge
majority the country voted for “ Constantine.” Venizelos
did not wait to complete the formalities incidental to a change
of Government. With no de Roquefeuil to contrive the scenic
effect he slunk out the country. For him the defeat was a
blessing in disguise since it forced him to bequeath to his


political opponents the responsibility for the disastrous sequel
to his Asiatic adventure.
The news of Venizelos’ defeat was a shock to the French
who had been employing their propaganda service to persuade
the world that King Constantine was a tyrant from whom
the Greeks had ardently desired to be freed. It touched the
reputation of many public men in France. M. Leygues, the
French Premier, suggested to the British Government that
force should be used to prevent the King from returning to
Athens, but the reply was discouraging. The British Minister
at Berne had already received instructions to inform the King
unofficially that his Government would not oppose his return
to the throne. Thereupon the French Government used such
pressure that a compromise was agreed to. Two Notes were
handed to the Greek Government, one declaring that the
recall of King Constantine would be considered as a ratification
by the Greek nation of his hostile attitude towards the Allies
during the war ; the other that financial support would be
withheld from Greece.
A few words of explanation about these threats of financial
pressure should be given. When King Constantine was
compelled by Jonnart to abdicate in 1917 Greece was in
dire need of money. Great Britain, France and the United
States agreed to advance ten million sterling each, to which
another two million sterling each from France and Great
Britain was added a little later, but for the sake of protecting
their own currencies they authorized Greece to issue notes to
that amount under their respective guarantees to reimburse
her not later than six months after the signing of peace.
Moreover, it was arranged that the National Bank of Greece
should lend to France and England all the money necessary
for the maintenance of their troops in Macedonia, thus
avoiding the necessity for these countries to export capital
to Greece. The debt of France to Greece on this account
amounted to about £12,000,000. At that time the exchange


value of the Greek currency was nearly the highest in Europe.
Actually, at the moment when Venizelos was defeated in the
elections, Great Britain had paid £6, 000,000 and had repaid
her debt to the National Bank of Greece ; the United States
a little over £3,000,000, and France nothing at all. The
twelve millions in cash gold value advanced by Greece on the
French account out of the twenty-four millions owing by
France, have not actually been repudiated, but a vast number
of counter-claims have been set up for adjudication by the
Hague Court. “ France, on the other hand, has never cancelled
Greece’s debt to her in respect of the munitions furnished to
her and so she is taking with both hands. She is doing to
Greece exactly what she complains that the United States
are doing to her and even worse.” 1
The humour of the situation lies in the fact that as soon
as the Greeks had an opportunity of expressing their views
in an election they threw out the French nominee, and they
were to be punished for it. The principle involved —that a
debtor is entitled to refuse to pay what he owes because he
has taken a dislike to his creditor—is novel.
1 M. William Martin in the Journal de Gerihe, August 17th, 1929.


CHAPTER XVII
NOVEMBER 1920-NOVEMBER 1 922
THE DISASTER IN ASIA MINOR. THE MILITARY DICTATORSHIP
THE defeat of Venizelos in the elections was a startling
surprise to the French politicians and journalists who
had succeeded in convincing themselves and the
public that the man whom they had brought back to power
was the national hero of Greece. The fact was that from
1917 to 1920 the Press Bureau of the Greek Foreign Office
had been spending nearly seventy million gold francs in
subsidies to foreign newspapers for propaganda laying stress
on the genius of Venizelos.
In March 192 1 a conference of the Allied Powers assembled
in London to put an end to hostilities in the Near East by
revising the Treaty of Sevres. M. Calogeropoulos, the
Prime Minister, and M. Gounaris, the War Minister,
represented Greece. The terms proposed to Greece and
Turkey deprived Greece of the military occupation of the
Smyrna territory, but on the whole they were acceptable to
a country which was weary of oversea adventure and desired
nothing more than peace and rest. The Greek Delegation
accepted the proffered terms with certain reservations on
points of detail and on March 10th M. Gounaris handed a
Note to Lord Curzon which concluded as follows :
“ The Greek Delegation has the honour to inform the
British Government in strict confidence that if it should
prove possible for the British Government to secure the
acceptance by Turkey of the conditions laid down in Lord


Curzon’s Memorandum, as modified in the appended Note,
it may count on the acceptance by the Greek Government
of an additional protocol to the Treaty of Sevres defining
the organization of the Smyrna territory as outlined in the
said Memorandum and Note.”
The Kemalist Delegation would not commit itself in
London. The Turks stated that they would have to return
to Angora to submit the proposals to the Grand National
Assembly. Meanwhile Bekir Sami Bey, the head of the
Kemalist Delegation, had rejected a proposal similar to that
contained in Lord Curzon’s Memorandum, communicated to
him privately by Mr. Lloyd George, and it was clear that the
Turks had no intention of compromising. Moreover Bekir
Sami Bey had been busy in secret negotiations with the French
for the conclusion of an armistice in Cilicia and when he was
in Paris on his way back to Angora he threw off the mask
and declared openly that the proposals of the London Confer-
ence could not be accepted. It will be seen that from the
day of his first meeting with the British Ministers M. Gounaris
showed his readiness to help the British Government to obtain
a settlement of the Asia Minor question by negotiation and
so put an end to the war. His real concern was the safety of
the Greek population in the Smyrna territory which the rash
policy of Venizelos had placed in jeopardy. Whether the
problem could ever have been solved by diplomacy in the
face of the intransigeance of the Turks is more than doubtful,
but the catastrophe which befel Greece eighteen months later
was largely due to the fact that members of the British Cabinet
were at cross purposes as regards the British policy to be
followed at this crucial juncture as is shown by the following
incident.
On the day when M. Gounaris was to arrive in London,
March 9th, Sir Maurice Hankey, in a casual conversation
with a member of the Greek Delegation, counselled modera-
tion, saying that the Greek army in Asia Minor should refrain


from any rash action against the Kemalists. This message
had hardly had time to reach M. Calogeropoulos, when an
urgent message from Mr. Lloyd George was brought to him
personally. In substance it was to the effect that the advice
which Sir Maurice had given might be disregarded and that
the Prime Minister (Mr. Lloyd George) saw no objection to
the Greeks undertaking an offensive against the Kemalist
forces if the safety of the Greek army called for it—in other
words, to imposing, peace by force of arms. This secret
suggestion, made behind the back of the Conference, must
have been made without consulting the British General Staff
who had been convinced ever since Venizelos obtained the
consent of President Wilson, M. Clemenceau and Mr. Lloyd
George to his occupation of Smyrna, that the Greek army was
quite unequal to the task. The following extracts from the
diaries of Sir Henry Wilson show what the British General
Staff thought of Venizelos’ chances against the Turks in
Asia Minor. He records a conversation with Venizelos on
October 28 th, 1919 :
“ I told him straight out that he had ruined his country
and himself by going to Smyrna, and the poor man agreed,
but said the reason was because Paris had not finished off
the Turk and had made peace with him. This, of course,
is only partly so. Venizelos is very bitter against the Turk
and said the whole twelve divisions were available if we
would finish the Turk off. He realizes that he is in a
hopeless position and is trying now to sell his twelve
divisions. He begged me to tell Lloyd George that both
he (Venizelos) and Greece were done. I said I would.
The old boy is done.” 1
Another conversation on March 19th, 1920, is described
as follows :
“ Winston and I had an hour with Venizelos this after-
noon. We made it clear to him that neither in men nor in
1 Sir Henry Wilson , His Life and Diaries, London, 1927, Vol. 11., p. 213.


money, neither in Thrace nor in Smyrna, would we help
the Greeks, as we had already taken on more than our small
army could do. I told him that he was going to ruin his
country, that he would be at war for years with Turkey and
Bulgaria and that the drain in men and money would be far
too much for Greece. He said that he did not agree with
a word I said.” 1
Again, on June 17th :
“ I saw Venizelos who is sketchy to a degree. He pro-
mises Lloyd George everything and Lloyd George believes
everything he is told ; but when I come to pin Venizelos
down, he knows nothing and can promise nothing.” a
Probably Mr. Lloyd George was influenced by the opinion
expressed before the Conference by Colonel Sariyannis, the
Greek Assistant Chief of Staff, a Venizelist offlcer who had
served in Asia Minor from the beginning and who now sat
as technical adviser to the Greek Delegation. His opinion
was that the Greek army was in a position to crush the Kemalist
forces within a fortnight, and he declared to the Conference,
in the presence of General Gouraud, that if need be, the
Greeks could pursue the Turks and capture Angora within
three months, thus making a definite end of the Kemalist
resistance. Both the French and the Italian Delegations
emphatically disagreed with him, but Mr. Lloyd George
stepped into the breach and reminded the Conference that
in the spring of 1920 the Greek army had given the lie to
the opinion of the Allied Military Council by carrying out
successful operations against Kemal which the Allied experts
had declared to be beyond its power.
The autograph letter from M. Raymond Poincar£ to a
Greek writer, of which a photograph is reproduced, gives
the French view of the Smyrna adventure.
1 Op. cit., p. 230.
2 Op. cit., p. 244.


[Translation]
The Senate. 30th June, 26.
Sir,
When I sent you yesterday a card of thanks I had not yet
received your letter which reached me this morning. . . .
Mr. Lloyd George in particular and M. Venizelos by a
common understanding plunged Greece into an adventure
of which the only object was to further the policy of
British Imperialism in Asia Minor and which was from its
inception condemned to certain failure. After the question
had been examined by Marshal Foch I warned Greece of
the danger of the expedition. Probably at the moment
M. Venizelos thought me too Turkophil. It was un-
fortunately he who allowed himself to be manoeuvred by
Mr. Lloyd George. But it would take too long to explain
all this in a letter and the facts are so complex that it
would be necessary to supplement your version with precise
details with which you have not been furnished.
Your book is none the less very interesting and again I
thank you for having sent it to me.
Your obedient servant,
POINCARÉ.
The seed scattered by de Roquefeuil was germinating in
strange soil. I have before me the photograph of a secret
document, of which the authenticity cannot be doubted,
consisting of a Minute by General Gramat, Chief of the French
Military Mission to the Greek army, addressed to Lieutenant-
Colonel Collomb of the same Mission then in Smyrna, directing
him to engage and pay secret agents to spy upon the Greek
army and the civilian population in Anatolia. Both these
officers belonged to a permanent Military Mission paid, not
by the French, but by the Greek Government, and its duties
were confined to giving military instruction and advice to
Greek officers on the training of their men when asked for it.
The impropriety—to use no stronger word—of furnishing
them with French public funds to be expended in spying upon
their employers seems to have occurred to General Gramat


AUTOGRAPH TETTER FROM M. POINCARÉ TO A GREEK
CORRESPONDENT ON THE SUBJECT OF THE POLICY
OF VENIZELOS IN LANDING TROOPS IN ASIA MINOR


since he enjoins secrecy and the destruction of all minutes
and telegrams that might bring these proceedings to light.
Colonel Collomb was, however, not so careful as he might
have been in this respect.
Obviously, the information required by the French Govern-
ment was necessary and it was quite legitimate to obtain it,
but men cannot serve two masters and French officers actually
in the service of the Greeks were not the persons to employ.
(Translation.)
French Military Mission Athens, 1/14 April, 1921
Attached to the Greek Army General Gramat to Lieut.-Col.
General Staff. Collomb, Smyrna.
No. 3170/2. Secret.
No. 22 E. In reply to your report No. 53 of April sth,
1921 (including paragraph), I have the honour to inform
you that the French Minister in Athens has placed at my
disposal 1,000 drachmas as a first instalment for paying
Intelligence agents whom you have to remunerate. An
exact account of the disbursement of these funds must be
kept.
Your position as a member of the French Military
Mission with the Greek army paid by the Greek Govern-
ment, requires the greatest -prudence in the selection of
Intelligence agents and absolute secrecy in the employment
of these funds.
The information which you should procure concerns
first the Greek army —military operation, equipment and
morale, but I should also be glad to be kept informed of the
state of public opinion in Asia Minor and its sentiments
regarding the Allied and Enemy Governments as well as
regarding the Greek Government, and the efforts made by
foreign propaganda, etc.
Do not keep files of your telegrams. Destroy regularly
all minutes and telegrams you receive.
The instructions for the use of your cypher should be
destroyed ; the dictionary should be kept by you personally.
If you are experiencing difficulties in despatching tele-
grams (which in any case should be as few as possible), you


should send them through the Consul-General addressed
to the French Minister for me. /r ,. , N
( Signature ) Gramat.
Mr. Lloyd George had obtained from the Allies a removal
of the shackles imposed on M. Venizelos when they debarred
the Greeks from attacking the Turks and warned them that
if they were attacked by the Turks, their counter-attack must
not be pursued more than three kilometres beyond the Greek
lines.
M. Gounaris was thus placed in a difficult position. He
had accepted Lord Curzon’s scheme for a settlement of the
Smyrna question, subject to its acceptance by the Turks.
On the other hand it was now certain that the Turks would
reject it and his military expert, Colonel Sariyannis, was
promising a complete and speedy victory and Mr. Lloyd
George was egging him on, behind the back of the Conference,
to obtain a settlement by force of arms. He is scarcely to be
blamed for trusting to the support of the British Prime
Minister.
This duality of policy within the British Coalition Cabinet
was maintained throughout the Greek campaign in Asia
Minor. It was the main cause of the Greek disaster. When-
ever a Greek success was announced Mr. Lloyd George sang
a paean in praise of Greek valour, patriotism and efficiency ;
whenever there was a check he effaced himself and left Lord
Curzon to do what he could by diplomacy to find a way out
of the muddle. And while Greece was left to feed on words
from the British Prime Minister France and Italy were busy
signing secret treaties of friendship with Kemal and furnishing
him with money and war material.
The end came in the early autumn of the following year.
The Greeks were defeated ; the Turks reappeared in arro-
gance on the Bosphorus and the British Cabinet realized that
the Greek army had been defending British interests in the
Near East single-handed. Mr. Lloyd George was swept out


of office and in one of his first public utterances afterwards
we find him denouncing as weak and inefficient the Greek
statesmen who had fallen because they had taken his advice
and praising Venizelos who had plunged Greece into the
disastrous venture in Asia Minor.
The preliminary Greek offensive against Eski-Sehir was a
failure. The Turkish army proved to be far stronger and
better armed than Colonel Sariyannis had believed. For
months past the French and Italian Governments had denied
to Greece the right to search vessels under their flags and a
stream of munitions had been flowing to the Turks. The
check at Eski-Sehir was purely local, but it made it impossible
for the Greeks to withdraw without admitting defeat. They
called up fresh classes and prepared for an offensive on a
large scale. The morale of the Army had been greatly
improved by the arrival of King Constantine. At first the
offensive carried all before it and after driving the Turks out
of Kutashia and Eski-Sehir, it pursued them half-way to
Angora.
The Greek offensive was held up at the very gates of
Angora in the bloody battle of Sangarios. The Greeks broke
contact with the enemy and occupied positions on the line
Eski-Sehir—Afioun—Kara-hissar. Gounaris was now com-
pelled to explore the avenues of peace on the morrow of a
set-back in the field. He and his Foreign Minister, M.
Baltazzi, went to London in October 1921 and had several
interviews with Lord Curzon and Mr. Lloyd George. They
agreed to Lord Curzon’s proposal to try to arrange for medi-
ation by the three Western Powers. But weeks became months
and the Greek Ministers could get nothing beyond sym-
pathetic speeches and vague suggestions of financial support
that never materialized. The position of the Greek army in
Asia Minor grew steadily worse. The men were suffering
from lack of food and clothing. The Greek Treasury was
depleted. The Turks, on the other hand, were receiving from


the French and Italians war material of all kinds and were
now superior in the field. They had organized a strong force
of cavalry and were now preparing to strike a decisive blow
on the far-flung lines of the Greeks. M. Gounaris now made
a last appeal to the British Foreign Secretary for money to
maintain the Greek army in Asia Minor ; otherwise he would
have no alternative but to evacuate immediately, for the
campaigning season was approaching and the Greek High
Command considered that “ the impending Turkish offensive
would expose the Army to the gravest danger.” A withdrawal
under enemy pressure was unthinkable and it was necessary
“ while there is yet time to take the initiative of an immediate
withdrawal before it is forced upon us by the development of
the situation.”
This was on February 15th, 1922, but M. Gounaris’
appeal brought no response. His position was tragic. He
knew that the Greek population of Asia Minor was now
faced with the prospect of a Turkish massacre thanks to the
policy of Venizelos which he had done everything in his
power to oppose. He was heard to say, “ Were it not for
the fate of these unfortunate people would I, the Prime
Minister of Greece, be in the humiliating position of waiting
on the pleasure of foreign Cabinets ? ” and one day, almost
talking to himself, “ What untold misery has this man not
brought upon his country ? ” “ This man ” was Venizelos,
though he would not mention his name.
Gounaris now demanded a meeting with Lord Curzon on
the plea of urgency, but on the ground that he had pressing
business in the House of Lords, Lord Curzon referred him
to an Under-Secretary. Mr. Lloyd George was equally
inaccessible. Gounaris waited vainly for a fortnight and
then resolved upon the evacuation of Asia Minor. He sent
the preliminary orders before leaving London and advised
the British Government of what he was doing. But before
he had had time to reach Athens a letter was received from the


British Foreign Office in reply to his letter of February : sth
enlarging upon the patriotism and discipline of the Greek
soldiers, and expressing the hope that these qualities would
not fail them at this difficult moment ; that the wisest way
out of the situation was to hasten a diplomatic settlement ;
that it was hoped that M. Gounaris would take heed of the
counsels that might be given him in a spirit of confidence and
good faith. It was an appeal to him to revoke the evacuation
order.
Gounaris, who had been stamped by de Roquefeuil as a
rabid pro-German, was in reality of all the Greek statesmen
the most susceptible to British influences, and this proved to
be his undoing. Once more relying on the words of British
Ministers he complied. Great as may be the responsibility
of Mr. Lloyd George a year earlier, one cannot acquit Lord
Curzon of his share since he induced the Greek Government
to continue a hopeless struggle from which Gounaris might
have extricated her. Both statesmen forgot that war is not
waged with fine phrases but with guns, shells and munitions,
and of these the Greeks had no more left.
The Turks could now choose the time and place for their
attack. The Greek front was in the form of an inverted
pocket thrust into the heart of Asia Minor. The Turks
launched their attack on the Afioun Kara-Hissar hinge of the
position and on August 26th broke through the Greek
defences behind Afioun and poured troops and cavalry
through the breach, thus taking the main position at Afioun in
reverse. The officer commanding the sector where the breach
was made was a Colonel Plastiras, of whom we shall hear more.
The main front being now endangered the troops were with-
drawn to their second line of defence, but this movement was
frustrated by the Turks and for this new disaster the Greek
officer responsible was again Colonel Plastiras. The whole
Greek front now became involved in the retreat, which soon
became a rout. In less than a month the fighting was at an


end and the flames of “ Smyrna the Infidel " proclaimed to
the world that the Turk was master once more.
A full report dealing with the responsibilities for the Greek
disaster has never been published, but the following report of
General Dimaras, Commanding the 4th Division, which gave
way before the Turkish attack, throws some light on the
question.
“ On August 26th, though having received orders to
reoccupy with sufficient forces a few trenches which our
soldiers had abandoned on the fortified position ‘ Mavros
Vrachos,’ Colonel Plastiras failed to take the necessary
action and lost the whole fortified position, thus causing
the first breach in our lines through which the enemy
penetrated and effected the defeat and destruction of the
Greek Army.
“2, On August 27th, though ordered to occupy
during the night the heights of the south of Kiupurlu and
thus to secure the passage over the carriage road from
Afioun to Tulu-Bunar, of a column consisting of the 4th
Division, the heavy and field artillery and the cars and train
of the whole Southern army, Colonel Plastiras failed to
occupy the said heights and also failed to report to the 4th
Division that he had failed, the result being that on the
following day this division was marching in the belief that
its left flank was covered from this direction and suddenly
received a violent surprise attack sustaining terrible losses
and being totally dispersed ; that the enemy having
penetrated our front, cut the Southern army in two, pre-
vented it from establishing itself on its second line of
defences, caused it to lose contact and forced it off its
schedule, thus preparing the way for the capture of most
of its units four days later.”
Leaving aside the actual field of battle it is not difficult to
assign a reason for this dibacle. When King Constantine
came back he found that he had inherited a war in Asia
Minor from Venizelos, and in the laudable desire to let
bygones be bygones he did not follow Venizelos’ example of


retiring the officers who had been disloyal to him. He restored
to the army the Royalist officers removed from the army by
Venizelos, because they had been loyal to their Sovereign ;
consequently the army was greatly over-officered and there
was keen and bitter competition for the commands. Unfor-
tunately Venizclist officers kept up their political propaganda
in favour of Venizelism and flouted the Royalist officers even
in the face of the enemy. The General Staff alternated between
mercurial optimism and the depth of pessimism and their
communiques to the Government in Athens were often grossly
misleading. The troops were fighting in a roadless and
mountainous country. There was a large proportion of
untrained troops and the commissariat was inadequate. The
dry rot of political intrigue was eating into their morale, and
nobody in Athens seemed to know how far the canker had
spread. With an army so officered the first reverse was
certain to have disastrous results. 1 Moreover, Kemal had
become possessed of heavy guns of which the General Staff
knew nothing. In October 1921, the French had concluded
a treaty with him under which they had ceded 80,000 Mauser
rifles, 10,000 uniforms, many aeroplanes and 2,000 horses, a
clause that was strongly criticized in France itself, since if
Kemal had resumed hostilities the French would have found
themselves firing upon men dressed in their own uniforms.
There was besides the psychological factor that the Greeks
fight a winning far better than a losing battle, that they were
badly provisioned and had been under arms almost con-
tinuously for ten years, and that the defeatist propaganda of
certain Venizelist officers had been undermining their morale.
It has been said that when the Greek debacle began, Mr.
Lloyd George advised Gounaris not to ask for an armistice,
reminding him of the mistake made by Ludendorff in 1918.
However this may be, events ran too swiftly for protracted
negotiations. On the morrow of the defeat a group of officers,
1 Towards Disaster , by H.R.H. Prince Andrew of Greece.


intimates of M. Venizelos, whose conduct during the military
operations had not covered them with glory, used the popular
excitement as a cover for their design to march on Athens
under the leadership of Colonel Plastiras. They declared
their only object to be the rescue of Thrace though, as the
sequel showed, their action was directed at bringing their
political party back to power and wreaking vengeance on their
opponents. Having possessed themselves of the town they
called upon King Constantine to abdicate on the plea that
his presence on the throne was the only obstacle to Greece’s
return into the bosom of the Allies, and that France would
intervene to protect her. To make an appeal to France
more acceptable, they invited Yenizelos to return and take
charge of foreign policy, not as Foreign Minister, but as
general director and delegate to the Peace Conference.
The French Press, which had been so vociferous a champion
of Venizelos a few years before, now gave him the coldest of
welcomes, and when he presented himself at the Quai d’Orsay
on the eve of the Lausanne Conference to plead the Greek
claim to Eastern Thrace, he met with a blunt refusal.
The Turcophil policy of France had been from the first quite
independent of the Greek question. In none of the speeches
in the debate in the French Chamber on the Lausanne Treaty
were the names of Constantine or Venizelos even mentioned
as having influenced the course of French policy. After
recalling the fact that Turkey had to thank France for being
allowed to retain Constantinople, M. Herriot remarked that
it was to some extent the fault of France that Turkey had come
into the war against her.
The military revolution of 1922 speedily lapsed into the
worst faults of the Venizelist regime. Venizelos found in it
the means of avenging his defeat in the elections of 1920. It
took the form of a ferocious reprisal which put its authors
outside the pale of civilized Governments. Three ex-Prime
Ministers, two ex-Ministers, and the Commander-in-Chief of


the army in Asia Minor, were arrested and brought to trial,
not before a judicial court, but before a military court-martial
packed with nominees who could be trusted to obey orders.
The sentence they were to pronounce was debated beforehand
at a Cabinet Council, and when one member suggested exile
from Greece as a sufficient penalty, M. Politis is said to have
exclaimed, “ What ? Repeat the comedy of Corsica ? ”
referring to the escape from Corsica of one or more anti-
Venizelists who had been deported thither by the French at
Venizelos’ request. To put such men to death required a
special decree to give it some legal colour, and here M. Politis’
training in the law school in Paris was to come in useful.
Venizelos was absent in Lausanne, but his responsibility for
these judicial murders stands out clear enough from the
contents of the secret telegram sent on November 12th, 1922,
by Politis, the Foreign Minister of the Revolutionary
Committee—a telegram revealed by M. Rentis, his successor
in office, and never repudiated by its author, who at the moment
of writing is Greek Minister in Paris and a candidate for a
vacant judgeship of the International Court at The Hague. It
was addressed to Caclamanos who served as a channel of
communication with Venizelos. 1
Athens, 30/12 November, 1922.
“ Caclamanos, Hotel Alexandra, Lausanne.
“ I think it right to inform you of my anxiety about the
grave consequences that may ensue from the meddling of
the Legations, especially the British Legation, in the trial
of the Ministers of the former regime. More than once the
British Minister has thought fit to call my attention to the
dangers for the pacification of the country and the bad
impression that will be produced abroad if the accused are
condemned and executed. Two weeks have passed since
the publication of the decree constituting the Court Martial
and he addressed a personal letter to me in this sense. I
1 Translated from Frangulis, Former Deputy to the League of Nations.
La Grice et La Crise Mondiale, Vol. 11, p. 482.


explained to him that the exemplary punishment of the
accused was a formal concession to public opinion ; that
the Revolutionary Committee might lose all authority and
expose itself to a check in the work it has undertaken if it
did not bear in mind that all foreign pressure excited public
opinion to extreme views instead of inclining it to moderation
and that under these conditions the only advice of any value
would be that which a government could give freely in the
general interest of the country. This impression has been
strengthened by the attitude shown by the Committee when
the Minister’s letter was submitted to it. The Committee
assured me that it was not disposed to listen to the personal
views of diplomats and that if foreign governments assumed
the responsibility of giving official advice, it would reply in
writing that the English having allowed Constantine to
return, and having exploited that circumstance to push
Greece into disaster, they would run the danger, if on
humanitarian pretexts they insisted upon sparing the
former ministers whom they used to treat as enemies,
of causing an irremediable catastrophe to the country.
Unfortunately my warning had not the desired effect
on the British Minister who, through his secretaries,
has never ceased to exercise pressure on the Revo-
lutionary Committee. Yesterday he made a fresh move
in the line of intervention. He sent me an official
letter saying that he had received instructions from his
Government ‘ to call official attention most energetically
against any barbarous or vindictive action against the
political prisoners.’ At the same time he allowed me to
read a despatch in which Lord Curzon appealed to my
personal sentiments and demanded a written assurance that
in any case the accused would not be executed, and inti-
mated that if they were he would be compelled to remind
Greece that Great Britain was one of the guarantors of the
Greek Constitution and that she would come to an under-
standing with the French Government on the measures to
be taken. I have asked Mr. Lindley to telegraph to Lord
Curzon that I found it impossible to give the assurances
demanded, having no power to decide the matter and that
the Government must be trusted with liberty to bring the


BATTERY OF TWO GUNS MOUNTED BY THE REVOLUTIONARIES ON LYCABETOS HILL COMMANDING
EVERY CORNER OF ATHENS
This battery enabled them to instal the republic and has kept them in power ever since.


Revolutionary Committee to moderation in adapting itself
to circumstances. Fearing the disastrous effect of this
intervention on the Revolutionary Committee, I have
hitherto abstained from communicating it. I have limited
myself to a fresh discussion on the subject with the Com-
mittee in the presence of M. Zaimis, allowing it to be
understood that some step was imminent. The Revolu-
tionary Committee explained the situation in the following
manner :—The first result of the September Revolution
was a return to order and confidence by stopping the
mouths of the followers of Constantine. But the British
Minister’s intervention against the execution of the guilty
persons has resulted in these men preparing for a reaction.
The Revolution has thus been losing ground daily, until
legal prosecutions and the news of a quick judicial decision
restored its authority. The new pressure exercised by the
British Minister, which soon became known in the ranks of
the Royalists, has encouraged reaction and made them more
bold. Believing in their impunity owing to British pro-
tection they are doing everything to sap the Revolution—
corruption of consciences, anti-militarist propaganda in the
barracks, Constantine propaganda among the people and the
refugees. The Committee is convinced that if the eventual
capital sentences are not immediately followed by execu-
tions, at any rate of two or three of the most guilty, it will
be so terribly discredited that it must be dissolved ; this
would mean chaos and civil war between two fractions of
the country with terrible consequences for the national
defence. On the other hand if justice is done, reaction will
be definitely put down, the elections will confirm the
revolutionary work and the country can achieve the re-
organization of its army to suffice for protecting its frontiers
and for eventually participating in the struggle of civiliza-
tion against barbarous Turkey. This conception is absolutely
sound. But there is more. The Committee is no longer
master of the situation. Behind it there are thousands who
would at no price accept its yielding, especially to pressure
from foreigners. They would avenge themselves on the
accused by massacring them. There is reason to fear
excesses even more regrettable. I ought to add that this
R


persistent intervention of foreigners will throw the country
into anarchy. M. Zaimis could not assume power and I
myself should feel obliged to resign. In my view the
British Government does not appreciate the gravity of the
situation in which its Minister has placed it. No doubt he
is actuated by the highest motives and really thinks that he
is acting in the interest of the country. But, rightly or
wrongly, he gives everyone the impression that he has un-
consciously come under the influence of the royalists with
whom he is intimate, just as the Naval Mission which is
intimately connected with them. His insistence has given
birth to a suspicion that his Government is interesting itself
in the accused from scruples of conscience owing to the
fact that indirectly it encouraged them in their criminal
policy. I have the imperative duty of enlightening the
British Government in order that it may assume its respon-
sibilities with full knowledge of the facts. I beg you
urgently to see Lord Curzon and inform him of the pre-
ceding facts by leaving a special Note. If Lord Curzon is
not at Lausanne when you receive this telegram, I beg you
to go without delay to meet him. Will you let me know
urgently the result of your action. The case will be tried
to-morrow and will be short.
POLITIS.”
This insistence on the evil of foreign intervention in Greece
conies oddly from the pen of one who owed his position to
foreign bayonets.
M. Caclamanos, to whom this telegram was addressed, was
a dummy address for Venizelos to whom Politis had to give
an account of the mission entrusted to him. The telegram
was sent on the day before the opening of the trial, if a judicial
proceeding in which the conviction and sentence have both
been decided beforehand can be called a trial. The arguments
are those of a burglar surprised by a householder as a
defence for shooting him lest he telephone to the police;
in fact the motive for the murders was the same as the
burglar’s—fear—that cause of so many of the crimes in
history. The despatch was carefully worded for use with
Lord Curzon.


On November 24th, 1922, the following telegram was
sent to the Greek Legations in London and Paris :
Absolute Priority.
Athens, : ith/24th November, 1922.
Greek Legation, Paris for M. Diomede.
Greek Legation, London.
“ The British Minister has just communicated to me the
reply from his Government on the question which he asked
on Monday evening. Unhappily it is in the negative.
The British Government informs its representative that it
sees no valid reason to change its attitude and that it adheres
to its decision, in case the former ministers are executed,
as intimated to M. Caclamanos in London last week, to
break off diplomatic relations. I told Mr. Lindley that I
could only regret a decision which would throw terrible
responsibilities on his Government. I added that as I had
foreseen, the persistence of the British Government would
force the Government to resign and the Revolution would
be left without leaders or restraints, and thus Great Britain
in her desire to avoid evils, thanks to her attitude, will
herself provoke the greatest evils. I repeated what I had
already told Mr. Lindley ; I told him my conviction that
the policy of his Government in this affair will be strongly
condemned by everybody, since nobody could understand
why, for the lives of a few persons considered by Greek
opinion to have been responsible for the national catas-
trophe, it should run the risk of creating international
complications, and showed that on this point at least, there was
no agreement between the Great Powers—encouraging in this
way Turkish ambition and making the re-establishment of
peace in the East impossible. No one can believe that England
is acting, as she says, in the sole interest of Greece, for in
that case, her friendship ought to give to Greece freedom to
reject the advice given to her and leave her free to follow it
or not. Finally England cannot base her attitude on the
plea of general interest, since France has not joined her in
this protest, and this abstention is the more significant
when in the British Note it is stated that the British Govern-
ment reserves the right to come to an agreement with
France as to the measures to be taken, an agreement which


is not manifested. England, in her desire to impose her
personal views in this affair, has taken up the position as a
guaranteeing Power, but she has forgotten that she cannot
adopt this attitude as a matter of right. She should have
accepted sincerely the corresponding obligations and at my
suggestion Mr. Lindley has sounded his Government as to
whether it is disposed, in case the Revolutionary Committee
should consent to commute the death sentences into depor-
tation, to give guarantees that the condemned persons shall
never again take part in the public life of the country.
The reply was in the negative. Under these conditions
the action of the British Government is not only unjustified,
it is at the same time odious , for it amounts to imposing a
wish without assuming any obligation. History, I said,
will draw a parallel with the attitude of Lord Palmerston in
the notorious affair of Patsifico when the whole world
expressed its condemnation of England.
“ The Revolutionary Committee, in view of the provo-
cations in the British Press, will not hesitate to publish
with the text of the Notes from the British Legation, the
reply that it will make—a reply in which the national Greek
views will be opposed to the views of the British Govern-
ment. The world will judge and Ido not doubt that it will
pronounce against England. In conclusion, I told Mr.
Lindley that personally I regretted profoundly the impasse
in which he found himself, and that while I was uneasy
about the consequences to my country, my conscience was
clear since I had done everything that I could to avert the
consequences which would result. Mr. Lindley had no
reply to make to these arguments and contented himself
with saying more than once that he counted upon the
political wisdom of the Revolutionary Committee.
“ The Council of Ministers will meet this afternoon to
examine the situation and probably it will be fortified in its
decision to resign. I will keep you informed of the resolu-
tion passed.
POLITIS.”
It would be difficult to frame a more disingenuous telegram
than that of this verbose professor of International law.
Apart from its impudent criticism of England, whose attitude


he describes as “ odious ” because she was striving to save
him and his associates from a crime, there was no public
demand for the death penalty from the Greek people. The
demand came from a handful of Venizelists who had seized
the power. “ The world will judge between them and Ido
not doubt that it will pronounce against England 1 ” The
world did judge and its verdict was that the writer of the
telegram and his associates were outside the pale of civilization.
On November xst Venizelos had published in the Greek
newspapers the following declarations : “I declare formally
that I have definitely retired from public life,” and on Novem-
ber 19th, a letter emphasizing that his decision was irrevocable.
This, it may be supposed, was intended to serve as an alibi in
connection with the judicial murders that were to follow.
The court-martial assembled on November 13th. It con-
sisted of General Othonaios as President, and nine other
Venizelist officers unknown to fame. At : 1 p.m. on Novem-
ber 12th, 1922, the accused persons, M. Gounaris, M.
Protopapadakis, M. Baltazzi, M. Stratigos, M. Goudas, M.
Stratos, M. Theotoki and Commander-in-Chief Hadjianesti
were transferred from their prison to the Parliament House,
where a room had been prepared for them as a common cell,
and at 9 a.m. on November 13th, 1922, all the accused
except M. Gounaris were brought before the court-martial.
GoUnaris had developed typhus and could not appear ; never-
theless he was tried in his absence. On the night of October
28 th, though he had a high temperature, he had written
sixty-seven pages of his defence with a pencil borrowed from
his warder. He pointed out to his fellow-prisoners that the
act of accusation was for the most part composed of extracts
from the Venizelist newspapers. The accused objected at once
to the constitution of the Court declaring that their preliminary
interrogation by General Pangalos had convinced them that
the Court was the setting for a quasi-judicial assassination.
Meanwhile the Government, mindful of the devices of


de Roquefeuil, had organized street demonstrations attended
almost entirely by refugees from Asia Minor who, subsisting
on the Government dole, were compelled to take part.
To every objection of the defence the prosecutor replied
that “ the Revolution constituted a legal power,” and that the
Government was exercising the power in the name of the
Revolution, an argument that satisfied a Court resolved on a
conviction, although King George II was still on the throne.
It seems strange that a training in International law in Paris
could not have provided M. Politis with a better argument.
The absence of the principal prisoner through illness would
in any civilized court have invalidated the proceedings,
but the prosecutor declared that its first duty was “ to observe
the principle of celerity ” —a principle which also had been
consecrated by the Revolution. This elastic personality, the
“ Revolution,” might have been invoked to justify calling in
the public executioner without the mockery of a trial, but seeing
that the executions had already been decided upon whatever
happened, perhaps the prosecutor was right.


CHAPTER XVIII
DECEMBER 1922- FEBRUARY 1 923
THE EXECUTION OF THE ROYALIST LEADERS. THE EXPULSION
OF THE KING
A FFAIRS had been moving outside the court-martial.
/% On October 29th the British and Italian Ministers
A m. had represented to the Greek Foreign Minister in
the name of their colleagues that to try Greek politicians by a
revolutionary court-martial for their acts while in office would
produce a painful impression abroad. On November 2nd the
British Minister had pressed for a postponement of the trial
since it would be contrary to the Greek interests if confidential
diplomatic documents were revealed in the course of the
proceedings. Nevertheless, all the secret documents that
seemed to bear unfavourably on the accused were produced,
whereas in their defence the accused voluntarily refrained
from using documents of which the disclosure might have
affronted foreign Governments. As soon as the British
Government became aware of what had happened it requested
M. Caclamanos, the Greek Minister in London, to defer his
journey to Lausanne and return to London, and expressed its
surprise that the Revolutionary Government should have dis-
regarded the British representations by bringing the former
Ministers before a court-martial. Further, on November
15th, Mr. Lindley delivered to the Foreign Secretary a Note
couched in terms more outspoken than is usual in diplomatic
correspondence, writing of the acts of the Revolutionary


Committee as “ barbarous ” and describing the intended
executions as “judicial murders.” The Prime Minister, M.
Crokidas, foreseeing the difficulties that lay before Greece in
appearing at Lausanne as a civilized State with so damaging
an example of her civilization to her discredit, declared his
intention of resigning and leaving the responsibility to the
Venizelist officers. Two other civilian Ministers, Calligas and
Dr. Christomanos, resigned. In a letter handed to the
Cabinet Council on November 19th, Dr. Christomanos gave
the following reasons for his resignation. “ I consider that the
decision to carry out the death sentences about to be passed
is harmful to the national interests and contrary to the pledges
of the Revolution to achieve internal reconciliation.” The
Revolutionary Committee, finding that all its civilian ministers
were leaving, called upon M. Venizelos to send them advice
from Lausanne.
On November nth the Revolutionary Government sent
Mr. Lindley an ambiguous reply, sheltering itself, as usual,
behind the “ Revolution ” ; he requested a more explicit
answer. On the following day the revolutionary chiefs, with
Colonel Plastiras at their head, called upon M. Zaimis and
begged him to take office. Zaimis demanded as a preliminary
the immediate dissolution of the Revolutionary Committee,
and since this condition was inacceptable, the Committee
instructed military officers to form a Cabinet. On November
23rd Mr. Lindley called upon M. Politis to express the
indignation of his Government and of British public opinion
at the indifference shown by the Revolutionary Government
to the repeated diplomatic representations of the Powers. At
midday on November 24th, Mr. Lindley, in the name of his
Government, informed M. Politis that unless the Revolutionary
Government accepted the British view within forty-eight
hours, he had orders to leave Greece and there would be a
rupture of diplomatic relations. The Council of Ministers
met that afternoon and Politis, fearing that he might be held


responsible for the crime which he had advised, announced his
intentin ofo resigning and going abroad. There were alarms
and excursions that evening, and at 2 a.m. the Revolutionary
Committee undertook to form a Cabinet.
Next morning the British Councillor of Legation called to
say that having received no reply to his Note, Mr. Lindley
was preparing to leave. The Cabinet crisis was pleaded and
he was asked to wait for a few hours.
At Lausanne, Lord Curzon begged M. Venizelos personally
to stop the executions. Venizelos promised to telegraph to
Athens, but probably Lord Curzon felt (rightly, as will be seen
from the text of the telegram he sent) that Venizelos was not
at all anxious to save his political opponents from their fate.
Accordingly Lord Curzon sent for Commander Talbot,
formerly British Naval in Athens, and requested him
to leave for Athens at once and intercede personally with the
Revolutionary Committee for the lives of the prisoners.
Talbot undertook the mission on the stipulation that rigid
secrecy should be observed and that the Committee should
receive no hint of his approaching visit. M. Venizelos fully
understood the stipulation and undertook to observe it.
Nevertheless, some person in the Greek Delegation at Lau-
sanne must have telegraphed the news to Athens, for the
Committee knew that he was on his way and took steps
accordingly. According to a statement made afterwards by a
supporter of Colonel Gonatas who had been charged with
the duty of forming a Cabinet, he received a message that
“ everything that was to take place should be carried out
before Tuesday morning,” the day on which Commander
Talbot was to arrive. It appears that one member of the
Revolutionary Committee, Admiral Gerondas, advised moder-
ation and caution, and brought down upon his head indignant
protests from the others. Gerondas left the meeting and sent
in his resignation from the Committee. The meeting did not
break up until late on Saturday, November 25th. The


court-martial resumed its sitting at 3.30 that afternoon. The
President warned the accused and their advocates to cut short
their defence and announced that the Court would sit on
Sunday, which it had not done previously. There was every
evidence of haste, though no one at that time knew the reason
—the expected arrival of Commander Talbot on the following
Tuesday. Politis having resigned, M. Rendis, a Venizelist
official who had shown a passionate prejudice against the
accused as witness for the prosecution during the court-
martial, had taken charge of the Foreign Office. During the
morning the new Cabinet took the oath and during the after-
noon the British Minister visited the Ministers and made very
strong representations against the premeditated executions.
On the evening of Monday, November 27th, the new Ministers
held a long conference on the subject of this fresh intervention
by the British Government. Though there were military
developments in Thrace at the moment a large number of
officers were free to hold long conferences in Athens under
the presidency of Colonel Condylis. They had presented a
resolution to the Ministers demanding the execution of the
ex-Ministers and of Prince Andrd who had been in command
of the right wing of the Greek army in Asia Minor.
Meanwhile the trial had been dragging on for a fortnight.
Only persons provided with cards of admission were allowed
to be present, and only thirty-two of these cards were allotted
to friends of the prisoners. The remainder were distributed
among officers and civilians known to be members of the
Venizelist party. At midnight the Court retired to deliberate,
but the sentence was not pronounced until 6.40 a.m. on the
following morning. It is obvious that a Court which had
decided upon the verdict and sentence before it met, could
not have spent nearly seven hours in discussion. The explan-
ation is that the newspapers went to press at 5 a.m. and
by delaying the sentence until 6.30, the Court hoped to
avert any popular intervention against their judgment. The


prisoners, however, were not allowed to hear their sentences ;
they had been removed from the Parliament House more than
four hours earlier. At 1.30 a.m. a priest had been brought
in by a side door, and half an hour later lorries drew up to
transport the prisoners to the Averof Prison. Just before
they were removed General Pangalos, who had presided at
their preliminary inquisition, had joined the judges, of whom
several were opposed to the execution of all the prisoners. He
trotted out that hard-driven steed—“ The Revolution ” —to
persuade them to an indiscriminate sentence of death. Agree-
ment was reached at 2.15 a.m. and several of the judges
retired. They returned to the Chamber at 6.15 to hear
General Othonaios pronounce the sentence. The hall was
nearly empty ; the General’s voice was almost inaudible.
Having read the sentence he forgot to declare the Court
closed and one of the members had to return to rectify the
omission. The text of the judgment was long. It began
with the words, “ In the name of King George II of Greece.
The Extraordinary and Revolutionary Council of War, having
decided in conformity with the law . . .” It declared the
eight prisoners guilty and sentenced the Commander-in-
Chief and the five former Prime Ministers and Ministers to
death, and MM. Goudas and Stratigos to perpetual im-
prisonment and degradation from their military rank. Further,
it confiscated large sums as fines from their estates and charged
their estates with the cost of their detention in prison.
M. Gounaris, suffering from an acute stage of fever, had
been forbidden by his doctors to attend the trial and was
guarded in a nursing home in Asclipiou Street. No news of
the proceedings in Court were allowed to reach, him, but he
seems to have had an intuition that his hour was at hand, for
on the Monday night he kept saying, “ All will be over to-
morrow.” After his preliminary interrogation he had assured
his fellow-prisoners that though they might be spared he
himself would certainly be executed.


At 2 a.m. the quiet of the street was broken by the sound
of cars arriving and of orders given to troops to close the
street to traffic. Fifteen minutes after the sentence was
pronounced a police officer burst into his room in the nursing-
home and shouted in the presence of Gounaris’ terrified sister,
“ Get up, you ! ” (using the singular pronoun which in Greek
implies contempt) “ you have been condemned to death.”
Gounaris was the only person in the nursing-home to retain
his composure. He tried vainly to console his sister by
saying that public men seldom die a natural death, and that
whether death comes soon or late to us makes little difference.
His temperature was 105 F. (40.6 C.) He was helped to his
feet and dressed while the doctor administered an injection.
He asked for a piece of paper to write his will. It consisted of
only a few sentences, yet it took him twenty-five minutes to
write them. AH he possessed (about £3O) he left to his old
cook in Patras, a small house in Patras to his sister and his
books to his native town. At intervals while he was writing
one of the soldiers kept swearing at him. “We can’t wait
any longer, hurry up.” When he had finished he came out,
supported by his doctor, and was bullied and insulted by the
soldiers. He turned towards them and said, “ Pah I You
assassins ! ” and silenced them. When the ambulance
arrived at the prison gate he was lifted out on the stretcher
which was set down in the rain just inside the gate. Chilled
to the bone he begged to be taken inside the building to join
the other prisoners. This last request was denied him.
Cavalry and infantry were arriving to guard the prison gate,
at which the relations of the condemned men had assembled.
Only the son of the ex-Premier Stratos was admitted, and it
was he who announced their sentences. Some of them were
incredulous and young Stratos could only add that at that
very moment the British Minister was protesting in their
favour. He could get no reply to his telephone calls except
from M. Rendis, the new Foreign Secretary. To him he


protested the barbarity of refusing to allow the condemned
men to take leave of their relations. On this, consent was
reluctantly given for the nearest relations of the condemned
men to be admitted.
At 9 o’clock Colonel Gregoriades from the military council
arrived to read the sentences of the court-martial to the
prisoners. Dr. Vlachos, a kinsman of Gounaris who was
attending him, vainly pressed him to allow M. Gounaris to
be carried into the building to the other prisoners, but when
he represented that it would save Gregoriades a double reading
he consented. The sick man was carried into the room and
placed on a bed. His fellow-prisoners crowded round to greet
him. His first question was about the result of the trial.
Baltazzi replied, “ We six are to die ; Xenophon and Michel
are to be imprisoned for life,” and he added in French, “ All
will be over in an hour ! ” At that moment Gregoriades
entered the room and read the sentences, provoking a smile
from the condemned men when he came to the paragraph
imposing monetary penalties. When he had finished the
relations were admitted and farewells were taken. Lady
Law, the sister of General Hadjianesti, was for going again
to the British Minister, but the General peremptorily refused
his consent. A priest was admitted and all took the sacrament.
The hour approached. Stratos turned to his son and said,
“ I advise you never to enter politics in Greece. Sell all that
remains to us and go and live abroad.” Protopapadakis
enjoined his wife to pay not only his own fine, but that of
Gounaris as well, Gounaris being a poor man.
The behaviour of Stratos throughout this tragic business
is surely unique in the lives of modem politicians. Though
a staunch royalist he had been strongly opposed to Gounaris.
He had joined the Ministry only a few days before it fell at
the outbreak of the military revolt and therefore he was in
no way responsible for the events on which the charges were
founded, but in Gounaris’ absence from the trial he


conducted the defence for his fellow-Ministers and scorned to
plead the fact that he was not involved in the charges
brought against them. His condemnation showed clearly
that the object of these judicial murders was to wipe out every
strong leader who might become a rallying-point for a future
royalist reaction. If “ greater love hath no man than to give
his life for his friend ” the loyalty of Stratos deserves to stand
for an example to the generations of politicians yet to come.
At 10.30 a Gendarmerie officer entered and told them that it
was time to go. Gounaris refused the use of his stretcher and
went out supported by the others. The mother of Stratos,
who was over eighty, clung to her son ; gendarmes roughly
tore her.away and she fell on the floor shrieking “Mur-
derers ! ” Four motor lorries were drawn up at the gate,
two empty, two filled with soldiers. Gounaris was lifted into
the first vehicle and all were set in motion towards the plain
of Goudi where the executions were to take place. It was but
a short distance. The ground was surrounded by troops, or
rather civilians recruited from among the refugees from Asia
Minor—men of ripe age who were the support of the Revolu-
tionary Committeee. Behind them a thin line of spectators ;
the roads had been barred to the public.
The lorries stopped, the prisoners got down. “ Where
are we to go ? ” asked Stratos, “ Into the next world,” said
Gounaris stumbling forward. General Hadjianesti, whose
sentence included degradation in rank, stripped off his own
insignia rather than allow anyone to touch him. An officer
indicated the places each was to occupy ; firing-parties of
five men each drew up at fifteen paces ; all the prisoners
refused to have their eyes bandaged ; they seemed calm and
unmoved, until the shots were fired. In the firing party facing
M. Protopapadakis, who had been Deputy for the island of
Naxos, was a young soldier from the same island. The volley
was fired, but the ex-Minister was not the only man who fell.
This young soldier fell too ; the surgeon was called to examine


him. He had died from heart failure. Most of the island
deputies were treated by their constituents with a kind of
filial regard, and it was as if Destiny had called upon this boy
to murder his own father in cold blood. The executions were
adroitly timed : Commander Talbot, whose hour of arrival
was known to M. Venizelos, reached Athens too late.
On November 28 th Venizelos had sent the following
telegram to Athens :
“ Absolute Priority, 7 p.m.
“Lausanne, November 28th, 1922.
“To the Revolutionary Committee, Athens.
“ During the tea interval of the sitting this afternoon
Lord Curzon, profoundly moved, came over to me with a
telegram announcing the death sentence of the accused
pronounced by the Court-martial and laid stress on the
horrible impression which it would create, not only in
Government circles in England, but also on public opinion
if the responsible ministers of the country who had had
public opinion manifestly behind them when they assumed
power were executed, and added that if this were done the
British Government would recall its minister. Though, as
you know, I am careful to avoid intervening in home
affairs, I think it nevertheless my duty to assure you that the
impression will really be what Lord Curzon represents it
and to draw your attention to the fact that my position here
will become difficult.
VENIZELOS.”
Enquiries appear to have established the fact that this
telegram reached the Foreign Office in Athens at 1 a.m. on
November 29th, 1 and that the conversation with Lord Curzon
to which it refers actually took place after the sentence
and after the executions. That Venizelos had. been kept
in ignorance of such a fact when the wires were open and
even the smallest matter of everyday routine was reported in
cypher to the Greek Delegation at Lausanne it is difficult to
believe. Moreover, the text of the telegram carries internal
1 A. Frangulis. La Grke et la Case Mondiale, Vol. 11, p. 567.


evidence that it was to throw dust in the eyes of Lord Curzon
and the other delegates at Lausanne—the suggestion that he
did not meddle in home affairs ; the air of pleading with
people more powerful than himself instead of threatening, as
was his habit, to resign unless his suggestions were adopted.
The remarkable point in this pitiable message is the fact that,
while shielding himself behind Lord Curzon’s opinion, he
evades giving his own opinion about the executions. To him
it is all a question of expediency; there is not a word of con-
demnation for the crime which the men of his own party were
about to perpetrate ; the worst that can happen is—“ my
■position will become difficult .” One thing is certain, Venizelos
could have prevented the executions if he had wished to do so.
As soon as the news was made public Venizelos gave an
interview to the press, which was published in the Daily News
and other newspapers on November 30th.
“ M. Venizelos approved of the executions of the five
Ministers and the Commander-in-Chief whom he believed
to have been guilty of a criminal betrayal of Greek interests.
. . . He declared that the executed men were condemned
by a legally constituted court and that therefore Great
Britain had no right to protest against their execution.
The British Government and the British public made no
protest when Mr. Erskine Childers was executed. Why
therefore all this indignation when Greece condemns men
who were sworn enemies of the State ? ”
The New Tork Tribune added, “ He declared that if he
had been head of the Government he would have sanctioned
the executions ; that the men executed were traitors ; that
Gounaris was a crafty sophist and that all were criminals.”
It remained for Politis to deliver an apologia for the execu-
tions in the form of a lecture in the Court of Cassation building
in Paris—the kind of apologia that might have been expected
from such a man with some training in law and pleading.
The reader shall not be wearied by a quotation ; he has already
seen the telegram of the lecturer advocating the executions.


THE FUNERAL OF KING CONSTANTINE AT NAPLES


The tragedy was execrated by the Governments and the
press of every civilized country. Great Britain broke off
diplomatic relations with Greece. In the Italian Senate
Mussolini announced that the Government had instructed its
Chargd d’Affaires to suspend any dealings with the Greek
Government. The French Government and the press 1
regarded the murdered Ministers as having been sacrificed
to the policy and personal hate of Venizelos, pointing out that
had the Battle of Sangarios ended differently they would have
been proclaimed as heroes. Greece was made to feel the
universal reprobation in the Conference at Lausanne ; Lord
Curzon refused to see Venizelos for a time. In one respect
only was Commander Talbot’s mission successful. It had
been intended to try Prince Andr£ for disobedience of orders
when in command of the right wing of the Greek army and
execute him like the others, but the effect of the executions
upon foreign public opinion had frightened the Revolutionary
Committee and Talbot was allowed to escort him out of the
country.
The Lausanne Conference dragged on and seemed to be
nearing its end when on February 4th, 1923, the Turks
formulated fresh demands. On this Lord Curzon decided to
quit Lausanne. Ismet Pasha did the same and no one re-
mained except a few members of the Secretariat. General
Pangalos, who commanded the Greek troops in Thrace, took
the opportunity of the rupture for projecting an attack upon
Constantinople and the French had some difficulty in pre-
venting a fresh outbreak of hostilities. On March Bth, the
Turkish Government delivered a fresh Note to the Allies
and the Conference was resumed on April 23rd. An Agree-
ment was signed on July 24th, 1923. Greece was condemned
to lose Karagatch ; the Turks to accept the condition, an
idee fixe of Venizelos, that nearly a million Greeks should be
torn from their homes in Asia Minor and repatriated, though
1 With the dishonourable exception of the Journal des Dibats.
s


many of them had been born in Turkish territory and could
speak nothing but Turkish. Speaking generally the Turks
escaped most of the consequences of having been on the
losing side during the war. The defeat of Greece was a
defeat for the victorious Allies in the Great War.
But Greece had lost more than territory ; she had forfeited
the respect of civilized nations. Instead of being a nation
possessed of an army she had become an army which con-
trolled the nation. According to a Republican law instituted
in 1924, any Greek citizen “who stirs up political passions
by attacking or criticizing or disapproving the decision of any
court which has pronounced death, or other sentences on
persons convicted of high treason since 1922, or writes history
dealing with the actions of the fallen dynasty, shall be tried
by court-martial.’' How many Greeks, historians and
journalists, have rendered themselves liable in the last eight
years to this summary jurisdiction ?


CHAPTER XIX
CONCLUSION
ONE of the first acts of the military camarilla that
seized the executive power in Athens in 1922, had
been to demand the abdication of King Constantine
on the ground that his presence was depriving Greece of
normal diplomatic relations with the Entente Powers. He
complied without resistance and retired to Palermo in failing
health. Thrones were being vacated in many countries
because their sovereigns were unpopular, but King Constan-
tine had the distinction of abdicating twice because he was
too popular with his people. He did not long survive his
abdication, but while he still lived, incredible as it may seem,
the military-Venizelist Government seriously considered the
question of applying to the Italian Government for his extra-
dition to Greece to be put upon his trial by court-martial.
The project was dropped only because it became evident that
the application would be refused. To the credit of the French
Press it must be recorded that the 'Journal des Debats alone
expressed regret that this crowning infamy was not per-
petrated. When the news of his death three months after his
abdication reached Athens his son and successor, King George
11, was refused leave by his military Cabinet to hoist the flag
over the palace at half-mast. So well had de Roquefeuil and
the French Press Censor done their work, that even as late as
1924 we find a journal like the Temps referring to King
Constantine as a “ felon king.” 1 There are elementary
1 The Temps of October 18th, 1924.


school books in France to-day in which he is described as a
“ traitor,” and in Greek schools since 1917 the history of the
Balkan War has been suppressed lest the children should be
taught to venerate the memory of the man who brought them
victory and doubled their national inheritance.
Throughout the year 1923 the situation of the Revolutionary
Committee had been growing precarious. It was composed of
inferior men of no standing in the army, and there were many
Venizelist officers of unblemished army records who chafed at
receiving orders from men who they knew to be unfit for the
posts they had usurped. The movement for overthrowing the
Committee grew rapidly. The leaders of the malcontents
were not self-seeking ; they were for purging the adminis-
tration and restoring a constitutional government. Had they
been successful, it is certain that Greece would never have
been declared a Republic, but unfortunately General Metaxas,
at that time the leader of the Royalist Party, saw in the pre-
vailing discontent an opportunity for assuming the leadership.
He entered into negotiations with the military leaders of the
movement in the provincial garrisons, but found them luke-
warm. His interference damped their zeal, for they realized
that the success of this movement would only serve to bring
General Metaxas to power. They resolved, therefore, to come
to an understanding with the Government and save their own
faces.
The dictatorship had maintained itself in power from the
beginning by posting a battery, of which a photograph is
given, a little below the top of Lycabetos Hill, which com-
manded every corner of Athens. The people knew too well
that the men who had usurped the power and went in daily
fear of a reckoning, would not scruple to open fire on them.
News of the projected movement had reached the ears of the
Committee and in their view a reactionary movement on the
part of the army would prove to be their death-warrant.
In October 1923 the revolt broke out, the majority of the


provincial garrisons rose and demanded the abolition of the
dictatorship and an immediate return to a Constitutional
regime. For several days Athens-was virtually cut off from
the rest of the country, and if the revolting garrison had
marched promptly upon Athens, the dictatorship would have
fallen. But it had become a half-hearted revolt with divided
counsels ; the garrison at Salonica, which had not joined in
the movement, arrived just in time to save Athens.
There were many anxious conferences at the seat of Govern-
ment. It was recognized that the country could not continue
indefinitely to be ruled by a revolutionary committee. Martial
law had been proclaimed ; all royalist newspapers were sus-
pended. The Committee decreed the holding of an election
while under a state of siege.
By this time Greek politicians had not much to learn about
the manipulation of elections. The Committee knew how
the election would go if left to itself and were resolved not to
leave it to itself. On December 9th, a royalist open-air
meeting was authorized by the Government with a fine show
of impartiality. Peasants from the surrounding country
flocked into Athens at an early hour, bringing their wives and
children, meaning to make the meeting a great holiday.
Troops had been sent to the meeting to keep order. There
was a dense crowd. The speakers were cheered vociferously
and the crowd began to march peacefully along one of the
main streets which took them past the offices of the Revolu-
tionary Committee. Alarmed at the great concourse of people,
the officer commanding the troops gave the order to fire.
Fifty people, including women and children, were shot down.
After this outrage, for which the Government expressed no
regret, the royalists made the mistake of withdrawing all their
candidates from the election ; the Government nominees were
elected automatically from first to last, and the military
dictators declared that the “ Sovereign People ” had shown
their preference for a republic. King George was still on the


throne—a rallying-point for every royalist. The country
must be brought to declare for a republic, but first King
George must be got out of the way. On the morrow of the
election Colonel Gonatas sought an audience as a representative
of the Committee, and told the King that the result of the
elections showed a distinctly republican tendency and that the
people should be left unhampered to decide upon the question
of the future form of government ; that it would facilitate
matters if His Majesty would take leave of absence for three
months while the question was being submitted to the people.
The King left with the Queen who was seen to be in tears
when friends assembled on the quay of the Piraeus to bid her
good-bye.
Before the election changes had been made in the balloting
system which made it possible for the authorities to modify
the result to suit themselves ; to reduce the register to a
number of voters so small that the result of the election could
accurately be foretold, and to include the name of every
refugee from the Turkish dominions. More than half these
refugees were illiterate ; they were ready to vote as they were
told to vote. The educated minority were converted into a
privileged class of plural voters pledged to vote for the
Government. Venizelos was recalled from Paris, and Colonel
Plastiras, mounting the tribune, tendered to him what he
called the “ Sovereign right to govern the country.” Thus
Venizelos became President of the Council in the spring
of 1924, but not for long. The thorn in his flesh was a
“ red ” demagogue named Papanastassiou. Following an
altercation with this man in the Chamber, he resigned and
again quitted Greece, leaving Papanastassiou to succeed him.
This worthy formed a ministry of army officers of the same
complexion as those of the Provisional Government. He
promoted all those who had been responsible for the judicial
murders of 1922 to the rank of General. He raided the
Treasury to gratify his military supporters, and on March


25th, 1924, he induced the National Assembly to proclaim
a Republic. It is right to say that a considerable number of
the Deputies abstained from voting for a Republic, but these
he stifled by the promise of a plebiscite. There being no
provision in the Constitution for taking a plebiscite, Papan-
astassiou felt free to conduct one on a fashion of his own.
The army was brought into play. Troops, armed with
machine-guns, were despatched to all the important provincial
centres to overawe the people against voting for a Con-
stitutional Monarchy. A great number of the voters stayed
prudently at home. In Athens itself no known royalist was
allowed to approach the polling-booths, which were inten-
tionally blocked by queues of soldiers. Army lorries disgorged
soldier voters and took up those who had already voted the
right way to other polling-booths where they voted again.
On the flagship Avarof, where there were 300 royalists out of
350, shore leave was granted only to the fifty republicans, who
were shepherded by officers from booth to booth as long as
the daylight lasted. At Zante, where a royalist majority was
feared, officers seized the voting papers, ejected the returning
officers and did their own counting. At Janina, a royalist
stronghold, the Commandant paraded the garrison and
served out to them voting papers already marked “ Republic ”
and ordered them to take them to the polling-booth on pain of
detention in the cells. Even de Roquefeuil could not have
managed an election more skilfully.
Before there had even been time to count the voting papers
Papanastassiou announced officially that from eighty to ninety
per cent, had voted for a Republic. On the following day he
promulgated a decree prohibiting the Courts from hearing
plaints against illegalities committed in the course of the
plebiscite and a few days later a second providing severe
penalties against any person who should contest the legal
sanction of the new Republican regime. Next his hand fell
heavy on the Royal Family, irrespective of age or sex,


depriving them of their Greek nationality and their private
property on one pretext or another, conditions which still
subsist.
The political chaos that followed lasted for four years.
Greece seemed to have slipped back into the political slough
of some of the small South American Republics where the
government of the day is liable at any moment to be turned
out by ambitious soldiers avid for their share of the spoils of
office. With their leaders dead and their rank and file im-
poverished and down-trodden, the Royalists had lost heart.
Public affairs at last reached such a state that Venizelos once
more saw his chance to exchange his voluntary exile for the
reins of government and restore some semblance of order. In
response to an appeal he returned to Athens in 1928.
He threw the Republican Constitution to the winds ; used
military pressure to compel the Government to resign ; dis-
solved a Chamber which legally could be dissolved only by its
own vote ; and modified by mere decree the electoral law to
suit his own party. He then proceeded to an election. This
time he was careful to abstain from the violence towards his
opponents that had disgraced his term of office when he was
brought back by the French in 1917. His public speeches
were an example of moderation. Taking advantage of the
economic crisis he made exuberant promises of prosperity
which within four years would make Greece one of the richest
and most prosperous corners of Europe. No doubt the
Greeks, like other democratic communities, knew how to
estimate the value of electoral promises, but when business is
at a standstill and ruin stares the trader in the face, he is in the
humour to catch at any potential saviour. The people were
weary of military dictatorships and Venizelos appeared to be
the only man who could rid the country of their sway since all
the past and would-be dictators had sprung from his party.
Moreover, he did not neglect the Royalists. His policy was
to bring all the warring parties under his flag. At that time


the refugees from Asia Minor were ready to vote for him
solidly. He was elected and a brand new Republican Con-
stitution, complete with President and the rest, was passed by
the Chamber.
Democracy as it is understood in the Western countries
has no meaning in republican Greece. There the electors do
not vote for a principle or a programme, but for a man who,
if elected, is expected to concern himself less with his con-
stituency than with his followers. Towards these he must
behave like the patron of Imperial Rome. All the “ soft
jobs ” must be kept for them whether they are efficient or
otherwise ; if they abuse their positions excuses must be
made for them. Their only unpardonable misdemeanour is
to be lukewarm in devotion to the leader of their party, and
since their livelihood depends upon their patron it is rare
that they are lukewarm.
Two years passed—two years in which the country was
called to live upon electoral promises. Venizelos had been
dealing in words for so many years that no one had troubled
to enquire whether he had ever made a study of economics.
Of commercial problems he knew nothing. All that could be
said of his administration was that, disposing of a strong
majority in Parliament as he did, it was an improvement on
that which it had replaced. He could put to his credit the
stamping-out of the curse of brigandage, by insisting on the
execution of two notorious highway robbers who had wiped
out a police escort of specie belonging to the National Bank.
In almost every other direction he had failed. His Ministers
were reduced to the position of chief clerks ; he settled every-
thing personally. Most of those who still admire his talents
generally prove on enquiry to be persons who are making a
personal profit out of his Government. Many of the refugees
from Asia Minor have now become property-owners and have
therefore no inducement to truckle to the hand that fed them.
The last municipal elections showed how far he had lost


ground. All governments lose popularity with every week
that passes, but the decline with Yenizelos has been more
significant than with politicians in any other country.
Among the Ministers, the officials, and the Greek public
generally, there has been a decline in standard. Thanks to
the methods introduced by the Venizelist administration of
19 17-1920 commissions for services are demanded, offered
and accepted freely and unblushingly, and with all its grandiose
schemes of development the country is crushed by the squan-
dering of public treasure during the war period. Yet Yenizelos
has never succeeded in freeing himself entirely of the fetters
of the political soldiers. When the former Dictator, General
Pangalos, was sentenced by the Supreme Court of the Senate
to deprivation of rank and other penalties for various mis-
demeanours committed while in office, and officers of the
Macedonia garrison protested vehemently in his favour,
Yenizelos gave way, showing thereby that he relied more
upon the army to keep him in power than upon Parliament.
Yenizelos has been quick to see the writing on the wall.
He himself took no direct part in proclaiming the Republic
for at heart he has never been either Royalist or Republican.
Ir fact he opposed the forced deposition of King George. His
statesmanship has its good side and now that his antagonism
to King Constantine has passed into history, his experience
has brought him to realize what foreign friends of Greece
have known for some time—that the republican regime has
been a failure. One was not therefore surprised to hear him
lately eulogizing the last kings of Greece, and especially the
deposed sovereign, King George. This indeed is the most
hopeful sign in the reappearance of Yenizelos on the political
stage of his distracted country.
It is hard to say what the mass of the electors think. The
peasants, especially the peasants of old Greece, have never
understood why their King was deposed. They know that the
Republic was founded by soldiers and not by them. Probably


they are Royalists almost to a man. The middle and upper
classes are divided. For the most part the army leaders
support the present regime because they hope that their pasts
may be wiped from the memory of the people in the absence
of a king. And yet, so fantastic a jade is Fate, probably it will
be from the army that a return to a constitutional regime
may come. A large proportion of the junior officers are
Royalist at heart, though they dare not let their inclinations
be known. The word “ Republican ”in Greece, has come to
be nothing more than a designation for the Militarist-
Venizelist party. It exists because Venizelos used the mili-
tarists as a stepping-stone to power and the militarists count
upon Venizelos to guarantee their commands to them and to
protect them reckoning for the past. The refugees still
remain an unknown quantity.
If the dead past ever buried its dead affairs in Greece
might drag on as they are for a space, but Venizelos’ popularity
with the refugees has lately received a fresh blow from news
of the terms of the treaty which he concluded with the Turks
at Angora. His methods of conciliation, the extraordinary
concessions he made at the expense of his country and of the
refugees from Anatolia, who have always cherished the hope
of being able some day to return to their century-old homes,
have outraged the feelings not only of the soldiers who fought
the Turks in Anatolia, but also of the refugees. Late in
October 1930, while Venizelos was still at Angora, the Greek
Government became aware of a conspiracy among the army
officers, said to have been organized by General Pangalos, the
former military dictator, to seize the power by a coup d'itat.
The conspiracy was crushed, but the discontent is still
smouldering and the refugees, who formed a solid bloc for
Venizelos at the last election, are bitterly hostile to him. It
will be strange if his influence in Greece weathers the storm
in the elections of 1932, unless in the meantime he contrives
something to divert the popular discontent.


The dead past never quite buries its dead. De Roquefeuil
very nearly succeeded in embroiling France with her Allies.
But for him and those who believed his tales, there would
have been no Venizelism, for Venizelos used the Allies only
as a stepping-stone to power ; there would have been no
expedition to Asia Minor ; no military revolution ; no
deposition of the King. De Roquefeuil was a warning to
Intelligence officers how their work should not be done, but
he had the distinction of having changed the course of history
with results that brought no one any benefit, least of all
himself, and that brought Greece to disaster. There may
have been a prophetic note in the words of King Constantine
to Admiral Mark Kerr at Lausanne in November 1920 :
“ The British are the fairest-minded people in the world, and
when they are allowed to know the truth they will acquit
me.”


INDEX
Alexander, King, installed as King Constan-
tine’s successor, 227; bis death, 238
Allies’ ultimatum to Greece, 123 ; demanding
control of post and telegraphs, 128
Andri, Prince, 273
Argyropoulos, Greek admiral, on submarines,
98
Armed demonstration in Athens, 178 ; secret
orders, t8o; casualties, 186
Balkan War, 33
Binazet, M. Paul, sees King Constantine, 165;
concludes agreement, 167; congratulated
by French Government, 169; his telegram
delayed, 171
Berlin Congress, 1878, 26
Blockade by Powers, 28, 201; censorship of
letters, 205 j growing effect of, 208 ; block-
ade runners, 214
Bolanis, leader of sham attack on Legation,
131; interned, 134
Bosdari, Count, Italian Minister, 150; in
danger from French bombardment, 185
Bratsanos, Captain, induced by de Roquefeuil
to desert, 145
Briand, M., 108, 153
Brigandage, the Muncaster Case, 1870, 25
British Intelligence, 92; inaccurate reports,
122
Bulgaria, flirting with both sides, 43, 50;
Allies truckle to, 58 ; mobilizes, 62
Cacoulidis, Captain, deserts and insults the
King, 143
Calais Conference, 108
Calogeropoulos, Prime Minister, 137; offers
to job the Allies, 138
Capodistrias, first President of Greece, 16
Cardale, Captain, R.N., 49
Cassela, M., Head of French Intelligence in
Switzerland, 198
Cauboue, General, 202; bis. ultimata, 208
Chamonard, Captain, accuses de Roquefeuil,
>94
Champsaur, Captain Maurice; his revelations,
138 ; induces naval officers to desert, 143
Chaumet, M., succeeds Lacaze and calls for
enquiry, 196
Condylis, revolutionary general, 266
Constantine, Crown Prince, Commander-in-
Chief, 32, 34 j becomes King, 36; offers
to job Allies, 54; appeals to Poincarl, 55 ;
his forecast of a stalemate, 95 ; undertakes
to protect Allies while re-embarking, 104;
powerless to surrender arms, 176; telegram
to Kbg George V, 184; summons Crown
Council on Jonnart’s ultimatum, 222;
leaves Greece voluntarily, 224 j death of,
275
Constantine Myth, 72
Constantinople under German control, 40
assigned to Russia by secret treaty, 49
Crete, revolts against Turks, 23 j proclaims
union with Greece, 31
Cunninghame, Sir Thomas, British Military
Attache, 103; conversation with Lord
Kitchener, 104
Dardanelles, Greek staff opposed to plan, 46;
Allies’ failure, 51
Dartige du Fournet, Commander-b-Chief of
combbed fleet, 93 ; ordered to seize Greek
light vessels, 159; instructed to seize am-
munition, 164; demands artillery, 173;
last audience with King Constantine, 175;
recalled to Paris, 19:; ordered to Dinan,
194; awarded the G.C.8., 194
Daveluy, Vice-Admiral, accuses de Roque-
feuil, 194
Delcass£, M., belief in Bulgaria, 34
Delyannis, Prime Minister, 30; assassinated,
3>
Demldoff, Prince, Russian minister, 149;
condemns French policy, 213
Dictatorship in Greece, 276


Dlmitracopoulos, M., declines office, 137
Dulte of Edinburgh, elected to throne, but
declines, 19
Ekaterini, Royal troops sent to, 164 ; attacked
by Venizelists, 168
Election of King, ig
Elliot, Sir Francis Elliot, British minister, 146
Execution of Royalist ex-ministers, 263
Expulsion of enemy ministers, 165
Falkenhayn, General von, bis view of the
Salonica expedition, toy
Ferdinand, King of Bulgaria, his intrigues,
59 _
Fournier, Admiral, judges Admiral Dartige
du Fournet, 193
Franco-British squadron, arrives at Salamis,
127
French Radio Agency, 60
Gramat, General, collects secret information,
247
Gennadius, M., Greek minister in London,
deserts to Venizelists, 206 ; attempts to
penalise royalists, 207; insults royalist
ministers, 2it
George I elected King, 20; marriage, 25 ;
life attempted, 31; assassinated, 35
George 11, King, expulsion of, 278
Germany, demands withdrawal of Greek army,
113 j protests against Greek unneutral acts,
11J; advances on Kavalla, 124; German
agents expelled, 130
Goehen and Breslau , true story of, 37
Gounaris, Prime Minister, 52; executed by
Revolutionaries, 270
Great War, outbreak of, 37
Greco-Serbian treaty, 63
Greece, awarded Thessaly, 27 j population of,
29; offered territory in Asia Minor, 52 ;
offered Cyprus, 82; French proposal to
disarm, 96
Greek character, 23
Greek warships seized, 168
Grey, Viscount, belief in Bulgarian sincerity,
54. 58
Grivas, General, leads revolt against Otho, 18
Guillemin, French minister, 84; under in-
fluence of de Roquefeuil, 92; character,
148 ; censured by M. Briand, 153; secretly
sends Bfnazet agreement to Venizelos, 167
Hibben, Mr. Paxton, American journalist,
113 ; his vindication of King Constantine,
114
Hydra , Greek cruiser, seized by Champsaur for
Venizelos, 144
lonian Islands, restored to Greece, 21
Jonnart, M., French Senator, sent to Athens,
210; presents ultimatum, 219 ; Russia pro-
tests, 219; British protest, 220; demands
abdication, 220; congratulated by Ribot,
225 ; letter to Ribot, 231
Kaiser Wilhelm, telegrams to King Constan-
tine, 38 ; his estate in Corfu, in
Karaburnu, Fort, seized by Sarrail, 112
Kautsky Documents, 38
Kavalla, occupied by enemy, 124 j garrison
transported to Germany, 125
Kerr, Admiral Mark, his opinion on Greek
participation in Dardanelles, 50
Kitchener, Lord, audience with King Con-
stantine, 49; conversation with Sir T.
Cunninghame, 104 j favours evacuation of
Salonica, 108
Lacaze, Admiral, Minister of Marine, 87;
character, 93 ; instructs Admiral to ignore
foreign ministers, 158 ; treatment of Ad-
miral Dartige du Fournet, 173 ; retires, 195
Lambros, Professor, Prime Minister, 162
Lawson, Mr. J. C., Naval Intelligence Officer
in Crete, 155 ; escapade in Cythera, 204
Loan, French, to Venizelos; position of Allied
loans, 240
London Agreement re King Constantine, 217
London Conference, 1921, 242
Mandols, Lieut, de, takes statement from
Bolanis, 135
Massacre at Isdani Monastery by French
troops, 228 ; of peasant electors, 277
Meheraet Ali, reconquers Peloponnesus for
Turkey, 15
Metaxas, General, 50
Military League, 3 1
Military revolution, 254 ; arrests former mm-
isters, 255; Politis advises execution of
ministers, 23;
Mirbacb, Count, German minister, 61


Napier, Colonel, captured by enemy sub-
marine, 152
Nayarino, battle of, 16
Newspapers subsidised by Allies, 61
Otho, first King of Greece, 16, 17; attacks
Turks, 18 ; deposed, 19
Outrages by French coloured troops, 154
Papanastassiou, M., Republican demagogue,
278
Persecution of royalists, 232; Venizelist out-
rages in the islands, 234
Poincarf, M. Raymond, letter, 246
Politis, his inaccurate reports, 103 ; opposes
reconciliation with King Constantine, zio ;
advises execution of ex-ministers, 255
Repatriation of Greeks, 273 ; refugees vote
for Venizelos, 281
Republic, established by fraudulent voting,
279
Revolution, 1843, *7 > 1862, 18
Ribot, M., suggests dethronement of King
Constantine, 212
Romanos, M., Greek minister in Paris, goes
over to Venizelos, 206
Roquefeuil, Commander de, 13 ; appointed
French Naval Attache, 87 ; his system, 88 ;
forms magazine of arms and explosives, 89 ;
attends conference in Malta, 89; correspon-
dence with ministers, 94 ; submarimtis, 97,
112; urges naval landing, 128; settles
peace conditions with von Schenk, 129;
blows up Greek vessels, 129; organizes
sham funeral of victims, 130; plans sham
attack on French Legation, 131 ; induces
Venizelos to leave Athens, 138 ; ridicules
him, 139 ; harbours Greek deserters, 144 ;
appointed director of Allied controls, 159;
demands bloody reprisals, 185; ignores
summons to Naval Enquiry, 194; forced
to retire, 196 ; prepares black list of Greek
royalists, 225
Rosebery, Lord, stops Greek fleet, 28
Royalist demonstration against seizure of
ships, 160
Rupel Fort, surrendered to enemy, 119
Salonica, origin of expedition, 66 ; secret de-
bate in French Chamber, 68; first troops
landed, 69; a political gesture, So; enemy
advance, 84; troubles at, lot
Sarrail, General, 78; military record, 81;
character, 81; fears attack by Greek army,
82 ; factious complaints, loz ; blows up
Demir-Hissar bridge, 105 ; interview with
General Moschopoulos, 106; expels enemy
consuls, H 2; General Cordonnier’s esti-
mate, 187; empty fears of Greek attack,
212 ; urges bombardment of Athens, 213 ;
authorized to seize Thessalian crops, 215
Schenk, Baron von, 59; character, 61
Secret police, Allies’, :52
Serbia, repulses Austrians, 43 ; army trans-
ferred to Salonica, 116
Skouloudis, M., Prime Minister, 83 ; proposes
general election, 86; resigns, 122
Smyrna expedition, 236; Greek advance,
237; stopped by France and Italy, 238 ;
the disaster, 248 ; battle of Sangarios, 249,
251; causes, 252
Spies serving both sides, 91
Sponneck, Count, 21
Stavridi, Sir John, arrives with message from
Mr. Lloyd George, 85
Stratos, M., minister, his execution, 270
Tatoi, fire at summer palace, 136
Tsar Nicholas, comments on French policy,
138, 151
Turot, M., Director of French Radio propa-
ganda, 6t
Uhlans, falsely reported at Larissa, 161
Venizelist demonstrations, paid for by French,
119, 126, 127; mobilization ineffective,
*57
Venizelists persecuted by royalists, 175
Venizelos, M., summoned from Crete, 32;
authorizes coaling of Goeien, 39; offers to
join Allies, 42; resigns, 48; suggests
ceding territory to Bulgaria, 53 ; recalled
to power, 62 ; invites Allies to Salonica, 66 ;
his excuses, 69; bellicose speech, 70;
resigns, 71; angry letter to King Constan-
tine, 73; Gounaris* reply, 74; waning
popularity, 75; opposes election, 76;
secretly advocates blockade, 97; incites
Allies against his country, 109; threatens
to launch revolution, 117; uses de Roque-
feuil to transmit his views, 118 ; condemns


attack on French Legation, 136; obtains
release of demonstrators, 136; lands in
Crete, 155; denies disloyalty to Constantine,
156; demands official recognition, 163; re-
fuses reconciliation with King Constantine,
aij; installed in Athens under French
guns, 227, 230; despatches army corps
against Bolsheviks, 234; produces forged
proclamation at Peace Conference, 235;
his dealings with Mr. Lloyd George, 236,
244; life attempted, 238 ; defeated at
election, 239 ; approves executions, 272 ;
recalled by republicans, 28a
Wilson, Sir Henry, on Venizelos, 244, 245
Young Turks, depose Sultan, 31
Ypsilantis, Prince, proclaims Greek inde-
pendence, 15
Zaimis, M., Prime Minister, 30, 52, 78, 123
215
Zappeion, Admiral Dartige du Fournet’s
headquarters during demonstration, 181
