

ORIGIN AND FOUNDATION
ST. PAUL’S COLLEGE
ESTABLISHED WITHIN
THE UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY
INCORPORATED BY ACT OF THE . LEGISLATURE
1855.
SYDNEY:
FEINTED BY F. M. STOKES, CORNER OF ELIZABETH AND KING STREETS.
1856.




CONTENTS
'7-1-1
Visitor, Warden, and Fellows, List of 4
Origin, Establishment, and Objects, of the College 5
Extracts from University By-Laws 12
Act of Incorporation 13
Affiliated Colleges’ Endowment Act 17
List of Subscribers to the College 21


VISITOR
Metropolitan of Australasia.
WARDEN
VICE-WARDEN
SENIOR
FELLOWS
The Rev. Robert Allwood, 8.A.,
Canon of St. Andrew's Cathedral
The Rev. William Branwhite
Clarke, M.A., F.G.S.
The Hon. James Macarthur, Esq.
M.E.C. and M.L.A.
The Senior Fellows, with the
Warden
FELLOWS
Hutchinson Hothersall Browne,
Esq.
Daniel Cooper, Esq., Speaker of the
Legislative Assembly
EiUyiiw.V Dumaresq., Esq.
Arthur Tod Holroyd, Esq., M.L.A.
Charles Kemp, Esq.
The Rev. George King, M.A.
The Right Rev. The Lord Bishop of Sydney
The Rev. Henry Judge Hose, M.A.
(Lately Assistant Master of Westminster School.)
James Mitchell, Esq., M.L.C.
Charles Nathan, Esq.
Robert Tooth, Esq., M.L.C.
Robert Johnson, Esq., M.L.C.
The Hon. Sir Alfred Stephen,
Knt, M.L.C., Chief Justice
The Rev. William Horatio Walsh,
M.A., Canon of St. Andrew's
Cathedral
i, form the Council of the College.
Thomas Whistler Smith, Esq.
The Rev. William Stack, M.A.
The Rev. Alfred Hewlett Stephen,


ORIGIN, FOUNDATION, AND OBJECTS,
ST. PAUL’S COLLEGE
In the year 1850 was founded, and munificently endowed, by
Act of the New South Wales Legislature, the University oe
Sydney : established, as the Preamble states, for the better
advancement of Religion and Morality, and to extend to
all Classes of Her Majesty’s subjects, without distinction,
encouragement for pursuing a regular and liberal course of
Education. In the same year, the Senate of the University
was appointed; and the Act received the special confirmation
of the Queen in 1851. The duty of selecting its first Professors
having been entrusted to a Committee in London, the very learned
and distinguished Persons chosen by them to constitute the
“ Professorial Board ” arrived in the Colony in 1852; and, in
October of that year, the University was formally inaugurated.
From the terms of a Proviso, in section 11 of the Act,
it would appear that the establishment and maintenance of a
College , in connexion with and under the supervision of the
University, was contemplated by the framers of the Act. Bat,
by section 20, (although it authorises Regulations for securing the
attendance of Students at Divine Worship, at a Church or Chapel
approved of by their Parents,) no Religious test can be administered
to any Student, or person desirous of becoming a Student; and,
although this by no means justifies the conclusion, that. Religious
instruction was therefore excluded, yet it seems to have been
generally conceded, that the duty could not be undertaken—in
any form —from the very nature of its constitution, by the
University itself. It appears, therefore, to have been at an early
period suggested to the Senate, that the institution of such a


College, an Educational Establishment, as the term is usually
understood to imply, with Moral training, unaided by Religion,
was open to objections too grave to he overcome. The idea
of a College, under the superintendence of the University, wavS
accordingly in the year 1852 abandoned; the Provost (Sir
Charles Nicholson) observing, in his Official Report, that the Senate
would gladly see “ that Theological teaching, which the condition of this
Country forbids to a National Institution, and that Moral training , and
Domestic Discipline, which no University is competent to undertake
supplied by Private Establishments within the University, after
the model of the Colleges at Oxford and Cambridge.
Several clergymen and gentlemen, members of the Church of
England, resident in Sydney and its neighbourhood, conceived
therefore, that the opportunity was a favorable one, for
supplementing the University by a College of their own; and
that its establishment, at an early period, in connexion with
the University, would be advantageous to the Church, and
the interests of Religion, and the Community : in order
that, with Secular learning, her pure Doctrines might be
inculcated, and her youth receive the benefits of careful Moral
training, with Domestic Supervision, and Social intercourse, under
judicious regulation and control.
Under that impression, and with those objects, a public Meeting
was convened, and held in Sydney on the 15th December, 1852,
Sir Alfred Stephen, C. J., in the chair, (the lamented Bishop
Broughton being at that time absent in England,) when, with
other Resolutions, - moved or seconded respectively by J. B,
Darvall Esq., M. C., James Norton Esq., T. W. Smart Esq.,
M, C., the Rev. Frederic Wilkinson, M. A., and others, the
following were adopted.
“ That, in the opinion of this Meeting, the Legislature of the Colony,
by the endowment and foundation of the Sydney University, has provided
the means of imparting Secular knowledge of the highest order and
efficiency.”
lhat it is at tlie same time matter of deep regret, that circumstances,
over which the Legislature could exercise no legitimate control, precluded
it from conferring upon the University, in addition to the cultivation


of Science and Letters, the charge of the Religious and Moral teaching
of the Student: —And that it has therefore become the duty of Members
of the Church of England, promptly to make provision for the Moral
and Religious superintendence of their Youth, by the establishment of
a separate College; independent as to its internal Discipline and Rules,
but in permanent alliance with the University as at present constituted.”
A working Committee was then formed; by whom, in the
following month, a Prospectus was framed and circulated; and
large Subscriptions were soon collected—two individuals heading
the list with the noble Donations of £5OO and £525 respectively.
Shortly afterwards, interviews took place between the Committee
and the Colonial Government, on the subject of an Endowment
from the Public Funds; and between the former and the Senate of
the University, on the subject of the Affiliation of the College.
Scruples, however, were entertained by many of the Clergy and
Laity, whether union with the University—as her constitution
then stood was justifiable. To remove this difficulty, at the
suggestion of the Bishop of New Zealand, then on a visit to this
Colony in the course of one of his Missionary voyages, a
conference took place between himself, the College Committee,
and the Senate; the result of which finally was, an alteration
in the Statutes of the latter, having the effect of a distinct
recognition of Religious Attainments, as a requisite to the
granting of any University Degree or Honor.
That object being attained, a public Meeting was convened,
and held on the 29th July 1853, —the Archdeacon of Cum-
berland, and afterwards the Bishop of Newcastle, in the Chair, —
at which all the previous proceedings of the College Committee
were in effect confirmed; a Committee* was elected, comprising
* The Committee thus appointed were as follows. All Clergymen of
the Church of England in the Colony, and the following Lay Members •
namely, Sir Alfred Stephen, and Messrs. Thomas Holt, Charles Kemp,
James Norton, Robert Johnson, T. S. Mort, John Croft, T. W. Smith,
George King, J. F. Josephson, Charles Lowe, W. T. Cape, M. Metcalfe',
T. W. Smart, M.L.C., James Barker, Richard Johnson, Captain King, R.N.,
Charles Cowper, M.L.C., Robert Campbell, M.L.C., John Campbell. James
Mitchell, Charles Nathan, R. Coupland Lethbridge, Arthur Jeffries, M.L.C.,
Edward Knox, George Crawley, H. B. Bradley, J. P. Mackenzie, John
Stirling, H. H. Browne, Edmund T. Blacket, and George R. Hirst.


the same names, with others added; and the “Prospectus” of
the College, forming the basis of the subsequent Act of
Incorporation, was settled as follows being, with slight
modifications, identical with the one formerly circulated.
It is proposed to establish, in permanent alliance with the Sydney
University, a Church of England College, to be called Trinity
College; in which, systematic Religious Instruction, Domestic
Supervision, and Moral Discipline, with elementary Teaching,
and efficient assistance in preparing for the University Lectures
and Examinations, shall be provided for Students of the
University, whose guardians or parents may desire to secure
such advantages for them. —And thus, while their acquisition
of all other useful Knowledge will be facilitated, and that union
of the Tutorial and Professorial systems be attained, which is
so important in Academical Education, the great object will be
kept in view of instilling into their minds a reverence for the
Doctrines and Tenets of our Church, and Learning will be
consecrated, as it ever should be, to the service and honour
of God.
With these views, the following Plan and Arrangements are
proposed.
1. That College Buildings shall be erected, in Sydney
or its vicinity, to consist of a Hall, Chapel, and Library, with
Residences for a Warden and Vice-Warden, and Rooms for
about forty Students.
2. That the government of the College shall be vested
in a Council, to consist of the Warden and six Fellows.
8. That the Bishop of the Diocese shall be Visitor of
the College.
4. That the Council shall draw up Rules (with power
to amend them from time to time as may be thought expedient)
for the management of the College, and the ordering of all
things therein to the furtherance of true Religion and Learning.


5. That the Warden, who shall be a Clergyman in Priests’
Orders, shall be appointed by the six Fellows, and the Vice-
Warden be appointed by the Warden; such Vice-Warden, in
the Warden’s absence, to have all the powers and discharge the
duties of the Warden.
6. That, in the first instance, the Warden be selected in
England by the Professor of Modern History in the University
of Cambridge, Sir James Stephen; the Principal of King’s
College, London, Dr. R. W. Jelf; and the Margaret Professor
of Divinity in the of Cambridge, the Rev. J. J.
Blunt.
7. That there shall be eighteen Fellows belonging to the
College, of whom six shall be Clergymen in Priests’ Orders.
8. That, when a Church Constitution shall have been
legally established, the Clerical members resident in the College
shall be subject to all such regulations, as may then be enacted
for the government of the Clergy in general.
9. That the first eighteen Fellows shall be elected by the
Subscribers; and that all vacancies in their number, by
resignation or otherwise, shall be supplied by Graduates of the
University continuing on the books of the College. Provided
that, until there shall be twenty such Graduates at the least,
all vacancies among the Fellows shall be supplied by the
remaining Fellows, by election, in such manner as they may
appoint.
10. That the six Fellows, members of the Council, who
shall be called Senior Fellows, shall be elected by the eighteen
Fellows from their own body; all vacancies being supplied in
like manner.
11. That of such Senior Fellows, three shall he Clergymen
in Priests’ Orders, and three Laymen.


12. That the said six Fellows shall every second year
(or oftener, if need l>e) elect a Bursar, who shall have the
control and administration of the revenues and disbursements
of the College. The Bursar to be always capable of re-election.
13. That the Wardens (subject to any Eules made by the
Council) shall have the general superintendence and control of
the Students and of the Institution.
14. That arrangements shall be made, for the establishment
of a School in connexion wiidi the College, under such regu-
lations and supervision as the Council shall appoint.
15. That an Act shall be sought from the Legislature,
for the permanent settlement and continuance of the College,
upon the Foundation and for the purposes here indicated, by
Incorporation or otherwise, as may be thought most desirable.
The name originally proposed for the College, by its projectors,
(whose subscriptions, up to July 1853, exceeded £6000,) was
Queens College. For this, the Eesolutions of that date
proposed to substitute Trinity College. It was finally determined,
however, by an almost unanimous vote of the Subscribers, that
the name should be St. Paul’s College.
The Colonial Government had agreed, early in 1854, to
recommend to the Legislature an Annual Grant of £5OO a year,
in perpetuity, for the use of the Principal of every College,
which might be thereafter founded .by any Eeligious Denomination
within the University. To this, upon the motion of Charles
Cowper, Esq., M.C., on the 2nd November 1854, was added
the munificent Endowment of £20,000, in aid of the Building
Fund of every such College; on condition, that the sums actually
paid out of that amount should be met by an equal expenditure,
on the Buildings, (exclusively,) by the supporters of the College’.
In December 1855, the £IO,OOO stipulated by the Act
incorporating the College having been subscribed, the
Fellows were elected. At the request of the Senior Fellows


the Venerable Archdeacon Cowper accepted the temporary
appointment of Warden; and, in Jarruary 1856, the Incorporation
of the College was proclaimed. On St. Paul’s Day, the
Foundation Stone of the College Buildings, the Lord Bishop of
Sydney, the Provost and Senate of the University, and the Warden
and Fellows of the College being present, was laid by His Excellency
Sir William Denison: and, in June following, the Referees
appointed for that purpose (the Rev. William Selwyn, 8.D., the
new Margaret Professor at Cambridge, taking the place of his
predecessor, the late Professor Blunt,) selected for the office of
Warden the Rev. Henry Judge Hose, M. A., Assistant Master
of Westminster School, and late Scholar of Trinity College,
Cambridge.
At the date of the writing of this summary, (November 1856,)
the Subscriptions amount to £12,000 and upwards; of which,
however, all is not payable immediately. Contracts have been
entered into, aided by the Statutory contribution to an equal
amount, for the completion of a large portion of the Buildings,
comprising the Hall and Library, with accommodation for the
Warden and his family, and 30 Students. And it is hoped
that, in May next, the College will be ready for their reception.
May it be the means, by the blessing of Almighty God, year
after year, with the University to which it is attached, of
extending the inestimable benefits of systematic Religious training,
with Domestic supervision, and Secular instruction of the highest
order, throughout the community.
Sydney,
20 November 1856.


EXTRACTS EROM UNIVERSITY BY-LAWS.
43. Every Student belonging to a College in the University shall be
required to produce a Certificate of competent Religious Attainment,
from the Principal of such College, before he shall be entitled to any
Honor or Degree in the University.
44. Every Student not belonging to a College, before he shall be entitled
to any Honor or Degree, shall be required to produce a like Certificate,
from a Religious Teacher of the Denomination to which he belongs,
or from some other responsible person, whom the Senate of the University
may in each case accredit for that purpose.
46. The Degree of B.A. shall be conferred after Examination, which
shall take place once a year, at the close of Michaelmas Term.
47. No Candidate shall be admitted to this Examination, unless he
produce a Certificate from the Dean of the Faculty of Arts, of having
been a Student during three years at the University, and of having
complied with its Regulations. This Certificate shall be transmitted
to the Registrar, before the day appointed for the commencement of the
Examination.
50. To obtain the ordinary Degree of 8.A., the Candidate shall pass
a satisfactory Examination in Greek, Latin, Mathematics, Natural Philo-
sophy, Chemistry, Experimental Physics, and Logic.
59. The following twelve Scholarships are established in the Uni-
versity, viz.:—
Nine of the annual value of £5O each, provided from the University
chest.
One of the annual value of £5O, founded by Thomas Barker, Esquire.
One of the annual value of not less than £5O, founded by the
Honorable Edward Deas Thomson, Esquire.
One of the annual value of £3O, founded in pursuance of the bequest
of the late Solomon Levy, Esquire.
60. The above Scholarships, tenable for one year, shall be awarded,
after Examination, in the following manner:—
To Undergraduates of the first year, three Scholarships, viz. :—The
Levy Scholarship. Two University Scholarships.
To Undergraduates of the second year, three University Scholarships.


To Undergraduates of the third year, six Scholarships : viz.:—Three
University Scholarships for general proficiency ; —and three Special Scholar-
ships; viz.: One University Scholarship, for proficiency in Classics.—
The Barker Scholarship, for proficiency in Mathematics and Natural
Philosophy.—The Deas Thomson Scholarship, for proficiency in Chemistry
and Experimental Physics.
No Student of the first or second jear shall hold more than one
Scholarship; but a Student of the third year may hold one, or more, of
the three Special Scholarships, with an ordinary University Scholarship.
61. None of the above Scholarships shall be awarded, except to such
Candidates as exhibit a degree of proficiency which shall be satisfactory
to the Examiners.
ANNO DECIMO OCTAVO YICTORLE REGINHC.
An Act to Incorpoiate Saint Paul s College, as a College within
the University of Sydney.
[Assented to, Ist December, 1854.]
WHEREAS considerable funds have been subscribed for the Institu- Preamble,
tion and Endowment, in the Diocese of Sydney, of a College within the
University of Sydney, in connexion with the United Church of England
and Ireland, to be called Saint Paul’s College, wherein due Religious
Instruction in accordance with the Doctrines and Discipline of that
Church shall be afforded, and provision be made, as soon as may be
practicable, for the Residence of Students, under proper Academical
control: And whereas it is expedient that the said College (to be
governed by a Council consisting of the persons hereinafter mentioned)
should be incorporated: Be it therefore enacted by His Excellency the
Governor of New South Wales, with the advice and consent of the
Legislative Council thereof, as follows:
I. So soon as it shall be made to appear to the satisfaction of the 0olIe?e i,>
Governor, that a sum of not less than ten thousand pounds has been cor P° r &tea.
subscribed or contributed for the Endowment aforesaid, and that the
amount has either been paid, or secured to be paid, for that purpose,
and that a Warden and six Fellows for the government of the said
College, in accordance with the constitution thereof, as in this Act set
forth, have been duly appointed and elected respectively, the same shall


be notified by Proclamation in the New South Wales Government Gazette ,
under the hand of the Governor; and immediately upon such notification,
and from thenceforth, the Warden and Fellows of the same College shall
be, and they are hereby constituted a Body Politic and Corporate, by
the name of “ The Warden and Fellows of Saint Paul’s College”—by wffiich
name the said incorporated body shall have perpetual succession, and shall
have a Common Seal, and shall sue and be sued, or otherwise appear,
and answer and be answered ; and may take and hold, to them and their
successors, by grant, will, or otherwise, in perpetuity, or for any term
of life or years, as well chattels and other personal property, as lands,
buildings, and other hereditaments, and the same or any part thereof
may alien, or otherwise dispose of, or demise; and also shall or may
do all other things incident or appertaining to a Body Politic and
Corporate.
rasposai of 11. Provided always, That it shall not be lawful for the said Cor-
from S the I ' Ved poration, or any persons or person seized of or entitled to lands in trust
Crown. f or the Corporation, or for the purposes of the College, to alienate,
mortgage, charge, or demise any lands or hereditaments granted to or
in trust for the Corporation, or for College purposes, by Her Majesty or
Her Successors, without the consent in writing of the Governor, with
the advice of the Executive Council, for the time being.
Corporation 111. The said Body Politic and Corporate shall consist of a Warden
amt Council. an( j eighteen Fellows, of w r hom six shall always be Clergymen in Priests'
Orders of the United Church of England and Ireland, and twelve shall be
Laymen; which said eighteen Fellows shall elect six from their own
body, to be called Senior Fellows, who shall appoint the Warden, who
shall not be one of themselves; and the Warden and six. Senior Fellow's
for the time being shall together form a Council, to be called “ The
Council of Saint Paul’s College,” in wffiich shall be vested at all times
the government in every respect of the College, and all matters relating
thereto.
IV. The Bishop of the Diocese of Sydney shall be Visitor of the
College, with all such powers as by law appertain to the office of Visitor
of a College.
Warden. V. The Warden shall always be a Clergyman in Priests’ Orders of
the aforesaid United Church ; and he shall have power to appoint a Vice-
Warden, who shall in the Warden’s absence have all the powers and
discharge all the duties of the Warden.
Removal, VI. The Warden and Vice-Warden shall be respectively liable to
removal or suspension, for sufficient cause, by the Senior Fellows, subject


to an appeal to the Visitor; and the Vice-Warden shall also be liable
to removal or suspension by the Warden, subject to an appeal to the
Senior Fellows.
VII. Of the Senior Fellows, three shall always he Clergymen in senior
Priests’ Orders as aforesaid, and the other three shall be Laymen.
VIII. All vacancies in the office of Warden, or in the number of Vacancies.
Fellows, or Senior Fellows, occasioned by death, resignation, removal, or
other cause, shall, as soon as conveniently may be after the vacancy, (on
notification of the fact under the hand of two Fellows, or Senior Fellows,
to the other Fellows and Senior Fellows,) be supplied in the manner
following, that is to say—in the office of Warden by the Senior Fellows;
in the office or place of Senior Fellow, by the twelve other Fellows, from
their own body; and in the place or post of Fellow, by the remaining
Fellows.'
IX. Provided that the first eighteen Fellows shall he elected by the Election of
subscribers to the funds of the College, in such manner as they shall
among themselves appoint: And that all vacancies in the number of
Fellows, (not being Senior Fellows), so soon as there shall be twenty
Members of the College who are Graduates of the University, continuing
on the books of the College, shall be supplied by election by such
Graduates, in such manner as the Council may appoint.
-v- The College of Saint Paul hereby incorporated shall he a College College to b«
e> . n i, within the
of and within the University of Sydney ; and all Students m the College university.
shall, immediately upon entering therein, matriculate in the University,
and ’shall submit and be subject to the discipline thereof, and shall
continue in the College so long only as they shall he Members of the
University, and shall be required duly and regularly to attend the Lectures
of the University, on those subjects an examination and proficiency in
which are required for Honours and Degrees, with the exception (if
thought fit by the Council) of the Lectures on Ethics, Metaphysics, and
Modern History.
XI. In case a Church Constitution for the aforesaid United Church Clergy t
within this Colony shall be hereafter established, by any Act or Statute CoUege .
passed for that purpose, every Clergyman resident in the College shall
be subject to all such regulations as may (by or in pursuance of such
Church Constitution) be enacted for the government of the Clergy in
general.
XII. The Council of the College shall have power, from time to Power to
time, to make and establish all such By-Laws and Rules, for carrying m o By _ Laws .


effect the several provisions and objects of this Act, and particularly for
declaring the causes which shall create vacancies in the Office of Fellow
or Senior Fellow, and directing who shall preside at Meetings of the
Council and of the Fellows, and for the management of the College,
and prescribing the duties of the several Officers thereof, and of the
Warden and Vice-Warden, and the ordering of all things in and connected
with the College, and the discipline thereof, to the promotion of Religion
and Learning, as to the said Council shall seem expedient; and such
Laws and Rules, or any of them, from time to time to alter or revoke,
or to substitute others in their place.
XIII. Provided that every such By-Law and Rule shall be transmitted
to the Governor, within thirty days after being made, to be by him laid
before the Legislative Council or Houses of Legislature of the Colony, as
soon as conveniently may be thereafter.
XIV. Provided also that the Warden or Vice-Warden of the College,
subject only to the Laws and Rules so made, shall have the general
superintendence and control of the Students, and of the Institution.
XV. The Votes at all meetings of the Fellows, or Senior Fellows
or Council, (except votes for the Election of a Senior Fellow, or the
appointment of a Warden,) shall be taken exclusively of the person
presiding, unless there shall be an equality of votes; and, in every case
where all the Fellows or Senior Fellows resident within fifty miles of
Sydney, entitled to attend, shall have had notice of the time and place
of intended meeting, one Clerical and one Lay Member of the Council,
with the Warden, shall constitute a Meeting of the Council, and two
Clerical and two Lay Fellows, with one presiding Fellow, shall constitute
a Meeting of the Fellows; and the votes and proceedings of the majority,
at any such Meeting, shall be taken and accepted as the votes and
proceedings of the Council or Fellows respectively.
XVI. Provided that it shall be lawful for the Council, by any By-Law
or By-Laws by them made, and assented to by the Fellows, to ordain
and appoint that the person presiding at any Meeting, whether of the
Council, or the Fellows, or the Senior Fellows, shall have a deliberative
as well as a casting vote; and to alter the mode of supplying vacancies
in the office of Fellow, by ordaining and appointing that such vacancies
until twenty Graduates have become qualified as Electors, shall be supplied
by the remaining Fellows and the Graduates (continuing on the Books
of the College) jointly.
XVII. No temporary vacancy or vacancies in the office of Warden,
or in the number of Fellows or Senior Fellows of the College, shall be
deemed in any way to affect the Constitution of the College, or its
privileges or status as an Incorporated Body.


ANNO DECIMO OCTAVO VICTORIAS REGTNiE.
No. XXXVII.
An Act to provide for tlie Establishment and Endowment of
Colleges within the University of Sydney.
[Assented to, 2d December, 1854.]
WHEREAS it is expedient to encourage and assist the establishment Preamble,
of Colleges, within the University of Sydney, in which Colleges systematic
Religious Instruction, and Domestic Supervision, with efficient assistance
in preparing for the University Lectures and Examinations, shall be
provided for Students of the University: Be it therefore enacted by His
Excellency the Governor of New South Wales, with the advice and consent
of the Legislative Council thereof, as follows:
I. Whenever any College shall have been established, and incorporated Endowment
by any Act of the Governor and Council, as a College within the colleges l
University of Sydney, and the Founders of or Subscribers to such College
shall have complied with the conditions mentioned in the next section,
such College shall be entitled to the Endowments hereinafter severally
mentioned, which said Endowments shall be paid, by the Treasurer of the
Colony under warrants signed by the Governor.
11. No such College, although incorporated, shall be entitled to such Conditions of
Endowments, unless and until the sum of ten thousand pounds, at the Endowment-
least, shall have been subscribed by its Founders, and of that sum not
less than four thousand pounds shall have been paid, and invested in
such manner as shall be approved of by the Governor, and the residue
shall have been to his satisfaction secured to be paid, within three years
next following; nor unless the whole of the said ten thousand pounds
shall be devoted exclusively to the erection of College Buildings, on
land granted for that purpose by Her Majesty to the University, in trust
for such College, (if any shall be so granted, and if not, then upon land
otherwise conveyed to and accepted by the University on such trust), and
it shall have been agreed by the Founders that the entire amount shall
be so expended, if the University so require, within five years next after
the first payment on account of either of such Endowments.
111. There shall be paid out of the General Revenue, in aid of the Endowment
Building Fund of every College so incorporated, a sum or sums not for BuUdms *
exceeding in the whole twenty thousand pounds, nor more than shall have
been from time to time actually expended by the College, out of its
subscribed funds, for the purpose of building.


IV. There shall be paid out of the said General Revenue annually
to such Incorporated College, in perpetuity, a sum of Five Hundred
Pounds, for the use of and as a salary to the Principal of such College,
or in aid of such salary.
V. Every such Principal shall be entitled to the annual salary hereby
provided for, on the production of his own certificate, at the time of
each payment, that he has during the period to which it relates performed
the duties of his Office: Provided that he shall transmit to the Colonial
Secretary, once in each year, a certificate to the like effect, under the
hands of such persons as shall be for that purpose appointed, by the
constitution or rules of the particular College.
VI. Where any person selected to be the Principal of any such College
shall be out of this Colony at the time of his appointment, no such
certificate shall be required until after he shall have actually entered on
his duties, but he shall be entitled to the salary (and the College to which
he shall have been appointed may receive the same accordingly for his use)
from the day of his embarkation for this Colony: Provided that every
Principal shall actually enter on his duties within six months after such
embarkation, unless the Governor, upon being satisfied that unavoidable
obstacles have intervened, shall think fit to extend that term to nine
months.
VII. Until the subscribed fund shall be required for the erection of
College Buildings as aforesaid, the interest or other proceeds accruing from
the investment thereof, or of the portion remaining unexpended from time
to time, may be applied to the general purposes of the College, as the
governing body of such College may determine.
Students to VIIL All Students in an P sudl Colle S e shall > immediately upon
be Members entering therein, matriculate in the University, and shall thereafter
of University. con £- [nue | )e members thereof, and submit and be subject to the
discipline thereof, and shall be required duly and regularly to attend
the Lectures of the University, on those subjects an examination and
proficiency in which are required for Honours and Degrees, with the
exception (if thought fit by any such College) of the Lectures on Ethics,
Metaphysics, and Modern History.
Certificate as IX. And whereas it has been resolved by the Senate of the University
to Religious gy ( j ne y ) that Honours and Degrees shall not be given to any Student
Attainments. produce testimonials of competent Religious Attainments,
and it is expedient to give legal permanency to such resolution :Be it
therefore enacted, that no Honour or Degree shall be conferred by the
University on any Student who shall not produce, from the Principal of


his College, or (if not belonging to a College) from some Religious
Teacher, or other responsible person, accredited by the University, a
Certificate that he is of Competent Religious Attainments.
X. The term “ Principal” shall include the Master, Warden, or any Term
other Head of a College. . “Principal.”


SUBSCRIBERS.
The Residences stated are (in general) those at the time of Subscription. Since
the original date, Changes have occurred by Deaths, and otherwise, which
are not noticed in the subjoined Lists.
CENTRAL DISTRICT.
£ s. d.
Allwood, the Rev. Robert, 8.A., St. James's ... 50 0 0
Amicus, (PI. C.,) Sydney 20 0 0
Aimitage, the Rev. Frederic, M.A., Parramatta 10 0 0
Asplnall, Mrs. Edward, Ilyde Park ... 25 0 0
Note. In the Western Districts’ list of Subscribers, the names
of the Messrs. Lowe should be as follows.
William Willard Lowe, Eurunderee ■ £ ’ 50
James Willard Lowe, Sidmouth Valley
Cape, William Timothy, Paddington ..." 100 0 0
C. A. S., Sydney 0 10 0
Clarke, the Rev. W. 8., M.A., North Shore 25 0 0
Cleeve, J. Kingdon, Charlotte Place 10 10 0
Cobham, Richard, Cleveland Street 50 0 0
Cooper, Daniel, M.L.A., Rose Bay 500 0 0
Cowper, the Yen. Archdeacon, Bent Street 100 0 0
Cowper, Charles, M.L.A., Wivenhoe 100 0 0
Cox, George, Winbourn 100 0 0
Cox, Alfred, Glenmore ... 50 0 0
Cox, Edward, Fernhill 50 0 0
Croft, Thomas, King Street ... 10 10 0
Croft, John, Darling Point 100 0 0


SUBSCRIBERS.
Tin Residences staled are (in general) these at the time of Subscription. Since
the original date, Changes have occurred by Deaths, and otherwise, which
are not noticed in the subjoined Lists.
CENTRAL DISTRICT.
£ s. d.
Alhvood, the Rev. Robert, 8.A., St. James's ... ... 50 0 0
Amicus, (H. C.,) Sydney ... ... 20 0 0
Armitage, the Rev. Frederic, M.A., Parramatta 10 0 0
Aspinall, Mrs. Edward, Hyde Park ... ... „. ... ... ... 25 0 0
25 0 0
Barker, James, Annandale jpo q q
Barker, Thomas, M.L.A., Darlinghurst ... ... 100 0 0
Barney, Colonel George, R.E., North Shore 40 0 0
Berry, Alexander, M.L.C., North Shore . 100 0 0
Bettington, J. 8., Parramatta ~ 50 0 0
Billyard, William Whaley, Darlinghurst 50 0 0
Blacket, Edmund Thomas, Glebe ... .. 50 0 0
TT Tin.,. Tl T T , TT • 7 , • ... - _
Bowman, William, M.L.A., Richmond 100 0 0
Breillat, Thomas Chaplin, Newtown 100 0 0
Broadhurst, Edward, M.L.C., Darlinghurst 20 0 0
Browne, Hutchinson Hothersall, North Shore 50 0 0
Brown, Stephen Campbell, Richmond Terrace 1212 0
Buchanan, Benjamin, Darlinghurst 50 0 0
Burdekin, Mrs. M. A., Macquarie Street .... 100 0 0
Burnell, Henry Clay, Macquarie Street 10 0 0
Cape, William Timothy, Paddington 100 0 0
C. A. S., Sydney 0 10 0
Clarke, the Rev. W. 8., M.A., North Shore 25 0 0
Cleeve, J. Kingdon, Charlotte Place 10 10 0
Cobham, Richard, Cleveland Street 50 0 0
Cooper, Daniel, M.L.A., Bose Bag 500 0 0
Cowper, the Yen. Archdeacon, Bent Street 100 0 0
Cowper, Charles, M.L.A., Wivenhoe 100 0 0
Cox, George, Winbourn 100 0 0
Cox, Alfred, Glenmore ... 50 0 0
Cox, Edward, Fernhill 50 0 0
Croft, Thomas, King Street ... 10 10 0
Croft, John, Darling Point .. ... 100 0 0


£ *. d.
Daniel, Arthur Cecil, Darling Point 25 0 0
Darvall, John Bayley, M.L.A., Hyde Park 50 0 0
Denison, His Excellency Sir W. T (Annual) 50 0,0
Denison, Alfred, Government House 50 0 0
Dickson, David, Roslyn Hall 100 0 0
Donaldson, Stuart Alexander, M.L.A., Darlinghurst 20 0 0
Donaldson, James, Darlinghurst 50 0 0
Druitt, the Rev. Thomas, Hyde Park 50 0 0
Dumaresq, William, Watson’s Bay 10 0 0
Ebsworth, J. E., Surry Hills 25 0 0
Ebsworth, Frederick, Forbes Street 10 10 0
Ebsworth, O. 8., Glebe 50 0 0
Elyard, Samuel, Sydney 5 5 0
Evans, George, Surry Hills 1010 0
Fanning, William, Newtown 75 0 0
Favenc, Peter, Darlinghurst 25 0 0
Fawcett, Richard, George Street 100 0 0
Flood, Edward, M.L.A., Surry Hills 200 0 0
Flower, P. W., England ' ... 100 0 0
Foster, J., Sydney 10 0 0
Frankland, George F 110
Garsed, Mrs., Willow Lodge 6 0 0
Gospel, Society for Propagation* of the 250 0 0
Grylls, the Rev. J. C., M. A., Fort Street 20 0 0
Gunther, the Rev. James, Mudgee 10 10 0
Hassall, the Rev. Thomas, M.A., Cobbity 25 0 0
Hill, George, M.L.C., Surry Hills 50 0 0
Hirst, G. R., Redfern ' 10 0 0
Hodgson, Arthur, Sydney 50 0 0
Holroyd, Arthur Tod, M.L.A., Newtown 50 0 0
Holt, Thomas, M.L.A., Newtown 210 0 0
Hosking, John, Vaucluse 25 0 0
Irving, Clark, M.L.A., Macquarie Street 100 0 0
James, Henry Kerrisou, Newtown 10 0 0
Johnson, Robert, M.L.C., Double Bay 200 0 0
Johnson, Richard, Darlinghurst 50 0 0
Johnson, W. J., Macquarie Street 50 0 0
Johnson, H. W., Sussex Street 50 0 0
Johnstone, Robert, Annandale 100 0 0
Jones, J. W., Jamison Street 20 0 0
Josephson, J. F., Newtown 250 0 0
250 0 0


£ *. d.
Kemp, Charles, Macquarie Street 300 0 0
King, the Rev. George, M.A., St. Andrew’s 10 0 0
King, the Rev. Robert L., 8.A., Parramatta 5 5 0
King, Rear-Admiral P. Parker, St. Leonard's 20 0 0
Knox, Edward, M.L.C., Darlinghurst 105 0 0
Lavers, Josiah Vincent, Richmond Terrace 50 0 0
Lawson, William, Prospect 60 0 0
Lester, C 10 0 0
Little, Archibald, Sydney 50 0 0
Long, William, Darlinghurst 60 0 0
Macarthur, James, M.L.A., Camden 52 10 0
Macarthur, Sir William, Knt., Camden 52 10 0
Macarthur, Major-General Edward, Parramatta 100 0 0
Mackenzie, John Piper, Palmer Street 10 0 0
Macleay, George, M.L.A., Brownlow Hill 50 0 0
M'Lerie, John, Pitt Street 50 0 0
Macnab, Frank, Sydney 25 0 0
Mann, Gother Her, North Shore 10 0 0
Manning, Edye, Potts's Point 60 0 0
Manning, William Montagu, M.L.A., Darlinghurst 50 0 0
Mathews, Mr., Sydney 5 6 0
Metcalfe, Michael, Darlinghurst 150 0 0
Milford, Mr. Justice S. F., Darlinghurst .. 20 0 0
Milner, the Rev. John, B.A 60 0 0
Mitchell, James, M.L.C.," Cumberland Place 100 0 0
Mitchell, James S., Balmain 10 0 0
Morris, Augustus, Vaucluse Bay 100 0 0
Mort, Thomas Sutcliffe, Darling Point 625 0 0
Murnin, Michael Egan, Glebe 50 0 0
Murray, C. K., William Street 6 5 0
Nathan, Charles, Macquarie Street 100 0 0
Newton, Thomas, IJarlinghurst 50 0 0
Newton, Charles, Redfiem 50 0 0
Nichols, George Robert, M.L.A., Marshfield 200 0 0
Nicholson, Sir Charles, Knt., Darlinghurst 100 0 0
Norton, James, M.L.C., Elswick 50 0 0
Osborne, Henry, M.L.A., Wollongong 100 0 0
Oxley, J. Norton, M.L.A., Kirkham 5 0 0
Parker, Henry Watson, M.L.A., Parramatta ... 50 0 0
Parrot, Augustus, Hunter Street 3 3 0
Phenna, Robert, Campbell Street 110
Piddington, W. R., M.L.A., Darlinyhurst ~ ... 10 10 0
Pitt, George M., Sydney ' 10 0 0
Priddle, the Rev. C. F. D., Liverpool 25 0 0


£ s. d.
Randle, William, Sydney 60 0 0
Robey, Ralph Mayer, Neivtown 100 0 0
Rogers, George John, Sydney 100 0 0
Rogers, the Rev. Edward, Camden 6 0 0
Roxburgh, John Pirie, Sydney 10 10 0
Salting, Severin Kanute, M’Leay Street 100 0 0
Savigny, the Rev. W. H., 8.A., Newtown 25 0 0
Smart, Thomas Ware, Darling Point 600 0 0
Smith, Thomas Whistler, Darling Point 60 0 0
Stack, the Rev. William, M.A., Balmain 10 0 0-
Steele, the Rev. Thomas, D.C.L., Newtoion 10 0 0
Stephen, Sir Alfred, C.J., M.L.C., Ilyde Park 50 0 0
Stephen, Mathew Henry, William Street 10 0 0
Stephen, Montagu Consett, Liverpool Street 10 0 0
Stephen, the Rev. Alfred Hewlett, 8.A., Chippendale 25 0 0
Stiles, the Rev. H. T., M.A., Windsor 10. 0 0
Stirling, John, St. Leonard’s 100 0 0
Stone, the Rev. W., 8.A., Berrima 3 0 0
Stuart, Alexander, Miller’s Point 20 0 0
Sydney, the Lord Bishop of, Miller’s Point 100 0 0
Terry, Mrs. Eleanor, Potts's Point ... 50 0 0
Thomson, E. Deas, C. 8., M.L.C., Barham 60 0 0
Thorne, George, Rose Bay 100 0 0
Tooth, Edwin, Upper William Street ... 100 0 0
Tooth, Frederick, Parramatta Street 60 0 0
Tooth, Robert, M.L.C., Double Bay 100 0 0
Troughton, the Rev. John, Mulgoa 50 0 0
Towns, Robert, M.L.C., Miller's Point 100 0 0
Vidal, the Rev. George, 8.A., Denham Court 3 3 0
Walker, William, Sydney 10 0 0
Walsh, the Rev. W. H., M.A., Christ Church 25 0 0
Want, Randolph John, M.L.C., Point Piper 50 0 0
Watson, the Rev. B. L., M.A., Penrith ... .... 20 0 0
Watson, Miss, England 5 0 0
Weedon, Thomas Elijah, Sydney 10 0 0
Wentworth, Major D’Arcy, Toongabbee 40 0 0
Willis, Joseph Scaife, Macquarie Street 50 0 0
Wilshire, James Robert, M.L.A., Sydney 50 0 0
Wilshire, Austin Forest, Redfern 50 0 0
Wilson, Felix, Newtown 100 o o
W oolley, the Rev. John, D,C.L., University 50 0 0
Woolley, Thomas, Glebe 50 0 0
Wright, James, Liverpool Street ... * 50 0 0


Additional Subscribers, (to 31 Oct. 185GJ Centred
District.
£ s. d.
Dangar, Henry, Grantham 60 0 0
1 itzgerald, Robert, M. L. C., Windsor Iqq q q
King, George, Craig-end jq jq q
Lethbridge, Captain Robert, R.N., M.L.C., Cumberland Place ... 20 0 0
Merewether, Edward C., North Shore 2 5 0 0
O’Brien, Bartholomew, M.D., Castlereagh Street 50 0 0
Terry, Mrs. Rosetta, Pitt Street 50 0 0
SOUTHERN DISTRICTS.
Antill, J. Macquarie, Jarvisfield 10 0 0
Bradley, William, Lansdowne 100 0 0
Brougham, Patrick, Edward River 5 0 0
Chatfield, William, Goulburn 15 0 0
Chisholm, J. W., Wallagorang 60 0 0
Chisholm, James, Kippilaw 100 0 0
Conolly, William, Argyle Lodge ... 3 0 0
Desailley, George P., Deniliquin 6 0 0
Faithfull, William Pitt, M.L.C., Springfield 100 0 0
Futter, J. S., Lumley 10 0 0
Jamison, William, Long Reach 15 0 0
Jamison, Philip, Greenwich Park 21 0 0
Jenkins, Robert Pitt, M.L.C., Bombala 25 0 0
Kennedy, James, Edward River 25 0 0
Maitland, Edward, Goulburn 10 0 0
Oakes, Francis, Goulburn ... 5 q 0
Powell, Nathaniel S., Tun-ala 10 0 0
Reid, David, Ottiwell ]5 o 0
Sowerby, the Rev. William, Goulburn 10 0 0


£ S. d.
WESTERN DISTRICTS.
Clements, John Findlater, Littlebourn 25 0 0
Dargin, John, Bathurst 10 0 0
Ford, John, Kelso 20 0 0
Friend, Bathurst 20 0 0
Home, J. Stirling, Bathurst 25 0 0
Icely, Thomas, Carcoar 50 0 0
Jones, Thomas, Bathurst 10 0 0
Kennedy, David, Bathurst Bank 50 0 0
Lane, John T., Orange 10 0 0
Lee, William, M.L.A., Claremont 100 0 0
Lowe, Robert, Wilbertree 20 0 0
Lowe, James Willard, Sidmouth Valley 60 0 0
Machattie, Richard, Bathurst 20 0 0
McGuigan, J. 8., Bathurst 25 0 0
Mclntosh, J. Nepean, Bathurst 50 0 0
McPhillamy, Robert, Gormans Hill 30 0 0
McPliillamy, John, Mount Tamar 10 0 0
McPhillamy, Charles, Charlton 10 0 0
Oakes, Rowland Hassall, Bathurst 20 0 0
Palmer, W. Hall, Bathurst 20 0 0
Pinnock, George, Bathurst 10 0 0
Price, Kennet, Bathurst ... ~ ... 20 0 0
Richards, James Byrn, Carwynyan 10 0 0
Rotton, Henry, Blackdown 20 0 0
Serjeant, Samuel Benny, Bathurst 100 0 0
Shadforth, Alfred George, Bathurst 10 0 0
Sloman, Thomas Martin, Bathurst 25 0 0
Suttor, John Bligh, Wyagden 25 0 0
Suttor, William Henry, M.L.A., Brucedale 100 0 0
Suttor, Thomas Charles, Beverly Park 20 0 0
Tingcombe, the Rev. Henry, Littlebourn 10 0 0
West, Joseph, (tertius,) Gorman's Hill 20 0 0
West, Joseph, Junior, Macquarie Plains 25 0 0


£ s. <l.
NORTHERN DISTRICTS.
Cowper, the Rev. W. Macquarie, Stroud 10 0 0
Ferriter, J. S., Brisbane 5 0 0
Glennie, the Rev. Alfred, Brisbane Water 20 0 0
Glennie, the Rev. Benjamin, Darling Downs 25 0 0
Hood, T. Hood, M.L.C., Darling Downs 25 0 0
limes, Major A. C., Newcastle , 20 0 0
Newcastle, the Lord Bishop of, Morpeth 100 0 0
O’Connell, Maurice Charles, Port Curtis 100 0 0
Russell, Henry Stuart, Kangaroo Point 100 0 0
Wickham, Captain J. C., R.N., Brisbane 5 0 0
(The name of the Rev. James Gunther should have been inserted
in the Western District List, and of the Rev. William Stone in that for
the Southern District )


/
: hi mm
