

is Paramaribo ; this town is the seat of the Dutch government, and has
a Roman Catholic, English, and Lutheran churches. The government
is vested in a governor-general and a high council. The colony pro-
duces about 25,000,000 lbs. of sugar, and about 4,000,000 lbs. of
coffee, annually. It has recently (1842) been officially stated, that the
expenditure of the colony exceeds its income, the former amounting to
1,090,060 francs, the latter to 1,000,000 francs.
French Guiana , in 1809, was in the possession of the English, but
was restored to the French (who possessed the colony previous to
1839) in 1815, by the treaty of Paris. It is a small colony, like the
Dutch above noticed, divided into two districts, Cayenne and Sinnary.
The capital is called Cayenne. The principal product is, of course,
sugar. The clove and other spices, as arnatto, pepper, cinnamon, and
nutmegs are indigenous. Nearly the whole of the exports are shipped
for France and her colonies. It is a losing possession to the French,
though the sugar-crop had been much improved up to 1839.
The Chevalier Schombergk’s account of his last expedition in the
province of Guiana, (by him called Guyana and Guayana,) viz., his
route from Parara to the Upper Corentyn, and from thence to Deme-
rara, has been very recently read before the Royal Geographical Society,
and is deemed a valuable paper, containing a great deal respecting the
province of Guiana that is new, and of peculiar interest. The draw-
ings of Mr. Goodall, the splendid maps constructed by Mr. Schorabergk,
and the specimens of minerals collected by the latter, are now in course
of exhibition in the rooms of the Geographical Society. Mr. Schom-
bergk is now in England. — Editor.
THE CONDITION OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
To rational observers, it should be no subject of regret that the days
when emigration was looked upon as the panacea for all evils, instead
of the remedy for several of the greatest; and when the disposition of
the people to emigrate was a mania rather than an impulse, are com-
pletely passing away. The attempt to keep this idea alive, and to
create the notion that gold grew upon the trees of our colonies, was
ill-advised, and productive of nothing but disappointment and discon-
tent ; and those who adopted that fallacious course, are paying dearly
for their mistake, in the spirit which it has generated among the public
to the prejudice of their respective settlements. Those who were
induced to emigrate to the colonies which were most puffed, have, in
the excess of their disappointment, represented their condition much
less favourably than they deserve, and thus brought them into disrepute
among the emigrating classes at home.
As the policy pursued by the Western Australians was more sound,
so their present position is more favourable; they avoided exaggera-
te L II —no. 12. D


tion, and have saved many from disappointment, and themselves from
suspicion and discredit. Convinced of the fallacy of the puffing sys-
tem, they have, perhaps, even in their anxiety to avoid it, approached
too near to the other extreme, and did not make sufficient allowance
for the distrust with which the public is always prone to regard such
statements. Certainly they have not been in the habit of highly
colouring their accounts, although those who do not know the extent
of the colony’s resources, may be led to believe, from the highly -
favourable terms in which the strictest regard to truth allows them to
speak of it, that they have exaggerated its qualifications. This candour,
which has marked their conduct throughout, has been eminently dis-
played in a recent instance; and they did not attempt to conceal the
fact, that they were passing through a state of temporary depression ;
and we do not know but that we have heard as much of their slight
and partial monetary derangement, as we did of that in other colonies
which filled their newspapers with notices of bankruptcy—a result
with which it has not been in a single instance attended. The causes
and extent, and the remedy of this state of the money-market, are
fully explained in the Sivan River News of last November :
“ The actual and irritating causes are, firstly, excessive importations from the
sister colonies ; secondly, high rates of interest; and thirdly, the practice of
‘ kite-flying,’ or gaining credit upon bills.
“ The first of these evils acts prejudicially on the colony, in more than one
respect; the neighbouring settlements, it is notorious, have long been in a state
verging on general insolvency—prices were thus reduced to the lowest possible
rate, and even at that, no market existed at home. The surplus goods or stores
were therefore shipped off to the nearest profitable market —which Western
Australia was; and thus, while cash was drawn from the colony, imports at
bankrupts’ prices were poured in, and the Western Australian producer left to
compete with these reckless sellers. Such a state of things could not long exist,
for the Western Australians would be ruined, were it not, as we have shown on a
previous occasion, an evil which must cure itself. Prices being reduced by these
importations, the Western Australian market must become unprofitable, and thus
the foreigner be forced to abandon it for some other. The second bane, and a
terrible clog upon the exertions of the colonists, has been the exorbitant rate of
interest which prevailed. This has, just in time, been reduced by the banks, and,
though we think the present rate, 8 per cent., still too high, the pressure is
greatly removed. The third and last cause of the depression arose out of the
extravagance of the settlers, and their indulgence in luxuries which they bad no
right to expect, and could not have enjoyed at home. This prodigality led them
into expenses beyond their means, and though they found it very easy to satisfy
the demands for a time with a short bill, they were in an awkward dilemma three
months afterwards. Credit thus became destroyed, and the mischief, in some
degree, obviated, and we since have the governor’s assurance that ‘ the bill-system
is being checked.’”
There is nothing visionary in this ; it is founded upon no extravagant
expectations, but upon sheer common sense. The article then pro-
ceeds to caution the colonists against forming too inflated ideas, and
advises them to be contented with steadiness, rather than aim at rapidity
of enrichment: —•
“ We confidently predict that the colony must recover and ultimately flourish.
Climate, soil, and situation are the first qualifications for a settlement—unless
they are unexceptionable, capital and labour are but wasted ; Western Australia
possesses, in all three, advantages the most favourable and auspicious—and on


them we found our confident hopes for the future. If her present settlers should
be scared from their tasks, there are thousands in the mother-country ready to
take their places. ‘ But who would emigrate while the monetary affairs of the
colony are embarrassed?’ asks some desponding colonist. ‘ Every sensible man who
contemplates emigration,’ we reply. Prices being low, the small capitalist from
England would find it just the time to stock himself, and commence agricultural
operations; and the invalid from India wishing to avail himself of the salubrity
of the climate, would find living economical. Why, a late governor of the colony,
in our presence, not a month ago, observed, ‘ If I were a young man with a small
capital, I would go out now, and make my fortune ; and we have before us a letter
from an experienced old settler in the Vasse district, who says, “ We are surmount-
ing a crisis it was threatening, but has exploded without doing us any serious
injury; and only affords greater opportunities than ever for the new emigrant to
lay the foundation for a fortune.’
“ If the nature of the soil, the superiority of the climate, and the advantageous
situation of the colony—the high moral character of its population—and the
vastness of its available resources, are but properly made known in England, the
present depression of affairs will not deter any from emigrating, but, on the con-
trary, rather operate as an inducement. It the colonists, therefore, want to sur-
mount their present difficulties, they must bestir themselves, and not be cast down
by shadows—if they are anxious to enlarge and improve their colony, they must
not slacken in putting forth those unexaggerated statements of her resources which
cannot fail to invite emigration But, even without the slightest exertions on
their part, we again declare that though they may fail, the colony must ultimately
succeed. There are many in England, and elsewhere, with an inclination to emi-
grate, a disposition to work for their living, and an ambition to better their state,
on w'hom the peculiar resources of the colony will not be thrown away—there
are thousands who would prefer a comfortable competence in a genial climate, to
poverty in a less wholesome one ; and who would be contented could they attain to
independence, without grumbling if they cannot indulge in prodigality. Such we
would refer to the declaration of Mr. R. H. Bland, the Government Protector of
Aborigines, and one of the oldest settlers, which they will find in the Colombo
Observer, Ist of February last:— ‘ The climate of the colony is good ; the native
inhabitants are peaceable; and the natural resources of the country are such that
an industrious emigrant is sure to do well.’ ”
That the present condition of the colony affects the labourer only
in a beneficial manner, is apparent in the following extract from the
Inquirer of May Bth :
“ PurcEs of Provisions, &c. —(bread per 2ib. loaf) sd. ; mutton and beef,
4d. per lb.; lamb and veal, Bd.; potatoes, 10s. per cwt. ; onions, lid. per lb. ;
asparagus, 2s. per hundred; carrots, 12s, per cwt.; pumpkins, Id. per lb. ; cauli-
flowers, 4d. each; grapes, 2d. to Bd. per lb.; lemons, 245. per dozen.; fowls,
3s. fid. per couple.; eggs, Is. 9d. and 2s. per dozen; fresh butter, 2s. per lb.;
milk, 4d. per quart.; tea, 3s. fid. per lb.; sugar, 3d. per lb. ; rice, 9s. 4d. per
cwt.; wood, 9s. per cord. .
[These prices show a diminution on those of the same articles In 1839 of 50
per cent, on most of the commodities, and 75 per cent, and even more, on mutton,
beef, potatoes, eggs, milk, tea, and other necessaries, while wages have only fallen
25 per cent, so that the labourer is comparatively in a far better position than he
was five years ago.”— Ed. S. R- N.]
The following is the statistical report for the year ending 31st
March, 1844, as laid before the legislative council, by the governor,
on the 23rd May :
No. 1 Shipping return for the year ending 31st of March, 1844:
Inwards. — Port of Albany:—3o ships, 7,425 tons, fi22 men; of these 15
belonged to British colonies, 8 to the United States, and 7 to Foreign Countries.
Port of Fremantle:—3s ships, 6246 tons, 218 men; consisting of 4 from Great
Britain, 22 from British Colonies, 2 from America, and 7 from Foreign States,


No. 3.—Return of Exports
1844: —
and
Im]
Exports,—
£
s.
Wool, 17,800 lbs
8940
0
Sperm Oil, 30 tons
1800
0
Black Oil, 60 tons
1800
0
Whalebone, 107 cwt
4S1
10
Bark, 30 cwt
6
0
Timber, 5 tons
50
0
Salt Fish, 5 casks
15
0
Potatoes, 1 ton
12
0
Miscellaneous, 101 packages
505
0
£13,609
10
General Merchandise ....
.. 41,870
0
Spirits
.. 2,241
0
Wines
.. 2,275
0
Tobacco
494
0
Port of Vasse:—9 ships, 1897 tons, 175 men; composed of 3 from British colo-
nies, and 6 from the United States. Total—74 ships, 15,388 tons, 1015 men,
namely; 4 British, 40 Colonial, 16 American, and 14 Foreign.
Outwards. —Port of Albany;—3l ships, 7263 tons, 631 men, namely; 16 for
British colonies, 2 for Foreign States, and 13 for the whaling grounds. Port of
Fremantle ; 28 ships, 5782 tons, 152 men ; consisting of 2 British, 17 Colonial,
6 Foreign, and 3 whalers. Port of Vasse;—ll ships, 2454 tons, 227 men; of these
3 were Colonial, 2 American, and 6 whalers. Total-70 ships, 15,499 tons,
1010 men, namely: 2 British, 36 Colonial, 2 American, 8 Foreign, and 22
whalers. ( - r
No. 2.—Statement of cultivation and stock, to 31st of September, 1843 :
Cultivation 3047 acres Stock 72,897 acres
showing an increase on last year of 811 acres of cultivation, and 15,049 heads of
stock.
Imports
for the year ending 31st of March,
Imports. £
Freight, &c. 25 per cent... 11,720 0
.£58,600 0
No. 4.—Return of the Surveys, for the year ending 31st March, 1844.
Grants completed during the year... 94 Acres do. do. ... 383,646^
In this return, a new export will be observed —Bark. Of the pre-
paration of this article, the following intelligence is given in the
Inquirer of May Ist.
Export of Bark. —The collection and preparation of black wattle bark for
export, is now beginning to engage the attention of the settlers, and it is pleasing
to learn that Mr. J. Stokes has already upwards of 12 tons for shipment. The
black wattle tree grows abundantly all over the colony, and if labour were lower
and the roads better, thousands of tons might be exported annually. Even with
our existing means a considerable export might be created, as there are numerous
spots within favourable distances where large quantities might be collected.
Under the head of “the progress of the session,” the following
review of the proceedings of the legislature appeared in the last
number of the News :
Great expectations were raised when it became known that the legislative
council was called together by the governor earlier than it would have met accord-
ing to its general course, to take into consideration the condition of the colony.
The storekeeper who was terrified by the “ crisis,” which he had brought upon
himself, seemed to think that the council could convert the bills, on which he had
been foolish enough to give credit, into bank notes —the consumer who had
“accepted” for luxuries which he never required, trusted to the council for an
act allowing repudiation—the agriculturist, instead of striving to supply the wants
of the colony himself, asked the council for a law to prohibit other settlements
for supplying them, —and all classes looked to the council for assistance in a mat-
ter which only required a little exertion from themselves to set to rights. The
general expectations w'ere consequently disappointed the legislative council
could do nothing in the case, and the public did not fail to abuse it right heartily
for its inactivity. But, while we admit that the council is not blameable, and
that it was not in its power to assist the settlers, we cannot excuse other details


of its conduct which appear to us, at such a time, frivolous and unreasonable. If
they could do nothing to relieve the derangement of monetary affairs, which must
be left to right itself, as it will in due course, they might at least employ them-
selves in promoting the developement of the colony’s resources. The Inquirer
suggests two duties for the council to perform a co-operation in the attempt
recently made at home to procure the transmission of regular mails to Swan
Kiver by the Sydney packets, and some means for assisting the export of timber,
either by lending the colonial schooner to convey it to the Mauritius or other-
wise. There are many other ways in which it might make itself actually useful
to the colony, and it is not a little vexatious to find its time thrown away upon
unnecessary and useless discussions at a period when all its energies should be
brought into play. What has been done in the present session ? what account
can the members render of their stewardship ? Let us inquire. The Corn-law
debate occupied much more time than was necessary, and might have been dis-
posed of with much less discussion. A few bills which, at best, were only not
absolutely useless, were then brought forward, and the legislative wisdom was em-
ployed in the everlasting native-evidence bill, or in regulating town-trust squab-
bles and “aligning” streets. Then the governor brings forwards another of the
thousand-and-one bills of the session, more unprofitable than the rest, to “repeal
that clause of the act for building churches and chapels which authorises the grant
of government monies for such purposes.” The act, be it noted, authorised but
did not enjoin such grants, and yet the governor, when he finds the revenue will no
longer admit of them, does not consider it 'Sufficient to refuse them, bnt comes
down and asks the council to put it out of his power to give them. This is abso-
lute waste of time, and at a period, too, when such trifling is perfectly inexcu-
sable. Next comes a bill for marking out the boundaries of streets : this was an
useful proposition, though by no means essential to the extrication of the colony,
but yet when a petition is presented against it, two or three evenings are exhausted
in considering whether the petition shall be received, in the course of which the
very remarkable principle is laid down, that allowing a memorial to be read is
tantamount to granting its prayer! ■ But the most unnecessary and inefficient
measure of the session is, without doubt, the bill “to regulate the temporary
occupation of crown-lands.”
The council seems truly unfortunate in its attempts to legislate on squatting.
In June, 1841, it passed an act allowing the right of commonage to purchasers of
160-acre allotmeuts; this was disallowed by the home government. It then set
to work, on the recommendation of the Colonial Secretary, in framing an act to
prevent the temporary occupation of unalienated crown-lands, which after two
months’ consideration it produced in August, 1842, in the shape of a bill allowing
the temporary occupation of crown-lands, hy licensees paying a fee of £2O ;
which also failed in receiving the sanction of the home government, because it
allowed the private sale of the land occupied to the licensee, gave him the prefer-
ence when the licenses were renewed, and allowed him to recover, in the event of
his quitting the land, the money spent in’improving it, from the government. The
council was therefore ordered to frame another act, in accordance with the direc-
tions of the Secretary of State; and, despairing of giving him satisfaction in any
other way, they have passed an act which at once prohibits the occupation of
crown-lands without the authority of a license. As the council has not ventuied
farther into detail, but leaves the imposition of the license-fee and all the other
important prerogatives in the hands of the government, it is expected that the
present attempt will at least be received with favour at Downing-street.
The bill was first introduced by the governor on the 9th of May, when it was
read a first time. On the 29th it went into Committee, where it received a few
amendments. The most important of these was a provision for cases which
might arise where parties might be compelled from bush fires to drive their flocks
upon crown-lands, in which emergencies they are protected from prosecutiort
until they can procure a license. Mr. Leake would have had trespassers, or
squatters, for a less period than one month exempted from punishment, but this
was not allowed ; and after the scale of penalties had been fixed, not exceeding
£2O for the first offence, £3O for the second, or £SO for any subsequent transgres-
sion, on the 6th of June the bill passed into a law. We shall have more to say on


this act in our next, and also on the constitution of the council, whose independ-
ence is not exhibited in a most favourable light in the proceeding. But having
dwelt upon the objectionable measures of the legislature, it is but fair to glance
at those which are calculated to be serviceable to the public. Of these we hail
the prevention of scab-hill as the most important. It may seem a strange mat-
ter for senators to meddle with, and the remedy may appear more in the hands of
the liock-holders themselves j but they have appealed to the council for assistance
and have received as much as it is in the power of the council to afford. A penalty
of .€lO is to be levied upon any party driving infected sheep over another’s land,
without giving him notice of his intention, and damages to the amount of €3O are
moreover awarded to the latter, in the event of the disease being communicated to
any of his flock. We do not agree with the Inquirer that this bill will prove in-
operative ; we think it was the best which the council could pass. Another, and
a yet more important consideration on which the council had entered at the date
of the last advices, was the best means for decreasing the expenditure, increasing
the revenue, and appropriating it to the best advantage. The first is only to be
done by retrenchment and rigid economy in the public offices—the second may
be partially effected by raising the import-duties from to 5 per cent., (and if
this measure did not increase the revenue, it must reduce the fearful ‘ balance
of trade’ which has existed against the colony,) and the last must be at present
entrusted to the judgment and discretion of the governor. Of these, so long as
he is a free agent, we have not the slightest apprehension, and though we protest
against the authority which the Secretary of State exercises over the governor’s
acts, and while we are anxious for the day when the settlers shall have a repre-
sentative council, independent of external influence, to attend to their interests,
we must in justice concede this much to Governor Hutt, that in so far as his rela-
tion with the home government allows him, he always consults the best interests of the
colony, and displays the utmost discretion and tact in the management of its
finances.”
We are glad to find, among other suggestions for the promotion of
emigration* that the following projects are on foot, and witli some
prospects of success:
“ Public interest appears to be at length awakened 'on this subject, and two
suggestions have come before us lately. One is the raising of a private loan,
offering interest at 5 per cent, on the guarantee of the local government, and under
sanction of the colonial office, to be appropriated in the transmission of emigrants,
and refunded from extra import duties. The other project has been proposed to
the colonists, and there is reason to expect that they will assist in forwarding it j
it is the establishment in London of a kind of agricultural company, to purchase
whatever land was offered on profitable terms in the colony, and send labourers to
cidtivate it. Both these schemes are at present in embryo, and it is impossible to
say what are their respective chances of success, but we shall not fail to give ouf
readers early intimation of their progress.”
Every scheme which has for its object to introduce labour into a
colony where it would be of such good account, should be encouraged ;
but it appears that the colonists are making very profitable use of
that which they at present possess. They are building three ships, one
a schooner of 150 tons, of the excellent naval timber which abounds in
the colony ; and have lately imported and erected a steam saw and
Hour mill, which commenced working on the 2d of April, and was
completely successful, the wood being cut into the required lengths with
the greatest facility and expedition.
