

PROSPECTIVE ENLARGEMENT
COLONIAL PEESBYTEEIANISI:
A SERMON,
PREACHED IN ST. ANDREW’S SCOTS CHURCH,
On Sabbath November 6, 1864,
BY THE
EEY. JAMES BROTHERSTON LAUGHTON, 8.A.,
MINISTER OF ST. STEPHEN’S CHURCH,
ISatfjtirst, sootlj TOaks.
SYDNEY :
SHERRIFF AND DOWNING.
256, GEOROE STREET.


The Minister,
Elders, and Congregation,
St. Andrew’s Soots Church, Sydney,
This Discourse,
Published at the request oe some oe their Number,
Is very Affectionately Inscribed,
By their Faithful Servant for Christ’s sake,
THE AUTHOR.


A SERMON, &c.
“ By whom shall Jacob arise ? for he is small.”—Amos vii, 5.
In the first six verses of this chapter, we have an account
of two premonitory visions, which the Lord shewed to His
servant Amos, for the warning of His people Israel. The
first was a vision of grasshoppers, eating up the grass of
the land ; and the second, of a devouring fire. And whether
we understand these visions literally or figuratively—
whether they were intended to predict literal plagues of
insects and literal fires consuming the fruits of the earth—
or whether they had reference to the devastating inroads
of the Assyrian armies, and the burning by them of the
cities of Israel and Judah —the instructive fact to be
observed is, that, on the intercession of the prophet, the
Lord repented of the evil he had thought to do unto his
people, and said, “It shall not be.”
It is to the plea used by Amos, in his intercession, that I
propose at this time to call your attention. His prayer
was, “0 Lord, forgive, I beseech thee!” and his plea,
“By whom shall Jacob arise? for he is small.” As
though he had said, “If thou, Lord, art thus strict to
mark iniquity, and wilt indeed execute the judgments Thou
hast announced against Thy people, we should be utterly
cast down and destroyed, and could not stand a moment.
Israel, as compared with his enemies, is small and weak,
while they are as grasshoppers for multitude, and strong
with all the engines and munitions of war. It is only by


Thy strength, 0 God, that the seed of Jacob has attained
to its present distinguished position : it is only because
Thou hast fought for Israel that he has been able to stand
against his numerous and powerful foes. If, then, Thou
shouldst now cast him off, by whom shall Jacob arise ? or,
who shall cause or enable Jacob to arise or stand ? ”
Believing, as we are taught by St. Paul, that all the
various incidents of the history of God’s ancient people
happened unto them for ensamples, and that they are left on
record for our instruction, upon whom the ends of the world
are come—who live, that is, in the last time, and under the
final dispensation of God’s mercy—we are clearly warranted
in applying the language of the text to the circumstances of
the Christian Church, or of any branch of it. The unfaith-
fulness, the inconsistency, the lukewarmness, the back-
sliding, of the visible Church generally, and of particular
denominations in particular localities, have provoked, in all
ages, the judgments of God ; but, in condescension to the
prayer of His believing people, He has frequently held
back His hand from smiting. Grasshoppers, in the shape
of heretics or schismatics, or of false doctrines and corrupt
practices, and devouring fire, in the shape of reproach or
persecution, have oftentimes devastated, or threatened to
devastate, the heritage of God; but the cry of the godly
remnant has ascended, not in vain, to the Mercy-seat.—
“0 Lord God, forgive! 0 Lord God, cease, we beseech
Thee! If Thou forsake us, and leave us to be trodden
down by them that would oppress us, who shall enable us
to rise again, for we are small?”
Such being the general instruction suggested by the lan-
guage of the text, there can be no impropriety in applying
it more particularly to the reproof and correction of our-
selves, both individually, and as a Christian Denomination.
And, in dependence on God’s assistance, I now invite you,


at this interesting and critical period of the history of our
Colonial Presbyterianism, to consider with me, as suggested
by the language of the text, The present depressed State of
our Church in this colony, and The Means by which alone
it can be raised and enlarged.
May God, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, enlighten
our minds, and enable us so to confess and bewail our short-
comings, and so to plead with holy boldness at the throne
of Grace, that we may find help in our time of need, and
that the time to favour cur Zion, yea the set time, may now
be come!
I. We are to consider, then, in the first place, The pre-
sent depressed state of our Zion in this colony : (1 Jacob is
small !”
The term “ small,” as applied to a nation, a Church, or
a community, may mean either that it is few in number, or
that it is feeble in its influence and operations. The house of
Jacob was “small” in both these respects. “The Lord
did not set His love upon them, nor choose them, because
they were more in number than any people, for they were
the fewest of all people.” (Deut. vii. 7.) And in themselves
they were also feeble; it was only in the Lord that they
were strong. “If it had not been the Lord who was on
our side,” might Israel often have said—“ If it had not been
the Lord who was on our side, when men rose up against
us : Then they had swallowed us up alive, when their wrath
was kindled against us : Then the waters had overwhelmed
us, * * * Then the proud waters had gone over our
soul.” (Ps. cxxiv. 1.) So long as they kept the Lord’s cove-
nant, He strengthened them, so that all their enemies fled
before them ; but when they forsook Him, He hid His face
from them, and they were smitten. In like manner, the
New Testament Zion, including the whole of professing
Christendom, is very few in number as compared with the


heathen and Mahometan nations of the earth. The whole
number of those that bear the Christian name , is not more
than 300 millions, or less than one-third of the population
of the globe ; while thej number of nominal Protestants is
less than 100 millions. But then, if the number of pro-
fessing Christians be comparatively small, they cannot be said
to be weak or uninfluential, for every thing really great or
powerful in the world is connected with Christianity. And
if we look to the much smaller number of the Evangelical
Christians, who hold the Gospel faith in its purity, and
endeavour, however feebly and imperfectly, to maintain and
extend the cause of Christ in the earth, we shall find that
all that is worthy the name of Christian enterprise is carried
on by this “little flock,” whom the world despises, but
whose works are known and acknowledged of God.
The Presbyterian Denomination, as compared with other
evangelical denominations throughout the world, is cer-
tainly not “ small,” by reason of the paucity of its numbers.
Many Christians, including many of ourselves, have an
idea that Presbyterian Church Government has little or no
existence beyond Scotland and the North of Ireland, This
is altogether a mistake. With the sole exception of that
part of the United Kingdom called England, I have no
hesitation in affirming, that the large majority of the Pro-
testant Churches in Europe and America are Presbyterian.
The Evangelical United Church of Prussia, the Lutheran
Churches of France and Germany, the Protestant Churches
of Switzerland, Belgium, Holland, and Hungary, are all
Presbyterian; and in the United States of America, and
the British American Colonies, though the Methodists and
Baptists in several localities number, perhaps, more
meeting-houses, yet the largest portion of the intelligence
and education of that country is Presbyterian. It was truly
remarked, by a writer in the Preshy ter tan Magazine, for


February, 1863, that a member of our denomination “ is not
to be told here, and he is not to feel, that he belongs to a
religious system that is found only within the limited sur-
face and small population of Scotland. He belongs to the
largest family of Protestant churches ; to an ecclesiastical
system that is not confined to those who derive ancestry
from Caledonia, or who use the English tongue ; he belongs
to Protestant Christendom, in a wider sense and with freer
brotherhood than Episcopalians, who have Church affinities
in government with so few Protestant Churches of the
glorious Reformation.”
In this colony, to which we must now confine our atten-
tion, if our Zion be “ small,” it can scarcely be so because
it is few in number. Our actual numbers are little short of
40,000, out of a population of about 380,000 ; and in
respect of education, intelligence, and social position, we
fear comparison with no other denomination. Never-
theless, it is a melancholy fact, to which it is only the most
culpable folly to close our eyes, that our denomination, as
such, is feeble in its influence and in its operations : it is
“ small” in the eyes of other Christian Churches : “ small”
in the eyes of those who are disposed, secretly or avowedly,
to regard all Churches as obstructions to the march of in-
tellect and to the dissemination of revolutionary opinions.
There are some who, I believe, consider it manly and
patriotic not to admit the most palpable facts, when they
are unfavourable to themselves : it is, no doubt, always
humiliating to confess oneself “ small;” and the more truth
there is in the confession the more humiliation ; but I be-
lieve that true Christian wisdom requires us in such
matters to confess the truth to ourselves, and before Cod,
who knows the truth, whether toe have courage to look it in
the face or not. I believe that both religious principle and
sound expediency should prompt us, not only to confess our


present smallness, but also to search diligently and humbly
for the causes of it, that so we may, by Grod’s help, dis-
cover and apply an effectual remedy.
What, then, are the causes which have tended to weaken
our influence as a denomination, and to restrict our efforts
in the cause of Christ ? I believe they are chiefly these
two : Apathy and Division.
Now first, with regard to Apathy. Ido not intend to
say, because Ido not think, that the Presbyterians of this
colony are, as a body, more apathetic in religious matters
than other professing Christians, though they may be less
demonstrative; but Ido say, my brethren, that we ought
not to be content to have it said of us that we are no worse
than others ; we ought to be much letter / [Religious indif-
ference is too common everywhere ; but it is peculiarly
conspicuous in colonies. In our native land, the sacred in-
fluences of home, and school, and parish church, and the
general tone of society, are in favour of religious truth and
virtuous habits. This is true in the colonies to a much
more limited extent. The population in most of them is
very heterogeneous; it is a mixture , not a combination, of
persons of all countries and of all creeds, drawn together
by one common attraction, and influenced by the one com-
mon desire of improving their outward estate. It is not
surprising, therefore, that even the well-disposed, on finding
themselves surrounded by associations of a carnal and
worldly character, should, in some degree at least, yield to
the pressure, and in too many cases lose the fine edge of
their religious sensibilities, and at length fall into the pre-
vailing habits of irreligion and indifference.
If, however, it could have been expected, that any portion
of our colonial population should have been found main-
taining a bold and steadfast testimony for Grod’s truth and
Grod’s commandments, shining as lights in the midst of an


evil generation, and presenting a firm and unshaken front
against the enticements of evil-doers, surely we should have
looked to those who had enjoyed the advantage of early
religious training and example. It might have been ex-
pected that Scottish Presbyterians, in leaving their native
land, whose very stones are sprinkled with the blood of
martyrs, “ of whom the world was not worthy,” and whose
lonely glens it is impossible to traverse, without treading
on some spot hallowed by the most sublime and tender
memories, would have brought with them to the land of
their adoption somewhat of the old God-fearing and un-
worldly spirit, which makes our heroic ancestors stand out
so prominently from the historic canvas, and which has not
failed to stamp its impress upon the national character. It
might not unreasonably have been expected, that the
descendants of the men who took up arms “ for a broken
covenant and a persecuted kirk,” would not have forgotten
the Lord’s song in a distant land —a land not of captivity
and privation, hut of liberty and abundance —and that they
would not have forsaken, or looked coldly on, the Zion of
their earliest affections. From Presbyterians, more than
from other men, for they have received more, it might have
been expected, that the Lord’s work in this land should
have received ready help and sustenance, and that hj them
godly principles and holy practices should have been vigo-
rously promoted and defended.
I fear,, however, that truth compels us to admit, my
brethren, that as a denomination, we have not fulfilled the
expectations which our antecedents, both religious and
national, were calculated to raise. In this colony—l speak
not of other colonies, because it is ourselves that we are
commanded to judge—in this colony a large proportion of
Presbyterians appear almost entirely insensible to, or obli-
vious of, religious obligations ; a large proportion of the


remainder have, it is to be feared, little more than a name
that they live, while they are spiritually dead; and the
number of those who are really awake to their responsibili-
ties, really striving to live up to their privileges, and
readily and cheerfully bearing their fair share of the bur-
dens of the Church, is comparatively “small.” Now, Ido
not stand here to bring railing accusations against any;
but I feel that I am only giving open expression to what
most of us have said one to another, “withbated breath,”
a thousand times, when I say, that our Zion in this colony
is “ small” by reason of the apathy of her own children. There
is too large a leaven of worldliness among us —the salt has
in too many cases lost its savour—there has been a too
manifest want of catholicity of sentiment, and too little
feeling of identification with the cause of Christ throughout
the world, to permit our denomination to assume its proper
place, and exercise its proper influence. Nor can it be at all
relevant to say, in palliation of this fact, that some other de-
nominations are quite as apathetic as ourselves. Our origin,
our history, our principles, the many advantages we have
enjoyed and do enjoy, are such, that we ought to have been
teachers and examples to others in everything that is good,
instead of submitting to be led, or tamely standing by, with
hands hanging down and feeble knees, while others have
stepped in and occupied the position that we ought to have
occupied.
If, however, any of us think it a satisfactory ground of
consolation that we are not more apathetic than our brethren
of other Churches, even that consolation must fail when we
come to speak of our unhappy Divisions. In this respect
we have attained an unquestionable and a most unenviable
pre-eminence ; for if the charge of apathy may be brought
against some other Churches, it cannot be said that they
are divided to the same extent that we are. The Episcopa-


Han, Wesleyan Methodist, and Congregational denomina-
tions, whatever differences of opinion may exist among
ministers, or members of those communions respectively,
preserve at least an outward union, and visibly and effectu-
ally work, each in its respective sphere, for the advance-
ment of the common Christianity. It is not so with
us. With about fifty-five or sixty ministers in the colony,
we are divided into four separate organizations; the Synod
of Australia having about twenty-five ministers ; the Free
Church Synod about twenty; the Synod of New South
Wales five or six; and the United Presbyterian Church
one; with several ministers unattached, and several cate-
chists and missionaries. Now, I have no hesitation in
saying, that if these various organizations were consoli-
dated, it would not only do much to overcome the apathy
of which I have complained, but it would enable us to hold
our ground with any denomination in the colony, instead
of being, as we too often are, “ nowhere ” in the field.
It has been often said, and with some asperity, “ This is
all the fault of the ministers!” and I readily admit that
there is, or at least has been, some color for the remark.
It must be admitted, that some of those who, in times long
gone by, assumed the name of Presbyterian ministers, were
not happily selected, or rather were not selected at all, but
came as adventurers, without any pretension to either
character or attainments. It was not to be expected that
gentlemen of education would place themselves or their
famiHes under the ministry of such men, or mix themselves
up with their vain janghngs and petty squabbles ; and
therefore it was not surprising that many of the leading
laymen of our denomination made this an excuse for
seceding from it, and connecting themselves with other
Churches. In this, however, I venture to think, these
gentlemen were not themselves altogether free from blame.


Had they known and chosen to exercise their privileges as
Presbyterians, they might have taken the matter practi-
cally into their own hands at the beginning; and instead
of permitting any one that dropped upon our shores, no
matter from what quarter, or with what credentials, to ex-
ercise his ministry, they might have memorialised the
Church of Scotland, and obtained, in due ecclesiastical
order, a supply of competent and reputable ministers.
For want of this, some of the finest districts of the colony
were for years occupied by men, of whom, as they are now
beyond human censure, it may suffice to say, that they did
no service to the cause of religion generally, and seriously
hindered the cause of Presbyterianism in particular.
The secession of three ministers from the Synod of
Australia in 1846, though I have no desire to question the
conscientiousness of those brethren, was, I think, wholly
unnecessary, and has greatly impeded the healthy action
of our denomination. I cannot, however, entirely acquit
the laity from all responsibility in connection with this
secession; for, if they could not have changed the views
of the seceding ministers, they might at least have with-
held their countenance, and left them to secede alone. And
now, eighteen years of contention having elapsed since the
secession, when all that really love their Zion are eager for
Union, a few individuals have been able to retard the nego-
tiations, simply because their congregations, in most of
which the majority is favorable to the Union, will not act
decidedly, and say, “We are resolved that our church shall
no longer be a byword and a proverb for strife and schism ;
and if you cannot go with us into the Union, which appears
to us to be offered on a sound basis, and on equitable
terms, we must, however reluctantly, go without you.” I
presume that these ministers, as conscientious men, would
not allow such an announcement to influence their conduct;


some of them, probably, would desire nothing better than
to be martyrs for their principles, mistaken as I think
they are; but they would at least be compelled to
seek a more congenial atmosphere, or to confine their
ministrations to a very select few. The whole body of our
congregations is unanimous as to the proposed Union, with
one or two uninfluential exceptions. It is intolerable, then,
that our chariot-wheels are thus to be taken off, and our
progress thus obstructed, by the unreasonableness—l say
this without the slightest desire to offend—of a few indivi-
duals, who, however estimable in their private capacity,
are not of such importance that the whole denomination is
to be sacrificed, our energies paralysed, our proper work as
a Christian church postponed, and the souls of perishing
sinners neglected, until their inordinate scrupulosity shall
have been satisfied.
11. But I must now proceed to consider, in the second
place, The Means hy which alone our Zion can he raised and
enlarged. “By whom shall Jacob arise ?”
It is obvious that the enlargement of our Zion must he effected
hg resolutely putting an end to those causes which have made us
“ small.” Let us have no more Apathy —no more Disunion.
Let us go on vigorously , and hand in hand !
Apathy in a church, my brethren, is simply the result of
apathy in the individual members; and the way to arouse
a church from apathy is for each member to begin by
rousing himself. “ None of us liveth to himself: ” whether
we intend it or not, we all exercise an influence upon
others; and it must needs be a matter of great concern to
every right-minded man that the influence he exercises
should be for good, and not for evil. A congregation, in
like manner, does not exist for itself: not only is it a con-
stitutional part of a church or ecclesiastical community,
but it stands in this world as a city set on a hill, which


cannot be hidden. A congregation consisting of faithful
and zealous Christians exercises a vast influence for good
in the locality in which it is established, and that influence
consists in the aggregate influence of the individuals that
compose it. If all the members of this congregation —and
I am sure you will pardon my freedom—were thoroughly
in earnest, what might you not individually and collectively
accomplish ? If, when anything was proposed for the ad-
vancement of Christ’s kingdom, you were all there, and all
ready—-if you all resolutely held aloof from carnal or
worldly compliances, and maintained, consistently and per-
sistently, a walk and conversation becoming the Gospel you
profess to believe—if even in your own families, and in the
circle of your own acquaintance only, you all made it mani-
fest whose you are and whom you serve, it is impossible
but that the savour of your goodly ointments would go
forth, and the world would take knowledge of you that you
had been with Jesus. Your influence would be known
and felt to an extent of which the apathetic Christian has
little conception; for not only those now around you, but
the generation that shall come after you, should rise up
and call you blessed.
And oh, beloved ! let us have no more disunion ! I know
that before you I may speak freely, for I know that you
have long felt concerned for the divisions that have made
the church of which we are a part, 11 small” and uninfluen-
tial. I need not tell you that the accomplishment of this Union
is much upon my own heart, and that I have laboured ear-
nestly these ten years that the broken walls of our Zion might be
builtup, even in troublous times. After many vexatious delays,
we are now approaching what I confidently hope may prove
the last and decisive conference on this matter. The issue
is in the hands of Him who reigns in Zion, and who alone
is able to control the hearts of men. Let it be our cry,


then —•“ 0 Lord of Hosts, how long wilt Thou be angry
against the prayer of Thy people ? Thou feedest them
with the bread of tears : and givest them tears to drink in
measure. Thou makest us a strife unto our neigh-
bours : our enemies laugh among themselves. Return, we
Ijeseech Thee, 0 God of Hosts : look down from heaven,
and behold, and visit this vine. Turn us again, 0 Lord
God of Hosts : cause Thy face to shine, and we shall be
saved.” (Ps. 80, 4—6, 14, 19.
Yes, my beloved brethren! these touching words of the
Psalmist direct us to the true answer to the question of my
text, “By whom shall Jacob arise?” Ix is by God alone.
Perhaps it is because we have not sufficiently remembered
this, and have trusted too much to our own wisdom and
te arm of flesh, that our success has been so long delayed,
jrhaps God has designed to teach as more conclusively
than we have heretofore been willing to acknowledge, that
the mountain is made a plain, not by might, nor by power,
but by His Spirit ! (Zech. iv. 6.)
In all our efforts for the enlargement of Zion, then, let
us remember that God alone can make our efforts of
any avail. He can work by means which are beyond our
reach or control. In the course of His Providence, He
can obstacles and furnish helps, which we do not fore-
see, anq of which we know nothing.* 5 But, most of all, let
us seek the outpouring of His Spirit, by Whom alone can
the wilderness become a fruitful field, and streams flow in
the desert. When the windows of heaven are opened, and
the blessing from on high is poured forth richly and co-
piously, then, but not till then, “ shall Jacob arise,” and
the Temple be rebuilt, and the headstone thereof shall be
* Since these words were spoken, they have been remarkably verified, and
our prayers remarkably answered, by the removal, and that in a very simple
manner, of a difficulty which had caused very grave anxiety to all the friends of
Union.


’••KlTr**'' + 'fa,
UUskC
f f / 4 a. 7
brought forth with the shoutings of Zion’s sons, saying,
“ Grace, grace unto it! ”
But let me add, that this enlargement of our Zion, for
\ i , ~ which we so earnestly long, cannot be accomplished, in i ; t 4
-■ y"1 fall extent and meaning of it, without a large revival of
personal religion in our own souls.. Let us b(jgin by ex|
amining ourselves individually before God. How far has*
each of us contributed to make Jacob “ small” by his own
personal sins, by conformity to this world, by neglect of
duty, by coldness and formality in religious services, or by
withholding needful aid ? Let us solemnly repent of our
shortcomings in the presence of Him that searcheth the
heart. “Let us join ourselves anew to the Lord in an
everlasting covenant, that shall not be forgotten.” Let us
resolve to consecrate all our talents to Christ, looking upo.
ourselves as His stewards, and responsible to him for the
use we make of all our privileges and opportunities. Let
us make the Word of God more and more the rule of our
lives, cleansing our way by the application of its sacred
precepts. Let us wait with regularity and punctuality, and
with sincere devotion, upon the ordinances of the sanctuary.
Pray always, and faint not. The Spirit of the' Lord is i|ot
straitened! His arm is not shortened! If we plead w '•h
Him as Amos pleaded, we may hope He will y and
say, “It shall not be!” In the language of |ie P ( . ,uist
let us then cry: “Let Thy hand be upon the man of
Thy right hand, upon the Son of Man whom Thou n adest
strong for Thyself: so will not we go back from Thee!
Quicken us, and we will call upon Thy name. Turn us
again, 0 Lord God of Hosts, cause Thy face to shine, and
so we shall be saved ! ”
Let us pray.
