





TH E C L AIM S
WESTERN POLYNESIA
THE FRIENDS OF CHRISTIAN MISSIONS
THE AUSTRALIAN COLONIES,
Come over ..... and help us. — Acts, xvi. 9.
SYSKIEY:
PRINTED BY D. L. WELCH, ATLAS GENERAL PRINTING OFFICE,
483, GEORGE STREET.




INTRODUCTION.
The following Address was published in the Sydney Morning Herald , on Saturday
the 7th instant. It was one of a series of papers that have appeared in that
journal and also in the Empire , relating to Western Polynesia.
The papers have had special reference to the New Hebrides group, and the pre-
sent was intended to complete the series, in as far as that group is concerned.
Since it was given to the public through the above medium, the thought has oc-
curred that it may be of advantage to the cause it is designed to serve, to publish
it in its present form, and the means of doing this having been furnished by a few
generous friends, the writer sends it forth with the earnest prayer, that it may
subserve, in some humble measure, tbe interest* of the cause it seeks to advance.
It has been suggested that a little information respecting the group, and espe-
cially the islands to which the other papers of the series have bad particular ref-
erence, will be an appropriate introduction, as this may fall into the hands of some
who have not access to these. One or two notes will also be added. In other
respects it is thought best to let the address remain almost verbatim as it appeared
in the Herald.
The New Hebrides group lies between latitnde 14° 29 x North, and 20 J 4 South;
and 160° 41', and 170° 21' East longitude. It extends 375 miles in the direction
of N.N.W. and S.S.E. The population is estimated at 120,000. Tbe islands on
which missionary operations are now being carried on are Aneiteum, Tana, Era-
manga, and Fate, or Sandwich Island. These with Espirito Santo and Mallicollo,
are the principal islands of the group. There are several others, however, some
of which are far from inconsiderable, but very little is known about them.
Christian teachers were placed on Tana, by Mr. Williams, in 1839, on the day
preceding that on which he fell at Eramanga. Our operations were subsequently
extended to Aneiteum and Fotuna, the most easterly islands of the group, and to
Niua and Fate, and a few months ago a footing was gained on Eramanga. 1 eachers
were placed on that island in 1840. We were obliged to remove them however
after the lapse of about twelve months, and all subsequent attempts to re-occupy
the island failed till that referred to above, which was made in June last year.
The Fotuna teachers were murdered by the natives several years ago, and it is
at present unoccupied. Niua has also been without teachers for some years. It
is a very small island, and the claims of the larger islands have been such, that
though its chief and people have long been very anxious to obtain a teacher, we


have not yet been able to give them one. On Aneiteum, the Rev. John Geddie, and
the Rev. John Inglis are labouring in circumstances of most encouraging promise*
They are assisted by several Samoan and Raratongan teachers, and by five or six
natives of the island. These latter have rendered very efficient aid of late years.
On the island of Tana we have one Samoan, and three Raratongan teachers; on
Fate two Samoans and one Raratongan, and on Eramanga, two Raratongans.
With respect to Tana and Fate, the way is prepared for the labour of foreign
missionaries, and other doors will, we doubt not, be opened, ere many years pass.
May the Lord of the harvest abundantly prosper the preparatory and other
labours now in progress, and in due time, send forth in adequate numbers, such
labourers as, by his blessing, shall be instrumental in diffusing far and wide the
savor of his name throughout the islands and groups of the vast Pacific 1 And
may many of these labourers go forth under the sanction, and sustained by the
Churches of the Australian Colonies!
A. W. M.
Redfern, Sydney, May 10, 1853.


THE NEW HEBRIDES.
CLAIMS ON THE FRIENDS OF CHRISTIAN MISSIONS.
No. £l.
“ Can ye not discern the signs of the times.”— Matt. xvi. 3.
We have now gone the round of the islands belonging to the
New Hebrides, on which missionary operations have been com-
menced. The largest islands of the group, and many of the
smaller, are still in the darkness of heathenism. These we have
not seen, and we know so little of them, that to attempt to
write particularly about them would be altogether unsatis-
factory. We would only state that Espirito Santo, and Mal-
iicollo are much larger than any of the islands now occupied;
and that, from all accounts, they are very fine islands, most
inviting fields for Missionary labor, and in all probability might
at once be brought under culture by Christian Teachers. Es-
pirito Santo is, according to Cook, about 200 miles in Circum-
ference, and Mallicollo 140 or 150.
Our attention is anxiously directed towards these islands,
and we are earnestly desirous of extending our efforts to them.
It is thought undesirable however, to go on opening doors, and
occupying fresh ground till we have the prospect of obtaining
competent laborers to take up and carry forward the work.
The truth is, we are to a great extent brought to a stand, and,
unless the help we need be speedily forthcoming, we shall be
in great danger of losing much of what has been gained. Our
native laborers cannot carry forward the work beyond a certain
point, and in many cases that point has been reached, so our
Missions in Western Polynesia are in a very critical state at
the present time.
We have shewn in the papers that have successively ap-
peared, that a great preparatory work has been done, and what
is wanted now is the means of turning that to account. We


have hitherto said little as to our object in the publication of
these papers. In the present article, we purpose to speak out
plainly and fully, with reference to that object. We are about
to take our leave of the New Hebrides, and before doing so,
we wish to say a few parting words. We should be sorry if
all that has been said about them should answer no end, beyond
exciting a little temporary interest, or furnishing a little amuse-
ment for the passing hour. In that case we should consider
our labour lost, and our time mis-spent. But what is the ob-
ject we have had in view, and to which we attach so much im-
portance ! What ends would we have answered by bringing
these islands, and the tribes that inhabit them, so prominently
forward i Our object is Missionary. If other ends are in any
degree answered, it is well; but it is not for these we write.
Our aim is, to serve the interest of the “ Kingdom that cannot
be moved,” to promote that great cause which may well be de-
nominated, The cause of the age —the cause of Christian Mis-
sions. We want to awaken compassion for the poor benighted
islanders—to stimulate the zeal, and move the sympathies of
those who have it in their power to bestow upon them that
precious boon which can raise them from their present deep
degradation, fit them to take a place among the civilized nations
of the earth, and prepare them for a glorious immortality. To
these degraded and wretched tribes, who cannot plead their
own cause, the writer feels himself an especial “debtor,” and
he desires to leave nothing undone that he can do, towards
urging their affecting and soul-stirring claims. “The eye af-
fects the heart.” The writer has seen those for whom he
pleads, and he feels for them, as those who have only heard of
them can hardly be expected to feel. There is one thing how-
ever, which all the true followers of the Saviour have in com-
mon—and it is the grand motive power. They all “ know the
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ”; they are all more or less
under the constraining influence of his love. And to all in
these Colonies who love the Saviour—to all who reverence his
last command, and who count it their highest honor and privi-
lege to do his will, and advance the interests of his kingdom—
to all such the writer would make his earnest appeal.


We have said that a great preparatory work has been done.
This has been effected at a great expense of money, and of
much with which money cannot be compared. Martyr blood,
the blood of Williams and Harris flowed at the very outset of
the undertaking; and of our faithful teachers not a few have
pursued their self-denying labors till they have sunk exhausted
into their last resting place, or obtained the crown of martyr-
dom at the hands of those they sought to save. A long dreary
“ night of toil” has been struggled through, and the dawn, so
long, and so anxiously waited for, has come at last. A morn
of most auspicious promise has opened upon us —all the more
welcome because of the preceding gloom.
Hope is brightest when it dawns from fears.
Now it will not be questioned that all this has been done under
the direction of Providence, that it has been virtually done by
God, and thatit must be with reference to some great and worthy
end. And what can that end be, but the complete evangelization
of these islands ? And how is that to be accomplished ? By the
instrumentality of the Church, of course. God is most assuredly
calling some part of that at the present time to undertake the
work. These islands have without doubt a claim on the Chris-
tian Church. Christians are debtors to them, as they are to
the whole heathen world, and the providence of God plainly
indicates that the time has arrived for discharging the debt.
It cannot be discharged by Christians in their collective capa-
city, so that there must be some particular section of the
Church, which from contiguity , or some other circumstances,
is under obligation to do it. The obligation was felt and ac-
knowledged fifteen years ago. At that time there were no
Churches nearer than Great Britain, in circumstances to at-
tempt the discharge of it. The subject was brought before
them, and she promptly responded. The results are before us;
their labor has not been in vain. Circumstances are altered
now. These Churches have their offsets, and representa-
tives on shores which almost overlook the islands of the sea.
These offsets, once feeble and dependent, are now vigorous
and flourishing, self-sustaining, and self-extending. In these
altered circumstances, where are we to look for the means of


bringing the islands in question under Missionary culture ?
We cannot now look with any hope to the Churches of Great
Britain or America, as they have their hands full. I suppose
there is not a single section of the Evangelical Churches of
these Countries that is not already committed to the culti-
vation of fields that will swallow up all their resources for
many years to come. If they can carry forward to completion
the operations in which they are now engaged in different
parts of Polynesia, it is about all we can reasonably hope for
considering the urgency of other claims, to expect them to
take up all, or even any considerable part of the now unoccu-
pied fields of Western Polynesia is, in the present state of
things, out of the question.*
Where then are we to look ? 'The Continent of Europe
has enough to do with itself. That some sections of the Evan-
gelical Churches there, should be stretching out a helping
hand is matter of most grateful satisfaction, and we are far from
regarding lightly what they are doing; but it is plain that they
are not in a position to do much, and it is equally plain that
they are not the parties to whom we ought to look for the oc-
cupation of the fields in question. But where are we to look ?
If Great Britain, and America, and the Continent of Europe
fail, is not the case hopeless ? Well, it strikes us that the door
of hope for Western Polynesia has not yet been discovered.
Let us look again for “signs of promise.” All will admit that
there is something in contiguity. If parties can be found who
are only some fifteen hundred miles distant from the field, in-
stead of fifteen thousand, it will surely be admitted that there
is at least one thing in their circumstances that seems to indi-
cate that the Great Master calls them to the cultivation of that
part of his vineyard, to which our present enquiry is directed.
It will be further admitted that there is something in com-
mercial relations, present and prospective. Now what countries
have the most extensive intercourse with Western Polynesia?
Who are now, and who are likely to continue to be, in pos-
session of the commerce of these islands ? It is true, that at
See No. 1., page 15.


present, that is not very considerable, but the time is doubtless
coming, when it will be far from trifling. And is it not meet
and right, that those who go to them for purposes of gain, or
find an outlet among them for articles of merchandise, should
put them in possession of the pearl of great price ?
Again, if we can find parties by whom these islanders have
been extensively injured —if we can find a country whose sons
have gone forth among them, and inflicted upon them the
cruellest wrongs, thereby conveying a most eroneous impres-
sion respecting the true character of that country, and bringing
the deepest reproach on its religion. If such a country can be
found, is not it under special obligation to make reparation,
and do something, if not to vindicate its own character, to
wipe away the foul stains which have been brought upon the
Christian religion ?
And if we find further a conjuncture of the most remarkable
providential circumstances, all pointing in the same direction,
surely we can be at no loss to discover who are the parties of
whom we are in search. We know who specially controls and
directs every thing connected with the great cause of the world’s
evangelization. Now, is there not something very significant
in the way in which the claims of these islands have been
brought under the notice of Christians in these Colonies,
within the past three or four months, and in the unusual de-
gree of interest that has been excited ? Is there not something
very remarkable in the fact, that this should have been at a
time when every other door of hope is closed; when the ne-
cessity for prompt and extended effort is greater than it ever
has been ; and when the parties called upon to make the re-
quired effort are in circumstances immensely more advan-
tageous than they were ever before ? A few years ago they
were not in a position to undertake so great a work. But
now , when wealth is flowing in upon them in a manner alto-
gether unprecedented, when such a harvest is being reaped
throughout the Australian Colonies, as was perhaps never
equalled in any country, is it not remarkable that just at this
juncture, the God of providence should set before them, in the
manner he is doing, this most safe, and advantageous outlet


for their surplus wealth ? Surely there is a designed adjust-
ment in this matter. Surely the hand of Him who knows the
perils consequent upon the rapid accumulation of wealth, as
well as the ends to which it can most advantageously be ap-
plied, is apparent. And if so, how gladly and thankfully
should those who are surrounded with the dangers of rapidly
growing fortunes, avail themselves of this divinely provided
safety-valve ! How should they hasten to secure investments,
and take shares in this grand, and most profitable enterprise !
How should they press forward to “ make unto themselves
friends of the mammon of unrighteousness,” and approve
themselves faithful stewards to Him to whom the silver and the
gold belong ! Bear with us, Christian friends, while we thus
give free expression to our views and feelings on this matter.
Suffer the word of brotherly and affectionate warning. Suffer
us to remind you of the solemn responsibility that attaches to
your present position. He, who “ distributed to every man
severally as he will,” has bestowed on you the means of con-
ferring upon your fellow men the most inestimable blessings;
He has reposed in you a sacred trust; and He says to each of
vou, with reference to what he still regards as His property,
“ Occupy till I come.”
As regards Sydney , the friends there have so far, done nobly,
and we ask nothing further of them than that they go forward.
Most earnestly would we deprecate anything like flinching, or
halting, or turning aside. The present we regard as a crisis
in the Missionary history of these Colonies; and, of course,
consequences the most momentous depend on the movements
of those Who are called to lead the way, and responsibilities
the most weighty attach to them. To Sydney is assigned the
high honor and privilege of standing in the fore-front, and
giving the key note to the great movement. Let her there-
fore continue to act in a manner worthy of her high position.
That she should have to push her way through difficulties, and
go forward amidst the misgivings and opposition of some, is no
matter of surprise. It is but what all who have attempted
similar undertakings, have had to do before her.
What is wanted now is, that the Sister Colonies should follow


her example; and surely they will not be slow to do so, when
they hear that the Congregational Churches in Sydney and
Maitland, with the aid of friends, belonging to other denomi-
nations, in Parramatta and elsewhere, have raised within the
past few months as much as £1000; that a Society has been
formed ; that two Missionaries have been sent for to labor in
the New Hebrides, whose permanent support the Society has
guaranteed; and that a regular system for collecting funds is
about to be organized. When they hear of these auspicious
movements, we cannot think that they will be backward to
follow so good an example ; and we cannot but cherish the
delightful hope that ere many years pass, we shall see a ge-
neral combination, embracing all the Congregational Churches
of Australia, and as many others as may be disposed to unite
with them, in one great Missionary confederacy, whose agents
shall go forth far and wide, scattering the glorious light of life
throughout the isles of the Pacific. Soul reviving prospect?
Friends of the Redeemer ! hasten to its realization ! # Your
metropolitan city has set you a noble example. She has taken
her proper place in the great movement; and will not you
rally round her, and unite your efforts with hers in the holy
cause ? Without your aid, she will be comparatively feeble,
for she has immense claims from other quarters to which she
is liberally responding, but your united strength and resources
would enable you at once to attempt something on a scale
worthy of yourselves, and proportioned to the greatness and
urgency of the demands. v
On the Ministers and Deacons of the respective churches
rests the responsibility of making a movement, and leading the
way. On them, under God, all depends. If they will lead,
the Churches will surely follow. What a position therefore
is that which they occupy ! What solemn responsibilities at-
tach to them ! What an exalted privilege is open to them !
On the one hand, what guilt may be incurred ! What oppor-
tunities lost! On the other, what good may be accomplished !
What results realized ! When the proposed object is looked
at in its bearings on the present and the future, on time and
* See No. 11., page 15.


eternity, what weighty responsibilities, what momentous con-
sequences does it involve ! Home prosperity will doubtless
be materially affected by the course the parties referred to may
adopt. The connection between missions to the heathen, and
home prosperity is now matter of experience and of history.
It has been found that union, life, and extension at home, are
inseparably connected with attention, and liberality to the
cause abroad. In this matter the words of the Saviour have a
striking verification: “ Give, and it shall be given unto you ;
good measure pressed down, and shaken together, and running
over, shall men give into your bosom. For with the same
measure that ye mete withal, it shall be measured unto you
again.” In order to healthy action, there must be free circu-
lation, and in the case before us where there is the one, there
will be the other. “The liberal soul shall be made fat; and
he that watereth, shall be watered also himself.”
Future generations at home will feel the effects. They will,
if the right course be adopted, feel these as we are now feeling
those of the proceedings of the “ Fathers and Founders” of the
great Missionary Associations which are now exerting so
mighty an influence throughout the earth; The holy life con-
veying pulsations will be felt down through successive ages,
till the glorious end at which missions aim be fully realized.
Present and future generations of heathen nations will feel
the effects. But who shall say to what extent? What pen
can describe, what mind conceive the amount of misery that
will be averted, of blessing that will be conferred ! As the
waters of life flow out over these arid wastes, extending and
widening as they flow, what blessed consequences will be re-
alized ! War, horrid war, shall cease with all its long" dire
train of evils; woman shall cease to be enslaved and degraded;
the aged and the afflicted shall cease to be treated with cruelty
and neglect; parents will love and cherish their offspring; and
all the demon-like passions which now fill these lands with
pollution and blood, will give place to the benign “ spirit
which is from above.” Oh, would it not be an inestimable pri-
vilege to have any part, however humble, and how much more
to have a principal hand in effecting ends such as these ?


And eternity will feel the effects. We necessarily live for
eternity, and every thing we do tells more or less on eter-
nity, but in this case the eternal element is pre-eminently
present! To promote the interests of an eternal kingdom, to
save souls from an eternal ruin, and fit them for an eternal
heaven !—in a word, to rescue from the wreck of humanity
minds which shall expand with ever growing intelligence,
brighten with ever increasing glory, and approximate to a
nearer and nearer resemblance to the great Fountain of Being
and Blessedness throughout eternity ! Brethren ! this is our
glorious object—this the high calling to which you are now
summoned. And it is for you to consider and determine as to
the course you will adopt.
The grand question is, Does not God, in his providence, call
you at the present time to occupy a decided and effective po-
sition with reference to Christian Missions? Does he not
intimate that the time has come when you should attempt
something in a manner and on a scale very different from any
thing you have yet done ; and, are there not circumstances con-
nected with Western Polynesia, especially the New Hebrides,
that seem to indicate that that group has been opened and pre-
pared for you, and is designed to be your field, in connection
with the esteemed friends who are now at work upon it ?
May you be guided to the right conclusion !
Very solemn is the relative position of Christians in these
Colonies, and their neighbours, the islanders of Western
Polynesia. The one are in full possession of all that is need-
ful for their present and eternal well-being. A bountiful
Providence is giving them all things richly to enjoy. The
other presents a perfect contrast. With the exception of what
is needful for the bare support of animal life, they have nothing.
Their present state is deplorable in the extreme, and over their
prospects for eternity, there hangs a cloud of impenetrable
gloom. Oh, their case is a heart-rending one ! Their more
favored brethren, while themselves are so enriched with all
bountifulness, that they have nothing left to wish, have it in
their power to extend to them a divinely provided remedy,
adapted to meet the whole case, to change immensely their


entire condition, as regards the life that now is, and to fit them
for, and put them in possession of, the glorious life beyond.
And what mighty sacrifices must they make in order to accom-
plish such ends? Sacrifices! Why, they must avail them-
selves of an inestimable privilege ; they must place themselves
in circumstances of less danger than they are in now; they
must put themselves in the way of securing great present ad-
vantages, and of reaping a richer reward, than they might
otherwise do, at that day, when they and their brethren shall
be confronted before their common Lord ! They need deny
themselves no single necessary, surrender no single privilege,
incur no danger, endure no suffering. What then stands in
the way? Why should they not at once'bestir themselves?
Oh ! why ?
The opportunity will soon be past. Those for whom we
plead, and those to whom we make our appeal, will shortly be
in eternity. All we intend to do, all we ever shall do, for the
cause of our Redeemer, must be done quickly. The circum-
stances are urgent and affecting beyond what tongue can ex-
press, or thought conceive. While we linger and hesitate, life
wears away; souls pass into eternity; night draws rapidly on,
the call becomes louder and louder, “ Work while it is day ! ”
Oh, that such an impulse might come upon us from the glo-
rious fountain of all holy influence himself, as might effectually
arouse us, and make us so feel, and so act, as that the highest
honors of eternity may be ours at that day, when we shall be
called to give an account of our stewardship !
Redfern , May 4 th.
A. W. MURRAY.
P.S. The writer thinks it well to add, that though he has
had the Congregationalists chiefiy in view in this address, and
though he regards them as the parties more especially under
obligation to the New Hebrides, he cherishes no exclusive or
sectarian spirit towards other bodies. He would rejoice, and
he doubts not that his missionary brethren, and the Society
with which he is identified, would also rejoice to welcome the


agents of any Evangelical section of the Church of Christ in
these Colonies as coadjutors in the work of evangelizing
Western Polynesia. Between Aneiteum and the Indian
Archipelago there is ample room for us all.
A. W. M.
No. I.
It is to be recollected that much work is yet to be done in Eastern
Polynesia. The old missions must be sustained, and there is much
new ground yet to be occupied.
One rather extensive group, the Marquesas, is at present without
the gospel, and there are a great many smaller islands for which
nothing has yet been done. These must not be overlooked, and the
only parties who can be expected to occupy them, in as far as pre-
sent appearances go, are the American Board of Commissioners for
Foreign Missions, the Wesleyan Missionary Society, and the Lon-
don Missionary Society.
The section of the United Presbyterian Church in Nova Scotia,
with which Mr. Geddie is connected, and the Reformed Presbyterian
Church in Scotland, to which Mr. Inglis belongs, may be expected
to occupy one or two more islands of the New Hebrides, besides
Aneiteum. The Agents of the London Missionary Society will, it
is hoped, go forward with the preparatory work, but whether they
will be able permanently to occupy any part of Western Polynesia
is at present doubtful. Thus we seem shut up to look mainly to
Australia, for the means of evangelizing that extensive region.
No. 11.
Some may be disposed to entertain doubts as to the practicability
of the union proposed. But why should they, seeing that the thing
is no novelty ? Wherein would such a combination really differ from
the union of the various County and other Auxiliaries which com-
pose the London Missionary Society, except as regards the single
point of distance, and facilities for intercourse?
Wherein, again, would it differ from the great Missionary Soci-
eties of the United States of America? What should hinder the
various Colonies of Australia from combining in the manner proposed,
any more than the United States ? If it be said distance, and the
difficulty of intercourse, we should like to know whether, thirty
years ago, when the A B C F Missions, and the American Baptist
Missionary Society were formed, this object would not have applied
with equal force to the United States, yet after the lapse of so many
years these Societies remain, and, with growing resources and effi-
ciency, are diffusing the blessings of the gospel throughout the
heathen world. Difficulties did arise some years ago in the working


of these Societies, but they arose from a totally different cause than
the one in question, viz. : a cause which, blessed be God, we Eng-
lishmen have nothing to fear—the accursed and iniquitous system
of slavery. Besides, the difficulty in question will be daily dimi-
nishing, and in the course of a few years it will doubtless be reduced
to very small dimensions.
Should the fewness and feebleness of the Churches at present
existing throughout the Colonies be made an objection, we reply
that that is a difficulty which will be constantly decreasing; and
that there is no more likely way to secure a growing augmentation,
both as regards strength and numbers, than by taking a fair share
of the proposed work. We want nothing unreasonable, nothing
disproportionate. All we ask is, that something be attempted ac-
cording to the ability which God has given.
Should it be further objected that the claims of home are so great
as to preclude the possibility of doing much abroad. We fully ad-
mit the claims of home in all their greatness and urgency, but we
hold that the heathen have also great and urgent claims, which are
not less obligatory than those of the destitute Colonists, and sure
we are that the interests of both will be best promoted by each
being attended to according to its respective claims. There is no
need for the one duty to interfere with, much less supersede the
other.
According to one great and most attractive feature of the Divine
character, the heathen have a stronger claim than our colonial
brethren. We are taught in the unerring standard that the more
poor, helpless, and wretched any individual or community is, the
more fit it is to engage the infinite sympathies of the all-compas-
sionate One. And how beautifully and affectingly is this principle
illustrated in the teaching and miracles of Jesus ! With what irre-
sistible attractiveness did suffering and helplessness make their way
to his compassionate heart! To the “ poor” he preached the gospel,
and towards the poor, the suffering, and the helpless, his words and
deeds of mercy were most frequently directed. We cannot be wrong
in imitating Him.
It may be admitted that on some grounds, the Colonists have a
priority of claim, but on the important one referred to, the claims of
the heathen are decidedly the strongest. Where is the man or
woman, throughout the length and breadth of the Australian Co-
lonies, who may not have access to the Bible ? In their case there
is comparative destitution, and they are in imminent danger. The
means of safety however are within their reach. In the case of the
heathen, there is absolute destitution. “ How shall they believe in
Him of whom they have not heard ? and how shall they hear with-
out a preacher? and how shall they preach, except they be sent ? ”
PRINTED BY U. L. WELCH, ATLAS OFFICE, GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY.




