

The Life, Trial, and Execution of
JOHN TAWELL,
For the Murder of Sarah Hart, at Salthill
■
Life of J Taweli
H sppcnci ©a tbe a/rivsl sf Tavsl II *v I •*,. \ - v
float© W-Iti. to lil7, k* was svitenril eit t<i («, wt«-
Tnenl, and utade t clerk in Hie internal R-vrsns'H’.
tfee, fiydm-f . So rontinneJ mim* t iu** io ibis sjtne-
tvs, so>l frem tb» eircooisfencc of * very few -nv-
ksiny St that period in 111- colony, lio lisd ISr
spporloclty, altlioneli s convict, of m ikme * great
•tesl of m ney. SHbseqnriitlv be «.*< euitdsynil iu
ihe rarer it ot Or Bowman, who .«< cbiet pkv*ici«>i
St the feisoitst in Sydoey. H-re I'jw-il sltuinsil *
scry |rwi insight into chenii try, and al.o r-fr rij
mocb credit foe his general .><«j rondoet and vervi-
cn behalt uf Ihv Tattitutioii He hsd si-otn thM
capacity wnay advaotages, in s peenniarv inrint of
view ; so nmcb so, that ou obtaining his ’tiekrl of
lenvc." in 1875, he war enabled. lioui *vb*l Ss had
antasaed whilst iir.Cbv oolonv. Iu opens store at Par-
entails, which town it shout seventeen tuilev Iron*
Sydney, Sad tbe secarod plaav ot auy importance in
■re eolonv. From this time he seen auiaied usrllk
vwey rapidly, and ll was oor long before Faw- H <u it<t
•oninrand a horse aad gig. in which lie -a- **•-«.-
Corned la ga journeya to and froio Syilu-v lo I'ainm-
llH ia ace ef whieh lie had a aaxrow cacapent being
neerdored by twfi notorioas biirhrnugers, named,
STalnraley and Webber, wbo at that period were (he
terror 6t all the road* In the colour . Upon lhi» *c-
•asMb be was dremlfall / Hinted end looled of coo-
aidwable sum of money by tbe de-p-i edoet, who
shortly afterwards torfeitrri their lives un ihe gat-
lowa io Sydney gaol foe the numerous rnhheviee and
murders they had cominlued whilst in ine “Bush, '
A bout 1 SOT Taweli set np n cbeanist’. shop m .Sydney
upon a very lojge scale, b-ing the tint of the kieil
ta tha oalony. His profits iu it were iin.oeo-o, as he
■as enabled lo obtain large order- fioiu the uiotuer
corsolry j tie also inorens-d his wealih by fiklttg a
partner, a respectable men, wbo had arrived froat
bcotlaad with a very good capital. In less than mm
months, bow ever, ihe partnership wav dissolved, hut
U was well known tha* Taweli madecousidi rchly hy
rile connection. Whilst in Sydney hi* habits was
more Iha a ordinarily studious and regular although
tl was stated be gambled very mneb. It is a well
known fast that be increased his wealth amusingly,
by lending out sums of motley to small capitalists cc
at an immense per eentage; be also give-lily pot-
chased the most saleable comodities on ihe new ar-
rivals of shipping trout all parts of tlia World. Hie
gains too, wers eonsideratdy increased by specula-
ting In tbe whaling trade ; and at the time of hi- de-
parture from the colony, lie was part proprietor ot
two or three whaling ships. He also risked ranch of
bis capital in trafficktng’willi New Zeuland and oilier
Aonlb tea Islands. It is supposed, that at the time
of his leaving tbe polony his wealth contd not have
been much less than tgo, OOill. Taw'd!’# comiuct it
appears, during Ihe many years be was iu llie colony
was narked by strict decorum ; and it is a well
known faet that he was tbe means ot benefiting the
Society of Friends, of which lie was original'y a
member, to a very considerable Smniouni during his
absence abioad. It was generally known In Sydney
that Taweli had been a Quaker, whieh certainly
tended to excite more respect and sympathy for hint
which may be said Iu a g'eat measure to have led to
his subsdqnent wealth aud respeetibility. ll i» »
perfect troth, tbet for sooie time previous to bis
leaving the colony, he was in tbe habit ot miring
in the highest society, not excepting the tables of
the govenor and the executive council, and other au-
ihoritieaof the colony.
i The gosaips of Aylefbury must have a bit af mys.
liclam in their matters, and tlie following (ale is
riscqjaled abont with a fealing of awe by some was*
minded people :—A few days helore the (rial, as
IBri Taweli was driving from her own rreulsnco tv
the Hvrkham; stead station, a pair ol ponies to »
four-wheeled vehicle, winch she had frequently
been accustomed to drive before, tbe ponic* sud-
denly stopped, and nothing could induce them to ge
on. The whip was vigorously plied, and then more
gentle means were resorted to, bnt all tailej ; the
ponies, although previously, they had besn the most
docile animals possible, remained stationary ; no-
thing could induce them lo advance, aud the re-nlt
wax, that Mrs Taweli was obliged to walk to the
station This stery immediately got wind. At the
time sense said that It wes a strange thing—and
that in (heir opinion it wav a foreshadowing of evil.
Wow, however, when the (rial has terminated as it
haa done, it ie more talked of; end ro»ny who ere
not superstitions allude to it as one of those atiange
coincidences for which there ii no povnble way ef
setiffiscfecriy seconding.
, A highly respectable Quaker of Brtkhampsteed
also tali# this extraordinary tale Abonl a year
ega, the stillness end decorum of the Quakers’
jjrethif at Berkhempsteed, at which Tawsll attend-
ed, was disturbed by one of tbe male raerahen,
■bo (iiddeniy rose from his seat, end exclaimed with
frantic minestne**, tbet there was thru present a
j-esson who wat at that very moment meditating a
most fearful prime. Hit conviction was so strong
diet ho passionotely be-iugat tbit individual, whu-
ever bo might be, to rafiect upon ibe wickedness uf
his ixteatien. end to implere his Maker s pwtdoo lor
his murderous thoughts. As may tie imagroeb, 'he
Friends wvte throw n into great euustriu.itmn l»y
lb - «Tts"g** * n d tiupiwitims aTpwn 1 , and the iuu
~ vs - He np -ft alarm
Trial ud Sißtraec,
Tka trial look place oa Merck 14 k Tbr
rack for tear*. at tbe opening uf tke court s-»
•f tke Moot riotous character.
The prisons*-, John Taweli, aged 81, wo*
iHired is tke garb of tke Society of Frienon.
notwithstanding kta expulilon front that body
many years ago.,
Mr Sergeant Bytes aad P< etnlergast app* ar-
•4 for the prosecution, Mr Fitarov Kelly, Mr
O'Malley, and Q uniting, for ihe defence.
The prisoner challenged thirteen of the ju-
rera, aader the directum of Mr O'Malley.
Mary Ann Ashley ; I live in Bath place,
•altkilL On the Ist of Jannary, Sarah Haft
was living next door to me I saw the pi iso-
mer that day go into her house between four
aad five in the evening. 1 heard a stifled sort
of eeraam between six and seven o’clock. 1
took the eandle and opened the door. I saw
the prisoner coming out of Mrs. Han's house
There ie a little gardes in front of each house,
eeven yards long. I went lo Mrs Hart’s gate
before tke prisoner got out. He appeared agi-
tated, and could not open the o atc There
was a small button, whidh was hard to op, n.
I said nothiag to him about what I heat d whea
I wes opening the gate tor him. I bad made
a remark before. Directly I went out I said
'I am afraid my neighbour is i 1.” 1 should
think I spoke loud enough to be heard by the
prisoner. He was ia tbe pathway coming
dawn, about aix or seven yards from me. So
reply was made ; not a word. When I g»t
to Mrs Hart’s gate I could hear her still, w hilat
I was opening the gate It was the saute sti-
fled sort of scream still. V’his 1 opened the
frate I merely ssid to tbe prisoner, “ There is a
ittle button sir; allow me to open it.’’ He
made no reply. He was agitated. Mrs Harts
door was shut when I got to it I opened the
door and went in I saw her lying with her
head near the door Her dress was disordered
Her peltieoats were up nea ly to hi r knees
and one of her stockings down and torn, and
her left shoe off Her limbs were not
t took her hands and raised her, and sari, On,
Mrs Hart, what’s the matter, hit* made no repiy
I roth came from the corners of her mouth Her
eyes being fixed 1 thought she was dying 1
saw ou the tabla a bottle & a glass, with s >me
porter, lit tie mcra than half full. There was
a glass at eaoh sida of the table In one glass
'here was porter, there wee only a little troth
in tbe other Mrs Burnett, whom 1 railed in,
used the empty one to get some water for Mrs
Hart She could not drink any 1 emit one of
Mrs Burnett's apprentices to Dr Cbampney’s
Mr 'I h< tnas, formerly shopman 10 Mr.
Hug.es chemist 9S Biehopgate Street 1 on-
ticn, (now dead) deposed that the prieo-
tier *>n fits- lg<r»f Unanrv IBl§ jsn’mpe-n
»2 and V o'rlcttk in tbe d*f non bought*
bottle of prussic acid.
The learned counsel celled several witnesses to
character, and the court adjourned to Friday.
Baron Parke summed up the evidence ou wi-
day morning ; and the jury after an abseu'-u of hajf
an hour, returned with a verdiet of qvfity. T-Tfe
judce then proceeded tof-aest the mhl *-«tnc» of
death upon the prisoner. He told them he bud
been found guilty, hr ajur»of his own countrvinca
upon evidenoe which had perfectly satisfied Baton
Parkejand them, and he thought every fair m.d
reasonable person who heard it that be hsd
•omoiitred a nonet aeneous, diabolical, ctrwardlv,
murder upon hie unfertuaate vUdim, he then ras-
ed the sentence of death in the ueuai manner, or
tiering that his body, after execution should be bu-
ried within the precint* of the gaol. The unhappy
man received the sentence with an extraordinary
degree of firmness ; and beyond the aervousne.-a
which he manifested throughout he betrayed vary
Utile emotion, although numbers of perron* is
emirt were iu tears and some <rf the females sobbed
SrOUd. f , >-
Confession.
It appears ihat Taweli drew up e coufesrloo vwi.e
daps since, of which be made a copy ar a quai ter be.
fore five on frijay morning. This siareroeot lie pla-
ced In tbe hands of the Kev Mr. Co*, the rksplsia,
which lie begged of that gentleman ta keep, bill be
said he made no objection to the substance of it being
made known t • the public. The statement will oc
so far satisfactory to the public that it take* awa/
all donbt as to the gnilt ot the deceased. He nost-
fes«ed he sn guilty ot the murder of Sarah Hart,
and also that he was guilty of the attempt to innr-
der her on the previous occasion, in September l»«t.
He also staled he did not commit the murder from
pecuniary motivea, but from tbe dread that the re-
lation in wh'ch he stood towards Sarah Hart should
transpire and come to the ears of bis wife
The following it a brief statement of the manner in
which Taweli conducted himself.
John Taweli passed Ihe whole night with almost un-
abated firmness, only giving way to a tew tears and
amotions occasionally. He listened with becoming
attention many portions of Srcipturp, and i*ad ma-
ny himself,joining with propriety in observations a-
riseing from thejn. and not only did he listen to, and
onite in the prayers that were offers I lot him hut he
several time* rctirrd Into his sieeping cell, and fall-
ing on his knees pray id aloud nio-t fervently and
penitently. His firmness never forsook him to the
last. - • • •
Execution
The honr ai iiounctd for execution was 8 o'clock
but about a quia lei of an hour befora 8 a sudden*
motion in the erowd showed that the momeut had
root© —tin* last fatal moment when (he pri-or-rr was
to be launched into eternity, to meet his creator.
It was an awfnl movement that movement of the
crowd. The most intense silence prevailed— not a
word escaped after the crowd had said.“lie Is com-
ing." The wri tolled man was greatly moved wltco
he saw the crowd ; lie trembled exci edmgiy, was
sc 1 secly able to stand as he stepped cn the platform
under the drop. Caicr.itt the exi rut oner and ot*e
of the turnkeys, led him out of the gaol, and Ms.
Sheriff, the govetner, atood iromediaily behind him
The cap having to en mmieadiateh draw it over biiu
he knelt down to pray, wb.ch he did with the um.il
apparent fervour. After he had been pray ing lor
about a minnte and a halt he was hniped to rr.va by
C.ilcralt, who proceeded to plate the rope tow d
his ueek Here however there seemed to be au sue
neeeasary delay which might have been avoided ttg
alittie totethooglit. Their being no chatofioiu (be
cross beaut Irom which to fit Ihe othe .end of Cha
rope, a considerable time elaps-o bcfweu the rope
being placed ronn a his neck and the tying !| to the
cross beam, a) wlm h oQnsiJci able <ilf-ai:sltu tton
was m.imsfested by the spectators made
tw o or three turns with the rope, before it w as prop-
erly tixsd to ll.e beam. Thi- peiforineil toe drop
lel,l and the wretched man b- caiue at onco vmlently
convulsed—his arms and leg* contiacted—they fell
again—were again contra ted—fail again—again
eoniaicted —and he,hung a mo'iuntesa corpse, save
that he osctllaied to the ino'toa of the wind wfiieia
was blowing strongly at tile time. Fioojbly five
miuates elapsed between the appearing of tbe ccre.-
nal ,anp the ileath. Fr om the first hi* hands wjs
tigl fly bound together, and lie. kept bis fingers lock-
ed within each oilier as iffhe still prayed in -p.te uf
but boilil) snffering. It was expected that be woo; I
be recused with groous and exeeratious tiy the
crowd, bvt wc are pleased to be able to rWate, fart
no anrh disgracetol proceeding took p.ace. On sue
contrary a most deconis and becoming -Hence frav
observed. This conduct of the people contrasts vrt r
favorably with the behaeour ot the rrowds who as-
semble at >ewgate on s.milar occasions.
The body we* allowed In bang for n,. l our, it *•»»
then taken twit not cot tiowu He was execuied in
the Quaker# diess The hody-was irutuedtalHv In-
trued in ihe p eciitsnfrhe gaol, though op (olasf
c gnt his tru uos uad hopes, ftu r toe strung apple
ration* tiudrou Ihe -object, thot bis bony would he
deb' ered np to tin ui X: he f ia'*, koavrvr, war dug
tar v d“J s Fiinier, Guirehead
