

f “We must all toil or steal (howsoever ‘‘Lift up a Standard for the People.”
we name our stealing).” —Thomas —lsaiah Ixii., 10.
Carlyle, in Sartor Resartus.
THE
LAND QUESTION
What it is, and How only it can be Settled.
AN APPEAL TO NATIONS;
SHOWING THE EVILS OF PRIVATE PROPERTY IN LAND
AND THE NEED FOR
THE NATIONALISATION OF THE LAND.
HENRY GEORGE
Author of “Progress and Poverty.”
EDWARDS, DUNLOP & COMPANY, Limited,
SYDNEY, BRISBANE and LONDON,
r ss (


CONTENTS.
Mr. Justice Fitzgerald speaks truth.
Nothing peculiar in Irish distress.
The Irish Question much more than an Irish Question.
Inadequacy of proposed remedies.
The first principle to settle ; Whose land is it ?
False position of Irish leaders—Landlord’s right is
labour’s wrong.
The doctrine of vested rights—The great-great-grand-
son of Captain Kidd.
Private property in land must be abolished —the only
way, the easy way.
Political considerations—a frank avowal of principle
the best policy.
Appeals to national animosities wrong and injurious.
How to combine the strongest force against the least
resistance.
What Americans may learn in the discussion of the
Irish Question, and what American experience may
teach.
A little island or a little world.
Grandeur of the Civilisation that is possible.
Barbarism of the Civilisation that is.'
True Radicalism the true Conservatism.
“ In hoc Signo Vinces.”


“We hold these truths to be self-evident: That all men are created equal; that they are
endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable rights ; that among these are life,
liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. That to secure these rights, governments are
instituted among men, deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed; that
whenever any form of government becomes destructive of these ends, it is the right of
the people to alter or to abolish it.— Declaration of Indtpendenck.
LAND QUESTION:
What it is, and how only it can be Settled.
AN APPEAL TO NATIONS:
SHEWING THE EVILS OF PRIVATE PROPERTY IN LAND
AND THE NEED FOR
THE NATIONALISATION OF THE LAND,
HENRY GEORGE,
Author of “PROGRESS AND POVERTY .”
FOURTH EDITION OF “THE IRISH LAND QUESTION.”
EDWARDS, DUNLOP & COMPANY, Limited,
SYDNEY, BRISBANE and LONDON.


ANNOUNCEMENT.
A Fourth Edition of 5,000 copies has now become necessary, a
convincing proof of the vast and increasing interest of the people
in the great Land Question. The original title of this work was
“ The Irish Land Question,” but as the circumstances which caused
the adoption of this title have been considerably modified, a new
title was deemed necessary, hence the change of title in the second
and following editions.


THE LAND QUESTION.
I.
In charging the Dublin jury in the Land League cases, INIr.
Justice Fitzgerald told them that the land laws of Ireland were
more favourable to the tenant than those of Great Britain,
Belgium, or the United States.
As a matter of fact, Justice Fitzgerald is right. For in
Ireland certain local customs and the provisions of the Bright
Land Act mitigate somewhat the power of the landlord in his
dealings with the tenant. In Great Britain, save by custom
in a few localities, there are no such mitigations. In Belgium
I believe there are none. There are certainly none in the
United States.
This fact which Justice Fitzgerald cites will be re-echoed
by thq enemies of the Irish movement. And it is a fact well
worth the consideration of its friends. For the Irish move-
ment has passed its first stage, and it is time for a more
definite understanding of what is needed and how it is to be got.
It is the fashion of Land League orators and sympathising
newspapers in this country to talk as if the distress and dis-
quiet in Ireland were wholly due to British oppression, and our
National House of Representatives recently passed by unani-
mous vote a resolution which censured England for her
treatment of Ireland. But, while it is indeed true that
Ireland has been deeply wronged and bitterly oppressed by
England, it is not true that there is—in an economic sense, at
least—any peculiar oppression of Ireland by England now.
To whatever cause Irish distress may be due, it is certainly
not due to any English laws which press on industry more
heavily in Ireland than in any other part of the United Kingdom.
And, further than this, the Irish land system, which is so
much talked of as though it were some peculiarly atrocious
system, is essentially the same land system which prevails in
all civilised countries, which we of the United States have
accepted unquestioningly, and have extended over the whole
temperate zone of a new continent —the same system which
all over the civilised world men are accustomed to consider
natural and just.
Justice Fitzgerald is unquestionably right.
As to England, it is well known that the English landlords
exercise freely all the powers complained of in the Irish land-
lords, without even the slight restrictions imposed in Ireland.
As to Belgium, let me quote the high authority of the
distinguished Belgian publicist, M. Emile de Laveleye, of the
University of Liege. He says that the Belgian tenant-farmers
—lor tenancy largely prevails even where the land is most


_j. THE LAND QUESTION.
minutely divided—are rack-rented with a mercilessness un-
known in England or even in Ireland, and are compelled to
vote as their landlords dictate !
And as to the United States, let me ask the men who to
applauding audiences are nightly comparing the freedom of
America with the oppression of Ireland—let me ask the
Representatives who voted for that resolution of sympathy
with Ireland, this simple question: What would the Irish
landlords lose, what would the Irish tenants gain, if, to-morrow,
Ireland were made a State in the American Union and American
law substituted for English law ?
I think it will puzzle them to reply. The truth is that the
gain would be to the landlords, the loss to the tenants. The
simple truth is, that, under our laws, the Irish landlords could
rack-rent, distrain, evict, or absent themselves, as they pleased,
and without any restriction from Ulster tenant-right or legal
requirement of compensation for improvements. Under our
laws they could, just as freely as they can now, impose what-
ever terms they pleased upon their tenants —whether as to
cultivation, as to improvements, as to game, as to marriages,
as to voting, or as to anything else. For these powers do not
spring from special laws. They are merely incidental to the
right of property; they result simply from the acknowledgement
of the right of the owner of land to do as he pleases with his
own—to let it, or not let it. So far as law can give them to
him every American landlord has these powers as fully as any
Irish landlord. Cannot the American owner of land make, in
letting it, any stipulation he pleases as to how it shall be used,
or improved, or cultivated ? Can he not reserve any of his
own rights upon it, such as the right of entry, or of cutting
wood, or shooting game, or catching fish ? And, in the
absence of special agreement, does not American law give
him, what, as I understand it, the law of Ireland does not
now give him, the ownership at the expiration of the lease of
all the improvements made by the tenant ?
What single power has the Irish landowner that the
American landowner has not as fully ? Is not the American
landlord just as free as is the Irish landlord to refuse to rent
his lands or his houses to any one who does not attend a
certain church or vote a certain ticket ? Is he not quite as
free to do this as he is free to refuse his contributions to all
but one particular benevolent society or political committee ?
Or, if, not liking a certain newspaper, he chooses to give
notice to quit to any tenant whom he finds taking that
newspaper, what law can be invoked to prevent him ? There
is none. The property is his, and he can let it or not let it,


as he wills. And, having this power to let or not let, he has
power to demand any terms he pleases.
That Ireland is a conquered country; that centuries ago
her soil was taken from its native possessors and parcelled
out among aliens, and that it has been confiscated again and
again, has nothing to do with the real question of to-da}' —no
more to do with it than have the confiscations of Marius and
Sylla. England, too, is a conquered country; her soil has
been confiscated again and again ; and, spite of all talk
about the Saxon oppressor and the down-trodden Celt, it is
not probable that, after the admixture of generations, the
division of landholder and non-landholder anymore coincides
with distinction of race in the one country than in the other.
That Irish land titles rest on force and fraud is true; but so
do land titles in every country —even to a large extent in our
own peacefully settled country. Even in our most recently
settled States, how much land is there to which title has been
got by fraud and perjury and bribery—by the arts of the
lobbyist or the cunning tricks of hired lawyers, by double-
barreled shot-guns and repeating rifles !
The truth is that the Irish land system is simply the
general system of modern civilization. In no essential feature
does it differ from the system that obtains here—in what we
are accustomed to consider the freest land under the sun.
Entails and primogeniture and family settlements may be in
themselves bad things, and may sometimes interfere with
putting the land to its best use, but their effects upon the
relations of landlord and tenant are not worth talking about.
As for rack-rent, which is simply a rent fixed at short
intervals by competition, that is in the United States even a
more common way of letting land than in Ireland. In our
cities the majority of our people live in houses rented from
month to month or year to year for the highest price the
landlord thinks he can get. The usual term, in the newer
States, at least, for the letting of agricultural land is from
season to season. And that the rent of land in the United
States comes, on the whole, more closely to the standard of
rack, or full competition rent, there can be, I think, little
doubts That the land of Ireland is, as the apologists for
landlordism say, largely under-rented (that is, not rented for
the full amount the landlord might get with free competition)
is probably true. Miss C. G. O’Brien, in a recent article in
the “ Nineteenth Century,” states that the tenant-farmers
generally get for such patches as they sublet to their labourers
twice the rent they pay the landlords. And we hear inciden-
tally of many “good landlords,” i.e., landlords not in the


habit of pushing their tenants for as much as they might get
by vigorously demanding all that any one would give.
These things, as well as the peculiar bitterness of com-
plaints against middle-men and the speculators who have
purchased encumbered estates and manage them solely with a
view to profit, go to show the truth of the statement that the
land of Ireland has been, by its present owners, largely
underlet, when considered from what we would deem a
business point of view. And this is but what might be
expected*'' Human nature is about the same the world over,
and the Irish landlords as a class are no better nor worse than
would be other men under like conditions. An aristocracy
such as that of Ireland has its virtues as well as its vices, and
is influenced by sentiments which do not enter into mere
business transactions —sentiments which must often modify
and soften the calculations of cold self-interest. But with us
the letting of land is as much a business matter as the buy ing
or selling of pig-iron or of stocks. An American would not
think he was showing his goodness by renting his land for low
rates, any more than he would think he was showing his
goodness by selling pig-iron for less than the market price, or
stocks for less than the quotations. So in those districts of
France and Belgium where the land is most subdivided, the
peasant proprietors, says M. de Laveleye, boast to one another
of the high rents they get, just as they boast of the high prices
they get for pigs or for poultry.
The best measure of rent is, of course, its proportion to the
produce. The only estimate of Irish rent as a proportion of
which I know is that of Buckle, who puts it at one-fiourth of
the produce. In this country I am inclined to th.nk one-
fourth would generally be considered a moderate rentt Even
in California there is considerable land rented for one bird the
crop, ’and some that rents for one half the crop ; while,
according to a writer in the “ Atlantic Monthly,” the common
rent in that great wheat-growing section of the new North-
west now being opened up is one half the crop !
It does not seem to me that Justice Fitzgerald’s statement
can be disputed. The American land system is really worse
for the tenant than the Irish system. For with us there is
neither sentiment nor custom to check the force of competition
or mitigate the natural desire of the landlord to get all he can.
Nor is there anything in our system to prevent or check
absenteeism, so much complained of in regard to Ireland.
Before the modern era, which has so facilitated travel and
communication, and made the great cities so attractive to
those having money to spend, the prevalence of Irish ab-


senteeism may have been due to special causes, but at the
present day there is certainly .nothing peculiar in it. Most of
the large English and Scotch landholders are'absentees for the
greater part of the year, and many of them live permanently
or for long intervals upon the Continent. So are our large
American landowners generally absentees. In New York, in
San Francisco, in Washington, Boston, Chicago, and St. Louis,
live men who own large tracts of land which they seldom or
never see. A resident of Rochester is said to own no less
than four hundred farms in different States, one of which (I
believe in Kentucky) comprises thirty-five thousand acres.
Under the plantation system of farming and that of stock-
raising on afgrand scale, which are developing so rapidly in
our new States, very much of the profits go to professional
men and capitalists who live in distant cities. Corporations
whose stock is held in the East or in Europe own much greater
bodies of land, at much greater distances, than do the London
corporations possessing landed estates in Ireland. To say
nothing of the great land-grant railroad companies, the
Standard Oil Company probably owns more acres of Western
land than all the London companies put together own of Irish
land. And, although landlordism in its grosser forms is only
beginning in the United States, there is probably no American,
wherever he may live, who cannot in his immediate vicinity
see some instance of absentee landlordism. The tendency to
concentration born of the new era ushered in by the application
of steam shows itself in this way as in many others. To those
who can live where they please, the great cities are becoming
more and more attractive.
And it is further to be remarked that the evils of absentee-
ism are much exaggerated. That is to say, that to his tenantry
and neighbourhood the owner of land in Galway in Kilkenny
would be as much an absentee if he lived in Dublin as if he
lived in London, and that, if Irish landlords were compelled to
live in Ireland, all that the Irish people would gain would bo,
metaphorically speaking, the crumbs that fell from the land-
lord’s tables. For if the butter and eggs, the pigs and the
poultry, of the Irish peasant must be taken from him and
exported to pay for his landlord’s wine and cigars, what differ-
ence does it make to him where the wine is drunk or the cigars
are smoked ?
But it will be asked : If the land system which prevails in
Ireland is essentially the sameasthat which prevails elsewhere,
how is it that it does not produce the same results elsewhere ?
I answer that it does everywhere produce the same kind o


results. As there is nothing essentially peculiar in the Irish
land system, so is there nothing essentially peculiar in Irish
distress. Between the distress in Ireland and the distress in
other countries there may be differences in degree and differ-
ences in manifestation; but that is all.
The truth is, that as there is nothing peculiar in the Irish
land system, so is there nothing peculiar in the distress which
that land system causes. We hear a great deal of Irish emi-
gration, of the millions of sons and daughters of Erin who have
been compelled to leave their native soil. But have not the
Scottish Highlands been all but depopulated ? Do not the
English emigrate in the same way, and for the same reasons?
Do not the Germans and Italians and Scandinavians also emi-
grate ? Is there not a constant emigration from the Eastern
States of the Union to the Western —an emigration impelled
by the same motives as that which sets across the Atlantic ?
Nor am I sure that this is not in some respects a more demo-
ralising emigration than the Irish, for I do not think there is
any such monstrous disproportion of the sexes in Ireland as in
Massachusetts ? If French and Belgian peasants do not
emigrate as do the Irish, is it not simply because they do not
have such “long families?”
There has been recently deep and wide-spread distress in
Ireland, and but for the contributions of charity many of her
people would have perished for want of food. But, to say
nothing of such countries as India, China, Persia, and Syria,
is it not true that within the last few years there have been
similar spasms of distress in the most highly civilized countries
—not merely in Russia, and in Poland, but in Germany and
England ? Yes, even in the United States.
Have there not been, are there not constantly occurring, in
all these countries, times when the poorest classes are reduced
to the direst straits, and large numbers are only saved from
starvation by charity.
When there is famine among savages it is because food
enough is not to be had. But this was not the case in Ire-
land. In any part of Ireland, during the height of what was
called the famine, there was food enough for whoever had
means to pay for it. The trouble was not in the scarcity of
food. There was, as a matter of fact, no real scarcity of food,
and the proof of it is that food did not command scarcity prices.
During all the so-called famine, food was constantly exported
from Ireland to England, which would not have been the case
had there been any more true famine in the one country than
in the other. During all the so-called famine a practically un-
limited supply of American meat and grain could, through the


NOTHING PECULIAR IN IRISH DISTRESS* g
existing mechanism of exchange, have been poured into Ire-
land so quickly that the relief would have been felt instan-
taneously. Our sending of supplies in a national war-ship
was a piece of vulgar ostentation, fitly paralleled by their
ostentatious distribution in British gunboats, under the nominal
superintendence of a royal prince. Had we been bent on relief,
not display, we might have saved our Government the expense
of fitting up its antiquated war-ship, the British gunboats their
coal, the Lord Mayor his dinner, and the royal prince his valu-
able time. A cable draft, turned in Dublin into postal orders,
would have afforded the relief, not merely much more easily
and cheaply, but in less time than it took our war-ship to get
ready to receive her cargo ; for the reason that so many of
the Irish people were starving was—not that the food was not
to be had, but that they had not the means to buy it. - Had
the Irish people had money or its equivalent, the bad seasons
might have come and gone without stinting any one of a full
meal. Their effect would merely have been to determine
toward Ireland the flow of more abundant harvests.
I wish clearly to bring to view this point. The Irish famine
was not a true famine arising from the scarcity of food. It was
what an English writer styled the Indian famine—a “financial
famine,” arising not from scarcity of food, but from the poverty
of the people. The effect of the short crops in producing
distress was not so much in raising the price of food as in
cutting off the accustomed incomes of the people. The masses
of the Irish people get so little in ordinary times that they
are barely able to live, and when anything occurs to interrupt
their accustomed incomes, they have nothing to fall back
on.
Yet is this not true of large classes in all countries ? And
are not all countries subject to just such famines as this Irish
famine ? Good seasons and bad seasons are in the order of
nature, just as the day of sunshine and the day of rain, the
summer’s warmth and the winter’s snow. But agriculture is,
on the whole, as certain as any other pursuit, for even those
industries which may be carried on regardless of weather are
subject to alternations as marked as those to which agriculture
is liable. There are good seasons and bad seasons even in
fishing and hunting, while the alternations are very marked in
mining and in manufacturing. In fact, the more highly differ-
entiated branches of industry which advancing civilization
tends to develop, though less directly dependent upon rain and
sunshine, heat and cold, seem increasingly subject to alterna-
tions more frequent and intense. Though in a country of more
diversified industry, the failure of a crop or two could not have


such widespread effects as in Ireland, yet the countries of more
complex industries are liable to a greater variety of disasters.
A war on another continent produces famine in Lancashire;
Parisian milliners decree a change of fashion, and Coventry
operatives are only saved from starvation by public alms ; a
railroad combination decides to raise the price of coal, and
Pennsylvania miners find their earnings diminished by half,
or totally cut off; a Dank breaks in New York, and in all the
large American cities soup-houses must be opened !
In this Irish famine which provoked the land agitation,
there is nothing that is peculiar. Such famines on a smaller or
a larger scale are constantly occurring. Nay, more, the fact
is, that famine—just such famine as this Irish famine—con-
stantly exists in the richest and most highly civilized lands.
It persists even in “ good times” when trade is “ booming ; ”
it spreads and rages whenever from any cause industrial
depression comes. It is kept under—or, at least, kept from
showing its worst phases—by poor rates and almshouses, by
private benevolence, and by vast organised charities, but it
still exists, gnawing in secret when it does not openly rage.
In the very centres of civilization, where the machinery of pro-
duction and exchange is at the highest point of efficiency—
where bank-vaults hold millions, and show-windows flash
with more than a prince’s ransom, where elevators and ware-
houses are gorged with grain, and markets are piled with
all things succulent and toothsome, where the dinners of
Uucullus are eaten every day, and, if it be but cool, the very
little greyhounds wear dainty little blankets—in these centres
of wealth and power and refinement, there are always hungry
men and women and little children. Never the sun goes down
but on human beings prowling like wolves for food, or huddling
together like vermin for shelter and warmth. “ Always with
You ” is the significant headingunder which a New Yorkpaper,
in these most prosperous times, publishes daily the tales of
chronic famine ; and in the greatest and richest city of the
world—in that very London, where the plenty of meat in the
butchers’ shops seemed to some savages the most wondrous of
all its wonderful sights—in that very London, the mortuary
reports have a standing column for deaths by starvation.
But no more in its chronic than in its spasmodic form is
famine to be measured by the deaths from starvation. Per-
fect, indeed, in all its parts must be the human machine if it
can run till the last bit of available tissue be drawn on to feed
its fires. It is under the guise of disease to which physicians
can give less shocking names, that famine, especially the
chronic famine of civilisation, kills. And the statistics of mor-


tality, especially of infant mortality, show that in the richest
communities famine is constantly at its work. Insufficient-
nourishment, inadequate warmth and clothing, and unwhole-
some surroundings, constantly, in the very centres of plent} T
swell the death rates. What is this but famine—just such
famine as the Irish famine ? It is not that the needful things
are really scarce ; but that those whose need is direst have not
the means to get them, and, when not relieved by charity
want kills them in its various ways. When, in the hot mid-
summer, little children die like flies in the New York tenement
wards, what is that but famine ? And those barges crowded
with such children that a noble and tender charity sends down
New York harbour to catch the fresh salt breath of the Atlantic
—are they not fighting famine as truly as was our food-laden
war-ship and the Royal Prince’s gunboats ? Alas ! to find
famine one has not to cross the sea.
There was bitter satire in the cartoon that one of our illus-
trated papers published when subscriptions to the Irish famine
fund were being made—a cartoon that represented James Gor-
don Bennett sailing away for Ireland in a boat loaded down
with provisions, while a sad-eyed, hungry-looking, tattered
group gazed wistfully on them from the pier. The bite and
the bitterness of it, the humiliating sting and satire of it, were
in its truth.
This is “ the home of freedom,” and “ the asylum of the
oppressed ; ” our population is yet sparse, our public domain
yet w T ide ;we are the greatest of food producers, yet even here
there are beggars, tramps, paupers, men torn by anxiety for
the support of their families, women who know not which way
to turn, little children growing up in such poverty and squalor
that only a miracle can keep them pure. “ Always with You,”
even here. What is the week or the day of the week that our
papers do not tell of man or woman w r ho, to escape the
tortures of want, has stepped out of life unbidden ? What
is this but famine ?
Let me be understood. lam not endeavouring to excuse
or belittle Irish distress. lam merely pointing out that dis-
tress of the same kind exists elsewhere. This is a fact I want
to make clear, for it has hitherto, in most of the discussions of
the Irish Land Question, been ignored. And without an appre-
ciation of this fact the real nature of the Irish Land Question
is not understood,nor the real importance of the agitation seen.
What I contend for is this: That it is a mistake to consider
the Irish Land Question as a mere local question, arising out
of conditions peculiar to Ireland, and which can be settled by


remedies that can have but local application. On the contrary,
I contend that what has been brought into prominence by Irish
distress, and forced into discussion by Irish agitation, is some-
thing infinitely more important than any mere local question
could be ; it is nothing less than that question of transcendent
importance which is everywhere beginning to agitate, and, if
not settled, must soon convulse, the civilized world—the
question whether, their political equality conceded (for where
this has not already been, it soon will be), the masses of man-
kind are to remain mere hewers of wood and drawers of water
for the benefit of a fortunate few ? whether, having escaped
from feudalism, modern society is to pass into an industrial
organisation more grinding and oppressive, more heartless and
hopeless, than feudalism ? whether, amid the abundance their
labour creates, the producers of wealth are to be content in
good times with the barest of livings, and in bad times to
suffer and to starve ? What is involved in this Irish Land
Question is not a mere local matter between Irish landlords and
Irish tenants, but the great social problem of modern civiliza-
tion. What is arraigned in the arraignment of the claims of
Irish landlords is nothing less than the widespread institution
of private property in land. In the assertion of the natural
rights of the Irish people is the assertion of the natural rights
that, by virtue of his existence, pertain everywhere to man.
It is probable that the Irish agitators did not at first
perceive the real bearing and importance of the question they
took in hand. But they—the more intelligent and earnest of
them, at least —must now begin to realise it. * Yet, save,
perhaps, on the part of the ultra Tories, who would resist any
concession as the opening of a door that can not again be shut,
there is on all sides a disposition to ignore the real nature of
the question, and to treat it as springing from conditions pecu-
liar to Ireland. On the one hand, there is a large class in
England and elsewhere, who, while willing to concede or even
actually desiring that something should be done for Ireland,
fear any extension of the agitation into a questioning of the
rights of landowners elsewhere. And, on the other hand, the
Irish leaders seem anxious to confine attention in the same way,
evidently fearing that, should the question assume a broader
aspect, strong forces now with them might fall away and
perhaps to a large extent, become directly and strongly
antagonistic.
But it is not possible to so confine the discussion ; no more
* The Irish World which, though published in New-York, has exerted a large influence
upon the agitation on both sides of the Atlantic, does realise, and has from the first
frankly declared, thftt the fight must be against landlordism in toto and everywhere..


possible than it was possible to confine to France the questions
involved in the French Revolution; no more possible than it
was possible to keep the discussion which arose over slavery
in the Territories confined to the subject of slavery in the
Territories. And it is best that the truth be fully stated and
clearly recognised. He who sees the truth, let him proclaim
it, without asking who is for it or who is against it. This is
not radicalism in the bad sense which so many attach to the
word. This is conservatism in the true sense.
What gives to the Irish Land Question its supreme sig-
nificance is that it brings into attention and discussion—nay,
that it forces into attention and discussion, not a mere Irish
question, but a question of world-wide importance.
What has brought the land question to the front in Ireland,
what permits the relations between land and labour to be seen
there with such distinctness—to be seen even by those who
cannot in other places perceive them—is certain special con-
ditions. Ireland is a country of dense population, so that
competition for the use of land is so sharp and high as to
produce marked effects upon the distribution of wealth. It is
mainly an agricultural country, so that production is concerned
directly and unmistakably with the soil. Its industrial
organisation is largely that simple one in which an employing
capitalist does not stand between labourer and landowner, so
that the connection between rent and wages is not obscured.
Ireland, moreover, was never conquered by the Romans, nor
until comparatively recently, by any people who had felt in
their legal system the effect of Roman domination. It is the
European country in which primitive ideas as to land tenures
have longest held their sway, and the circumstances of its
conquest, its cruel misgovernment, and the differences of race
and religion between the masses of the people and those among
whom the land was parcelled, have tended to preserve old
traditions, and to direct the strength of Irish feeling and the
fervour of Irish imagination against a system which forces
the descendant of the ancient possessors of the soil to pay
tribute for it to the representative of a hated stranger. It is
for these reasons that the connection between Irish distress
and Irish landlordism is so easily seen and readily realised.
But does not the sams relation exist between English pau-
perism and English landlordism—between American tramps
and the American land system ? Essentially the same land
system as that of Ireland exists elsewhere, and, wherever it
exists, distress of essentially the same kind is to be seen. And
elsewhere, just as certainly as in Ireland, is the connection
between the two that of cause and effect.


When the agent of the Irish landlord takes from the Irish
cottier for rent his pigs, his poultry, or his potatoes, or the
money that he gains by the sale of these things, it is clear
enough that this rent comes from the earnings of labour, and
diminishes what the labourer gets. But is not this in reality
just as clear when a dozen middle-men stand between labourer
and landlord ? Is it not just as clear when, instead of being
paid monthly or quarterly or yearly, rent is paid in a lumped
sum called purchase money ? Whence come the incomes
which the owners of land in mining districts, in manufacturing
districts, or in commercial districts, receive for the use of their
land ? Manifestly they must come from the earnings of
labour—there is no other source foom which they can come.
From what are the revenues of Trinity Church Corporation
drawn, if not from the earnings of labour ? What is the source
of the income of the Astors, if it is not the labour of labour-
ing men, women, and children ? When a man makes a fortune
by the rise of real estate, as in New York and elsewhere many
men have done within the past few months, what does it
mean ? It means that he may have fine clothes, costly food, a
grand house luxuriously furnished, etc. Now these things
are not the spontaneous fruits of the soil; neither do they fall
from heaven, nor are they cast up by the sea. They are pro-
ducts of labour—can only be produced by labour. And hence,
if men who do not labour get them, it must necessarily be at
the expense of those who do labour.
It may seem as if I were needlessly dwelling upon a truth
apparent by mere statement. Yet, simple as this truth is, it
is persistently ignored. This is the reason that the true
relation and true importance of the question which has come
to the front in Ireland are so little realised.
To give an illustration : In his article in the “ North
American Review ” last year, Mr. Parnell speaks as though the
building up of manufactures in Ireland would lessen the com-
petition for land. What justification for such a view is there
either in theory or in fact ? Can manufacturing be carried on
without land any more than agriculture can be carried on with-
out land ? Is not competition for land measured by price, and,
if Ireland were a manufacturing country, would not the value
of her land be greater than now ? Had English clamour for
“ protection to home industry” not been suffered to secure the
strangling of Irish industries in their infancy, Ireland might
now be more of a manufacturing country with larger population
and a greater aggregate production of wealth. But the tribute
which the landowners could have taken would likewise have
been greater. Put a Glasgow, a Manchester, or a London in


one of the Irish agricultural counties, and, where the landlords
now take pounds in rent, they would be enabled to demand
hundreds and thousands of pounds. And it would necessarily
come from the same source—the ultimate source of all incomes
—the earnings of labour. That so large a proportion of the
labouring class would not have to compete with each other for
agricultural land is true. But they would have to do what is
precisely the same thing. They would have to compete with
each other for employment—for the opportunity to make a
living. And there is no reason to think that this competition
would be less intense than now. On the contrary, in the
manufacturing districts of England and Scotland, just as in
the agricultural districts of Ireland, the competition for the
privilege of earning a living forces wages to such a minimum
as, even in good times, will only give a living.
What is the difference ? The Irish peasant cultivator hires
his little farm from a landlord, and pays rent directly. The
English agricultural labourer hires himself to an employing
farmer who hires the land, and who out of the produce pays to
the one his wages and to the other his rent. In both cases
competition forces the labourer down to a bare living as a nett
return for his work, and only stops at that point because, when
men do not get enough to live on, they die and cease to com-
pete. And, in the same way, competion forces the employing
farmer to give up to the landlord all that he has left after
paying wages, save the ordinary return of capital—for the
profits of the English farmer do not, on the average, I
understand, exceed five or six per cenT And in other
businesses, such as manufacturing, competition in the same
way forces down wages to the minimum of a bare living,
while rent goes up and up. Thus is it clear that no change
in methods or improvements in the processes of industry
lessens the landlord’s power of claiming the lion’s share.
I am utterly unable to see in what essential thing the condi-
tion of the Irish peasant would be a whit improved were Ireland
as rich as England, and her industries as diversified. Tor the
Irish peasant is not to be compared with the English tenant-
farmer, who is really a capitalist, but with the English agricul-
tural labourer and the lowest class of factory operatives. Surely
their condition is not so much better than that of the Irish
peasant as to make a difference worth talking about. On the
contrary, miserable as is the condition of the Irish peasantry,
sickening as are the stories of their suffering, I am inclined to
think that for the the worst instances of human degradation one
must go to the reports that describe the condition of the labour-
ing poor of England, rather than to the literature of Irish


misery. For there are three things for which, in spite of their
poverty and wretchedness and occasional famine, the very
poorest of Irish peasants are by all accounts remarkable—the
physical vigour of their men, the purity of their women, and
the strength of the family affections. This to put it mildly, can
not be said of large classes of the labouring populations of
England and Scotland. In those rich manufacturing districts
are classes stunted and deteriorated physically by want and
unwholesome employments; classes in which the idea of female
virtue is all but lost,and the family affections all but trodden out.
But it is needless to compare sufferings and measure
miseries. I merely wish to correct that impression which leads so
many people to talk and write as though rent and land tenures
related solely to agriculture and to agricultural communities.
Nothing could be more erroneous. Land is necessary to
all production, no matter what be its kind or form ; land is the
standing-place, the workshop, the store-house of labour ; it is
to the human being the only means by which he can obtain
access to the material universe or utilize its powers. Without
land man cannot exist. To whom the ownership of land is
given, to him is given the virtual ownership of the men who
must live upon it. When this necessity is absolute, then does
he necessarily become their absolute master. And just as this
point is neared—that is to say, just as competition increases
the demand for land—just in that degree does the power of
taking a larger and larger share of the earnings of labour
increase. It is this power that gives land its value ; this is
the power that) enables the owner of valuable land to reap-
where he has not sown—to appropriate to himself wealth which
he has had no share in producing. Rent is always the de-
vourer of wages. The owner of city lands takes in the rents
he receives for his land the earnings of labour just as clearly
as does the owner of fanning land. And whether he be work-
ing in a garret, ten stories above the streets, or in a mining
drift thousands of feet below the earth’s surface, it is the
competition for the use of land that ultimately determines what
proportion of the produce of his labour the labourer will get
for himself. This is the reason why modern progress does
not tend to extirpate poverty ; this is the reason why, with
all the inventions and improvements and economies which
so enormously increase productive power, wages every-
where tend to the minimum of a bare living. The cause that in
Ireland produces poverty and distress—the ownership by some
of the people of the land on which and from which the whole
people must live—everywhere else produce the same results.
It is this that produces the hideous squalor of London and


Glasgow slums ; it is this that makes want jostle luxury in the
streets of rich New York, that forces little children to mono-
tonous and stunting toil in Massachusetts mills, and that fills
the highways of our newest States with tramps.
iv.
The facts we have been considering give to the Irish agita-
tion a significance and dignity that no effort for the redress of
merely local grievances'; no struggle for mere national indepen-
dence, could have. As the cause which produces Irish distress
exists everywhere throughout modern civilization, and every-
where produces the same results, the question as to what
measures will fully meet the case of Ireland has for us not
merely a speculative and sentimental interest, but a direct
and personal interest.
For a year and more the English journals and magazines
have been teeming with articles on the Irish Land Question ;
but, among all the remedies proposed even by men whose
reputation is that of clear thinkers and advanced Liberals, I
have seen nothing which shows any adequate grasp of the
subject. And this is true also of the measures proposed by
the agitators, so far as they have proposed any. They are
illogical and insufficient to the last degree. They neither dis-
close any clear principle nor do they aim at any result worth
the struggle.
From the most timid to the most radical, these schemes
embrace one or more of the following propositions :
ist, To abolish entails and primogenitures and other legal
difficulties in the way of sales.
2nd, To legalise and extend tenant-right.
3rd, To establish tribunals of arbitrament which shall decide
upon appeal as to the rent to be paid.
4th, To have the State buy out the landlords and sell again
on time to the tenants.
The first of these propositions is good in itself. To make
the transfer of land easy would be to remove obstacles which
prevent its passing into the hands of those who would make
the most out of it. But, so far as this will have any effect at
all, it will not be toward giving the Irish tenants more merci-
ful landlords; nor yet will it be to the diffusion of landed pro-
perty. Those who think so shut their eyes to the fact that
the tendency of the time is to concentration.
As for the propositions which look in various forms to the
establishment of tenant-right, it is to be observed that, in so
far as they go beyond giving the tenant surety for his improve-
ments, they merely carve out of the estate of the landlord an
estate for the tenant. Even if the proposal to empower the


i 8 THE LAND QUESTION.
courts, in cases of dispute, to decide what is a fair rent wete
to amount to anything (and the Land Leaguers say it would
not), the fixing of a lower rent as the share of the landlord
would merely enable the tenant to charge a higher price to his
successor. Whatever might thus be done for present agricul-
tural tenants would be of no use to future tenants, and nothing
whatever would be done for the masses of the people. In fact,
that the effect would be to increase rent in the aggregate, there
can be no doubt. Whatever modification might be madein the
landlord s demands, the sum which the out-goingtenant would
ask would be very certain to be all he could possibly get, so that
rent m the aggregate, instead of being diminished, would be
screwed up to the full competition or rack-rent standard.
What seem to be considered the most radical propositions yet
made are those for the creation of a “ peasant proprietary ”
the State to buy out the landlords and resell to the tenants, for
annual pa}unents extending over a term of years, and covering
principal and interest. Waiving all practical difficulties, and
they are very great, what could thus be accomplished ?
Nothing real and permanent. For not merely is this, too, but a
partial measure, which could not improve the condition of the
masses of the people, or help those most needing help, but no
sooner were the lands thus divided than a process of concen-
tration would infallibly set in, which would be all the more rapid
from the fact that the new landholders would be heavily mort-
gaged. The tendency to concentration, which has so steadily
operated in Great Britain, and is so plainly showing itself in
our new States, mustoperatein Ireland,and would immediately
begin to weld together again the little patches of the newly
created peasant proprietors. The tendency of the time is
against peasant proprietorships; it is in everything to concen-
tration, not to separation. The tendency which has wiped out
the small landowners, the boasted yeomanry of England
which in our new States is uniting the quarter-sections of pre-
emption and homestead settlers into great farms of thousands
of acres—is already too strong to be resisted, and is constantly
becoming stronger and more penetrating. For it springs from
the inventions and improvements and economies which are
transforming modern industry—the same influences which are
concentrating population in large cities, business into the hands
of great houses, and, for the blacksmith making his own nails,
or the weaver working his own loom, substitutes the factory
of the great corporation.
That a very great deal that the English advocates of
peasant proprietorship have to say about the results of their
favourite system in continental Europe is not borne out by


the facts, an} 7 one who chooses to look over the testimony may
see. But it is useless to discuss that. Peasant proprietorship
in continental Europe is a survival. It exists only among
populations which have not felt fully the breath of the new
era. It continues to exist only by virtue of conditions which
do not obtain in Ireland. The Irish peasant is not the French
or Belgian peasant. He is in the habit of having very “ long
families,” they very short ones. He has become familiar with
the idea of emigrating; they have not. He can hardly be
expected to have acquired those habits of close economy and
careful forethought for which they are so remarkable ; and
there are various agencies, among which are to be counted the
national schools and the present agitation, that have roused in
him aspirations and ambitions which would prevent him from
continuing to water his little patch with his sweat, as do the
French and Belgian peasant proprietors, when he could sell it
for enough to emigrate. Peasant proprietorship, like that of
France and Belgium, might possibly have been instituted in
Ireland some time ago, before the railroad and the telegraph
and the national schools and the establishment of the steam
bridge across the Atlantic. But to do it now to any extent,
and with any permanency, seems to me about as practicable
as to go back to hand-loom weaving in Manchester. Much
more in accordance with modern tendencies is the notice 1 have
recently seen of the formation of a company to buy up land in
southern Ireland, and cultivate it on a large scale; for to
production on a large scale modern processes more and more
strongly tend. It is not merely the steam-plough and harvest-
ing machinery that make the cultivation of the large field more
profitable than that of the small one; it is the railroad, the
telegraph, the manifold inventions of all sorts. Even butter
and cheese are now made and chickens hatched and fattened
in factories.
But the fatal defect of all these schemes as remedial
measures is, that they do not go to the cause of the disease.
What they propose to do, they propose to do merely for one
class of the Irish people—the agricultural tenants. Now, the
agricultural tenants arenot so large nor so poor a class (among
them are in fact many large capitalist farmers of the English
type) as the agricultural labourers, while besides these theie
are the labourers of other kinds —the artisans, operatives,
and poorer classes of the cities. What extension of tenant-
right or conversion of tenants into partial or absolute pro-
prietors is to benefit them ? Even if the number of owners of
Irish soil could thus be increased, the soil of Ireland would
still be in the hands of a class, though of a somewhat larger


class. And the spring of Irish misery would be untouched.
Those who had merely their labour would be as badly off as
now, if not in some respects worse off. Rent would still
devour wages, and the injustice involved in the present system
would be intrenched by the increase in the number who
seemingly profit by it.
It is that peasant proprietors would strengthen the existing
system that makes schemes for creating them so popular
among certain sections of the propertied classes of Great
Britain. This is the ground on which these schemes are
largely urged. These small landowners are desired that they
may be used as a buffer and bulwark against any questioning
of the claims of the larger owners. They would be put for-
ward to resist the shock of “ agrarianism,” just as the women
are put forward in resistance to the process servers. ‘ ‘ What!
do you propose to rob these poor peasants of their little home-
steads ? ’ would be the answer to any one who proposed to
attack the system under which the larger landholders draw
millions annually from the produce of labour.
And here is the danger in the adoption of measures not
based upon correct principles. They not only fail to do any
real and permanent good, but they make proper measures more
difficult. Even if a majority of the people of Ireland were
made owners of the soil, the injustice to the minority would be
as great as now, and wages would still tend to the minimum,
which in good times means a bare living, and in bad times
means starvation. Even were it possible to cut up the soil of
Ireland into those little patches into which the soil of France
and Belgium is cut in the districts where the movccllement
prevails, this would not be the attainment of a just and healthy
social state. But it would make the attainment of a just and
healthy social state much more difficult.
What, then, is the true solution of the Irish problem?
The answer is as important to other countries as to Ireland,
for the Irish problem is but a local phase of the great problem
which is everywhere pressing upon the civilised world.
With the leaders of the Irish movement the question is,
of course, not merely what ought to be done, but what can be
done. But to a clear understanding of the whole subject, the
question of principle must necessarily precede that of method.
We must decide where we want to go before we can decide
what is the best road to take.
The first question that naturally arises is that of right.
Among whatever kind of people such a matter as this is dis-
cussed, the question of right is sure to be raised, This, to me,


seems a very significant thing ; for I believe it to spring from
nothing less than a universal perception of the human-mind—
a perception often dim and vague, yet still a universal per-
ception, that justice is the supreme law of the universe, so that,
as a short road to what is best, we instinctively ask what is right ?
Now, what are the rights of this case? To whom right-
fully does the soil of Ireland belong ? Who are justly entitled
to its use and to all the benefits that flow from its use ? Let
us settle this question clearly and decisively, before we attempt
anything else.
Let me go to the heart of this question by asking another
question : Has or has not the child born in Ireland a right to
live ? There can but be one answer, for no one would contend
that it was right to drown Irish babies, or that any human law
could make it right. Well, then, if every human being born
in Ireland has a right to live in Ireland, these rights must be
equal. If each one has a right to live, then no one can have
any better right to live than any other one. There can be no
dispute about this. No one will contend that it would be any
less a crime to drown the baby of an Irish peasant woman, than
it would be to drown the baby of the proudest duchess, or that
a law commanding the one would be any more justifiable than
a law commanding the other.
Since, then, all the Irish people have the same equal right
to life, it follows that they must all have the same equal right
to the land of Ireland. If they are all in Ireland by the same
equal permission of Nature, so that no one of them can justly
set up a superior claim to life than any other one of them ; so
that all the rest of them could not justly say to any one of them
“ You have not the same right to live as we have; therefore
we will pitch you out of Ireland into the sea ! ” then they must
all have the same equal rights to the elements which Nature
has provided for the sustaining of life—to air, to water, and to
land. For to deny the equal right to the elements necessary
to the maintaining of life is to deny the equal right to life.
Any law that said, “ Certain babies have no right to the soil
of Ireland ; therefore they shall be thrown off the soil of Ire-
land,” would be precisely equivalent to a law that said, “ Cer-
tain babies have no right to live; therefore they shall be
thrown into the sea.” And as no law or custom or agreement
can justify the denial of the equal right tolife,sonolaworcustom
or agreement can justify the denial of the equal right to land.
It therefore follows, from the very fact of their existence,
that the right of each one of the people of Ireland to an equal
share in the land of Ireland is equal and inalienable: that is to
say, that the use and benefit of the land of Ireland belong


rightfully to the whole people of Ireland, to each one as much
as to every other; to no one more than to any other—not to
some individuals, to the exclusion of other individuals ; not to
one class, to the exclusion of other classes ; not to landlords,
not to tenants, not to cultivators, but to the whole people.
This right is irrefutable and indefeasible. It [pertains to
and springs from the fact of existence, the right to live. No
law, no covenant, no agreement, can bar it. One generation
cannot stipulate away the rights of another generation. If the
whole people of Ireland were to unite in bargaining away
theiprights in the land, how could they justly bargain away
the right of the child who the next moment is born ? No one
can bargain away what is not his; no one can stipulate away
the rights of another. And if the new-born infant has an equal
right to life, then has it an equal right to land. Its warrant,
which comes direct from Nature, and which sets aside all
human laws or title-deeds, is the fact that it is born.
Here we have a firm, self-apparent principle from which we
may safely proceed. The land of Ireland does not belong to
one individual more than to another individual, to one class
more than to another class; to one generation more than to
the generations that come after. It belongs to the whole
people who at the time exist upon it.
I do not dwell upon this principle because it has not yet
been asserted. I dwell upon it because, although it has been
asserted, no proposal to carry it out has yet been made. The
cry has indeed gone up that the land of Ireland belongs to the
people of Ireland, but there the recognition of the principle has
stopped. To say that the land of Ireland belongs to the people
of Ireland, and then merely to ask that rents shall be reduced,
or that tenant-right be extended, or that the State shall buy
the land from one class and sell it to another class, is utterly
illogical and absurd.
Either the land of Ireland rightfully belongs to the Irish
landlords, or it rightfully belongs to the Irish people; there
can be no middle ground. If it rightfully belongs to the land-
lords, then is the whole agitation wrong, and every scheme for
interfering in any way with the landlords is condemned. If
the land rightfully belongs to the landlords, then it is nobody
else’s business what they do with it, or what rent they charge
for it, or where or how they spend the money they draw from
it, and whoever does not want to live upon it on the landlord’s
terms is at perfect liberty to starve or emigrate. But if, on
the contrary, the land of Ireland rightfully belongs to the Irish
people, then the only logical demand is, not that the tenants


shall be made joint owners with the landlords—not that it be
bought from a smaU&r class and sold to a larger class, but that
it be resumed by the whole people. To propose to pay the
landlords for it, is to deny the right of the people to it. The
real fight for Irish rights must be made outside of Ireland; and,
above all things, the Irish agitators ought to take a logical posi-
tion, based upon a broad, clear principle, which can be every-
where understood and appreciated. To ask for tenant-right
or peasant proprietorship is not to take such a position ; to con-
cede that the landlords ought to be paid is to utterly abandon
the principle that the land rightfully belongs to the people.
To admit, as even the most radical of the Irish agitators
seem to admit, that the landlords should be paid the full value
of their lands, is to deny the rights of the people. It is an
admission that the agitation is,an interference with the just
rights of property. It is to ignore the only principle on which
the agitation can be justified, and on which it can gather
strength for the accomplishment of anything real and perma-
nent. To admit this is to admit that the Irish people have no
more right to the soil of Ireland than any outsider : for any
outsider can go to Ireland and buy land, if he will give its
market value. To propose to buy out the landlords it to pro-
pose to continue the present injustice in another form. They
would get in interest on the debt created what they now get
in rent. They would still have a lien upon Irish labour.
And why should the landlords be paid ? If the land of Ire-
land belongs of natural right to the Irish people, what valid
claim for payment can be set up by the Irish landlords ? No
one will contend that the land is theirs of natural right, for the
day has gone by when men could be told that the Creator of the
universe intended his bounty for the exclusive use and benefit
of a privileged class of his creatures—that he intended a few
to roll in luxury, while their fellows toiled and starved for
them. The claim of the landlords to the land rests not on
natural right, but merely on municipal law—on municipal law
which contravenes natural right. And, whenever the sovereign
power changes municipal law so as to conform to natural right,
what claim can they assert to compensation ? Some of them
bought their lands, it is true; but they got no better title than
the seller had to give. And what are these titles ! Titles
based on murder and robbery, on blood and rapine—titles
which rest on the most atrocious and wholesale crimes.
Created by force and maintained by force, they have not be-
hind them the first shadow of right. That Henry 11. and
James I. and Cromwell and the Long Parliament had the
power to give and grant Irish lands is true ? But will any one


contend they had the right ? W ill any one contend that in all
the past generations there haa existed on the British Isles, or
anywhere else, any human being, or any number of human
beings, who had the right to say that in the year 1881 the
great mass of Irishmen should be compelled to pay—in many
cases to residents of England, France, or the United States—
for the privilege of living in their native country and making a
living from their native soil ? Even if it be said that might
makes right ; even if it be contended that in the twelfth, or
seventeenth, or eighteenth century lived men who, having the
power, had therefore the right, to give away the soil of Ireland,
it will not be contended that their right went further than their
power, or that their gifts and grants are binding on the men
of the present generation. No one can urge such a prepos-
terous doctrine. And, if might makes right, then the
moment the people get power to take the land the rights of
the present landholders utterly cease, and any proposal to
compensate them is a proposal to do a fresh wrong.
Should it be urged that, no matter on what they originally
rest, the lapse of time has given to the legal owners of Irish
land a title of which they cannot now be justly deprived with-
out compensation, it is sufficient to ask, with Herbert Spencer,
at what rate per annum wrong becomes right ? Even the
shallow pretence that the acquiescence of society can vest in a
few the exclusive right to that element on which and from
which Nature has ordained that all must live, cannot be urged
in the case of Ireland. For the Irish people have never acqui-
esced in their spoiliation, unless the bound and gagged victim
may be said to acquiesce in the robbery and maltreatment
which he cannot prevent. Though the memory of their ancient
rights in the land of their country may have been utterly
stamped out among the people of England, and have been
utterly forgotten among their kin on this side of the sea, it has
long survived among the Irish. If the Irish people have gone
hungry and cold and ignorant, if they have been evicted from
lands on which their ancestors hadlived from time immemorial,
if they have been forced to emigrate or to starve, it has not
been for want of protest. They have protested all they could,
they have struggled all they could. It has been but superior
force that has stifled their protests and made their struggles
vain. In a blind dumb way, they are protesting now and
struggling now, though even if their hands were free they
might not at first know how to untie the knots in the cords
that bind them. But acquiesce they never have.
Yet, even supposing they had acquiesced, as in their ignor-
ance the working-classes of such countries as England and the


THE GREAT-GREAT GRANDSON OF CAPTAIN KIDD, 25
United States now acquiesce, in the iniquitous system which
makes the common birthright of all the exclusive property of
some. What then ? Does such acquiescence turn wrong into
right ? If the sleeping traveller wake to find a robber with
his hand in his pocket, is he bound to buy the robber off—
bound not merely to let him keep what he has previously
taken, but pay him the full value of all he expected the sleep of
his victim to permit him to get ? If the stockholders of a bank
find that for a long term of years their cashier has been
appropriating the lion’s share of the profits, are they to be told
that they cannot discharge him without paying him for what he
might have got had his peculations not been discovered ?
I apologise to the Irish landlords and to all other landlords
for likening them to thieves and robbers. They will, however,
understand that I do not consider them as personally worse
than other men, but that I am obliged to use such illustrations
because no others will fit the case. lam concerned not with
individuals, but with the system. What I want to do is, to
point out a distinction that in the plea for the vested rights
of landowners is ignored—a distinction which arises from the
essential difference between land and things which are the
produce of human labour, and which is obscured by our
habit of classing them all together as property.
Thegalleys that carried Caesar toßritain, the accoutrements
of his legionaries, the baggage that they carried, the arms that
they bore, the buildings that they erected; the scythed chariots
of the ancient Britons, the horses that drew them, their wicker
boats and wattled houses —where are they now ? But the land
for which Roman and Briton fought, there it is still. That
British soil is yet as fresh and as new as it was in the days of
the Romans. Generation after generation has lived on it since,
and generation after generation will live on it yet. Now, here
is a very great difference. The right to possess and pass on
the ownership of things that in their nature decay and soon
cease to be is a very different thing from the right to possess
and to pass on the ownership of that which does not decay,
but from which each successive generation must live.
To show how this difference between land and such other
species of property as are property styled wealth bears upon
the argument for the vested rights of landowners, let me
illustrate again.
Captain Kidd was a pirate. He made a business of sailing
the seas, capturing merchantmen, makingtheir crews walk the
plank, and appropriating their cargoes. In this way he
accumulated much wealth, which he is thought to have buried.


But let us suppose, for the sake of the illustration, that he did
not bury his wealth, but left it to his legal heirs, and they to
their heirs, and so on, until at the present day this wealth or a
part of it has come to a great-great-grandson of Captain Kidd.
Now, let us suppose that some one —say a great-great-grand-
son of one of the ship-masters whom Captain Kidd plundered,
makes complaint and says ; “ This man’s great-great-grand-
father plundered my great-great-grandfather of certain things
or certain sums which have been transmitted to him, whereas
but for this wrongful act they would have been transmitted
to me; therefore I demand that he be made to restore them.”
What would society answer ?
Society, speaking by its proper tribunals, and in accordance
with principles recognised among all civilised nations, would
say : “We cannot entertain such a demand. It may be true
that Mr. Kidd’s great-great-grandfather robbed your great-
great-grandfather, and that as the result of this wrong he has
got things that otherwise might have come to you. But we
cannot inquire into occurences that happened so long ago.
Each generation has enough to do to attend to its own affairs.
If we go to righting the wrongs and reopening the con-
troversies of our great-great-grandfathers, there would be no
end to disputes and pretexts for disputes. What you say may
be true, but somewhere we must draw the line, and have an
end to strife. Though this man’s great-great-grandfather may
have robbed your great-great-grandfather, he has not robbed
you. He came into possession of these things peacefully, and
has held them peacefully, and we must take this peaceful
possession, when it has been continued for a certain time, as
absolute evidence of just title; for, were we not to dothat,
there would be no end to dispute and no secure possession of
anything.”
Now, it is this common-sense principle that is expressed in
the statue of limitations —in the doctrine of vested rights.
This is the reason why it is held—and as to most things held
justly —that peaceable possession for a certain time cures all
defects of title.
But let us pursue the illustration a little further:
Let us suppose that Captain Kidd, having established a
large and profitable piratical business, left to his son, and he
to his son, and so on, until his great-great-grandson, who now
pursues it, has come to consider it the most natural thing in
the world that his ships should roam the sea, capturing peaceful
merchantmen, making their crews walk the plank, and bringing
home to him much plunder, whereby he is enabled, though he
does no work at all, to live in very great luxury, and look


THE GREAT-GREAT-GRANDSON OF CAPTAIN KIDD. 27
down with contempt upon people who have to work. But at
last, let us suppose, the merchants get tired of having their
ships sunk and their goods taken, and sailors get tired of
trembling for their lives every time a sail drifts above the
horizon, and they demand of society that piracy be stopped.
Now, what should society say if Mr. Kidd got indignant,
appealed to the doctrine of vested rights, and asserted that
society was bound to prevent any interference with the
business that he had inherited, and that, if it wanted him to
stop, it must buy him out, paying him all that his business
was worth—that is to say, at least as much as he could make
in twenty year's successful pirating, so that if he stopped
pirating, he could still continue to live in luxury off the profits
of the merchants, and the earnings of the sailors ?
What ought society to say to such a claim as this. There
will be but one answer. We will say that society should tell
Mr. Kidd that his was a business to which the statues of limi-
tations and the doctrine of vested rights did not apply; that
because his father, and his grandfather, and his great and
great-great-grandfather pursued the business of capturing
ships and making their crews walk the plank, was no reason
why he should be permitted to persue it. Society, we will all
agree, ought to say he would have to stop piracy, and stop
it at once, and that without getting a cent for stopping.
Or supposing it had happened that Mr. Kidd had sold out
his piratical business to Smith, Jones or Robinson, we will
all agree that society ought to say that their purchase of the
business gave them no greater right than Mr. Kidd had.
We will all agree that that is what society ought to say.
Observe, I do not ask what society would say.
For, ridiculous and preposterous as it may appear, I am
satisfied that under the circumstances I have supposed, society
would not for a long time say what we have agreed it ought to
say. Not only would all the Kidds loudly claim that to make
them give up their business without full recompense would be
a wicked interference with vested rights, but the justice of tins
claim would at first be assumed as a matter of course by all or
nearly all the influential classes—the great lawyers, the able
journalists, the writers for the magazines, the eloquent clergy-
men, and the principal professors in the principal universities.
Na}y even the merchants and sailors, when they first began to
complain, would be so tyrannised and browbeaten by this pub-
lic opinion, that they would hardly think of more than to buy-
ing out the Kidds, and, wherever here and there any one dared
to raise his voice in favour of stopping piracy at once and with-
out compensation, he would only do so under penalty of being


stigmatised as a reckless disturber and wicked foe of social
order.
If any one denies this, if any one says mankind are not
such fools, then I appeal to universal history to bear me
witness. I appeal to the facts of to-day.
Show rae a wrong, no matter how monstrous, that ever yet
among any people became ingrafted in the social system, and
I will prove to you the truth of what I say.
The majority of men do not think; the majority of men
have to expend so much energy in the struggle to make a
living that they do not have time to think. The majority of
men accept, as a matter of course, whatever is. This is what
makes the task of the social reformer so difficult, his path so
hard. This is what brings to those who first raise their voices
in behalf of a great truth the sneers of the powerful, and the
curses of the rabble, ostracism and martyrdom, the robe of
derision and the crown of thorns.
Am I not right ? Have there not been states of society
in which piracy has been considered the most respectable and
honourable of pursuits ? Did the Roman populace see any-
thing more reprehensible in a gladiatorial show than we do in
a horse-race ? Does public opinion in Dahomey see anything
reprehensible in the custom of sacrificing a thousand or two
human beings by way of signalising grand occasions ? Are
there not states of society in which, in spite of the natural
proportions of the sexes, polygamy is considered a matter of
course ? Are there not states of society in which it would be
considered the most ridiculous thing in the world, to say that
a man’s son was more closely related to him than his nephew ?
Are there not states of society in which it w T ould be considered
disreputable for a man to carry a burden, while a woman who
could stagger under it was around ?—states of society in which
the husband, who did not occasionally beat his wife, would be
deemed by both sexes a weak-minded, low-spirited fellow ?
What would Chinese fashionable society consider more out-
rageous than to be told that mothers should not be permitted
to squeeze their daughters’ feet, or Flathead women than being
restrained from tying a board on their infants’ skulls ? How
long has it been since the monstrous doctrine of the divine
right of kings was taught through all Christendom ?
What is the slave trade but piracy of the worst kind ? Yet it
is not long since the slave trade was looked upon as a perfectly
respectable business, affording as legitimate an opening for the
investment of capital and the display of enterprise as any other.
The proposition to prohibit it was first looked upon as ridicu-
lous, then as fanatical, then as wicked. It was only slowly


THE GREAT-GREAT-GRANDSON OR CAPTAIN KIDD. 29
atid by hard fighting that the truth in regard to it gained
ground. Does not our very Constitution bear witness to what
I say ? Does not the fundamental law of the nation, adopted
twelve years after the annunciation of the Declaration of Inde-
pendence, declare that for twenty years the slave trade shall
not be prohibited nor restricted ? Such dominion had the idea
of vested interests over the minds of those who had already
proclaimed the inalienable right of man to life, liberty, and
the pursuit of happiness !
Is it not but yesterday that in the freest and greatest
republic on earth, among the people who boast that they lead
the very van of civilization, this doctrine of vested rights was
deemed a sufficient justification for all the cruel wrongs of
human slavery ? Is it not but yesterday, when whoever dared
to say that the rights of property did not justly attach to
human
beings could not be rightfully bought and sold like cattle —the
husband torn from the wife and the child from the mother ;
when whoever denied the right of one who had paid his money
for him to work or whip his own nigger was looked upon as a
wicked assailant of the rights of property ? Is it not but
yesterday when in the South whoever whispered such a
thought took his life in his hands; when in the North the
abolitionist was held by the churches as worse than an infidel,
was denounced by the politicians and rotten-egged by the
mob ? I was born in a Northern State, I have never lived in
the South, I am not yet grey; but I well remember, as every
American of middle age must remember, how over and over
again I have heard all questionings of slavery silenced by the
declaration that the negroes were the property of their masters,
and that to take away a man’s slave without payment was as
much a crime as to take away his horse without payment.
And whoever does not remember that far back, let him look
over American literature previous to the war, and say whether,
if the business of piracy had been a flourishing business, it
would have lacked defenders ? Let him say whether any
proposal to stop the business of piracy without compensating
the pirates would not have been denounced at first as a
proposal to set aside vested rights ?
But I am appealing to other states of society and to times
that are past merely to get my readers, if I can, out of their
accustomed ruts of thought. The proof of what I assert about
the Kidds and their business is in the thought and speech
of to-day.
Here is a system which robs the producers of wealth as re-
morselessly and far more regularly and systematically than the


pirate robs the merchantman. Here is a system that steadily
condemns thousands to far more lingering and horrible deaths
than walking the plank—to death of the mind and death of the
soul, as well as death of the body. These things are undis-
puted. No one denies that Irish pauperism and famine are the
direct results of this land system, and no one who will examine
the subject will deny that the chronic pauperism and chronic
famine which everywhere mark our civilization are the results
of this system. Yet we are told—-nay, it seems to be taken
for granted—that this system can not be abolished without
buying off those who profit by it. Was there ever more
degrading abasement of the human mind before a fetish ? Can
we wonder, as we see it, at any perversion of ideas?
Consider : is not the parallel I have drawn a true one ? Is
it not just as much a'perversion of ideas to apply the doctrine
of vested rights to property in land, when these are its ad-
mitted fruits, as it was to apply it to property in human flesh
and blood ; as it would be to apply it to the business of piracy ?
In what does the claim of the Irish landholders differ from that
of the hereditary pirate or the man who has bought out a
piratical business ? “ Because I have inherited or purchased
the business of robbing merchantmen,” says the pirate, “there-
fore respect for the rights of property must compel you to let
me go on robbing ships and making sailors walk the plank
until you buy me out.” “ Because we have inherited or pur-
chased the privilege of appropriating to ourselves the lion’s
share of the produce of labour,” says the landlord, “ therefore
you must continue to let us do it, even though poor wretches
shiver with cold and faint with hunger, even though, in their
povertyjand misery, they are reduced to wallow with the pigs.”
What is the difference ?
This is the point I want to make clearly and distinctly, for
it shows a distinction that in current thought is overlooked.
Property in land, like property in slaves, is essentially different
from property in things that are the result of labour. Rob a
man or a people of money, or goods, or cattle, and the robbery
is finished there and then. The lapse of time does not, indeed,
change wrong into right, but it obliterates the effects of the
deed. That is done ; it is over ; and, unless it be very soon
righted, it glides away into the past, with the men who were
parties to it,|so swiftly that nothing save omniscience can trace
its effects ; and in attempting to right it we would be in danger
of doing fresh wrong. The past is forever beyond us. We
can neither punish nor recompense the dead. But rob a
people of the land on which they must live, and the robbery is
continuous. It is a fresh robbery of every succeeding genera-


tion—a new robbery every year and every day; it is like the
robbery which condemns to slavery the children of the slave.
To apply to it the statute of limitations, to acknowledge for it
the title of prescription, is not to condone the past; it is to
legalise robbery in the present, to justify it in the future.
The indictment which really lies against the Irish landlords is
not that their ancestors, or the ancestors of the grantors,
robbed the ancestors of the Irish people. That makes no
difference. “ Let the dead bury their dead.” The indictment
that truly lies is that here, now, in the year 1881, they rob
the Irish people. And shall we be told that there can be a
vested right to continue such robbery ?
VIII.
I have dwelt so long upon this question of compensating
landowners, not merely because it is of great practical im-
portance, but because its discussion brings clearly into view
the principles upon which the land question in Ireland, or in
any other country, can alone be justly and finally settled.
In the light of these principles we see that the landowners
have no rightful claim either to the land or to compensation
for its resumption by the people, and, further than that, we
see that no such rightful claim can ever be created. It would
be wrong to pay the present landowners for “ their” land at
the expense of the people ; it would likewise be wrong to sell
it again to smaller holders. It would be wrong to abolish the
payment of rent, and to give the land to its present cultivators.
In the very nature of things, land can not rightfully be made
individual property. This principle is absolute. The title of
a peasant proprietor deserves no more respect than the title of
a great territorial noble. Neither the sovereign power of
Great Britain, nor the whole people of Ireland, nor the whole
population of the globe, can give to an individual a valid title
to a square inch of Irish soil or any othersoil. The earth is
an entailed estate—entailed upon all the generations of the
children of men, by a deed written in the constitution of
Nature, a deed that no human proceedings can bar, and no
prescription determine. Each succeeding generation has but
a tenancy for life. Admitting that any set of men may barter
away their own natural rights (and this logically involves an
admission of the right of suicide), they can no more barter
away the rights of their succesors than they can barter away
the rights of the inhabitants of other worlds.
What should be aimed at in the settlement of the Irish
Land Question is thus very clear. The “ three F’s ” are,
what they have already been called, three frauds; and the
proposition to create peasant proprietorship is no better. It


32 THE LAND QUESTION.
will not do merely to carve out of the estates of the landlords
a minor estate for the tenants ; it will not do merely to sub-
stitute a larger for a smaller class of proprietors; it will not do
to confine the settlement to agricultural land, leaving to its
present possessors the land of the towns and villages. None
of these lame and impotent propositions will satisfy the
demands of justice or cure the bitter evils now so apparent.
The only true and just solution of the problem, the only end
worth aiming at is to make all the land the common property
of all the people.
This principle conceded, the question of method arises.
How shall this be done ? Nothing is easier. It is merety
necessary to divert the rent which now flows into the pockets
of the landlords into the common treasury of the whole
people. It is not possible to so divide up the land of Ireland
so as to give each family, still less each individual, an equal
share. And even if that were possible, it would not be
possible to maintain equality, for old people are constantly
dying and new people constantly being born. But it is
possible to equally divide the rent, or, what amounts to the
same thing, to apply it to purposes of common benefit. This
is the way, and this is the only way in which absolute justice
can be done. This is the way, and this is the only way, in
which the equal right of every man, woman, and child can be
acknowledged and secured. As Herbert Spencer says of it :*
1 Such a doctrine is consistent with the highest stated civilization; may be carried
out without involving a community of goods; and need cause no very serious revolution
in existing arrangements. The change required would simply be a change of landlords.
Separate ownership would merge into the joint-stock ownership of the public. Instead
of being in the possession of individuals, the country would be held by the great
corporate body*—society. Instead of leasing his acres from an isolated proprietor, the
farmer would lease them from the nation. Instead of paying his rent to the agent of Sir
John or his Grace, he would pay to an agent or deputy agent of the community.
Stewards would be public officials instead of private ones, and tenancy the only land
tenure. A state of things so ordered would be in perfect harmony with the moral law.
Under it all men would be equally landlords ; all men would be alike free to become
tenants. _ Clearly, therefore, on such a system, the earth might be enclosed, occupied,
and cultivated, in entire subordination to the law of equal freedom.
Now it is a very easy thing to thus keep away all private
ownership of land, and convert all occupiers into tenants of
the State, by appropriating rent. No complicated laws or
cumbersome machinery is necessary. It is only necessary to
tax land up to its full value. Do that, and without any talk
about dispossessing landlords, without any use of the ugly
word “ confiscation,” without any infringement of the just
rightsof property, the land would become virtuallythe people’s,
while the landlords would be left the absolute and unqualified
possessors of—their deeds of title and conveyance! They
could continue to call themselves landlords if they wished to,
* " Social Statics," Chap, IX., sec. 8.


PRINCIPLE THE BEST POLICY, 33
just as that poor old Bourbon, the Comte de Chambord, con-
tinues to call himself King of France; but, as what, under
this system, was paid by the tenant would be taken by the
15 P rett y c^ear that middle-men would not long survive,
and that very soon the occupiers of land would come to be
nominally the owners, though, in reality, they would be the
tenants of the whole people.
How beautifully this simple method would satisfy every
economic requirement; how, freeing labour and capital from
the fetters that now oppress them (for all other taxes could
be easily remitted), it would enormously increase the produc-
tion of wealth ; how it would make distribution conform to the
law of justice, dry up the springs of want and misery, elevate
S v? Cl r . om l° wes t stratum, and give all their fair share in
the blessings of advancing civilization, can perhaps only be
fully shown by such a detailed examination of the whole social
problem as I have made in a book which I hope will be read
by all the readers of this paper, :: since in it Igo over much
ground and treat many subjects which cannot be even touched
upon here. Nevertheless, any one can see that to tax land up
to its full rental value would amount to precisely the same thing
as to formally take possession of it, and then let it out to the
highest bidders.
IX.
We have now seen the point that should be aimed at, and
the method by which it is to be reached. There is another
branch of the subject which practical men must consider; the
political forces that may be marshalled; the political resistance
that must be overcome. It is one thing to work out such a
problem in the closet—to demonstrate its proper solution to
the satisfaction of a few intelligent readers. It is another thing
to solve it in the field of action, where ignorance, prejudice, and
powerful interests must be met.
It cannot be that the really earnest men in the Irish move-
ment are satisfied with any programme yet put forth. But
they are doubtless influenced by the fear that the avowal of
radical views and aims would not merely intensify present op-
position, but frighten away from their cause large numbers and
important influences now with it. To say nothing of English
conservatism, there is in Ireland a large class now supporting
the movement who are morbidly afraid of anything which sa-
vours of “ Communism ” or “ Socialism,” while in the United
States, whence much moral support and pecuniary aid have been
derived, it is certain that many of those who are now loudest in
their expressions of sympathy would slink away from a move-
* “ Progress, and Poverty.”


merit which avowed the intention of abolishing private property
in land. A resolution, expressive of sympathy with the Irish
people in their ‘ ‘ struggle for the repeal of oppressive land la ws, ’ ’
was, by the unanimous vote of the National House of Represen-
tatives, flung full in the face of the British lion. How many votes
would that resolution have got had it involved a declaration
of hostility to the institution of individual property in land ?
I understand all this. Nevertheless, lam convinced that
the Irish land movement would gain, not lose, were its earnest
leaders, disdaining timid counsels, to boldly avow the principle
that the land of Ireland belongs of right to the whole people of
Ireland, and, without bothering about compensation to the land-
holders, to propose its resumption by the people in the simple
way I have suggested. That, in doing this, they would lose
strength and increase antagonism in some directions is true,
but they would in other directions gain strength and allay an-
tagonisms. And, while the loss would constantly tend to di-
minish, the gain would constantly tend to increase. They would,
to use the phrase of Emerson, have “hitched their waggon
to a star.”
I admit, as will be urged by those who would hold back
from such an avowal as I propose, that political progress must
be by short steps rather than by great leaps; that those who
would have the people follow them readily,and especially those
who would enjoy present popularity and preferment, must not
go too far in advance; and that to demand a little at first is
often the surest way to obtain much at last.
So far as personal consideration is concerned, it is only to
earnest men capable of feeling the inspiration of a great prin-
ciple that I care to talk, or that I can hope to convince. To
them I wish to point out that caution is not wisdom when it
involves the ignoring of a great principle; that it is not every
step that involves progression, but only such steps as are in
the right line and make easier the next; that there are strong
forces that wait but the raising of the true standard to rally
on its side.
Let the time-servers, the demagogues, the compromisers,
to whom nothing is right and nothing is wrong, but who are
always seeking to find some half-way house between right and
wrong—let them all go their ways. Any cause which can lay
hold of a great truth is the stronger without them. If the
earnest men among the Irish leaders abandon their present
half-hearted illogical position, and take their stand frankly and
firmly upon the principle that the youngest child of the poorest
peasant has as good a right to tread the soil and breathe the
air of Ireland as the eldest son of the proudest duke, they will


APPEALS TO NATIONAL ANIMOSITIES 35
have put their fight on the right line. Present defeat will but
pave the way for future victory, and each step won makes
easier the next. Their position will not only be logically de-
fensible, but will prove the stronger the more it is discussed ;
for private property in land, which never rises from the natural
perceptions of men, but springs historically from usurpation
and robbery, is something so utterly absurd, so outrageously
unjust, so clearly a waste of productive forces and a barrier
to the most profitable use of natural opportunities, so thoroughly
opposed to all sound maxims of public policy, so glaringly in
the way of further progress, that it is only tolerated because
the majority of men never think about it or hear it questioned.
Once fairly arraign it, and it must be condemned; once call
upon its advocates to exhibit its claims, and their cause is lost
in advance. There is no political economist of standing
who dare hazard his reputation by defending it on economic
grounds ; there is to-day no thinker of eminence who either
does not, like Herbert Spencer, openly declare the injustice of
private property in land, or tacitly make the same admission.
Once force the discussion on this line, and the Irish reformers
will compel to their side the most active and powerful of the
men who mould thought.
And they will not merely close up their own ranks, now in
danger of being broken ; they will “carry the war into Africa,”
and make possible the most powerful of political combinations.
It is already beginning to be perceived that the Irish move-
ment, so far as it has yet gone, is merely in the interest of a
class; that, so far as it has yet voiced any demand, it promises
nothing to the labouring and artisan classes. Its opponents
already see this opportunity for division, which, even without
their efforts, must soon show itself, and which, now that the
first impulse of the movement is over, will the more readily
develop. To close up its ranks, and hold them firm, so that,
even though they be forced to bend, they will not break and
scatter, it must cease to be a movement looking merely to the
benefit of the tenant-farmer, and become a movement for the
benefit of the whole labouring class.
And the moment this is done the Irish land agitation
assumes a new and a grander phase. It ceasesjto be an Irish
movement; it becomes but the van of a world-wide struggle.
Count the loss and the gain.
X.
The Land League movement, as an Irish movement, has in
its favour the strength of Irish national feeling. In assuming
the radical ground I urge, it would lose some of this; for there
are doubtless a considerable number of Irishmen on both sides


of the Atlantic who would shrink at first from the proposal to
abolish private property in land. But all that is worth having
would soon come back to it. And its strength would be more
compact andjintense—animated by a more definite purpose and
a more profound conviction.
But in ceasing to be a movement having relation simply to
Ireland—in proclaiming a truth and proposing a remedy which
apply as well to every other country —it would allay op-
position, which, as a mere national movement, it arouses, and
bring to its support forces by which alone it can conquer.
England, not Ireland, is the field where the struggle for the
natural rights of Irishmen must be won, if won at all. The
powerful landed interest of England is against the movement
anyhow. The natural allies of the Irish agitators are the
English working classes—not merely the Irishmen and sons of
Irishmen who, in the larger English cities, are numerous
enough to make some show exert some voting power,
without being numerous enough to effect any important result
-—but the great labouring masses of Great Britain. So long
as merely Irish measures are proposed, they cannot gain the
hearty support even of the English radicals ; so long as race
prejudices and hatreds are appealed to, counter prejudices
and hatreds must be aroused.
It is the very madness of folly, it is one of those political
blunders worse than crimes, to permit in this land agitation
that indiscriminating denunciation of England and everything
English which is so common at Land League meetings and
in the newspapers which voice Irish sentiment. The men who
do this may be giving way to a natural sentiment; but they
are most effectually doing the work of the real oppressors of
Ireland. Were they secret emissaries of the London police,
were they bribed with the gold which the British oligarchy
grinds out of the toil of its white slaves in mill, and mine, and
field, they could not better be doing its work. “ Divide and
conquer ” is the golden maxim of the oppressors of mankind.
It is by arousing race antipathies and exciting national
animosities, by appealing to local prejudices and setting people
against people, that aristocracies and despotisms have been
founded and maintained. They who would free men must rise
above such feelings if they would be successful. The greatest
enemy of the people’s cause is he who appeals to national
passion and excites old hatreds. He is its best friend who
does his utmost to bury them out of sight. For that action
and reaction are equal and uniform is the law of the moral as
of the physical world. Herein lies the far-reaching sweep
of those sublime teachings that, after centuries of nominal


acceptance, the so-called Christian world yet ignores, and
which call on us to answer not revilings with revilings, but to
meet hatred with love. “ For,” as say the Scriptures of the
Buddhists, “hatred never ceases by hatred at any time;
hatred ceases by love; that is an old rule.” To denounce
Englishmen is simply to arouse the prejudices and excite the
animosities of Englishmen—to separate forces that ought to
be united. To make this the fight of the Irish people against
the English people is to doom it to failure. To make it the
common cause of the people everywhere against a system
which everywhere oppresses and robs them is to make its
success assured. Had this been made to appear, the Irish
members would not have stood alone when it came to the final
resistance to coercion. Had this been made to appear, all
England would be in a ferment at the proposal to give the
Government despotic powers. If the Irish leaders are wise,
they may yet avail themselves of the rising tide of English
democracy. Let the Land Leaguers adopt the noble maxim of
the German Social Democrats. Let them be Land Leaguers
first, and Irishmen afterward. Let them account him an
enemy of their cause who seeks to pander to prejudice and
arouse hate. Let them arouse to a higher love than the mere
love of country; to a wider patriotism than that which
exhausts itself on one little subdivision of the human race,
one little spot on the great earth’s surface ; and in this
name, and by this sign, call upon their brothers, not merely
to aid them, but to strike for themselves.
The Irish people have the same inalienable right to govern
themselves as have every other people; but the full recognition
of this right need not necessarily involve separation, and to
talk of separation now is to arouse passions that will be
utilised by the worst enemies of Ireland. The demand for the
full political rights of the Irish people will be the stronger if
it be made to line with and include the demand for the full
political rights of the unenfranchised English people. And it
must be remembered that all the tendencies of the time are
not to separation, but to integration ; not to independence, but
to interdependence. This is observable wherever modern
influences reach, and in all things. To attempt to resist it
is to attempt to turn back the tide of progress.
It is not with the English people that the Irish people have
cause of quarrel. It is with the system that oppresses both.
That is the thing to denounce; that is the thing to fight.
And it is to be fought most effectually by uniting the masses
against it. Monarchy, aristocracy, landlordism, would get but
a new lease of life by any attempt at separation which would


arouse sectional passions. They are strengthened by any talk
of it. The greatest blow that could be-struck against them
would be, scrupulously avoiding everything that could excite
antagonistic national feeling, to carry this land agitation into
England, not as a mere Irish question, but as an English
question as well. To proclaim the universal truth that land is
of natural right common property ; to abandon all timid and
half-way schemes which attempt to compromise between
justice and injustice, and to demand nothing more nor less
than a full recognition of this natural right would be to do
inquiry; to put English landholders upon the defensive, and
give them more than enough to do at home. England is ripe
for such an agitation, and, once fairly begun, it can have but
one result—the victory of the popular cause.
Nor is it merely the labouring classes of England who may
thus be brought into the fight, if the true standard be raised.
To demand the nationalisation of land by the simple means I
have proposed makes possible—nay, as the discussion goes on,
makes inevitable—an irresistible combination, the combina-
tion of labour and capital against landlordism. This com-
bination proved its power by winning the battle of free trade
in 1846 against the most determined resistance of the landed
lt would be much more powerful now, and, if it
can again be made on the land question, it can again force
the entrenchments of the landed aristocracy.
Now, this combination cannot be made on any of the
timid, illogical schemes as yet proposed ; but it can be made
on the broad principle that land is rightfully common
property. Paradoxical as it may seem, it is yet true
that, while the present position of the Irish agitators does
involve a menace to capital, the absolute denial of the right
of private property in land would not.
In admitting that the Irish landlords ought to get any rent
at all, in admitting that, if the land is taken from them, they
must be paid for it, the Irish agitators give away their whole
case. For in this they admit that the land really belongs to
the landlord, and put property in land in the same category
with other property. Thus they place themselves in an inde-
fensible position ; thus they give to the agitation a “ com-
munistic ” * character, and excite against it that natural and
proper feeling which strongly resents any attack upon the
rights of property as an attack upon the very foundations of
* 1 use the word in the usual sense in which it is used by the vulgar, and in which a
Communist is understood as one who wants to divide lip other people’s property,


HOW TO WIN. 39
society. It was doubless this mistake of the agitators in
admitting the right of private property in land to which Arch-
bishop McCabe recently alluded in saying that some of the
utterances of the agitators excited the solicitude of the Holy
See. For this mistake gives to the agitation the character of
an attack upon the rights of property. If the land is really
the property of the landlords (and this is admitted when it is
admitted that they are entitled to any rent or to any compen-
sation"), then to limit the rent which they shall get, or to inter-
fere with their freedom to make what terms they please with
tenants, is an attack upon property rights. If the land is
rightfully the landlords, then is any compulsion as to how they
shall let it, or on what terms they shall part with it, a bad and
dangerous precedent,which naturally alarms capital and excites
the solicitude of those who are concerned for good morals and
social order. For, if a man may be made to part with one
species of property by Boycotting or agitation, why not with
another ? If a man’s title to land is as rightful as his title to
his watch, what is the difference, between agitation by Land
League meetings and Parliamentary filibustering to make him
give up the one and agitation with a cocked pistol to make him
give up the other ?
But, if it be denied that land justly is, or can be, private
property, if the equal rights of the whole people to the use of
the elements gratuitously furnished by Nature be asserted
without drawback or compromise, then the essential difference
between property in land and property in things of human pro-
duction is at once brought out. Then will it clearly appear
not only that the denial of the right of individual property
in land does not involve any menace to legitimate property
rights, but that the maintenance of private property in land
necessarily involves a denial of the right to all other property,
and that the recognition of the claims of the landlords means
a continuous robbery of capital as well as of labour.
All this will appear more and more clearly as the practical
measures necessary to make land common property are pro-
posed and discussed. These simple measures involve no harsh
proceedings, no forcible dispossession, no shock to public con-
fidence, no retrogression to a lower industrial organisation, no
loaning of public money, or establishment of cumbrous commis-
sions. Instead of doing violence to the rightful sense of pro-
perty, they assert and vindicate it. The way to make land
common property is simply to take rent for the common benefit.
And to do this, the easy way is to abolish one tax after
another, until the whole weight of taxation falls upon the value
of land. When that point is reached the battle is won, The


hare is caught, killed, and skinned, and to cook him will be a
very easyjmatter. The real fight will come on the proposition
to consolidate existing taxation upon land values. When that
is once won, the landholders will not merely have been deci-
sively defeated,they will have been routed; and the nature of
land values will be so generally understood that to raise tax-
ation so as to take the whole rent for common purposes will
be a mere matter of course.
The political art is like the military art. It consists in
combining the greatest strength against the point of least re-
sistance. I have pointed out the way in which, in the case we
are considering, this can be done. And, the more the matter
is considered, the clearer and clearer will it appear that there is
every practical reason, as there is every theoretical reason, wh}'
the Irish reformers should take this vantage ground of princi-
ple. To propose to put the public burdens upon the landhold-
ers is not a novel and unheard of thing against which English
prejudice would run as something “ new-fangled,” some new
invention of modern socialism. On the contrary, it is the
ancient English practice. It would be but a return, in a form
adapted to modern times, to the system under which English
land was originally parcelled out to the predecessors of the
present holders—the just system, recognised for centuries, that
those who enjoy the common property should bear the common
burdens. The putting of property in land in the same category
as property in things produced by labour is comparatively
modern. In England, as in Ireland and Scotland, as in fact
among every people of whom we know anything, the land was
originally treated as common property, and this recognition ran
all through the feudal system. The essence of the feudal sys-
tem was in treating the landholder not as an owner, but as a
lessee. William the Conqueror did not giveaway the land of
England as the Church lands were given away by Henry VIII.,
when he divided among his sycophants the property of the
people, which, after the manner of the times, had been set
apart for the support of religious, educational, and charitable
institutions. To every grant of land made by the Conqueror
was annexed a condition which amounted to a heavy perpetual
tax or rent. One of his first acts was to divide the soil of Eng-
land into sixty thousand knights’ fees; and thus, besides many
other dues and obligations, was thrown upon the landholders
the cost of providing and maintaining the army. All the long,
costly wars that England fought during feudal times involved
no public debt. Public debt, pauperism, and the grinding
poverty of the poorer classes came in as the landholders gradu-
ally shook off the obligations on which they had received their


land, an operation culminating in the abolition by the Long
Parliament (re-enacted after the Restoration) of the feudal ten-
ures, for which were substituted indirect taxes that still weigh
upon the whole people. To now reverse this process, to
abolish the taxes which are borne by labour and capital, and
to substitute for them a tax on rent, would not be the adoption
of anything new, but a simple going back to the old plan. In
England, as in Ireland, the movement would appeal to the
popular imagination as a demand for the re-assertion of
ancient rights.
There are other most important respects in which this
measure will commend itself to the English mind. The tax
upon land values or rent is in all economic respects the most
perfect of taxes. No political economist will deny that it com-
bines the maximum of certainty with the minimum of loss and
cost, that, unlike taxes upon capital or exchange or improve-
ment, it does not check production or enhance prices or fall
ultimately upon the consumer. And in proposing to abolish
all other taxes in favour of this theoretically perfect tax, the
Land Reformers will have on their side the advantage of ideas
already current, while they can bring the avgumentum ad homi-
num to bear on those who might never comprehend an abstract
principle. Englishmen of all classes have happily been edu-
cated up to a belief in free trade, though a very large amount
of revenue is still collected from customs. Let the Land Re-
formers take advantage of this by proposing to carry out the
doctrine of free trade to its fullest extent. If a revenue tariff
is better than a protective tariff, then no tariff at all is better
than a revenue tariff. Let them propose to abolish the cus-
toms duties entirely, and to abolish as well harbour dues and
lighthouse dues and dock charges, and in their place to add to
the’tax on rent, or the value of land exclusive of improvements.
Let them in the same way propose to get rid of the excise, the
various licence taxes, the tax upon buildings, the onerous and
unpopular income tax, etc., and to saddle all public expenses
on the landlords.
This would bring home the land question to thousands and
thousands who have never thought of it before ; to thousands
and thousands who have heretofore looked upon the land ques-
tion as something peculiarly Irish, or something that related
exclusively to agriculture and to farmers, and have never seen
how, in various direct and indirect ways, they have to contri-
bute to the immense sums received by the landlords as rent.
It would be putting the argument in a shape in which even
the most stupid could understand it. It would be directing the
appeal to a spot where even the unimaginative are sensitive—


the pocket. How long would a merchant or banker or manu-
facturer or annuitant regard as dangerous and wicked an agita-
tion which proposed to take taxation off of him ? Even the
most prejudiced can be relied on to listen with patience to an
argument in favour of making some one else pay what they
now are paying.
Let me illustrate by a little story what I feel confident
would be the effect of the policy I propose.
Once upon a time I was the Pacific-coast agent of an
Eastern news association, which took advantage of an opposi-
tion telegraph company to run against the Associated Press
monopoly. The association in California consisted of one
strong San Francisco paper, to which telegraphic news was of
much importance, and a number of interior papers, to which it
was of minor importance, if of any importance at all. It
became necessary to raise more money for the expenses of
collecting and transmitting these dispatches, and, thinking it
only fair, I assessed the increased cost to the strong metro-
politan paper. Theproprietor of thispaper was very indignant.
He appealed to the proprietors of all the otherpapers, and they
all joined in his protest. I replied by calling a meeting. At
this meeting the proprietor of the San Francisco paper led off
with an indignant speech. He was seconded by several others,
and evidentl}- had the sympathy of the whole crowd. Then
came my turn. I said, in effect: “ Gentlemen, you can do
what you please about this matter. Whatever satisfies you
satisfies me. The only thing fixed is, that more money has to
be raised. As this San Francisco papers pays now a much
lower relative rate than you do, I thought it only fair that it
should pay the increased cost. But, if you think otherwise,
there is no reason in the world why you should not pay it
yourselves.” The debate immediately took another turn, and
in a few minutes my action was endorsed by a unanimous vote,
for the San Francisco man was so disgusted by the way his
supporters left him that he would not vote at all.
Now, that is just about what will happen to the English
landlords if the question be put in the way I propose. The
British landowners arein numbers but an insignificant minority.
And, the more they protested against the injustice of having
to pay all the taxes, the quicker would the public mind realize
the essential injustice of private property in land, the quicker
would the majority of the people come to see that the land-
owners ought not only to pay all the taxes, but a good deal
more besides. Once put the question in such a way that the
British working man will realize that he pays two prices for his
ale and half a dozen prices for his tobacco, because a land-


IN THE- UNITED STATES. 43
owner’s. Parliament in the time of Charles 11. shook off their
ancient dues to the State, and imposed them in indirect taxation
on him; once bring to the attention of the well-to-do English-
man, who grunts as he pays his income tax, the question as to
whether the landowner who draws his income from property
that of natural right belongs to the whole people ought not to
pay it instead of him, and it will not be long before the absurd
injustice of allowing rent to be appropriated by individuals will
be thoroughly understood. This is a very different thing from
asking the British taxpayer to buy out the Irish landlord for
the sake of the Irish peasant.
I have been speaking as though ail landholders would resist
the change which would sacrifice their special interests to the
larger interests of society, But lam satisfied that to think
this is to do landholders a great injustice. For landholders as
a class are not more stupid nor more selfish than any other
class. And as they saw, ag they must see, as the discussion
progresses, that they also would be the gainers in the great
social change which would abolish poverty and elevate the
very lowest classes above the want, the misery, the vice, and
degradation in which they are now plunged, there are many
landowners who would join heartily and unreservedly in the
effort to bring this change about. This I know, not merely
because my reading and observation both teach me that low,
narrow views of self-interest are not the strongest of human
motives, but because I know that to-day among those who see
the truth I have here tried to set forth, and who would carry
out the reform I have proposed, are many landowners.* And,
if they be earnest men, I appeal to landholders as confidently
as to any other class. There is that in a great truth that can
raise a human soul above the mists of selfishness.
The course which I suggest is the only course which can be
logically based on principle. It has everything to commend
it. It will concentrate the greatest strength against the least
resistance. And it will be on the right line. Every step
gained will be an advance toward the ultimate goal; every
step gained will make easier the next.
In speaking with special reference to the case of Ireland I
have, so far as general principles are concerned, been using it
as a stalking-horse. In discussing the Irish land question, we
* Among the warm friends my book “Progress and (Poverty” has found are many
landholders—some of them large landholders. As types I may mention the names of
D. A. Learnard, of San Joaquin, a considerable farmer, who had no sooner read it than
he sent for a dozen copies to circulate among his neighbours; Hiram Tubbs, of San
Francisco, the owner of much valuable real estate in and near that city; and Sir George
Grey, of New Zealand, the owner of a good deal of land in that colony, of which he was
formerly governor, as well as I understaidi of valuable estates in England.


really discuss the most vital of American questions. And if
we of the United States cannot see the beam in our own eye,
save by looking at the mote in our neighbour’s, then let us look
at the mote ; and let us take council together how he may get
it out. For, at least, we shall in this way learn how we may
deal with our own case when we wake up to the conscious-
ness of it.
And never had the parable of the [mote and the beam a
better illustration than in the attitude of so many Americans
towards this Irish land question. We denounce the Irish land
system ! We express our sympathy with Ireland ! We tender
our advice by congressional and legislative resolution to our
British brethren across the sea ! Truly our indignation is
cheap, and our sympathy is cheap, and our advice is very, very
cheap ! For what are we doing ? Extending over new soil the
very institution that to them descended from a ruder and a
darker time. With what conscience can we lecture them ?
With all power in the hands of the people, with institutions
yet plastic, with millions of virgin acres yet to settle, it should
be ours to do more than vent denunciation, and express sym-
pathy, and give advice. It should be ours to show the way.
This we have not done; this we do not do. Out in our new
States may be seen the growth of a system of cultivation worse
in its social effects than that which prevails in Ireland. In
Ireland the labourer has some sort of a home, and enjoys some
of the family affections. In these great “wheat manufactur-
ing ” districts the labourer is a nomad, his home is in his blan-
kets, which he carries around with him. And in our large cities
may we not see misery of the same kind as exists in Ireland?
If it is less in amount, is it not merely because our country is
yet newer ; because we have yet a wide territory and a sparse
population—conditions past which our progress is rapidly
carrying us ? As for evictions, is it an unheard-of thing, even
in New York, for families to be turned out of their homes
because they cannot pay the rent ? Are there not many acres
in this country from which those who made homes have been
driven by sheriffs’ posses, and even by troops?
And the men on the other side of the Atlantic who vainly
imagine that they may settle the great question now pressing
upon them by free trade in land, or tenant-right, or some mild
device for establishing a peasant proprietary—they may learn
something about their own case if they will turn their eyes to us.
We have had free trade in land ; we have had in our
American farmer, owning his own acres, using his own capital,
and working with his own hands, something far better than
peasant proprietorship. We have had, what no legislation can


give the people of Great Britain, vast areas of virgin soil. We
have had all of these under democratic institutions. Yet we
have here social disease of precisely the same kind as that
which exists in Ireland and England. And the reason is that
we have had here precisely the same cause—that we have made
land private property. So long as this exists, our democratic
institutions are vain, our pretence of equality but cruel irony,
our public schools can but sow the seeds of discontent. So
long as this exists, material progress can but force the masses
of our people into a harder and more hopeless slavery. Until
we in someway make the land, what Nature intended it to be,
common property, until we in some way secure to every child
born among us his natural birthright, we have not established
the Republic in any sense worthy of the name, and we can-
not establish the Republic. Its foundations are quicksand.
XIII.
Imagine an island girt with ocean ; imagine a little world
swimming in space. Put on it, in imagination, human beings.
Let them divide the land, share and share alike, as individual
property. At first, while population is sparse, and industrial
processes rude and primitive, this will work well enough.
Turn away the eyes of the mind for a moment, let time
pass, and look again. Some families will have died out, some
have greatly multiplied : on the whole, population will have
largely increased, and even supposing there have been no im-
portant inventions or improvements in the productive arts, the
increase in population, by causing the division of labour, will
have made industry more complex. During this time some of
these people will have been careless, generous, improvident;
some will have been thrifty and grasping. Some of them will
have devoted much of their powers to thinking of how they
themselves and the things they see around them came to be,
to inquiries and speculations as to what there is in the universe
beyond their little island or their little world, to making poems,
painting pictures, or writing books; to noting the differences
in rocks and trees, and shrubs and grasses; to classifying
beasts and birds and fishes and insects—to the doing, in short,
of all of the many things which add so largely to the sum of
human knowledge and human happiness, without much or any
gain of wealth to the doer. Others, again, will have devoted
all their energies to the extending of their possessions, What,
then, shall we see, land having been all this time treated as
private property ? Clearly, we shall see that the primitive
equality has given w r ay to inequality. Some will have very
much more than one of the original shares into which the land


46 the land question.
was divided; very many will have no land at all. Suppose
that, in all things save this, our little island or our little world
is Utopia, yet inequality in the ownership of land will have
produced poverty and virtual slavery.
For the people we have supposed are human beings—that
is to say, in their physical natures at least, they are animals who
can only live on land and by aid of the products of land. They
may make machines which will enable them to float on the sea,
or perhaps to fly in the air, but to build and equip these
machines they must have land and the products of land, and
must constantly come back to land. Therefore, those who
own the land must be the masters of the rest. Thus, if one
man has come to own all the land, he is their absolute master,
even to life or death. If they can only live on the land on
his terms, then they can only live on his terms, for without
land they cannot live. They are his absolute slaves, and so
long as his ownership is acknowledged, if they want to live,
they must do in everything as he wills.
If, however, the concentration of landownership has not
gone so far as to make one or a very few men the owners of
all the land—if there are still so many landowners that there
is competition between them as well as between those who
have only their labour—then the terms on which these non-
landholders can live will seem more like free contract. But it
will not be free contract. Land can yield no wealth without
the application of labour; labour can produce no wealth with-
out land. These are the two equally necessary factors of pro-
duction. Yet, to say that they are equally necessary factors
of production is not to say that, in the making of contracts as
to how the results of production ai'b divided, the possessors
of these two meet on equal terms. For the nature of these
two factors is very different. Land is a natural element;
the human being must have his stomach filled every few
hours. Land can exist without labour, but labour cannot
exist without land. If I own a piece of land, I can let it lay
idle for a year or for years, and it will eat nothing. But the
labourer must eat every day, and his family must eat. And
so, in the making of terms between them, the landowner has
an immense advantage over the labourer. It is on the side of
the labourer that the intense pressure of competition comes,
for in his case it is competition urged by hunger. And, fur-
ther than this: As population increases, as the competition for
the use of the land becomes more and more intense, so are the
owners of land enabled to get for the use of their land a larger
and larger part of the wealth which labour exerted upon it
produces. That is to say, the value of land steadily rises.


THE CIVILISATION THAT IS POSSIBLE. 47
Now, this steady rise in the value of land brings about a confi-
dent expectation of future increase of value, which produces
among landowners all the effects of a combination to hold for
higher prices. Thus there is a constant tendency to force mere
labourers to take less and less or to give more and more (put
it which way you please, it amounts to the same thing) of the
products of their work for the opportunity to work. And thus,
in the very nature of things, we should see on our little island
or our little world that, after a time had passed, some of the
people would be able to take and enjoy a superabundance of
all the fruits of labour without doing any labour at all, while
others would be forced to work the livelong day for a pitiful
living.
But let us introduce another element in the supposition.
Let us suppose great discoveries and inventions—such as the
steam-engine, the power-loom, the Bessemer process, the reap-
ing-machine, and the thousand-and-one labour-saving devices
that are such a marked feature of our era. What would be
the result ?
Manifestly, the effect of all such discoveries and inventions
is to increase the power of labour in producing wealth—to
enable the same amount of wealth to be produced by less
labour, or a greater amount with the same labour. But none
of them lessen or can lessen the necessity for land. Until we
can discover some way of making something out of nothing—
and that is so far beyond our powers as to be absolutely un-
thinkable—there is no possible discovery or invention which
can lessen the dependence of labour upon land. And, this
being the case, the effect of these labour-saving devices, land
being the private propertyjof some, would simply be to increase
the proportion of the wealth produced that landowners could
demand for the use of their land. The ultimate effect of these
discoveries and inventions would be not to benefit the labourer,
but to make him more dependent.
And, since we are imagining conditions, imagine labour-
saving inventions to go to the farthest imaginable point, that
is to say, to perfection. What then ? Why, then, the necessity
for labour being done away with, all the wealth that the land
could produce would go entire to the landowners. None of it
whatever could be claimed.by any one else. For the labourers
there would be no use at all. If they continued to exist, it
would be merely as paupers on the bounty of the landowners !
XIV,
In the effects upon the distribution of wealth, of making
land private property, we may thus see an explanation of that


paradox presented by modern progress. The perplexing pheno-
mena of deepening want with increasing wealth, of labour
rendered more dependent and helpless by the very introduction
of labour-saving machinery, are the inevitable result of natural
laws as fixed and certain as the law of gravitation. Private
property in land is the primary cause of the monstrous in-
equalities which are developing in modern society. It is this,
and not any miscalculation of Nature in bringing into the world
more mouths than she can feed, that gives rise to that ten-
dency of wages to a minimun—that “iron law of wages,” as
the Germans call it—that, in spite of all advances in productive
power, compels the labouring classes to the least return on
which they will consent to live. It is this that produces all
those phenomena that are so often attributed to the conflict of
labour and capital. It is this that condemns Irish peasants to
rags and hunger, that produces the pauperism of England and
the tramps of America. It is this that makes the almshouse
and the penitentiary the marks of what we call high civiliza-
tion ; that in the midst of schools and churches degrades and
brutalizes men, crushes the sweetness out of womanhood and
the joy out of childhood. It is this that makes lives that
might be a blessing a pain and a curse, and every year drives
more and more to seek unbidden refuge in the gates of death.
For, a permanent tendency to inequality once set up, all the
forces of progress tend to greater and greater inequality.
All this is contrary to Nature. The poverty and misery,
the vice and degradation that spring from the unequal distri-
bution of wealth, are not the results of natural law; they
spring from our defiance of natural law. They are the fruits
of our refusal to obey the supreme law of justice. It is be-
cause we rob the child of his birthright; because we make the
bounty which the Creator intended for all the exclusive pro-
perty of some, that these things come upon us, and, though
advancing and advancing, we chase but the mirage.
When, lit by lightning-flash or friction amid dry grasses,
the consuming flames of fire first flung their lurid glow into
the face of man, how must he have started back in affright!
When he first stood by the shores of the sea, how must its
waves have said to him, “ Thus far shalt thou go, but no
farther ! ” Yet, as he learned to use them, fire became his
most useful servant, the sea his easiest highway. The most
destructive element of which we know—that which for ages
and ages seemed the very thunderbolt of the angry gods—is,
as we are now beginning to learn, fraught for us with untold
powers of usefulness. Already it enables us to annihilate
space in our messages, to illuminate the night with new suns;


and its uses are only beginning. And throughout all Nature,
as far as we can see, whatever is potent for evil is potent for
good. “ Dirt,” said Lord Brougham, “is matter in the wrong
place.” And so the squalor and vice and misery that abound
in the very heart of our civilisation are but results of the mis-
application of forces in their nature most elevating.
I doubt not that, whichever way a man may turn to inquire
of Nature, he will come upon] adjustments which will arouse
not merely his wonder, but his gratitude. Yet what has most
impressed me with the feeling that the laws of Nature are the
laws of beneficent intelligence is what I see of the social possi-
bilities'involved in the law of rent. Rent* springs from natural
causes. It arises, as society develops, from the differences in
natural opportunities and the differences in the distribution of
population. It increases with the division of labour, with the
advance of the arts, with the progress of invention. And thus,
by virtue of a law impressed upon the very nature of things,
has the Creator provided that the natural advance of mankind
shall be an advance toward equality, an advance towards co-
operation, an advance towards a social state in which not even
the weakest need be crowded to the wall, in which even for
the unfortunate and the cripple there may be ample provision.
For this revenue, which arises from the common property,
which represents not the creation of value by the individual,
but the creation by the community as a whole, which increases
just as society develops, affords a common fund, which, pro-
perly used, tends constantly to equalise conditions, to open the
largest opportunities for all, and to utterly banish want or the
fear of want.
The squalid poverty that festers in the heart of our civiliza-
tion, the vice and crime and degradation and ravening greed
that flow from it, are the results of a treatment of land that
ignores the simple law of justice, a law so clear and plain that
it is universally recognised by the veriest savages. What is
by nature the common birthright of all, we have made the
exclusive property of individuals ; what is by natural law the
common fund, from which common wants should be met, we
give to a few that they may lord it over their fellows. And
so some are gorged while some go hungry, and more is wasted
than would suffice to keep all in luxury.
In this nineteenth century, among any people who have
begun to utilised the forces and methods of modern production,
there is no necessity for want. There is no good reason why
even the poorest should not have all the comforts, all thelux-
* I, of course, use the word “ rent ”in its economic, not in its common sense, mean-
ing by it what is commonly called ground rent.


uries, all the opportunities for culture, all the gratifications of
refined taste that only the richest now enjoy. There is no
reason why any one should be compelled to long and monoton-
ous labour. Did invention and discovery stop to-day, the forces
of production are ample for this. What hampers production
is the unnatural inequality in distribution. And, with just
distribution, invention and discovery would only have
begun.
Appropriate rent in the way I propose, and speculative rent
would be at once destroyed. The dogs in the manger who are
now holding so much land they have no use for, in order to
extract a high price from those who do want to use it, would
be at once choked off, and land from which labour and capital
are now debarred under penalty of a heavy fine would be
thrown open to improvement and use. The incentive to land
monopoly would be gone. Population would spread where it
is now too dense, and become denser where it is now too sparse.
Appropriate rent is this way, and not only would natural
opportunities be thus opened to labour and capital, but all the
taxes which now weigh upon production and rest upon the
consumer could be abolished. The demand for labour would
increase, wages would rise, every wheel of production would
be set in motion.
Appropriate rent in this way, and the present expenses of
government would be at once very much reduced—reduced
directly by the saving in the present cumbrous and expensive
schemes of taxation, reduced indirectly by the diminution in
pauperism and in crime. This simplification in governmental
machinery, this elevation of moral tone which would result,
would make it possible for government to assume the running
of railroads, telegraphs, and other businesses which, being in
their nature monopolies, cannot, as experience is showing, be
safely left in the hands of private individuals and corporations.
In short, losing its character as a repressive agency, govern-
ment could thus gradually pass into an administrative agency
of the great co-operative association—society.
For, appropriate rent in this way, and there would be at
once a large surplus over and above what are now considered
the legitimate expenses of government. We could divide this,
if we wanted to, among the whole community, share and share
alike. Or we could give every boy a small capital for a start
when he came of age, every girl a dower, every widow an
annuity, every aged person a pension, out of this common
estate. Or we could do with our great common fund many,
many things- that would be for the common benefit, many,
many things that would give to the poorest what even the


richest cannot now enjoy. We could establish free libraries,
lectures, museums, art-galleries, observatories, gymnasiums,
baths, parks, theatres; we could line our roads with fruit-trees,
and make our cities clean and wholesome and beautiful; we
could conduct experiments, and offer rewards for inventions,
and throw them open to public use.*
Think of the enormous waste that now goes on : The waste
of false revenue systems, which hamper production and bar
exchange, which fine a man for erecting a building where none
stood before, or for making two blades of grass grow where
there was but one. The waste of unemployed labour, of idle
machinery, of those periodical depressions of industry, almost
as destructive as war. The waste entailed by poverty, and
the vice, and crime, and thriftlessness, and drunkenness that
spring from it; the waste entailed by that greed of gain that
is its shadow, and which makes business in large part but a
masked war ; the waste entailed by the fret and worry about
the mere physical necessities of existence, to which so many
of us are condemned ; the waste entailed by ignorance, by
cramped and undeveloped faculties, by the turning of human
beings into mere machines !
Think of these enormous wastes, and of the others which,
like these, are due to the fundamental wrong which produces
an unjust distribution of wealth, and distorts the natural
development of society, and you will begin to see what a
higher, purer, richer civilisation would be made possible by the
simple measure that will assert natural rights. You will begin
to see how, even if no one but the present landowners were to
be considered, this would be the greatest boon that could be
vouchsafed them by society, and that, for them to fight it,
would be as if the dog with a tin kettle tied to his tail should
snap at the hand that offered to free him. Even the greatest
landlord ! As for such landlords as our working farmers and
homestead owners, the slightest discussion would show them
that they had everything to gain by the change. But even
such landholders as the Duke of Westminster and the Astors
would be gainers. For it is of the very nature of injustice
that it really profits no one.
This we may know certainly, this we may hold to con-
fidently ; that which is unjust can really profit no one; that
which is just can really harm no one. Though all other lights
move and circle, this is the pole-star by which we may safely
steer.
* A million dollars spent in premiums and experiments would, in all probability
make aerial navigation an accomplished fact.


When we think of the civilisation that might be, how poor
and pitiful, how little better than utter barbarism seems this
civilisation of which we boast! Even here, where it has had
the freest field and fullest development! Even here!
This is a broad land and a rich land. How wide it is, how
rich it is, how the fifty millions of us already here are but
beginning to scratch it, a man cannot begin to realise till he
does some thousands of miles of travelling over it. There are
a school and a church and a newspaper in every hamlet; we
have no privileged orders, no legacies of antiquated institu-
tions, no strong and covertly hostile neighbours, who in fancy
or reality oblige us to keep up great standing armies. We
have had the experience of all other nations to guide us in
selecting what is good and rejecting what is bad. In politics,
in religion, in science, in mechanism, everything shows the
latest improvements. We think we stand, and in fact we do
stand, in the very van of civilisation. Food here is cheaper,
wages higher, than anywhere else. There is here a higher
average of education, of intelligence, of material comfort, and
of individual opportunity, than among any other of the great
civilised nations. Here modern civilisation is at its very best.
Yet even here!
Last winter I was in San Francisco. There are in San
Francisco citizens who can build themselves houses that cost a
million and a half; citizens who can give each of their children
two millions of registered United States bonds for a Christmas
present; citizens who can send their wives to Paris to keep
house there, or rather to “keep palace,” in a style which out-
does the lavishness of Russian grand dukes. There are, also,
in San Francisco other citizens. Last winter I could hardly
walk a block without meeting a citizen begging for ten cents.
And, when a charity fund was raised to give work, with pick
and shovel, to such as would rather work than beg, the appli-
cations were so numerous that, to make the charity fund go as
far as possible, one set of men was discharged after having
been given a few days’ work, in order to make room for
another set.
Last summer, on the' plains, I took from its tired mother,
and held in my arms, a little sun-browned baby, the youngest
of a family of the sturdy and keen Western New England
stock,who alone in their two waggons had travelled near three
thousand miles looking for spme place to locate and finding
none, and who were now returning to where the father and his


THE CIVILISATION THAT IS, 53
biggest boy could go to work on a railroad, what they had
got by the sale of their Nebraska farm all gone. And
I walked awhile by the side of long, lank South-western
men who, after similar fruitless journeyings way up into
Washington territory, were going back to the Choctaw
Nation.
This winter I have been in New York. New York is the
greatest and richest of American cities—the third city of the
modern world, and moving steadily toward the first place.
This a time of great prosperity. Never before were so
many goods sold, so much business done. Real estate is
advancing with big jumps, and within the last few months
many fortunes have been made in buying and selling vacant
lots. Landlords nearly everywhere are demanding increased
rents ; asking in some of the business quarters an increase of
three hundred per cent. Money is so plenty that government
four per cents, sell for 114* an d a bill is passing Congress for
refunding the maturing national debt at three per cent, per
annum, a rate that awhile ago in California was not thought
exorbitant per month. All sorts of shares and bonds have
been going up and up. You can sell almost anything if you
give it a high-sounding corporate name and issue well-printed
shares of stock.
Nevertheless, prosperous as are these times, citizens of the
United States beg you on the streets for ten cents, and five
cents., and although you know that there are in this city two
hundred charitable societies, although you realise that on gen-
eral principles to give money in this way is to do evil rather
than good, you are afraid to refuse them when you read of
men in this great city freezing to death and starving to
death. Prosperous as are these times, women are making
overalls for sixty cents a dozen, and you can hire citizens for
trivial sums to parade up and down the streets all day with
advertising placards on their backs. I get on a horse-car and
ride with the driver, He is evidently a sober, steady man, as
intelligent as a man can be who drives a horse-car all the time
he is not asleep or eating his meals. He tells me he has a wife
and four children. He gets home (if a couple of rooms can be
called a home) at two o’clock in the morning; he has to be back
on his car at nine, Sunday he has two hours more. He gets
one dollar and seventy-five cents per day. I say to him that
it must be pretty hard to pay rent and keep six persons on one
dollar and seventy-five cents a-day. He says it is ; that he
has been trying for a month to get enough ahead to buy anew
pair of shoes, but he hasn’t yet succeeded. I ask why he does
not leave such a job. He says, “ What can Ido ? There are


a thousand men ready to step into my place! ” And so, in this
time of prosperity, he is chained to his car.
Our Napoleon of Wall Street, our Charlemagne of railroads,
who came to this city with nothing but a new kind of mouse-
trap in a mahogany box, but who now, though yet in the
vigour of his prime, counts his wealth by hundreds of millions,
if it can be counted at all, is interviewed by a reporter just as
he is about to step aboard his palace-car for a grand combina-
tion expedition into the South-west. He descants upon the
services he is rendering in welding into one big machine a lot
of smaller machines, in uniting into one vast railroad empire
the divided railroad kingdoms. He likewise descants upon
the great prosperity of the whole country. Everybody is
prosperous and contented he says: there is, of course, a good
deal of misery in the big cities, but, then, there always is!
But not alone in the great cities. I ride on the Hudson
River Railroad on a bitter cold day, and from one of the pretty
towns with Dutch names gets in a constable with a prisoner,
whom he is to take to the Albany penitentiary. In this case
justice has been swift enough, for the crime, the taking of a
shovel, has only been committed a few hours before. Such
coat as the man has he keeps buttoned up, even in the hot car,
for, the constable says, he has no underclothes at all. He stole
the shovel to get to the penitentiary, where it is warm. The
constable says they have lots of such cases, and that even in
these good times these pretty country towns are infested with
such tramps.
Is it real advance in civilization which, on the one hand
produces these great captains of industry, and, on the other,
these social outcasts ?
This is a most highly civilized community, yet every lower
window has to be barred, every door locked and bolted ; even
door-mats, not worth twenty-five cents, you will see chained to
the steps. Stop for a moment in a crowd and your watch is
gone as if by magic ; shirt-studs are taken from their owners’
bosoms, and ear-rings cut from ladies’ ears. Even a standing
army of policemen do not prevent highway robbery; there are
populous districts that to walk through after nightfall is a risk,
and where you have far more need to go armed and to be wary
than in the backwoods. There are dens into which men are
lured only to be drugged and robbed, sometimes to be mur-
dered. All the resources of science and inventive genius are
exhausted in making burglar-proof strong-rooms and safes, yet,
as the steel plate becomes thicker and harder, so does the burg-
lar’s tool become keener. If the combination lock cannot be
picked, it is blown open. If not a crack large enough for the


introduction of powder is left, then the air-pump is applied and
a vacuum is created. So that those who in the heart of civili-
zation would guard their treasures safely must come back to the
most barbarous device,and either themselves,or by proxy,sleep-
lessly stand guard. What sort of a civilization is this ? In
what does civilization esse'ntually consist if not in civility—that
say, in respect for the rights of person and of property ?
Yet this is not all, nor the worst. These are but the
grosser forms of that spirit that in the midst of civilization
compels every one to stand on guard. What is the maxim
of business intercourse among the most highly respectable
classes ? That if you are swindled it will be your own fault;
that you must treat every man you have dealings with as
though he but wanted the chance to cheat and rob you.
Caveat emptor! “Let the buyer beware.” If a man steal a
few dollars he may stand a chance of going to the penitentiary.
I read the other day of a man who was sent to the penitentiary
for stealing four cents from a horse-car company. But, if he
steal a million by business methods, he is courted and flattered,
even though he steal the poor little savings which washer-
women and sewing-girls have brought to him in trust, even
though he rob widows and orphans of the security which dead
men have struggled and stinted to provide.
This is a most Christian There are churches and
churches. All sorts of churches, where are preached all sorts
of religions, save that which once in Galilee taught the arrant
socialistic doctrine that it is easier for a camel to pass through
the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the kingdom
of God; all save that which once in Jerusalem drove the
money-changers from the temple. Churches restful to the
very eye, in which the weary and heavy laden can join in the
worship of their Creator for no larger an admission fee than it
costs on the Bowery to see the bearded lady or the Zulu giant
eight feet high. And then there are mission churches, run
expressly for poor people, where it does not cost a cent. There
are, in fact, more churches than there are people who care to
attend them. And there are likewise Sunday schools, and big
religious “ book concerns,” and tract societies, and societies
for spreading the light of the Gospel among the heathen in
foreign parts.
Yet, land a heathen on the Battery with money in his
pocket, and he will be robbed of the last cent of it before he is
a day older. “By their fruits shall ye know them.” I wonder
whether they who send missionaries to the heathen ever read
the daily papers. I think I could take a file of these news-
papers, and from their daily chroniclings match any thing that


could be told in the same period of any heathen community—
at least, of any heathen community in a like state of peace and
prosperity.
I do not say that such things are because of civilization, or
because of Christianity. On the contrary, I point to them as
inconsistent with civilization,as incompatible with Christianit y.
They show that our civilization is one-sided and cannot last as
at present based ; they show that our so-called Christian com-
munities are not Christian at all. I believe a civilization is
possible in which all could be civilised—in which such things
could be impossible. But it must be a civilization based on
justice and acknowledging the equal rights of all to natural
opportunities. I believe that there is in true Christianity a
power to regenerate the world. But it must be a Christianity
that attacks vested wrongs, not that spurious thing that de-
fends them. The religion which allies itself with injustice to
preach down the natural aspirations of the masses is worse
than atheism.
There are those who may look on this little book as very
radical, in the bad sense they attach to the word. They mis-
take. This is, in the true sense of the word, a most conser-
vative little book. Ido not appeal to prejudice and passion.
I appeal to intelligence. Ido not incite to strife; I seek to
prevent strife.
That the civilized world is on the verge of the most tre-
mendous struggle, which, according to the frankness and
sagacity with which it is met, will be a struggle of ideas or
a struggle of actual physical force, calling upon all the potent
agencies of destruction which modern invention has discovered,
every sign of the times portends. The voices that proclaim
the eve of revolution are in the air. Steam and electricity are
not merely transporting goods and carrying messages. They
are everywhere changing social and industrial organization;
they are everywhere stimulating thought, and arousing new
hopes and fears, and desires and passions; they are every-
where breaking down the barriers that have separated men,
and integrating nations into one vast organism, through which
the same pulses throb and the same nerves tingle.
The present situation in Great Britain is full of dangers
—of dangers graver and nearer than those who there are
making history are likely to see. For the moment the
forces [of reaction triumph. Davitt is snatched to prison;
a “ Liberal ” Government carries coercion by a tremendous
majority, and the most despotic powers are invoked to make


possible the eviction of Irish peasants. The order of Warsaw
is to reign in Ireland and the upholders of ancient wrong deem
it secure again, as the wave that was mounting seems sweep-
ing back. Let them wait a little and they will see. For again
the wave will mount, and higher and higher, and soon the
white foam will seethe and hiss on its toppling crest. It is not
true conservatism which cries “ Peace ! peace ! ” when there is
no peace; which, like the ostrich, sticks its head in the sand
and fancies itself secure ; which would compromise matters by
putting more coal in the furnace and hanging heavier weights
on the safety-valve ! That alone is true conservatism which
would look facts in the face, which would reconcile opposing
forces on the only basis on which reconciliation is possible—
that of justice.
I speak again of Great Britain, but I speak with reference
to the whole modern world. The true nature of the inevitable
conflict with which modern civilisation is everywhere begin-
ning to throb can, it seems to me, best be seen in the United
States, and in the newer States even more clearly than in the
older States. That intelligent Englishmen imagine that in the
democratization of political institutions, in free trade in land,
or in peasant proprietorship, can be found any solution of the
difficulties which are confronting them, is because they do not
see what may be seen in the United States by whoever will
look. That intelligent Americans imagine that by these
questions which are so menacingly presenting themselves in
Europe their peace is to be unvexed, is because they shut their
eyes to what is going on around them, because they attribute
to themselves and their institutions what is really due to con-
ditions now rapidly passing away—to the sparseness of popu-
lation and the cheapness of land. Yet it is here, in this
American Republic, that the true nature of that inevitable
conflict now rapidly approaching which must determine the
fate of modern civilization may be most clearly seen.
We have here abolished all hereditary privileges and legal
distinctions of class. Monarchy, aristocracy, prelacy, we have
swept them all away. We have carried mere political demo-
cracy to its ultimate. Every child born in the United States
may aspire to be President. Every man, even though he be a
tramp or a pauper, has a vote, and one man’s vote counts for
as much as any other man’s vote. Before the law all citizens
are absolutely equal. In the name of the people all laws run.
They are the source of all power, the fountain of all honour.
In their name and by their will all government is carried on ;
the highest officials are but their servants. Primogeniture and


entail we have abolished wherever they existed. We have
and have had free trade in land. We started with something
infinitely better than any scheme of peasant proprietorship
which it is possible to carry into effect in Great Britain. We
have had for our public domain the best part of an immense
continent. We have had the pre-emption law and the home-
stead law. It has been our boast that here every one who
wished it could have a farm. We have had full liberty of
speech and of the press. We have not merely common schools,
but high schools and universities, open to all who may choose
to attend. Yet here the same social difficulties apparent on
the other side of the Atlantic are beginning to appear. It is
already clear that our democracy is a vain pretence, our
make-believe of equality a sham and a fraud.
Already are the sovereign people becoming but a roifaienant,
liketheMerovingiankingsof France,like the Mikados of Japan.
The shadow of power is theirs ; but the substance of power is
being grasped and wielded by the bandit chiefs of the stock
exchange, the robber leaders who organise politics into
machines. In any matter in which they are interested, the little
finger of the great corporations is thicker than the loins of the
people. Is it sovereign States or is it railroad corporations that
are really represented in the elective Senate which we have
substituted for an hereditary House of Lords ? Where is the
count or marquis or duke in Europe who wields such power as
is wielded by such simple citizens as our Stamfords, Goulds,
and Vanderbilts ? What does legal equality amount to, when
the fortunes of some citizens can only be estimated in hundreds
of millions, and other citizens have nothing ? What does the
suffrage amount to when under threat of discharge from em-
ployment, citizens can be forced to vote as their employers
dictate ? when votes can be bought on election day for a few
dollars apiece ? If there are citizens so dependent that they
must vote as their employers wish, so poor that a few dollars
on election day seem to them more than any higher considera-
tion, then giving them votes simply adds to the political
power of wealth, and universal suffrage becomes the surest
basis for the establishment of tyranny.
Even if universal history did not teach the lesson, it is in
the United States already becoming very evident that political
equality can only continue to exist upon a basis of social equal-
ity ; that where the disparity in the distribution of wealth in-
creases,political democracy only makes easier the concentration
of power, and must inevitably lead to tyranny and anarchy.
And it is already evident that there is nothing in political
democracy, nothing-in popular education, nothing in any of


TRUE CONSERVATISM. 59
our American institutions, to prevent the most enormous dis-
parity in the distribution of wealth. Nowhere in the world
are such great fortunes growing up as in the United States.
Considering that the average income of the working masses of
our people is only a few hundred dollars a year, a fortune of a
million dollars is a monstrous thing—a more monstrous and
dangerous thing under a democratic government than anywhere
else. Yet fortunes of ten and twelve million dollars are with
us ceasing to be noticeable. We already have citizens whose
wealth can only be estimated in hundreds of millions, and
before the end of the century, if present tendencies continue,
we are likely to have fortunes estimated in thousands of
millions—such monstrous fortunes as the world has never seen
since the growth of similar fortunes ate out the heart of Rome.
And the necessary correlative of the growth of such fortunes
is the impoverishment and loss of independence on the part of
the masses. These great aggregations of wealth are like great
trees, which strike deep roots and spread wide branches, and
which, by sucking up the moisture from the soil and intercep-
ting the sunshine, stunt and kill the vegetation around them.
When a capital of a million dollars comes into competition with
capitals of thousands of dollars, the smaller capitalists must be
driven out of the business or destroyed. With great capital
nothing can compete save great capital. Hence, every aggre-
gation of wealth increases the tendency to the aggregation of
wealth, and decreases the possibility of the employee ever
becoming more than an employee, compelling him to compete
with his fellows as to who will work cheapest for the great
capitalist—a competition that can have but one result, that of
forcing wages to the minimum at which the supply of labour
can be kept up. Where we are is not so important as in what
direction we are going, and in the United States all tendencies
are clearly in this direction. A while ago, and any journeyman
shoemaker could set up in business for himself with the savings
of a few months. But now the operative shoemaker could not
in a lifetime save enough from his wages to go into business
for himself. And, now that great capital has entered agricul-
ture, it must be with the same results. The large farmer, who
can buy the latest machinery at the lowest cash prices and use
it to the best advantage, who can run a straight furrow for
miles, who can make special rates with railroad companies,
take advantage of the market, and sell in large lots for the
least commission, must drive out the small farmer of the early
American type just as the shoe factory has driven out the
journeyman shoemaker. And this is going on to-day.
There is nothing unnatural in this. On the contrary, it is in


the highest degree natural. Social development is in accord-
ance with certain immutable laws. And the law of develop-
ment, whether it be the development of a solar system, of the
tiniest organism, or of a human society, is the law of integra-
tion. It is in obedience to this law—a law evidently as all-
compelling as the law of gravitation—that these new agencies,
which so powerfully stimulate social growth, tend to the
specialization and interdependence of industry. It is in obedi-
ence to this law that the factory is superseding the independent
mechanic, the large farm is swallowing up the little one, the
big store shutting up the small one, that corporations are
arising that dwarf the State, and that population tends more
and more to concentrate in cities. Men must work together in
larger and in more closely-related groups. Production must
be on a greater scale. The only question is, whether the
relation in which men are thus drawn together and compelled
to act together shall be the natural relation of interdependence
in equality, or in the unnatural relation of dependence upon a
master. If the one, then may civilization advance in what is
evidently the natural order, each step leading to a higher step.
If the other, then what Nature has intended as a blessing
becomes a curse, and a condition of inequality is produced
which will inevitably destroy civilization. Every new inven-
tion but hastens the catastrophe.
Now, all this we may deduce from natural laws as fixed and
certain as the law of gravitation. And all this we may see
going on to-day. This is the reason why modern progress,
great as it has been, fails to relieve poverty; this is the secret
of the increasing discontent which pervades every civilized
country. Under present conditions, with land treated as pri-
vate property, material progress is developing two diverse
tendencies, two opposing currents. On the one side, the ten-
dency of increasing population and of all improvement in the
arts of production is to build up enormous fortunes, to wipe
out the intermediate classes, and to crowd down the masses to
a level of lower wages and greater dependence. On the other
hand, by bringing men closer together, by stimulating thought,
by creating new wants, by arousing new ambitions, the ten-
dency of modern progress is to make the masses discontented
with their condition, to feel bitterly its injustice. The result
can be predicted just as certainly as the result can be predicted
when two trains are rushing toward each other on the same track.
This thing is absolutely certain. Private property in land
blocks the way of advancing civilisation. The two cannot long
co-exist. Either private property in land must be abolished,
or, or it has happened again and again in the history of mankind,


civilisation must again turn back in anarchy and bloodshed.
Let the remaining years of the nineteenth century bear me
witness. Even now, I believe, the inevitable struggle has
begun. It is not conservatism which would ignore such a
tremendous fact. It is the blindness that invites destruction.
He that is truly conservative let him look the facts in the face ;
let him speak frankly and dispassionately. This is the duty of
the hour. For, when a great social question presses for settle-
ment, it is only for a little while that the voice of Reason can
be heard. The masses of men hardly think at any time. It
is difficult even in sober moments to get them to calmly reason.
But when passion is roused, then they are like a herd of stam-
peded bulls. Ido not fear that present social adjustments can
continue. That is impossible. What I fear is that the dams
may hold till the flood rises to fury. What I fear is that
dogged resistance on the one side may kindle a passionate
sense of wrong on the other. What I fear are the demagogues
and the accidents.
The present condition of all civilised countries is that of
increasingly unstable equilibrium. In steam and electricity,
and all the countless inventions which they typify, mighty
forces have entered the world. If rightly used, they are our
servants, more potent to do our bidding than the genii
of Arabian story. If wrongly used, they, too, must turn to
monsters of destruction. They require and will compel
great social changes. That we may already see. Operating
under social institutions which are based on natural justice,
which acknowledges the equal rights of all to the material
opportunities of nature, their elevating power will be equally
exerted, and industrial organisation will pass naturally into
that of a vast co-operative society. Operating under social
institutions which deny natural justice by treating land as
private property, their power is unequally exerted, and tends,
by producing inequality, to engender forces that will tear and
rend and shatter. The old bottles cannot hold the new wine.
This is the ferment which throughout the civilised world is
everywhere beginning.
XVII.
Let me recapitulate. What I want to impress upon
those who may read this book is this :
The Irish land question is not a mere local question ; it
is a universal question. It involves the great problem of
the distribution of wealth, which is everywhere forcing
itself upon attention.
It cannot be settled by measures which in their nature


can have but local application. It can only be settled by
measures which in their nature will apply everywhere as
readily as in Ireland.
It cannot be settled by half-way measures. It can only
be settled by the acknowledgment of equal rights to land.
Upon this basis it can be settled easily and permanently.
If the Irish reformers take this ground, they will make
their fight the common fight of all the peoples ; they will
concentrate strength and divide opposition. They will
turn the flank of the system that oppresses them, and
awake the struggle in its very entrenchments. They will
rouse against it a force that is like the force of rising tides.
What I urge the men of Ireland to do is to proclaim,
without limitation or evasion, that the land, of natural
right, is the common property of the whole people, and to
propose practical measures which will recognise this right
in Great Britain as well as in Ireland.
What I urge the Land ■ Leagues of the- United States to
do is to announce this great principle as of universal applica-
tion ; to give their movement a reference to America as
well as to Ireland ; to broaden and deepen and strengthen
it by making it a movement for the regeneration of the
world—a movement which shall concentrate and give shape
to aspirations that are stirring among all nations.
Ask not for Ireland mere charity or sympathy. Let her
call be the call of fraternity : “ For yourselves, O brothers,
as well as for us! ” Let her rallying cry awake all who
slumber, and rouse to a common struggle all who are
oppressed. Let it breathe not old hates ; let it ring and
echo with the new hope !
In many lands her sons are true to her; under many
skies her daughters burn with the love of her. Lo! the
ages bring their opportunity. Let those who would honour
her carry her banner to the front!
The harp and the shamrock, the golden sunburst on the
field of living green! emblems of a country without nation-
ality ; standard of a people down-trodden and oppressed !
The hour -has come when they may lead the van of the
great world-struggle. Types of harmony and of ever-
springing hope of light and of life ! The hour has come
when they may stand for something far higher than local
patriotism ; something grander than national independence.
The hour has come when they may stand forth to speak
the world’s hope, to lead the world’s advance!
Torn away by pirates, tending in a strange land a heathen
master’s swine, the slave boy with the spirit of Christ in his


heart, praying in the snow for those who had enslaved him,
and returning to bring to his oppressors the message of the
Gospel, returning with good to give where evil had been
received, to [kindle in the darkness a great light—this is
Ireland’s patron saint. In his spirit let Ireland’s struggles
be. Not merely through Irish vales and hamlets, but into
England, into Scotland, into Wales, wherever the English
tongue is spoken, let the torch be carried and the word be
preached. And beyond! The brotherhood of man stops
not with difference of speech any more than [with seas or
mountain chains. A century ago it was ours to [speak the
ringing words. Then it was France’s. Now it may be
Ireland’s, if her sons be true.
But wherever, or by whom, the word must be spoken, the
standard will be raised. No matter what the Irish leaders
do or do not do, it is too late to permanently settle the ques-
tion on any basis [short of the recognition of equal natural
rights. And, whether the Land Leagues move forward or
slink back, the (agitation must spread to this side of the
Atlantic. The Republic, the true, Republic, is not yet here.
But her birth struggle must soon begin. Already, with the
hope of her, men’s thoughts are stirring.
Not a republic of landlords and peasants ; not a republic
of millionaires and tramps; not a republic in which some
are masters and some serve. But a republic of equal citizens,
where competition becomes co-operation, and the inter-
dependence of all gives true independence to each ; where
moral progress goes hand-in-hand with intellectual progress,
and material progress elevates and enfranchises even the
poorest and weakest and lowliest.
And the gospel of deliverance, let us not forget it; it is
the gospel of love, not of hate. He whom it emancipates will
know neither Jew nor Gentile, nor Irishman nor English-
man, nor German, nor Frenchman, nor European nor
American, nor difference of colour nor of race, nor animosi-
ties of class nor condition. Let us set our feet on old
prejudices, let us bury the old hates. There have been
“Holy Alliances” of kings. Let us strive for the Holy
Alliance of the people.
Liberty, equality, fraternity ! Write them on the banners.
Let them be for sign and countersign. Without equality,
liberty cannot be; without fraternity, neither equality nor
liberty can be achieved.
Liberty—the full freedom of each bounded only by the
equal freedom of every other.
Equality—the equal right of each to the use and enjoy-


64 the land question.
ment of all natural opportunities; to all the essentials o!
happy, healthful, human life !
Fraternity—that sympathy which links together those
who struggle in a noble cause; that would live and let live ;
that would help as well as be helped ; that, |in seeking [the
good of all, finds the highest good of each !
“ By this sign shall ye conquer ! ”
“ We hold these truths to be self-evident: That all men 'are
created equal; that they are endowed by their Creator with
certain unalienable rights; that among these are life, liberty , and
the pursuit of happiness! ”
It is over a century 'since these words rang out. It is
time to give them their full, true meaning. Let the
standard be lifted that all may see it ; let the advance be
sounded that all may hear it. Let those who would fall
back, fall back. Let those who would oppose, oppose.
Everywhere are those who will rally. The stars in their
courses fight against Sisera !
HENRY GEORGE.
New York, March, 1881.


“ - ...


