





THE STORM AND THE HAVEN
A Tributre to the Memory
OF' THE
REV. D. J. DRAPER
LATE REPRESENTATIVE FROM THE AUSTRALASIAN CONFERENCE
TO THE BRITISH CONFERENCE ; WHO, WITH
MRS. DRAPER,
AND TWO HUNDRED AND FORTY-TWO FELLOW PASSENGERS AND CREW,
FOUNDERED IN THE STEAMSHIP “LONDON,”
ON JANUARY 11 th, 1866.
COMPILED BY THE
REVS. JOHN C. SYMONS AND JOSEPH DARE.
. “ The Captain tells us there is no hope of our getting into port; but the
Great Captain above tens us there is hope, and we may all get'safe to heaven.”
—‘The late Rev D. J. Draper on board the "London."
[THIRD THOUSAND.]
MELBOURNE :
SOLD AT THE WESLEYAN BOOK DEPW,
LONSDALE STREET, AND BY .ALL BOOKSELLERS.]^:
2 1866.




pcmorg
OF THE LATE
R K "V. DANIEL ,T. DRAPER,
WHO, WITH
MIRS. DRAPER
AND a
TWO HUNDRED AND FORTY-TWO FELLOW-SUFFERERS,
Perished January 11, 1866,
BY THE FOUNDERING OF THE STEAMSHIP “LONDON,”
IN THE BAY OF BISCAY,
ON HER VOYAGE TO MELBOURNE,
THIS LITTLE VOLUME,
AS A MARK OF THEIR LOVE AND ESTEEM,
|s |ptLrual.et>
BY HIS STRONGLY ATTACHED FRIENDS,
THE COMPILERS,
JOHN C. SYMONS.
JOSEPH DARE.
Melbourne,
ibih April, 1866.


Yet more! the billows and the depths have more !
High hearts and brave are gather’d to thy breast!
They hear not now the booming waters roar,
The battle-thunders will not break their rest.
Keep thy red gold and gems, thou stormy grave !
Give back the true and brave!
Give back the lost and lovely! those for whom
The place was kept at board and hearth so long,
The prayer went up through midnight’s breathless gloom,
And the vain yearning woke ’midst festive song!
Hold fast thy buried isles, thy towers o’erthrown—
But all is not thine own.
To thee the love of woman hath gone down,
Dark flow the tides o’er manhood’s noble head,
O’er youth’s bright locks, and beauty’s flowery crown :
Yet must thou hear a voice—Restore the dead!
Earth shall reclaim her precious things from thee!
Restore the dead, thou sea!
Mrs. llemans.


INTRODUCTION.
In sending forth this little volume, the compilers feel a
melancholy pleasure in paying their humble tribute to the
memory of one whose friendship they highly valued, to
whose counsels they are greatly indebted, and whose loss
they deeply deplore.
They have sought, within the limited space which their
plan necessitated, to furnish as much information as pos-
sible respecting the active and busy life of Mr. Draper.
None can be more conscious than they of the imperfections
of the sketch. It would have been far easier to have
extended the volume to double its size, than it has been to
keep it within its present limits. But they are anxious that
its price should be such as to enable even the poorest of
Mr. Draper’s numerous friends to obtain a copy; and this
could only be accomplished by rigidly keeping to the
number of pages of which the volume consists.
The compilers have spared no labour to obtain all the
information available respecting the shipwreck, and the
last scenes on board the London; and they believe they


have introduced all that is authentically known in respect
to them. The investigation by the Board of Trade
shows that two hundred and forty-four persons perished,
instead of two hundred and twenty as before stated.
If they have taken no notice of other persons whose
names have been honourably mentioned in connection
with the catastrophe, it is not because they do not
judge them worthy of "honourable mention;” nor because
they imagine that Mr. Draper alone did his duty nobly
and well; but because it does not come within the scope
of this volume, which is designed to be a “memorial”
one to Mr Draper.
They have abstained from “ moralising,” believing that
if the event which has deprived them—and multitudes
besides—of their dear friends, and the Christian heroism
displayed in these scenes, do not reach the hearts and
consciences of their readers, no remarks which they could
make might be expected to do so. Besides, the sermons
and extracts which they give contain excellent and
numerous appeals to the conscience and the heart.
The compilers desire to express their thanks to the
Eevs. Dr. Cairns, M. H. Becher, and J. P. Sunderland
for the notices of Mr. Draper which they have kindly
contributed. Their thanks are due to the Bev. Dr.
Jobson, who (at the request of the President of the
British Conference) preached a memorial sermon in City


Road Chapel, London, and from which they have received
considerable assistance in preparing the biographical
sketch.
The photograph, which appears as the frontispiece, is
copied by Mr. F. Cornell from one taken in London, in
September last, by Mr. F. Jones, of Oxford-street, and is
unquestionably the best likeness of oar departed friend
that was ever taken.
The facsimile of Mr. Draper’s autograph is traced from
one of his latest letters.
This introduction may fitly close with the accom-
panying lines, kindly contributed by a friend at Rich-
mond :
They sleep—as all must sleep. What matters where !
Life’s path together trod, the same dark tomb they share;
The waves can sing a requiem as sweet
As ever zephyr sighed ; there no unholy feet
Shall desecrate the sod; but murmuring shell,
And rippling waters, and the rolling wave,
Shall render ceaseless homage! There the brave,
The good, the beautiful, and the beloved,
All that this earth held dear, or heart adored,
Repose in peace : —spoken the last farewell,
The last sigh spent, Life’s weary journey o’er,
No ruthless hand shall ever part them more. i
Melbourne, April 2bth, 1866.


CONTENTS.
PAGE.
Introduction
5
Biographical Sketch
9
Narrative of the Loss op the “London” ... ... 40
List op Passengers. &c
47
Memorial Sermon by Rev. John Eggleston ... 49
Notices op Rev. D. J. Draper:-
By Rev. Dr. Cairns
6O
By Rev. M. H. Becher
65
By Rev. J. P. Sunderland
••• ••• 67
Sermon by Rev. J. Dare
... 69
By Rev. J. D. Geden
... 70
By Rev. Newman Hall
... 71
The Archbishop of York
7l
From “London Weekly Review” 71
From “Macmillan’s Magazine” ... n
From “ The Churchman ” 72
Conclusion .
72


THE STORM AND THE HAVEN.
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH.
The Rev. Daniel James Draper was a native of Wick-
ham, near Fareham, Hampshire, England, in which village
he was born August 28th, 1810. His parents were respect-
able and moral—his father was the chief carpenter and
builder of the village—they were regular in their attend-
ance at the parish church, and were attentive to the
morals of their children.
At the time of which we write, there was no Wesleyan
service in his native village. There was a chapel in Fareham,
in which, from his intimacy with the family of Mr. Webb,
he was induced to become a hearer, and soon after was
converted to God. It is told that at first young Draper
could not be induced to enter the chapel, but that he was
often found lingering and listening at the door. On one
occasion the doorkeeper remonstrated with him severely
for hanging about the door, instead of entering the chapel.
This caused him to declare that he would never come near
the place again. He did not, however, keep this resolu-
tion; but becoming a worshipper, the Word of God was
applied to his conscience, he was convinced of sin, and
through “ repentance towards God, and faith in our Lord
Jesus Christ,” he was made “a new creature in Christ
Jesus.”
Immediately upon his conversion he united himself with
the Wesleyan Church at Fareham. His age at the time
of this great change is not known; but since he became a
local preacher at twenty, he could not have been then much,
if at all, over seventeen years of age. His union with the
Wesleyans was not agreeable to his family, and in conse-
quence he had to endure considerable opposition; this,
B


however, did not move him. Shortly after a Wes-
leyan chapel was erected in Wickham—his father being
the builder, assisted by his son, in which soon after the
latter was privileged to proclaim the gospel. Removing
to Southampton, the young man became usefully employed
m the Sabbath-school. When about twenty he was
appointed a local preacher by the Rev. W. D. Goy.
In 1833, Mr. Draper removed to Brecon, in South Wales,
and resided with an elder sister by a former wife of his
father. He met in the minister’s class, and was noted for
his regular attendance and sincere piety. The Rev. James
Cooke, who was then stationed at Brecon, bears testimony to
his love for, and knowledge of the Scriptures and Wesley’s
Hymns; and also for his great gift in prayer, and states
tiiat m his happiest seasons he often gave out and sung
with a zest never to be forgotten:—
“ Happy, if with my latest breath
I may but gasp his name ;
Preach Him to all, and cry in death,
Behold, behold the Lamb !”
In this “ the child was father to the man,” for these cha-
racteristics remained with him throughout his entire
career, and many of our readers will remember how often'
and with what deep feeling he was accustomed to use
these words, little imagining that they would be so realised
by him m his last hours.
, . a local preacher in the Brecon Circuit he commended
himself to the church by his diligent study, his earnest
desn e to save souls, his laborious and self-denying labours
and by the success which attended his efforts. To his
sister, with whom he resided, he was made the means of
tier salvation. His good report and evident fitness for the
A- mmistl 7> the superintendent, the Rev.
John Nicklm, to nominate him to the Quarterly meeting as
a candidate for the Wesleyan Ministry; and at the Annual
District Meeting, held in Swansea in May, 1834 he
—together with the Rev. F. Lewis, who laboured so long
and usefully in Australasia, —was recommended to the
Conference, by whom he was received as a probationer in
the Wesleyan Ministry.
Mr. Draper’s first, and only circuit in England was
Chatteris, where he laboured under the superintendency of


the Rev. Francis Derry for one year. A friend now in the
colony, who then lived in that circuit, informs us that Mr.
Draper was the first young man appointed to it, and that
he resided in March, eight miles distant from Chatteris.
Testimony is borne to his usefulness; several persons refer
to him as the instrument of their conversion, and he was
greatly beloved.
Having been applied to by the Missionary Committee,
he expressed his willingness to labour in the mission field;
and at the end of a year Mr. Draper was appointed to
Nevis, in the West Indies, for which place his name appears
in the “Minutes of Conference.” He objected to that
appointment, and was then selected to proceed to New
South Wales. At a Jubilee meeting held in Geelong, on
Bth August, 1864, Mr. Draper stated, that “ twenty-nine
years ago that day he received a letter which turned his
attention to these colonies.’ He has often playfully re-
marked to his friends, that his first act as a Methodist
preacher was one of rebellion, in refusing to go where he
was appointed. The churches who were favoured with his
valuable services in these lands will recognise in this
“ rebellion” an illustration of the quotation so often upon
his lips:—
“ There’s a divinity which shapes our ends,
Rough hew them as we may
and they will not fail to thank God that he was sent to
Australia rather than to the West Indies.
In a letter to his sister, dated London, 9th October,
18.35, Mr. Draper writes:—“Nine of us were ordained on
Wednesday evening last, in Southwark Chapel. We are
going to different parts of the world, but on the same
errand: to convey in some humble manner the light of
life to the ends of the earth. I conceive that the situation
which I am about to fill is one of the most important, if it
be not the most important that a human being can possibly
occupy; and when I connect with its importance the honour
of suffering for Christ —supposing we shall be called to
suffer—l am led to exclaim, ‘ What am I, O Lord, and
what my father’s house, that Thou shouldst thus distin-
guish me ?’ ,
‘ ’Tis mercy all; let earth adore,
Let angel-minds inquire no more.’ ”


Six missionaries were to proceed to New South Wales,
hey were the Revs. John M'Kenny, John Spinney, W.
A Brookes, Frederick Lewis, D. J. Draper, and Matthew
M ilson—the latter, who is now labouring in South Aus-
tralia, alone survives. Mr. Draper had been recently
married to Miss Webb, of Fareham. 7
Speaking of their embarkation on 13th October, 1835,
wenfX? teS ' that U /- Buntm g’ with numerous friends,
went with them m a steamer to Gravesend, to join the
Bencoolen “During the trip down the river Dr. Bunting
tinn 'Z!? the tlme m s P eakin S words of comfort, exhorta?
on, and encouragement to all the missionaries in their-
S K uck worAs as the following were addressed to me—
VV orother, you are going to New South Wales,—a new
world, and a most interesting field of labour. You will
find a moral atmosphere unfavourable to the success of the
gospel ministry. Years may pass before you witness any
vou will meet Tu labours ’ , and 1 think it probable that
you will meet with many discouragements. However
success is certain. It must come! it must eomf° For
some yeais we seemed to labour almost in vain, and often
thr In a ? Pe w? as lf tbe & racio «s dew were withholden from
SniriMins 1 heart has well-nigh fainted, the good
now with rn3 Ugh ai remen * brance the words of him
now with God:— It must come, it must come!’ It came
at length, and thank God we no longer ‘ labour hi vain
nor spend our strength for nought ’ ” 8 ’
Those were not the days of clipper ships, and rapid
passages : it was not until February 22, 1836 that the
missionaries and their wives reached Hobart Town the
thei a e ge that CU i )yi - ng f ° Ur months - B is remembered
roominMelril f 1 heid in the school-'
X™ o IU MelviUe-street, the band of missionaries made
then appearance, producing no small excitement That
prayer-meeting where thanks for theirpreserSn during
comminefed 7 S . U PP Iicat + ion ** their future success were
commingled, is not forgotten to this day.
mtnhl” a ? leasant for about a month among the hos-
pitable and warm-hearted Weslevans of Hobart Town
the mission party proceeded to Sydney. During the vov’
age they were m most imminent peril. A furious
S ho™°T d ti w a le • Tho « Si?
m six fiouis, if the wind did not change, they would


be lost. The violence of the gale prevented their
assembling for prayer; but in their own cabins
they cried to God for deliverance. At one o’clock
in the morning the captain reported, “the wind has
changed; it is blowing off the land, and all danger is
over.” The next day they joyously assembled to present
their united thanks to God, for His merciful deliverance,.
Sydney was reached on Sunday evening, 3rd April. Here
the mission party separated—Messrs. Spinney, Brookes,
and Wilson proceeding to the South Seas, the others
remaining in New South Wales.
• Mr. Draper’s first station was Parramatta. He was
accustomed often in after years to refer to the depressing
character of his labours, and to the want of success which
for some time continued. His usual work is thus stated
in a letter to the missionary secretaries, dated May 19,1838.
He says:—“ On Sunday morning, at eleven o’clock, I
preach in the chapel (at Parramatta;) in the afternoon I
ride, on an average, eighteen miles, and preach in the
country. On Sunday evening, at half-past six, I preach
in the chapel in town again. On Monday I meet the
female class at four p.m., hold a prayer-meeting in the
chapel at seven, and frequently meet the juvenile class
afterwards. Tuesday I hold a prayer-meeting in a private
house at seven, when many attend. Wednesday I go to
Liverpool, visit the people, and preach in the evening.
Thursday I preach in the chapel in the evening. Friday
evening I meet a class. These engagements, with visiting
the town and country members, and preparation for the
pulpit, occupy my time fully, and I am thankful that I eat
not the bread of idleness. The Sunday labour in this
circuit is certainly the hardest in which I ever engaged,
and frequently makes me unwell on the following day;
but I thank God I have no object in view but to serve my
generation according to His will.
* Be they many or few, my days are His due,
And they all are devoted to Him.’ ”
Under his earnest labours the congregations increased in
the town and country; church-members multiplied; Sunday-
schools flourished; and in September, 1839, he had the
happiness of seeing a large, handsome chapel opened in
Macquarie-street at Parramatta; and also, on the same


day, th<? laying of the foundation-stone of a Gothic chapel
on the northern side of the river which divides the town
on a piece of land previously given by Richard Rouse'
Esq., to the Rev. Samuel Leigh.
Before two years had passed he was called to suffer the
distressing loss of the wife of his youth. He was left with
an infant son who now survives him—Mr. Thomas Webb
Draper, at present in New Zealand.
From Parramatta, Mr. Draper removed to Bathurst,
at that time almost the outermost limits of civilisation
Here he found some earnest Christian men, and amid
incessant toil was privileged to see much good accomplished.
While in this circuit, in July, 1839, Mr. Draper was
married to his second wife, the estimable lady who per-
ished with him. She was a Miss Elizabeth Shelley, the
daughter of one of the very first missionaries to the'South
beas, and was a native of Parramatta.
. Mr ; Draper was next appointed in Sydney. Here as
in other places, his labours were appreciated, and their
resuits were very manifest, in the consolidation and exten-
sion of Methodism.
In 1846, Mr Draper removed to Adelaide, where he
remained until 1850. Methodism there was at that time
at a low ebb, and required both wisdom and energy on the
condition 17 mmiStcr m order to raise & from its depressed
The Rev W Longbottom, whose labours in the early
history of South Australia had been so useful, and whose
name and memory are dear to all who knew him, had been
stationed a second time in Adelaide. He found the
church scattered and all but destroyed, and he earnestly,
and with considerable success, laboured for its restoration
But his health completely failing, he was laid aside, and it
became necessary to send some minister to succeed.him.
le discovery of the Burra Burra copper mine took
place about this period, and from the great influx of popu-
t tion which resulted from that discovery, the appointment
became an important one. An appeal was made to Sydney,
Adelaide SP ° n^e Ji? P rapcr volunteered to proreed to
Adelaide, upon the condition that another minister should
be apposed m th him. This was readily agreed to, and
theßer. John Harcourt was sent in JimeflUr. Draper
following in October, 1846. 1


At that time, and for some years after, the entire colony
formed one circuit, and the preaching places lay far distant
from each other. In cultivating this extensive field Mr.
Draper spared no energy; he was in labours more abun-
dant, frequently riding on horseback fifty miles a-day to
minister the word of life to congregations in distant locali-
ties and scattered neighbourhoods.
Signal success, by God’s blessing, crowned his labours.
Soon it became necessary to increase the number of
ministers, and successively Messrs. Thrum, Lowe, Symons,
Flockart, Dare, Hull, and T. Williams becamehis coadjutors.
The question of State aid to religion excited frequent
and sometimes angry debate, in connection with which Mr.
Draper was made the subject of no small misrepresentation
and annoyance. Considerable difference of opinion existed
among the Wesleyans as to whether they should, or should
not avail themselves of State grants.
The policy pursued by Mr. Draper has been acknow-
ledged to be a wise one. He contended that Wesleyan
Methodism had never considered it to be unlawful to receive
grants of land, or money from the Crown, so long as no
conditions were attached to these grants which were incon-
sistent with the fullest and freest Christian liberty.
As State aid in South Australia was offered without any
restrictions upon the recipients; and as, further, «£in no way
benefited the ministers —all being paid either to the quarterly,
or trustee meetings—Mr. Draper held, that each quarterly,
and trustee meeting should determine for itself, whether it
would or would not receive aid. The majority of the
officers was in favour of its reception. This gave umbrage
to a considerable section, who did not scruple to speak and
write most unjustly of Mr. Draper. He felt this conduct
deeply; but it did not move him from what he considered
his duty. He had the satisfaction of finding when State
aid and its agitation were done away, that his judicious
use of it while it lasted, enabled the church to take the
very first position in the land; and that most, if not all
those wdio have maligned and traduced him, acknowledged
his purity of motive, the wisdom of his plans, and regretted
the course they had pursued.
In 1850 and ’5l Mr. Draper projected a scheme of Church
Extension, which embraced the erection of a number of
chapels and ministers’ residences. The people entered


most heartily and liberally into this work. Of those
ffinnrn 18 th l n0 1 1 - le , edifice in Piri e-street (which cost
£6000) was the chief, as well as the last. It was a great
undertaking, but was conducted to a successful Isue.
ust, however, as this scheme was completed, news of the
goid discoveries of \ictoria reached Adelaide. The people
flocked from South Australia by thousands. In less than
tk,n e of 70 t Soo m ° re than l 5 ’ 000 men lGft ° Ut ° f a P°Pula-
woulrfJ ’ ? P - rS ° nS i Xone could tell what the issue
would be and universal rum stared all in the face. Those
T? T §t to the faith of God’s
P pie. Ihe chief burden of responsibility as to the
newly completed churches rested upon Mr! Draper • for
congregations, members, officers, trustees, had gone to’ the
diggmgs, and none could say if they would return or
S ;M Mr. Draper’feel
this trial. Those who did not know him intimately were
naware of the depth of his feelings and emotions. A
minister who was much with him during that period
“ Hours did I spend with him at that time, seeking to
Many TTirJTb of T meetin §; the unexpected difficulties.
iMany a time have I seen him walk up and down his
study his hands behind him as was sometimes his wont—
sTemS ee Sf bl fff\ and l0n& at thc dt ' Solation - Then
church.’” 1 aU hIS h ° PeS ’ and ° f the P revi °usly flourishing
diffi“r idei l t r Urred ia conne ction with these financial
Draner hJ b 1§ ° f a P e ™ aa ent record. Mr.
miffs tl tb I°™ Cn f^ C<l °» e morning in some slight
repairs to the fence ot his garden, and among other things
had been sawing off the tops of some palinfs! White g
this work he was called away to give a cheque for a con-
siderable sum due to the contractor for the Pirie-street
TPc unusual exercise in which he had been engaged
hi Snaw T to tr T h i e J° m T hat ’ and sh °wed itsdfffi
ms signatme. In a short time he received a request from
the manager of the South Australian Bank, Mr TinhT
requesting him to call. Pull of anxiety ami under til


was presented here to-day which has greatly concerned me.
It has not your usual firm signature. I fear you are
getting nervous and anxious about matters. Now, this
will never do; it is to*persons like yourself that we look
for encouragement in this time of difficulty. You must
not give way; and I have sent for you, to say
shall have any accommodation you may want.” Mr.
Draper always regarded this circumstance in the light of a
providential interposition, and was greatly cheered by it.
At this crisis the Rev. J. C. Symons volunteered to
proceed to the Victoria gold-fields to minister to the South
Australian Methodists, and, if possible, to raise funds for
the relief of the burdened trustees.
We have before us the statement of the “case” of the
chapels, as drawn up by Mr. Draper, together with the
instructions which he furnished to Mr. Symons for his
guidance. From the former of these documents we extract
the following, viz.:—
“ Not less than twenty-seven chapels have been built,
affording, in the aggregate, accommodation for 5730 persons.
Nearly the whole of these places of worship have been erected
during the last three years, and are most durable and com-
modious structures. In addition to the above, four sub-
stantial dwelling-houses for ministers have been built in
different parts of the colony. The whole of these buildings,
including the spacious chapel in Pirie-street, Adelaide,
have cost not less than £13,000, exclusive of the value of
the land, a considerable portion of which has been pur-
chased, and may be estimated at not less than £2OOO.
“ The debts remaining on this property amount to about
£4500.
“ This sum is distributed over the various properties,
and would have been (in almost every case) perfectly
manageable and easily liquidated in two or three years
had the state of the colony continued ordinarily prosperous.’
Various causes, which it is not necessary to mention,
prevented this mission from being very successful in a
direct pecuniary sense. Indirectly the success was most
gratifying. It enabled the Wesleyan Church to establish,
so early as March, 1852, a mission on the gold-fields,
which has gone on increasing and extending to the present
time; it relieved South Australia for a time from the
maintenance of one minister; the net sum of over £llO


was collected for the burdened chapels; and such was the
reeling of satisfaction and thankfulness of the South Aus-
)[ a , ia ” Methodists because they had not been forgotten, and
that their ministers were ready to submit to the privations
and inconveniences of a “ digger’s life” in order to minister
to their spiritual necessities, that upon their return—which
took place in most instances at the end of a few months—
l ! e^ e S Cl Z d m^ St - into plans for the removal of
the debts from their holy and beautiful houses, and contri-
buted most liberally; soon mourning was turned into ioy,
and Mr. Draper was permitted to witness the fruit of his
long, earnest, and wise labours.
In 1855 Mr. Draper was appointed to Victoria He
took charge of the Melbourne, East (Collingwood) Circuit,
and was also Chairman of the Victoria District. Then
tor two years he was relieved from circuit charge, and
occupied the position really of a “bishop,” travelling
extensively throughout the colony and promoting thf
iSTsfii mterests °f f he church. Three years, from 1858
to 1861 were spent in the Melbourne Third (St Kildal
he removed to Melbourne
fr St’ Kdd S 67 ChUrC1 '- ) HIS last year—lB64—was spent
During eight years, the district of which Mr. Draper
was chairman, included the entire colony, and when it
became necessary to form three districts, he was appointed
Chairman of the Melbourne District.
It is not necessary to dwell at length upon his services
during these ten years ; they are too well known to need
even mention. Few, however, can understand the
immense amount of work which he performed. His mere
correspondence arising out of his duties as “head of the
Wesleyan Denomination” was equal to that of many
merchants ; and this m addition to his ordinary duties as
superintendent of a circuit. 7 as
The erection of Wesley Church, with its parsonage
schools, book depot, &c., is largely due to him: for though
he was not in charge of the circuit at the time when the
c ureh was erected, it was he who originated the idea
nd_ he was constantly in communication with the’
minister the Rev. W. L. Binks—and the trustees
aiding them by his counsel. And, when through unfore-
seen circumstances, a large sum of the puinhase-money


of the Collins-street property failed to be paid, and the
trustees became seriously embarrassed, he cheered them
with his buoyant and reliant spirit, threw himself heartily
into their troubles, and under his wise, energetic, and
skilful plans, succeeded in relieving them to a very great
degree of their burdens.
From the time when, in 1855, the Australasian Missions
were formed into an Affiliated Conference, Mr. Draper took
an active and prominent part in all connexional affairs.
He was elected Secretary of the Conference, during the
years 1857, 1858, and 1860. In 1859, he was elected Pre-
sident of the Conference. In these, the highest ecclesiastical
offices which his church could confer upon him, he dis-
charged his duties to the entire satisfaction of his brethren.
As ministerial treasurer of the “Worn-out Ministers’and
Ministers’ Widows’ Fund,” which—in connection with the
Hon. A. Fraser, M.L.C. —he held from its formation to his
death, he was indefatigable, and has laid his brethren
under deep obligation by his attention to its details.
For some years Mr. Draper had contemplated a visit to
his “ fatherland.” He had designed to ask for a year’s
leave of absence in 1863, but the failure of the Rev. W.
Butters’s health decided him not to do so. In 1864 the
non-return of Mr. Butters, —as was expected and hoped,—
induced him to postpone his visit. He, however, stated to
the Conference that (D.Y.) he hoped to be able to leave
the following year. At the Sydney Conference of 1865,
he asked and obtained leave of absence for one year to visit
England. In granting that request, the Conference placed
upon its minutes the following record: —
“The Rev. Daniel J. Draper’s request for leave of absence
for one year, in order to visit England, is granted; and
the Conference unanimously resolves: That the Rev. D.
J. Draper be appointed our Representative to the British
Conference, believing that such an appointment will be
highly advantageous to the interests of this Connexion.
“ The Conference records its high sense of the value of
Mr. Draper’s long and arduous services in Australia,
extending over a period of thirty years, and recognises the
ability and wisdom he has displayed as Chairman of impor-
tant Districts. The Wesleyan Church in these Colonies
has derived, and will in all' future time derive advantage
from Mr. Draper’s devoted labours; and the Conference


earnestly hopes that, by the blessing of God, he will speedily
return to Australia, to advance still farther the interests of
the Redeemer’s kingdom.”
In the official Address to the British Conference, announc-
ing his appointment as Representative to that Conference,
this passage occurs:—“ The Rev. Daniel J. Draper has our
ready consent for him to visit the land of our fathers. By
our unanimous wish he is commended to you as our Repre-
sentative in your Conference. You need not be informed
ol his valuable services to us, his intimate knowledge of
our Connexion, or the high esteem and confidence in which
he is held. We believe that from you he will receive a
most affectionate welcome. He wall be followed by our
prayers that he may return to us in health, and in the
fulness of the blessing of the Gospel of Christ.”
The Rev. G. Daniel, in a communication to the Editor
° • un Wedayan Chronicle , refers to an incident connected
with Mr. Draper’s request to the Conference for leave of
absence, and which we gladly record here. Mr. Daniel
writes:—“You, and other members of Conference will
remember that when addressing us concerning his pro-
jected v isit to England, one subject that he particularly
clvvelt upon for future inquiry and consideration with the
lathers and brethren at home, was that fund, to which he
had devoted so many long and anxious hours, which he
always called ‘The Old Preachers’ Fund;’ and amongst
other matters connected therewith incidentally was the
subject of the obituaries of deceased ministers. ‘I must
confess, Mr. President and brethren,’ said he, ‘that, I have
always felt a desire that when I shall be called away my
name may appear amongst that list of worthies recorded
m the Home minutes; and I think it rather hard that we
who June come out into the work in connection w r ith the
Dome Conference,* should, because in the order of God’s
1 rovidence we have become connected with this affiliated
Conference be deprived of that privilege. It may seem a
tiivial matter, perhaps,’ said he, ‘but when a man gets on
the wrong side of fifty’ and then, immediately checking
h'mself, he said, as the tears welled up and filled his eyes,
that is not the right expression; no, it is not the
wrong side of fifty, it is the bright side.’
“ We glorify the grace of God in our departed, venerated
friend and brother, which enabled him, whether on the


platform of the Conference, or in the saloon of the storm-
riven, sinking London, to say ‘For to me to live is Christ,
and to die is gain.’ ”
Returning to Melbourne, Mr. and Mrs. Draper prepared
for their voyage. Business-like and orderly, their arrange-
ments were speedily and completely made. “ Well do I
remember,” writes Mr. Symons, “various conversations with
Mr. Draper, which showed how anxious he was to make
preparation against every contingency. On more than one
occasion before the Conference he expressed his conviction
that Providence indicated his way homew T ard- He re-
marked : ‘ You know I have long talked of visiting
England; but there has always been some difficulty in the
way. Now all is clear, and never till now has this been
the case. It seems to me that I must go now or never.’ On
the day on which he signed his will, he came to my office,
and in his cheerful way said, as he sat down :-r-‘ Well, John
Christian I suppose a man does not die any the sooner for
having made has will; I have just come from signing
mine.’ He then explained in general terms the disposition
he had made of his property, and gave reasons for what
seemed to be a peculiarity in his will.”
He had taken his passage in the well-known ship Great
Britain, and was to sail for England on the loth March,
1865. It could not be that one so valued and loved should
leave our shores—for a time even, as we fondly hoped—
without some public expression of the estimation in which
he was held.
The day before his embarkation, the ministers of Mel-
bourne, with their wives, and several ministers from other
parts of the colony, invited Mr. and Mrs. Draper to break-
fast with them, wdien the following address was presented
to him:—
“To the Rev. D. J. Draper, Chairman of the Melbourne
District.
“ Rev. and Dear Sir, —We, the ministers of the Wes-
leyan Methodist Church in Victoria, desire, upon the
occasion of your visit to England, to express to you our
sentiments of respect and esteem.
“ Some of us have been associated with you in other
colonies. To most of us you have been known for many
years; and there is not one of our number who does not


regard it as a privilege and a source of more than ordinary-
pleasure to have been brought within the range of your
acquaintance.
“As a minister of our church, occupying for many
years a prominent position, we desire to bear testimony to
the evangelism, the instruction, the energy, and success
which have characterised your ministry.
“As an ecclesiastical officer, whether in the chair of the
Conference, or presiding over the district meeting, or
transacting the multifarious and highly important business
of our church, you have always commanded our confidence
and secured our respect.
“ The great ability which you have uniformly displayed
in conducting the affairs of our church while you have
been at its head in Victoria has been of lasting benefit,
and has helped to lay, in this young country, the founda-
tions of Methodism broad and deep.
“ The kindness and courtesy which have marked your
personal and official intercourse with us have made
impressions upon our hearts which will be long cherished;
while your readiness to advise, your sympathy in our
varied difficulties, your counsel and assistance in our times
of perplexity and sorrow, will ever be gratefully remem-
bered by us.
“We rejoice that it has been our privilege to labour with
you in this interesting and important field of Christian
enterprise. With thankfulness to God for His great good-
ness to us, we look back and trace the gradual and rapid
progress which Methodism has made during the last ten
years. And as we have been fellow-labourers in the past,
so, we hope, we shall be in the future ; and that upon
your return from England we shall be again favoured with
your presence and services.
“We cannot but be thankful, also, that in all your
labours you have had in Mrs. Draper one who, in every
respect, has proved herself to be a help-meet. In labours
more abundant, ever ready unto every good word and
work, she has commanded our admiration ; while in her
social intercourse she has won the affection of ourselves
and those connected with us.
“In bidding yourself and Mrs. Draper adieu for a
season, we ask your acceptance of the accompanying
watch, which we hope you will regard as a mark of ova


esteem and love. May you be long spared to wear this
memento.
“We unitedly and earnestly pray that the presence
and blessing of God may be with yourself and Mrs.
Draper, in your visit to our fatherland; that you may be
preserved amid the perils of voyage and travel; that your
visit may be one of great happiness; and that in due time
you may be permitted to return and labour many years in ’
this part of the Lord’s vineyard.
“ Signed for and on behalf of the Wesleyan ministers of
Victoria.
“ James S. Waugh,
“ President of the Conference, Chairman.
“ Melbourne, 14th March.”
The gold watch presented to Mr. Draper was a very
handsome one, and bore the following inscription:—“ Pre-
sented to the Rev. D. J. Draper, by the Ministers of the
Wesleyan Methodist Church in Victoria, on the occasion of
his departure for England. Melbourne, 14th March, 1865.”
Mr. Draper replied at some length, expressing his
gratification at receiving so handsome and flattering a
testimonial; his thankfulness to God that he had been
able to secure the confidence of his brethren, for, next to
the favour of God, he valued the confidence and esteem of
his brethren; the consciousness of much weakness in the
discharge of his important work. He briefly reviewed his
term of sendee in Victoria, and bore testimony to the ability
and zeal of his brethren, who had been workers with him;
spoke of the union which had always characterised the
ministers of Victoria; of his love for, and thorough identi-
fication with Australasian Methodism. He closed his
address, which was delivered under evident and strong
emotion, by asking that himself and Mrs. Draper might
have an interest in their prayers for a safe and prosperous
voyage.
Deeply interesting as that meeting was, all who were
privileged to attend it will feel an additional but melan-
choly pleasure in recalling that last occasion when they
were permitted to meet in social intercourse these
lamented friends.
On the evening of 14th, a tea meeting was held in the
Upper School-room, adjoining Wesley Church. The


spacious room was filled. Ladies from the various Mel-
bourne circuits presided at the tables. After tea a public
meeting was held in the church. A large number of
persons were present, and it was pleasing to see numerous
representatives of all the circuits and congregations
arriving, while there were some who had come from
Ballaarat, Sandhurst, Castlemaine, Daylesford, &c., to
show their respect for Mr. Draper.
The Hon. Alex. Fraser, M.L.C., who presided, expressed
in strong terms his estimation of Mr. Draper’s personal
and official character and services; the sense entertained
by the church of the ability and earnestness with which
Mr. Draper had for thirty years laboured in this and the
neighbouring colonies, and stated that with sentiments of
pleasure proportionate to the regret which they now felt
at his departure, would his friends reassemble on his return
to welcome him again amongst them. At the close of his
appropriate and earnest remarks, he called upon Dr. Cutts
to read the following address
“ To the Rev. D. J. Draper,
“ We, the undersigned ministers and office-bearers, for
ourselves and as representing the members of the Aus-
tralasian Wesleyan Methodist Church in Victoria, desire,
on the eve of your departure for Great Britain, to bear
our testimony to the value of the services Avhich you
have rendered to the Methodist Church in Australia,
during your residence of nearly thirty years in the three
leading colonies, Victoria, New South Wales, and South
Australia.
“ Your appointment to Melbourne occurred at a most
important period in the history of Victoria. The recent
discovery of gold, the great influx of population, and the
unsettled condition of the colony, all combined to make
your position as Chairman of the district, one of more than
ordinary difficulty and responsibility. We rejoice that
under God, and aided by the zealous and able services of
your brethren, you have been instrumental in building up
our beloved Methodism and extending her influence and
usefulness in no ordinary degree.
“ Your eminent fitness for office, and the skill, ability,
and uniform courtesy with which you have conducted the
affairs of our church during the ten years of your residence
amongst us, have elicited our highest approval and


admiration. Your ministrations as a pastor and preacher
have been in a high degree useful, while as a Christian and
a gentleman, your example has been influential for good.
“You will, we are sure, join with us in gratefully
reviewing the steady progress of Methodism in Victoria,
as evidenced in the numerous, commodious, and elegant
churches, ministers’ residences, and school-houses ;—the
large accession of members, —the numerous congregations,
—the zealous and useful band of local preachers, class-
leaders, Sabbath-school teachers, and other officers with
which our church is now blessed. I We thank God and
take courage.’
“ It is gratifying to know that our separation is only to
be for a season; —be assured your return will be hailed
with satisfaction, and you will receive a hearty welcome.
“ Our earnest prayer is. that you and Mrs. "Draper may
have a safe and pleasant voyage, and be ever favoured
with our Heavenly Father’s choicest blessings in all your
future movements.
“We ?ire, Rev. and dear Sir,
“ Yours, faithfully.”
[Signed by numerous ministers and officers.]
“Melbourne, Victoria, 14th March, 1865.”
Mr. Draper replied to the address at some length. He
expressed his sense of the great kindness of the Methodists
in Victoria, the happiness and comfort with which he had
laboured among them, the gratifying and, as he believed,
healthy progress of Methodism. During his thirty years
of service in Australasia, he had been preserved in health;
he did not now, he was thankful to say, go to England in
search of health. He hoped by relaxation for a year to
be better able to perform his various duties; he expected
by his association with the good and great hi the old
country, to he benefited and instructed. As representing
Australian Methodism, he should seek to do so faithfully
and well. Some persons had said to him, that when he
got to England he would not return; but, if God spared
him, he should certainly come back. All his sympathies
and interests were with Australia. He had never yet
chosen his position as a Methodist preacher, he had always
left himself in the hands of his brethren ; he hoped always
to do this. It was impossible for him to say where, upon


his return, he might be appointed. If it should he in
Victoria, he should rejoice to labour again among those
with whom he had been so happy.
Both the addresses were beautifully illuminated on
parchment, and the second was elegantly bound in morocco.
When they were sent to him on board the ship he remarked,
that perhaps he had better leave them behind; but when
it was suggested that it would be gratifying to his
friends if he took them with him, he acquiesced; and with
him they, and the presentation watch have sunk into the
great deep.
Mr. and Mrs. Draper was accompanied to the Great
Britain, on March 15th, by a large number of ministers
and laymen. The Rev. Joseph Dare was, we believe, the
last of their Australian friends from whom they bid adieu,
and fondly does he cherish the memory of the quiet hour
spent with them after all others had returned to the shore.
The voyage to England occupied sixty-four days and
was a very pleasant one. Dr. Cairns was a passenger by the
same ship, and this added greatly to the'happiness of the
voyage. Liverpool was reached on Saturday, May 20th,
1865.
Mr. Draper wrote from thence, “We have had a first-
rate voyage; we cannot speak too highly of the ship, or
her captain, or her officers, or her crew. We have had
religious services on Sundays. On the five first Sundays I
preached in two or three parts of the ship, and Archdeacon
Braim in one or two. Dr. Cairns held a Bible class on
Sunday afternoon, and engaged a little in two or three
other services, but has abstained from preaching because
of the affection of the throat, from which he has been
suffering. The general services on deck at 10.30 a.m.
have been largely attended. But a crowded ship is a poor
place for religious exercises, and there are few indeed who
have any sympathy with spiritual religion.”
A letter from Mrs. Draper, dated London, September
19th, 1865, giving a brief sketch of their visit up to that
time, will be read with interest. It will show with what
feelings an educated and intelligent native of Australia
views the scenes and doings of the old country:—
“ I think I had better give you a brief account of our
journeyings since we arrived in Old England. We landed
in Liverpool Saturday, 20th May, and remained there two


days, from thence we went up to the great city, and spent
a week there. I greatly admired the country as we passed
through it, the foliage of the trees and the green hedges
were all that I expected to find them; I was pleased, hut
not surprised, because I had read much about the old land,
and had heard its praises sung for many years. London
is a wonderful place. The streets appear to have no end.
Some of the suburbs are pretty and very pleasant, but I
should be sorry to spend my life in the city. The rattle
of the vehicles in the streets is incessant, and the crowds
in the principal thoroughfares are anything but desirable.
From London we went to Fareham in Hampshire, and
stayed a week with some of Mr. Draper’s relations. Then
we returned to London and spent another week, seeing all
that we could see in the time. From thence we proceeded
to Brecon, South Wales, and remained a week, with another
sister of Mr. Draper’s. We liked Wales very much.
Leaving Brecon we passed through North Wales, along
the north coast, to Holyhead. Then by packet to Dublin,
and thence by rail to Cork, performing the whole of that
journey in thirty-two hours. We gave seven days to Cork,
Blarney Castle, &c., and two days to the Lakes of Killar-
ney. These beautiful lakes and the surrounding scenery
are equal to all that has been said of them. The girls
with mountain dew and goat’s milk meet you at every
turn, and their Irish tongue and keen wit are very
amusing. Having received a kind invitation from Mr.
and Mrs. Hull, we next found our way to Dublin, and
spent eight days most agreeably under their hospitable
roof. Mr. Hull devoted the whole week to us, taking us
about the beautiful city and its environs. Both Mr. and
Mrs. Hull were exceedingly kind. After leaving Dublin
we went to Belfast. The Irish are truly hospitable. They
gave us every reason to be gratified with our visit. We
bade adieu to Old Ireland at eight o’clock in the evening,
crossed the Channel to Greenock, reaching that place by
six o’clock in the morning, from thence to Glasgow to
breakfast, and the same day at eleven set off for the Lakes.
We went by train down the banks of the Clyde, by Dum-
barton Castle, to the head of Loch Lomond, passed through
the Lake in a steamer, then overland in a coach to the head
of Loch Katrine, passed through that in another boat, and
then by coach all through the Trossachs to Callendar; thence


by train to Stirling, and back to Glasgow the same night by
ten o’clock. The scenery through the lakes and mountains
is magnificent, grand, picturesque and beautiful. We
enjoyed the day exceedingly. The next morning we took
train for Edinburgh. We are both of opinion that the
Scottish capital is the most beautiful city we have
seen. We took rooms at a temperance hotel in a fine
situation, and devoted two days to sight-seeing. From
Calton Hill the view is most extensive and fine. The old
castle is an interesting relic of the past, and Holyrood
awakens many feelings of a peculiar character when
thinking of the scenes that have been enacted there. We
drove through the old town, and saw many curious places.
I will tell you more about it by-and-bye. Newcastle was
our next destination, and there we remained with Mr.
Neale’s* mother and sister five days, receiving from them
and their relatives a great deal of kindness and attention.
W r e then proceeded to Newark, where Mr. Eggleston’s
good old father lives. Our home was with Mrs. Knight, a
sister of Mr. Eggleston’s. We were made truly welcome and
exceedingly comfortable.
i “ Mr. Draper has preached in every place we have visited.
The chapels in England are no better than ours, and our
congregations and preachers are as good.
“ Birmingham Conference next claimed our attention.
We were there twelve days, staying with Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Harcourt, formerly of Melbourne. I saw very
little of Birmingham, as Mr. Draper was so occupied with
Conference, he could not go with me. I was anxious to
see Leamington and Kennilworth Castle, but was disap-
pointed. From Conference we went to the Potteries, and
spent a very pleasant week with a cousin of mine (Miss
Elizabeth Shelley.) I saw my father’s birthplace, and
went to the chapel where he was received as a member of
the Independent Church seventy years ago. We then
went to Brecon, and stayed another week among the
mountains of Wales—thence to London for a week, and
again into Hampshire—visiting the Isle of Wight—and
spending five days at Southampton, where Mr. Draper
was taken out as a local preacher. We went to see Netley
Abbey—l greatly enjoy gazing on old ruined places,
* Rev, F. Neale, of Albury,


Whilst in Southampton, we took a trip to ‘ Stonehenge,’
a wonderful place indeed. Also to Salisbury Cathedral, a
magnificent old affair. We heard the choral service and the
fine organ pealing forth and echoing through the vaulted
roofs and cloisters with great effect. Last Wednesday we
came once more to the great metropolis. During the
different times we have been in London, we have visited
the Zoological Gardens, Hyde Park, and Rotten Row,
Kensington Museum, the Crystal Palace, St. Paul’s, the
Thames Tunnel, Greenwich Hospital, the British Museum,
and the National Gallery, &c. &c. We were nearly three
weeks with Dr. and Mrs. Jobson, who have been both
kind and agreeable. We have dined twice at Mr. Powell’s
and are to spend a fortnight with them before long. We
are now at the Rev. W. Horton’s, an old Australian
missionary, who knew me when a little girl. We expect
to jfo to France next week, and are to visit Mrs. Farmer’s
before we leave.”
Dr. Jobson, in the sketch which he read in connection
with the memorial sermon at City Road, states: —
“ On the first Sabbath after their arrival, Mr. Draper
preached in Great Queen-street chapel, in the morning;
when, by the testimony of the Rev. Thomas Jackson, and
of others who heard him, he preached an earnest, powerful
and evangelical sermon. He was also with us at the
laying of the foundation-stone of the new chapel in
Caledonian-road, and attended the social meeting for that
object, held afterwards in the large room under Highbury
chapel.
“ Mr. Draper attended the Wesleyan Conference, held
at Birmingham in July and August last, in his official
character, as Representative of the Australasian Con-
ference. His first public address there was at the Mis-
sionary Committee of Review, in which he claimed for
himself and brethren of Australia the honourable title of
“ missionaries,” and of loyal association with the parent
Missionary Society. He spoke of the efforts making in
Australia "for the" Jubilee celebration; and how it was
hoped that by it a theological institution for the training
of young ministers and missionaries would be seemed. He
referred to the several classes of mankind in the Austral-
asian colonies who had to be considered in missionary
efforts there; and named, with deep feeling, the twenty-


five thousand natives of China in the gold regions of
Victoria. In his official address to the Conference, he
expressed the real fraternal oneness which existed among
the Methodists in Australia and the Methodists of Great
Britain; and declared, that large as is the space of the
globe intervening between them, they are, in doctrines,
discipline, outward forms, and inward spirit, truly one.
He then reported the general results of Methodist labour
in Australia, and said: —‘ He, and his brethren for whom
he spoke, looked upon the results as being of great import-
ance. They knew that where Samuel Leigh once stood
alone, as a Methodist minister on the shores of Australia,
they had now one hundred and fifty who preached the
gospel in the spirit and form in which he used to preach
it. There were at least eighteen thousand there in whom
they rejoiced as those who loved and served the Lord
Jesus Christ. They had forty thousand children in their
Sunday-schools throughout the Australasian border; and
where Samuel Leigh commenced the work single-handed
they had now one hundred and nine thousand persons in
regular attendance at their places of worship. Their
operations were divided into two parts, the ‘ home’ and
‘ foreign missions.’ Many members of their churches had
gone to labour in the islands of the South Seas. In the
colony of Victoria they had more places of worship, more
persons regularly attending their religious services, and
more church accommodation in good, substantial edifices,
than any other Christian community.’ This address was
listened to with deep interest; and though it was delivered
at a late hour of the evening’s open session—and after
Bishop Janes, the representative from the Methodist Epis-
copal Church of America, had spoken at length upon the
state of Methodism in the United States, so recently rent
and torn by deadly conflict, and had thrilled the assembly
by descriptions of the four millions of the coloured races
in the Southern States just set unexpectedly free from
bondage by the overruling providence of Almighty God—-
yet Mr. Draper’s _ address sustained the enthusiastic cha-
ractcr of the session, and frequently elicited expressions
0 -ni from the audience. The Conference
officially expressed its high appreciation of the character
and services of the Australasian representative, and its
unfeigned joy at the success vouchsafed by the Almighty


to him and his brethren in the southern world. During
the Conference, he went in and out among the brethren as
a minister of Jesus Christ, and, by his spirit and deport-
ment, gained their universal esteem and affection.”
Writing in September, to Mr. Symons, Mr. Draper
says:—“ Your district meeting wall be on (I expect) when
this reaches you. I hope you will have a happy meeting. I
dare say some of the brethren will think of me. lam sure I
shall at the season gratefully remember the many happy and
profitable hours I have spent in their society. I shall be
obliged to you if you will present to any of them who may
inquire respecting me, my warmest Christian love and esteem.
I often think of them when I inquire of my elegant pocket
companion respecting the hour. I ought to tell you that
the watch keeps most correct time. I have not altered it
since I landed. ’Tis a splendid time-keeper.”
In October Mr. and Mrs. Draper paid a hasty visit to
France and Belgium. He thus writes of this tour
“ Since my last letter to you we have had a delightful
trip to Brussels, Paris, and their surroundings. Con-
sidering that we do not speak French we got on pretty
well. We were intensely interested in looking out from
the‘Lion Mount’on the field of Waterloo, and walking
over the spots rendered so famous by that memorable
struggle. • I have a good stick, cut from the hedge at
Hugomont, which I am having polished, tipped, and
tasselled. The neighbourhood of Brussels, as well as the
city itself, pleased us greatly. At Paris we saw as many
of the lions as we could. What magnificence is there !
It would require a month, at least, to visit all the
sights there, so that we can have only an imperfect idea of
the whole. The churches, palaces, buildings are all
gorgeous. But the Sunday in Paris! Oh, what godlessness
prevails—’twas looking on a new phase of human nature.
We were glad to find out the nice chapel where the
Wesleyans assemble. I heard Jacob Stanley preach in the
morning, and supplied the pulpit myself jn the evening.
About one hundred and fifty were present.’)
Returning again to England, our dear friends began to
make arrangements for their voyage to Australia. Mr.
Draper writes:—“ I shall soon begin to want a more
settled state of things. I am very glad we came, and
hope to profit by it. Mr. Boyce and others are trying to


get me to stay another year, but I do not think of doinj?
so. It cholera, &e., should prevent our going via Eemt
we may go in the London .” b S
In one of his last letters, dated December 18th, 1865
our lamented friend writes The time of our leading- is
now definitely fixed. We intend joining the London at
Plymouth on Monday (New Year’s Day.) Putting our
with t?° d ’ T h ° + has kind] y and mercifully dealt
with us throughout our visit, we shall go on board a good
ip, and hope to reach the land whither we go in safety.
* * * etPmg I can now write will affect my appoint-
ment, as it will be fixed before this can possibly reach vou
So we shall consider our lot to be providentially fixed
wherever we may be I was at the missionary committee
kst week and heard many kind things said to myself!
We have been about among the principal friends, and' have
no occasion to complain of the attentions we have received
Mrs. Draper is quite well, so am I; never better or
stronger. I think the trip has done us good. Our kind
for us t 0 and others who may inquire
offihp J ? bS ° n ata * e V—‘ ‘‘He remained in London, to the end
IJ. y, ear ’ and his ‘ oldest Australian friend of
Victoria, _ as he called him, Mr. Walter Powell; his early
associate m Australasian service, the Rev. William Horton^
. Mr. Alexander McArthur, with whom he had been associated
l extension. of Methodism in New South Wales •
services difiSmit parte r . Missionai 7
again in Great Queen-street chapel ; Tnd attended to
needful preparations for departure. On Monday mornino-
January the Ist, he bade farewell to his friends in I ondon’
zTt r nt b >- raii *s? 5.%
riJeTwifh 5h dOU haVmg alread P sailed down the
n u-i 1 , of ker passengers on board.”
• V, n r rida P, sth January, Mr. and Mrs. Draper embarked
“I London, and set sail at midnight. Saturdav the
weather was comparatively quiet and the shin sV' a
on against a headia.
forma l ! W frf ot iu n Y, to P rev ent Divine service being per-
dSng ir d A D t r n» Drapel ' r d - S-
sea. Mondav Htb Was a stron S B' ale > with heavy
Monday, Bth, the sea was so heavy that the


engines were stopped, and she was put under canvas ;
the wind lessened about noon, and steam was again
put on. Tuesday morning, 9th, the flying jibboom,
foretopmast, topgallantmast, and royal mast were car-
ried away. The violence of the gale was such that the
wreck of these spars could not be cleared, and they swung
to and fro, doing serious injury. In two hours the main
royal mast was carried away. In the afternoon the wind
blew a hurricane, with a terrific sea, which every now and
then broke on board the ship, carrying away the port life-
boat, besides doing other damage. At three a.m. of the
10th, the Captain put the ship about, and made for Ply-
mouth under full steam. At half-past ten that night “ a
big sea washed away the skylight of the engine-room,” and
so large a body of water rushed into the engine-room as
to put out the fires within three minutes. The sea which
destroyed the skylight, washed two men (a sailor and a
passenger) into the engine-room. From that time the seas
were continually bursting in upon the doomed ship, ren-
dering unavailing all the efforts made to preserve her.
Then came that never-to-be-forgotten prayer-meeting in
the saloon, conducted by Mr. Draper, at midnight a
prayer-meeting which may be said to have continued
almost without intermission till the noble vessel went
down. .
During those hours of agony and horror which inter-
vened between the destruction of the hatchway and the
sinking of the ship, Mr. Draper was incessant in his
endeavours to lead to Christ and administer comfort to his
fellow sufferers; and we are told by the survivors that
“ The women sat round him reading Bibles, with the
children; and occasionally some man or woman would
step up to him, and say, ‘ Pray with me, Mr. Draper’—a
request that was always complied with. Up to the time
the ship went down the reverend gentleman ministered to
those amongst whom he moved constantly. He was heard
to say repeatedly, ‘Oh God, may those who are, not con-
verted be converted now —hundreds of them. "VN hen
the announcement was made hy the captain that the. ship
was rapidly sinking, Mr. Draper stood up, and with a
firm, clear voice, tears streaming down his face, he said,
“ The captain tells us there is no hope —that we must all
perish. But I tell you there is hope for all. Although


we must all die, and shall never again see land, we may
make the port of heaven.”
As he was last seen, a few minutes only before the ship
foundered, he was speaking with deep emotion, but in a
clear and distinct voice, the tears meanwhile streaming
down his cheeks, and was heard to say, “ Those of you
who are not converted, now is the time, not a moment to
be lost; for in a few minutes we shall all be in the pre-
sence of our Judge.”
Nor can we doubt that Mrs. Draper would be engaged
in ministering to her dying sisters. We hear of Mr. and
Mrs. Draper sitting together weeping, with his arm thrown
around her ; yet this could not have been of long duration.
Calm and thoughtful she handed to one of the seamen her
rug to keep him warm in the boat, and when asked what
will you do without it ? she is stated to have replied: “It
will only be for a few minutes longer.”
The last we hear of them is, that a few minutes before
the ship sunk, they were singing—
“ Eock of Ages, cleft for me.”
And thus they perished, in the full vigour of life, with
high hopes of future usefulness, and expectations of many
years of happy and active service in the Lord’s vineyard.
But their work was done, and in that grand and heroic
exit amid the ruthless wave of the ocean, they have left a
name and furnished an example which will live for
generations yet to come.
We cannot close this sketch of our departed friends
without a word or two as to their general characteristics.
Mr. Draper was remarkable for his far-sightedness. In
all his schemes and efforts for the extension and stability
of Methodism, he constantly regarded them in their bear-
ings upon the future. Believing that Australia was
destined to become a great nation, haying entire confidence
as to its progress, he was not influenced by mere present
appearances, but felt that by securing sites, erecting sub-
stantial churches, and extending the ordinances of religion
he was serving both the present generation, and preparing
for the advantage of the succeeding ones.


Reference should also be made to his power of inspiring
confidence in himself, and in his plans. His straightfor-
ward and honest policy, his clear practical conception, his
careful calculations, his manly, genial carriage, combined
to fit him, pre-eminently for the leader in any enterprise
who would be cheerfully and devotedly followed. Only
those who have been associated with him in the work of
the church can form any just estimate of these qualities.
His presence and counsel dispelled gloom, and gave heart
to those who were engaged with him in the duties and
responsibilities of the church. '
As a friend he was sympathising and kmd,*while his
counsels were ever judicious. With the utmost confidence
you could commit the most delicate case to him, with the
assurance that his judgment would be faithful and wise.
In the private relations of life he engaged the affections
of all who surrounded him ; and those who knew him best
loved him most. The compilers of this volume acknowledge
their indebtedness to him; and as they call to mind, amidst
their grief, his fatherly kindness and wise counsels, feel
that his removal has occasioned a vacancy that can never
His ability as an administrator of Methodism has been
already referred to. With the polity of Methodism he
was perfectly familiar, and understood all the workings
of its financial system. Not only do the circuits m which
he more particularly laboured bear testimony to the
benefits of his administration, but they are acknowledged
throughout the extensive districts over which he presided
as chairman. , . ~ . m „„„
In Mr. Draper there was nothing ascetical or morose,
but the constant manifestation of a cheerful godliness;
while blandness of manner, undeviating politeness, a
graceful way of saying pleasant things, grea comersa
tional powers (in which pleasantry and humour were
generally woven,) made him a most agreeable companion.
Towards other denominations he was distinguished by-
great catholicity of affection; and, while a firm adherent
to that system of evangelical Arminiamsm held by the
Methodist church, he rejoiced m the prosperity of aft
sections of the Christian church. He was emphaHcally a
representative man. Christians of all names held him m
high esteem, and join in lamenting Ins loss.


There is one enterprise in which Mr. Draper took a most
lively interest, but of which he was not permitted to see
the completion—we allude to Wesley College. For many
years he was most anxious for the erection of the college.
He deeply deplored the delay which took place in its
establishment. It will be remembered by his friends how
he rejoiced at the commencement of the building. In his
address on the occasion of laying the foundation-stone he
said:—“They desired also to obtain for it an efficient
governor and efficient teachers; and if they succeeded in
doing that he could promise them that at the end of a
twelvemonth they would have 200 boys receiving a good
sound education.” But he was not permitted to realise
these hopes.
He, in conjunction with Mr. Powell, spared themselves no
trouble to procure a suitable head master. His communica-
tions to the committee, as well as to his private friends,
showed how near to his heart was the success of the insti-
tution. _ In one of his letters to the Secretary, Mr. Draper
writes in his cheerful characteristic manner—“We are
staj ing a fortnight at Mr. Powell’s, and a few evenings
since he sang, with great success,
* Come, cheer up, my lads, ’tis to glory we steer.’
We had previously been conversing about the college, and
I accepted his selection of the fine old sea-song as a good
think you?” He expected great benefit to
Methodism, and to the colony, from the college; and he
wrote of the more than ordinary expectations of pleasure
peritj 16 h ° ped t 0 ex P erience in its completion and pros-
. is an affecting thought, that just when so many were
joyously inaugurating the college, our brother was pro-
claiming mercy through Christ to his fellow-sufferers on
board the London; and that within about two hours after our
meeting dispersed, he, with his beloved wife—and we may
well believe, many who were brought through him to the
Saviour—sunk beneath the raging waves, while their
spirits rose to heaven.
The esteem in which Mr. Draper was held beyond the
bounds of his own denomination may be seen from the
notices kindly contributed by Revs. Dr. Cairns, M. H.
ec cl ’ Sunderland; as also by the references


made to him in the sermons from ministers of all denomin
ations preached in the colony on the loss of the London.
He was a man of catholic spirit, a good citizen, a kind and
firm friend; Australia can ill afford to spare such men as he
was.
Mrs. Draper, whose loss is deplored only less than that
of her noble husband, was a Christian gentlewoman of rare
gifts and virtues, to whose piety, intelligence, and firmness
he was in no small degree indebted. As she had shared
with and aided him in his toils on land, so she sank with
him into the mighty deep. She was highly intelligent,
extensively read, and was well acquainted with the best
literature of the day. All her gifts, natural and acquired,
were devoted to the service of God. Few persons excelled
her in conducting Bible classes among the young, and as a
class leader she had few equals. Among the poor and sick
she was constantly found, ministering both to their temporal
and spiritual necessities. As previously stated, she was
the daughter of one of the very first missionaries to the
South Seas, her father—Mr. Shelley—having come out to
Tahiti in the ship Duff, in 1797. She was born in Parra-
matta, New South Wales, was converted to God in early
life, became a scholar iil the first Wesleyan Sunday-school,
and afterwards a teacher in the same school. She was Mr.
Draper’s second wife, and was married to him in 1839.
Her venerable mother, now verging upon ninety years of
age, and nearly blind, survives her. It was Mrs. Draper’s
cherished hope to be permitted to smooth the dying pillow'
of her revered mother, and it was on this account that
Mr. Draper was appointed to Sydney by the last Con-
ference ; but an all-wise Providence has willed it otherwise.
Of our dear departed friends we may say:—“ They were
lovely and pleasant in their lives, and in their death they
were not divided.”
Mr. Draper leaves behind him an only son, who is at
present in the Bank of New Zealand, Dunedin, with whom
the deepest sympathy will be felt; and for whom, in this
terrible affliction, we solicit the prayers of all our readers.
In New South Wales, South Australia, Victoria, and
indeed throughout the entire Australasian Wesleyan
Church, the distressing, and to human vision, untimely
death of Mr. Draper will be mourned deeply and long.
While the church will deplore its bereavement, multitudes


will feel that they have lost a personal friend. His
memory will be gratefully 7 cherished in many a family
circle, as well as in many a Christian congregation.
And yet there will be joy mingled with the sorrow, joy
and gratitude that God enabled him to be an angel of
mercy to the perishing ones in the ill-fated ship. If his
life were that of an earnest and useful worker in the
Lord’s vineyard, his death was that of a moral hero. He
has left behind him, as a precious legacy to his sorrowing
friends, a name more enduring than sculptured urn or
monumental brass.
Immediately upon the mournful intelligence of the loss
of the London, with Mr. and Mrs. Draper among the
passengers, reaching Melbourne, steps were taken to pay
proper respect to the memory of one to whom Methodism
owed so much. The pulpits were at once hung with
mourning, sermons having reference to the calamity were
delivered by all the Wesleyan ministers. A memorial
sermon was preached in Wesley Church, to a congregation
densely crowded, while hundreds were unable to gain
admission. A memorial sermon was also delivered at
Ballaarat, to an equally crowded audience. Ministers of
every' denomination have rendered tribute to the truly
heroic bearing and conduct of our departed brother and
friend in the storm-stricken London. Nor has this been
confined to Victoria, where he was known and esteemed,
but throughout England. In almost every pulpit “at
home,” as well as here, mention has been made of the
calamity; and from the Archbishop of York, down to the
humblest preacher in the land, Mr. Draper and his Chris-
tian heroism have been the theme of grateful admiration.
The following circular, which has been read in most of the
congregations, fully explains the steps which have been,
and are intended to be taken to perpetuate the memory of
Mr. Draper, and his faithfulness in his last trying hours:—
“ Dear Friends, —On receiving the melancholy intelli-
gence of the loss of the London, in which the Rev. D. J.
and Mrs. Draper met their death, the Wesleyan ministers
in and around Melbourne assembled to arrange for services


suitable to tlie improvement of the sorrowful occasion.
They accordingly determined that the principal pulpits of
our church should be clothed with mourning, and that a
memorial sermon should be preached in Wesley Church on
Wednesday, 21st March, by the Rev. J. Eggleston.
“ It was further decided that it was desirable that some
more lasting form of perpetuating the memory of one who
was so widely known and well beloved, whose services had
been so invaluable to our church, and whose Christian
heroism at the time of the sad disaster had elicited the
admiration of all classes, should be adopted; and it was
therefore resolved to convene a meeting of office-bearers
and others to take the matter into consideration. At a
meeting held on Monday, 26th March, it was resolved to
erect a representative tablet in Wesley Church, and endow
a scholarship in Wesley College, to be called ‘ The Draper
Scholarship.’
“ As there is no circuit in Victoria that has not partici-
pated in the benefits which Mr. Draper so long conferred
on the Wesleyan Church in this colony, we were assured
that all would wish to partake of the mournful privilege of
erecting a lasting tribute to his memory. The central com-
mittee, have, therefore, resolved to communicate with each
circuit, that all our societies, congregations, and friends
may have an opportunity of joining in the proposed
objects.
“As it is the purpose of the committee to proceed with
the above without any delay, it is respectfully requested
that all subscriptions be forwarded to the superintendent
of the circuit, or the general treasurers, not later than the
31st May.—We remain, dear friends, yours truly,
“John Whitney, ) Secretarieß .
“ Joseph Dare,- )
“ Melbourne, 4th April, 1866.”
The scholarship has been determined upon because it is
believed to be consistent with Mr. Draper’s wishes, sup-
posing it to have been possible that he could have been
consulted. His deep interest in Wesley College is known
to all, and he has given practical evidence of this in the
munificent legacy of £2OO to its building fund, which is
made in his last Will and testament.


NARRATIVE OF THE LOSS OF THE
LONDON.
The London was a screw steamship, built at Blackwall, in
July, 1864; she had two decks, three masts, was shiprigged,
and clinker-built; her gross tonnage was 1752 tons, deduct-
ing from which 323 tons for the propelling power, left
her a register tonnage of 1428; her length from the fore-
part of the stem, under the bowsprit, to the aft side of the
head of the sternpost, was 267 feet two-tenths; her main
breadth to outside of plank, thirty-five feet nine-tenths; and
her depth in hold from tonnage deck to ceiling at midships,
twenty-four feet. She had two high and low pressure direct
acting-engines, built by Messrs. Humphreys and Tennant, of
Deptford, in 1864, and of the combined power of 200 horses
nominal. She was the property of Messrs. Charles Hamdon
Wigram, Clifford Wigram, and Robert Wigram, to the
extent of fifty-six shares; Messrs. Franklin Alport and
Charles Morgan, shipbrokers, being owners of two shares
each; and her unfortunate master of four. She was built
with the very best iron, and was stronger in construction
even than was required by “Lloyd’s Rules;” indeed, she was
built and fitted without reference to expense, and was in
the highest degree seaworthy. Her value was over ,£BO,OOO,
of which the captain’s share was about £SOOO. The declared
value of the cargo was £124,785 17s. 4d. Mr. O’Dowd
states: —“ With reference to the length, breadth, and depth
of the ship, as stated upon the register, and to some sugges-
tions as to her narrowness of beam for a vessel of such
length, I have deemed it my duty to inquire whether the
alleged disproportion was peculiar to the London, and the
result I have ascertained is, that it exists in a much greater
degree in some of the finest ships afloat. The length, for
example, of Her Majesty’s transport ship Himalaya, is 340
feet, whilst her breadth is only 44-7.”
The London left the East India Docks, Dec. 29,1865, bound
for Melbourne. She was under the command of Captain J.
B. Martin; a Trinity-house pilot, Mr. George James Thomp-
son, to take her to Plymouth, was also on board. Her


draught of water at Gravesend was, according to the state-
ment of this pilot, nineteen feet nine inches forward, and
twenty feet nine inches aft. Several passengers got on
board at Gravesend. On the morning of the 30th she left
Gravesend and proceeded as far as the Nore, where, owing
to the severity of the weather, she anchored, and remained
during the whole of the 31 st. On the Ist of January she got
again under weigh, proceeding on her voyage under steam,
the wind still blowing strongly from the S.W. The Downs
were cleared by noon, and the ship went down the Channel
against strong head winds. On the 3rd it became so boister-
ous, and the indications of the barometer so threatening,
that at about two p.m. the pilot decided on taking her to
Spithead for shelter. She anchored on the Motherbank at
four p.m., and lay there until daylight on the 4th, when she
steamed out through the Needles Passage, the wind being
then south-westerly. She arrived off Plymouth at daylight
of the sth, and at nine a.m. she was boarded by a Plymouth
pilot, who took her into the Sound. Here a most distress-
ing calamity occurred, in the swamping of the small boat
from the pilot cutter, which had on board the pilot with his
assistant —the latter was rescued by a boat launched from
the London, but the pilot was drowned. In two hours after-
wards she was anchored inside the breakwater. The
remainder of this day was occupied in embarking the
remaining passengers, and shipping an additional supply
of coal. A short time after midnight the anchor was
hove up, and she took her final departure from England.
The weather is described as then moderate, the wind blow-
ing lightly from the northward, and little or no sea running.
Having cleared the breakwater the ship proceeded on her
intended voyage, the speed being about eight knots an hour.
They sighted the Lizard lights at about five a.m. The weather
continued the same until six a.m., when the wind veered to
the westward, and the sea began to rise. On Sunday, the
7th, the wind, which was still westerly, increased in violence,
with strong squalls and a high sea, which caused the ship to
roll considerably. Still the weather was not so boisterous
but that Divine Service was held, Dr. Woolley and Mr.
Draper uniting in conducting it. On Monday, the Bth the
wind freshened to a gale from the, S.W., and at nine a.m.
of that day the captain ordered fires to be extinguished
and sail to be made on the ship. These orders were
obeyed, and the ship was hauled to the wind on the star-
board tack. At five p.m. the weather improved, when
all sails were taken in, and the fires were ordered to be
D


lighted. Early on Tuesday, the 9th, the wind increased to
a hard gale from S.W., with a very heavy sea, the ship
then going through the water under steam only, and at the
reduced speed of about two knots an hour. At this time
she pitched with much violence, taking whole seas over her
hows. At seven a.m. an unusually heavy sea broke into
the lifeboat stowed on the port quarter, filling the boat; and
carrying her away completely with all her gear. At nine
a.m. the ship gave a tremendous pitch, so as to bury herself
forward, when the sea carried away the jib and flying jib-
booms, and they took with them the foretop-mast, and fore-
topgallant, foreroyal-mast, and mainroyal-mast, with all
their spars, sails, and other gear. The masts fell
in board, and hung suspended by their rigging; but the
jibbooms remained under the bows, fastened to the ship by
their stays, which were made of wire. Every effort to get
them clear failed until next morning, it having blown a
furious gale during the night from the south-west, with a
sea that kept constantly washing all forward. On the morn-
ing of Wednesday, the 10th, the gale continued without the
least abatement, and at three a.m. the captain gave orders
to Mr. Greenhill, the engineer on duty, to put on full steam,
as he intended to put back to Plymouth, in order to refit.
The ship was accordingly turned round, the fore and mizen
staysails were set, and she steamed N.N.E. at the rate of
five or six knots an hour. In the course of the morning
the masts, which up to that time had been swinging about
aloft, were secured, and the wreck of the jibbooms cleared
away from the ship. Observations taken at noon of this day
indicated her position to be lat. 46 deg. 48 min. N., lon. 8
deg. 7 min. W. (about 200 miles from the Land’s End.) At
six p.m. both the fore and mizen staysails were blown away
by a furious squall. The life-boat and the cutter, which were
stowed on the starboard side, were carried away by a violent
sea. At nine p.m. the wind increased to a perfect hurricane
from N.W., the squalls blowing with a degree of fury seldom
paralleled. The engines were stopped, and the ship put
under the maintopsail, which was soon blown away in shreds.
The captain then ordered the engines to be set in motion,
and the ship’s head was kept N.N.E. Up to this time, not-
withstanding the heavy seas she encountered, it does not
appear that the vessel had shipped much water. At half-past
ten p.m. a terrific sea broke upon the ship over the weather or
port gangway, and an immense mass of water descended almost
perpendicularly over the hatch of the engine-room, and
smashed it right in, washing in the engine-room two men, a


passenger, and a seaman. There being nothing to obstruct
the rushing in of the sea, the engine-room began to fill
with water. The fires were extinguished at once, in about
eight minutes the engines ceased to work, and the engi-
neers remained below till the water was up to their waists, .
and they could work no more. The large bilge pumps also
became useless for the same reason. The condition of the
ship then became utterly helpless, often falling into the
trough of the sea, rolling gunwale under, and labouring
heavily. The captain called upon those who were bailing,
“ Men, put down the buckets, and come to try to secure the
engine-room hatch, for that is the only chance to save the
ship; secure that and we may keep her up yet.” Every endea-
vour to replace the hatchway proved unavailing; efforts
were made to stop the opening with sails, mattresses, and
spars, but without success, and though the pumps and
donkey-engine were kept at work, yet the water quickly
gained upon them, and all their efforts were without
success. It was then that the Captain, in seaman-like
phrase, told the crew and passengers, “ Boys, you may say
your prayers.”
At four a.m. of the 11th a tremendous sea struck the
ship abaft, which stove in four windows (or stern ports)
of the upper or poop cabin. Through the breaches thus
made the sea rushed into the ship in such quantities
that the ’tween decks were soon half full of water. The
ship at this time was settling fast in the water. _ The captain
went into the engine-room, and with the engineer, Green-
hill, took soundings, when it was found that there were
fourteen feet of water in her. The captain then told
Greenhill that he had abandoned all hope of saving her, and
shortly afterwards made a similar communication to the
passengers. At about ten a.m., the captain ordered the
boats to be got ready, which was done; and the starboard
pinnace, which was of iron, was lowered into the water, but
was almost immediately upset by the sea and lost. Shortly
after this the captain entered the saloon and said— “ Bodies,
there is no hope for us, I am afraid. Nothing short of a
miracle can save us.” Mr. Draper calmly replied, Then
let us pray!” It was at this period, we presume, that he
used the memorable words —“Well, my friends, the captain
informs us that our ship is doomed, and that there is no
hope of our getting into port; but the great Captain above
tells us there is hope, and that we may all get sate to
Heaven.” At two p.m., the vessel appeared to be sinking
rapidly, the channels being nearly level with the water, lhe


captain then directed Greenhill that, as the port cutter was
ready for lowering, he had some chance of saving himself,
and that he had better get into her. The Captain shook
hands with him, and said :—“ There is not much chance
for the boat; there is none for the ship. Your duty
is done; mine is to remain here.” The boat was lowered,
and four men, named Jones, Daniels, Shield, and Smith,
followed by others of the crew and three passengers, got into
her. When asked to come into the boat, the captain, with
the true courage of a British seaman, preferred to sacrifice
his life to availing himself of the chance to escape, and
replied, “ No, I will go down with the passengers; but I wish
you God speed, and safe to land.” He gave them their
course, N.N.E., to Brest, and threw them a compass to steer
by. The number in the boat was nineteen, consisting of the
first, secondand third engineers, one midshipman, onefireman,
boatswain’s mate, quartermaster, carpenter’s mate, steward,
boatswain s boy, five able and one ordinary seamen, and three
passengers. Shortly afterwards, those who went in the boat
pushed off from the ship, seeing that she must immediately
sink, and apprehending that the boat might be sucked in as
she went down; after going a very short distance they saw her
go down by the stem. The boat drifted by the wind for about
twenty hours, when she fell in with the Italian barque called
the Marifinople, the master of which appears to have treated
the survivors with every kindness, and he ultimately landed
them at Falmouth. The Board of Trade have testified
their sense of the generous and disinterested behaviour of
Captain Cavasa, and his officers and crew, on this occasion.
The investigation held by the Board of Trade has elicited
no new facts as to the cause of the disaster. Though the
leport of the assessors is yet wanting, we do not imagine
that it will do more than point out some method by which
in future such calamities may be avoided. If this be the
result, the inquiry will have answered a most important
purpose.
From the evidence given we gather, that there does not
appear to have been any reason why the London should have
remained at Plymouth instead of sailing when she did; the
barometer was then unsteady, but did not at the time of her
sailing, indicate more than unsettled weather, though two
days after it fell very low; it was almost calm when the
ship left I lymouth. Until the ninth—four days after sail-
-110 serious apprehensions were entertained; nor does
there seem to have been just ground for fear until after the
ship s head was directed towards Plymouth. Upon her


course being changed she began to ship “ green seas,” and
when at ten o’clock at night of the 10th Jan., a “ mountain
of water” swept away her main engine-room hatchway, her
fate was sealed. In “ three minutes” the engine fires were
out, though her engines worked for some ten minutes after.
Constant efforts were made to get on the “hatchway”
again, for at first it was not broken to pieces, but this was
without avail. Sails, mattresses, spars, were used to stop
the opening, but without success. The pumps and donkey-
engine were at work, together with men bailing with
buckets, but the cross seas came over the bulwarks, delug-
ing the decks, and filling the ship, till all hope was gone,
and the gallant ship gradually settled down, and sunk
beneath the mighty waters.
No light is thrown upon the calamity, showing why effort
had not been made earlier to launch the boats, or why the
two remaining boats were not attempted to be used, or why
no rockets were fired or signals made. At least one vessel
passed close to the London while she was in a sinking state,
but took no notice of her because no signal of distress was
made. It is by no means certain that any aid could have
been rendered; still it is possible that it might have been;
other vessels too might have seen rockets had they been
fired, and possibly have saved some of the ill-fated people.
Mr. Greenhill stated in reply to Mr. Trail, that the jolly-
boat and pinnace went down with the ship—“ for his own
part he did not think for a moment there was any chance of
escape in a small boat, as the sea was rolling tremendously.
The pinnace might have been lowered; and just as himself
and the eighteen got into the cutter, and immediately before
the ship went down, they could perceive that a rush was
made to lower the pinnace, but it was too late.
Nor are we helped to any solution as to the cause of the
hatchway being swept away. It is suggested by one of the
witnesses that the striking of the flying jibboom against the
hatchway caused it to give way; but this is by no means
clear. We are told certainly that twenty men tried to
replace the hatchway, but from the great motion of the ship
and the terrifie seas they were unable to accomplish the task;.
Prom the evidence we are disposed to conclude:— _
1. That the London was too sharp and _wedge-like m her
build. We remember seeing her at Sandridge, and remark-
ing upon the peculiarity of her bow—that it was constructed
so as not to ease her descent into the water, or to assist her
in rising—it was, in fact, straight up and down, instead of
projecting forward and outward on each side. It was sai


at . -ut e investl gation, that she was better proportioned in
width, as compared with length, than most other vessels of
hei class; yet, if we are rightly informed, she was peculiar
m her wedge-like shape under water as contrasted with
Th? ***** -? e pe^top form of most other
buoyancy P ecup arit]es rendered her defective in
2 That she was overloaded. Not, certainly, in the
S mcal ® ense of the word—for it was proved that her
lead weight was scarcely so much as was usual, that the
tons mlv ° f C °f S ’ n f hic J. much has been “ade, was fifty
tons only, nearly all of which was used before she was in
I™ peri J~ but, being from her build, defective in
she w as not fitted to battle successfully with
3 Rnt U ih ICane “ft e T antered * having so full a cargo!
great ooeSnr?n e fK f imdevin S ™ plainly found in the
We prSumc flm - W,u ’’> S ° 60111111011 to steam vessels,
we presume the hatchway” was as strong as usual but if
itifcf e<l ■*<? r iat tIM seas'SLh
came with such terrific force upon the deck of the shin
T le opening once made, it was a mere question of time at
her ho ev(^pTeithera P ”“?* float ‘ could then save
or a ceSrtion S co^ 111 ff of the main hatchway,
or a cessation of the gale. The bursting-in of the stern
ports not stern-posts —was the result of the ship settling
eiC' retrench WeM .
men could
themselves and passengers, is evident. Severe criticism W
one s safe and comfortable home, and say of emiW
SS? or left
sssss&^ssss
tory of the lost London is told, his calmness*


energy, and death in the discharge of duty, will cause many
an eye to fill with tears, and many a heart to throb with
emotion, as it will teach them how a brave British seaman
can die rather than desert his post.
List of Passengers, &c.
Thera appears to be some discrepancy between the list of
passengers published, and the actual number on board. Mr.
O’Dowd, the solicitor of the Board of Trade, stated at the
official inquiry:—“ The number of passengers that went
on board in London was 125, increased to 180 by the
embarkation of 55 at Plymouth. The master and officers
were is follow: —John Bohun Martin, master; Robert
Harris, first mate; Arthur William Ticehurst, second mate;
Arthur C. Angel, third mate; John Jones, first engineer;
John Greenhill, second engineer. The ship’s articles
shovjed that there were on board, constituting the master,
officers and crew, eighty-three altogether.” The total number
of s/uls on board thus appears to be 263. Of these nineteen
were saved, leaving the number who perished as 244. With
these remarks we give the following list of the passengers,
which however numbers only 163 ; but it is as complete as
any published, having been carefully compared with all the
copies within reach: — . ,
First Class.—Rev. Mr. and Mrs. Draper; Mrs. Owen and
ciild- Mr. and Mrs. G. F. P. Urquhart; Mr. J. Patrick; Mr. G.
T Brooke and Miss Yaughan Brooke (under the names of
Mr. and Miss Yaughan;) Mr. J. Alderson; Mr. P. Benson;
Mr and Mrs. J. Fenton and two children; Mr. and Mrs.
Chapman and two children; Mr. G. M. Smith; Mr. and
Mrs Clarke and son; Mr. F. Lewis; Mr. and Mrs. J. Bevan;
Dr J Woolley; Mr. and Mrs. Debenham; Miss L.
Maunder; Mr. J. Bobertson; Mr. T. M. Tennant; Mrs.
Mr and Mrs. Kerr; Mrs. and Miss King; Mr. and Mrs.
Trafil and child; Mr. G. Palmer; Mr T Brown; Mr. and
Mrs. Amos; Mr. E. Brooks; Mr. J. R. Richardson; Rev.
Thomas and two children; Mr. A. Sandilands; Mr. E.
Youngman; Mr. H. J. Dennis; Mr. E. A Marks;. Mr D.
F De g Pass; Master W. D. BurreH; Dr. J. Hunter; Miss
D’Ovoy; Miss C. M‘Lachlan ; Miss Cutting; Mr M Millan.
Second Class:— Mr. Kaye Eastwood; Mr. F. Stone; Mi.
and Mrs. White; Miss H. Price; Mr. J L. WiUiams; Mr
and Mrs. Graham; Mr. B. G. Rowe; Mr..J.E. Wilson (saved;)
Mrs. Morland;' Miss G. Graham; Mr. J. Dothie, Mr.


IW. M, D W J - W< »t OTSe! Mr -
Mr. a.'ESIinZ and Z° Wood" £ t f"
Oayson; Mr Thomas Wood; Mr. Godfrey Wood-Misf’E
Wood; Mr. B Beran; Miss S. Brootor; Ifeß,* ft
T. O Hagen; Mr. H. W. Harding; Mr. F. Fryer Mr J
Munro (saved; Mr. D. C. Main (saved;) Mr. C Johiftone.'
I v I Fen ?? Ck; Mrs - and Miss Meggs; Mr G H
beU; M.SS E. Marks; Mr. E. G. TrefeAen ;'Mr. anf S'
Mr DaMs. ° tW ° dau^hters > Mr. A. MLelnj
P Jl abin '™ W< Passm °re; Mr. H. Miller- Mr C
P. Chandler; Mr. B. Hay; Miss E Trmp«. ’ Hi-
Simpson; Mr. and Mrs. Hansen; Mr' and Mrs Grahal
three children; Mr. David Graham; Mr hPVittie AT
Mr. k Mr 88 ?!
noyoii; S M,fj. wSk;' Mr.^BaiTOn^Mre”'! “'A
two chddren; Mr. Algernon L. Otter; Mr. MV
a U L c °S.v Ml Co“ cMor; MrJEM ™°°*; Jt-w:
CStrf/.K„?d SsJ oh n Jo T««
third engineer; Thomas Brown fireman • W M Prl H A
Shipman; D T. Smith, wiSSS
quartermaster; John Kins- AB • B a „-’ ■ c,, n V, anieis >
Bichard Lewis, A. 8.; See GoAh 7b Ed™
A. 8.; William Crimes, 0.5.; A G imot ’ Qum,
William Hart, carpenter's mate • E<Wd c J ? Wam S boy A
class steward; D.G.Main passer ™ G^ er ’ second-
ger; J. E. Wilson, passenger S; Munr0 >


MEMORIAL SERMON BY REV. JOHN
EGGLESTON.*
“I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because Thou did’st it.”
Ps. xxxix. 9.
Such was the feeling of many of ony hearts when the sad
intelligence reached us which has filled us with sadness, and
has brought us to the sanctuary this evening. A calamity
so fearful, involving so large a sacrifice of life, an event
which came so near to us in the removal of those whose
arrival had been looked for so confidently, paralysed us for
the moment. We could hardly realise its truth; we could
not understand it ourselves; we could not explain it to
others. We could only look above and conclude it to be an
inscrutable and startling dispensation of Him who giveth
not an account of his matters; who has His path in the great
waters, and whose footsteps are not known. We could not
open our mouths in complaint—that would be to rebel, to
deny the perfections of God. Our text describes our state,
“ I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because Thou didst
it.” We have had time to think. We have heard more
of the transactions that took place. We still say, “Thou
didst it.” We still feel that it would be wrong to question
the justice, the wisdom, the goodness of God in the event.
We are, perhaps, more reconciled, when we consider those
great moral and religious benefits which are being accom-
plished by the wide-spread influence of this melancholy
catastrophe. We have thought that a consideration of God’s
providence in this painful event would be suitable for the
present occasion.
I. We shall show that we are right in looking upon it as a
Dispensation of Providence —in saying to God “ Thou didst
it.”
11. We shall suggest considerations which should forbid
murmuring, and assist us in cultivating resignation to the
Divine will.
(1.) We are to show that it is a dispensation of Providence,
that we are right in saying to God, “ Thou didst it.” Some
* Preached at the request of his brother ministers in W-esley Church
Melbourne, March 21st, 18(i6.


charge us with weakness and ignorance in looking upon
such events as under the arrangements of Divine Providence;
they look upon them as resulting from the regular and
ordinary concurrence of events, as happening in accordance
with those fixed and immutable laws which govern the
natural world. We hear of the fierceness of the storm, the
defects in the construction of the vessel, the imprudence of
the commander and officers in stowing the cargo, or in
venturing forth when the storm-signals provided to warn
mariners portended a fearful hurricane. We should hesitate,
without the clearest evidence, to admit anything that would
reflect on the commander, who bravely perished with the
vessel, or on those who owned her, whose character stands
so high, and whose course has been hitherto so prosperous.
But if everything that has been written on these subjects
could be established, we should still maintain that “the
Lord reigneth.” That there is a mind superintending all
human actions, a Being who has charge of all human interests,
and who can influence and control everything that affects
the destinies of individual man.
The doctrine of Providence is clearly revealed in thia
sacred volume. Individual, family, social and national
interests are all declared to be under His immediate charge.
In the world of matter and in the world of mind, He has
immediate, universal, and supreme influence, so that every-
thing which affects our interests can be directed or con-
trolled by Him. In fact, the Bible is the Book of Providence,
as a moral discipline exercised over redeemed creatures.
Special and signal interpositions of God are manifest in all ages.
Take thehistoryof Noah, of Joseph,of Job, of Moses, of Daniel,
and of the Apostles, with the signal events recorded, and
you have all classes of Providential interposition—instances
in which the elements, infernal and angelic agency, and
human actions, are all under the guidance and control of a
superintending Providence. It would be impossible to con-
clude that the ordinary laws of nature inflicted and removed
the plagues of Egypt, built the walls of the sea, and made a
dry passage for the Israelites to pass through; brought
manna from heaven, and a river from the smitten rock, to
feed the Israelites in the wilderness; closed the mouths of
hungry lions while Daniel remained in their den; deprived
the furnace of power to burn the three Hebrew children,
while its flames instantly destroyed their enemies; pre-
vented a single individual from perishing at Paul’s ship,
wreck; opened the prison doors, knocked off Peter’s fetters,
and conveyed him to the praying church. The various facts


in the sacred history illustrate and bear out those doctrines
which declare that God is about our bed and about our path,
and spies out all our ways; that He is our guide, our
defender ; that the very hairs of our head are numbered ;
that invites us to pray to Him in distress, and to praise Him
for mercies received. _
And we ask can it be otherwise, if we admit the tact ot
the Divine existence? We cannot conceive how any person
who admits the idea of a Creator can deny His Providence.
Surely the Being who brought into existence the vast uni-
verse must possess infinite attributes. He must be Omnis-
cient, Omnipotent, Omnipresent; and these attributes must
be immutable and eternal. With such a Being ever existing,
what can transpire without His appointment or permission.
Fix upon any event, great or small; if Omnipresent, he
must be there when it transpires ; if Omniscient, He must
be acquainted with it, whether proceeding from natural or
moral agencies; if Omnipotent, He could prevent it, or
change it, or counteract it, as His infinite wisdom and
choice might dictate. , , , ,
What reason can be assigned why He should stand by
and be a passive spectator of what transpires m His own
universe affecting His own creatures ? , TT .
We must deny His moral qualities to suppose that He is
an indifferent spectator of what occurs; that He has brought
creatures into existence and then abandoned them; that He
has created intelligences capable of knowing, loving serving
and enjoying Him, and then shrouded Himself m darkness,
yea, withheld Himself utterly from them; and manifests no
practical interest in their welfare. We pity the soul that
can pride itself on its independence of mind, because it
denies the doctrine of God’s present Providence, and can
manage to exclude Him from His own world. My brethren,
we rejoice that we have been taught by our blessed Bedeemer
in this sacred volume, to recognise Jehovah as clothing the
lily of the valley, marking the falling sparrow, holding the
winds in His fist, and the waves of the sea in the hollow of
His hand; creating light, forming darkness ; the Author of
blessings, the Appointer of troubles. And in this our great
trouble, we must see His providential hand. ~
We admit that there are mysteries in God s Providence.
Many events are mysterious to us from our culpable
ignorance of the principles of God’s moral,government. They
are clearly revealed in this sacred volume; and, if we would
study these records of Providence, we should have clearer
views. His reign on earth is peculiar. He is conducting a


fallen race tlirougli a moral discipline, in order to save them
from sin, and prepare them for obedience and future reward;
and hence good and evil are distributed as they best pro-
mote their improvement. He has to administer the affairs
of this world to meet the case of those who have moral
responsibility, and hence self-determination; and He has to
adjust his dealings to their faithfulness or unfaithfulness,
to chasten or reward them as their real interests demand.
God’s dispensations are involved in mystery because we
know not all the interests that are included. In dealing
with some special cases others are naturally and necessarily
involved. In visiting nations with his chastenings—the
pestilence, the drought, the famine, the flood, the scourge of
war, commercial confusion, multitudes are involved whose
characters and conduct would not have invited the
chastening; but while arranging for the general good, their
cases are under special consideration, and if evil is permitted
it is because it can be overruled to the promotion of higher
interests both in time and in eternity. We may be surprised
to see the wicked flourish; but if sin was invariably
punished, men would be compelled to virtue and be
mere machines : there would be no moral choice. AVe may
wonder to see the righteous suffer, but moral ends are
achieved for themselves or others, and eternal reward will
compensate the sufferers. Job’s sufferings were severe, but
they developed the power of grace, to the encouragement of
tens of thousands in all future ages. And they afforded
lessons on God’s Providence as a moral discipline, which
would spread far and wide in the day in which he lived, and
influence the moral character of nations in the future.
The wickedness of Joseph’s brethren, and the trials through
which he passed, were intended to place him eventually in a
position of eminence and usefulness in a powerful nation,
and were part of an extensive plan of Divine discipline for
the. benefit of mankind. He makes the wrath of man to
praise him, and the remainder of wrath he restrains.
The . painful event that has brought us together is
mysterious, but we must refer it to God. He could have
prevented it. “He has the winds in his fist, and the waves
of the sea in the hollow of his hand.” He could have just
given a turn to the fearful storm before it came in the path
of the steamer, and let them pass on safely. Or he could
have allowed the captain to have known the signals along
the coast, that are reported to have given warning of its
appioach, and induced him to postpone the starting, and
thus they would have escaped its violence. Or he could


have laid affliction upon one of our dear friends, and
compelled them to allow the London to go without them;
and thus they would have escaped. He did not interpose
to prevent, and he must have had reasons for it. Some
may urge —How can we look upon an event so disastrous
as amongst the dispensations of Providence? Gaze upon
those mountain waves heaving over the sides of the London
and sweeping “ the main hatchway over the engine-room,”
the succeeding billows tearing away the mattresses and
blankets as fast as they are brought to shelter the disabled
part, deluging the engine-room, putting out the fires, and
compelling the engineers to quit their posts. See the waves
sweeping along over the stern, forcing the dead-lights in,
breaking the stern ports, and flooding the vessel. See those
bodies of ladies and children rolling helplessly about on
that deluged deck. See that wave breaking along the poop,
and carrying fifty into the angry waters. See passengers
and crew vieing with each other in their efforts to rescue
the vessel from destruction. Think of the prayers that were
offered there and elsewhere for the safety of the vessel.
Think of that servant of God, Mr. Draper, who was return-
ing to these colonies with important information from the
parent -church, and more eminently qualified for the dis-
charge of ministerial duties, cut down in the very zenith of
his usefulness. Think of those interesting youths, who
had been to the fatherland, had honourably completed their
education, and whose fond parents were full of expec-
tation that their future career would cheer, comfort, and
reward them for the expenditure made to prepare them
for future honour and usefulness. Think of those parents
who were so anxiously expected by families who needed
their help and supervision;—and tell us, after reviewing
these events, whether a kind and gracious God had anything
to do with these harrowing circumstances?
We admit the force of these appeals; they naturally arise
while gazing on the scenes presented by the sad narrative;
but still we must fall back upon the revealed character of
God. We are compelled to look to God, and say, “Thou
didst it.”
If we had merely heard of the wreck of the London—
if she had been seen to go down by a passing vessel, too late
to save a soul from a watery grave, and we had known
nothing about the proceedings for the last few days she was
afloat—we must still have submitted to the dispensation,
and we should have a right to conclude that the Judge of the
whole earth must do right.


Many of His dispensations are involved in mystery. Our
faith is tried. We know not His designs in permitting
calamitous events. We have to refer to the perfections of
His nature as revealed in this sacred volume. We know
that His wisdom cannot err, that His goodness is unfailing.
When we look at His boundless love displayed in Gethsemane
and Calvary, we must rest assured that some wise and
gracious design underlies the distressing event, and we may
exclaim with one of old, “Verily, thou art a God that hidest
thyself, O God of Israel, the Saviour.” The conclusion we
must come to is, that though “ clouds and darkness are
round about Him : righteousness and judgment are the
habitation of His throne.” If there had been no possible
interpretation of this awful event we should have had no
right to complain; we ought still to have cultivated resig-
nation to the Divine will.
We are not, however, left in darkness and uncertainty as
to the fate of our friends. In kindness to us, much is
known. Nineteen escaped before the London sank. Their
testimony is made public, and is spreading throughout the
world, producing deep interest. They have been privately
conversed with, and facts have been narrated big with
interest, and calculated to shed light on some of God’s
designs in permitting this fearful event. Let us try to
realise a few of these facts. About 263 persons left port in
the London; for nearly six days no small tempest lay on
them; one calculated to excite concern and lead persons to
seriously feel the importance of their circumstances. For
forty-eight hours death and eternity were staring them in
the face. There were a few pious souls on board who knew
the importance of religion, and who employed their influence
to induce their fellow passengers to seek salvation. Our
dear friend, Mr. Draper, is specially mentioned as exerting a
powerful influence in this emergency, but he was not the
only one who thus acted. Mrs. Draper was with him to the
last, for a survivor has stated that she gave one of the
sailors a large rug as he left the ship, to wrap it round him;
and if this collected thoughtfulness existed, we know how
actively she would be engaged in promoting the spiritual
interests of the passengers throughout the trying season.
V e have heard of others who were decidedly pious, and who
would doubtless act in character. We are informed that
when the captain announced to the passengers and crew that
there was no hope, Mr. Draper exclaimed, “ My friends, the
captain tells you there is no hope, that we must all perish;
but I tell you there is hope—there is hope for all although


we must all die, and shall never again see land, we may make
the port of Heaven.” We have read of the prayer-meeting he
conducted at midnight; of the females reading the Bible in
the cabin; of one after another coming and saying, “ Mr.
Draper, pray for me,” and the request being always complied
with. A survivor declared to one of Mr. Draper’s friends
that the last thing he heard on quitting the vessel for the
boat, only a few minutes before she sank into the ocean,
they were singing that hymn,
“Rock of ages, cleft for me,
Let me hide myself in thee.”
Another testifies to hearing his earnest exhortation to
prepare immediately for death.
With these and similar facts before us, may we not see
some of the gracious designs of this sad event, and cultivate
resignation to the Divine will ?
Did not God, hy these sad circumstances, use special means to
save numbers of the souls on board that vessel from eternal
death? Think of two hundred and sixty human beings
being brought face to face with death and eternity for
forty-eight hours, not knowing how soon they might sink
to rise no more. Witness the earnestness of God’s seryants
in exhortation and prayer. Could they have a more powerful
incentive to approach the mercy-seat ? Some of them may
have exhausted all ordinary means, parents’ instructions and
prayers; the ministry of the Word in the sanctuary; the
efforts of Sabbath-school teachers; the dispensations of
God’s Providence. Influenced by evil associations, these
means of grace may have been resisted, and their bene-
ficial influence prevented. But they are now placed in
circumstances in which every lesson they had learned would
bear down upon them with all its weight and importance.
Eternity is brought near; the judgment-seat would have
force; death’s cold flood may soon embrace them. No
wonder that the cross should be valued; that the presence
of a devoted servant of God should be prized.
Others on board that vessel may have been so trained and
situated as to have been out of the reach of ordinary
religious influences, and had they been spared to reach this
land they might still have been surrounded with associations
that would have led them from God. But now death stares
them in the face, and they see around them those whose
consciences are calm, whose souls are confidently trusting
in God’s word, and who can exercise a joyous hope of
heaven. Well might they come to God’s servant, and say,


“ Mr. Draper, pray for me.” Who can tell how many who
went on board that vessel, godless and careless, were
awakened, and converted and prepared for heaven. And
surely the storm that gave them an easy bodily death was
worth expending if their souls were rescued from the
quenchless flames of everlasting perdition.
With reference to our departed friends, Mr. and Mrs.
Draper, notwithstanding our painful loss, and the sad idea
of their having the wide ocean for their resting place; could
we have wished that loving heart, that clear persuasive
voice away from the London, when two hundred and sixty
souls were imperilled, many of whom were entreatingly
exclaiming, “ What must Idoto be saved?” Has not this
event stamped an honour on our beloved brother? Has it
not afforded him an extent of usefulness that he could hardly
have attained if he had not been on board that vessel, even
though many years of ordinary ministerial labour had been
permitted him? We glory in men who go and toil for years
amongst savages until they sink under the exhaustive in-
fluence of anxieties and wasting climates; and when we see
their places filled up by others who are ready to die in the
service of souls, we glorify God in them. And could we
read the accounts of our dear brother’s herculean efforts,
the last twenty-four hours spent in incessant labours for
Christ and souls, in the presence of storm and tempest, in
a sinking ship, and not feel that there is a dignity in
sanctified human nature, and a divine reality in the office
of the Christian ministry? We feel assured that the scene
which his zeal and love furnished on board that tempest-
crushed vessel will do more to commend the gospel and its
ministry to the thoughtless and sceptical than anything
which could have transpired. Some men who have looked
upon religion as a system of priestcraft, and concluded that
ministers would not attend to their duties unless they were
well paid for it, will be constrained to see that it is a lovino-
power, that ministers have a self-sacrificing zeal. There
was an exhibition of Christian faith and love in the exhort-
ations. and prayers of those forty-eight hours which exhibit
the glory of the Christian character. It has taken hold of
the very soul of every community in which the account has
spread.
There could be no selfish motives; no pride to gratify,
when all alike expected to sink to rise no more. Men are
constrained to look upon it as the pure outburst of a believ-
ing and loving heart.
I ask my ministerial brethren, much as they feel the loss


whether that was an -unsuitable close to the ministerial
career of Daniel James Draper? We have seen the zeal of
his noble soul at work in these colonies in fl aming schemes
for Church extension, and in evangelistic efforts to save
souls and build up the Church of God. We have seen him
ever ready to help any public institution that could benefit
the bodies and souls of the people,—and can we see him in
that frightful storm, working at the pumps, addressing
words of spiritual comfort to the people when the captain
proclaimed the hopelessness of their condition, holding a
prayer-meeting in the saloon at midnight; starting “Dock
of Ages, cleft for me,” when the floating bodies of the dead
indicated the fast approach of the last moments of all; and
sinking with exhortations to come to Christ still upon his
lips, and not feel that he had a glorious end? He was
enabled to —
“Ilis body with his charge lay down,
And cease at once to work and live.”
to—“ Preach Christ to all, and cry in death, Behold, behold
the Lamb!”
We cannot complain on his account. As a soldier of
Christ he died amidst the trophies of victory; he and his
dear partner passed through an easy “ death triumphant
home.”
The designs of God’s Providence were not confined to
those who sank with that vessel. He spared some to bring
monitory intelligence to us, and we have already felt the
appeals arising from the mournful facts.
Surely the members of the Church are warned to use the
ministry while they have it. Numbers present were favoured
with Mr. Draper’s ministrations. Would you not have
listened more faithfully had you known you must so soon
be deprived of the opportunity of hearing him again ?
Has not the fact of his death brought up before you with
vividness his sermons and speeches ? Kind exhortations,
words of warning or encouragement, have you not felt their
force in a way you have not been accustomed to ? Value
your privileges while you have them; your ministers are
dying men, you are mortal, improve the opportunities that
are afforded you.
As ministers there is a strong call to work while it is day. If
so eminent a “ standard-bearer” can be removed, we need
not expect exemption from the shafts of death. There are
plenty of avenues through which death can strike besides a
B


storm at sea; and while we have the opportunity we ought
to save souls from death. “ Whatsoever thy hand findeth
to do, do it with thy might; for there is no work, nor devise,
nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave, whither thou
goest.”
Ministers and people may derive encouragement from the
power of sustaining grace epinced on this occasion. How
blessedly was God’s servant supported in this trying hour.
We sometimes tremble lest we should faint in the day of
adversity. Witness the calm confidence and hallowed zeal
displayed amidst that war of elements, during the most
imminent peril.
See Mr. Draper as though the stormy elements were
nothing to him, absorbed by the spiritual condition of those
around him, and devoting his whole attention to their
religious interests. See Mrs. Draper’s thoughtfulness
respecting the bodily comfort of the sailor, and handing
him her rug. There is no fear of death, no distraction of
spirit, but a calm assurance that all must end right, if even
they must pass through this troubled sea to Heaven. Let
us believe God when he says, “My grace is sufficient for
thee.”
Have not religion and eternity been brought home to thousands
by this sad event in a way that they could not have been by
ordinary means ? Relatives of those who perished are
numerous; the event itself has excited interest amongst
masses of persons wherever the intelligence has reached.
The ordinary dispensations of God’s Providence are too apt
to lose their effect. The ministry of the Word is resisted
until it becomes powerless. The funeral processions become
so common that they fail to impress the general mind.
bometim.es sudden death, from disease or accident snatching
a neighbour or acquaintance into eternity, startles those who
view the event, into a conviction of the uncertainty of life;
but too frequently all these influences fade away. But
here is an event that comes suddenly and startlingly upon
us, in which all the lessons of God’s Providence are concen-
trated with overwhelming force. We see the power of
religion, the vanity and uselessness of wealth and position
when the summons comes, “ This night thy soul shall be
required of thee;” the uncertainty of life, the importance of
being always prepared for our solemn change. The variety
of persons in that passenger list will give an interest to the
narrative in the cases of vast multitudes, and they will be
prepared to feel the force of those moral lessons that are
intended to be conveyed: few occurrences have awakened


so general a religious impression as has been already pro
duced by this sad event.
Allow me to ask whether numbers in this congregation
have not felt the force of these circumstances? Have not
such ideas as these arisen ? What are worldly plea-
sures? What are millions of gold and silver? What
are the most brilliant earthly associations when death
comes with a summons from Heaven, which cannot be
turned aside ? How blessed is the soul that has secured an
interest in Christ, and can look with calmness on death, and
can “read its title clear to mansions in the skies.” We
may all live thus, and it is the only real happy life to live.
No person can charge our departed friends, Mr. and Mrs.
Draper, with a gloomy religion. They had a joyous union
with the God of love, “ cheerful and blithe” they pursued
their earthly course; and when the last messenger came
they were prepared. Let me urge all present to come to
the cross of Christ for salvation. Never rest until you have
the assurance of Divine forgiveness gladdening your heart.
When guilt is cancelled, and the Holy Spirit sweetly attests
to your soul that you are God’s adopted child, when your
nature is renewed and sanctified by Divine grace, and you
realise the Divine fellowship, and cheerfully engage in the
Divine service; then you will be enabled to meet death with
calmness however he may approach you. Whether in a
storm at sea, or in a resting place on land, you will view him
as bringing a summons to the skies.


NOTICES.
Dr. Cairns has kindlv contributed the following interest-
ing notice of the late D. J. Draper:—
It is with mingled feelings that I take up my pen to pay a
slight tribute of affection to the memory of the late Mr.
Draper. I delight to recall and to delineate the virtues'
of a much-loved friend. I mourn the loss I have sustained
in common with many others, and I wet with my tears the
little wreath which I cast into his grave.
It was. my good fortune to gain his acquaintance and his
friendship very soon after his arrival in this colony in 1855.
I well remember how I regretted the removal of the Rev.
W. Butters. I had found him an able and willing
coadjutor in all those Christian and philanthropic under-
takings which the interests of the country required at that
juncture—a prudent counsellor, an earnest fellow-labourer,
a kindly associate, and I had some fear that his successor
might not be so well fitted for this sphere of public useful-
ness as he had proved himself to be. But I was speedily
and most agreeably disappointed. In Mr. Draper I met
with a brother minister of Christ, richly endowed with
spiritual grace, full of wisdom and charity, ready and well-
furnished for every good work.
From that period to the sad era of his death, my inter-
course with him was as intimate, cordial and continuous as
it could well be between ministers of different denomina-
tions. Outside our respective churches there was, and there
is a wide field for the combined efforts of Christian men to
provide for the moral and religious welfare of the commu-
nity at large; on this extensive arena we worked together
with mutual respect, with true sympathy, and thorough
confidence in each other’s integrity. I always relied on the
support of my friend, and I was never mistaken; at times
perplexing questions would spring up, unforeseen difficul-
ties would present themselves, and of course there was
danger of divided counsels and weakness, as the conse-
quence of division, but in no instance did a cloud or the
shadow of a cloud come between Mr. Draper and myself.


Frank . and unrestrained conversation, invariably termi-
nated in complete unanimity, so that we never had a
difference of opinion on any subject that we considered in
common; never the slightest discrepancy of view or of
judgment occurred to chill or impair the warmth of our
brotherly fellowship. Of the many social questions that
engaged our attention I may specify as amongst the most
important that of our benevolent institutions, that of the
sanctity of the Sabbath, that of education for all classes of
the people. In forming, or in guiding these important
interests I had ample opportunities of seeing and admiring
the high principle, the practical sagacity, the pure motive,
the patience, the faith, the prayerfulness of my dear friend.
We sometimes exchanged pulpits; he preached for me, and
I officiated for him.
His style of preaching was that of a vigorous mind and
gracious heart. He spake because he believed. He loved
the name of Jesus, and with fervency did he publish the
great Salvation, which was the purchase of His blood. His
compassion for sinners was deep and overflowing, and it was
at once his chosen duty and his chief delight to expatiate
on the grace of G-od in the gift of His Son, to entreat and to
beseech the guilty soul to accept that one precious gift. In
prayer, he was particularly full and devout. He enjoyed,
beyond what is usual, an unction from the Holy One. His
heart was a flame of love while communing with the
Lord, and the full tide of supplication which flowed from
his lips proved that the secret of the Lord was with him—
that he drank abundantly of “ the pure river of the water
of life.” His distinguishing characteristics were these—at
least as I discerned them —strong sense, warm affections,
simplicity and godly sincerity, and great knowledge of the
Scriptures, an ardent zeal for the glory of God in the
redemption of sinners. A more amiable man, a more genial
man there could not be. His natural cheerfulness was
• purified and heightened by the love of Christ which was
shed abroad in his heart. He was equally removed from
the impulsive and the ascetic. His Christianity was the
bright and joyful radiance of the Day-star that shone within
his heart—he was, in himself, in the benignity and gladness
of his own sanctified spirit, a pleasing example of the
blessed gospel which it was his privilege to preach. I
reckoned it a kind providence that in my voyage to England
in the Great Britain I had Mr. and Mrs. Draper as fellow-
passengers in that magnificent vessel. From the time of our
embarkation to that of our arrival at Liverpool, we were


constant companions and bosom friends. I need scarcely
say here, that Mrs. Draper was worthy of her husband, and
that he possessed in her a helpmate in every sense fitted to
strengthen his hands as a minister, to insure his personal
comfort and increase the measure of his happiness. It was
no small pleasure to see how tenderly they cared for each
other, and lived in the bonds of mutual sympathy and
affection. In Mrs. Draper was united in a rare degree the
gift of a sound understanding with that of a kindly heart,
bhe was thoughtful and considerate, a fine specimen of a
woman whose native amiability is enhanced and hallowed
by the grace of an habitual piety.
In the ship we spent much time together, and that time
was made profitable to me by the spiritual tone of his mind,
and the instructive character of his conversation. At first
I was too much an invalid to undertake any great share of
ministerial duty on board. The weight of it fell on his
shoulders, and I can bear testimony to the heartiness with
which he gave himself to serve the Lord to the utmost of his
ability, and wherever he could find access to any section of
the passengers or crew, his only desire was to embrace
every opportunity of being useful to others, as a faithful
minister of Christ; his sole motive was to do good to the
souls of his neighbours, proclaiming the message of peace in
the ears of all, and pressing home on every conscience the
invitations of redeeming love. He had his trials, too, as well
as his encouragements, and they brought out the patience
and meekness of his spirit, with a power and beauty seldom
exceeded. I shall ever retain a grateful recollection of our
confidential converse on all the grand topics of our holy
religion. Christ and His cause constituted a fruitful theme,
of which we never wearied, and which cheered, or rather
gilded many an hour, as our noble vessel bore us over the
mighty wilderness of waters. As we interchanged views,
feelings, opinions, on all the leading doctrines of the gospel,
the giounds of separation between us gradually lessened,
until it became evident to both that we and our churches
were divided by a partition so low that true-hearted Chris-
tians could very easily shake hands over it, and so thin that
a slight increase of love would assuredly demolish it
altogether. On one subject we dwelt with peculiar earnest-
ness, and that was- the duty incumbent on the evangelical
churches to do more in the way of mutual recognition, and
to devise some system of actual fellowship, if not of wisely-
regulated co-operation. This, I confess, is an idea that has
taken a deep hold of my own thoughts, and my sentiments


and aspirations met with a cordial response in the honest
heart of my Wesleyan brother. I saw him for the last time
in Edinburgh, about the end of July. He and his partner
had spent some weeks in Ireland, and had visited the most
remarkable scenes of that interesting country. They
were greatly pleased with all they had seen and expe-
rienced, were loud in their praises of the Scottish
metropolis, declaring again and again that no city
they had ever seen could compare with Edinburgh for
picturesque and varied beauty. I wished them to remain
not only that day, which was Saturday, but until the
following Monday, that I might have the pleasure of intro-
ducing them to some Edinburgh friends, and of taking them
to hear some of our most' celebrated preachers on the Sab-
bath. This, however, was beyond their power, as Mr.
Draper had been advertised to preach next day in some
English town, which compelled them to leave by the mail
that afternoon. We then bid each other farewell, expressing
a hope that we might be able to take our return voyage in
the same vessel, and that, God willing, we should meet at
all events in Melbourne in the course of the month of
March. Little did I foresee or dream of the terrible catas-
trophe which hurried my dear friends from the anxious life
of time to the rest and blessedness of heaven. How could
I imagine that my brother’s race was nearly run—his war-
fare nearly accomplished?—and that I should see him no more
until I too should enter the world of spirits ! For him the
will of the Lord was the expression of his love—the sudden
call a happy transition. We know now that his work was
all but finished; one additional service and no more was
required of him ere he ascended to the throne of God —to
the recompense of the reward.
Filled with gratitude for the full cup enjoyment pro-
vided for him during his visit to England, he set his face
to Australia, desiring nothing better than to spend the
residue of his days in working the Lord’s honourable work
in this distant field. But the work intended for him was
to confirm those of God’s children who were his companions
in the fated London, and to sound the last notes of solemn
warning in the ears of all in that ship who had hitherto
rejected mercy. For this high purpose lam persuaded Mr.
and Mrs. Draper were placed in the devoted vessel. There
were Christians there, and they needed strengthening for
the struggle that awaited them. There were unconveited
sinners there; and that, if possible, they might be led to
the refuge of the cross, God associated with them his tried


and faithful servant. How well and nobly he fulfilled his
ad e Stfon miSSion> " " reCol ' ded f ° r
S fu h ! im m that Prolonged season of terrible
conflict with the horrors of death, see him self-possessed
calm, fearless, engrossed with the anxiety for the soulTof
others, his own faith strong, his hope bright and clear. Not
f„ h T elf dld he think 80 ™h as of the multitude
suddenly placed on the brink of eternity, and expecting
e to *? e to the judgment JRf
£ a T”‘ S ° f his «he
m-!tr d f , Cy and B Tace in the memorable midnight
trernM* mee aS ke spake a wor d in season now to one
embling creature, now to another, as he offered Christ to
pas«ed°t 0 e tW fi mP !° red the , Lo *' d to convert ere they
were heard b " the ? matterS not what
vessel sank P amc - st ™ ck survivors as the broken
vessel sank m the tempest-tossed deep, and her living?
freight were m an instant consigned to a watery tomb- we
tha t thad •“ He VMS not ’ for God took Mu.” From
like m ! °i™i S h . ls emancipated spirit ascended, Elijah-
Faithful v. flame ’ t 0 a place P re P a red for him,
t aithrul unto death, he went to receive a crown of life.
“ r . Ta PPy sou h thy days are ended,
All thy mourning days below;
G°, by angel guards attended,
1 o the light of J esus go !
W aiting to receive thy spirit,
L"! the Saviour stands above;
Shows the purchase of His merit,
Reaches out the crown of love.
For the joy He sets before thee,
Bear a momentary pain,
Die, to live a life of glory,
Suffer, with thy Lord to reign.”


The Rev. M. H. Lecher has favoured us with the fol-
lowing extracts from a sermon preached by him in St.
James’s Cathedral on Sunday, 18th March, 1866;
“ Boast not thyself of to-morrow,” said Solomon, “ for thou
knowest not what a day may bring forth;” and how often,
since Solomon wrote, have men been taught by unexpected
calamities the truth and wisdom of his words ?
How little, for example, did we think, while assembling
here last Sunday, that a few days would bring tidings which
would cover not merely this city, but all these colonies, with
a cloud of gloom?—that the cry of so many hearts, broken
by the sorrow of bereavement, should rise up to God from
our midst this day? * * * * * * *
Passenger ships have made their voyages with so much
safety and regularity that we have become forgetful of the
dangers which they that go down to the sea in ships are
exposed to. So confident are we of safety, that on hearing
of the departure of friends from England, on a voyage to
Melbourne, we are prepared to embrace them in a few weeks,
as a matter of course—the idea of anything happening to
them scarce ever entering into our minds.
The loss of the ship London, with so many on board, well
known and dear to so many amongst us, was a calamity alike
unlooked for and appalling.
The account of the disaster—of those two fearful days,
during which all hope that their lives should be spared was
taken away—of the noble, unselfish behaviour of the captain,
crew, and passengers—of those three ministers of the
gospel, now working at the pumps, now praying with the pas-
sengers —was one which no one could read unmoved; * * *
and yet terrible as this calamity was, there is no reason that
we should have our faith in God’s love and mercy shaken,
or look upon the event as an altogether unmixed evil.
In the first place, as regards those who were on board the
London; is there not reason to hope—nay, are there not
grounds for belief, that fearful as was their exit from this
life, with many, if not with most of them, “it is well?”
We know that in the case of the righteous “it is surely
well”—that whenever death meets them, whether on beds
of lingering sickness, or without one moment’s warning, “ it
is well.” Death can never find those unprepared who are
“washed, sanctified, and justified in the name of the Lord


Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God”—sudden death is to
them sudden glory.
But how in the case of others, many of whom, it is to be
feared, would have gone on board that ill-fated ship, totally
unprepared for a speedy summons to God’s presence?
What might have been their final lot had they escaped
the violence of the ocean, and landed safely on these
shores, we cannot tell. But I would ask you to
notice, that short as their time was, theirs could
not properly be called sudden death. For two days
there were sufficient grounds for alarm to lead those
to prayer who had never prayed before, and for twenty-four
hours before death actually overtook them all hope of escape
had passed away. The conversion of the soul is God’s work,
and can be effected by Him in a moment, as well as in a
lifetime; and who shall say how many during that fearful
day and night may not have passed from death unto life by
a true repentance towards God and a living faith in the
Lord Jesus Christ?
For, observe, they were not left to perish without the offer
of escape. Three ministers of the gospel were on board-
one of them, the Rev. Daniel James Draper—long known
amongst us as an able and devoted minister in these
colonies, and right faithfully and in the spirit of his Divine
Master does he appear to have finished his course. Mr.
Draper was a man wonderfully adapted, both by gifts and
giaces, for the occasion. He was remarkable for his hardy,
robust constitution, great physical courage and powers of
endurance. He had great natural fluency of speech,
possessing, the rare gift of being able to express his
thoughts in plain sensible language, without previous
preparation. He was also singularly gifted in prayer
surely it was rich mercy that such a man of God was in the
midst.
. r ' Draper appears also to have had opportunities for exer-
cising his ministry towards all on board—for as the waters
gained upon the ship—we find the passengers of every
class assembling together in the saloon, and receiving in
calm silence, the announcement of impending death—a
silence only broken by the voice of Christ’s ambassador
proclaiming* life and immortality through the gospel,
burely we may believe that this his last sermon here below
was “ a savour of life unto life” to many. * * *


The Rev. J. P. Sunderland, agent for the London Mis-
sionary Society, pays the following tribute to the worth of
Mr. Draper:—
The death of a useful, active and experienced minister of
the gospel must be felt as a general loss to the whole com-
munity. Whilst each denomination of Christians seeks to
carry out its own ideas of the way in which Christ’s work
should be done, yet all true Christians are acting under the
directions of the same Divine Lord, and the success of one
branch of the church is a matter of joy to all. When
a “standard-bearer” falls in the army of the Lord, there is
a feeling of sincere grief—for where there is so much to be
done to make this bad world better, we need all the wise
and strong workers we can find to maintain the warfare.
The shadow of a great grief rests upon many Christian
hearts through the sad loss of the London. The Eev. D. J.
Draper and his beloved wife are prominent objects of
thought to those who dwell upon the last hours of the
sinking ship. Mr. Draper acted as became the Lord’s
servant in that trying scene. He fulfilled the expectations
of his fi’iends. His Christian conduct must excite the
devout admiration of those who view him as the minister of
the gospel, with death before him—a raging sea waiting to
engulf all in its angry waters—and making the best of a
few hours or moments to lead those to the Saviour, who
were asking—“ What must we do to be saved?”
However great may have been the respect in which Mr.
Draper was held by those who knew him and had the
pleasure of acting with him in Christian work, that esteem
rises higher when he is viewed in the last hours of his life.
All denominations of Protestant Christians in this colony
must know something of his worth. The Congregational
ministers who had an opportunity of co-operating with Mr.
Draper in the common objects of Christian enterpx-ise, can
look back with pleasure to the value of his counsels and the
fervour of his zeal. The experience of the writer extending
over several years has made this loss like a personal one.
When opportunity presented, Mr. Draper was ready to give
his help to other denominations than his own, in furthering
Christian work. The hearty manner in which he joined in
the meetings connected with the London Missionary Society
on several occasions will be long remembered. .He was in


his element on the missionary platform. The greatness
oi the work—the expansiveness of the field— and the
the preaching of the gospel among the
eathen, well suited his broad Catholic sympathies. We
remember how touchingly he referred to his interest in the
fW a n° nS n°( the , Lo ? don Missionary Society from the fact
that his beloved wife was so intimately connected bv
relationship with the band of missionaries sent forth in the
ship Duff, in the early days of the South Sea Missions.
He was ever ready to take his place at the missionary
meeting and his genial countenance was lighted up with a
smile when he listened to the accounts of those who had
seen the moral transformations wrought by the gospel of
Christ in heathen lands; and when he rose to speak under
these circumstances, there was an energy and flow of true
his hearers WlllCh Carried his a PP eals to the consciences of all
, d hose who mee t here on the various committees of our
religious associations found him to be a man of quick per-
ceptions, sound judgment, and determined purpose His
tW TT? was a ma rked feature which impressed
those who met him and joined with him at the throne of
grace m seeking those blessings which are needed by us all
m every good work to which we set our hands and hearts.
His warm earnest spirit will be missed. He was regarded
by those not connected with the Wesleyan denomination as
ready 1 fjl T! J° r Ws well - powers. He was
whPu i w fl m n - S^ ed f ° r 6Tery S ood word and and
when m his official capacity he had to act with brethren of
raVncpfh llg +p US P ersuasion ®’. be always commanded their
lespect by the manner m which he discharged those duties
leyan^himcfi 6 ' 1 UP ° n him aS the re P resentati ve of the Wes-
prime f ~ th e vigour of his days-he has been
called to his rest and reward. He died as he lived—a holy
active, zealous Christian minister of the gospel. All those
who have known him, as far as we can learn, amongst the
tr?iP^h ega f l^ nallStS k esteemed him ’ and in common with all
wldch f en \ y W ° U ! d s y m P a thise with the church
which has lost such a minister. They would maanih fho
difficulf G< ? W J iCh V tf d UP ’ and sustained 80 long in many
tbo wll ° US lab .° UrS the Eev ‘ D ‘ J - Draper! and may
the Wesieyan denomination and other Christian associations
be honoured with men of equal power and worth.
His name, with that of his beloved wife—his ministry—
his last moments and his dying work, will linger long in the


memory of those who knew him. Often will his image
appear to the mind—and in those places where he has
preached Christ and Him crucified, will he be thought of as
a “ ministering spirit.” He was a fearless exponent of the
grand truths of the gospel, and when we think of him, the
words of Cowper rise up in our minds, and with them we
close this brief tribute to his memory: —
There stands the messenger of truth : there stands
The legate of the skies ! his theme divine,
His office sacred, his credentials clear,
By him the violated law speaks out
Its thunders ; and by him, in strains as sweet
As angels use, the gospel whispers peace.
He ’stablishes the strong, restores the weak,
Reclaims the wanderer, binds the broken heart,
And armed himself in panoply complete
Of heavenly temper, furnishes with arms
Bright as liis own, and trains, by every rule
Of holy discipline, to glorious war,
The sacramental host of God’s elect.
The Argus of Monday, March 19th, stated that on
Sunday, 18th, nearly in all the churches of all denomina-
tions in and around Melbourne sermons were preached in
reference to the loss of the London, and that distinct and
most honourable reference was made to the truly noble
and heroic conduct of Mr. Draper. From that notice we
extract the following resume of the sermon in Wesley
Church, by Dev. Joseph Dare:—
Mr. Dare took his text from Psalm lxxvii. 19.—“ Thy
way is in the sea, and Thy path in the great waters, and
Thy footsteps are not known.” He opened by expressing
his belief that the Providence of God followed man in all
circumstances, and urged that such a belief, being general,
must afford much consolation to men in all times of trouble,
sorrow, and affliction. The path of Deity could be traced
as much in the tempest as in the softest zephyr which blew.
After a lucid exposition of the passage, and of the beautiful
psalm of which it is a part, the preacher referred to the
painful circumstances connected with the loss of the London.
A great affliction had visited them—they mourned as indi-
viduals, as a church, and as a community. In the face of


su 1 ch 1 a catastrophe they were dumb, yet they looked to Him
who had stricken also to heal. Providence in his inscruta-
ble ways made allotments of success and disaster, happiness
and sorrow There was no such thing as chance; therefore
men must bow to the Power which ruled the whirlwind and
directed the storm. There was, he admitted, a mystery
about these visitations which no human being could fathom
but ■“ here we saw through a glass darkly.” The loss of the
Royal Charter, and the wreck of the Admella had fallen like
a blow on this community; but this more recent disaster—
the loss of the London, with its precious freio-ht of souls—
seemed to be a more terrible calamity. He pictured the
feelings with which the voyagers set out—fathers to ioin
their wives and children, to meet their parents, wives
K h X r6 -r t6d t .°. their husbands, men of business to
join their firms, ministers to their charges. The terrors of
the storm, and the final catastrophe were also alluded to in
stirring words. The Eev. Mr. Draper’s ministrations to the
doomed passengers were subjects of eulogy. Mr. Dare in
conclusion, sought to administer consolation to the bereaved
and the sorrowing, and made a touching appeal to his
auditory to improve the mournful event,by dedicating them-
selves to God and living henceforth in a state of prepared-
ness for eternity. F
TW Ee TY L + ?\ GEDEN ’. Classical Tutor at Richmond
theological Institution, writes:—
* * “ 1 w as much impressed by Mr. Draper’s
conversation and bearing. He had seen the world, and
he talked like a man to whom men and things were familiar
Ihe experiences of life had evidently accomplished their
purpose m him. He was in command of himself; his iudo--
ment was strong and well-balanced; his tone and miner
altogether showed the completeness, the symmetry, and the
tender and genml perfection of one who had laboured and
suffered and, m all, had grown wiser and better, and more
serviceable for his generation and mankind. His centre could
not be doubted Christ and Christ’s work (particularly as
nh?Jn+ Gn >f d + 7 ? Ie i th 1 ° dlsir ;’ these were conspicuously^ the
objects about which his whole thought and being revolved
Cheerful, peasant courteous, alive to all that was goino- on
around him utterly free from all sourness and affSctation
he exhibited with wonderful attractiveness, the simplicity
purity, dignity, and high and holy aims of the Minister of
Christ. His prayer at family worship I shall never forget.


As he offered it, I could not but remark, how the little child
and the ripe saint met in those natural, lowly, reverent, and
calmly mighty supplications. It was the prayer of a man,
between whose spirit and God there was no haze, and who
was as sure of answer as if voices from Heaven told him he
was heard. Happy those hundreds of lost men and women,
who, in the panic and horror of their fearful death-struggle,
were blessed with the instructions and faithful pleadings
with God on their behalf of a shepherd of souls like Mr.
Draper ! Happy that shepherd himself, who, from a min-
istry such as that which he was enabled to exercise, hour
after hour, in the face of terrors worse than destruction,
passed without pause into the everlasting joy of his Lord.
The Rev. Newman Hall, in a sermon from the text,
“ The sea hath spoken,” paid a fervent tribute to the memory
of Mr. Draper, who, “ seeing himself cut off from the years
of faithful service he had anticipated, Samson-like, set him-
self to gain in death more souls, perhaps, than if he nad
lived much longer.”
The Archbishop op York, in a sermon in reference to
the loss of the London, spoke of Mr. Draper as “ that holy
■ man of God who nobly did his duty.’
The London Weekly Review, the organ of the English
Presbyterians, says: — .
“ One of the most touching scenes was the assembling in
the saloon of all the passengers to join in prayer, which was
led by Mr. Draper, the representative of the Australian
Wesleyan Conference, who throughout showed a spirit of
the most Christian intrepidity, spending his last hours in
administering spiritual comfort to his companions m sorrow.
Such a bearing as this in such circumstances furnishes the
most striking proof of the genuine power of heartfelt Chris-
tian faith, in which we hope that many others shared.
MacmilUn’s Magazine.- A “broad church” periodical, says ig
_« of the Rev. Daniel Draper, we learn only that he was
Wesleyan minister, ‘ well-known and highly respected m
Australia where he had resided thirty years, and whither
with his wife, the daughter of one of the
“rs oTt
£Te blather beyond middle age. exhorting and praying
to the last ‘He was heard to say repeatedly, , y
to who are not converted, be converted now-hundreds
; of them!’ And whoever may or may not agree with


special creed of the Wesleyan minister, his faith, prosred in
face of a death as solemn as that of the primitive martyrs,
must have been as strong and as sublime almost as theirq.”
The Churchman says:— * * “ Let sciench
stand there (on the deck of the London ) and be tried, and it
will be found that the Wesleyan preacher who so bravely
did his best to lead those who were about to perish with
himself to prayer and to their God, was a wiser man and a
truer hero than any unbelieving man of science who has
ever breathed. He understood better too the facts of human
nature and of the universe, and the awfulness of both.
These awful things, £ the wind and storm fulfilling His
word/ and' those other judgments too under which our
country is suffering, or is likely to suffer, say to the scep-
tical, the unbelieving, and the materialist, very plainly, as
plainly as to the careless and profane, *Be still, and know
that I am God.’ ”
It would be easy to extend this volume to double its size
by notices respecting Mr. Draper, which have appeared in
sermons and in the public journals, both in Australia and
England. The determination, however, stated in the intro-
duction limits us to space, and compels the omission of
much that we would gladly insert. We direct the attention
of our readers to the Wesleyan Chronicle, of March, and April,
as containing-by far the fullest; information yet published
respecting Mr. Draper’s last hours—in letters from the Hon.
A. M‘Arthur, Walter Powell, Esq., Revs. W. B. Boyce, W.
Butters, and others. In Dr. Jobson’s memorial sermon,
preached in City Road Chapel, The Wesleyan Magazine, The
Missionary Notices; Guthrie,s Sunday Magazine, The Christian
Times, The Band of Hope Review, The Wreck of the London,
(an English publication;) and in publications issued, in
Victoria, just and generous tributes are paid to Mr. Draper’s,
heroic conduct and Christian devotedness amidst the last
scenes of the ill-fated ship.




