

THE
BUEKE AND WILLS 1
EXPLORING EXPEDITION:
AN ACCOUNT
OP TUB
CROSSING THE CONTINENT OF AUSTRALIA,
COOPER’S CREEK TO CARPENTARIA,
Ifortnrits irui) ilicinniphiral
ROBERT O’HARA BURKE, AND WILLIAM JOHN WILLS. 4
MELBOURNE:
WILSON AND MACKINNON, 78, COLLINS STREET EAST. TC’
1861.






. t


THE
BURKE AND WILLS
EXPLORING EXPEDITION:
AN ACCOUNT
OF THE
CROSSING THE CONTINENT OF AUSTRALIA,
COOPER’S CREEK TO CARPENTARIA,
§iojgrajljial sktr|«s
ROBERT O’HARA BURKE AND WILLIAM JOHN WILLS.
MELBOURNE :
WILSON AND MACKINNON, 78, COLLINS STREET EAST,
1861,




THE BURKE AND WILLS EXPLORING EXPEDITION.
This pamphlet is not put forth as a
history of the Exploring Expedition. It
is but the last chapter of a sad history : the
thrilling narrative of the successful but
fatal feat of crossing the continent of Aus-
tralia, by Burke, Wills, Gray, and King.
To understand it, however, it will be
necessary to bear in mind a few facts con-
nected with that history.
On the 20th of August, 18G0, the Expe-
dition, organized under the auspices of the
lloyal Society of Victoria, left the Itoyal
Park, Melbourne, taking with it twelve
months’ suppty of stores,, consisting of
twenty-one tons of goods in all, which were
to be but slightly trenched upon while with-
in the bounds of civilization. The names of
the members of the expedition were—Robert
O’Hara Burke, leader ; George James
Landells, in charge of the camels, and
second in command; William John Wills,
astronomer and surveyor; Thomas Beckler,
medical officer; Ludwig Becker, artist, natu-
ralist, geological director, &c.; Charles Fer-
guson, foreman ; and Thomas M'Donough,
William Patton, Patrick Langan, Owen
Cowen, William Brahe, Robert Fletcher,
John King, Henry Crocker, and John
Drakeford, associates.
Some changes in the party were subse-
quently found necessary, and several were
dismissed.
On the 24th the Expedition cammed at
Sandhurst, and on the following day pro-
ceeded en route to Swan Hill, reaching
it on the 6th September, where it
was most hospitably entertained by the
leading inhabitants of the township, prior
to its taking leave of Victoria. From
thence it proceeded to the Darling, which
it reached towards the end of the month.
There Mr. Burke established his first
depot, at the Laidley Ponds, now named
Menindie. An advanced party of eight,
under Burke, now pushed on to Cooper’s
Creek ; and as, the season had been un-
usually wet and late, there was such an
abundance of grass and water, that they
reached that point with comparatively iittle
difficulty on the 11th November. The
party then travelled slowly down the
creek, in order to recruit the strength of
the animals, and in search of a suitable
spot for the establishment of the per-
manent depot, which was fixed upon at
camp 65. Having made all bis arrange-
ments, and written a despatch to the com-
mittee on the 13th December, Burke did
not wait for the arrival of the remainder of
the party under Mr. Wright, whom he
had engaged at Menindie, and to whom he
had given orders to bring on the bulk
of the stores ; but leaving the depot in
charge of Brahe, Patton, M‘Donough,
and Dost Mahomed, he set forward, on
the 16th December, for Eyre’s Creek,
taking with him Wills, King, and Gray,
six camels, a horse, and about three months’
supply of provisions. In his despatch
he says, “ 1 shall leave the party which
remain here under the charge of Mr.
Brahe, in whom I have every confidence.
The feed is very good. There is no
danger to be apprehended from the
natives, if they are properly managed,
and there is therefore nothing to prevent
the party remaining here until our return,
or until their provisions run short.”
Brahe and his companions, thus left in
charge, immediately set about forming a
stockade to protect themselves from the
annoyance of the natives, who appeared in-
clined to be troublesome, though subsequent
events show that this was more apparent
than real, and arose, probably, from the
difficulty of holding intelligent intercourse
with them. Four months passed away
without any tidings either of those
who had gone forward to the interior, or
from those behind at the Darling; scurvy
broke out amongst the small parly, find
Brahe was fearful of being reduced to


extremities. He said, in his statement to
the committee, “ after most seriously
considering all the circumstances,” he
made up his mind to start for the
Darling on Sunday, the 21st. April.
He did so; having first deposited
a small quantity of stores, consisting of
501 b. flour, 501 b. of oatmeal, 501 b. of sugar,
and 301 b. of rice, at the foot of a large
tree, on which he marked the word “ Dig.”
On the 28th Brahe fell in with Wright’s
party, which had broken down, reduced
by sickness and death, in the vain at-
tempt to reach Cooper’s Creek, and was
now about to make an immediate retreat
to Tarrugutta. He at once placed himself
and party under the command of Wright,
who then remained at Bulla till the Ist of
May, when he commenced his contem-
plated return to Tarrugutta. In his
despatch of the 20th June, Wright says,
“ Upon reaching the next camp, Koorli-
atto, I resolved to give the sick a further
spell, while I advanced with Mr. Brahe
to the depot at Cooper’s Creek, for the
purpose of ascertaining whether Mr.
Burke had returned, or the provisions left
there by Mr. Brahe had been discovered
by the natives. I found no signs of
Mr. Burke’s return or of the cache of
stores having been disturbed; and re-
turned to Koorliatto on the 12th of May,
finding the men at the camp there all safe,
but very little improved in health.”
Assisted by Brahe and his companions,
Mr, Wright was enabled to convey the
remainder of his party back to Menindie,
though, owing to the “ difficulty of
moving men so extremely weak” as were
the sick, the journey was very tedious.
He then sent on despatches with Brahe,
who was met at the inn known as the
“ Durham Ox,” on the Loddon, by Mr.
Howitt, in command of the contingent
party which had been sent forward from
Melbourne, in consequence of the anxiety
excited to know the fate of the Exploring
Expedition. Howitt returned to Sand-
hurst, in company with Brahe, and, on
their arrival, he sent on the following tele-
gram :
“ Sandhurst, June 29.
“The Hon. John Macadam, M.D.
“ I met Mr. Brahe at the Loddon with de-
spatches, and received the following message :
‘Mr. Wright has reached Menindie with eight
■men, having been joined by Mr. Burke’s depot
party from Cooper’s Creek. Messrs. Becker, Pur-
cell, Stone, and Patton, died on the journey. Mr,
Burke left Cooper’s Creek on the 16th December.
Nothing has been heard of him since that date.
He was accompanied by Messrs. Wills, King, and
Gray. The natives proved hostile, and the country
for 150 miles was waterless. Two camels and
three horses died, and one was lost.
(Signed) “* W. Wright.
“ I shall be in town with Mr. Brahe to-morrow
morning.
(Signe'd) “A. W. Howitt,
Leader of Contingent Party.”
The intense excitement caused by this
painful information, induced the Com-
mittee promptly to increase the strength of
the contingent party, and Mr. Howitt
again started on his mission, with instruc-
tions to proceed with all possible dispatch
to Cooper’s Creek, there to search for
Burke’s track, and, if possible, carry relief
to his party. The results are now before
the public.


THE CONTINENT CROSSED.
DEATH OF BURKE AND TWO OF HIS PARTY.
Late on Saturday, November 2,informa-
tion reached Melbourne from Sandhurst
of the arrival there of a messenger (Mr.
Brahe) from Mr. Howitt’s searching ex-
pedition, with a despatch from that leader,
conveying the melancholy intelligence
that Burke and Wills had perished at
Cooper’s Creek in the month of June last,
of exhaustion, from fatigue and want of
proper food ; and that a third member of
the party (Gray) had died on the return
journey between the Gulf of Carpentaria
and Cooper’s Creek. The fourth (King)
was found on the creek, living with the
natives, by whom he had been treated
kindly, and, we are happy to say, he is
now restored to health. In his posses-
sion were the journals of the leader of
the Expedition and Mr. Wills’s maps and
notes (which are now in possession of the
Royal Society), which show that Burke
and his companions successfully accom-
plished the crossing of the continent to
the shores of the Gulf of Carpentaria,
which theyreached on the 11th February.
The chart kept by Mr. Wills shows that
the party followed Sturt’s track to its
farthest point, in lat. 24, when, finding
the country to the north utterly imprac-
ticable, a course was struck direct east to
the 140th parallel of longitude, which
they followed north, almost in a straight
line to the Albert River. They rested
three days at a point on the river, in lat.
17deg. 53min, south, within the tidal in-
fluence, thus having accomplished the
great feat of crossing the continent from
sea to sea. They then turned back, al-
most by the same route, travelling for the
most, part of the way on foot, killing their
horses and some of their camels for food,
and suffering much from hunger. They
THE VICTORIAN EXPEDITION.
reached Cooper’s Creek on the evening of
the 21st April,—the very day on which
Brahe and the depot party under his
charge left the creek to return to Menin-
die. A small quantity of provisions hidden
by the depot party was found by Burke
and his companions, who, feeling them-
selves too weak to travel to Menindie
(about 400 miles), made two successive
attempts to reach the South Australian
settlements, and were driven back on
both occasions by want of water. In
these attempts the month of May was
spent.
The very small quantity of provisions
that had been left by Brahe’s party be-
came soon exhausted, ' and they had to
gather the seeds of a native plant which
they found—the same plant which Lyons
and Macpherson had to rely upon for
some time. Without proper food, and
worn out by the labour of gathering it,
and doubtless prostrated in mind by the
hopeless position that week after week
found them in, their strength wasted
away, and towards the end of June and
about the same time that the tidings of
the other deaths reached Melbourne, and
about the time Mr. Howitt’s party made
its first start from this city, poor Burke
died while in the act of making a last
attempt to obtain succour from the blacks
for himself and his companion; and Wills,
alone in his hut, and about the same
time as his friend Burke, breathed his
last. From June till the 15th September,
when he was found by Howitt, King, the
last survivor of the party, lived amongst
the natives of Cooper’s Creek, by whom
he was kindly treated. He was origi-
nally a soldier in the Indian army, and
arrived here with Mr. Landells, as did


also Gray. The latter was a very strong
young fellow, yet he was the first to
perish. King, on the other hand, was
not strong, and had left India for the
benefit of his health. His narrative, which
we give, will be found extremely inter-
esting.
Melancholy interest attaches to the
last despatch written by Mr. Burke,
briefly but comprehensively announcing
the success he had achieved, and to the
last few lines traced despairingly by the
hand of poor Wills.
The following is Mr. Howitt’s de-
spatch, announcing the results of his
mission. It is dated from a camp on
the return journey to Menindie, where
no doubt he has now arrived :
Poria Creek, Oct. 10,1861.
Sir, —I have the honour to report my arriva T
here with the Contingent Exploring Party, on
my return journey, having, on September 15 in
latitude 27deg. 44min., and longitude 140 deg.
40min., found John King, the only survivor of
Mr. Burke’s party, living with the Cooper’s Creek
natives. Mr. Burke and Mr. Wills had died some
time previous to my arrival, from hungeV and ex-
haustion, and Gray died before reaching Cooper’s
Creek, on their return journey from the Gulf.
King was in a very weak, exhausted state when
found, but, I am happy 10 say, has lecovered
wonderfully since, and Mr. Wheeler has just re-
ported him to me as being out of his hands. The
full particulars will be found in my diary, which,
with King’s narrative, is enclosed. I may state
regarding my diary, that I have only transcribed
that portion subsequent to our reaching this place
on our outward journey, as up to that time we
had followed the Expedition track, and nothing
of interest had occurred. It may suffice for me
to say, that from leaving Menindie we had tra-
velled without meeting with any particular
hindrances, finding splendid feed almost the
whole way, and sufficient wa'er for our
use, with the exception of three nights, when
our horses were without The rain had
been very partial, and in places we only
found just sufficient for our immediate use. Toro-
woto and Carriapundy swamps and the mud
plains were perfectly dry, and no water that,
could long oe relied on, without subsequent rain,
from Nuntheruntiee Creek to this place, a distance
of about 180 miles. I had intended leaving the
Expedition track at Carriapundy, but was de-
terred from doing so by the very dry appearance
of the country; and, therefore, followed the
track to this creek, which is permanent. I am
happy to be able to state, that the party are and
have been in perfect health, and that the horses
are in excellent working order. The camels are,
on the whole, in as good condition as when they
left Menindie, and may be pronounced cured of
the scab, which I cannot help attributing in a
great measure to the bad management of the
sepoys. So far, I have met with no loss or acci
dent of any kind, and the natives, wherever I
have seen them, have been friendly. I eXpeet iO
be down at Menindie in three weeks, and may
probably spend two or three days at Torowoto to
endeavour to find permanent water, as I know of
none there that can be relied on. I forward
these despatches by Mr. Brahe and Weston Phil-
lips, with four of our best- horse*. I consider
that they will have no particular difficulties in
going down, excepting as regards wa er, which
would not be lessened by a larger party, and I
cannot well spare more men, from the number of
camels and pack horses to look after. Should
there be horses at Menindie fi for the journey
down, I have instructed Vlr. Brahe to proceed at
once to town, taking with him the documents
and field books belonging to Mr. Burke and Mr.
Wills, and rela'ing to the journey 10 and from
the Gulf King I shall send down on my arrival
at the Darling.
I beg to urge on the committee the necessity of
sending me immediate instruc ions to Menindie
respecting the further disposal of the party and
equipment.
I have the honour to be. Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
A. W. llowiTr,
Leader of the Contingent Exploring Party,
To the Hon. John Macadam, M.D., Hon.
Secretary the Exploration Committee,
Melbourne.
BURKE’S LAST DESPATCH.
The following is the last despatch written by
Mr. Bnrke. It was found amongst the papers
deposited on Cooper’s Creek :
Dep6t No. 2, Cooper’s Creek, Camp 65.—The
return party from Carpentaria, consisting of
myself, Wills, and King (Gray dead), arrived
here last night, and found that the dep6t
party had only started on the same day.
We proceed on to-morrow slowly down the
creek towards Adelaide by Mount Hopeless,
and shall endeavour to follow Gregory’s track 5
but we are very weak. The two camels are done
up, and we shall not be able to 'ravel faster than
four or five miles a day. Gray died on the road,
from exhaustion and fatigue. We have all suf-
fered much from hunger. The provisions left
here will, I think, restore our strength. We
have discovered a practicable route to Carpen-
taria, the chief portion of which lies on the 140th
deg. of E longitude. There is some good country
between this and the Stony Desert. From there
to the tropics the country is dry and stony. Be-
tween the tropics and Carpentaria a considerable
portion is rangy, but it is well wat > ed and richly
grassed. We reached the shores of Carpentaria
on February 11,1861. Greatly disappointed at
finding the party here gone.
(Signed) Robert O’Hara Burke, Leader.
April 22,1861.
P S. The camels cannot travel, and we cannot
walk, or we should follow the other party.
We shall move very slowly down the creek.
May 30, 18*1.
We have been nnable to leave the creek.
Both camels are dead, and our provisions are
done. Mr. Burke and King are down on the


lower part of the creek, lam about to return
to them, when we shall all probably come up this
way. We are trying to live the best way we can,
like the blacks, but find it hard work. Our
clothes are going to pieces fast. Send provisions
and ciuihes as soon as possible.
(Signed) WILLIAM J. WILLS.
The dep6t party having left, contrary to in-
structions, has put us in this fix. I have de-
posited some of my journals here, for fear of
accidents.
(Signed) W. J. W.
KING’S NARRATIVE.
Mr. Burke, Mr. Wills, and I, reached the
depot at Cooper’s Creek, on April 21st, about
half-past 7 in the evening, with two camels—
all that remained of the six Mr. Burke took
with him. All the provisions we then had con-
sisted of a pound and a- half of dried meat. We found
the party had gone the same day, and looking
about for any mark they might have left, found
the tree with DIG, April 21. Mr. Wills said the
party had left for the Darling. We dug, and
found the plant of st .res. Mr. Burke took the
papers out of the bottle, and then asked each of
us whether we were able to proceed up the
creek in pursuit of the party. We said not; and
he then said that he thought it his duty to ask
us, but that he himself was unable to do so,
but that he had decided upon trying to make
Mount Hopeless, as he had been assured by the
committee in Melbourne that there was a cattle
station wbhin 150 miles of Cooper’s Greek. Mr.
Wills was not inclined to follow this plan, t'ut
wished to go down our old track, but at last
gave in to Mr. Burke’s wishes. I also wished to
go down by our old track. We remained four
or five days to recruit, making prepara'ions
to go down the creek by stages of four to five
miles a-day, and Mr. Burke placed a paper in
the plant, stating what were our plans. Tra-
velling down the creek, we got some fish from
the natives, and, some disiance down, one of the
camels (Landa) got bogged, and although
we remained there that day and part of
the next trying to dig him out, we found
our sirengih insufficient to do so. The
evening of the second day, we shot him as he
lay, and, having cut off as much meat as
we could, we lived on it while we stayed to dry
the remainder. Throwing all the least neces-
sary things away, we made one load for the re-
maining camel (Rajah), and each of us carried a
swag of about 251 b. We were then tracing down
the branches of the creek running S., but found
that they ran out into earthy plains. We had
understood that the creek along Gregory’s track
was continuous; and finding that all these creeks
ran out into plains, Mr. Burke returned, our
camel being completely knocked up. We then in-
tended to give the camel a spell for a few days, and
to make a new attempt to push on forty or fifty
miles to the south, in the hope of striking ihe
creek. During the time that the camel was being
rested, Mr, Burke and Mr. Wills went in search
of the natives, to endeavour to find out how the
nardoo grew. Having found their camp, they
obtained as much nardoo cake and fish as they
could eat, but could not explain that they wished
to be shown how to find the seed themselves.
They returned on the third day, bringing some
fish and nardoo cake with them. On the follow-
ing day, the camel Rajah seemed very ill, and I
told Mr. Burke I thought he could not linger out
more than four days ; and as on the same evening
the poor brute was on the point of dying, Mr.
Burke ordered him to be shot. I did so, and we
cut him up with two broken knives and a lancet.
We cured the meat, and planted it; and Mr.
Burke then made another attempt to find the
nardoo, taking me with him. We went dowu
the creek, expecting to find the natives at the
camp where they had been last seen, but found
that they had left; and not knowing whether they
had gone up or down the creek, we slept in their
gunyahs that nigh f , and on the following morn-
ing returned to Mr. Wills, The next day Mr.
Burke and I started up the creek, but could see
nothing of them, and were three days away,
when we returned and remained three days in
our camp with Mr. Wills. We then made a
plant of all the articles we could not carry with
us, leaving 61b. of rice and a quantity of meat,
and then followed up the creek to where there
were some good native huts. We remained at
that place a few days, and finding that our pro-
visions were beginning to run short, Mr. Burke
said that we ought to do something, and that if
we did not find the nardoo, we should starve,
and that he intended to save a little dried meat
and rice to carry us to Mount Hopeless. The
three of us then came to the conclusion that it
would be better to make a second attempt to
reach Mount Hopeless, as we were then as
strong as we were likely to be, our daily allow-
ance being ■ hen reduced, Mr. Burke asked each
of us whether we were willing to make another
attempt to reach the South Australian settle-
ments and we decided on going. We took with
us what remained of the provisions we had
planted—two and a-half pounds of oatmeal, a
small quantity of flour, and the dried meat—this,
with powder and shot, and other small articles,
made up our swags to 301 b. each, and Mr. Burke
carried one billy of water, and I another. We had
not gone far before we came on a flat, where
I saw a plant growing which I took to be clover,
and, on looking closer, saw the seed, and called
out that I had found the nardoo. They were
very glad when I found it. We travelled three
days, and struck a watercourse coming south
from Cooper’s Creek. We traced this, as it
branched out and reformed on the plains, until
we at last lost it in flat country. Sandhills were
in front of us, for which we made, and travelled
all day, but found no water. We were all greatly
fa'gued, as our rations now consisted of only one
small johnny cake and three sticks of dried meat
daily. We camped that evening about four
o’clock, intending to push next day until two
o’clock p.m., and then, should we not find water,
to return. We travelled and found no water,
and the three of us sat down and rested for an
hour, and then turned back. We all felc satisfied
that, had there been a few days’ rain, we could
have got through. We were then, according to
Mr. Wills’s calculation, forty-five miles from the
creek. We travelled on the day we turned back
very late, and the following evening reached the
nearest water at the creek. We gathered some
nardoo, and boiled the seeds, as we were unable


to pound them. The following day we reached
the main creek ; and knowing where there was a
fine water-hole and native gunyahs, we went
there, intending to save what remained of our
flour and dried meat, for the purpose of making
another attempt to reach Mount Hopeless. On
the following day, Mr. Wills and I went out to
gather nardoo, of which we obtained a supply suf-
ficient for three days; and finding a pounding-
stone at the gunyahs, Mr. Burke and I pounded
the seed, which was such slow work that we were
compelled to use half flour and half nardoo. Mr.
Burke and Mr. Wills then went down the creek
for the remainder of the dried meat which we had
planted, and we had now all our things with us,
gathering nardoo, and living the best way we
could. Mr. Burke requested Mr. Wills to go up
the creek as far as the depot, and to place a note
in the plant there, stating that we were then
living on the creek, the former note having
stated that we were on our road to South Aus-
tralia. He also was to bury there the field-books
of the journey to the Gulf. Before starting he got
31b. of flour and 41b. of pounded nardoo, and about
a pound of meat, as he expec ed to be absent
about eight days. During his absence, I gathered
nardoo and pounded it, as Mr. Burke wished to
lay in a supply in case of rain.
A few days after Mr. Wills left, some natives
came down the creek to fish at some water-
holes near our camp. They were very civil to us
at first, and offered us some fish ; on the second
day they came again to fish, and Mr. Burke took
down two bags, which they filled for him ; on the
third day they gave us one bag of fish, and after-
wards all came to our camp. We used to keep
our ammunition and other aiticles in one gun-
yah, and all three of us live together in another.
One of the natives took an oilcloth out of this
gunyah, and Mr. Burke seeing him run away
with it, followed him with his revolver, and fired
over his head, and upon this the native dropped
the oilcloth. While he was away the other blacks
invited me away to a waterhole to eat fish ;
but I declined to do so, as Mr. Burke was away,
and a number of natives were about who would
have taken all our things. When I refused, one
took his boomerang and laid it over my shoulder,
and then told me by signs that if I called out for
Mr. Burke, as I was doing, that he would strike
me. Upon this I got them all in front of the
gunyah and fired a revolver over their heads, but
they did not seem at all afraid, until I got out the
gun, when they all ran away. Mr. Burke,
hearing the report, came back, and we saw no
more of them until late that night, when they
came with some cooked fish, an! called out
‘'white fellow.” Mr. Burke then went out with
his revolver, and found a whole tribe coming
down, all painted, and with fish in small nets
carried by two men. Mr. Burke went to meet
them, and they wished to surround him, but he
knocked as many of the nets of fish out of their
hands as he could, and shouted out to me to fire.
I did so, and they ran off. We collected five
small nets of cooked fish. The reason he would
not accept the fish from them was, that he was
afraid of being too friendly lest they should be
always at our camp. We then lived on fish until
Mr. Wills returned. He told us that he had
met the natives soon after leaving us, and that
they were very kind to him, and had given him
plenty to eat both on going up and returning.
He seemed to consider that he should have
very litcle difficulty in living with them, and as
their camp was close to ours, he returned to
them the same day, and found them very hos-
pitable and friendly, keeping him with them two
days. They then made signs to him to be off.
He came to us and narrated what had happened,
but went back to them the following day, when
they gave him his breakfast, but made signs for
him to go away. He pretended not to understand
them, and would not go, upon which they made
signs that they were going up the creek, and
that he bad better go down. They packed up,
and left the camp, giving Mr. Wills a little nar-
doo to take to us.
During his absence, while Mr. Burke was
cooking some fish, during a strong wind, the
flames caught the gunyah, and burned so rapidly
that we were unable, not only to put it out, but
to save any of our things, excep'ing one revolver
and a gun. Mr. Wills being returned, it was de-
cided to go up the creek and live with the
natives, if possible, as Mr. Wills thought we
should have but little difficulty in obtaining pro-
visions from them if we camped on the opposite
side of the creek to them. He said he knew
where they were gone, so we packed up and
started. Coming to the gunyahs, where we ex-
pected to have found them, we were disappointed,
and seeing a nardoo field close by, halted, in-
tending to make it our camp. For some time
we were employed gathering nardoo, and laying
up a supply. Mr. Wills' and I used to
collect and carry home a bag each day, and
Mr. Burke generally pounded sufficient for our
dinner during our absence, but Mr. Wills found
himself getting very weak, and was shortly un-
able to go out to gather nardoo as before, nor
even strong enough to pound it, so that in a few
days he became almost helpless. I still continued
gathering ; and Mr. Burke now also began to
feel very weak, and said he could be of very
little use in pounding. I bad now to gather and
pound for all three of us. I continued to do this
for a few days, but finding my strength rapidly
failing, my legs being very weak and painful, I
was unable to go out for several days, and we
were compelled to consume six days’ stock which
we had laid by. Mr. Burke now proposed that
I should gather as much as possible in three days,
and that wi h this supply we should go in search
of the natives—a plan which had been urged
upon us by Mr. Wills as the only chance of
saving him and ourselves as well, as he clearly
saw that I was no longer able to collect sufficient
for our wants. Having collected the seed, as
proposed, and having pounded sufficient to last
Mr. Wills for eight days, and two daysfor ourselves,
we placed water and firewood within his reach,
and started. Before leaving him, however, Mr.
Burke asked him whether he still wished it, as
under no other circumstances would he leave
him ; and Mr. Wills again said that he looked on
it as our only chance. He then gave Mr. Burke
a letter and his watch for his father, and we
buried the remainder of the field books near the
gunyah. Mr. Wills said that, in case of my
surviving Mr. Burke, he hoped that I would
carry out his last wishes, in giving the watch
and letter to his father.
In travelling the first day, Mr. Burke seemed


very weak, and complained of great pain in his
legs and back. On the second day he seemed to
be better, and said that he thought he was
getting stronger, but, on starting, did not go two
miles before he said he could go no further. I
persisted in his trying to go on, and managed to
get him along several times, until I saw that he
was almost knocked up, when he said he could
not carry his swag, and threw all he had away.
I also reduced mine, taking nothing but a gun
and some powder and shot, and a small pouch and
some matches. On starting again, we did not go
far before Mr. Burke said we should halt for the
night, but, as the place was close to a large sheet
of water, and exposed to the wind, I prevailed on
him to go a little further, to the next reach of
water, where we camped. We searched about,
and found a few small patches of nardoo, which
I collected and pounded, and, with a crow which
I shot, made a good evening’s meal. Prom the
time we halted Mr. Burke seemed to be getting
worse, alihough he ate his supper. He said he
felt convinced he could not last many hours, and
gave me his watch, which he said belonged
to the committee, and a pocketbook, to give
to Sir William Stawell, and in which he
wrote some notes. He then said to me,
“ I hope you will remain with me here
till I am quite dead—it is a comfort to know
tha- some one is by ; but when I am dying, it is
my wish that you should place the pistol in my
right hand, and that you leave me unburied as
I lie.” That night he spoke very little, and
the following morning I found him speechless, or
nearly so ; and about eight o’clock he expired. I
remained a few hours there, but as I saw
there was no use in remaining longer, I went up
the creek in search of the natives. I felt very
lonely, and at night usually slept in deserted
wurleys, belonging to the natives. Two days
after leaving the spot where Mr. Burke died, I
found some gunyahs, where the natives had
deposited a bag of nardoo, sufficient to last me
a fortnight, and three bundles containing various
articles. I also shot a crow that everinsr, but
was in great dread that the natives would come
and deprive me of the nardoo.
I remained there two days, to recover my
strength, and then returned to Mr. Wills, I took
back three crows ; but found him lying dead in
his gunyah, and ths natives had been there and
'had taken away some of his clothes. I buried
the corpse with sand, and remained there some
days ; but finding that my stock of nardoo
was running short, and being unable to gather it,
I tracked the natives who had been to the camp
by their footprints in the sand, and went some
distance down the creek, shooting crows and
hawks on the road. The natives, hearing the
report of the gun, came to meet me, and
took me with them to their camp, giving me
nardoo and fish. They took the birds I had
shot and cooked them for me, and afterwards
showed me a gunyah, where I was to sleep with
three of the single men. The following morning
they commenced talking to me, and putting one
finger on the ground, and covering it with sand,
at the same lime pointing up the creek, saying,
“ Whitefellow,” which I understood to mean that
one white man was dead. From this I knew that
they were the tribe who had taken Mr. Wills’
clothes. They then asked me where the third
white man was, and I also made the sign of
putting two fingers on the ground and covering
them with sand, at the same time pointing up the
creek. They appeared to feel great compassion
for me when they understood that I was alone on
the creek, and gave me plenty to eat. After being
four days with them, 1 saw that they were be-
coming tired of me, and they made signs that
they were going up the creek, and that I had
better go downwards; but I pretended not to
understand them. The same day they shifted
camp, and 1 followed them; and, on reaching
their camp, I shot some crows, which pleased
them so much that they made me a breakwind in
the centre of their camp, and came and sat round
me until such time as the crows were cooked,
when they assisted me to eat them. The same
day, one of the women, to whom I had given part
of a crow, came and gave me a ball of nardoo,
saying that she would give me more only she
had such a sore arm that she was unable to
pound. She showed me a sore on her arm, and
the thought struck me that I would boil some
wa'er in the billy and wash her arm with a
sponge. During the operation the whole tribe
sat round, and were muttering one to another.
Her husband sat down by her side, and she was
crying all the time. After I had washed it, I
touched it with some nitrate of silver, when she
began to yell and ran off, crying out, “ Mokow !
mokow !” (Fire ! fire !) From this time, she
and her husband used to give me a small quan-
tity of nardoo both night and morning, and
whenever_l he tribe were about going on a fishing
excursion" he used to give me notice to go with
them. They also used to assist me in making a
gourley, or breakwind, whenever they shifted
camp. I generally shot a crow, or a hawk, and
gave it to them in return for these little services.
Every four or five days the tribe would surround
me,and ask whether I intended going up or down
the creek ; at last I made them understand that
if they went up I should go up the creek, and if
they went down I should also go down, and from
this time they seemed to look upon me as one of
themselves, and supplied me with fish and nardoo
regularly. They were very anxious, however, to
know where Mr. Burke lay ; and one day when
we were fishing in the waterholes close by I took
them to the spot. On seeing his remains the
whole party wept bitterly, and covered them with
bushes. After this they were much kinder to me
than before ; and I always told them that the
white men would be here before two moons; and
in the evenings, when they came with nardoo and
fish, they used to talk about the “ whitefellows”
coming, at the same time pointing to the moon.
I also told them they would receive many pre-
sents, and they constantly asked me for toma-
hawks, called by them “ Bomayko.” From this
time to when the relief party arrived—a period of
about a month—they treated me with uniform
kindness, and looked upon me as one of them-
selves. The day on which I was released, one of
the tribe who had been fishing came and told me
that the whitefellows were coming, and the whole
of the tribe who were then in camp sallied out
in every direction to meet the party, while the
man who had brought the news took me acrossthe
creek, where I shortly saw the party coming
down.


BRAHE’S MEMORANDUM.
The following is the memorandum deposited
by Brahe with the provisions, when he left the
depot, at Cooper’s Creek, on the 21st of April. It
was found by Mr. Burke’s party on the evening
of the same day :
Dep6t, Cooper’s Greek, April 21, 1861.
The depot party of V.E.B. leaves this camp
to-day, to return to the Darling. I intend to go
S.E. from camp 60, to get on to our old track near
Bulloo. Two of my companions and myself are
quite well; the third—Patton—has been unable
to walk for the last eighteen days, as his leg has
been severely hurt when thrown by one of the
horses. No person has been up here from the
Darling.
We have six camels and twelve horses, in good
working condition.
William Brahe.
HOWITT’S JOURNAL.
Camp 20, Poria Creek, Sept. 1. Lat. 28deg.
44min., long. 142 deg. 42min,—The country, after
leaving camp 19 (Koorlejur), was generally sandy
ridges, running variously from N.E. round to
N.W. Between these sandy tracts, we passed a
good deal of clayey flat ground—in places hard
and smooth, in others spongy and rotten, and
cracked deeply by the heat, polygonum and cane-
grass growing in great quantities. The feed
everywhere poor and scanty and very dry. 1
believe that very little rain has fallen here this
season. After about ten miles, the sand ridges
became more marked, and of a red colour, and
the flats wide, and draining to the N.E. Scattered
box-trees began to appear, and birds were more
numerous. At five miles more, struck Poria
Creek, a deep channel coming from a northerly
direction, and containing abundance of water ; its
general width appears to be about sixty feet, and
the banks are lined with small box-trees; water
plants and a species of water moss grow in the
bed, and, from fish and cray-fish being found in
it, I have no doubt that it is permanent—in
fact, the only water I can consider such of all
these we have seen on this side the Daubeny
Ranges. At a distance of about half-a mile, the
course of the creek is followed by high red sand
ridges, running parallel to its course. There is
no timber anywhere but on the creek, and only
small bushes, and one or two kinds of pittisporum
and mulgar on the sand ridges. The country is
very inferior, in every respect but water, as we
proceed. Signal fires in two places as we were
travelling; both very large, and no doubt in-
tended to announce our arrival. On some of the
oats I observed quantities of the plant growing,
from the seeds of which the natives make their
bread. It appears to choose a loose blistered
clayey soil, subject to be flooded, such as is gene-
rally found in polygonum ground. The leaves
resemble clover, but with a silvery down, which
is also found on the seed when fresh ; these grow
on short stems springing from the root, and are
flat and rather oval; in places where the plant
has died down, these seeds quite cover the
ground ; they are gathered by the native women,
and, after being cleaned from the sand, are
pounded between two stones and baked as cakes.
Camp 20, Sept. 2.—Spelled here to-day, before
starting across for Cooper’s Creek. Mend mg
pack-bags, dressing camels, baking four days'
bread, &c. Day warm ; wind from S. 8., which
seems to be the prevalent quarter. Flies begin
to be troublesome.
Gamp 21, Sept. 3. Lat 28deg. 33min., long,
142 deg. 31min. —Started at eight o’clock, and left
the expedition track at Po ia Creek. Struck a course
for Cooper’s Creek N.W. by compass. For seven
miles travelled over sand ridges running N E.
and S. W., with wide clayey valley between, in which
were occasional small pools of muddy water. The
feed everywhere very dry, but tolerably plentiful
on the sand hills. Bushes and small mulgar
trees were growing in places. We here crossed a
dry box swamp, where crows, wood swallows,
kites, and small birds were numerous ; and I ob-
served here several trees with a rough bark re-
sembling cork, and with bunches of long,
pointed, dark green leaves growing at the ends
of the small branches. The sand bills here be-
came low and flat, and the valley wider.
Shortly afterwards crossed the track of a large
camel going N.E., apparently about eight months
ago. The conn'ry undulating and well grassed,
and, as far as I could make out, the watershed
both to the N.E. and S.W. At twelve o’clock,
after crossing a dry swamp full of watercourses,
and passing a low sand hill, came on a creek run-
ning S.W., thickly timbered with large box
trees, the bed wide and the banks steep, and in
several places large pools of clear water. Marsh-
mallows and other vegetation, now perfectly dried
up, were on the banks. Native camps were nu-
merous ; but none that I saw were very recent.
Mussel-shells and the claws of crayfish were
lying near them. I have every reason to believe
that some of these pools are permanent. Cross-
ing this we passed several branch creeks running
through a clayey plain, and all lined with trees;
large pools of water in several. I named this
creek after the Hon. David Wilkie, M.D.,
M.L.G. On leaving the clay flats at the creek
we again crossed sand hills and undulating
country for several miles, mostly well grassed,
but much burned up. Saltbush and cottonbush
plentiful in the hollows, and sca'tered timber
beginning to appear. At half-past two came on
a watercourse running N., and containing large
but shallow pools of water. The feed round
about excellent, and enough timber to be called
a thin gum forest. The gums here a new
species not before seen by us, several feet of
the butt having a rough semipersistent bark,
above which it is smooth and greenish, with a
red tint; leaves thick and glossy, very much re-
sembling one growing near Oraeo. Ducks hero
very tame. Camped, having made eighteen
miles, and country not looking so well ahead.
The general fall seems to be to the westward.
Samla, the largest of our camels, lay down just
before reaching the camp ; he is the only one of
the lot that has not improved in condition, and
he keeps himself poor by constantly watching
the other camels, and driving them away from
the females. He only carries 2cwt.
Camp 22, Stokes’ Ranges, Sept. 4, Lat. 28deg.
20min., long. 142dep. 19min.—Left camp at
half past seven. Travelled for three miles through
open gum forest, growing on clayey land. Water
channels frequent, with occasional small pools
of water. Saltbush and grass, but very dry.


'Then crossed an open plain with claypans, the
drainage of which, running westward, forms
numerous small box creeks, which form and
spread out again on the plain. No water here,
only liquid mud. At ahout five miles passed a
small box creek with pools of water, and came
on an open sandy plain destitute of vegeta'ion,
excepting the remains of salsolaceous plants
grown last season. At ten o’clock crossed a
large dry gum creek, full of gravel and boulders,
coming in an easterly direction from the range.
As it lay in our course we followed it up for
some disiance, but found no water, although
crows, rose cockatoos, and crested pigeons were
on it. The country here became stony, but wi h
more dry grass, and gradually rose to the
range; from this point the travelling was very
severe upon the horses, and consequently very
alow, as the ground is everywhere covered wi'h
fragments of sharp flinty stones. The ranges are
of no great height, and slope gently upwards,
but are cut by numerous deep gorges, filled with
blocks of stone and scrub, and mostly containing
a dry gum creek. These lying across our track
made it difficult to get on. The mulgar scrub
was very thick in places, a great deal of it dead,
and numbers of shrubs new to me. Camped
t half-past three at the edge of a deep
scrubby gorge, with plenty of dry grass, but
no water. Went down the gorge after camping,
to look for water, but found none, nor could I
see any chance from the loose gravelly bed and
large .boulders. Scrub very thick ; among other,
the naive orange, of large size, and covered
with unripe fruit. Distance, twenty miles.
Camp 23, north side of Stokes’ Ra.iges, Sept.
5. Lat. 28deg. lOmin., long. 42deg. Bmia.—Had
some difficulty in crossing the gully this morn-
ing, the sides being steep and covered with large
blocks of stone ; thick mulgar, scrub up both
sides. Prom here, travelled over similar stony
ndges to those described yesterday for several
hours, crossing two wide deep gorges, each with
a dry creek and large gums, and flanked by
precipitous stony ranges. On reaching the sum-
mit of the range, found it to be a stony table
land, almost devoid of vegetation. Some re-
markable flat-topped peaks to the N. about
twelve miles. At noon, suddenly came to the
edge of a bluff overlooking the Cooper’s Creek
country ; apparently a boundless extent of plains,
with dark lines of scrub or timber on the horizon.
Tq descend from this bluff to a wide basin of
open country below, probably seven to eight hun-
dred feet, occupied an hour, and I could only
consider it a happy chance that some ot the pack-
horses or camels met with no accident among
the large blocks of loose stone. I could not have
believed that camels could have carried their
loads up or down such places as we have crossed
to-day. On reaching the basin, found it stony
to a degree difficult to describe. The ground
was literally paved with angular and rounded
fragments of sandstone and flint, coated
with a shining oxide of iron. Vegetation
very scanty, and water nowhere visible
although I saw birds which I have seldom
seen far from springs. Travelling for several
miles over this country, surrounded by a chain of
abrupr, square hills, we slowly picked our road
as best we could. Several of the horses were
very footsore, and most of them fagged with the
severe day’s work and want of water. The day,
too, was unusually warm. At 3 30, found it
necessary to camp, the camels and horses being
very tired. No water, scarcely any feed.
After camp went to a square steep hill, with
Mr. Brahe, to reconnoitre the country. Prom it
had an extensive view towards Cooper’s Greek,
and was pleased to see that the stony country
does not probably extend more than four miles
from us. Beyond that open plains, and on the
horizon what seem to be sand hills and timber.
A large body of smoke to the west I found the
summit of the hill to be covered with large masses
of a white crystalline stone, grouped iu irregular
columns, and ringing with a metallic sound when
struck. It is the same stone as that universally
strewn over the country, and of which and a
coarse sandstone and conglomerate the ranges
are mos ly formed. Managed to give the horses
two quarts of water each, in the hope that they
would feed. They were so thirsty that two tried
to take the quart pots off the fire.
Camp 24. Sept. 6. Lat. 28deg. ; long. 142 deg.
2min.— Left camp shortly after six. The horses
had not fed during the night, partly from thirst,
partly being afraid of the stones. Followed
down a gully leading into very sti ny plains, which
we crossed for several hours, being obliged to
lead the horses very slowly. No timber and
scarcely any vegetation : the most desolate stony
wilderness imaginable. About ten o’clock came
near the sandhills, and the country improved as
regarded travelling, but not for feed or water.
On a dry wateicourse came on a party of natives,
of whom some ran away ; the others, consisting
of an old grey-haired man, an old hag of a
woman, a younger man, and two or three lubras
and children, waited until I rode up. They were
in a very excited state, waving branches, and
jabbering incessantly. The younger man shook
all over with fright. Sandy could not understand
them, and I could only catch “ Gow” (Go on).
At last, by the offer of a knife, I prevailed on
the old man to come with us to show us the
nearest water, but after half a mile his courage
gave way, and he climbed up a box-tree to be out
of reach. Mr. Brahe rode up to him, when he
climbed into the top branches, jabbering wi hout
stopping for a moment. Finding that he would
not comedown, and kept pointing to the N.W.
(our course), we left him. All the natives were
naked, and the old man was the only one
who had any covering for his head—a net.
We here entered undulating sandy country,
slightly scrubby and well grassed, and at the
same time came on Brahe’s down track. Our
horses at once struck into a better pace, going at
least three mileff and a half an hour. The camels
also pushed on well. The loose horses kept wide
of the track, looking out for water in the
polygonum ground, and at ten minutes past
twelve, one old stager found an ample supply in a
channel on the right hand. The horses at once
made a rush, and it was almost impossible to
prevent their drinking as much as they wished.
Three had for the last hour shown unmistakable
signs of giving in, and all were very much pinched
with thirst. Camped by the water in first-rate
feed. Rain came on steadily from N. E. shortly
after, and has continued. The horses have just
been a third time to water.
Camp 24, Sept. 7.—lt rained very heavily


****** nijfbt, with strong gusts of wind from
,N.E t> and this morning the flats and the claypans
are swimming with water, and the ground very
soft. Resting to-day, as the horses require it.
Drying things, shoeing horses, and digging tank
to try and hold water later in the season.
Camp 25, Cooper’s Creek, Sept. 8. Lat. 27deg.
51mm. ; long. 141 deg. 45tnin.—(Half a mile
above camp sixty of Victorian Expedition.)—Tra-
velled N. 60 deg. W., through a succession of sand
hills, with flats of rotten polygonum ground
between. The vegetation very green and in full
flower, and box-trees growing on most of the flats.
Towards noon, after crossing some high red sand
hills, came into the earthy plains through which
the various channels of Cooper’s Creek run to
the westward. The ground very rot en, and
cracked by numerous deep fissures ; dry channels
in every direction. About six miles brought us
to a patch of sand hills, where the bare loose
summits were crested with a pink flowering mesem-
hrysanthemum; the pink flowers, with the orange-
coloured sand and the bright green vegetation,
produced a very singular effect. We here sud-
denly came upon a native camp of four wurleys.
Only one black fellow was at home, and the three
leading men of our procession came suddenly
upon him as he was lying on the ground playing
with his dog. He_ gave a succession of yells, and
then ran off as if electrified. Here we crossed
the first branch of Cooper's Creek, a wide shallow
bed, full of green weeds and grass, and lined
with box. From this we crossed about three
miles of loose earthy plains, devoid of vegetation,
and camped on the N. side of a large branch,
nea.r a shallow sheet of water. No feed on the
plains, but grass and green weeds in the channel.
Large box trees on the bank. Distance travelled,
twenty-four miles.
m p 26. Sept. 9. _ Lat. 27deg. 49min. ; long.
141 deg. ohmin,—While loading up this morning,
five blackfellows made their appearance on the
opposite side of the creek, and, as usual, com-
menced shouting and waving their arms. We
cooed in return, and one waded across, but
waited on the bank until I broke a branch, and
beckoned him to come up. The others then fol-
lowed him. They were all fine well-built young
men, with open intelligent faces, and very
different from the natives usually met wi : b.
They wore nets wrapped round their waists ; and
one, apparently the head man, had his front teeth
knocked out. Sandy said hs could only under-
stand “narrangy word” they said ; but I believe
that he could not understand them at all, as he
was quite unable to make them comprehend that
I wished to know if they had seen any stray
camels about the creek. Before we had finished
loading, they returned to the opposite hank, and
sat down watching ns. On our starting they
waded across to our camp—probably to pick up
anything left behind, which would be very little.
To-day we travelled over earthy plains for thirteen
miles ; they were cracked in every direction, and
covered with a network of channels. In times of
flood, the whole of them must be under water,
and I can scarcely imagine anything more
luxuriant than the appearance of these plains
after a wet season. At present everything is dry
and withered, hut everywhere the stalks of marsh
mallows and other flowering plants are as high as
a horse’s back, and very close together. Tufts of
grass line each side and cover the bed of the waier*
courses. Here and there clumps and lines of tim-
ber mark the course of the larger creeks, and
sandhills rise like islands from the plains. To
the S. of W., at about nine miles, we had a range
—probably stony—and followingitsbase a strongly
marked line of timber, which I believe to be the
main creek. No flood appears to have come down
for two seasons, and waterholes which were
tolerably well filled five months ago are now dry,
or nearly so. At thirteen miles crossed a branch,
where Mr. Burke’s marked tree, LXI , stands, and
camped at a claypan under a sandhill, a
mile to the W. Sirong breeze from the N.E. and
N. all day, and steady rain at night. Near here,
I observed for the first time a new tree, with a
rongh scaly bark and thick foliage, the leaves
small and oval, and set in pairs on astern. The
tree grows to fifteen or twenty feet, and bears
numbers of flat brown pods, each containing from
four to six hard light brown beans, known by us
as the bean tree.
Camp 27, Sept. 10. Lat. 27deg. 39min. ; long.
141 deg. 30min.—The rain ceased shortly be-
fore sunrise, and the travelling was in conse-
quence very heavy, the earthy plains being not
only soft, as before, but sticky. Shortly after
leaving camp saw several natives on a sand hill
making signs. I went up to them with Mr.
Welsh, and after a great deal of trouble, persuaded
one to come to me He was a fine-looking fellow,
painted white, skeleton fashion, and carried &
very long boomerang stuck in his girdle behind.
I could make nothing of him, excep’ing that ho
gave me a small ball of what seemed to be
chewed grass, as a token of friendship, and in
return I gave him a piece of cold doughboy I bad
with me for lunch, which he seemed to relish
very much. We travelled till noon over a suc-
cession of earthy plains, broken by numerous
box channels, one of which contained a large
reach of water; but the feed everywhere was
miserably dry and scarce. The country looks
wretched. After passing this channel, seven
natives made their appearance, one of whom Mr.
Brahe recognized as one of the party who tried
to surprise the depot last season. They pre-
sented him with a small quantity of some dried
plant, from a bundle which one of them carried ;
it had a strong pungent taste and smell, and I am
at a loss to conjecture its use, unless as a kind of
tobacco. Our black boy was frightened, and
told me he thought they meant to “ look out, kill
him”—as I understood—by witchcraft, or en-
chantment, or poison. They followed us at a
distance to our camp, where they sat down a little
way off, making signs that they were hungry,
and wanted tomahawks. After an hour’s waiting,
they decamped. Killed two deaf adders and a
snake of a sulphur colour on the track. Halted
near a small pool of water, where there was a
little green feed, which has become a rarity. The
country looks miserable ahead. Travelling very
heavy on the horses, as the mud balls in great
lumps. Stony ridges to the S. of the creek, at about
four miles, and a good deal of timber visible on ail
sides. Weather still threatening rain ; flies very
troublesome.
Camp, 28, Sept. 11. Lat., 27deg. 35tnin. ;
long., 141 deg. 19min. —Our horses strayed for
feed during the night, and made it late before we
started. Travelled through a box forest full


ft? channels, when we came to a dry creek
coming from the N.E., with a rocky bed.
Prom here, for some distance, stony ground
to the right hand, and deep channels running
parallel to each other in a westerly direc-
tion, I observed flood marks considerably higher
than our heads on horseback, and the water must
be much confined by the stony rises on each side
of the creek, although they are probably two
miles apart. Mint was growing on the edges of
the channels, and tea tree of large size. We
then came on a long reach of water, about sixty
yards wide ; the country miserable, not a vestige
of feed to be seen anywhere, except the withered
and blackened remain sof plants on the plains,
and occasional patches of green couch grass in
the creek bed. After this we traversed a box
forest, and came on a deep channel from the
N.E., where Mr. Burke’s first dep6t was situated.
The feed was slightly better, owing to the sandy
nature of the ground. About noon, passed large
reaches of brackish water, and numerous pools
of brine, in the channels of the creek, but saw
no feed anywhere. At length found one place
where patches of couch grass, with green plants
and tufts of coarse grass, were growing among
the stones, and halted, as the clay plains before
us were perfectly bare. It is long since I have
seen such a barren, miserable place as this part
of Cooper’s Creek. Na ive camps were numerous,
but all deserted. During the day, flights of
cockatoo parrots passed us, migrating to the
eastward. Where we are camped the creek is
wide, with a stony bed; the south bank is formed
of limestone, and large quantities of opalized
wood are lying about. A short distance above,
the rocky banks come close down to the creek.
Gamp 29, Sept. 12. Lat. 27deg. 35min.;
long. 141 deg. 6min.—Travelled over clayey
plains, wi;h scattered timber and a good deal of
withered herbage. A rugged range, apparently
sandstone, with fla’-topped hills and peaks to
the N., running N.E. and S.W., at about nine
miles distance. At four miles passed a wide
deep reach of water, several miles in length, be-
tween steep banks, and probably brackish, from
its colour. Numbers of pelicans, spoonbills,
cormorants, and other water-fowl on it. On
each side bare cracked plains, extending to the
stony rises. At three miles more, the stony
country on our right hand closed in numerous
deep channels, forming the creek, some of which
were rocky, some sandy. Here, as elsewhere,
was green grass and plants growing on the sand.
Rather thickly timbered. At noon, came to
where the creek forces a passage between rocky
ridges ; the channels are deep and tortuous, and
in places encumbered with large blocks of stone.
I here saw red gums for the first time on the
creek. This continued for four miles, with
narrow ridges of hard clay, covered with dense
polygonum, separating the watercourses, when
we came on more open country, with detached
sandhills, and better feed, though very dry.
Large reaches of water; rocky banks of sand-
stone in places ; bars of rock cross the
creek. Camped near some sandhills, at a large
waterhole. After camping, tried fishing, and good
success, only that I lost two books, which I can
ill spare. Caught five silver perch, weighing
from to 31b., and several others were caught
by the party by firelight. The fish excellent.
and of a fine flavour. Distance, seventeen
miles.
Gamp 30, Sept. 13. Lat. 27deg. 38min.; long,
141 deg. —Made a short stage to-day, for the sake
of feed for the horses, which is a thing to be
considered, from the dry appearance of the
country. Reached the dep6t, Fort Wills, in
three miles, through country rather better than
wo have seen for some days. More rain has
fallen here lately than elsewhere, and the grass
is just springing, but too short So be of much use.
I believe this to be the first rain for many months.
The water all down the creek as far as we have
come, has fallen at the rate of about three feet
in the last four months. Found the depfit as Mr.
Brahe left it, the plant untouched, and nothing
removed of the useless things lying about, but a
piece of leather. But from the very evident fact
that things are buried, I cannot understand why
the natives have not found them. From here
followed down the creek for several miles, and
camped at some sandhills near a pool of water.
Saw here the track of a large camel going up the
creek. The small crested pigeon, spoken of by
Sturt, numerous. Cool wind from S. B.
Camp 31, Sep. 14. Lat,, 27deg. 42min.; ong
140 deg. 4ruin. —We had a late start this morn-
ing, as three of the horses were away, and one
ill—indeed, I doubted at first whether he would
be able to travel. Followed the course of the
creek down for about nine miles, crossing several
branches which go out south, and form a reach of
water before re-entering the main creek. Here
the rocky ridges on bo h sides close in, and the
water has forced a narrow deep channel through
a perfect wall of rock, forming below the finest
reach of water we have yet seen—about 500 yards
wide, and several miles long, and very deep.
The rugged hills on the north side, and the fine
gums on its banks, produce a fine effect. The
rock through which the channel has been worn is
of a hard flin'y nature, inclined to be columner,
but forming huge masses of boulders. Deep
round hollows have been worn in these by the
floods, and at the water’s edge in one place
where I tried the depth, the rock is per-
pendicular below the surface. Waterfowl, fish,
and turtle are plentiful. The immediate
neighbourhood, and as far as one can see
on each side is destitute of vegetation and
very stony. We had some trouble in getting the
horses and camels over the masses of rough
stone which block up bo h sides of the creek.
Leaving this, we struck across a large bend, over
sandy country, with large red sand hummocks,
and better grassed than any we had yet seen on
the creek. More rain must have fallen here, as
pools of water were visible in many places.
About three o’clock struck the creek again, with
a wide sandy bed, heavily timbered with box and
gum, and scrubby. The creek, I think, had
been running slightly, from the water-marks, and
a good deal of green grass was growing on the
banks. Camped on a large waterhole, about a
quarter of a mile below Mr. Burke’s first camp
after leaving the depot. We could see where the
camels had been tied up, but found no marked
tree. To-day I noticed in two or three places old
camel droppings and tracks, where Mr. Brahe in-
form ecTme he was certain their camels had never
been, as they were watched every day near the
depot, and tied up at night. Mr. Burke’s camels


were led on the way down. It looked very much
as if stray camels had been about during the last
four months. The tracks seemed to me to he
going up the creek, bu the ground was too stony
to be able to make sure.
Camp 32, Sept. 15. Lat. 27deg. 44min., long.
140 deg. 40min.—On leaving this morning I went
ahead with Sandy, to try and pick up Mr. Burke’s
track. At the lower end of a large waterhole,
found where one or two horses had been feeding
for some months ; the tracks ran in all directions
to and from the water, and were as recent as a
week. At the same place I found the handle of
a clasp-knife. Prom here struck out south for a
short distance from the creek, and found a dis-
tinct camel’s track and droppings on a native
path ; the footprint was about four months old,
and going E. I then sent the black boy to follow
the creek, and struck across some sandy country
in a bend on the north side. No tracks here ; and
coming on a native path leading my way, I fol-
lowed it, as the most likely place to see any signs.
In about four miles this led me to the lower end
of a very large reach of water, and on the oppo-
site side were numbers of native wurleys. I
crossed at a neck of sand, and at a little distance
again came on the track of a camel going up the
creek ; at the same time I found a native, who
began to gesticulate in a very excited manner,
and to point down the creek, bawling out, “ Gow,
gow !” as loud as he could ; when I went towards
him he ran away, and, finding it impossible to get
him to come to me, I turned back to follow the
camel track and to look after my party, as I had
not seen anything of them for some miles. The
track was visible in sandy places, and was evi-
dently the same I had seen for the last two days.
I also found horse tracks in places, but very old.
Crossing the creek, I cut our track, and rode
after the party. In doing so I came upon three
pounds of tobacco, which had lain where I saw
it for some time. This, together with the knife-
handle, the fresh horse 'racks, and the camel
track going eastward, puzzled me extremely, and
led me into a hundred conjectures. At the lower
end of the large reach of water before mentioned
I met Sandy and Prank looking for me, with the
intelligence that King, the only survivor of Mr.
Burke’s party, had been found. A little further
on I found the party halted, and immediately
went across to the blacks’ wurleys, where I found
King sitting in a hut which the natives had made
for him. He presented a melancholy appearance
—wasted to a shadow, and hardly to be distin-
guished as a civilised being but by the remnants
of clothes upon him. He seemed exceedingly
weak, ard found it occasionally difficult to fol-
low what he said. The natives were all gathered
round, seated on the ground, looking with a
most gratified and delighted expression. Camped
where the party had halted on a high bank, close
to the water. I shall probably be here ten days,
to recruit King before returning.
Camp 32, Sept. 16.—King already look
vastly improved, even since yesterday, and not
like the same man. Have commenced shoeing
horses and preparing for our return. Wind from
S.W., with signs of rain. The natives seem to
be setting ready for it.
Camp 32, Sept. 18. Left camp thi| morning
with Messrs. Brahe, Welsh, Wheeler, and King,
to perform a melancholy duty which has weighed
on my mind ever since we have camped here, and
which I have only put off until King should be
well enough to accompany us. We proceeded
down the creek for seven miles, crossing a branch
running to the sou’hward, and followed a native
track leading to that part of the creek where
Mr. Burke, Mr. Wills, and King camped after
their unsuccessful attempt to reach Mount Hope-
less and the nothern settlement of South Aus-
tralia, and where poor Wills died. We found the
two eunyahs pretty much as King had described
them, situated on a sandbank between two water-
holes, and about a mile from the flat where they
procured the nardoo seed, on which they managed
to exist so long. Poor Wills’s remains we found
lying in the wurley in which he died, and where
King, af >er his return from seeking for the natives,
had buried him with sand and rushes. We care-
fully collected the remains and interred them
where they lay ; and, not having a prayer-book, I
read chap. v. of 1 Cor., that we might at least feel
a melancholy satisfaction in having shown the last
respect to his remains. We heaped sand over the
grave, and laid branches upon it, that the natives
might understand by their own tokens not to dis-
turb the last repose of a fellow being. I cut the
following inscription on a tree close by, to mark
the spot:—
W. J. WILLS,
XLV. Yds.
W.N W.
The field books, a note-book belonging to Mr.
Burke, various small articles lying about, of no
value in themselves, but now invested with a deep
interest from the circumstances connected with
them, and some of the narnoo seed on which
they had subsisted, with the small wooden trough
in which it had been cleaned, I have now in my
possession. We returned home with saddened
feelings; but I must confess that I felt a sense of
relief that this painful ordeal had been gone
through. King was very tired when we returned?;
and I must, most unwillingly, defer my visit to the
spot where Mr. Burke's remains are lying until
he is better able to bear the fatigue.
Sept. 19.—Shoeing horses. A very slow and
troublesome job, as many have never been shod
before, and our forge is of the most primitive
description. This afternoon got the pigeons in
order of flying. Their tails being rubbed down
by travelling so far in a cage, I got the tails
from several crested pigeons, and inserted feathers
in the stumps of our carriers, fastening the
splices with waxed thread ; the plan answered
far better than I bad expected, and the birds
can now fly about the aviary we have made of a
tent with the greatest ease.
Sept. 20.—Started the pigeons at daybreak,
each with a message fastened to its legs. On
throwing them up they commenced wheeling
round the camp, but separated, one being chased
by one of the large kites which are always hover-
ing about the creek. After flying round in
various directions with great speed they gra-
dually drew across the creek, when we lost sight of
three; the fourth, after making a large circle,
pitched in a tree about half a mile off. After
breakfast he was found under a bush, with a kite
watching him ; and the feathers of one of the


Other pigeons was found not far off. having been
killed. Of the two flthers nothing has been
seen, and 1 hope that they got clear away, but I
am much afraid that the experiment has proved
a failure ; however, I should have thought more
of it if the pigeons had made a more decided
start. Last night the wind changed from NE.
to S.W., and brought up a slight shower. This
morning S. W., with heavy clouos, threatening
rain. King improving slowly, but very weak.
Turned out 'he white pigeon again this after-
noon ; he flew into a gum s'anding in 'he camp,
and has taken up his quarters there—not a proper
proceeding for a carrier-pigeon, according to my
ideas.
Sep k . 21.—Finding that it would not be prudent
for King to go out for two or three days, I could
no longer defer making a search for the spot
where Vlr. Burke died, and with such directions
as King could give, I went up the creek this
morning with Messrs. Brahe, Welsh, Wheeler,
and Aitkin. We searched the creek upwards for
eight miles, and at length, strange to say, found
the remains of Mr, Burke lying among tall
plants under a clump of box-trees, wi bin 200
yards of our last camp, and not thirty pace* from
our 'rack. It was still more extraordinary that
three or four of the party and the two black boys
had been close to the spot without noticing it.
The bones were entire, wi h the exception of the
hands and feet; and the body had been removed
from the spot where it first lay, and where the
natives had placed branches over it, to about five
paces distance. I found the revolver which Mr.
Burke held in his hand when he expired par ly
covered with leaves and earth, and corroded with
rust. It was loaded and capped. We dug a
grave close to the spot, and interred the remains
wrapped in the union jack—the most fitting
covering in which the bones of a brave but un-
fortunate man could take their last rest. On a
box-tree, at the head of the grave, the following
inscription is cut:—
II O’H B.
21 I 9 | 61.
A. H.
Sept. 22. —The pigeon s ill keeps its quarters
at 'he camp, and comes down to feed now and
then. I have removed the message, and shall
leave it to its fate. It has been trying hard to
rain for two or three days, but does not seem
able; great clouds drift over, looking ready to
burst, but only squeeze ou two or three drops,
and then pass over. I expect fully that it will
clear up wi'hout rain; another dry season will
make Cooper’s Creek look fearfully miserable.
When the hot weather comes on the water holes
will many of them be dry, unless filled by rain
or a flood. I have written down King’s narra-
tive as much as possible in his own words.
Shall annex it to this diary. Finished shoeing
the horses.
Sept. 23. —Went down the creek to-day, in
search of the natives. One of the party accom-
panied me, and we took two days’ rations, in case
it should be necessary to prolong our search. Two
days afrer we camped here the naives left, and
have not been seen since ; and I could not think
of leaving without showing them that we could
appreciate and reward the kindness they had
shown to Burke’s party, and particularly to King.
For three miles we travelled over alluvial flats
along the creek, timbered with box and large
gums, and dotted with bean-trees, orange-trees
of large size but at present without fruit, various
kinds of acacias, and other bushes. To the right
band level flats and sand ridges, apparently toler-
ably grassed. We then came on a large reach of
water, where four or five natives had just been
fishing ; their nets were lying on the sand to dry,
and the fire yet burning. Not seeing any one
about, and getting no answer to a cooey, we went
on. At three miles more we passed the first
feeder of Straleaki’s Creek, going to the south-
ward, and at a large reach of water below found
the natives camped. They made a great commo-
tion when we rode up, but seemed very friendly,
I unpai ked my blanket and took out specimens
of the things I intended giving them—a toma-
hawk, a knife, beads, a looking-glass, comb, and
flour and sugar. The tomahawk was the great
object of attrac ion, after that the knife, but I
think that the looking-glass surprised them most.
On seeing their faces some seemed dazzled, others
opened their eyes like saucers, and made a
rattling noise with their tongues expressive of
surprise. We had quite a friendly palaver, and
my watch amused them immensely. When I
gave them some of the sugar to taste, it was ab-
surd to see the sleight of hand with which they
pretended to eat it, I suppose from a fear of being
poisoned, which I suppose is general, as our black
boys are continually in dread lest the “wild black-
fellows” should poison them by some means. I
made them understand that they were to bring
the whole tribe up next morning to our camp to
receive their presents, and we parted the best of
friends. The names of the principal men are
Tchukulow, Mungallee (three in number), To-
quunter, Pitchery (three in number, one a funny
little man, with his head in a net and a kite’s
feather in it—another a tall man, with his beard
tied in a point), Pruriekow, and Borokow.
Sept. 24 —This morning, about ten o’clock,
our black friends appeared in a long procession,
men, women, and children, or, as thev here also
call them, piccaninnies ; and at a mile distance
they commenced bawling at the top of their
voices as usual. When collected altogether on a
little flat, just below our camp, they must have
numbered between thirty and forty, and the
uproar was deafening. With the aid of King, I
at last got them all seated before me, and distri-
buted the presents— tomahawks, knives,necklaces,
looking-glasses, combs, among them. I think no
people were ever so happy before, and it was very
interesting to see how they pointed out one or
another who they thought might be overlooked.
The picaninnies were brought forward by their
parents, to have red ribbon tied round their dirty
little heads. One old woman, Carrawaw, who
had been particularly kind to King, was loaded
with things. I then divided 501 b of sugar be-
tween them, each one taking his share in a
Union Jack pocket handkerchief, which they were
very proud of. The sugar soon found its way into
their mouths ; the flour, 501 b. of which I gave
'hem, they at once called “ white-fellow nardoo,”
and they explained that they understood that
these things were given to them for having fed
King. Some old clothes were then put on some


of the men and women, and the affair ended in
several of our party and several of the black-
fellows having an impromptu *• corroboree,” to
the intense delight of ihe natives, and, I must
say, very much to our own amusement. They
left, making signs expressive of friendship, carry-
ing their presents with them. The men all wore
a net girdle, and of the women, some wore one of
leaves, others of feathers. I feel confident that
we have left the best impression behind us, and
that the “ white-fellows,” as they have already
learned to call us, will be looked on henceforth
as friends, and that, in case of emergency,
any one will receive the kindest treatment at
their hands.
Sept. 25. —At camp 31. This morning I
turned my face homewards. The object of
our mission being fulfilled, I bad to do so,
but I re 1 urn with a great regret at not
being able to go on. We take back five months’
rations from this date, at the scale we have been
using, and which has proved sufficient. The party
are in the best of health, the horses in fine
order, and the camels none the worse for their
journey, and decidedly in better health than
when they left the Darling. On the edge of a
country so well worth exploring, in a tolerably
good season, and with the means I now have at
my disposal, I feel how much might be done.
We camped to-day at our last camp but one
coming down the creek, making an easy stage for
King. Got in by noon, as the horses were very
fresh after their spell. The camels gave us a
good deal of trouble this afternoon, and from a
cause which may and probably will eons’antly
occur. One of the male camels has taken to
driving the females about, and fighting with the
other male, Sami, who up to this time had been
master. To-day the other camel was furious, and
in spite of being short hobbled, and having his
head tied down to his knee, chased the whole of
the camels from the camp, ten minutes after
they were let loose, and although Brahe went
immediately after them, and was for three hours
on their tracks, he was unable to overtake them.
Coming back for a horse, he took Sandy with
him, and cut across to where he had left the
racks, running N. over some very rough stony
country. It was dark before they returned,
having found the camels some miles away. From
this and similar occurrences, I find it very un-
wise to take male and female camels on a
journey toge her. One is never safe for a day
from their straying, and from continual fights be-
tween the male camels for mastery. The result
is, that the camels are continually harassed, and
watch each other instead of feeding. With
either all male or all female camels there would
be less, or certainly not more, trouble than with
horses; and, with this drawback, I firmly be-
lieve in the suitability of camels for exploring.
Sept. 26—Made ten miles, and camped where
the creek forces a passage through the rocks.
Sept. 27. —Obliged to stay where we are, as one
of the mares foaled during the night. Knocked
the foal on the head. Blowing hot wind.
Sept. 28. —Camped at the fish-pond, having
made only fifteen miles. King very tired ; can-
not ride on a camel, as he thought, and had to
give him a horse to try if it would be easier
for him. Dug up the things planted by Mr.
Burke and Mr. Wills, and found the field-books
and papers all safe. All hands fishing this even-
ing, and a large number of fish caught, varying
from a quarter of a pound to three pounds and
a-quarter. Blowing a strong hot wind from N.
and N. 8.; will dry up the surface water very
fast.
Sept. 29.—The doctor does not consider that
King should travel to-day, so shall remain here.
Gould not have a much better place on the creek
plenty of feed and abundance of fish. A dozen
caught this morning weighed nearly twenty
pounds. Two of the par y caught seventy-two
dounds weight from three o’clock to sundown.
They are most excellent eating. Ido not know
any fish of as fine a flavour. Strong gale
from N. and N.E., and very hot. If this
goes on without rain we shall have some
pushing to do before reaching Kolialto; and,
without rain has fallen, I do not think we can
depend with certainty on any water from Poria
to Nunderungee Creek—about 180 miles.
Sept. 30.—Camped at our 28th camp. Surface
water nearly all gone, and no feed. Found a
small pool at the mouth of a gully, but_ all the
other water in the creek was as salt as brine. Hot
wind again.
Oct. 1. - Halted above our 27th camp, at a
number of waterholes, where there was pretty
good feed Passed our black friends on the road,
who invited us to stop and eat fish and nardoo, and
have a corroboree. Strong hot wind from N.W.
round to N.E —the fifth day now ; and it seems
to have blown away every sign of clouds. The
sky looks hard and blue, with a grey haze on the
horizon, and the vegetation is withering fast.
Where we camped happened to be not more
than a couple of hundred yards from a large
native camp, situated in a branch channel, and
completely hidden by dense timber and scrub.
When we arrived, all the men excepting three old
fellows were away, and only the lubras and
picaninmes were at home, in a terrible fright at so
many white-fellows squatting down close to them.
They began to pack up their things for a flight;
but an amicable understanding being brought
about, and some of the men returning, we were
soon the bes r of friends. I distributed the few
remaining presents, and they gave in return
some chewed pitchery and nardoo balls. One
old greybeard had been as far as Wonominta
Creek, and could repeat 'he names of the various
waters between here and that place, vid Bulla ;
but I found him impenetrable on any other road.
There were about twenty men, all well made and
well fed, and several were old pa’riarchs, and
some of them apparently old rascals, too. They
were far more inclined to be troublesome and
importunate than our friends lower down—parti-
cularly one tall young fellow, rubbed all over with
redearth, whopestered me for a tomahawk. One
of them had had his arm broken above the wrist,
and roughly bandaged up with rags and grass
cord ; the doctor set it properly, and it was re-
markable to see the perfect composure with
which the blackfellow bore the operation. Ip
assisting I had to use my clasp knife to cut bark-
splints, and laying it down beside me it of course
vanished, and I saw no more of it; but strange
to say, in the same place shortly afterwards one
of the knives was found which I bad given the
blackfellows, which, I suppose, they had ex-
changed for mine, on the principle of the old


saying, that "exchange is no robbery.” After a
while the natives began to draw in too close to
our camp, talking a good deal about our " portos,”
or bundles, so that we had to draw a line as a
boundary, a hint they took at once, and all
squat' ed down beyond it. At dusk I fired off two
rockets, to their unbounded surprise, but they
were not so alarmed as I expected, probably from
feeling that we were kindly disposed towards
them. I believe that the sight of us smoking,
and seeing the smoke coming out of our mouths,
alarmed them much more, as some made signs to
put the pipe away, and others got up and walked
off, looking behind them. At dark they retired
to their camp.
Oct. 2.—This morning the natives came up and
commenced a brisk trade in nets, grass string
girdles, boomerangs, and other things, for old
clothes, rags, and such like valuable property. For
part of an old blanket I obtained two boomerangs,
a large staff used in digging roots, one of the long
pointed sticks used in fishing, a stone tomahawk
cemented into a boxwood handle, and the head of
a larger one, about the size and shape of an
American axe, which the proprietor, a tall old
warrior with one very sinister eye, scraped up
from the sand by his hut. The smaller tomahawk
he dropped twice between his camp and ours, and
pretended he had never had it, until I made him
understand that I was not going to be done, when
he burst out laughing, and sent his lubraback for
it. The whole mob sat down by our camp, and
observed us packing up with great interest, but
were terribly frightened at the horses, far more
so than at the camels. They accompanied us for
half a mile on our road, and then waited locking
after us for a while. Camped at some sand-hills
near our 26th camp, the only water near being
a pool of liquid mud, from which we obtained a
small supply of water by draining the surface.
In going up this was a fine channel. Day rather
hot, but the wind from the S., and a great im-
provement on the last five of hot winds.
Oct. 3.—This morning the clouds began to
bank up from the south, drawing northward, with
every sign of a thunderstorm. During the
time we were travelling, before reaching our
camp, the clouds continued to gather in masses,
threa ening rain, but dispersed as they passed
over towards an arch of blue sky to the north.
The country much greener since we came down,
owing to the two righ s’rain we had. Camped
at the remains of what had been a large sheet of
water in one of the branches of the creek. It has
now a veiy unpleasant taste of soda, and pro-
duces thirst rether than quenches it. Sent
Phillips away sifter dinner on one of the spare
horses, to run our track as far as possible before
night among the sand-hills, to see if there was
any water in the polygonum fla s. The clouds
still gathering, and thunder and heavy rain to
the north-west and south-east. We lit a fire at
dark on the edge of the plain, but had great dif-
ficulty in keeping it up, as the natives had burned
all the dead wood near the water; by means of
this, and rockets fired occasionally, Phillips
returned about nine o’clock, having been ten
miles on the track. He reported the water to be
almost all dried up, and had only seen two small
pools of mud. The night very dark, with thunder
and lightning, but no rain.
Oct. 4.—Started late this morning, as I wished
all thehorsesto drink well before leaving the creek,
and also as I bad to send the camels two miles to
fill the water-bags, this pool being scarcely drink-
able. I went on ahead of thepaity to search for
water, but did not leave the track for the ten
miles Phillips had been over. The sand-hills are
looking splendid, the two nights’ rain having
covered them with grass and herbage, and even the
earthy flats between the ridges show some signs of
vegetation. About three o’clock I came on four
native children sleeping under the shade of a box-
tree, and covered with nets. One waking sud-
denly, s 1 anted up in a terrible fright at such an
unusual sight, and ran off screaming into the
polygonum, where I saw its mother peeping at
me through a bush. When I called out to her to
come she did so, but kept at a very respectful
distance. 1 asked her for water, and to re-assure
her gave her an old handkerchief. She got her
children gathered round her, two on her back and
one carrying a fourth, all of them screaming
loudly, and having pointed out a little pool of
mud, moved off to a sand-hill, where she com-
menced bawling to some of the natives, who
seemed to be about half a mile off. I went off to
hunt over the flat for water, and shortly heard
shouts of " Gew, gew,” behind me, from three
natives, who came running up in an exci f ed state,
each with a boomerang or a waddy. We soon,
however, came to a friendly understanding by
means of the few words I knew, and the promise
of a knife decided them to show me the water.
One of them, a jolly-looking young fellow, minus
his front teeth, took the lead ; the other two, both
of them dressed in red paint and ahead net, keeping
a little on one side. We kept up a sort of conversa-
tion, and in half an hour came to their camp, a large
hut on a sand-hill, with a small pool of water near,
among the clay-pans. I was very much amused
at the ceremonious way in which my guide led the
way, poiming out the best road, and very
earnestly making me notice the bushes in my way,
as if I were in danger of falling over them. They
gave me as usual a ball of chewed pitchery, and
seemed very much surprised that neither I nor
my horses cared about drinking. I found it quite
impossible to make them understand that the
waterhole was too small. My guide having re-
ceived his knife, was now very anxious to have
my shirt, which, of course, I objected ro; and,
as I could learn nothing more, I gave them a few
matches and rode on my way. My four black
friends, however, either out of politeness, or in
the hopes of getting my shirt, followed me, and
kept so close behind the tail of my horse, each
with a waddy in his hand, that I 'bought it best to
send them back to their camp, whither i hey went,
after some yabbering among themselves. About
three miles further on I found eight small chan-
nels of water in a polygonum fla% containing suffi-
cient water for ourselves and our horses for two
days. Camped here, when the party came up, in
splendid feed.
Oct. 5. —Camped to-day at the tank, which,
with the channel by it, is brimful of water.
The country looks beautiful, the sandhills are
covered with flowers and bushes in full bloom,
and swarm with birds of all kinds. It has every
appearance of being spring here. Passed several
fine channels of water by 'he track Natives in
various places scat'ered through these sand-
hills. It is very difficult to estimate the num-


ber of the blacks here, hut I believe they can-
not be far short of 400, belonging to Cooper’s
Creek.
Oct. 6.—Stokes’ Ranges, Surprise Creek.-
Left the tank this morning, carrying as much
water as possible on the camels, and two horse
loads, sufficient for ourselves for four days and
one drink for the horses ; calculating on making
Koliat ior Poria Creek, in four days. If I find
water on the track I intend striking for Wilkie’s
Creek. The sandhills covered with grass and
flowers, and even the bare clayey plains, and the
miserable stony country between them and the
ratges, had straggled into something resembling
vegetadon. The ranges, where we entered them,
by Brahe’s Gap, are not so high as where we
crossed them more to the westward, but run in
low ridges along wide stony valleys formed by
the numerous gorges we found so difficult to
cross. M alga and acacia scrub everywhere, but
not much feed ; only saltbush and very short
herbage grown since the rains. We were agreably
surprised by a fine waterhole in the first creek
we came to, which proved to be the lowest of
several of nearly the same size highe up the
creek. I believe it to be about ten yards wide
and eighty long, and some three or four feet
deep. Distance, eighteen miles.
Oct. 7. —Stokes’ Ranges, Keppel’s Greek, lat.
28deg. 17mim, lon. 142 deg. 30min. —We were
late in leaving camp this morning, as nineteen of
the horses had followed the track back for
several miles. The country travelled through for
fifteen miles was much of the same character—
wide stony fiats surrounded by low ridges, and
intersected by gum creeks coming from the
gorges in a northerly direction. We passed
through a succession of gaps, in each of which
we found a creek with pools of clear rain- water,
and from the very loose gravelly nature of the
ground, I am inclined to believe that these
creeks are still . unning slowly underground
since the rain. At fifteen miles came on the
south slopes of the range, with a wide view to-
wards Kuliatti and Poria. Camped on a small
watercourse near its function with Keppel’s
Creek. Two tolerable pools of water. Another
make-believe thunder- storm to-night, with violent
gusts of wind, but no rain, exceptingat two places
to the N.W., where it appeared to be raining,
about a mile wide. Everything looks spring-like
here.
Oct 8. —Junction Camp, No. 21.—Crossed
Keppel’s Greek and travelled over stony slopes,
for six miles, when we crossed the creek on to
barren sandy plains. At three miles entered
the eandhilis and found the country terribly
burned up, and no sign of water. Rain can-
not have fallen here for some time. Made our
old camp in twenty-two miles from Keppel’s
Greek, and found water still in the small creek,
but the feed very dry and scanty.
October 9.—Poria Creek. —When the party
started this morning I went to the westward of
the track, and found that at a short distance the
sandhills terminated in the gum forest and poly-
gonum swamps before-mentioned. From a high
sandhill I could see across these for many miles
towaids the range, in a westerly direction, and I
believe that they also extend to or across Wilkie s
Creek to ihe south. I found no water, but lam
convinced that there are other channels similar
to the one we camped on last nigh which will
contain water for months after rain At Wilkie’s
Creek I again lef the track, and followed the
creek upwards, crossing several deep channels
running in and out from it, and full o water.
At a short distance I came on a large sheet of
water, certainly more than a mile long, and about
ei.hty feet wide, and with the couch grass growing
on its banks, and large box limber, having a
striking resemblance to some of the smaller
branches of Cooper’s Creek. It is a far finer
watercourse than I had at first supposed. Made
Poria C cek about two o’clock. The country
very dry and parched—we seem, in one day’s
journey, to have travelled from spring into
summer.
WILLS’ JOURNAL.
COOPER’S CREEK TO CARPENTARIA.
FIELD BOOK NO. 1.
[The omissions in the diary are supplied by the
information contained in the maps, with the ex-
ception of the last two days on the shore of the
gulf.]
Sunday, Dec 16,1860. —The two horses having
been shod, and our reports finished, we started
at forty minutes past six a m. for Eyre’s Creek,
the party consisting of Mr. Burke, myself.
King, and Charley, having with us six camels,
one horse, and three months’ provisions. We
followed down the creek to the point where
the sandstone ranges cross the creek, and
were accompanied to that place by Brahe,
who would return to take charge of the depht.
Down to this point the banks of the creek are
very rugged and stony, but there is a tolerable
supply of grass and saltbush in the vicinity. A
large tribe of blacks came pestering u« to go to
their camp and have a dance, which we declined.
They were very troublesome, and nothing but
the threat to shoo them will keep them away ;
they are, however, easily frightened, and,
ah hough fine looking men, decidedly not of a
warlike disposi ion. They show the greatest in-
cl nation io take whatever they can, but will run
no unnecessary risk in so doing. They seldom
carry any weapons, except a shield and a large
kind of boomerang, which I believe they u-e for
killing rats, &c. ; some imes, but very seldom,
they have a large spear ; reed spears seem to be
quite unknown to them. They are undoubtedly
a finer and better looking race of men than the
blacks on the Murray and Darling, and
more peaceful, but in other respects I be-
lieve 'hey did not compare favourably with them,
for, from the li tie we have seen of them, they
appear to be mean-spirited and contemptible in
every respect.
Monday, Deo. 17. —We continued to fol-
low down the creek. Found its course very
crooked, and the channel frequently dry for a con-
siderable distance, and then forming into magnifi-
cent waterholes, abounding in wa erL wl of all
kinds The country on each side is more open
than on the upper part of the creek. The soil
on the plains is of a light ear by nature, sup-
porting abundance of saltbush and grass. Most
of the plains are lightly timbered, and the ground


Is finer, and not cracked up, like at the head of
the creek. Left Gamp No. 67 at ten minutes ot
six a.m., having breakfasted before leaving. We
followed the creek along from point to point, at
first in a direction W. N. W. for about twelve
miles, then about N. W. At about noon we passed
the last water, a short distance beyond which the
creek runs out on a polygonum (Polygo-
num Cunninghami) flat ; but the timber
was so large and dense, that it deceived us
into the belief that there was a continuation of
the channel ; on crossing the polygonum ground
to where we expected to find the creek we be-
came aware of our mistake. Not thinking it
advisable to chance the existence of water a-head,
we camped at the end of a large but shallow
sheet of wa er in ihe sandy bed of the creek.
The hole was about 150 links broad, and feet
deep in most places. In mos f . places the tem-
perature of he water was almost incredibly high,
which induced me to try it in several places.
The mean of two on the shady side of the
creek .ave 97.4 deg. As maybe imagined, this
water tasted disagreeably warm, but we soon
cooled some in water-ba.s, and, thinking that it
would be interesting to know what we might call
cool, I placed the thermometer in a pannikin
containing some that appeared delightfully cool,
almost cold in fact; its temperature was, to our
astonishment, 78deg. At half-past six, when a
strong wind was blowing from south, and tem-
perature of air had fallen to 80deg., the lowest
temperature of water in the hose, that had been
exposed to the full effect of evaporation for
several hours, was 72deg. This water for
drinking appeared positively cold -too low a
temperature to be pleasant under the circum-
stances. A remarkable southerly squall came on
between five and six p.m., with every appearance
of rain. The sky however soon cleared, but the
wind continued to blow in a squally and irregular
manner from the same quar er at evening.
Wednesday, Dec. 19. Star ed at a quarter
past eight am. Leaving what seemed to be
the end of Cooper’s Greek, we took a
course a little to the north of west, intending
to try ana ob au water in some of the creeks
that Stur menu ,nea that he had crossed, and
at th sa'. urn ■ to see whether they were con-
nected w tii Cooper’ Creek, as appeared most
jrobaot i rom the direction in which we found
the .alter running, and from the manner in which
it had been breaking up into small channels
Honing across the plains in a N. and N.N. W.
direction. We left on onr tne flooded flats
on which this branch of the creek runs out, and
soon came to a series of sand ridges, the direc-
tions of which were between N. W. and N.N. W.
The country is well grassed, and supports plenty
of saltbush. Many of the valleys are liable to be
inundated by the overflow of the main creek.
They have watercourses and polygonum flats,
bordered with box-trees, but we met with no
holes tit to hold a supply of water. At about ten
miles w t ossed a large earthy flat, lightly tim-
bered »t l lox and gum. The ground was very
bad fo f -avdiing on, being much cracked up,
and intersected by innumerable channels, which
continually c ied ofi the water of a large creek.
Some of be valleys beyond ibis were very pretty,
the ground oeing sound, and covered with fresh
plants, which made them look beautifully green.
At fifteen miles, we halted where two largo
plains joined. Our attention had been at-
tracted by some red-breasted cockatoos, pigeons,
a crow, and several other birds, whose pre-
sence made us feel sure that there was water
not far off; but our hopes were soon destroyed
by finding a clay pan just drying up. It contained
just sufficient liquid to make the clay boggy. At
ten minutes to seven p.m. we moved on, steering
straight for Eyre’s Creek, N. W. by N., intending
to make a good night’s journey, and avoid ihe
heat of the day; but at a mile and a half we
came to a creek, which looked so well that we
followed it for a short distance, and finding two
or three waterholes of good milky water, we
camped for the night. This enabled me to secure
an observation of the eclipse of Jupiter’s I satel-
lite as well as some latitude observations. The
night was so calm that I used the water as a
horizon, but I find it much more satisfactory to
take the mercury, for several reasons.
Thursday, Dec. 21 (20 ?). We did not
leave this camp until half-past eight, having
delayed to refill the water-bags with the milky
water, which all of us found to be a great treat
again. I is certainly more pleasant to drink
than the clear water, and, ar the same time, more
satisfying. Our course from here, N.W. by N.,
took us ihrough some pretty country, lightly
timbered and well grassed. We could see the line
of creek timber winding through the valley
on our left. At a distance of five miles
there was a bush-fire on its banks, and
beyond it the creek made a considerable bend to
the S W. At two miles further we came in
sight of a large lagoon, bearing N. by W., and at
three miles more we camped on what would
seem the same creek as last night, near where it
enters the lagoon. The latter is of great extent,
and contains a large quantity of water, which
swarms with wildfowl of every description. It
is very shallow, but is surrounded by the most
pleasing woodland scenery, and everything in the
viciuity looks fresh and green. The creek near
its junction with the lagoon contains some good
water-holes, five to six feet deep. They are
found in a sandy alluvium, which is very boggy
when wet. There wasa large camp of not hss
than forty or fifty blacks near where we stopped.
They brought us presents of fish, for which we
gave them some beads and matches These fish
we found io be a most valuable addition to our
rations. They were of the same kind as we had
found elsewhere, but fiuer, being nine to ten
inches long, and two to three inches deep, and in
such good condition that they might have been
fried in their own fat. It is a remarkable fact,
that these were the first blacks who had offered
us any fish since we reached Cooper’s Greek.
Friday, Dec. 21. —We left Camp 70 at
half-past five a.m., and tried to induce one
or two of the blacks to go with us, but
it was of no use. Keeping our former course,
we were pulled up at three miles by a fine
lagoon, and then by the creek that flows into
it ; the latter being full of water, we were
obliged to trace it a mile up before we could cross.
I observed on its banks two wild plants of the
gourd or melon tribe; one much resembling a
stunted cucumber, the other, both in leaf and
appearance of fruit, was very similar to a small
model of a water melon (probably muckia


micrantha). The latter plant I also found at
Camp 68. On tasting the pulp of the newly
found fruit, which was about the size of a
large pea, I found it to be so acrid that it was
with difficulty that I removed the taste from my
mouth. At eight or nine miles from where we
crossed the creek we passed another large lagoon,
leaving it two miles on our left, and shortly after-
wards we saw one nearly as far on our right.
This last we should have availed ourselves of, but
that we expected to find water in a creek which
we could see, by the timber lining its banks,
flowed from the lagoon on our left, and crossed
our course a few miles ahead. We reached it at
a distance of four or five miles further, and found
a splendid waterhole, at which we camped. The
creek at this point flows in a northerly direction,
through a large lightly timbered flat, on which it
partially runs out. The ground is, however,
sound and well clothed with grass and salsola-
oeous plants. Up to this point the country through
we have passed has been of the finest description
for pastoral purposes. The grass and saltbush
are everywhere abundant, and water is plentiful,
with every appearance of permanence. We- met
with porcupine grass (Triodia pungens, Br.)
and only two sand-ridges before reaching Camp
71.
COOPER’S CREEK TO CARPENTARIA.
FIELD-BOOK NO. 2, LAT. 27DEG. TO 25|DEG.
STATIONS 72 TO 78.
Saturday, Dec. 22.—At five minutes to five
a.m. we left one of the most delightful camps
we have had in the journey, and proceeded on
the same course as before, N.W. by N., across
some high ridges of loose sand, many of which
were partially clothed with porcupine grass. We
found the ground much worse to travel over than
any we have yet met with. As the ridges were
exceedingly abrupt and steep on their eastern
side, and although sloping gradually towards the
west, were so honeycombed in some places by the
burrows of rats, that the camels were continually
in danger of falling. At adistanee of aboutsixmiles
we descended from these ridges to undulating
country of open box forest, where everything
was green and fresh. There is an abundance of
grass and salt bushes, and lots of birds of all
descriptions. Several flocks of pigeons passed
over our heads, making for a point a little to our
right, where there is no doubt plenty of water,
but we did not go off our course to look for it.
Beyond the box forest, which kept away to the
right, we again entered the sand-ridges, and at a
distance of six miles passed close to a dry salt
lagoon, the ridges in the vicinity of which are
less regular in their form and direction, and con-
tain nodules of limestone. The ground in the
flats and claypans near has that encrusted sur-
face that cracks under the pressure of the foot,
and is a sure indication of the presence of saline
deposits. At a distance of eight miles from the
lagoon, we camped at the foot of a sand-ridge,
jutting out on the Stony Desert. I was rather
disappointed, but not altogether surprised, to find
the latter nothing more nor less than the stony
rises that we had before met with, only on a
larger scale, and not quite so undulating. During
the afternoon several crows came to feed on the
plain. They came from an E.N.E. direction, no
doubt from a portion of the creek that flows
through the forest that we left on our mht. In
the morning, as we were loading, a duck passed
over, but it was too dark to see which way it
went.
Sunday, Bee. 23. —At five a.m,, we struck out
across the desert in a W.N.W. direction. At
four miles and a half we crossed a sand-ridge, and
then returned to our N.W. by N. course. We
found the ground not nearly so bad for travelling
on as that between Bulloo and Cooper’s Creek ;
in fact, I do not know whether it arose from
our exaggerated anticipation of horrors or not,
but we thought it far from bad travelling ground,
and as to pasture, it is only the actually stony
ground that is bare, and many a sheep run is,
in fact, worse grazing than that. At fifteen
miles we crossed another sand-ridge, for several
miles around which there is plenty of grass and
fine sal bush. After crossing this ridge, we de-
scended to an earthy plain, where the ground was
rather heavy, being in some places like pieces
of slaked lime, and intersected by small water-
courses. Flocks of pigeons rose from amongst
the salt bushes and polygonum, but all the creeks
were dry, although marked by lines of box timber.
Several gunyahs of the blacks were situated near
a water-hole that had apparently contained water
very lately, and heaps of grass were ljing about
the plains, from which they had beaten the seeds.
We pushed on, hoping to find the creeks as-
suming an improved appearance, but they did
nor, and at one o'clock we halted, intending to
travel through part of the night. About sunset
three flocks of pin eons passed over us, all going
in the same direction, due north by compass,
and passing over a ridge of sand in that direc ion.
Not to have taken notice of such an occurrence
would have been li tie short of a sin, so we
determined to go eight or ten miles in that di-
rection. Starting at seven o’clock p.m., we, at
six miles, crossed the ridge over which the birds
had flown, and came on a flat, subject to in-
undation. The ground was at first hard and
even, like the bottom of a clay pan, but
at a mile or so we came on cracked earthy ground,
intersected by numberless small channels running
in all directions. At nine miles, we reached the
bed of a creek running from east to west; it was
only bordered by polygonum bushes, but as there
was no timber visible on the plains, we thought it
safer to halt until daylight, for fear we would
miss the water. At daylight, when we had
saddled, a small quantity of umber could be seen,
at the point of a sand-ridge, about one and a half
to two miles to the west of us, and on going there
we found a fine creek, with a splendid sheet of
water, more than a mile long, and averaging
nearly three chains broad ; it is, however, only
two or three feet deep in most parts.
Monday, Dec. 24.—We took a day of
rest on Gray’s Creek, to celebrate Christmas.
This was doubly pleasant, as we had never in our
most sanguine moments anticipated finding
such a delightful oasis in the desert. Our camp
was really an agreeable place, for we had all the
advantages of food and water attending a position
on a large creek or river, and were at the same
time free of the annoyance of the numberless
ants, flies, and mosquitoes that are invariably
met with amongst timber or heavy scrub.


Tuesday, Dec, 25.—We left Gray’s Creek
fct half past four a.m., and proceeded to
cross the earthy rotten plains in the direction of
Byre’s Creek. At a distance of about nine
miles, we reached some lines of trees and
bushes, which were visible from the top of the
sand-ridge at Gray’s Creek. We found them
growing on the banks of several small
creeks, which trend to the N. and N.N W.
At a mile and a-half farther we crossed a small
creek, N.N.B, and joining the tnes above-
mentioned. This creek contained abundance of
water, in small detached holes, from fifty to one
hundred links long, well shaded by steep banks
and overhanging bushes. The water had a sus-
piciously transparent colour, and a slight trace of
brack i-hness, bu the latter was scarcely per-
ceptible. Near where the creek joined them is a
sand-hill, and a dense mass of tine timber. The
smoke of a fire indicated the presence of blacks,
who soon made their appearance, and followed us
for some distance, beckoning us away to the N. B.
We, however, continued our course N. W.
by N , but, at a distance of a mile and a-half,
found that the creeks did not come round as we
expected, and that the fall of the water was in a
direction nearly opposi e to our course, or about
west to east. We struck off N | W. for a high sand-
ridge, from which we anticipated seeing whether
it were worth while for us to fellow the course of
the creeks we had crossed. We were surprised
to find alt the water-courses on the plains trend
ing rather o the south of east ; and at a distance
of three miles, after changing our course, and
when we approached the sand-hills towards which
we had been steering, we were agreeably pulled
up by a magnificent creek, coming from the
N.N. W., and running in the direction of tbe
fire we had seen. We had now no choice but to
change our course again, for we could not have
crossed even if we had desired to do so. On fol-
lowing up the south bank of the creek, we found
it soon keeping a more northerly course than it
had where we first struck it. This fact, together
with magnitude and general appearance, lessened
the probability of its »eing Eyre’s Creek, as
seemed at first very likely from their relative
positions and directions. The day being very hot,
and ihe camels tired from travelling over the
earthy plains, which, by the by, are not nearly
so bad as those at the head of Cooper’s Greek, we
camped at one o’clock p m., having traced the
creek up about five miles, not counting the bends.
For tbe whole of this distance we found not a
break or interruption of water, which appears to
he very deep. Tde banks are from twemy to thirty
feet above the water, and very steep; they are
clothed near the water’s edge wit h mint and other
weeds, and on the top of each side there is a belt
of box trees and various shrubs. The lower part
of the creek is bounded towards the north by a
high red sand-ridge, and on the south side is an
extensive plain, intersected by numerous water-
courses, which drain off the water in flood time.
The greater portion of the plain is at present very
bare, but the stalks of dry grass show that after
rain or floods there will be a good crop on the
harder and well-drained por ion, but 1 believe the
loose earthy portion supports no vegeiation at
any time. The inclination of the ground from
the edge of the creek bank towards the plain is
in many places very considerable. This 1 should
take to indicate that the flooding is or has been
at one time b> h frequent and regular
Wednesday, Deo. 26 —Wes anted at five a.m,,
following up the creek from point to point of the
bends. Its general coarse was at first N. by W.,
but at about six miles he sand ridge on the west
closed in on it, and at this point i takes a turn
to he N N E. for hsif a-mile, and then comes
round suddenly NW. Up to his point, it
had been rather improving in appearance than
otherwise, but in the bend to the N. W. the
channel is very broad, its bed ting limestone
rock and iudura ed clay ; is for a space of five
or six chains quite dry, then commences another
waterhole, the creek keeping a little more
towards N. We crossed the creek here, and
struck across the plain on a due N. course, for
we could see the line of timber comb g up to the
sand-ridges in that direction, for a distance of
seven or eight miles. We did not touch the creek,
and the eastern sand-ridge receded to adis ance,
in some nlaces of nearly three mil s, from our
line, leaving an immense extent of grassy plain
between it and the creek. The distinctly marked
feature on the lower part of this creek is, that
whenevert he main creek is on one t ide of a plain,
there is always a fine billy bong on the opposite
side, each of them almost invariably sticking
close to the respective sand-ridges. Before
coming 10 the next bend of the creek, a view
from the top of a sand-hiil showed me that the
creek receives a large tributary from the N. W.,
at about two miles above where we had crossed
it. A fine line of Umber, running up to the N W.,
joined an extensive tract of box forest, and the
branch we were following was lost to view in a
similar forest towards the N. The sand-ridge
was so abrupt when we came to the creek, that it
was necessary to dsscend into its bed through
one of the small ravines adjoining it. We found
it partially run out, the bed being sand, and
strewed wi h nodules of lime, some of which
were one and a- half to 'wo feet long. They
had apparently been formed in the sand-downs by
infiltration.
COOPER’S CREEK TO CARPENTARIA.
FIELD BOOK NO 3 LAT S 25 DEO. TO 23j EG.
STATIONS 78 TO 8 •
Sunday, Dec. 30 -Finding that the creek
was trending considerably owards the east,
without much likelibo-id of al ering its course,
we struck off from it, taking a ten days’ supply
of water, as there were ranges visible to the
north, which had the appearance of being stony.
A N E by N. course was first taken for about
seven miles, in order to avoid them. The whole
of this distance was over alluvial earthy plains,
the soil of which was firm, but the vegetation
scanty.
COOPER’S CREEK TO CARPENTARIA.
FIELD BOOK NO. 4. CAMP 85 TO 90. LAT 23|
DEG. TO 22|DEG. FINE COUNTRY—TROPICS.
Saturday, Jan. s.—On leaving Camp 84 we
found slight, but distinct inoicatiods of rain in
the groves, and a few blades of grass and small
weeds in the little depressions on the plain.
These indications were, however, so slight that
but for the fact of our having found surface


water in two holes near our camp, we should hardly
have noticed them. At a distance of about two
miles, in a N.N.E. direction, we came to a creek
with a longj, broad, shallow waterhole. The well-
worn paths, the recent tracks of natives, and the
heaps of shells, on the contents of which the
latter had feasted, showed at once that this creek
must be connected with some creek of consider-
able importance. The camels and horses being
greatly in need of rest, we only moved up about
half a mile, and camped for the day.
Sunday, Jan. 6.—Started at twenty minutes to
six o’clock, intending to make an easy day’s stage
along the creek. As we proceeded up in a
northerly direction, we found the waterhole
to diminish in size very much, and at about two
and a-half miles the creek ran out in a lot of
small water-courses. At the upper end of the
creek we found in its bed what appeared to be an
arrangement for catching fish. It consisted of a
small oval mud paddock, about 12ft. by Bft., the
sides of which were about nine inches above the
bottom of the hole and the top of the fence,
covered with long grass, so arranged that the ends
of the blades overhung scantily by several inches
the sides of the hole. As there was no sign of timber
to the N., we struck off to N.W. by N. for a fine
line of timber that came up from the S.W., and
seemed to run parallel with the creek we were about
to leave. At a distance of about three miles we
reached the bank of a fine creek, and containing a
sheet of water two chains broad, at least fifteen
feet deep in the middle. The banks are shelving,
sandy, and lightly clothed with box trees and
various shrubs. On starting to cross the plains
towards this creek, we were surprised at the
bright green appearance of strips of land, which
look in the distance like swamps ; on approach-
ing some of them we found that there had been
a considerable fall of rain in some places, which
had raised a fine crop of grass and poriulac { portu■
laca olerasca, L.), wherever the soil was of a sandy
and light nature, hut the amount of moisture
had been insufficient to affect the hard clayey
ground, which constitutes the main portion of
the plain. The sight of two native companions
feeding here, added greatly to the encouraging
prospects ; they are the only specimens of that
bird that I remember to have seen on that side
of the Darling.
Monday, Jan. 7.—We started at half-past four
a.m. without water, thinking that we might safely
rely on this creek for one day’s journey. We,
however, found the line of timber soon begin to
look small; at three miles the channel contained
only a few pools of surface water. We continued
across the plains on a due north course, fre-
quently crossing small watercourses, which had
been filled by the rain, but were fast drying up.
Here and there as we proceeded, dense lines of
timber on our right showed that the creek came
from the east of north. At a distance of thirteen
miles we turned to the N.N.8., towards a fine
line of timber. We found a creek of consider-
able dimensions, that had only two or three small
waterholes ; but as there was more than sufficient
for us, and very little feed for the beasts any-
where else, we camped. I should have liked this
camp to have been in a more prominent and
easily recognized position, as it happens to be
almost exactly on the tropic of Capricorn. The
tremendous gale of wind that we had in ths
evening and night prevented me from taking a
latitude observation, whereas I had some good
ones at the last camp and at Camp 86. My
reckoning cannot be far out. I found on taking
out my instruments one of the spare thermo-
meters was broken, and the glass of my ane-
roid barometer cracked —the Tatter, I believe,
not otherwise injured. This was done by the
camel having taken it into his head to roll while
the pack was on his back.
Tuesday, January B.—Started at a quarter past
five a.m., with a load of water, determined to be
independent of all creeks and watercourses. At
a mile and a-half found surface water in a small
creek, and at a mile further water in two or
three places on the open plains. The country we
crossed for the first ten miles consists of fine opera
plains of firm argillaceous soil, too stiff and hard
to be affected by the small quantity of rain that
has fallen as yet. They are subject to inunda-
tions from the overflow of a number of small
creeks which intersect them in a direction B.N.E.
to W.S.W. Nearly all the creeks are lined with
box-trees and shrubs, in a tolerably healthy state.
Of the remains of dead trees, there is only a fair
proportion to the living ones. After traversing a
plain of greater extent than the rest, we, at ten
miles, reached the creek, proportionately large
and important looking. The channel, however,
at the point where we struck it, was deep, level,
and dry, but I believe there is water in it not far
off; for there were some red-breasted cockatoos
in the trees, and native parrots on each side. On
the north side there is a part bearing off to the
N.N.W. The mirage on the plain to the
south of the creek was stronger than I have
before seen it. There appear to be sheets of
water within a few yards of one, and it looks suf-
ficiently smooth and glassy to be used for an arti-
ficial horizon. To the westward of the plains
some fine sand-hills were visible nearly in the
direction in which the creek flowed. To the north
of the creek the country undergoes a great
change. At first there is a little earthy land sub-
ject to inundation. The soil then becomes more
sandy, the stony pans in which water collects
after rain ; the whole country is slightly undu-
lating, lightly timbered and splendidly grassed. A
number of small disconnected creeks are scattered
about, many of which contained water, protected
from the sun and wind by a luxuriant growth of
fine grasses and small bushes. We passed one or
two little rises of sand and pebbles, on which
were growing some trees quite new to me; but
for the seed pods, I’should have taken them for a
species of casuarina, although the leaf-stalks have
not the jointed peculiarities of those plants. The
trunks and branches are like the sheoak, the
leaves like those of a pine; they droop like a
willow, and the seed is small, flat, in a large flat
pod about six inches by three-quarters of an inch.
As we proceeded, the country improved at every
step. Flocks of pigeons rose and flew off to the
eastward, and fresh plants met our view on every
rise; everything green and luxuriant. The horse
licked his lips, and tried all he could to break his
nose-string in order to get at the food. We camped
at the foot of a sandy rise, where there v as a large
stony pan with plenty of water, and where the
feed was equal in quality, and superior as to
variety, to any that I have seen in Australia,


excepting perhaps on some' soils of volcanic
origin.
Wednesday, Jan. 9. —Started at five minutes
past five without water, trusting to get a supply
of water from the rain that fell during the thun-
derstorm. Traversed six miles of undulating
plains covered with vegetation richer than ever.
Several ducks rose from the little creeks as we
passed, and flocks of pigeons were flying in all
directions. The richness of the vegetation is
evidently not suddenly arising from chance thun-
derstorms, for the trees and bushes on the open
plain are everywhere healthy and fresh-looking ;
very few dead ones are to be seen, besides which
the quantity of dead and rotten grass which, at
present, almost overgrows in some places the
young blades, shows that this is not the first
crop of the kind. The grasses are numerous, and
many of them unknown to me, but they only
constitute a moderate portion of the herbage ;
several kinds of spurious vetches and portulac, as
well as salsolaceae add to the luxuriance of the
vegetation. At seven miles we found ourselves
in an open forest country, where the feed was
good, but not equal to what we had passed,
neither had it been visited by yesterday’s rain. We
soon emerged again on open plains, but the soil
being of a more clayey nature, they were not
nearly so much advanced in vegetation as the
others. We found surface water in several
places, and at one spot disturbed a fine bustard
which was feeding in the long grass. We did not
see bira until he flew up. I should have
mentioned that one flew over our camp last
evening, in a northerly direction. This speaks
well for the country and climate. At noon we
came to a large creek, the course of which was
from E.N.E. to W.S.W. The sight of white
gum trees in the distance had raised hopes which
were not at all damped on a close inspection of
the channel. At the point where we struck it,
there was certainly no great quantity of water;
the bed was broad and sandy, but its whole ap-
pearance was that of an important watercourse,
and the large gums which line its banks, together
with the improved appearance of the soil, and the
abundance of feed in the vicinity, satisfied us as
to the permanency of the water and the value of
the discovery. Although it was so early in the
day, and we were anxious to make a good march,
yet we camped here, as it seemed to be almost a
sin to leave such good quarters. The bed of the
creek is loose sand, through which the water
freely permeates; it is, however, sufficiently
coarse not to be boggy, and animals can approach
the water without any difficulty.
Thursday, Jan. 10.—At twenty minutes past
five a.m., we left our camp with a full supply
of water, determined to risk no reverses, and to
made a good march. I should mention that
last evening we bad been nearly deafened by the
noise of the cicadae, and but for our large fires
should have been kept awake all night by the
mosquitoes. A walk of two miles across a well-
grassed plain brought us to a belt of timber, and
we soon afterwards found ourselves pulled up by
a large creek, in which the water was broad and
deep. We had to follow up the bank of the
creek in a N.E. direction for nearly a mile before
we could cross, when to our joy we found that it
was flowing, not a muddy stream from the effects
of recent floods, but a small rivulet of pure
water, as clear as crystal. The bed of the river
at this place is deep and rather narrow. The
water flows over sand and pebbles, winding
its way between clumps of melaleuca and
gum saplings. After leaving the river, we
kept our old course due north, crossing
in a distance of one mile three creeks with
gum trees on their banks. The soil of
the flats through which they flow is a red
loam of fair quality, and well grassed. Djeyond
the third creek is a large plain, parts of which
are very stony ; and this is bounded towards three
east by a low stony rise, partly composed of de-
cayed and honey-combed quartz rock in situ i _
and partly of water-worn pebbles and other alia--
vial deposits. At about two miles across this.:,
plain, we reached the first of a series of smal
creeks, with deep water-holes. These creeks and
holes have the characteristics peculiar to water--
courses which are found in flats formed from the
alluvial deposits of schistose rocks. The banks
are on a level with the surrounding ground, and
are irregularly marked by small trees or only
by tufts of long grass, which overhang the chan
nel, and frequently hide it from one’s view,
even when within a few yards. At about five
miles from where we crossed the river, we came
to the main creek in these flats, Patten’s Greek.
It flows along at the foot of a stony range, and
we had to trace it up nearly a mile in a
N. N. E. direction before we could cross it. As
it happened, we might almost as well have fol-
lowed its course up the flat, for at a little more
than two miles we came to it again. We re-
crossed it at a stony place just below a very large
wa'erhole, and then continued our course over
extensive plains, not so well grassed as what we
had passed before, and very stony in some places.
At eight miles from Patten’s Creek, we came to
another, running from S.W. to S.E. There was
plenty of water in it, but it was evidently the re-
suit of recent local rains. On the banks was an
abundance of good feed, but very little timber.
Friday, Jan. 11. —Started at five a.ra., and in
the excitement of exploring fine well-watered
country, forgot all about the eclipse of the sun,
until the reduced temperature and peculiarly
gloomy appearance of the sky drew our attention
to the matter. It was then too late to remedy the
deficiency, so we made a good day’s journey, the
moderation of the mid-day heat, which was only
about 86deg., greatly assisting us. The country
traversed has the most verdant and cheerful
aspect; abundance of feed and water every where.
All the creeks seen to-day have a course more or
less to B. by S. The land improves in appear-
ance at every mile. A quantity cf rain has fallen
here and to the south, and some of the flats are
suitable for cultivation if the regularity of thq
seasons will admit,
COOPER’S CREEK TO CARPENTARIA.
FIELD-BOOK NO. 5. CAMP 92 to §&
LAT. 22|DEG. to 2ISDKG. STANDISH RANGES,
Saturday, Jan. 12,—We started at five a.m. 4
and keeping as nearly as possible a due N.
traversed for about eight miles a splendid flat,.
through which flow several fine well- watered creeks,}
lined with white gum trees. We then entered $
series of slaty lo w sandstone ranges, amongst whip^


were some well-grassed aflayetsdnp,r teafnol tw
in the main gullies., The more s'ony por ions
are, however, covered with porcupine grass, and
here and there with tnallee, Large ant-hills
are very numerous ; they vary in height from
two feet and a half to four feet. There was a
continuous rise perceptible all the way in crossing
the ranges, and from the highest portion, which
■we reached at a distance of’about seven miles, we
had a pretty good view of the country towards
the north. As far as we could see in 'he dis-
tance, and bearing due north, was a large range,
having somewhat the ou line of a granite moun-
tain. The east end of this range jus' comes
up to the magnetic north ; the left of this, and
bearing N.N.W., is a single conical peak, the top
of which only is visible. Further to the west
there were some broken ranges, apparently sand-
stone ; to the east of north the tops of very
distant and apparently higher ranges were seen,
the outlin" of which was so indis inct tha' I can
form no idea as to their character. The inter-
mediate country below us appeared alternations
of fine valleys and stony ranges, such as we had
just been crossing. From here a descent of two
miles brought us to a creek having a northern
course, but on tracing it down for about a
mile we found it turn to the south-east, and
join another from the north. We crossed
over to the latter on a N. by W. course, and
camped on the west bank. It has a broad sandy
channel; the water-holes are large hut no deep;
the banks are bordered with fine white gums, and
are in some places very scrubby. There is abun-
dance of rich green feed everywhere in the
vicinity. We found numerous indications
of blacks having been here, bu saw nothing of
them. It seems remarkable hat where their tranks
are so pleniful we should (have seen) none since
we left Kina’s Creek. I observed iha the natives
here climb trees like those on the Murray, in
search of some animal corresponding in habits
to the opossum, which they get out of the
hollow branches in a similar manner. I have
not yet been able to ascertain w a the animal is.
Sunday, Jan. 13.—We did not leave camp this
morning up il half-past seven, having delayed for
the purpose of getting the camels’ shoes on - a
matter in which we were eminently unsuccessful
We took our breakfast before starting, for almost
the first time since leaving the depot. Having
crossed the creek, our course was due north as
before, until at about six miles we came in sigh
of the range a-head, when we took anorthhalf east
direction, for the purpose of clearing he eastern
front of it. We found the ground more sandy
than what we had before crossed, and a i r-at
deal of it even more richly grassed. Gamp 93 is
si'uated at the junction of three sandy creeks,
in which there is abundance of water. The
sand is loose, and the water permeates freclv,
so that the latter may be obtained delightfully
cool and clear by sinking anywhere in the beds of
the creeks.
COOPER’S CREEK TO CARPENTARIA
FIELD BOOK NO. 6 LAT. 211 DEG TO 20J DEG.
STATIONS 98 TO 105. UPPER PART OF CLON-
CURRY.
Saturday, Jan. 19.- Started from Camp 98 a'
half-past five o’clock a.m., and, passing to the
north-west of Mount Forbes, across a fine and well
grassed plain, kept at first a north by east direc-
tion. At a distance of three miles 'he plain
became everywhere stony, being scattered over
with quartz pebbles ; and a little further on wa
came to low quartz ranges, the higher portions
of which are covered with porcupine grass, hut
the valleys are well clothed with a varie y of
coarse and rank herbage. At about five miles we
crossed a creek with a sandy bed, which has been
named Green’s Creek. There were blacks not
far above where we crossed, but we did not dis-
turb them. After crossing the creek, we took a
due north course, over very rugged quartz ranges
of an auriferous character. Pieces of iron ore, very
rich, were scattered in great numbers over some
of the hills. On our being about to cross one of
the branch creeks in the low range, we surprised
some blacks--a man, who, with a young fellow,
apparently his son, was upon a tree cutting out
something, and a lubra with a picaninny. The
two former did not see me until I was nearly
close to them, and then they were dreadfully
frightened. Jumping down from the trees, they
started off, shouting what sounded to us very
like “Joe, Joe.” Thus disturbed, the lubra,
who was some distance from them, just then
caught sight of the camels and the remainder of
the party as they came over the hill into the
creek, and tnis tended to has'en their flight over
the stoi es and porcupine grass. Crossing the
range at the head of this ere- k, we came on a
gully running north, down which we proceeded,
and soon found it open out into a creek at two or
three points, in which we found water. On this
creek we found thefirst specimen of a eucalyptus,
which has a very different appearance from the
members of the gum-tree race. It grows as high
as a good-sized gum-tree, but with the branches
less spreading ; in shape it much resembles'he
elm ; the foliage is dark, like that of the light-
wood ; the trunk and branches are covered with
a grey hark, resembling in outward appearance
that of the box'ree. Finding that the creek
was trending too much to the eastward, we struck
off to the nor h again, and at a shor distance
came on a fine creek running about 88 E As it
was now ab >ut time to camp, we travelled it up
for about a mile and a half, and came to a fine
waterbole in a rocky basin, at which there were
ots of birds.
COOPER’S CREEK TO CARPENTARIA.
FIELD BOOK NO 7 LAT. 20|DEG, TO 19,jDEG ;
CAMPS 105 TO 112, MIDDLE PART OF CLON-
CURRY.
Sundaj, Jan. 27. —Started from Camp 105, five
minutes past two in the morning. We followed
along the bends of the creek by moonlight, and
found the creek wind about very much, taking on
the whole aN E course. At about five miles it
changed somewhat its features ; from a hr >ad and
sandy channel, winding about through gum
tree flats, it assumes the unpropittous appearance
of a stiaigbt narrow creek, running in a N.N B.
direction between high perpendicular earthy
banks. After running between three or four
miles in this manner, it took a turn to the west,
at which point there is a fine water-hole, and then
assumed its original character. Below this we
found water at several places ; but it all seemed
to be either from surface drainage or from springs
in the sand. The land in the vicinity of the


creek appears to have received plenty of rain, the
vegetation everywhere being green and fresh ; but
there is no apnearance of the creek having flowed
in this part of the channel for a considerable
period. Palm trees are numerous, and some
bear an abundance of small round dates (nuts)
just ripening. These palms give a most
picturesque and pleasant appearance to the
creek.
Wednesday, Jan. 30.—Started at half past
seven a.m., after several unsuccessful attempts
at vetting Golah out of the bed of the creek. It
was determined to try bringing him down until
we could find a place for him to get out at; but
after going in this way two or three m'.les, it was
found necessary to leave him behind, as it was
almost impossible to get him through some of the
wa’erholes, and had separated King from the
party, which was a matter for very serious con-
sideration, when we found blacks hiding in the
box trees close to us.
COOPER'S CREEK TO CARPENTARIA.
FIELD-BOOK NO. 8. CAMPS 112 119. LAT.
19Jdeo to 17deg. 53min. lower part
OF CLONCUKRY.
RETURNING FROM CARPENTARIA TO COOPER’S
CREEK.
FIELD-BOOK NO. 9. SUNDAY, FEBRUARY.
Finding the ground in such a state from the
heavy falls of rain, that the camels could scarcely
be got along, i r was decided to leave them at
Camp 119, and for Mr. Burke and I to proceed
towards the sea on foot. After breakfast we
accordingly starred, taking with us the horse and
three days’ provisions. Our first difficulty was in
crossing Billy’s Creek, which we had to do where
it enters the river, a few hundred yards below
the camp. In getting the horse in here, he got
bogged in a quicksand bank so deeply as to be
unable to stir, and we only succeeded in ex ri
eating him by undermining him on the creek
side, and then lunging him into the water.
Having got all the things in safety, we continued
down the river bank, which bent abou’ from east
to west, but kept a general north course. A great
deal of the land was so soft and rotten, that he
burse, with only a saddle and about twenty five
pounds on his back, could scarcely walk over it.
At a distance of about five miles we again had
him bogged in crossing a small creek, after
which be seemed so weak, that we had great
doubts about getting him on. We, however,
found some better ground close to the water’s
ed. e where the sandstone rock runs out, and we
stuck to it as far as possible. Finding that the
river was bending about so much that we ivere
making very little progress in a northerly direc-
tion, we struck off due north, and soon came on
some table-land where the soil is shallow and
gravelly, and clothed with box and swamp gums.
Patches of the land were very boggy, but he
main portion was sound enough. Beyond this we
came on an open plain, covered with water up to
one’s ankles. The soil here was a stiff clay, and
the surface very uneven, so that between the
tufts of grass one was frequently knee-deep in
water. The bottom, however, was sound, and
no fear of bogging. After floundering through
this for several miles, we came to a path formed
by the blacks, and there were distinct signs
of a recent migration in a southerly direction.
By making use of this path, we got on much bet-
ter, for the ground was well irodden and hard.
At rather more than a mile, the path entered
a forest, through which flowed a nice water-
course, and we had not gone far before we found
places where the blacks had been camping.
The forest was intersected by little peb'ly rises on
which they had made their tires, and in the sandy
ground adjoining some of the former had been
digging yams*, which seemed to be so numerous
that they could afford to leave lots of them about,
probably having only selected the very best. We
were not so particular, but ate many of those that
they had rejected, and found them very good.
About half-a mile further, we came close on a
blackfellow, who was coiling by a camp fire, whilst
his gin and picaninny were yah Bring along-ide.
We stopped for a short time to take out some of
the pistols that were on ihe horse, and that they
might, see us before we were so near as to frighten
them. Just after we stopped, the black got up to
s re ch his limbs, and after a few seconds looked
in our direction. It was very amusing to see the
way in which he stared, standing for some time
as if he thought he must be dreaming, and then,
having signalled to he others, they dropped on their
haunches and shuffled off in the quie est manner
possible. Near their fire was a fine hut, the best I
have ever seen, built on the samepnnciole as those
at Cooper’s Greek, but much larger and more com-
plete I should say a dozen blacss might, com-
fortably coil in it together. It is situated at
the end of the forest, towards the north, and
looks out on an extensive marsh, which is at
times flooded by the sea water. Hundreds of
wild geese, plover, and pelicans, were enjoying
themselves in the watercourses on the marsh,
all the water on which was too brackish to be
drinkable, except some holes that are filled by
the s ream that flows through the forest. The
neighbourhood of this encampment is one of the
prettiest we have seen during the journey. Pro-
ceeding on our course across the marsh, we came
to a channel through which the sea-water enters.
Here we passed hree blacks, who, as is uni-
versally their custom, pointed out to us, un-
asked, the best part down. This assisted ua
greatly, for the ground we were taking was very
boggy. We moved slowly down, about three
miles, and then camped for the night. The
horse Billy being completely baked, next morn-
ing we started at daybreak, leaving the horse
short-hobbled.
Tuesday, Feb. 19, 1861. —Boocha’s Camp,
Wednesday, Feb. 20. - Pleasant Camp, 5, R.
Thursday, Feb. 21. - Recovery Camp 6, R,—■
Between four and five o’clock a heavy thunder-
s orm broke over us, having given very lit le
warning of its approach. There had been light-
ning and thunder towards S.B and S. ev-r since
noon yesterday. The rain was incessant and very
heavy for an hour and a-half, which made the
ground so boggy that the animals could scarcely
walk over it. We nevertheless started at ten
minutes to seven a ra., and after floundering
along for half an hour, halted for breakfast.
We then moved on again, but soon found that
the travelling was too heavy for the camels, so
camped for the remainder of the day. In the
* The dloscorea of Carpentaria.


afternoon the sky cleared a little, and the sun
soon dried the ground, considering. Shot a
pheasant, and much disappointed at finding him
all feathers and claws. This bird nearly resem-
bles a cock pheasant in plumage ; but in other
respects it bears more the character of the magpie
or crow ; the feathers are remarkably wiry and
coarse.
Friday, Feb. 22, —Camp 7, R. —A fearful
thunderstorm in the evening about eight p.m.,
E.S.E., moving gradually round to S. The
flashes of lightning were so vivid and incessant as
to keep up a continual light for short intervals,
overpowering even the moonlight. Heavy rain
and strong squalls continued for more than an
hour, when the storm moved off W.N.W.; the
sky remained more or less overcast for the rest
of the night, and the following morning was both
sultry and oppressive, with the ground so boggy
as to be almost impassable.
Saturday, Feb. 23. —Camp 8, R.—ln spite of
the difficulties thrown in our way by last night’s
storm, we crossed the creek. We were shortly
afterwards compelled to halt for the day, on a
small patch of comparatively dry ground near the
river. The day turned out very fine, so that the
soil dried rapidly; and we started in the
evening to try a trip by moonlight. We were
very fortunate in finding sound giound along
a billibong, which permitted of our travelling
for about five miles up the creek, when we
camped for the night. The evening was most
oppressively hot and sultry—so much so,
that the slightest exertion made one feel
as if he were in a state of suffocation. The
dampness of the atmosphere prevented any eva-
poration, and gave one a helpless feeling of lassi-
tude that I have never before experienced to such
an extent. All the party complained of the same
sensations, and the horses showed distinctly the
effect of the evening trip, short as it was. We
had scarcely turned in halt an hour when it began
to rain, some heavy clouds having come up from
the eastward, in place of the layer of small cirro
cumuli that before ornamented the greater por-
tion of the sky. These clouds soon moved on, and
we were relieved from the dread of additional
mud. After the sky cleared, the atmosphere
became rather cooler, and less sultry ; so that,
with the assistance of a little smoke to keep the
mosquitoes off, we managed to pass a tolerable
night,
Sunday, Feb. 24.—Camp 9, E. —Compara-
tively little rain has fallen above the branch
creek with the running water. The vegetation,
although tolerably fresh, is not so rank as that we
have left. The water in the creek is muddy but
good, and has been derived merely from the sur-
face drainage of the adjoining plains. The
Melaleneus continues in this branch creek, which
creeps along the foot of the ranges.
Monday, Feb. 25. —Gamp 10, R.—There has
been very little rain on this portion of the creek
since we passed down. There was, however, no
water at all then at this point. At the Tea-tree
Spring, a short distance up the creek, we found
plenty of water in the sand, but it had a disagree-
able taste, from the decomposition of leaves and
the presence of mineral matter —probably iron.
There seems to have been a fair share of rain
along here, everything is so very fresh and green;
and there is water in many of thb channels w£
have [crossed].
Tuesday, Feb. 26.—Caple Tree Camp, 11, R.
Thursday, Feb. 28.—Reedy Gully Camp, 12,
R.—Game into the Reedy Gully Camp about
midnight on Tuesday, the 26th. Remained there
throughout the day on Wednesday, starting at
2 a m. on Thursday.
Friday, March I.—Camp of the Three Crows,
!3, R.
Saturday, March 2.—Saltbush Camp, 14, R.—
Found Golah. He looks thin and miserable.
Seems to have fretted a great deal, probably at
finding himself left behind, and he has been
walking up and down the tracks till he has made
a regular pathway. Gould find no sign of his
having been far off it, although there is splendid
feed to which he could have gone. He began to
eat as soon as he saw the other camels.
Sunday, March 3, 1861. —Eureka Camp, 15,
R. —In crossing a creek by moonlight Charley
rode over a large snake. He did not touch him,
and we thought it was a log Until he struck it
with the stirrup-iron. We then saw that it was
an immense snake, larger than any that I have
ever before seen in a wild state. It measured
eight feet four inches in length, and seven inches
in girth round the belly. It was nearly the same
thickness from the head to within twenty inches
of the tail, it then tapered rapidly. The weight
was eleven pounds and a half. From the tip of
the nose to five inches back the neck was black,
both above and behind ; throughout the rest of
the body the under part was yellow, and the sides
and back had irregular brown transverse bars on
a yellowish brown ground. I could detect no
poisonous fangs, but there were two distinct rows
of teeth in each jaw, and two small claws or nails,
about three-eighths of an inch long, one on each
side of the vent.
Monday, March 4. —Feasting Camp, 16, R. —
Shortly after arriving at Gamp 16 we could fre-
quently hear distant thunder towards the east,
from which quarter the wind was blowing. Dur-
ing the afternoon there were frequent heavy
showers, and towards evening it set in to rain
steadily, but lightly. This lasted until about 8
p.m., when the rain ceased, and the wind got
round to W.; the sky, however, remained over-
cast until late in the night, and then cleared for
a short time; the clouds were soon succeeded by
a dense fog, or mist, which continued until
morning. The vapour having then risen occupied
the upper air in the form of light cir-stratus and
cumuli clouds.
Tuesday, March s.—Camp 17, R.—Started
at 2 a.m. on a S.S.W. course, but had soon to
turn in on the creek, as Mr. Burke felt yery
unwell, having been attacked by dysentery since
eating the snake. He now felt giddy, and un-
able to keep his seat. At 6 a.m., Mr. Burke
feeling better, we started again, following along
the creek, in which there was considerably more
water than when we passed down. We camped
at 2.15 p.m. at a part of the creek where the date
trees* were very numerous, and found the fruit
nearly ripe, and very much improved on what it
was when we were here before.
Wednesday, March 6.—Camp 18, R._ —Arrived
at the former camp, and find the feed richer than
* Probably Livistoras,


fever, tod the ants just as troublesome. Mr.
Burke is a little better, and Charley looks com-
paratively well. The dryness of the atmosphere
seems to have a beneficial effect on all. We
found, yesterday, that it was a hopeless matter
about Qolah, and we Were obliged to leave him
behind, as he seemed to be completely done up,
and could not come on, even when the pack and
saddle were taken off.
Thursday, March 7. —Big-Tree Camp 19, R.
Palm-Tree Camp No. 104, and 30 latitude; by
Observation coming down, 20deg. 2lmin. 40sec.
There is less water here than there was when we
passed down, although there is evidence of the
creek having been visited by considerable floods
during the interval. Feed is abundant, and the
vegetation more fresh than before. Mr. Burke
almost recovered, but Charley is again very un-
well, and unfit to do anything ; he caught cold
last night through carelessness in covering him-
self.
Friday, March 2o’, R.—Followed the
creek more closely coming up than going down.
Found more water in it generally.
Saturday, March 9—Gamp 21, R.—Reached
our former camp at 1.30 p.m. Found the herb-
age much dried up, but still plenty of feed for
the camels.
Sunday, March 10. —Camp 22, R. —Camped at
the junction of a small creek from the westward,
a short dis ance beiow our former camp, there
being plenty of good water here, whereas the
supply at Specimen Camp is very doubtful.
Monday, March 11.—Camp 23, R. —Halted for
breakfast at the Specimen Gamp at 7.15 a.m.
Found more water and feed there than before.
Then proceeded up the creek, and got safely over
the most dangerous part of our journey. Camped
near the head of the gap, in a flat about two
miles below our former camp at the gap.
Tuesday, March 12. —Camp 24, R.
Wednesday, March 13 —Camp 25, R.—Rained
all day, so heavily that I was obliged to put my
watch and field book in the pack, to keep them
dry. In the afternoon the rain increased, and all
the creeks became flooded. We took shelter
under some fallen rocks, near which was some
feed for the camels, but the latter was of no
value, for we had soon to remove them up
amongst the rocks out of the way of the flood,
which fortunately did not rise high enough to
drive us out of the cave ; but we were obliged to
shift our packs to the upper part. In the
evening the water fell as rapidly as it had
risen, leaving everything in a very boggy state.
There were frequent light showers during the
night.
Thursday, March 14. —Camp 26, R.—Sandstone
Cave.—The water in the creek having fallen
sufficiently low, we crossed over from the cave,
and proceeded down the creek. Our progress
was slow, as it was necessary to keep on the
stony ridge instead of following the flats, the
latter being very boggy after the rain. Think-
ing that the creek must join Scratchley’s near
our old camp, we followed it a long way, until,
finding it trend altogether too much eastward,
we tried to shape across for the other creek, but
were unable to do so from the boggy nature of
the intervening plain.
Friday, March 15,—Camp 27, R.
Saturday, March 16.—Camp 28, R.—Scratch-
ley»g ("] J , p.plf r
Sunday, March 17.—Camp 29, R,
Monday, March 18.—Camp 80, R.
Tuesday, March 19.—Camp 31,- R.
Wednesday, March 20.—Gamp’32, R. —Feast-
ing Camp.—Last evening the sky was clouded
about nine p.m., and a shower came down
from the north. At ten o'clock it became
so dark that we camped on the bank of
the Creek, in which was a nice current of
clear water. To-day we halted, intending to
try a night journey. The packs we overhauled,
and left nearly 601 b. weight of things behind.
They were all suspended in a pack from the
branches of a shrub close to the creek. We
started at a quarter to six, but were continually
pulled up by brllibongs and branch creeks, and
soon had to camp for the night. At the junction
of the two creeks just above fare] the three
cones, which are three remarkable small hills to
Thursday, March 21.—Humid Camp, 33, R.—
Unable to proceed on account of the slippery and
boggy state of the ground. The rain has fallen
very heavily here to-day, and every little depres-
sion in the ground is either full of water or
covered with slimy mud. Another heavy storm
passed over during the night, almost [extin-
guishing] the miserable lire we were able to get
up with our very limited quantity of water-
logged and green wood. Having been so unfortu-
nate last night, we took an early breakfast this
morning, at Gamp 38, which I have named the
Humid Camp, from the state of dampness in
which we found everything there; and crossing
to the east bank of the main creek, proceeded in
a southerly direction nearly parallel with the
creek. Some of the flats near the creek contain
the richest alluvial soil, and are clothed with luxu-
riant vegetation. There is an immense extent of
plain, back, of the finest character for pastoral
purposes, and the country bears every appear-
ance of being permanently well watered. We
halted on a large billibong at noon, and were
favoured during dinner by a thunderstorm, the
heavier portion of which missed us, some pass-
ing north and some south, which was fortunate,
as it would otherwise have spoiled our baking
process, a matter of some importance just now.
We started again at seven o’clock, but the effects
of the heavy rain prevented our making a good
journey.
Friday, March 22. —Muddy Camp, 34, R. —
Had an early breakfast this morning, and started
before sunrise. Found that the wet swampy
ground that checked our progress last night was
, only a narrow strip, and that had we gone a
little further we might have made a fine journey.
The country consisted of open, well-grassed,
pebbly plains, intersected by numerous small
channels, all containing water. Abundance of
fine rich portulaca was just bursting into flower
along all these channels, as well as on the greater
portion of the plain. The creek that we camped
on last night ran nearly parallel with us through-
out this stage. We should have crossed it to
avoid the stony plains, but were prevented by the
flood from so doing.
Saturday, March 23. —Mosquito Gamp, 35, R.
—Started at a quarter to six, and followed
, down the creek, which has much of the charac-


teristic appearance of the River Burke, where we
crossed it on our up journey. The land in the
vieinhy greatly improves as one goes down, be-
coming less stony end better grassed. At eleven
o’clock we crossed a small tributary from the
eastward, and there was a distant, range of consi-
derable extent visible in that direc ion. Halted
for the afternoon in a bend, where there was
tolerable feed, for i he banks are everywhere more
Or less scrubby.
Sunday, March 24 —Three hour Camp, 36, R.
Monday, March 25 Native Dog Camp, 27 R.
Slatted at half-past live, looking for a good place
to halt for >he day. This we found at, a short
distance down the creek, and immediately dis-
covered that it was close to Gamp 89 of our up
journey. Had not expected hat we were so
much to the westward. After breakfast took
some time altitudes, and was about to go back to
last camp for some hings that had been left,
when I found Gray behind a tree, eating skilli-
golee. He explained that he was suff-ring from
dysentery, and had taken the flour without leave.
Sent him to report himself to Mr. Burke, and
went cm. lie, having got King to tell Mr. Burke
for him, was called up and received a good thrash-
ing. There is no knowing to »ha r extent he has
been robbing us. Many things have been found
to run unaccountably short. Started at. seven
o’clock, the camels in first-rate spirits. We fol-
lowed our old course back (S ) The first portion of
the plains had much the same appearance as when
we came up, but that near camp 88, which then
looked so fresh and green, is no« very much
dried up, and we saw no signs of water anywhere.
In fact, there seems to have been little or no
rain about here since we passed. Soon after
three o’clock we struck the first of several small
creeks or billibongs, which must be portions of
the creek with the deep channel that we crossed
on going up, we being now rather to the west-
ward of our former course. From here, after
traversing about two miles ot the barest cl*y
plain, devoid of all vegetation, we reached a small
watercourse, most of the holes in which con ained
some water of a milky or creamy description.
Fine saltbush and portulac being abundant in the
vicinity, we camped here at 430 a m. When we
s’arted in the evening, a strong breeze had
already sprung up in the south, which conveyed
much of the characteristic feeling of a hot wind.
It increased gradually to a force of five and six,
but 1 y eleven o’clock bad become decidedly cool,
and was so chilly towards morning that we found
it necessary o throw on our ponchos. A few
cir. cum. clouds were coming up from the east
when we started, but we left them behind, and
nothing was visible during the night but a thin
hazy veil. The gale con inued throughout the
26th, becoming warmer as the day advanced. In
the afternoon it blew furiously, raising a good
deal of dust. The tempera ure of air at 4 p.m.
was 941 eg. in the shade. Wind trees all day.
Tuesday, March 26.—Saltbush Camp, 38, R,
Wednesday, “an-h 27.—Gamp 39, R.
Thursday, March 28 —Camp 40, R.
Friday, March 29 Camp 41, R.—Camels’last
feast. Fine green feed at this camp. Plenty of
vine and young polygonums on the small billi-
bom s.
Saturday, March 30 —Camp 42, R —Boocha’s
Rest.—Employed all day in cutting up, jerking
and eating Boocha. The day turned out SS
favourable for us as we could have wished, and
a considerable portion of the meat was completely
jerked before sunse'.
Sunday, March 31. —Camp 43, R. —Mia Mia
Camp. Den y of good dry feed, various shrubs,
salt bushes, including cotton bush and some
coarse kangaroo grass ; water in the hollows on
the stony pavement. The neighbouring country
chiefly composed of stony rises and sand ridges.
Monday, April I.—Camp 43, R.
Tuesday, April 2.—Camp 44, R.— Thermome-
ter broken.
Wednesday, April 3.—Camp 45, R.—Salt Meat
Camp.
Thursday, April 4.—Camp 46, R.—The Plant
Camp.
Friday, April s.—Camp 47, R. Oil Gamp.—
Earthy and clayey plains, generally sound, and
tolerably grassed ; but in other places bare salt-
bush, withered.
Saturday, April 6.—Wild Duck Camp, 48, R.—
Earthy flats, cut into innumerable watercourses,
[succeeded by] fine open plains, generally very
bare, but having in some places patches of fioa
saltbush. The dead stalks of portulac and mal-
lows show that those plan's are very plentiful in
some seasons. [Towards noon came upon] earthy
plains and numerous billibongs.
Sunday, April 7. -Camp 49, R.—Find the
water and feed much dried up. Nearly all the
water we have met with has a slightly brackish
taste of a peculiar kind, somewhat resembling in
flavour potassio tartrate of soda.
Monday, April 8 —Camp 50, R.—Camped a
short dis ance above Camp 75. The creek here
contains more water, and there is a considerable
quantity of green trass in i's bed, but it is much
dried up since we passed before. Halted fifteen
minutes to send back for Gray, who gammoned
he could not walk. Some good showers must
have fallen lately, as we have passed surface
water on the plains every day. In the latter por-
tion of to-day’s journey the young grass and
portulac are springing freshly in the fiats and on
the sides of the sand ridges.
Tuesday, April 9.—Camp 51, R.—Camped on
the bank of the creek, where there is a regular
field of saltbush, as well as some grass in its bed,
very acceptable to the horse, who has not had a
proper feed for the last week until last night, and
is, consequently, nearly knocked up.
Wednesday, April 10.—Camp 52, R. —Re-
mained at Camp 52, R, all day to cut up and
jerk the meat of the horse Billy, who was so re-
duced and knocked up for want of food that
there appeared little chance of his reaching the
other side of the desert; and as we were running
short of food of every description ourselves, we
thought it best to secure his flesh at once. We
found it healthy and tender, but without the
slightest trace of fat in any portion of the body.
Thursday, April 11.—Plenty of water in creek
down to this point.
Friday, April 12. —Extensive earthy plains,
intersected by numerous watercourses.
Saturday, April 13.—Small watercourses lined
with lakes. Plenty of saltbush and chrysanthe-
mums on either side. Camped on Stony
Desert.
[Note by Transcriber. —Up to this point, as it
appears from Mr, Wills’s field-hook, the expedt-


lion never passed . a day in which they did not
traverse the banks of, or cross, a creek or other
watercourse.]
Sunday, April 14.
Monday, April 15.—1 t commenced to rain
lightly at five a.m. this morning, and continued
raining pretty steadily throughout the day.
Owing to the wet and the exertion of crossing the
numerous sand ridges, Linda became knocked up
about four o’clock, and we had to halt at a clay-
pan amongst the sand hills. [The party seems
to have crossed a creek near a native camp,
about 10 a.m ]
Tuesday, April 16.
Wednesday, April 17.—This morning, about
sunrise. Gray died. He had not spoken a word
distinctly since his first attack, which was just as
we were about to start.
Thursday, April 18. —Another creek and native
camp were passed.
Friday, April 19.—Camped again without water,
on the sandy bed of the creek, having been fol •
lowed by a lot of natives who were desirous of
our company ; but as we preferred camping alone,
we were compelled to move on until rather laie,
in order to get away from them. Tne night was
very cold. A strong breeze was blowing from the
S., which made the fire so irregular that, as on
the two previous nights, it was impossible to keep
up a fair temperature. Our general course
throughout the day had been S.S.B.
Saturday, April 20.
Sunday, April 21. —Arrived at the depdt this
evening, just in time to find it deserted. A note
left in the plant by Brahe communicates the
pleasing information that they have started to-
day for the Darling ; their camels and horses all
well and in good condition. We and our camels
being just done up, and scarcely able to reach the
depot, have very little chance of overtaking
them. Brahe has fortunately left us ample pro
visions to take us to the bounds of civilization,
namely:—Flour, 501 b.; rice, 201 b. ; oatmeal,
601 b.; sugar, 601 b.; and dried meat, 151 b. These
provisions, together with afe w horse- shoes and nails
and some odds and ends, constitute all the articles
left, and place us in a very awkward position in
respect to clothing. Our disappointment at find-
ing the depot deserted may easily be imagined ;
—returning in an exhausted sta e, after four
months of the severest travelling and priva-
tion, our legs almost paralyzed, so that each
of us found it a most trying task only to
walk a few yards. Such a leg-bound feeling
I never before experienced, and hope I never
shall again. The exertion required to get up a
slight piece of rising ground, even without any
load, induces an indescribable sensation of pain
and helplessness, and the general lassitude
makes one unfit for anything. Poor Gray must
have suffered very much many times when we
thought him shamming. It is most fortunate for
us that these symptoms, which so early affected
him, did not come on us until we were reduced to
an exclusively animal diet of such an inferior
description as that offered by the flesh of a worn
out and exhausted horse. We were not long in
getting out the grub that Brahe had left, and we
made a good supper off some oatmeal porridge
and sugar. This, together with the excitement
of finding ourselves in such a peculiar and almost
unexpected position, bad a wonderful effect in re-
moving the stiffness from our leis. Whether it
is possible that the vegetables can so have aflf cted
us, I know not; but both Mr. Burke and I re*
marked a most decided relief and a strength in
the legs greater than we had had for several days.
I am inclined to think hat but for the abundance
of portulac that we obtained on the journey, we
should scarcely have returned to Cooper’s Creek
at (_a.ll].
Memo.—Verbally transcribed from the field-
books of the late Mr. Wills. Very few words,
casually omitted in the author’s manuscript,
have been added in brackets. A few botanical
expiana ions have been appended. A few sepa-
rate general remarks referring to this portion of
the diary will be published, together with the
meteorological notes to which they are contiguous.
No other noes in reference to this portion of the
journey are extant.
Nov. 5,1861. Fred. Mueller,
JOURNAL OF TRIP PROM COOPER’S
CREEK TOWARDS ADELAIDE.
April, 1861.
The advance party of the Victorian Exploring
Expedition, consisting of Burke, Wills, and
King (Gray being dead), having returned from
Carpentaria on ihe 21st April in an exhausted
and weak state, and finding that the de( ol party
left at Cooper’s Creek had started for the Darling,
with their horses and camels fresh and in good
condition, deemed it useless to attempt io over-
take them, having only two camels, both done
up, and being so weak themselves as to be unable
to walk more than four or five miles a day. Find-
ing abo that the provisions left at the depot for
them would scarcely take them to ' enmdie,
started down Cooper’s Creek for Adelaide, vid
Mount Hopeless, on the morning of the 23rd
April, intending to follow as nearly as possible
the route taken by Gregory ; by so doing they
hope to be able to recruit themselves and the
camels, whilst sauntering slowly down the creek,
and to have sufficient provisions left to take them
comfortably, or at least without risk, to some
station in South Australia. Their equipment
consists of the following articles : - Flour, 501 b.;
sugar, 601 b.; rice, 201 b. ; oatmeal, 601 b. ; jerked
meat, 251 b. ; ginger, 21b. ; salt, 11b.
(Then follow some native words, with their
meanings).
Tuesday, April 23.—From Depdt.—Having col-
lected ‘Ogether all the odds and ends ’hat seemed
likely to be of use to us, in addition to provisions
left in the plant, we started at a quarter past nine
a.m., keeping down the southern bank of the
creek. We only went about five miles, and
camped at half past eleven on a billibong, where
the feed was preuy good. We find the change
of diet already making a great improvement in
our spiri s and strength. The weather is delight-
ful, days agreeably warm, but the nights very
chilly. The latter is more noticeable from our
deficiency in clothing, the depot party having


taken all the reserve things back with them to
the Darling. To Camp No. 1.
Wednesday, April 24,—From Camp No. 1. —As
we were about to start this morning some blacks
came by, from whom we were for:unate enough
to get about twelve pounds of fish for a few
pieces of straps and some matches, &c. This is a
great treat for us, as well as a valuable addition
to our rations. We started as a quarter past
eight p.m. on our way down the creek, the blacks
going in the opposite direction—little thinking
that in a few miles they would be able to get
lots of pieces for nothing, better than those they
had obtained from us. To Camp No. 2.
Thursday, April 25.—From Camp No. 2.
Awoke at five o’clock, after a most refreshing
night’s rest. The sky was beautifully clear and
the air rather chilly. The terrestrial radiation
seems to have been considerable, and a slight
dew had fallen. We had scarcely finished break-
fast when our friends the blacks, from whom we
obtained the fish, made their appearance with a
few more, and seemed inclined to go with us and
keep up the supply. We gave them some sugar,
with which they were greatly pleased. They are
by far the most well-behaved blacks we have seen
on Cooper’s Greek We did not get away from
the camp until half-past nine a.m., continuing
our course down the most southern branch of the
creek, which keeps a general S.W. course. We
passed across the stony point which abuts on one
of the largest waterholes in the creek, and
camped at half-past twelve about a mile below
the most dangerous part of the rocky path. At
this latter place we had an accident that might
have resulted badly for us. One of the camels
fell while crossing the worst part, but we for-
tunately got him out with only a few cuts and
bruises. The waterhole at this camp is a
very fine one, being (to Camp No. 3)
several miles long and on an average about
chains broad. The waterfowl are numerous, but
rather shy—not nearly so much so, however, as
those on the creeks between here and Carpen-
taria, and I am convinced the shyness of the
latter, which was also remarked by Sturt on his
trip to Eyre’s Creek, arises entirely from the
scarcity of animals, both human and otherwise,
and not from any peculiar mode of catching them
that the blacks may have.
Friday, April 26. From Camp No. 3. —Last
night was beautifully calm, and comparatively
warm, although the sky was very clear. Re-
loaded the camels by moonlight this morning, and
started at a quarter to six. Striking off to the
south of the creek, we soon got on a native path,
which leaves the creeK just below the stony
ground, and takes a course nearly west across a
piece of open country, bounded on the south by
sand-ridges, and on the north by the scrubby
ground which flanks the bank of the creek at this
part of its course. Leaving the path on the right
at a distance of three miles, we turned up a
small creek which passes down between some
sand-hills ; and finding a nice patch of feed
for the camels at a waterhole, we halted at
fifteen minutes past seven for breakfast. We
started again at fifty minutes past nine a.m.,
Continuing our westerly course along the path
we crossed to the S. of the watercourse above the
water, and proceeded over the most splendid
saltbush country that one could wish to see.
bounded on the left by sand-hills, whilst to thts
right the peculiar-looking flat-topped sandstone
ranges form an extensive amphitheatre, through
the far side of the arena of which may be traced
the dark line of creek timber. At twelve o’clock
we camped in the bed of the creek, at Camp
No. , our last camp on the road down from
the Gulf, having taken four days to do what we
then did in one. This comparative rest, and the
change in diet, have also worked wonders, how-
ever ; the leg-tied feeling is now entirely gone,
and I believe that in less than a week we shall
be fit to undergo any fatigue whatever. The
camels are improving, and seem capable of doing
all that we are likely to require of them. To
Camp No. 4.
Saturday, April 27.—First part of night clear,
with a light breeze from 8, Temperature at
midnight lOdeg. (Reaumur); towards morning
there were a few cir. cum. clouds passing over N.E.
to S.W., but these disappeared before daylight;
at five a.m. the temperature was 7 sdeg. (Reau-
mur). We started at six o’clock, and, following
the native path, which at about a mile from our
camp takes a southerly direction, we soon came
to the high sandy alluvutT deposit, which separates
the creek at this point from the stony rises.
Here we struck of? from the path, keeping well
to the S. of the creek, in order that we might
mess in a branch of it that took a southerly
direction. At twenty minutes past nine we came
in on the creek again where it runs due south, and
halted for breakfast at a fine waterhole, with fine
fresh feed for the camels. Here we remained
until noon, when we moved on again, and camped
at one o’clock oil a general course ; having been
throughout the morning S.W. eight miles. The
weather is most agreeable and pleasant; nothing
could be more favourable for us up to the pre-
sent time. The temperature in the shade at
half-past ten a.m, was 17 - 5 (Reaumur), with a
light breeze from S., and a few small cir. cum.
clouds towards the N. I greatly feel the want of
more insiruments, the only things I have left
being my watch, prism compass, pocket compass,
and one thermometer (Reaumur). To Camp
No. 5.
Sunday, April 28.—From Camp No. 5. —Morn-
ing fine and calm, but rather chilly. Started at
a quarter to five a.m., following down the bed of
a creek in a westerly direction, by moonlight.
Our stage was, however, very short, for about a
mite one of the camels (Landa) got bogged by the
side of a waterhole, ard although we tried every
means in our power, we found it impossible to get
him out. All the ground beneath the surface
was a bottomless quicksand, through which the
beast sank too rapidly for us to get bushes or
timber fairly beneath him, and being of a very
sluggish stupid nature, he could never be got to
make sufficiently strenuous efforts towards ex-
tricating himself. In the evening, as a last
chance, we let the water in from the creek, so as
to buoy him up and at the same time soften the
ground about his legs, but it was of no avail.
The brute lay quietly in it as if he quite enjoyed
his position. To Gamp No. 6.
Monday, April 29.—From Camp No. 6. —Find-
ing Landa still in the hole, we made a few
attempts at extricating him, and then shot him ;
and after breakfast commenced cutting off what
flesh we could get at, for jerking.


Tuesday, April 30.—Gamp No. 6.—Remained
here to-day for the purpose of drying the meat,
for which process the weather is not very favour-
able. (Meteorological note follows.)
Wednesday, May I.—From Camp No. 6.
Started at twenty minutes to nine, having loaded
our only camel. Rajah, with the most necessary
and useful articles, and packed up a small swag
each of bedding and clothing for our own
shoulders. We kept on the right bank of the
creek for about a mile, and then crossed over at
a native camp to the left, where we got on a path
running due west, the creek having turned to
the N. Following the path, we crossed an open
plain, and then sand-ridges, whence we saw the
creek straight ahead of us, running nearly S.
again. The path took us to the southernmost
point of the bend, in a distance of about two and
a-half miles from where we had crossed the
creek, thereby saving us from three to four
miles, as it cannot be less than six miles round
by tue creek. To Camp No. 7.
Thursday, May 2.—Camp No. 7. —Breakfasted
by moonlight, and started at half-past six. Fol-
lowing down the left bank of the creek in
a westerly direction, we came, at a distance
of six miles, on a lot of natives, who were
camped on the bed of a creek. They seemed
to have just breakfasted, and were most liberal in
the presentations of fish and cake. We could
only return the compliment by some fish-hooks
and sugar. About a mile further on, we came to
a separation of the creek, where what looked like
the main branch looked towards the south. This
channel we followed, not, however, without some
misgivings as to its character, which were soon
increased by the small and unfavourable appear-
ance that the creek assumed. On our continuing
along it a little further, it began to improve, and
widened out, with fine waterholes of considerable
depth. The banks were very steep, and a belt of
scrub lined it on either side. This made it very
inconvenient for travelling, especially as the bed
of the creek was full of water for considerable
distances. At eleven a.m., we halted until half-
past one p.m., and then moved on again, taking
a S.S.W. course for about two miles, when, at
the end of a very long waterhole, it breaks into
billibongs, which continue splitting into sandy
channels until they are all lost in the earthy soil
of a box forest. Seeing little chance of water
ahead, we turned back to the end of the long water-
hole, and camped for the night. On our way
back, Rajah showed signs of being done up. He
had been trembling greatly all the morning. On
this account his load was further lightened to the
amount of a few pounds, by the doing away with
the sugar, ginger, tea, cocoa, and two or three
tin-plates. To camp No. 8.
Friday, May 3.—Camp No. B.—Started at seven
a.m., striking off in a northerly direction for the
main creek. At a mile aud a-half came to a
branch which (left unfinished.) To camp No. 9.
Saturday, May 4. —Junction from Camp No.
9.—Night and morning very cold. Sky clear,
almost calm; occasionally a light breath of air
from south. Rajah appears to feel the cold very
much. He was so stiff this morning as to be
scarcely able to get up with his load. Started to
return down the creek at 6.45, and halted for
breakfast at nine a.m., at the same spot as we
breakfasted at yesterday. Proceeding from there
down the creek, we soon found a repetition of
the features that were exhibited by the creek
examined on Thursday. At a mile and a-half
we came to the last water-hole, and below
that the channel became more sandy and
shallow, and continued to send off billibongs to
the south and west, slightly changing its course
each time until it disappeared altogether in a
north-westerly direction. Leaving King with the
camel, we went on a mile or two to see if we could
find water, and being unsuccessful, we were
obliged to return to where we had breakfasted,
as being the best place for feed and water.
Sunday, May s.—To Camp No. 10.—Started
by myself to reconnoitre the country in a
southerly direction, leaving Mr. Burke and
King with the camel at Camp No. 10. Travelled
S. W. by S. for two hours, following the course of
the most southerly billibongs. Found the earthy
soil becoming more loose and cracked up, and
the box-track gradually disappearing. Changed
course to west, for a high sand ridge, which I
reached in one hour and a half, and continuing in
the same direction to one still higher, obtained
from it a good view of the surrounding country.
To the north were the extensive box forests
bounding the creek on either side. To the east
earthy plains intersected by water-courses and
lines of timber, and bounded in the distance by
sand-ridges. To the south the projection of the
sand-ridge partially intercepted the view; the rest
was composed of earthy plains, apparently clothed
with chrysanthemums. To the westward, another
but smaller plain was bounded also by high sand-
idges, running nearly parallel with the one on which
I was standing. This dreary prospect offering no
encouragement for me to proceed, I returned to
Camp 10 by a more direct and better route than
I had come, passing over some good saltbush land,
which borders on the billibongs to the westward.
(Here follow some meteorological notes.)
Monday, May 6.—From Camp No. 10 back to
Camp No. 9. —Moved up the creek again to
Camp No. 9, at the junction, to breakfast, and
remained the day there. The present state of
things is not calculated to raise our spirits much.
The rations are rapidly diminishing ; our clothing
especially the boots, are all going to pieces, and
we have not the materials for repairing them
properly; the camel is completely done up, and
can scarcely get along, although he has the best
of feed, and is resting half his time. I suppose
this will end in our having to live like the blacks
for a few months.
Tuesday, May 7.—Camp No. 9. - Breakfasted
at daylight, but when about to start, found that
the camel would not rise, even without any load
on his back. After making every attempt
to get him up, we were obliged to leave him
to himself. Mr. Burke and I started down the
creek to reconnoitre. At about eleven miles we
came to some blacks fishing. They gave us some
half-a-dozen fish each for luncheon, and intimated
that if we would go to their camp, we should
have some more, and some bread. I tore in two
a piece of macintosh stuff that I had, and Mr.
Burke gave one piece, and I the other. We then
went onto their camp, about three miles further.
They had caught a considerable quantity of fish,
but most of them were small. I noticed three
different kinds- a small one that they call “ cupi,”
five to six inches long, and not broader than an


eel ; the common one, with large coarse scales,
termed “peru;” and a delicious fish, some of which
run from a pound to two pounds weight. The
natives call them “cawilchi.” On our arrival at the
camp, they led us to a spot to camp on, and soon
afterwards brought a lot of fish and bread, which
they call nardoo. The lighting a tire with matches
delights them, but they do not care about having
them. In the evening, various members of the
tribe came down with lumps of nardoo and hand-
fuls of fish, until we were positively unable to eat
any more. They also gave us some stuff they call
bedgery, or pedgery. It has a highly in-
toxicating effect, when chewed even in small
quantities. It appears to be the dried stems and
leaves of some shrub.
Wednesday, May B.—Left the Macks’ camp at
half past seven, Mr. Burke returning to the junc-
tion, whilst I proceeded to trace down the creek.
Tbislfounda shorter ask than I had expected, for
it soon showed signs of running out, and at the same
time kept considerably to he north of west.
There were several fine waterholes within about
four miles of the camp I had left, but not a drop
all ihe way beyond that, a distance of seven
miles. Finding that the creek turned greatly
towards the north, I returned to the blacks’ en-
campment ; and, as I was about to pass, they in-
vited me to stay. So I did so, and was even
more hospitably en f ertained than before, being
on this occasion offered a share of a gunyah, and
supolied with plenty of fish and nardoo, as well
as a couple of nice fat rats. The latter I found
most delicious. They were baked in the skins.
Last night was clear and calm, but unusually
warm. We slept by a fire, just in front of the
blacks’ camp. They were very attentive in
bringing us firewood, and keeping the fire up
during the night.
Thursday, May 9.—Parted from my friends,
the blacks, at half-past seven, and started for
Camo No. 9.
Friday, May 10.—Damp No, 9 —Mr. Burke and
King employed in jerking the camel’s flesh, whilst
I went out to look for the nardoo seed, for making
bread. In this I was unsuccessful, not being able
to find a single tree of it in the neighbourhood of
the camp. I however tried boding the large kind
of bean which the blacks call padlu; they boil
easily, and when shelled are very sweet, much
resemblii gin taste the French chesnut. They
are to be found in large quantities nearly every-
where.
Saturday, May 11.—Camp No. 9. —To day Mr.
Burke and King started down the creek for the
blacks’ camp, determined to ascertain all parti-
culars about ihe nardoo. I have now my turn
at the meat jerking, and mustdivlse some means
for trapping the birds and rats, which is a plea-
sant prospect after our dashing trip to Carpen-
taria, having to hang about Cooper’s Creek,
living like the blacks.
Sunday, May 12.—Mr. Burke and King re-
turned this morning, having been unsuccessful
in their search for the blacks, who, it seems, have
moved over to the other branch of the creek.
Decided on moving out on the main creek to-
morrow, and then trying .to find the natives of
he creek,
Monday, May 13.—Shifted some of the things,
and nrought them back again, Mr. Burke think-
ing it better for one to remain here with them
for a few days, so as to eat the remains of the
fresh meat, whilst the others went in search of the
blacks and nardoo.
Tuesday, May 14. Mr, Burke and King gone
up the creek to look for blacks, with four days’
provisions. Saif employed in preparing for a
final start on their return. This evening Mr,
Burke and King returned, having been soma
considerable distance up the creek, and found no
blacks. It is now se tied that we plant the
things, and all start together the day after to-
morrow. The ’reather con inues very fine ; the
nights calm, clear, and cold, and the days clear,
with a breeze generally from S., but to-day rrom
8., for a change. This makes the first part of
the day rather cold. Wben clouds appear they
invariably move from W. to B.
Wednesday, May 15.—Camp 9.—Planting the
things, and preparing to leaver the creek for
Mount Hopeless.
Thursday, May 16.—Having completed our
planting, &c., started up the creek to the second
blacks’ camp, a distance of about eight miles.
Finding our loads rather too heavy, we made a
small plant here of such ar ides as could best be
spared. (Here follow a few meteorological notes.)
Friday, May 17. —Nardoo. —Started this morning
on a blacks’ path, leaving the creek on our left,
our intention being to keep a south-easterly
direction until we should cut some likely-looking
creek, and then to folio wit down. On approach-
ing the foot of the first sand-hill King caught
sight in the flat of some nardoo seeds, and we
soon found that the flat was covered with them.
This discovery caused somewhat of a revolution
in our feelings, for we considered that with the
knowledge of this plant we were in a position
to support ourselves, even if we were destined to
remain on the creek and wait for assistance from
town. Crossing some sand-ridges running N,
and S., we struck into a creek which runs out of
Cooper’s Greek, and followed it down. At about
five miles we came to a large waterhole, beyond
which the watercourse runs out on extensive
flats and earthy plains. Calm night; sky cleared
towards morning, and it became very cold. A
slight easterly breeze sprang up at sunrise, but
soon died away again. The sky again became
overcast, and remained so throughout the day.
There was occasionally a light breeze from south,
but during the greater portion of the day it was
quite calm. Fine halo around the sun in the
afternoon.
Saturday, May 18.—Camp No. 16.—(N0 entry
except the following meteorological entry on an
opposite page, which may probably refer to this
date.)_ Calm night, sky sometimes clear and
sometimes partially overcast with veil clouds.
Sunday, May 19.—(N0 entry beyond this cita-
tion of date.)
Monday, May 20.—(N0 entry beyond this cita-
tion of date.)
Tuesday, May 21. —Creek. (No entry beyond
this citation of date.)
Wednesday, May 22.—Cooper’s Creek. (No
entry beyond citation of date.)
Thursday, May 23. —(No entry beyond this
citation of date.)
Friday, May 24.—Started with King to cele-
brate the Queen’s birthday by fetching from
Nardoo Greek what is now to us the staff of life.
Returned at a little after two p.m,, with a fair


supply, but find the collecting of the seed a
slower and more troublesome process than could
be desired. Whilst picking the seed, about
eleven o’clock a.m., both of us heard distinc ly
the noise of an explosion, as if of a gun, at some
considerable distance. We supposed it. to have
been a shot fired by Mr. Burke ; but on returning
to the camp found that he had not fired nor had
heard the noise. The sky was partially overcast
with high cum. str. clouds, and a light breeze
blew from the east, but nothing to indicate a
thunderstorm in any direction.
Saturday, May 25.—(N0 entry beyond this.)
Sunday, May 26.—(N0 entry beyond this.)
Monday, May 27.—Started up rhe creek this
morning for the dep6t, in order to deposit
journals and a record of the state of affairs here.
On reaching the sand hills below where Landa
was bogged I passed some blacks on a fla col-
lecting nardoo seed. Never saw such an abun-
dance of the seed before. The ground in some
parts was quite black with it. There were only
two or hree gins and children, and they directed
me on, as if to their camp, in the direction I was
before going ; but I had not gone far over the
first sand hill when I was overtaken by about
twenty blacks, bent on taking me back to their
camp, and promising any quantity of nardoo and
fish. On my going with them, one carried the
shovel, and another insisted on taking rny swag,
in such a friendly manner that I could not refuse
them. They were gready amused with the
various lit le things I had with me. In the even-
ing they supplied me with abundance of nardoo
and fish ; and one of the old men, Poko Tinnamira,
shared his gunyah with me. . . . The night
was very cold, but, by the help of several fires—
[The entry suddenly stops, but in the margin of
the opposi e page are written the names of seve-
ral natives, and certain native words, with their
meanings in English ]
Tuesday, May 28 —Left the blacks’ camp, and
proceeded up the creek. Obtained some mussels
near where Landa died, and halted for breakfast.
Still feel ve y unwell from the effects of he con-
stipation of the bowels. The stools are exceed-
ingly painful. After breakfast, travelled on to
our third camp coming down. Puy to Blowr.
(sic )
Wednesday, May 29. Started at seven
o’clock, and went on to the duck-holes, where
we breakfasted coming down. Halted there
at thirty minutes past nine for a feed, and
then moved on. At the stones saw a lot of
crows quarrelling about something near the
water. Found it to be a large fish, of which they
had eaten a considerable portion. Finding it
quite fresh and good, I decided the quarrel by
taking i with me. It proved a most valuable
addition to my otherwise scanty supper of nardoo
porridge. This evening I camped very com-
fortably in a mia-mia, about eleven miles from the
dep6t The night was very cold, al hough not
en irely cloudless. A brisk easterly breeze sprang
up in the morning, and blew freshly all day. In
the evening <he sky clouded in, and there were
one or two slight showers, but nothing to wet
the ground.
Thursday, May 30.—Beached the depdt this
morning, at eleven o’clock. No traces of any one
except blacks having been here since we left.
Deposited some journals, and a notice of our
present condition. Started back in the afternoon,
and camped at the first waterhole. Last night
being cloudy, was unusually warm and pleasant.
Friday, May 31.—Decamped at thirty minutes
past seven, having first breakfasted. Passed be-
tween the sand-hills at nine, and reached ihe
blanket mia-mias at twenty minutes to eleven ;
from there proceeded on to the rocks, where I
arrived at half-past one, having delayed about
half-an-hour on the road in gathering some por-
tuloc. It had been a fine morning, but the sky
now became overcast, and threatened to set in
for a steady rain ; and as I felt very weak and
dred I only moved on about a mile further, and
camped in a sheltered gully, under some bushes.
Night clear and very cold. No wind. Towards
morning sky became slightly overcast with cirro
str. clouds.
Saturday, June I.—Started at a quarter to
eight a.m. Passed the duck holes at enam.,
and my second camp up at two p.m., having
rested in the meantime about forty-five minutes.
Thought to have reached the blacks’ camp, or at
least where Landa was bogged, bat found myself
altogether 'oo weak and exhausted ; in fact, had
extreme difficulty in retting across the numerous
little gullies, and was at las obliged to camp, from
sheer fatigue. Night ultimately clear and cloudy,
with occasional showers.
Sunday, June 2. -Started at half-past six,
thinking to breakfast at the blacks’ camp, below
Landa’s grave ; found myself very much fagged,
and did not arrive at their camp until ten a m,,
and then found myself disappointed as to a good
breakfast, the camp being deserted Having
rested awhile, and eaten a few fish-bones, I
moved down the creek, hoping by a late march
to be able to reach our own camp, but I soon
found, from my extreme weakness, that that
would be out of the question. A certain amount
of good luck, however, still stuck to me, for, on
going along by a large waterhole, I was so fortu-
nate as to find a large fish, about a pound and
a-half in weight, which was just being choked by
another which it had tried to swallow, but which
bad stuck in its throat. I soon had a fire lit, and
both of the fish cooked and eaten. The large one
was in good condition. Moving on again after
my late breakfast, I passed Camp 67 of the
journey to Carpentaria, and camped for the night
under some polygonum bushes.
Monday, June 3 —Started at seven o’clock,
and, keeping on the south bank of the creek,
was rather encouraged, at about >hree miles, by
the sound of numerous crows a-head ; presently
fancied I could see smoke, and was shortly after-
wards set at my ease by hearing a cooey from
Pitchery, who stood on the opposite hank, and
directed me around the lower end of the water-
bole, continually repeating his assurance of
abundance of fish and bread. Having with some
considerable difficulty managed to ascend he
sandy path that led to the camp, I was conducted
by the chief to a fire, where a large pile of fish
were just being cooked in the most approved
a yle. These I imagined to be for the general
consumption of the half a dozen naives gathered
around, but it turned out that they had al ready
bad their breakfast. I was expected to dispose
of this lot—a task which, to my own astonish-
ment, I soon accomplished, keeping two or three
blacks pretty steadily at work extracting the


bones for me. The fish being disposed of, next
came a supply of nardoo cake and water, until I
was so full as to be unable to eat any more,
when Pitchery allowing me a short time to re-
cover myself, fetched a large bowl of the raw
nardoo flour, mixed to a thin paste—a most in-
sinuating article, and one that they appear to
esteem a great delicacy. I was then invited to
stop the night there, but this I declined, and
proceeded on my way home.
Tuesday, June 4. —Started for the blacks’
camp, intending to test the practicability of
living with them, and to see what I could learn
as to their ways and manners.
Wednesday, June s.—Remained with the
blacks. Light rain during the greater part of
the night, and more or less throughout the day,
in showers. Wind blowing in squalls from S.
Thursday, June 6. —Returned to our own
camp, found that Mr. Burke and King had been
well supplied with fish by the blacks. Made pre-
paration for shifting our camp nearer to their’s
on the morrow.
Friday, June 7. —Started in the afternoon for
the blacks’ camp with such things as we could
take found ourselves all very weak, in spite of
the abundant supply of fish that we have lately
had. I myself could scarcely get along, although
carrying the lightest swag—only about thirty
pounds. Found that the blacks had decamped,
so determined on proceeding to-morrow up to
the next camp, near the nardoo field.
Saturday, June 8. —With the greatest fatigue
and difficulty we reached the nardoo camp. No
blacks, greatly to our disappointment. Took
possession of their best mia mia, and rested for
the remainder of the day.
Sunday, June 9. —King and I proceeded to
collect nardoo, leaving Mr. Burke at home.
Monday, June 10.—Mr. Burke and King col-
lecting nardoo; self at home, too weak to go
out. Was fortunate enough to shoot a crow.
[Here follow some meteorological notes, which
appear to relate to another period.]
Tuesday, June 11.—King out for nardoo. Mr.
Burke up the creek to look for the blacks.
Wednesday, June 12.—King out collecting
nardoo. Mr. Burke and I at home, pounding
and cleaning. 1 still feel myself, if anything,
weaker in the legs, although the nardoo appears
to he more thoroughly (?) digested,
Thursday, J une 13. —Last night the sky was
pretty clear, and the air rather cold, but nearly
calm; a few cir.-st. hung about the N. E. horizon
during the first part of the night. Mr. Burke
and King out for nardoo. Self weaker than ever,
scarcely able to go to the water hole for water.
Towards afternoon cir.-cum. and cir.-st, began to
appear, moving northward, scarcely any wind all
day.
Friday, June 14, —Night alternately clear and
cloudy, cir.-cum. and cum.-st. moving north-
wards; no wind, beautfullyi mild for the time of
year; in the morning some heavy clouds on
the horizon. King 'out for nardoo ; brought in a
good supply. Mr. Burke and I at home, pounding
and cleaning seed. I feel weaker than ever, and
both Mr. B. and King are beginning to feel very
unsteady in the legs.
Saturday, June 15.—Night clear, calm, and
cold ; morning very fine, with a light breath of
air from N.E. King out for nardoo; brought in
a fine supply. Mr. Burke and I pounding and
cleaning. He finds himself getting very weak,
and lam not a bit stronger, I have determined
on beginning to chew tobacco and eat less nardoo,
in hopes that it may induce some change in the
system. I have never yet recovered from the
effects of the constipation, and the passage of the
stools is always exceedingly painful.
Sunday, June 16. —Wind shifted to N., clouds
moving from W. to E.; thunder audible two or
three limes to the southward; sky becoming
densely overcast, with an occasional shower about
nine a. m. We finished up the remains of the Rajah
for dinner yesterday. King was fortunate enough
to shoot a crow this morning. The rain kept all
hands in pounding and cleaning seed during the
morning. The weather cleared up towards the
middle of the day, and a brisk breeze sprang up
in the south, lasting till near sunset, but rather
irregular in its force. Distant thunder was
audible to westward and southward frequently
during the afternoon.
Monday, June 17. —Night very boisterous and
stormy. Northerly wind blowing in squalls, and
heavy showers of rain, with thunder in the north
and west. Heavy clouds moving rapidly from
north to south ; gradually clearing up during the
morning, the wind continuing squally during the
day from W. and N.W. King out in the after-
noon for nardoo.
Tuesday, June 18. —Exceedingly cold night.
Sky clear, slight breeze, very chilly, and change-
able ; very heavy dew. After sunrise, eir.-st.
clouds began to pass over from west to east, gra-
dually becoming more dense, and assuming the
form of cum.-st. The sky cleared, and it became
warmer towards noon.
Wednesday, June 19.—Night calm; sky during
first part overcast with cir.-cum. clouds, most of
which cleared away towards morning, leaving the
air much colder, but the sky remained more or
less hazy all night, and it was not nearly as cold
as last night. About eight o’clock a strong
southerly wind sprung up, which enabled King
to blow the dust out of our nardoo seeds, but
made me too weak to render him any assist-
ance,
Thursday, June 20. —Night and morning very
cold, sky clear. lam completely reduced by the
effects of the cold and starvation. King gone out
for nardoo. Mr. Burke at home pounding seed ;
he finds himself getting very weak in the legs.
King holds out by far the best; the food seems
to agree with him pretty well. Finding the sun
come out pretty warm towards noon, I took a
sponging all over, but it seemed to do little good
beyond the cleaning effects, for my weakness is so
great that I could not do it with proper expedi-
tion. I cannot understand this nardoo at all ; it
certainly will not agree with me in any form.
We are now reduced to it alone, and we manage
to get from four to five pounds per day between
us. The stools it causes are enormous, and seem
greatly to exceed the quantity of bread consumed,
and is very slightly altered in appearance from
what it was when eaten.
Friday, June 21.—Last night was cold and
clear, winding up with a strong wind from N.E.
in the morning. I feel much weaker than ever,
and can scarcely crawl out of the mia-mia. Un-
less relief comes in some form or other, I cannot
possibly last more than a fortnight. It is a great


consolation, at least, in this position of ours, to
know that we have done all we could, and that
our deaths will rather be the result of the mis-
management of others than of any rash acts of
our own. Had we come to grief elsewhere, we
ould only have blamed ourselves; but here we
are, returned to Cooper’s Creek, where we had
evefy reason to look for provisions and clothing ;
and yet we have to die of starvation, in spite of
the explicit instructions given by Mr. Burke,
that the depdt party should await our return,
and the strong recommendation to the com-
mittee that we should be followed up by a
party' from Menindie. About noon a change of
wind took place, and it blew almost as hard from
the west as it did previously from the N.E. A few
cir. cum. continued to pass over towards east.
Saturday, June 22.—Night cloudy and warm.
Every appearance of rain. Thunder once or
twice during the night. Clouds moving in an
easterly direction. Lower atmosphere perfectly
calm. There were a few drops of rain during the
night, and in the morning, about nine a. m., there
was every prospect of more rain until towards
noon, when the sky cleared up for a time. Mr.
Burke and King cut for nardoo. The former re-
turned much fatigued. lam so weak to-day as
to be unable to get on my feet.
Sunday, June 23.—A1l hands at home. lam
so weak as to be incapable of crawling out of the
mia-mia. King holds out well, but Mr. Burke
finds himself weaker every day.
Monday, June 24.—A fearful night. At about
an hour before sunset, a southerly gale sprang
up and continued throughout the greater portion
of the night; the cold was intense, and it seemed
as if one would be shrivelled up. Towards morn-
ing, it fortunately lulled a little, but a strong
cold breeze continued till near sunset, after which
it became perfectly calm. King went out for
nardoo, in spite of the wind, and came in with a
good load, but he himself terribly cut up. He
says that he can no longer keep up the work, and
as he and Mr, Burke are both getting rapidly
weaker, we have but a slight chance of anything
but starvation, unless we can get hold of some
blacks.
Tuesday, June 23 (sic).—Night calm, clear,
and intensely cold, especially towards morning.
Nea Braybreak, King reported seeing a moon in
the E., with a haze of light stretching up from it,
he declared it to be quite as large as the moon,
and not dim at the edges. lam so weak
that any attempt to get a sight of it was out of
the question; but I think it must have been
Venus in the zodiacal light that he saw, with a
corona around her. Mr. Burke and King remain
at home cleaning and pounding seed. They are
both getting weaker every day. The cold plays
the deuce with us, from the small amount of
clothing we have. My wardrobe consists of a
wide-a-awake, a merino shirt, a regatta shirt
without sleeves, the remains of a pair of flannel
trousers, two pairs of socks in rags, and a waist-
coat of which I have managed to keep the pockets
together. The others are no better oft. Besides
these we have between us for bedding, two small
camel pads, some horsehair, two or three little
bits of a rag, and pieces of oilcloth saved from the
fire. The day turned out nice and warm.
Wednesday, June 24 {sic), —Calm night; sky
overcast with hazy cum. strat. clouds. An
easterly breeze sprang up towards morning,
making the air much colder. After sunrise there
were indications of a clearing up of the sky, but
it soon clouded in again, the upper current con-
tinuing to move in an easterly direction, whilst
a breeze from the E. and N.E. blew pretty regu-
larly throughout the day. Mr. Burke and King
are preparing to go up the creek in search of the
blacks. They will leave me some nardoo, wood
and water, with which I must do the best I can
until they return. I think this is almost our
only chance. I feel myself, if anything, rather
better, but I cannot say stronger. The nardoo is
beginning lo agree better with me ; but without
some change I see little chance for any of us.
They have both shown great hesitation and re-
luctance with regard to leaving me, and have re-
peatedly desired my candid opinion in the matter.
I could only repeat, however, that I considered
it our only chance, for I could not last long
on the nardoo, even if a supply could be kept up.
Thursday, June 25 {sic). — Cloudy, calm, and
comparatively warm night, clouds almost sta-
tionary. In the morning a gentle breeze
from east. Sky pratially cleared up during
the day, making it pleasantly warm and bright,
it remained clear during the afternoon and even-
ing, offering every prospect of a clear cold night.
Friday, June 26 (sic.)— Clear cold night, slight
breeze from the E., day beautifully warm and
pleasant. Mr. Burke suffers greatly from the
cold, and is getting extremely weak ; he and
King s f art to morrow up the creek, to look for
the blacks—it is the only chance we have of being
saved from starvation. I am weaker than ever
although I have a good appetite, and relish
the nardoo much, but it seems to give us no
nutriment, and the birds here are so shy as not
to be got at. Even if we got a good supply
of fish, I doubt whether we could do much work
on them and the nardoo alone. Nothing
now but the greatest good luck can now save any
of us ; and as for myself, I may live four or five
days if the weather continues warm. My pulse
are at forty-eight, and very weak, and my legs
and arms are nearly skin and bone. I can only
look out, like Mr. Micawber, “for something to
turn up;” but starvation on nardoo is by no
means very unpleasant, but for the weakness one
feels, and the utter inability to move oneself, for
as far as appetite is concerned, it gives me the
greatest satisfaction. Certainly, fat and sugar
would be more to one’s taste, in fact, those seem
to me to be the great stand by for one in this
extraordinary continent; not hat I mean to de-
preciate the farinacious food, but the want of
sugar and fat in all substances obtainable here is
so great that they become almost valueless to us
as articles of food, without the addition of some-
thing else.
(Signed) W. J. Wills.
MR. BURKE’S NOTES,
The following extracts are from the memo-
randum-book of Mr. Burke :
Mr. Archer, to whom the task of transcribing it
was intrusted, writes the following preface :
“ I went carefully through Burke’s note-book
last night. It is an ordinary memorandum-book,


with a clasp, and a side-pocket for a pencil. It is
much dilapidated, and several of the leaves are
torn out; some so torn had been written on. I
have numbered these consecutively throughout.
The following is a copy, letter for letter and word
for word, of all that remains of Burke’s pen-
cillinvs. I have queried all doubtful points”:—
No, 69. —Line of cour i xng (?) on bags, 1,4, 19,
20, 11, 3. Think well before giving an answer,
and never speak excep from strong convictions.
16fch December. —Left depot 65 ; followed by
the creek
17th —The same. 66.
18 h.—The same. 67.
19th.—We made a (?) small creek, supposed to
be Onta Era (?), or in the immediate neighbour-
hood of it. Good water. Gamp 69.
20th —Made a creek, where we found a great
many natives. They presented us with fish, and
offer d their women. Camp 70
21 it. Made another creek, camp 71. Splendid
water, fine feed for the camels ; would be a very
good place for a station. Since we have left
Cooper’s Greek we have travelled over a fine
sheep grazing country, well watered, and in every
respect well suited for occupation.
22nd December, 1860. —Camp 72. Encamped
on the borders of the desert.
23rd.—Travelled day and night, and encamped
in the night in the bed of a creek, as we supposed
we were near water.
24th.—Encamp d on the morning of this day
on the banks of Gray’s Creek, called af er him
because he was detached on horseback from the
party, and found it good water. The third day
without it. Now for a retrospective glance : We
started from Cooper’s Creek, Camp 66, with the
intention of going through to Byre’s Creek with-
out water. Loaded with 800 pin sof water ; four
riding camels carried 130 pints, each horse 150,
two pack camels 50 each, and 5 pints each mao.
25ch, Christmas Day. S arted at four am,
from Gray’s Greek, and arrived at a creek which
appears to be quite as large as Cooper’s Creek.
At two p.m. Oolab Sing gave some very decided
bints about stopping by lying down under the
trees. Splendid prospect.
26th Dec., 27th Dec., ?Bth Dec., 29tb Dec. —
Followed up the creek until it took a turn to the
south-east, which I thought rather too much to
put no with, therefore left it on the morning of
the 30th December, 12 30, on the road started
at seven o’clock, travelled eleven hours. 31st,
started at 2.20 sixteen and a-half hours on the
road, travelled thirteen and a-half hours.
Ist January.—Water.
2nd January.—Prom King’s Creek, eleven
hours on the road. Started at seven, travelled
nine and a-half hours ; desert.
3d January,—Five started; travelled twelve
hours no minutes.
4 r .h.—Twelve hours on the road.
sr,h.—Water at Wills’ or King’s Creek. It is
impossible to say the time we were up, for we
had to load the camels, to pack and feed them.
Wilson and Mackinnon, Printers, 78, Collins Street East, Melbourne.
to watch them and the horse, and to look for
water; but lam satisfied that the frame of man
never was more severely taxed. [Then follows an
entry for March 28ih, commencing thus,
“ March 28—At the conclusion of’’— -Then some
of the leaves appear to have been torn out from
pages 43 055.]
I3th January, 1860.—As I find it impossible to
keep a regular diary, I shall jo - . down my ideas
when I have an oppon unity and put the date.
Upon two occasions, at Cooper’s Greek and at
Ring’s Creek, on New Year’s Jay, whenever the
natives tried to bully or bounce us and were re-
pulsed, although the leaders appeared to be in
earnest, he followers, and particularly the young
ones, lauzhed heartily and seemed to be amused
at their leaders’ repulse. The old fellow at King’s
Creek who stuck his spear into the ground and
threw dust in the air, when I fired off ray pistol,
ran off in the most undignified manner. Names
for places ; —Thackeray, Barry, Hindoo, Lyons,
Forbes, Archer, Bennet, Colles, 0. S Nicholson,
Wood, Wrixon, Cope, Turner, Scratobley, Ligar,
Griffith. Green, Roe, Hamilton, Archer, Guiles.
18t,h Janu try. —Still on the ranges; tne camels
sweating profusely from fear.
20th January.—l determined today to go
straight at the ranges, and so far the experiment
has succeeded well. The poor camels sweating
and groaning, but we gave them a hot bath in
Turner’s Creek, which seemed to relieve ihem
very much. At last through—the camels bleed-
ing, sweating, and groaning. [Leaves 35 to 39
torn out. and eight leaves preceding torn out, no
marks of writing visible on ihe remnants. Leaves
24 to 33, both inclusive, blank on both sides ]
28oh March.—At the conclusion of report, it
would be well to say ihat we reached the sea, but
we could not obtain a view of the open ocean,
although we made every endeavour to do so.
Leaving Carpentaria— Flour, 831 b. ; pork, 31b. ;
D. meat, 351 b. ; biscuits, 121 b. ; rice, 12lb. ; sugar,
101 b. [Page 15 blank ] —Return party from Car-
pentaria arrived here las night, and found that
the D party had started on the same day. We
proceed slowly down the creek towards Adelaide
by Vlount Hopeless, and shall endeavour to follow
Gregory’s track ; but we are very weak, the
camels are done up, and we shall not be able to
travel faster than five miles a day at moat. Gray
died on I he road, from hunger and fatigue We
all suffered much from hunger, but the pro-
visions left here will, I think, res ore our
s rength. We have discovered a practicable
route to Carpentaria, the principal portion of
which lies in the 140th meridian of east longi-
tude. Between this and the Stony D -sert there
is some good country from there to the tropic.
The country is dry and stony between he tropic
and Carpentaria A considerable portion is
rangy, hut i- is well watered and richly grassed.
[Pages 20 and 21 torn, no writing apparent.
Pages 22 and 23 contain a memorandum of
siores, but without any particular reference to
time and place J


From the “ Examiner .”
ROBERT O’HARA BURKE.
One of our daily contemporaries has ob-
tained some slight particulars of the previous
career of the lamented gentlemen whose
names have become household words through-
out these colonies, which, in default of fuller
and more certain information, possess con-
siderable interest. From them we gather
that the leader of the expedition was born at
St. Clerans, Galway, Ireland, and was in his
fortieth year of age when he died. “He was
partly educated at home, and afterwards, for
the higher studies, in Belgium. Subsequently
he entered the Radefzky regiment of Hun-
garian Hussars in the Austrian service. Here
he displayed great assiduity in military
studies, soon came to be regarded as a most
efficient cavalry officer, and at an early period
obtained a captaincy. The eventful political
changes of that year of continental dis-
quietude, 1848, led to Mr. Burke’s re-
linquishing the Austrian service. After-
wards we hear of him as holding a com-
mand in the Irish mounted constabulary,
when he was for some time stationed in
Dublin, On resigning this office to emigrate,
he received several very flattering testimo-
nials, demonstrating that at that time, as
continually since, he l?ad the ability to se-
cure the respect and esteem of his com-
panions and fellow-officers. Mr. Burke ar-
rived at Hobart Town in 1853, but appears to
have soon proceeded to Melbourne, where he
at once obtained an appointment as acting-
inspector of police, under Mr. Mitchell. In
this capacity he remained till the close of
>3, when he was transferred to a command
Carlsruhe. In 1854 ho was advanced to
i Eeechworth district, to relieve Mr. Brice,
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES.
the police magistrate, and with a step in pro-
motion to the post of district inspector. Dur-
ing the progress of the Crimean war Mr. Burke
obtained leave of absence to enable him to
visit England, where he hoped, with the
interest he possessed, to have been enabled
to share the glory and the peril of the grand
struggle then existing between Russia and
the Allied Powers. In this hope he was
disappointed by the termination of the war,
upon which he returned to this colony and
re-assumed his command in our mounted
police force. In 1858 Mr. Burke was removed
to Castlemaine,” where he was stationed
when he obtained the appointment of leader
of the Victorian Exploring Expedition.
From the moment it became probable that
he would be selected to fill this responsible
post Burke is said to have “ diligently pre-
pared himself for it. He at once commenced
an active examination of the records of pre-
vious explorers, so as to become thoroughly
acquainted with the personal experiences of
Australian pioneers of discovery, and well in-
formed as to the actual knowledge of the
interior and remote coasts already on record.
He likewise entered upon a course of regular
training, taking severe pedestrian exercise,
and accustoming himself to fatigue and priva-
tion of every possible kind that an attempt to
traverse the vast untrodden wilds of Aus-
tralia was likely to bring to his experience.”
WILLIAM JOHN WILLS.
Of Wills, the sharer of Burke’s perils,
sufferings, and glory, we are informed that
“ his father was a physician at Totness, in
Devonshire, and Wills was designed to pur-


sue the study of the same profession. With
this object in view, he sought with ardour,
as a pupil of his father, the attainment of
the various branches of knowledge required
in this profession, and for four years exhibited
the most unremitting application to such
studies. In chemistry and the experience of
the medical schools he became specially dis-
tinguished for proficiency. He had received
an excellent academical education at the
grammar school of Ashburton, —a public
school of note, as being endowed with scholar-
ships by the famous William Gifford, and
also by Dr. Ireland, Dean of Westminster.”
Wills arrived in this colony in 1853,
and at first obtained a situation at the Royal
Bank Station, Deniliquin. His father emi-
grated the succeeding year, and settled at
Ballarat, where Wills assisted him for a
time in his profession. Subsequently, he “ ob-
tained employment in the service of the
Government as an officer in the Survey De-
partment, under Mr. Byerley, and there dis-
played his characteristic assiduity and pro-
ficiency. Having acquired a knowledge of
and interest in astronomical and other
The deeds and the death of the Victorian
Explorers continue to monopolize the atten-
tion of the public, and, as a matter of course,
much has been written and uttered concern-
ing them so essentially—though unintention-
ally—mean and paltry, that for the moment
the grandeur of the enterprise, the success of
which has been so dearly purchased, is almost
overborne by the mass of puerility and little-
ness to which the subject has given birth.
Fortunately, the work which Burke and
Wills accomplished, and the heroism they
displayed, are so intrinsically magnifi-
cent, that they cannot be permanently
dwarfed by any amount of babble and trivia-
lity which men of narrower minds may in-
dulge in concerning them. It is a pity,
however, to see that the true-hearted senti-
ment of mingled mournfulness and triumph
which was at first universally displayed on
THE HEROES OF THE YICTORIAN EXPEDITION.
sciences to which the Observatory is devoted,
he obtained, through the recommendation of
Mr. Ligar, the Surveyor-General, a situation
as assistant in that establishment. Here he
remained for two years, when the opportunity
presented itself of ottering to join the Ex-
ploring Expedition.”
Wills, it appears, had long entertained a
strong wish to be connected with such an
enterprise. “So long ago as 1855 he fre-
quently spoke, as many of his friends can
recollect, of a longing desire to explore the
interior of Australia, He also expressed at
this time a belief that he should he among
the first who ever should succeed in crossing
to the Gulf of .Carpentaria. In 1856 there
was a proposal brought before the public by
a Dr. Catherwood to explore the interior of
this country. This project, however, was
abandoned; but Wills, who happened to be
then on the River Wannon, immediately on
chancing to hear of it walked to Ballarat, a
distance of ninety miles, in his anxiety to
join the proposed expedition.”
He was twenty-seven years of age at the
time of his melancholy yet glorious death.
behalf of the Victorian explorers is in danger
of being frittered away in sham hero-worship
and unmerited eulogium. The feeling
which seemed at the outset to have
resulted in a settled purpose to do fit-
ting honour to the two whose names
have been inseparably linked together,
and to reward the survivor—who undoubtedly
performed his part as nobly as his leaders—
has been partially directed towards other
objects not nearly so worthy. Burke and
Wills demand all the honour which the
country can give. There may be regret for
others, and praise for others ; hut of public
honour the remains of the two who were the
Victorian explorers should receive all that
this colony can bestow. Let it be remem-
bered that it is their deeds which have shed
glory over this expedition, and awakened the
sentiment which it is now sought to mis-


direct. Had they failed to reach the Gulf of
Carpentaria, and been discovered alive and
well in some remote portion of the settled
districts of this continent, would the public
have burned to do honour to those whose
deaths had given solemnity to the failure ?
It is not to men who proved themselves too
weak for the task they undertook, and sank
on the threshold, nor yet to one who was
accidentally the companion of the explorers,
but who seemed to the hour of his death to
have no heart in the work, that pceans and
elegies should be chanted ; it is to those
whom posterity will reverence that all the
glory that we can render should be conse-
crated. Let us not make a mistake about
our heroes, and render our epoch ridiculous in
coming time.
That all the honour we can pay the
memories of Burke and Wills will seem
short of what they deserve in the eyes of the
outer world, and of succeeding generations,
we thoroughly believe. The Burke and
Wills Exploration will stand out in the
future far above all preceding and cotem- J
porary enterprises, and the more remote the
time the more completely will it be isolated.
Other adventurers may have been as brave and
worthy, but they did not place a track across
the continent of Australia fiom south to
north, and satisfy the long-standing and oft-
reiterated demand of modern science and in-
vestigation. Who bethinks him now of
those who before Vasco da Gama essayed to
round the African Cape, or before Columbus
to discover a western world ? And by-and-
bye what will be known of the predecessors
of M‘Cltntock in the task of navigating the
north-western passage ? It is the same with
the crossing of this continent; those who
were the first to accomplish it will be the
world’s immortals, whatever feeble efforts
we may make to obtain a portion of
their well-earned fame for others. The
feat they have performed may or may
not be turned to profitable account
during the current year or genera-
tion, but that does not affect the issue.
Neither do the multifarious blunders and
disasters by which it has been accompanied.
These may be sad affairs to us, but they will
hot greatly affect foreigners, who, it has been
said, generally indicate, with correctness,
what will be the opinion of posterity in one’s
own nation
That others besides Burke and Wills have
acted bravely and perished sadly in this ex-
pedition is not to be gainsaid ; but this
appears to us to be beside the question when
the honour of a public record, a public
funeral, and a public monument comes to be
decreed. If these symbols of mortal glory be
accorded to second and third rate men, how
shall we signify our appreciation of the
highest and noblest? It is true that Gray
accompanied Burke and Wills to the Gulf
of Carpentaria, but have we any good grounds
for supposing that he performed his duties
more nobly and courageously than most
men in his position would have done ?
So far as our information goes, are we
not led irresistibly to a contrary conclu-
sion ? It is true that Becker, Purcell,
Fatten, and Stone died because of this expe-
dition ; the fact is a terrible and grievous
one. But there is no triumph connected with
their deaths. They had not struggled and
conquered for their duty’s sake. All the fame
which the colony will gain by this expedition
it owes to Burke and Wills. Let it not
evince blindness in the act of paying its debt
of gratitude.




ing, the sole' survivor of Burke’s Exploration Party,
ved in town on Monday evening. He looks like a worn-
man, who will require much gentle usage before he is
a go before that wretched collection of savans, the fix-
ation Committee of the Royal Society. This ill-con -
ited body made a mess (as it its wont with everything)
i the reception of King on his return ; a grand muster
t place, everybody spoke about what was to be done
il it was too late to do anything. They ultimately
le their way to the railway station just in time to bo
bed on one side by the crowd, while King hi rnself was
;n off to Government House by Dr. Wills, the father
iurko’s brave companion. King was the bearer of the
letter ever penned by Wills —addressed to his father,
s King delivered with his own hands, and it has been
lished. It was written a few days before his death, and
1 to Burke and King who both assented to its contents,
onveys a painful charge against Brahe, and some re-
ions on the Committee, which must lie heavily on the
sciences of the meddling busybodies who compose it.
Cooper’s Creek, 27th June, 1861.
y dear Father, —These are probably the last lines you will
• get from me. We are on the point of starvation, not so
;h from absolute want of food, but from the want of nutriment
'hat we can get.
ur position, although more provoking, is probably not near
iisagrceable as that of poor Harry » and his companions. We
e had very good luck, and made a most successful trip to
pentaria and back, to where we had every right to consider
selves safe, having left a depot here consisting of four men,
ive horses, and six camels. They had provisions enough to
e lasted them twelve mouths with proper economy, and we
also every right to expect that we should have been ira-
liately followed up from Menindie by another party with
itional provisions and every necessary for forming a permanent
ot at Cooper’s creek. The party we left here had special in-
Ictions not to leave until our return, unless from absolute nc-
ity. We left the creek with nominally three months’ supply,
they were reckoned at little over the rate of half-rations. We
:uLated on having to eat some of the camels. By the greatest
d luck at every turn we crossed to the Gulf, through a good
lof fine country, almost in a straight line from here. On the
er side the camels suffered considerably from wet; we bad to
and jerk one soon after starting back. We had now been out
ttle more than two months, and found it necessary to redace
rations considerably, and this began to tell on all hands, but
It it by far less than any of the others. The great scarcity and
ness of game, and our forced marches, prevented our supplying
deficiency from external sources to any great extent; but we
sr could have held out but for the crows and hawks, and the
tula. The latter is an excellent vegetable, and I believe secured
return to this place. We got back here in four months and
r days, and found the party had left the Creek the same day,
L,we were not in a fit state to follow them,
find I must close this, that it may be planted, but I will write
4
f o,s>
inclined, for suffering such men to scramble up to high
places and monopolise all positions of public trust for the
notoriety which accompanies them. The Age of this
morning publishes a brief biographical sketch of King from
which 1 abridge the following:—
The father of King served in the 95th Highlanders for many
years, and died when the subject of the present sketch was but
some six months old. King himself was bom in the town of Moy,
in the country of Antrim, on the 16th December, 1838, and is con-
sequently in the 23rd year of his age. His mother died inf
September, 1847, when he was not yet nine years old, lie was
educated at the Royal Hibernian Military School, Phoenix Park,
Dublin. He entered the array in the 70th Regiment, at the early'
age of fourteen years and one month, and he forthwith joined
the depot of the regiment at Chatham, the service companies
being at the time sttaioned at Cawnpore. King landed in the
Indian peninsula on the 29th October, 1853, the regiment to
which he was attached being at that time under the command of
Colonel Galway, and subsequently of Colonel Chute, The service
companies were soon afterwards transferred to Peshawur, where
they were engaged in suppressing the mutiny of the native troops
of that garrison. The Sepoy regiments in the station at the time
were the 51st and 53rd regiments; and these troops having been
paraded without arms in presence of the corps to which King
was attached, were disbanded without resistance, the prompt
measures adopted by the officers in command having rendered
any opposition on the part of the disaffected soldiers not merely:,
hopeless,'but altogether impracticable. At a later period of the
revolt, however, King was afforded the opportunity of witnessing
several of the military executions which were so general in the
Indian peninsula for a time. Having been engaged for some time
with the 70th in the service of suppressing the mutiny, King was
sent after a severe attack of illness to the convalescent depot of
the military district, in which he was stationed for the benefit of
his health. The station is named the Murree Hills, and here King
remained for a period of sixteen months. During this period he
(first formed the acquaintance of Mr. G. J. Landells, a gentle-
man whose name is sufficiently familiar to Victorian readers. Mr.
I.andells was at the time on his way to the northern districts of
India, with the view of executing the commission for the pur-
chase of camels upon which he had been despatched from this
jcoldny by the local Government, and after a brief stay he re-
sumed his journey. Subsequently King rejoined the service com-
panies of his regiment at a station named Rawlpindie, and here
pie applied for and succeeded in obtaining his discharge. From,
this place he proceeded direct to the seaport of Kurrachee, where
he again met Mr, Landells, who nad in the meantime arrived
from the interior wrth the camels which be baa been -smv raf
procure, and which have since been so closely identified with the
history of King and his gallant leaders and companions.
At Knrrachce, King was engaged by Mr. Landells ta super !
intend the coolie assistants in charge of the saraels, and the
appointment was confirmed and prolonged upon the arrival of|
the animals and party in Victoria, Mr, Landells having recom-
mended Mr. King to Mr. Burke, in a great measure on the
ground that he could communicate with the Indians in their own
language. That he possessed other and still more valuable quali-
fications for the position in which, so fortunately for the country,
, 7 V i f , flbavivlkh H/l Hlv UUDJ UuU 111 1) Ulbil, OU Ivl VtlUiaVVlJ vuv oonw -i J J
ie more, although it has not so good chance of reaching you as nd) we confidently trust, for himself, he was placed, has been
-• have great claim on the committee for their neglect, since very clearly demonstrated. Wo may also add, as a corro-
:ave you in sole charge of what is coming to me. The whole of Native proof, that Kinsr showed himself in the eyes of his
money I desire to leave to my sisters ; other matters I will headers and companions worthy of the trust reposed in him that,
ve for the present. Adieu, my dear father, Love toX om ’* Mr. Landells left the expedition, the charge of the camels
, . , „ __ .W* Wills. vas entrusted to him.
think to live about four or five days. My spmts are excellent. Ki ■„ now l)ving ; n the strictest privacy, with his
n anyeno doubt the absolute accuracy of this dying piste at St K;ida 6 He is altogether unrit to take part in
tement? Calm dispassionate, and almost uncomplaining, ’ blic proceedings, and it would bo cruelty to ask him
1 yet we find the Exploration Committe, with this letter t( / d( f 6o tm he fpe lfl himself thoroughly restored. His
oyer the question of whose fault it n ,i nd wa nts rest quite as much as his body requires invi-i
the reception at the railway was a failure. Let g ora ti ng . He speaks in the highest terms of esteem and
or readers look m the journals of this morning at the respect of both Burke and Wills.
[Oft, and blame, or pity, or despise ms as they may feel r |


WORKS RECENTLY PUBLISHED
BY
WILSON & MACKINNON, 78, COLLINS-ST. EAST.
LTHE EDUCATIONAL GAZETTE, Literary Companion, and
Jl General Review. Royal octavo. Price Is. Subscription 10s. per annum, including
Postage. Published every third Saturday.
BRADSHAW’S SHEET ALMANAC for 1863. Royal folio, printed
in colors. Price 6d. ; by post Is.
COLE’S GARDENING IN VICTORIA; containing full Directions
for the Formation and General Management of a Good Garden; together with a Comprehensive
Calendar for the Operations of each Month in the Year. By T, C. Cole, Richmond Nursery.
Bvo. Cloth. Price 7s. 6d.; by post 9s. 6d.
DISEASES OF CHILDREN IN VICTORIA. By J. William
Mackenna, Lie. in Mid. and Surgeon. Price Is. 6d.; by post 2s.
HANDBOOK TO AUSTRALASIA; a Brief Historical and Descrip-
tive Account of Victoria, Tasmania, South Australia, New South Wales, and New Zealand.
With a Map. 12mo. Price 55.; by post 7s.
LAND ACT OF VICTORIA. Reprinted from'the Authorized Edition.
18mo. Price 6d.; by post Is.
LORD’S DAY versus SABBATH. A Letter to the Right Rev, the
Lord Bishop of Melbourne. By the Rev. Isaac New. Octavo. Price Is.; by post Is. 6d.
POETICAL AND PRACTICAL FREE TRADE. By M. Tindall
Macintyrb, Longwood. Octavo. Price Is. ;by post, Is. 6d.
THE DECALOGUE A DIVINE CODE OF MORAL LAW. A
Letter in Reply to the Rev. Isaac New’s “Lord’s Day versus Sabbath.” By the Right Rev. the
Lohb Bishop of Melbourne. Price Is. ; bv .ost Is. Cd.
THE GREATNESS OF MAN. A Lecture by the Rev. Isaac New,
Lice 6d.; by post Is.
THE WORKING MAN S GUIDE TO THE LAND ACT. Being ¥
a Systematic Arrangement and Popular Reading of its Provisions. By P. Stanley Tomlins.
Price Is. ; by post Is. Cd.
TRAVELS WITH DR. LEICHARDT. By the Author of “ Hortns
Tasmaniensis,” &c. Price 2s^d.; by post 3s. Cd.
VICTORIAN HANSARD. Debates and Proceedings of Parliament
of Victoria. Session 1360-61. Vol, VII. Half-bound calf, 1300 pages. Price £4.
VICTORIA SUFFERING A RECOVERY. A Lecture by Archibald
Michie, Esq., M.L.A. Price 6d.; by post Is.
THE VINE AND WINE MAKING. By “V.” and “Bebeerao.”
Price Is, ; by post Is. 6d.
PUBLISHED MONTHLY.
BRADSHAW'S RAILWAY AND GENERAL GUIDE TO VIC-
TORIA. The Colonial Monthly Directory. Price 6d. Subscripti 6s. per annum; by
post 12s.
THE AUSTRALIAN EVANGELIST. A Baptist Periodical. Sixteen
pages quarto. Price 6d.; subscription, second volume, 4s. 6d.; by post ss. 9d.
PUBLISHED QUARTERLY.
AUSTRALIAN MEDICAL JOURNAL. On the first of January,
April, July, and October. Edited under the Superintendence of the Medical Society of Victoria,
übsoription £1 per anm m.
