

A SERMON
THE REV. GEORGE CLARKE
IN MEMORY OF
JAMES HENRY BRETT WATCH,
Congregational Church , Davey Street , Hobart ,
14x11 November, 1897.
PRIVATELY PRINTED.
Hobart, eTasmania.
y/ '
The Guileless Disciple.


PREFACE.
Mr. Clarke has added one more to the numberless
obligations under which he has placed me , by per-
mitting me to print this “ Sermon ” which he
preached as a memorial of my brother. Nearly
fifty years of the closest intimacy gives Mr. Clarke
both the knowledge and the right to speak of my
brother s character , and the estimate he has formed
will certainly be recognised as true by all who
knew him. Any one desirous of obtaining a copy
of this “ Memorial Sermon ” can have it on
application.
Charles E. Walch.
Hobart,
November , 1897.


A Memorial Sermon.
John i. 47. —“Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile!”
WE greatly misunderstand the Lord and Saviour of us
all if vve suppose that because He is so high and
holy He must care only for perfection. If He will accept
nothing from us that falls short of His standard of purity we
are indeed undone. But it was never His to break the
bruised reed or to quench the smoking flax. He was quick to
recognise goodness of every kind and measure in those who
were around Him, and to see it in darkness and sin where no
ray of light was perceptible to others. He did not hesitate to
express His pleasure and approval wherever He saw it, and no
one has ever suspected that His praise was flattery, or that
hollow compliment tainted His words of truth and soberness.
You can be appreciative without being fulsome, and the
assumption of saintliness gains nothing by the practice of
censoriousness, though too many seem to think that their ideal
of righteousness is best maintained by the disparagement of
those who are less holy than themselves. The denunciation of
inferior goodness is a very poor mark of Christian excellence, and
it is as far as possible from, the mind of Christ. He said to the
Roman centurion, “I have not found so great faith, no not in
Israel,” and to the Syrophoenecian mother, “ O woman, great
is thy faith : be it unto thee, even as thou wilt.” Of the young
ruler who kept the commandments, and lacked one thing for
the attainment of the perfect life, we are told, that notwithstand-
ing his failure, “Jesus, looking upon him, loved him.” He said
to the thoughtful Scribe, “ Thou art not far from the Kingdom
of God.” Of the poor widow in the Temple he said, “ She hath
cast in more than they all,” and of Mary of Bethany, “Lether
alone; she hath done what she could, and wherever My Gospel
shall be preached through all the world, this that she hath
done shall be told as a memorial of her.” While here, “Jesus
saw Nathanael coming to him, and saith of him, behold an
Israelite indeed —a son of Israel indeed—in whom is no guile,”
The Lord Jesus sometimes showed that He could flash the
search light of His knowledge into the hidden lives of those who
were around Him, and when He did so, He extorted the
confession of something in Him that was far above the
normal capacity of the sons of men. When He said to
the Samaritan woman “ Thou hast had five husbands, and he
whom thou hast is not thy husband,” she could do no less


than exclaim, “ Sir, I perceive that thou art a prophet,” and
when on the eve of the resurrection day He appeared to all
but Thomas in the group of the upper-room, and they found
it so hard to persuade Thomas that they had seen the risen
Lord, Jesus again appeared on the second Sunday, and took
the words of His doubting disciple out of his mouth. He
showed that He knew all that Thomas had said, and
repeated word for word his protest. “ Reach hither thy finger
and behold my hands; and reach hither thy hand and thrust
it into my side, and be not faithless but believing.” That
showed that though absent, Jesus knew all that had passed,
and it is no wonder that Thomas said unto Him, “ My Lord
and my God.” And now in this narrative of a short conversa-
tion, it was enough that Jesus should say with a meaning that
only Nathanael could know, “ When thou wast under the fig
tree, I saw thee,” to make him burst into the cry, “ Rabbi, thou
art the Son of God; thou art the King of Israel.”
And if Jesus knew what had been in the past lives of men,
He knew also what was in their private thoughts. Over and
over again we are told that He knew what men were reasoning
in their hearts. He could read and reveal the unuttered
thoughts of those who were around Him, and He often
addressed Himself to their thoughts more than to their words.
Friends and foes alike knew that He had this searching power,
and wondered how He came by it. To His disciples it
seemed almost the supreme proof of His superhuman dignity.
“Now,” they said in the upper room when He told what was
passing in their minds, “Now are we sure that thou knowest
all things, and needest not that any man should ask thee ; by
this we believe that thou earnest forth from God.” Doubtless
it was to the unuttered thoughts of Nathanael that our Lord
was now addressing himself. You will see, if you look care-
fully into this brief conversation, that it is coloured all through
with the story of the ancient patriarch —Jacob the guileful
supplanter, Israel the wrestler with God who prevailed, Bethel
and its stairs to heaven, with its ascending and descending
ministries of angels all this is reflected in the inter-
view with Nathanael. Doubtless he had his everyday
occupation, but it was and is a common thing in Eastern
countries for busy men to retire into some shade for the
sake of commerce with Heaven, away from observation and
disturbance, and all the noise of human traffic. It seems to
have been so with Nathanael, and that, under the shade of the
fig tree, he had been reading, thinking, and praying, with his
mind full of the story of Jacob. If you can imagine this pre-
paration you may well understand how he could be arrested by
the challenge, “ Behold a son of Israel indeed, in whom is no
guile.”


Our Lord did not say that the man was perfect, or that he
had no sin or weakness, or mistake or shortcoming, but that he
had no guile. He was frank, open, and sincere. There was
nothing false, or tricky, or double-dealing about his character.
However faulty he might be, he was devout, straightforward,
and honest. “ Behold a son of Israel indeed, in whom is no
guile.” ■
The world is not disposed to overrate the mere absence of
guile, and, as always, the wise old world has much to say for
itself. With guile everywhere around us it does not do to be too
innocent. We are apt somehow to have no great thoughts of
a simple guileless life. To talk of men as innocent is hardly a
compliment. We sometimes associate guilelessness with weak-
ness and inexperience. It brings up to us the man who is
easily imposed upon and easily led astray. One must not be
too simply honest if he wishes to succeed in life. Simplicity
of character is apt to make one look like a fool. What we
think of it in any man depends upon his knowledge of the
world. Where all is guile around him and he does not know
it, it is not an impressive thing that he should be free from it
himself. But when he does know, it is a quality of command-
ing excellence. Meekness in the weak and helpless is com-
mendable enough, but it is nothing compared to the meekness
of the brave and strong. “ Wise as serpents and harmless as
doves,” that is our Lord’s illustration of Christian manhood ;
or, as St. Paul puts it, “In malice be ye children, but in
understanding be ye men.” “ I would have you wise unto
that which is good, and simple concerning evil,”
The world, then, I say, is not altogether wrong in treating
mere guilelessness with only a measured respect. But the
guilelessness which thinks, observes, and takes true account of
men and things, and yet is still guilelessness—that is a very
different matter, even in the world’s estimation. Even here,
in the long run, guile does not pay. It is found out in time.
Then suspicion, distrust, and aversion grow, and in the end
respect, esteem, confidence, and trustfulness are utterly
shattered, and life is no more worth living. The cleverness
of such a man may be for a while admired. I rather admire
it myself. You may try to make your profit out of it by
meeting wiles with wiles. But to get a character for dodging is
the worst reputation by which a man can be cursed. It is
worse than to have a name for many of the more vulgar forms
of vice. It means that, so far as honesty is concerned, the
man is rotten to the core. You may not say what you think of
him, but you think it all the same. It is a cleverness which
frays out the last shred of your faith in moral principle, and in
the end it becomes plain enough that on mere prudential
consideration, the game is not worth the candle. To me it is


almost the saddest of all shipwrecks, and, in the course of a
fairly long life, it has filled me often enough with lamentation
and woe. The most charitable judgment on any man from
whom you once hoped better things, will not allow you to say
that in him is no guile. The judgment of man can go no
further, but the judgment of God, if we had sense enough to
apprehend it, must be awful beyond any human words. It is
the most melancholy ending of a man’s career that you can
possibly imagine, and may God in His mercy keep us all from
it.
Jesus Christ himself lived the simplest life that has ever
been lived under these heavens, and yet it is the grandest,
strongest, and wisest life that is known to history. It was said
of Him that “He did no sin, nor was guile found in His
mouth,” and we know that the testimony is true. The wiles of
the devil are not always addressed to our personal interests.
The devil as a philanthropist is the most formidable tempter
with whom we have to deal. He came to Jesus in the
wilderness and offered to help Him with his craft to set up and
hasten on His kingdom of w T orld-wide beneficence, and was
repulsed with the order, “Get thee behind me, Satan!” It
is the standing temptation of the benevolent to do a little evil
that good may come, and to gloss over devices of questionable
morality on the principle that the good end justiifies the
doubtful means. The devil as a philanthropist has been very
active in the Church for two thousand years, and for the sake
of the cause good men have yielded more or less to his
subtleties. Wisdom, tact, prudence, management, are all well
enough, but when you push them into guile they are hindrances
and not helps to the reign of the Christ. Even in our religious
work it is well if it may be said of each of us, “ Behold an
Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile.”
All the works of God are verity and judgment, and it is only
verity and judgment that can know them. That is specially
true in the whole realm ot morals and religion. The man who
is radically false can have no conviction that there is anything
true. To the guileful there is nothing straightforward, to the
impure there is nothing pure, to the venal there is nothing that
cannot be bought, to the sensual there is nothing that is
spiritual, to the frivolous there is nothing that is earnest. If
the moral eye is not single men cannot see because they have
no wish to see. “ Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall
see God,” is no arbitrary promise, but a fixed principle that is
in the very heart of things.
Nathanael, the quickest believer, was so because he was an
Israelite indeed without guile.
The connection between the absence of moral guile and the
power of spiritual vision is not obscurely hinted by our Lord


when He said, “Because I saw thee under the fig tree believest
thou ? Thou shall see greater things than these. Verily,
verily, I say unto you, hereafter ye shall see heaven open and
the angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of
Man.” That is Christ’s first recorded promise to His own.
What does it mean ? How is it connected with the quick
belief of an Israelite indeed in whom was no guile ? The
heavens, opened ! Angels ascending and descending! A
ladder of commerce and ministry between earth and heaven !
Here again we can hardly doubt that the thought of the
Saviour was still looking back to the old story so long past.
When Jacob, the guileful trickster, started on the course of
wandering and labour and sorrow which was to be God’s dis-
cipline of transferring him into the honest-minded Israel, he
came to Bethel and laid his head upon a stone and slept, and
then in his weariness and loneliness and fear there was granted
him the vision of the stairs to heaven, and its ascending and
descending angels. And now Nathanael the guileless disciple
who believes at a simple word shall see a better ladder from
earth to heaven. The heavens shall be opened. He shall see
angels of God going up and down upon the Son of man.
Yea, He Himself shall be the way as well as the truth and the
life. Something of this there had already been. At the
baptism of our Lord the heavens had been opened, and there
had been the visible and audible sign of a descending power
greater than that of any angel. So on more than one occasion
during our Saviour’s ministry Nathanael was to witness the pre-
sence of heavenly visitants, and the fact of a perpetual com-
merce between the Son of Man on earth and the unseen powers
of heaven, I do not doubt that the disciples saw more than has
been recorded in the gospel story. There is a mystery about
those lonely prayers of Christ which the disciples heard, but in
which they did not join, that must have convinced them of a
very peculiar and intimate communion between the lowly Jesus
of Nazareth and the highest that they could think of the
unseen world. There was manifested to them a living com-
munion between earth and heaven that went far beyond a good
man’s prayers, and all that they had read of the fellowship of
saint and prophet in the olden time. They came to under-
stand at last that all human cries and woes might pass through
Christ to the Father’s heart and be welcome as ascending and
descending angels, and that all blessings needed by man—for-
giveness, guidance, help, inspiration—could pass through Christ
the living way. Through all human things there is nothing
that darkens the heavens like guile. It is they who in an
honest and good heart receive the seed of the Sower that bring
forth fruit, some thirty-fold, some sixty-fold, and some a
hundred-fold. More than intellect, more than learning, more


than endowment of any kind, it is the pure and simple purpose
that lets in the light of heavenly things.
We look at guilelessness as a mark of temperament rather
than as a habit of disposition that may be cherished and
acquired. Did not the crafty Jacob become the open-hearted
Israel ? Is there anyone who cannot by God’s grace make
large approach to simplicity of character ? Guile is gloom.
It is the guileless who are always the bright-hearted. It is to
the simple that the heavens are opened. It is the pure in
heart who see the ladder, and the God who is above it all. It
is to them that angel ministries come and go, and that the
commerce between earth and heaven is clear and unimpeded.
May the Lord grant to us all that we may be the children of
the light and of the day, and not the children of the darkness.
“ Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.”
I am anxious to-night that I should speak only the words
of truth and soberness, and all the more because the late Mr.
James H. B. Walch was my close friend for fifty years—loyal,
steadfast, affectionate, chivalrous; a man to be thoroughly
trusted for honour and honesty, and for careful consideration of
the interests of those with whom he had to deal. He was born
in October, 1828, at Cannanore, in Southern India. His
father, Major Walch, of H.M. 54th Regiment, belonged to the
school of pious officers who have shed so much lustre on the
Indian Service at a time when Christian manliness and fidelity
in the Army was tested far more severely than it is to-day, and
you may be sure that the father’s character had much to do
with the making of the son. Major Walch, after five years’
residence in England, retired from the Army and came to
Tasmania in 1842. In January, 1846, he took over Tegg’s
bookselling and stationery business at the corner near
Wellington Bridge, Hobart, and James joined his father in the
business at that date. How it has gone on and grown I need
not stop to tell you, and his career as a citizen and a man of
business for fifty years is sufficiently well-known to the public.
It is enough to say that the whole community knew him to
be worthy and trustworthy, and that he has gone to his rest
with the universal greeting of ‘ well done,’ and the feeling that the
life which he lived was a life worth living.
Next to myself, Mr. Walch was the oldest member of
this church, and for many years he has been its senior
deacon. I need not tell my own people how loyal he
has been to its fellowship, how much he had its interests
at heart, how steadily he has given us his sympathy and
support, or how consistently he has maintained among us his
position as a Christian man. But even in the church his
visible ministries were only a part of his services. Privately


and personally he did many a beautiful thing known only to
one or two, or perhaps to no one but the recipient of his kind-
ness. The faith and devotion of our friend were of the simplest
order. He held with firmest grasp what we recognise
as the cardinal facts and doctrines of evangelical religion.
On matters of supreme interest his own convictions were
settled enough, and on moral motives and principles he was
immovable , but given only reverence and sincerity he was very
tolerant of differences of opinion and practice. His heart was
large enough to say to men of all churches, “ Grace be with all
them that love Our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity.”
There are two or three salient features in Mr. Walch’s
character to winch I should like to draw your special attention.
One is the man’s simple integrity of thought, purpose, and
action. It is no new thing with me to associate him with the
story of Nathanael of Cana. I have done so for many a year.
Our friend was no fool. He had as clear an insight as most
of us into the crooked ways of human character and conduct,
yet he did his best to keep himself unspotted from the world,
I have the right to speak, and I say that I never knew a man
more free from all that is false, and tricky, and paltering than
James VValch. In business everybody knew that his word was
his bond. He was not only just, but, as I have said before, he
was chivalrous in his justice. He never would assign a bad
motive to another if he could help it, and even when wronged
his natural resentment never took on the least feeling of vin-
dictiveness. In understanding he was a man, in malice he was
a child.
Another very notable feature in Mr. Walch’s character was
his commanding sense of duty. “He reverenced his con-
science as his king.” His life was one of great toil and labour,
and while still a young man he carried a burden of responsibility
that seemed almost too hard to bear. So much and so many
were dependent upon him. He was a great sufferer, and for the
last ten years his suffering mounted to the pitch of perpetual
agony. In spite of it all, he held steadily to his place and his
duty. His strength of resolution was nothing short of heroic,
and to those who knew, it was a wonder that he could so master
his pain as to lose himself so often in the work that it was
given him to do. To such a man the final rest must have a
meaning that it cannot have to less tried and toiling spirits. He
was one of those of whom we are told —“ Yea, saith the spirit,
they rest from their labours and their works do follow them.”
One point more—perhaps the most important of all—and I will
bring this brief tribute of affection to a close : It is Mr.
Walch’s constant feeling of the sacredness of family life, and
the very impressive example he has set us of making every-
thing give way to the conduct of home. More than school,


more than church, more than formal ministries of any kind—
the family institution was to him the very ark and citadel of
Christian living. Of course, lam not going to do anything so
unseemly as to draw aside the veil that hides and protects the
sanctities of domestic life; but this much I may say, that to
make home, and keep home pure, loving, Christian, sweet,
seemed to Mr. Walch the first and most commanding duty of
a man. He believed in home influence and training as the
most effective of all means for the formation of character. I
may at least give you a glimpse of his way of looking at the
subject. Here is how he writes to one of his sons, who
was just starting on a long visit to the old country:
“ Now that you are leaving home our best blessings go with
you, and we pray that Almighty God may preserve
you body and soul. We look forward to the time of
having you amongst us again, but if it is God’s will that
we should not meet again on earth, may He grant in His
mercy and love that we may all meet in heaven.” Again, “ I
wished to speak a few earnest words to you before you left, but,
after all, it is not a few parting words that a father should
depend upon for influencing his son ; it is the years of home
training that have been the opportunity, and I earnestly hope
that this influence will be a permanent one with all my dear
children I have always sought for Divine help and
guidance in all the affairs of life, and I implore you to do the
same. Above all things, choose for your companions those of
sterling principle and honour. I know how easily young men
form friendships, but at any cost you must shake off any
companions who would lead you into wrong paths. For a time
the path may appear a pleasant one, but in reality it is not so,
and its end is misery and sorrow.” These are very sacred
words, and perhaps they will help you better than anything else
to see into the loving father’s heart of the friend who has gone
to his rest in the peace of Christ, and with the tears and bene-
dictions of all who knew him.
“Mercury” Print, Hobart,




Mr, Charles E. Walch’s Writings
OUNDAY SCHOOL TEACHING: A Letter to Sunday
School Teachers pp. 16. Price, Threepence. Postage, Id.
{A OSPEL SICKNESS : Its Symptoms, Causes, and Cure.
VGT A Paper read before the Congregational Union of
Tasmania, 1893. pp. 12. Price, Threepence. Postage, Id.
A NNUAL REPORTS OF THE DAYEY STREET
UA- CONGREGATIONAL SUNDAY SCHOOL, Hobart.
Gratis.
Published April,
Published April.
Published April
Published April.
Published April,
Published April.
1891. Postage, Id.
1892. Postage, Id.
1893. Postage, Id.
1894. Postage, Id.
1895. Postage, Id.
1896. Postage, Id.
Note, —All the earlier Reports, 1885-90, are out of print.
An analysis oe the gospel according to
ST. LUKE, Chaps, iv. to xiv. Price, One Penny.
HOW WE MANAGED OUR MUNICIPALITY. By an
English Ex-Mayor. With a Preface by Charles E.
Walch. Price, One Penny.
HE SEVEN ROVERS : A Rollicking Record of Pleasure,
J- Privation, and Peril ; Afloat and Ashore. By One of
Them. pp. 34. Printed for Private Circulation only.
Hobart:
J. WALCH & SONS, PUBLISHERS.
