

Nji.: -;
} ,
THESIS
WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO THE
SOUTH SEA ISLANDS.
THE DOCTRINE OF CHRISTIAN MISSIONS,




T II E S I S
THE DOCTRINE OF CHRISTIAN MISSIONS,
WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO THE
SOUTH SEA ISLANDS.
BT THE
KEY. JOHN INGLIS,
MISSIONARY TO NEW ZEALAND AND THE NEW HEBRIDES.
El) IXUUEG H, 188 I.


MORRISON AND GIBB, EDINBURGH,
PRINTERS TO HER MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE.


1U335S /F i
d 2 cP •
THE DOCTRINE OF CHRISTIAN MISSIONS
The doctrine of Christian Missions is not a new development
of religious dogma: the idea did not originate with the com-
mencement of the Christian era. The principle lay involved
in the first promise. All the prophets, especially David and
Isaiah, gave prominence to this subject. The reign of the
Messiah, the extension of His dominion, His peaceful triumphs,
and the glory of that kingdom, of which knowledge, truth,
righteousness, prosperity, and happiness were the leading
characteristics, bulk largely in the visions of these Old Testa-
ment seers.
But the New Testament writers give special prominence to
the doctrine of Christian missions. The great commission
given by Christ to His apostles, and recorded in the last
chapter of Matthew, lays a foundation sufficiently broad to
authorize and sustain all our missionary enterprises: “ All
power is given unto me in heaven and in earth. Go ye there-
fore, and teach (or make disciples or Christians of) all nations,
baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost; teaching them to observe all things what-
KH3


soever I have commanded you : and, 10, I am with you alway,
even unto the end of the world. Amen” (Matt, xxviii. 18-20).
The Old Testament Church was attractive and conservative ;
the New Testament Church is aggressive and diffusive, —its
aim is universality. In the days of Solomon, when the Jewish
dispensation was in the zenith of its attractive power, all the
kings of the earth came to Jerusalem to hear the wisdom of
Solomon, and to carry back to their respective lands a know-
ledge of the living and true God, of the way of securing His
favour, and of obtaining eternal life. In this manner the
Jewish Church became a missionary Church. Subsequently,
the Lord, in His providence, first by the Assyrian, and next by
the Babylonian captivity, and afterwards by the dispersion of
the Jews in Egypt, Asia Minor, and Europe, under the Greek
and Roman Governments, a considerable knowledge of the
word and worship of the true God was diffused among the
Gentile nations. But this result was effected, not by the prin-
ciples and policy which actuated the leaders and members of
the Jewish Church, but by the beneficent arrangement of God’s
providence. At the time of our Saviour’s advent, the two great
schools of Jewish thought were equally indifferent about the
diffusion of scriptural truth throughout the world, and equally
dead to the benevolent principles that breathed in the sacred
writings. The spirit of David and Isaiah had disappeared
from the counsels of those who sat in Moses’ seat. The Jewish
Church was no longer conservative, it was narrow ; it was no


longer attractive, it had become repulsive. The kingdom of
the expected Messiah was not to them a kingdom that was to
enlighten, elevate, and bless the world, but a kingdom that was
to elevate the Jews to complete supremacy, and to render all
nations subservient to their sway. They clave to the letter of
the law which killeth, but ignored the spirit of the law which
giveth life.
While the general dispersion of the Jews, the extensive diffu-
sion of the Greek language, and the extent and stability of the
Koman Empire, rendered that time the most favourable and
opportune that had ever occurred for the diffusion of divine
truth and the spread of Christianity, the state of Jewish feeling
was completely antagonistic to missionary operations, and
decidedly opposed to the extending of spiritual privileges to
the Gentiles, But God, by His Spirit, raised up and qualified
an agency for utilizing to the utmost the providential advan-
tages of the age.
O O
On the day of Pentecost, and during the subsequent period,
when the Holy Ghost was poured out so plentifully upon the
Christian Church, Hebrew and Hellenistic Jews were being
prepared as missionaries to proclaim the facts relating to the
incarnation, the life, the work, the death, the resurrection, and
the ascension of Christ, from Jerusalem to the utmost bounds
of the Roman Empire. The apostles were slowly and step by
step emancipated from their narrow Jewish prejudices, till
finally Paul was called to the apostleship of the Gentile world,


and Christ said, in reply to his regretful Jewish longings,
“ Make haste, get thee quickly out of Jerusalem; ” £t depart, for
I will send thee far hence unto the Gentiles.”
The Christian Church was now fully committed to her great
missionary enterprise, and those apostolic missionaries were
soon preaching the gospel in all the great centres of political
and commercial influence, such as Damascus, Antioch, Ephesus,
Corinth, and Rome on the one hand, and Alexandria, Cyrene,
Edessa, and Babylon on the other. Nor did they confine
themselves to one class of people : they preached the gospel to
all classes, and obtained converts among all nationalities. The
gospel was embraced by Jews and Greeks, Barbarians, Scythians,
bond and free ; the truth steadily advanced ; Christianity went
on conquering and to conquer, till, in less than three centuries,
it became the religion of the Roman Empire, and a Christian
sovereign sat upon the throne of the Caesars. Rank and wealth,
learning and social position, were all arrayed on the side of
Christianity, while the votaries of the ancient religions of
Greece and Rome were now only the obscure Pagani, the rustic
villagers.
During the next two hundred years the Church aimed more
at consolidation than extension, at correcting error within
rather than at extending truth without; still missionary opera-
tions were carried on, and the Church continued more or less
true to her aggressive character. For the thousand years that
followed, known as the dark ages, notwithstanding the ignor-


ance and the corruptions that prevailed both in the Eastern and
the Western Churches, the missionary work, the conversion of
the heathen nations to Christianity, was still recognised as the
Church’s work; and men of eminently missionary spirit ori-
ginated and wrought out schemes which produced valuable
results. In proof of this it is needful to name only two of our
own countrymen, Patrick in Ireland and Columba in lona, they
being fair specimens of mediaeval missionaries. The diffusion
of such Christianity as they possessed and understood was
the chief motive that stimulated the great discoveries of the
fifteenth century. It was primarily this desire that led Queen
Isabella of Spain to stake her crown and pledge her jewels to
supply funds for Columbus. And it was chiefly zeal for the
propagation of the gospel that animated and sustained the
great discoverer of America to undertake the most important
voyage, judged by its results, that was perhaps ever performed
by man. It was chiefly missionary zeal which impelled Prince
Henry, King John 11., and Emmanuel of Portugal to plan and
carry out their great schemes of discovery. And it was the
same influences that contributed largely to sustain the heart of
Diaz while doubling the Cape of Good Hope, and to maintain
the courage of De Gama while circumnavigating Africa and
opening up the way to India and the East.
At the Reformation the struggle was too keen between the
Reformers and the Romanists to allow of much aggressive work
in non-Christian countries. But the first great struggles of


the Reformation were scarcely over when the missionary spirit
was again awakened. Xavier stands forward as the great
leader of the Romish propaganda. On the Protestant side
there is no such great outstanding name. But missions were
not overlooked by the Protestant communities. Both Calvin
and Cromwell—the one the most representative man among
the clergy, the other among the- laity, in their respective
centuries—recognised the duty of evangelizing the heathen ;
but the times were unpropitious. In the seventeenth century,
the Pilgrim Fathers had scarcely settled in America when they
directed their attention to the spiritual wants of the aborigines.
Elliot, the apostle of the American Indians, opened the whole
Bible in their own tongue to those wild savages, preached to
them successfully the gospel of Christ, and grounded them
thoroughly in the doctrines of the Shorter Catechism, and has
left a name as an earnest, enlightened, and successful missionary
that will never be forgotten. In the eighteenth century, the
Moravian Church in Germany commenced its distinguished
missionary career. About the same time the Society in Eng-
land for the Promotion of Christian Knowledge commenced
missionary operations in India, and numbered among its agents
the devoted and venerated Schwartz. In Scotland, the Society
for the Propagating of Christian Knowledge supported the
saintly Brainerd and the gifted Edwards as its missionaries
among the American Indians. That century, however, was the
day oT small things.


It was not till the end of the last and the beginning of the
present century that the spirit of missionary enterprise awoke
in earnest in all the Reformed Churches, both in Europe and
America. But I cannot follow these further, as my object is to
direct special attention to the missions in the South Seas.
I cannot, however, avoid noticing that the doctrine of Christian
missions has in all ages exerted a powerful influence for good,
directly on the Church, and indirectly on the world, but never
more so than in the present century.
The discoveries of Captain Cook in the South Seas a century
ago, produced much the same effect upon the public mind, that
the discoveries of Livingstone, Stanley, and others, in the Lake
regions of Central Africa, have done in our own day. Omai, a
native of Tahiti, who was brought to this country, was lionized
in London. He was painted by Reynolds, apostrophized by
Cowper as the “ gentle savage,” and enjoyed the friendship of
Cook, who took him back to his own island. The public mind
was awakened, and a number of earnest Christian men and
women became deeply anxious about the spiritual welfare of
those degraded but interesting islanders. Chief among these
were the Rev. Dr. Haweis, chaplain to Lady Huntingdon, and
the Rev. Dr. Dove of the Scotch Church in London, afterwards of
Glasgow. In 1796, the London Missionary Society was formed,
on evangelical but not denominational principles. The ship
Duff was bought, and fitted out as a mission vessel, under
the command of Captain Wilson, a retired East Indian officer


of high Christian character as well as eminent professional
ability. A large band of missionaries were sent out in the
Duff, and mission stations were formed on Tahiti, Tongataboo,
or the Friendly Islands, and the Marquesas Islands. But
the stations on the Friendly Islands and the Marquesas
were subsequently broken up, and on Tahiti the missionaries
endured great hardships. In 1814, the Church Missionary
Society commenced missionary operations in New Zealand,
under the guidance of the Rev. Samuel Marsden, colonial chap-
lain in New South Wales. In 1821, the Wesleyan Methodists
also commenced a mission among the natives of New Zealand,
under the direction of the Rev. Samuel Leigh. About the same
time they also established a mission in the Friendly Islands,
under the Rev. Walter Lawrie, and subsequently in the Fiji
Islands. In 1820, the American Board of Foreign Missions
sent out the Rev. Mr. Bingham and a band of missionaries,
and commenced a mission in the Hawaiian or Sandwich Islands.
And in 1848 the Presbyterian Mission was commenced in the
New Hebrides by the Rev. John Geddie.
Before entering upon the history or the results of those
missions, it may be proper to give a brief account of the popula-
tion of the South Seas. The whole of the islands over the great
Pacific or Southern Ocean, which extends from the great
American continent on the east, to Australia, the Philippine
Islands, China, and Japan, on the west, are inhabited by two,
and only two, races, viz. the Malay Polynesian and the Papuan ;


the former inhabiting the eastern groups, and the latter the
western, of this vast ocean. Let a line be drawn, as the basis
of a triangle, from the south-west point of New Zealand to the
north-west point of the Sandwich Islands ; let two lines be
drawn from the extremities of this line, so as to meet on Easter
Island as the apex of this triangle : within these three lines,
within this triangle, will be found all or very nearly all the
Malay population of the South Seas, and none else. The
principal groups thus included are New Zealand; the Tongan
group, or the Friendly Islands; Samoa, or the Navigators’
Islands ; the Hervey group, of which Rarotonga is the principal
island ; the Society group, of which Tahiti is the largest and
best known ; the Low Archipelago, of which Pitcairn’s Island
with its marvellous and romantic history is one ; the Marquesas,
with their fine-looking but uncontrollable people; and the
Hawaiian or Sandwich group, the inhabitants of which are now
the most advanced in Christianity, civilisation, and self-govern-
ment, of any of the Malay Polynesians. All to the west of
this triangle is inhabited by Papuans. These two races are
entirely distinct. The Malays are evidently of Asiatic origin,
descendants of Shem, and were settled upon those islands
possibly about the eleventh or twelfth century, but perhaps
earlier. Their skin is a light yellow, their hair smooth and jet
black ; they are a fine, tall, well-formed race of people. They all
speak one language, but there is a distinctly-marked dialect in
each group. The language is smooth and euphonious, and one


peculiarity pervades the whole language, and runs through
every dialect, viz., that every syllable ends with a vowel. A
system of taboo —a making of persons and things sacred for
a time, or permanently, according to circumstances —prevailed
among the whole race. Their religion was a combination of
superstition, cruelty, and abominable immorality.
The Papuans inhabit the Fiji Islands, New Caledonia, the
Loyalty Islands, the New Hebrides, Queen Charlotte’s group,
the Santa Cruz group, the Solomon Islands, New Ireland, New
Britain, and New Guinea, besides other smaller groups. The
natives are of African origin, evidently descendants of Ham.
Their skin is black, though not the jet black of the negroes ;
their hair is crisp and frizzled; they are strong in body and
well formed; their mental faculties are strong and vigorous.
They are clearly, however, a much earlier migration than the
Malays. It is probable that their settlement in those islands
dates back to the time when the old Hametic empires of
Nineveh and Egypt were sending forth their colonies to people
those Eastern Archipelagoes. Their languages are different, not
only on every group, but also on every island ; and on the
larger islands there are often more languages than one spoken.
From all that we know of those languages, —of their vocables
and of their grammar, of the form of the words and the
structure of the sentences,—we have reason to believe that they
are all derived from one common language. The taboo is
universal among them. Their religion, like that of most of


the African races, is a species of Feticism. In personal appear-
ance the Malays and Papuans are quite distinct, while their
languages have nothing whatever in common, either in the form
of the words or the structure of the sentences.
It was wisely ordered in divine providence that missionary
operations were begun among the Malays, and not among the
Papuans, —the one field was so much more favourable for
evangelistic labours than the other. Eastern Polynesia is much
more healthy than Western Polynesia,—a matter of primary
importance when European or American agency has to be
largely employed. In the next place, the Malay language is
much more easily mastered than the polyglot spoken by the
Papuans. And, in the third place, the social condition of the
one people was much more favourable for the reception and
development of Christian principles and influences, than it was
among the other. Among the Papuans there is scarcely such a
thing as national life, except in Fiji, and even there it was not
by any means equal to what it was found to be among the
Malays. Society is all but completely disintegrated, the tribes
are almost all small, and the power of the chiefs limited, every
man doing that which is right in his own eyes.
The Malay Polynesians are now all but completely evangelized-
This work w T as accomplished by the four great Societies, viz.
the London Missionary Society, the Church Missionary Society,
the Wesleyan Missionary Society, and the American Board of
Foreign Missions. The Society Islands, the Low Archipelago,


the Hervey group, Samoa, and some smaller groups, were
evangelized by the London Missionary Society ; the Tongan
group by the Wesleyans; New Zealand by the Church Missionary
Society and the Wesleyans ; and the Hawaiian, Marquesan, and
some other groups by the American Board of Foreign Missions.
These Malay missions are now all nearly, if not entirely, self-
supporting and.self-extending, although European and American
missionaries are still superintending and directing the native
ministry.
For the last thirty or forty years, these Societies, along with
our own Presbyterian Mission, have been extending their efforts
to the Papuans in Western Polynesia. The London Missionary
Society, with their mission vessel the John Williams, have
evangelized the Loyalty Islands ; they opened up the New
Hebrides, and generously passed this group over to the Presby-
terian Mission; and they, in their turn, with their mission
vessel the Dayspring, arc doing their utmost to evangelize
this important group. The London Missionary Society have
also opened up a new and difficult mission in Papua or New
Guinea. The Wesleyans, with their mission ship the John
Wesley, have laboured with great diligence and success on the
Fiji group, which is now largely Christianized. They have also
recently opened up a new and arduous mission in New Britain
and in New Ireland. The American Board of Foreign Missions,
with their mission ship the Morning Star, have been extend-
j1 1 O' their missionary work in the many groups of small islands


on the north of the line, called Micronesia. The Church of
England, first under Bishop Selwyn, subsequently under Bishop
Patteson, and at present under Bishop Selwyn, son of the
former missionary bishop, with their mission ship the Southern
Cross, have with great earnestness been carrying on their
Melanesian mission in the Solomon, the Santa Cruz, and other
groups.
Such are the agencies at work among those two races.
Missions are being carried on by five great organizations. They
employ five well-equipped mission vessels of 150 to 300 tons
burden each,, one of them with auxiliary steam power, with
two smaller vessels for local service. They have had generally
from 100 to 120 ordained missionaries ; but of late years, since
native agency has been extensively raised up, the European
and American missionaries are being considerably reduced in
number, some think far too prematurely.
It is difficult to obtain exact statistics on a field so wide, and
with agents so numerous, but the following may be accepted
as an approximation sufficiently close for our present purpose,
which is to deal only in broad generalities. Eighty years ago
there was not a single native Christian in all the South Sea
Islands; not a sentence had been printed in any of their
languages. When the mission ship the Duff first ploughed the
waters of the Pacific, and landed the first band of missionaries
on Tonga, Tahiti, and the Marquesas, darkness covered the
land, and gross darkness the people. Those islands were all


then the dark places of the earth, and were full of the habita-
tions of horrid cruelty. But now the inhabitants of some 300
islands, large and small, have abandoned heathenism and pro-
fessed Christianity. The number of converts from heathenism
throughout the world, the fruits of all our modern missions, is
estimated at something less than two millions. The converts in
the South Seas at the present time are estimated at a sixth of
these, or 330,000. If we make allowance for the great decrease
of population over almost all the groups, and take into account
the fact that in the most populous of those mission fields, two,
and in some cases three, generations have successively professed
Christianity, there can hardly be fewer than a million of the
natives of the South Sea Islands who have been Christian
worshippers since missions were established among them.
Eighty years ago they were wholly without literature, wholly
without books ; yea, sixty years ago they were still nearly
without any printed books. But now the missionaries have
translated, and the British and American Bible Societies have
printed, the entire Bible in eight different languages. The
London Missionary Society has supplied the whole Bible to the
Tahitians, the Rarotongans, and the Samoans ; the American
Board of Missions to the Hawaiians; the Wesleyan Society to
the Tongans and the Fijians ; the Church Missionary Society,
assisted by the Wesleyans, to the Maories of New Zealand ;
while our Presbyterian Mission has opened the whole Bible to
the Aneityumese in the New Hebrides. Besides these eight


translations of the whole Bible, they have in addition given
the natives five translations of the New Testament in other
languages, or distinctly different dialects. The London Mis-
sionary Society have given the New Testament to the natives
of Mare, to the natives of Lifu, and to the natives of Uvea, in
the Loyalty group ; and also to the natives of Niwe or Savage
Island ; while the Wesleyans have supplied it to the natives of
Rotnmah. Portions of the Scriptures have also been trans-
lated into a great many other languages. There has also
sprung up a considerable amount of native literature, or of
literature in the native languages, secular as well as religious,
both translations and original compositions. Over all those
300 islands life and property are now quite safe ; whereas in
heathenism it was at the risk of his life if any man went
ashore, while it was certain death if he was shipwrecked.
It is not to be expected that in Christians, and in Christian
Churches, raised up out of races so degraded and so ignorant,
the type of Christianity should be of a high order; and no
doubt,- looking on them as a whole, the weakness of Christian
character, the infirmities, the imperfections, and the inconsis-
tencies resulting from their previous habits of life, have often
been prominent in their after conduct. Yea, there has been at
times, in almost all the missions, periods of strong reaction in
favour of heathenism. The most noted of these was what took
place in New Zealand rather more than twenty years ago, and
was known as the pai mairire , or hau-hauism, —a movement


that was half-political and half-religious, but in which the
religious was wholly subservient to the political. The political
organization was a kind of great national land league, thoroughly
anti-British in its object. The religious system, which was
formed solely, or at least chiefly, to support this political
object, was a mixture of the most attractive or Seductive por-
tions of Popery and heathenism. This movement shook both
the Episcopal and the Wesleyan Missions to their foundations,
and for a time seemed to sweep away the Christianity of the
Maories. But when the political movement had exhausted
itself, the religious manifestation, having no real vitality, soon
collapsed, and Christianity since that time has been steadily
regaining its former position. But notwithstanding all reverses
and all drawbacks, I know, both from extensive reading and a
long and wide experience among both races, that a great
change has been effected ; and I can bear testimony, not only
to the genuineness and truthfulness of the change effected by
Christian teaching, but also that, both among individuals and
communities, their religious knowledge and their exemplary
conduct have been such as to show that the gospel is still the
power of God unto salvation. War, murder, infanticide, the
strangulation of widows, the burying alive of the aged,—all the
cruelties and all the abominations of heathenism have dis-
appeared before the gospel. But not only have the natives
ceased to do evil, they have also learned to do well. Peace,
quietness, kindness, and goodwill among themselves and towards


foreigners have become the rule ; the reverse of that has been
the exception. In former times, the truth of men’s religion was
tested and proved by what they would suffer for its sake. The
Christian converts in the South Seas have, in sufficient num-
bers, been fully proved by this test. A large addition to the
ranks of the noble army of martyrs has been supplied from the
natives of the South Seas. But in this commercial age of ours,
in which a money standard is applied to everything, men’s
religion is tested not so much by what they will suffer, as by
what they will do, or rather by what they will give, for it;
hence activity in working, and especially liberality in giving,
for the gospel has become largely the test of men’s piety.
This criterion the South Sea Christians can bear as successfully
as the other. In connection with all the missions, large num-
bers of native Christians have volunteered to go forth and live
among the heathen as evangelists, teachers, helps and servants
to missionaries, and in any or every capacity to assist in
extending a knowledge of the gospel in the heathen islands
around, and make known the way of salvation, which had
come with such freshness and power to their own souls. Their
contributions, too, for religious purposes have been on a scale
of great liberality. They have contributed very largely of
their labour in the erection of churches, schoolhouses, and mis-
sion premises. They have paid for large editions of all these
eight translations of the Bible, and also for the five additional
translations of the New Testament. Moreover, in all the older


missions the natives either wholly or very nearly meet all the
expenses of carrying on these missions. They always support
the native agents, and generally, in addition, contribute as
much to the general funds of the Society as meets all the
expenses of supporting the European or American missionaries.
The means employed in producing these results have been
suitable and adequate. All these missions aimed at employing
a well-educated agency. As a general rule, the missionaries of
all these Societies or Churches have been fully equal to the
average of the ministers of their respective denominations at
home, both in natural abilities, accurate scholarship, Christian
character, moral earnestness, and general fitness for their work.
All the missions have availed themselves, as soon as possible,
of native agency, and that to the utmost extent that was prac-
ticable ; and they have all made arrangements for raising up
an efficient native agency, so that the work may be conserved,
continued, and extended. All the missionaries have set them-
selves to acquire a knowledge of the languages of the natives
among whom they have been labouring, so that religious
instruction has always been conveyed through the medium
of the native languages. These missions have been all pre-
eminently Bible missions. The first efforts of all the mission-
aries was to open the Bible to the natives in their own tongue;
and the natives have shown their appreciation of this privilege,
by the amount of money they have raised to pay for the
Scriptures. At the present time there are only fifty - eight


complete translations of the Bible, printed in all the languages
of the world ; and of these fifty-eight printed translations eight
belong to the South Sea missions, nearly a seventh of the
whole. These missions have all given great prominence to
popular education. They have all established schools every-
where, and endeavoured to teach the whole population to read
and write ; and they have all likewise set up educational estab-
lishments of a higher order, for the training of teachers in the
first place, and also for the raising up of a native ministry ; and
in all these objects they have been, on the whole, to a great
extent successful. But while the primary and chief end of
these missions was strictly religious, —was to explain the prin-
ciples and enforce the practice of the Christian religion, —never-
theless civilisation has everywhere followed in the track of
Christianity. As fast as Christianity rendered life and pro-
perty secure, industry and all the arts of peace immediately
followed ; quiet and contented and peace-loving communities
everywhere sprang up, where hitherto nothing had been known
but either open warfare or an armed peace, or a suspicious
friendship,-—a state of things in which neither life nor property
was secure.
The doctrines taught in all these missions have, as a general
rule, been those known as evangelical, viz., the plenary inspira-
tion of the Bible ; the divinity of the Saviour ; the fall of man;
the atonement of Christ; justification by faith ; sanctification
by the Spirit; the two sacraments of Baptism and the Lord’s


Supper; the divine obligation of the Sabbath; and the eternity
of future rewards and punishments. And while eschewing
everything ritualistic and ascetic, the missionaries have all
inculcated an enlightened and earnest devotion, and a high
and pure morality; they have impressed upon the minds of
their converts, their duty to God and their duty to man.
These missions have all acted harmoniously; they have so
divided their fields of labour as to avoid interfering with one
another’s operations. Here and there, and on stray occasions,
an over-zealous individual has manifested a proselytizing spirit;
but both the missionaries on the field, and the Societies or
Churches supporting them at home, have invariably respected
fully the rights of others, and by mutual consent and assist-
ance have endeavoured to advance the interests of their
common Christianity, rather than the interests of their re-
spective denominations.
Few, if any, missions have been so successful as these
missions in the South Seas, and all of them have been about
equally so. This was so fully recognised, that for thirty or
forty years there was scarcely a missionary sermon preached
from the pulpit, or a missionary speech delivered from the
platform, in which the amazing success of the gospel in Tahiti
and the other South Sea Islands was not appealed to, as a
proof that the gospel still possessed its ancient power, and that
the Lord was still true to His promise. Williams’ Missionary
Enterprises was held to read like an additional chapter to the


Acts of the Apostles; but every one of those missions could
furnish in their history incidents as thrilling, and results as
cheering, as any contained in that marvellous book. But of
late years the continents have bulked so largely in the eyes of
Christendom, that they have quite overshadowed the small
though numerous islands of the Southern Ocean. The millions
in India, China, and Africa have so largely engrossed the
attention of the Christian Church, that the thousands in the
islands are beginning to be ignored. I have no wish to under-
rate the importance of the continents with their teeming
millions; by all means let them be evangelized. Let the
Church of Christ gird up herself, and put forth all her strength
for the great enterprise; and could we count our mission
funds by millions, and our mission agents by thousands, it
might be well to direct our chief attention to the continents.
But so long as our mission funds can be counted only by
thousands, and our missionaries by hundreds, and while the
success on the islands has been so much greater in proportion
than on the continents, so long let a prominent place be assigned
to the islands in selecting our mission fields, and in maintaining
our mission agencies. It has been proved by a comparison of
statistics, that God in His providence has granted ten times
more success in the islands, in proportion to the number of
missionaries, than in most of the continents, while missions can
be carried on in Polynesia at half the expense at which they can
He carried on in India.


I shall now glance at the difficulties that are being specially
felt in the South Sea missions. In addition to all the difficulties
arising out of heathenism, an insalubrious climate, and a Babel
of tongues, there have been three extraneous difficulties of a
formidable character, with which those missions have had all
more or less to contend, viz. Popery, alcoholic drinks, and an
unsanctified commerce. More than forty years ago, Queen
Amelia, the wife of Louis Philippe, King of the French, and
sister of Bomba, King of Naples, took up the idea that it would
be a most meritorious work to establish a Catholic or Popish
mission in the South Seas, wherever a Protestant mission had
been or might be established,—this mission to be counte-
nanced and supported, so far as might be necessary, by the
naval power of France. The Propaganda at Rome warmly
welcomed the proposal, and the Government of Louis Philippe,
to gain the support of the Church, and to supply a counterpoise
to the power of Britain at the antipodes, concurred in the
foreign mission policy of the Queen, And the result has been,
that French priests and French men-of-war have harassed the
missionaries and the natives for well - nigh half a century.
They began at Tahiti, and they ended, if they have ended yet,
at the Loyalty Islands. Rome and France, in relation to the
South Sea missions, remind us strongly of the apocalyptic
Beast with the Woman as its rider. The Woman would not
be specially formidable if she were simply walking on foot,
and the Beast would in general be harmless, if he were not


guided and goaded on by the rider; but, under the instigation
and direction of the ambitious and malignant rider, the Beast
is ferocious and destructive. Of Popery by itself we are not
afraid ; truth is more powerful than error or falsehood, and
with the Bible in our hands we have nothing to fear from
mediaeval tradition and ecclesiastical authority. And the civil
Government of France, when left to itself, and not under the
influence of Rome, is just and generous; but French naval
power, under the instigation of the Papacy, forced a protectorate
on Tahiti, and broke up the Protestant mission on that group.
The same policy all but succeeded at the Sandwich Islands.
The French extorted from King George of Tonga, a treaty
altogether in their own favour ; and in the Loyalty Islands
they so oppressed and persecuted the native Protestants, that
the British Government interposed, and made representations
on their behalf to the late Emperor Napoleon. But since
Ecclesiasticism first declined, and subsequently collapsed in
France, Popish influence has become feeble throughout all the
South Seas, and the Protestant missions have had rest and
quietness.
Another great hindrance to mission work in the South Seas,
is the fearful extent to which alcoholic liquors are brought to
the islands. Both the British and French Governments allow
those liquors to be shipped to those islands, as they do to
other places, without paying duty. The arrangement is that
duties are paid at the port of arrival, not at the port of


departure. But as in most, if not in all, of these islands the
native Government is too weak to enforce payment of duties,
as is done in French or British ports of entry, the result is
that traders and employers of labour virtually pocket all those
duties. Hence they can buy rum, gin, brandy, and other
alcoholic liquors at current prices, and sell them as if they had
paid the Government duty. On this account they would
rather make payments in drink than in anything else, and
they would rather sell drink than anything else ; the chance
of making a profit of three, four, or five hundred per cent.,
which they have been known to do, is too much for the average
of commercial morality in the South Seas to resist, even when
the deadly effects of the traffic are quite well known. It is
doubtful if such temptations, in connection with a lucrative
traffic,-would be strongly resisted anywhere. The natives fall
an easy prey to intoxicants, and immorality, crime, disease,
and death follow as the consequences. It is impossible to
supply statistics on this question, but the evil is everywhere
known, acknowledged, and deplored.
A third difficulty has been the unsanctified character of a
large amount of the commerce that has been carried on among
those islands, and the character and doings of so many of the
white men who trade or settle among the natives. As a
general rule, the first white men who take up their residence
in those islands are waifs and strays, a part of the rowdyism of
the surrounding colonies. Their influence is almost always


antagonistic to that of the missionary. The traffic in those
seas, especially among heathen islands, is to a large extent
unfavourable to Christianity and true civilisation. The articles
of commerce brought to those islands where the natives are
still heathen, are chiefly such as pander to the depraved tastes
of the natives, and foster the worst features of heathen
character. Apart from drink, to which I have made special
reference, the most common articles provided by the traders
are gunpowder, shot, firearms, and tobacco ; by the former, war
is stimulated, and by the latter, habits of self-indulgence are
strengthened, and physical debility is engendered. Some of
the worst forms of European disease are from time to time
imported by trading vessels. Finally, what has been euphoni-
ously called the Labour Traffic—the deporting of natives from
the islands to be employed as labourers elsewhere —has been
an unmixed evil, and in Western Polynesia a source of great
injury to our missions. This system began with the great raid
made by the Peruvian slavers in 1863, mostly confined to the
eastward islands and the small islands on the line, in which
hundreds of natives, partly by fraud and partly by force, were
captured and carried away into slavery. In this case, the
French men-of-war on the Tahitian station did good service
in chasing and capturing several of the slavers, and in liberat-
ing and conveying home the captives. Immediately after the
Peruvian slavers had disappeared, numbers of labour vessels
appeared on the New Hebrides and other groups, professedly


models of gentleness and innocence, their object being to
recruit, as it was called, for labourers, to be employed for six
months in Queensland, Fiji, or New Caledonia. It was not
long, however, till the six months developed into five years,
and numbers were never returned at all, till Government inter-
fered. The traffic went on, till the cruelties and barbarities,
culminating with the shocking atrocities of the Carl case,
on the one hand, and the bloody reprisals, frequently on the
innocent, crowned with the murder of the lamented Bishop
Patteson, on the other hand, were such that the Imperial Par-
liament had to intervene, and passed a law on the subject to
regulate the trade, and which is to be quoted as the “ Kidnap-
ping Act.” By this enactment, and the constant presence in
Western Polynesia of a number of small gunboats, under the
direction of the Commodore on the Australian station, all
gross outrages have been suppressed. But the traffic is still
extensively carried on, the spirit of the Act is often evaded,
and the labour trade continues to be a source of great injury
to the native tribes. So great is the demand for native labour,
and so lucrative is the trade, that the British Government are
afraid to prohibit it altogether, lest the traders should hoist the
French, or the German, or the American flag, and the Govern-
ment should lose all control over the traffic.
Notwithstanding the great success of the South Sea missions,
the constant and universal operation of some or all of these
evils has led to a great decrease of the population,—perhaps


to one-lialf over tlie whole area where Christianity has been
embraced. There is no mystery in the law by whose operation
the dark races melt away before modern civilisation ; it is as
plain as any law of nature ; it would be a mystery if they did
not melt away. It is not Christianity which causes the decrease
in the population : Christianity is eminently conservative as
regards life and health. It is not civilisation which is depopu-
lating the islands : civilisation is always favourable to the
vitality of races. But it is the vices and diseases of civilised
life so largely imported; the selfishness of traders and colonists,
who for gain pander to the destructive tastes of the natives;
and also the ignorance of the poor natives themselves, who
know not how to use the good and reject the evil of what
civilisation brings to them. In many, perhaps in most cases,
the transition from barbarism to civilisation is too rapid ; an
injudicious use is often made of the conveniences and advan-
tages of civilised life, which is injurious, instead of being bene-
ficial to health and life. It is, however, satisfactory to know
that in most of the older missions this transition period is
past; the decrease of population is stayed, and a period of
increase has begun. As for those evils that retard missionary
operations, the one principal remedy is to increase missionary
agency as fast and as far as possible. Every new mission
station that is opened becomes a centre of protection to the
natives from all those evils ; and not till mission stations cover
the whole islands will that protection be complete.


I come now to consider the future of these missions. The
missions were all commenced, and have been carried on nearly
up to this time, by British and American Churches. But since
the Australasian colonies have increased so largely in popula-
tion and wealth, a strong missionary spirit has been developed;
and all the missions supported by Societies and Churches in
Britain are being more or less taken over by the Churches in
the colonies with which these denominations are respectively
connected; so that the time is evidently not far distant when
all these missions south of the line will be supported by the
Churches in Australia and New Zealand. In this way the
Churches at home will by and by be set free to devote their
resources in men and means to the nearer and larger missions
in India, China, Japan, and Africa. As those is]ands all lie
contiguous to Australia and New Zealand, —as those colonies are
all rapidly increasing in population and wealth, —as the mis-
sionary spirit is already strongly developed in the colonial
Churches, —as the condition of the islands is becoming well
known to the colonists, and as their commercial value is becom-
ing better understood and more fully appreciated,- —so there is
every likelihood that the claims of those wofully degraded but
deeply interesting natives will be fully acknowledged, and their
necessities carefully considered, by the colonial Churches.
Owing to the great prominence that has been given of late
years to our large missions in Asia and Africa, a strong pre-
judice against those island missions has arisen in the minds


both of the supporters of missions and of many of our young
aspirants for missionary labour. It is supposed, by the latter
especially, that while superior natural abilities and high scholastic
acquirements are necessary to meet the demands of mission life
in India and China, and that while there is even scope for the
exercise and display of these attainments in South and Central
Africa, it would be throwing themselves away to select those
islands as their field of missionary effort; that the slenderest
abilities and the most limited attainments are good enough
for the low and degraded specimens of humanity that occupy
those islands. This, however, is quite a mistake : good natural
abilities and high attainments in scholarship are as necessary
in the South Sea missions as in any other field. Human nature
is much the same everywhere; and the difficulties of mission
work, though widely different in character, are much the same
in amount all the world over. Owing to the multiplicity of
tongues spoken in those islands, nowhere are linguistic abilities
more needed; and no mission field furnishes more scope for
philosophic and scientific inquiries in the study of comparative
philology. Nor are the natives so much lower than many
other heathen races. Physically, you have there the model
type of the “ noble savage.” Intellectually, they are at least not
below mediocrity ; and as to their moral nature, when brought
under the influence of the gospel, their Christian character is
good and exemplary. They are docile, affectionate, truthful,
grateful, reverent, and devout. Mr. Buzacott said to a young


missionary respecting the Rarotongans ; “ If you know how to
manage them, they will risk their own lives to save yours ; ”
and this will apply to the Papuans as well as to the Malays.
Moreover, men of good talents and superior acquirements will
always either find or create useful and profitable work any-
where, and will always leave their mark behind them. It
would be easy to supply from the South Sea missions a list of
names, in proportion to their numbers, as distinguished for
talents, as conspicuous for attainments, and as eminent for suc-
cessful labours, as can be found in any other field of modern
missions.
There are three conditions under any one of which a mission
will be popular: If a mission is new, if a mission is pre-
eminently successful, or if a mission is undertaken to an
overwhelmingly numerous population. If it is a new mission,
like those at present commenced in central Africa, there is about
it all the charm of novelty, all the halo of hope, and all the
excitement of romance to invest it with interest, and to secure
for it support. If it is a mission that is specially successful,
such as many of the South Sea missions have been at times, or
as the Madagascar mission has been for a number of years, —
when thus dazzled with success, every friend of missions is
willing to support it, and every young missionary candidate is
eager to join it. Or if it is a mission to India or China, with
its hundreds of millions, however small the amount of success
may be, the idea that the mission is associated with untold


millions makes such an impression upon the public mind, as
leads them easily to infer that its influence must, in some
mysterious way, be commensurate to the numbers with which
it is connected. But the South Sea missions have'at present
none of these accidental advantages. They are no longer new
missions, —the novelty and the romance with which they were
once invested are now gone. They are not at present specially
successful, they continue all to be moderately so ; but there is
not at present anywhere among all those thousand isles such
striking progress, or such marked success, as have at times
drawn the attention of Christendom to them, and led to the
exclamation—See what the Lord hath wrought! Nor can the
population of those islands, counted simply by thousands, or
tens of thousands, or at most by hundreds of thousands, be
compared for a moment with the countless millions of the great
continents. On this account we plead for the South Sea
missions under great disadvantages. We can urge their claims
simply as a matter of duty ; we can appeal only to the command
of God, the promises of Scripture, the aspects of providence,
the present condition of the natives, and the history of the
past. But foregoing everything fortuitous, accidental, Or ad-
ventitious, —strong sources of support to some missions at the
present time, —and relying simply on the essential and abiding
reasons for carrying on this work, our hopes are still sanguine
of ultimate success.
And, in conclusion, I refer to our grounds of encouragement,


both for the success of missions in general, and of the South Sea
missions in particular. The Church of Christ is a living,
organized body. The essential conditions of organized life are
growth, increase, and extension. These conditions, as we have
seen, have been always present in the Church, Christianity is
essentially an aggressive system. John the Baptist said of
Christ, as the founder and head of a new society, “He must
increase ; ” and the Prophet Isaiah says of Christ’s kingdom, “ Of
the increase of His government and peace, there shall be no
end.” Our Lord says, “ The kingdom of heaven is like a grain
of mustard seed,” small, very small in its beginnings, great in
its results. Daniel said of the stone that smote the image, it
“ became a great mountain and filled the whole earth : ” “ The
God of heaven shall set up a kingdom that shall break in pieces
and consume all these kingdoms, and shall stand for ever,” The
principles of Christianity are of universal adaptation. There is
nothing local, nothing temporary, nothing peculiar about them.
We have therefore the fullest assurance that Christian missions
will not be a failure, yea, they will be a brilliant success; and
the same will hold good in an especial degree of the South Sea
missions. The promises of God are distinct about the islands :
“Keep silence before me, 0 islands;” “Let them declare His
praise in the islands; ” “Glorify ye the Lord in the isles of
the sea ; ” “ Listen, 0 isles, unto me ; ” “ Let the isles and the
inhabitants thereof sing His praise ; ” “ The isles shall wait upon
me, and trust;” “ All the isles of the heathen shall worship


Him.” Yes, Melanesia, Micronesia, and Polynesia —the black
islands, the little islands, and the many islands—shall all
worship Him and show forth His praise. The promises cannot
fail. And, next, to encourage us we have the past history of
the Church, we have the history of all other missions, and
we have the history of the South Sea missions in particular.
Never were missions undertaken under more unfavourable
circumstances. The natives were among the most degraded,
cruel, and wicked to be found on the face of the earth. The
missionaries who went among them took their lives in their
hands, and several of them were cruelly murdered. On no
region of the earth has the curse of Babel and the confusion
of tongues been so severely felt. These islands, too, were
then at the ends of the earth, the most distant lands to which
the gospel could at that time be sent, and to which there was
then no regular communication. It was a voyage of six,
eight, or ten months before missionaries could reach their
O '
destination. Forty years ago, the missionaries were often two
years and more before they received letters from home. Less
than thirty years ago, I was a year and a day without receiving-
one letter from the outside world. But now the South Seas
have become one of the great thoroughfares of the world, and
they are being traversed daily in all directions by ships of all
nations. Never were missions undertaken more as a simple act
of faith, in obedience to the divine command, and in depend-
ence on the divine promise, and never scarcely was faith more


fully rewarded. Not only have all these missions thus far been
pre-eminently successful, but God in His providence has created
such surroundings, as give now a moral certainty for the evan-
gelization of every group and every island in that vast
expanse of ocean, although there remaineth yet very much
land to be possessed. When this century commenced, the
great western slopes of the North American continent was a
wilderness, Australia and New Zealand were much in the same
condition ; but the gold discoveries, first in California, next in
Australia, and finally in New Zealand, gave such an impetus to
colonization, which even then was setting in strongly, that now
new-formed states have sprung up almost to maturity on both
sides of the Pacific. All the islands north of the line will now
be safe under the evangelistic principles that are strong along
the western seaboard of the United States ; and all the groups
south of the equator will ere long be overtaken by the
rapidly-increasing population of Australasia. The eighty years’
missionary experience on those islands, the number of native
agents now available, the amount of scriptural and other
reading in the hands of the natives, the nearness of the
missions to the basis of operations, the facilities for holding
intercourse with the islands, the rapidity of communication
with Europe and America, the vastly increased knowledge
about missions that now prevails, and the deep interest that
is taken in them, the greatly-improved organizations for con-
ducting missions, —all these things show the increasing ratio


with which missions may be expected to advance, compared
with what could be done eighty years ago. The grounds of
encouragement are now, humanly speaking, something like a
hundred to one, as compared with what they were when the
ship Duff sailed down the English Channel with the first
contingent of South Sea missionaries on board. Little could
those men foresee to what that first attempt was to grow.
Little could they comprehend of the aggressive power of that
principle which they were about to plant in the distant isles
of the sea. The command of God continues the same, the
promises of God are still firm and sure, and the history of
these eighty-four years records a succession of honest and
earnest efforts crowned with remarkable success; and the pre-
sent prospects, while revealing a vast amount of heathenism
in those islands still to be evangelized, show clearly that the
resources, in men and means, for accomplishing this work
cannot fail to be ample and sufficient. A strong missionary
spirit is pervading all those young communities ; the aggressive
spirit of the gospel, the expanding element of Christianity, is
strong in all those newly-organized Churches ; and the claims of
those degraded islanders is distinctly felt and fully recognised.
Our brethren at the antipodes are quite prepared to undertake
these obligations, and discharge these duties.
We may therefore safely conclude that the time is not far
distant, when all those isles shall wait for God’s law, when the
multitude of those isles shall rejoice, when all those Ethiopians


shall stretch out their hands unto God; when the heathen
inhabitants of all those islands shall be raised from their
present state of ignorance and degradation, to enjoy all the
blessings and all the advantages of pure and undefiled religion,
of scriptural education, and of general civilisation; when
Fetich superstition shall disappear, when the knowledge of
the true God shall enlighten every mind, and when the love of
the blessed Saviour shall gladden every heart.
MORRISON AND GIBB, EDINBURGH,
PRINTERS TO HER MAJESTIES STATIONERY OFFICE.




