

e ;
* THE
t •
INDUSTRIAL RESOURCES
■ VICTORIA.
WITH
PRACTICAL SUGGESTIONS ON AGRICULTURE, EMPLOYMENT OF
- LAROR, WATER SUPPLY, AC., AC.,
H. LILL LINDSAY, Civil Engineer M, R, I, A — F, .G, S, L, —
M, Inst., C, E, — M, B, D, S, Ac., Ac.,
AND FOR MANY YEARS A COUNTY SURVEYOR IN IRELAND,
AUTHOR OF
“IRISH GRAND JURY LAWS CONSIDERED,”
* f AGRICULTURE OF THE COIJNTY OF ARMAGH.”
Nostri Plena Laboris.
PUBLISHED BY
GEORGE ROBERTSON, COLLINS STREET, MELBOURNE;.
THOMAS BROWN, MOORABOOL STREET, GEELONG.




INDUSTRIAL RESOURCES
YICTOEIA.
WITH
PRACTICAL SUGGESTIONS ON AGRICULTURE, EMPLOYMENT OF
LAROR, WATER SUPPLY, AC., AC.,
H. LILL LINDSAY, Civil Engineer M, 11,1, A—F, G, S, L, —
M, Inst., C, E, —M, R, D, S, &c., &c.,
AND FOR MANY YEARS A COUNTY SURVEYOR IN IRELAND,
AUTHOR OP
“ IRISH GRAND JURY LAWS CONSIDERED,”
"AGRICULTURE OP THE COUNTY OP ARMAGH.”
Nostri Plena Laboris.
PUBLISHED BY
GEORGE ROBERTSON, COLLINS STREET, MELBOURNE.
THOMAS BROWN, MOORABOOL STREET, GEELONG.




DEDICATION.
To Andrew Clarke , Esq., Captain R. Engineers ,
Member of the Legislative Council , and Surveyor
General of Victoria.
To you, as the arbiter of the Land Question from
which all economic improvements may he expected
to proceed, the following writings are inscribed: and
when I consider the knowledge that you must have of
the statistics of Victoria, I make but an humble offer
indeed, to acquaint you with some of the circum-
stances connected with its Industrial Resources:
hoping at a future time to enter more largely into the
subject of its industrial economy.
I trust that the merits of this work may be freely,
fairly, and impartially discussed, as well by the public,
as 1 feel assured (from your well-known impartial
character) that they will be by yourself: and conclude
in the expression of a hope, that though my state-
ments and suggestions may be considered by many a
cursory reader, to be valueless, and premature for a
new colony like this; consequences may arise from
them, which will bring the mighty showers of heaven
into subserviency to the will of the inhabitants; and
cause the germinating bud, and the genial advance-
ment of vegetable life, to promote and enhance the
wealth and prosperity of Victoria.
I cannot conclude however, without acknowledging
your kindness, in granting me access to, and affording
me tracings of some of your unpublished maps of the
Colony.
And have the honor to remain,
Your most obliged servant,
H. LILL LINDSAY, C. E.
Melbourne, June, 1856.




PREFACE.
In the following pages, although some of the sub-
jects appear under distinct headings, yet agricultural
improvement, and employment for labor, pervade the
whole: statistical calculations are only introduced for
explanatory purposes, —as they would be very vagus
and valueless, at the rate of prices of articles of
food, &c., which prevailed during and for two years
previous to the year 1855, and the precarious value of
labor ruling in Victoria.
Leading principles and arguments, are therefore
only put forward; and these being understood, it will
not be a matter of much difficulty, for any reader to
satisfy himself, as to the conclusions, even by calcula-
ting from a different scale of prices, than those which
prevailed during the year 1855, and holding in view
the probability of a vast increase of population.
This work was intended for publication at the com-
mencement of this vear, but unforeseen circumstances
•/ ' #
have caused its delay until now; and as some of the
statements written during last year, and having a
prospective value have already pretty nearly turned
out to be facts, it is to be hoped, that, that circum-
stance will not militate against, but for the character
of the work.
H. L. LINDSAY,
June, 1856.




CONTENTS.
View of the subject—Labor as a commodity 1
Agriculture ... *
A Water Supply
Hot Winds 15
Sites for Reservoirs 47
Repayment of Costs ... ... ••• ••• ••• 21
Labor as Capital ... ... ••• ••• ••• 24
The kind of Crops suited for the Soil and Climate... ... 30
The mode of treating the Soil and Rotation system of Cropping 32
Practical Results of Agriculture 36
The Rearing of Stock 41
Pastoral Lands 44
Mills and Manufactories ... ... ••• ••• 47
Quartz Crushing 51
The Prospective wages of Labor ... ... ... 54
The Present Prices of other Commodities ... ... 61
The Value and Rent of Land ... ' ... ••• ••• 67
The Standard of Value 79
Canals 83
Railways ... . . ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• 85
Concluding Remarks 87


ERRATA.
Page 2, Line 32, for “ ernomous ” read enormous.
Do. 27, do. 30 & 40, for “ 1856 ” read 1855—6.
Do. 58, do. 33, for “ unknon ” read unborn.
Do. 58, do. 36, for “of nations ” read of a nations.
Do. 59, do. 9, for “ circumstance ” read circumstances.
Do. 79, do. 19, from bottom, for “ of” read being of.
Do. 88, do. 8& 9, for “natural” read national.


INDUSTRIAL RESOURCES OF VICTORIA,
WITH PRACTICAL SUGGESTIONS ON
AGRICULTURE, EMPLOYMENT OF LABOR, WATER
SUPPLY, &o.
VIEW OF THE SUBJECT. LABOR AS A COMMODITY.
The object of the writer, in this case, is to give
a familiar introduction to what is of paramount
necessity in the Colony of Victoria , that is, Food and
Employment for the People.
Adam Smith’s arguments on the Wealth of Nations,’
1 will take as a standard guide. His principles were,
the Wages of Labor, the Profits of Stock, and the
Rent of Land ; and in modifying these principles, to
suit the circumstances of this Colony, I shall deviate
as little as I can from the opinions and demonstra-
tions of so great and scientific an author.
In taking A. Smith for my guide, in writing on the
Political Economy of Victoria, I feel the poor position
that I hold, with respect to that distinguished author,
on National Jurisprudence ; but rest satisfied, in the
expectation of a hope, that indulgent readers will
give me credit for sincerity, and impartially decide
upon the soundness of the statements which I offer
for their kind consideration.
In the first place, I will take the Wages of Labor.
In most, if not all the civilized countries in the world,
it is regulated by the Value of Stock ; as the interest
of money varys, so will the price of labor ; at the


same time, that labor as a material, is tlm ground-
work of any prosperity that may arise, either to a
Nation or a Company ; and it is the “ Sine qua non ”
for carrying out those great improvements in the
Colony of Victoria, which will be proposed in the
sequel.
In forming an opinion as to the proper direction
of labor, in the future development of the resources
of this Colony, it is necessary, in the first place, to
make a few remarks on what the Colony has already
passed through. And without referring to what the
price of labor was, previous to the time of the gold
discovery, it- may be said, that that auriferous period
was the great and primary epoch in the annals of
Australia; as regards the value of rude and unim-
proved labor : the population being altogether dispro-
portioned to the vast openings which were made
for the requirements of labor, that it in consequence
became a commodity of far greater value than could
for a moment be reconcilable, with proper notions, of
the due advancement of a nation, either in w r ealth or
prosperity.
The result was, that an undue influx of immigrants
took place, and when they landed on the shores of
Victoria, the desire for gold being predominant in
every ones mind, the rush to the diggings was kept
up, and almost all other pursuits were neglected, or
were carried out in that extravagant manner with
respect to the price of labor, that is sure to end in
failure and disappointment; and such is .the practi-
cal result at the present time. Buildings, &c., were
erected at ernomous cost, (and many of them for the
purpose of storing imported goods, to meet the wants
of so sudden an increase of population), which will
not now return even 5 per cent, on the expenditure ;
and that being the case now, what may be expected
when the value of labor shall have become assimila-
ted to that of other countries, as that is the great
climax to be aimed at and looked forward to. And
as a sequitar , the corresponding reduction in the value


of lands which so suddenly rose with the price of
labor.
Had the wages of labor never risen to such an ex-
traordinary height, the present depression never could
have occurred ; from one extreme of extravagance, in
endeavouring to create a want for employment, and
without considering, that in a new country particu-
larly, a due regard should always be paid to a proper
division of labor, and the value of its concomitants;
Lands and Stock —the other extreme, is now resorted
to; that of affording no employment, except on some
very urgent grounds, or for some purposes that
cannot be postponed ; and this must of necessity be
the state of affairs for a considerable time to come ;
as with the wages of labor, the prices rf other com-
modities, the profits of stock, the rent of houses and
lands, increased simultaneously or gradually, so before
the price of labor can now he reduced to its proper
standard, a proportionate reduction must take place
in the value of all other commodities.
The object of the writer of these remarks, is to
pave a way for the speedy establishment of so bene-
ficial a change, and to make the value of labor, the
profits of stock, the value and rent of land, all, be
regulated by one uniform principle, that which guides
and promotes the Wealth of Nations.
With such a population as that which now exists
in Victoria, it will be some time before a proper
system of labor equilibrium can be properly estab-
lished ; a population assembled in large groups, without
any fixed purposes of action, must of necessity, often
become in want of perhaps the' necessaries of life,
being either without means of providing for them-
selves, or even wdth means; being dependant on
Foreign supplies, for both food and raiment, and in
either case; the existence of want is sure to he the
harbinger to turbulence and disorder. Without a
legitimate employment for labor, this Colony can
never make V, further step in advancement. The
labor employed in seeking for gold, is not of thnt


legitimate character which enriches a new country,
though it would an old one, with an otherwise settled
population, a portion of which would always he left
to cultivate the ground. Gold finding in Victoria,
certainly has done good in creating a great revenue
from import duties, which could not otherwise have oc-
curred in the same space of time, and Towns smdißinld-
ings have been suddenly got up in consequence ; but
supposing the Gold Fields, for a period to fail, what
would become of those Towns and those Buildings ?
—nothing but ruin ! they can only be considered as
Land or Stock, and altogether auxiliaries to the profits
of Gold field labor, and once the profits of that
labor were gone, away would go the value of the
rest, and the importer would fail in having a market
for his goods for want of funds by the people to pur-
chase them. Similar circumstances are of frequent
occurrence at home, where large masses are congre-
gated together; it is therefore clear, that in establish-
ing a new country, the more the population can be
scattered, the better for the ultimate benefit, both of
the country and themselves. And how can this be
brought about in Victoria ? In this way, the labor
is the gold of this or any other country; it is by labor
that the gold is found, and though individual profits
might not he so rapidly made at more legitimate
pursuits, yet labor legitimately directed and economi-
cally carried out, would be of a lasting, while the
other affords but a transient benefit; by the one, all
individual enterprise would reap an advantage; while
by the other, the benefits occur by chance, and for
one that may be enriched, one hundred may be left
penniless.
The first attempt at wealth, after the rush for gold
seems now to some extent to have abated, is to open
another source of employment for the labor of
Victoria, and this can be effected and carried out in
a very simple form, that is, by Opening the Land .
Here, is an inexhaustible source of Wealth ! Here,
are Freedom ; Happiness; Comfort. Here, labor


pays itself, stock becomes of steady value, and the
price of land is brought to its proper level; not by
the usurious schemes of speculators, who purchase
lands, and retail them, to accommodate the poor man
perhaps at his ruin ; but the land will be valuable,
only, according to its capabilities of producing ; as
compared with other lands and othei countries.
On his Farm, the laborer can retire to rest, well
satisfied that his days labor will be profitable, —hds
rent is fixed, or perhaps none ; his outgoings are
small, —his incomings will be all so much gold, and
how much more respectably made. He can sit under
his own vine, and under his own Fig tree, and exclaim
with the poet Cowper,
11 Oh ! friendly to the best pursuits of man,
Friendly to thought, to virtue, and to peace,
Domestic life in rural pleasure passed.” •
But to arrive at this paradise, who that ever beheld
the Vineyards of Italy and Spain, who that ever con-
templated the vast wealth, produced by the wheat
growing portions of Europe, Asia, and America;
including the barley growing portion of Northern
Russia ; with rice growing India and China. And
who that considers, for a country yet unexplored, the
Bice, Wheat, and Maize, growing all round the coast
of Africa. Who, that reflecting on all these, and travel-
ling through Victoria generally, that will not exclaim,
—Where is the hand of man —where his handiwork
—where is the plough employed in the field, or the
thrashing machine at the barn, —where are the hay
ricks, and where the corn stacks, —where the vine-
ries, —where the gardens and fowl-houses, —and echo
answers —Where ! Who that would travel through
some of the fine pastoral districts of Victoria, —who,
that would pass through the rich agricultural land,
—who that would observe the barren ana parched-up
plains, that will not exclaim—Why should such a
country be allowed to remain as a waste ! Why
should not the hands of the cultivator be encouraged,
and a premium, if necessary, be offered, for the


taking of Farms, on conditions of carrying out the
proper improvements ?
Why is all this ? J ust because of a system of bad
government. Now we are on the eve of reformation,
and it is to be hoped, that great and beneficial effects
will be the result. Let the lands be opened, and
then there will be legitimate employment for labor.
It is necessary to observe that there are some ex-
ceptions to the general absence of cultivation, —that
there seems to exist an anxious desire for it; so much
so, that a considerable breadth of land, near the
towns, is this year under crop, and that mostly wheat.
In a rude state of society, the opening and letting
of land would not be promotive of much good, but
in connection therewith, the opening of communica-
tions to the nearest markets would be of paramount
importance, and Victoria may be considered as all but
in this rude state at the present moment, no matter
how intelligent her people may be ; as the lands are
to a vast extent, unopened , and but few good com-
munications have as yet been made to the interior,
and until both of these shall have been effected on a
very extensive scale, neither energy nor intelligence,
in the proper application of labor, will be of very
great value.
In a civilized state of society, such as Victoria
might be placed in, by the opening of the Land, and
letting or selling it to individuals, according to their
means of leasing or of purchasing: and opening of the
main roads at least; the object of the writer of these
remarks is only commenced. Here is a new field for
operation, a new subject to begin with, a hitherto un-
cultivated country to improve and cultivate ; to make
agriculturists of a population weaned from the idea
of farming,—a greater desire to run upon chance, in
the seeking for gold having long existed. Here rude
and scientific labor commence, rude so far as clearing
out the land for agricultural purposes and scientific,
with regard to the turning of the land to the best
account. This however, brings the writer to his


anxious position, —that of directing the application
of labor, not exactly from the Gold Fields, but
towards,
AGRICULTURE.
Agricultural pursuits, with regard to Victoria, are
what will be her rise and glory : without agricul-
ture she will be nothing: after gold seeking shall
have passed away, with a proper system of agricul-
ture, she may become great, in the promotion of it,
and victorious in the carrying of it out, so far at least
as to prevent the necessity of any importation of food.
There will then be a different plan of employment
for labor, instead of going off to the diggings on a
mere chance of success, a laborer need only apply to
a neighbouring farmer, or become one himself ; so as,
in either case, to secure constant employment for his
labor. And the labor expended on a farm, while produc-
ing an equivalent for gold, to the occupier, is actually
producir g wealth to the country, —a steady wealth; for
a farm being once improved, is not likely to be al-
lowed to run waste, and the consequence will be, that
according to its magnitude and productive qualities,
a proportionate amount of population will settle upon
it, and become steady members of society; and so on,
labor will be diverted into a different channel, and its
value will be determined by the value of the stock,
which may be produced, comparing this with other
countries under equal circumstances.
To pursue a proper system of agriculture in this
colony, the wages of labor is the primary object to be
considered, and particularly with regard to the
profitable employment of the people. And supposing
all the people to be located and distributed on farms,
through the country, the well-known mortal feeling
would still prevail, of human nature ever complaining.
What would now be the cause of discontent? Want
of water. Who that ever bought, or rented land, and
built,upon it, and found that he had no supply of
water, that did not deplore v the perhaps irreparable


loss. Who is there, that ever even built a house,
without knowing to some extent, how he could be
supplied with water ? Who would take a farm for
agricultural purposes, without first enquiring, as to
the proximity of water ? Who would take a pas-
toral run where water could not he found ? And on
the other hand, —Is not a house increased in value
by its contiguity to water ? Is not land valued, for
agricultural purposes, on account of its being close to
water ? And how can cattle exist without water ?
All these great principles of human industry may and
can be attempted, and substantially carried into
operation in this colony, and are sure to be attended
with success, if a constant supply of water were
practically attended to and carried into effect; and as
has been already stated, the wages of labor being the
primary object, in carrying on a proper system of
agriculture; it will be difficult, if not altogether
impossible, to fix the amount of that wages at a
steady marketable value, until the lands of the colony
shall have been placed in a position to suit them, for
purposes of agriculture, and for profitable pastoral
runs ; and thereby to establish some standard, by
which land as a portion of stock, may be system-
atically valued, and for this purpose, the all important
consideration must be, How to effect,
A WATER SUPPLY.
This is a subject of the most vital importance, to
the full development of the resources of this Colony;
the nature, extent, and advantages of a project so
vast in its design, and so general in its anticipated
benefits, it would require volumes to delineate and
portray ; but here the object is to give a brief out-
line of the plan of operations, and a general descrip-
tion of the practical results. The characteristic
features of the country must first be considered, in
order to arrive at a comprehensive mode of maintain-
ing over its surface a constant supply of water.
The Great Plateaus, or Table Lands, are chiefly of


igneous formation, the Rock being Basalt , and for
the most part is what is termed Tabular Basalt. This
Rock possesses no planes of stratification, though
fissures and fractures frequently appear in it; and
wherever it exists, the surface or rain water, cannot
penetrate or pass through it, so as to form springs.
Springs being formed by the passing of rain water be-
tween the planes of Stratified Rocks, to a lower level,
where it re-appears at every opening in the rocks:
Springs may also be formed by the passage of rain down
the fissures and fractures of igneous Rocks ; and as all
springs are supplied from rain water, it would he (as a
general rule) useless to attempt, and hopeless to expect
to procure either Wells or Springs out of Tabular Ba-
saltic Rock, except where it may have become fissured
and broken. The rain water in consequence, flows off
the surface, and not into the ground, in the volcanic
districts ; and it is therefore, that the Rivers and
Creeks in those districts, are so readily dried up, in the
absence, and so rapidly filled, during the existence of
rain. Another cause why the rain passes so rapidly
off, is that the surface itself is mostly composed of
that stiff loam which forms an almost impervious
obstacle to the lodgement and passing through of
water, the rains pass off in consequence, even of that
cause, in sudden, and often disastrous floods; and as
far as vegetation, or irrigation, is concerned, without,
perhaps, adding an iota of real benefit to either.
This circumstance of itself manifests the necessity of
introducing artificial means of collecting the rain-
water, to meet the necessities occasioned by extreme
drought,—which is greatly increased by the absence
of moisture in the atmosphere (there being no equi-
librium, or changing of particles, kept up, in conse-
quence of there being no surface water for evapora-
tion. True, it may be said that springs occur in
Volcanic Rocks, —but it is only by the passing of
water through the fissures and caverns in such rocks;
and, as they follow no general laws, when once the
water disappears from the surface, it is impossible to


tell where to find it afterwards ; it descend into
the deepest recesses of the rocks, and there become
the primary cause of those gaseous explosions which
so frequently occur, and particularly in warm lati-
tudes ; so that, for all useful and practical purposes,
it cannot he considered as an agent that might be
turned to any advantage whatever.
Another feature of the country, is where Stratified
Rocks are in existence. These rocks form passages
and receptacles for rain, or surface-water; and
springs may be found exuding from them at lower
levels, and where openings occur ; and wells may, in
most cases, be advantageously formed in them; but
the Stratified Rocks, of most of this Colony, are of
the oldest of the Palaeozoic group, and having been
upheaved by, and being found in close proximity with
Granite Rocks, from the great angle or plane of their
dips, present very few encouragements to the economic
and advantageous sinking of wells, —as the sinkings
should, of necessity, be very deep, and even then
there would be no certainty of obtaining water. It
is, therefore, plain that, even where Stratified Rocks
of the older formations exist, water cannot be ob-
tained (beyond what may naturally appear in springs),
without resorting to artificial means, either by the
sinking of wells, or collecting the water as it falls on
the surface. These extra supplies will be greatly les-
sened in magnitude in stratified districts, as the flows
from rivers and creeks, are more constant and steady.
But the fact is notorious, that, in this Colony, both in
the volcanic and stratified districts, a great want of
water is felt during the summer months; and how
that want is to be supplied, in a judicious manner, is
the object to be attained, —which brings under con-
sideration another feature in this delineation, the ca-
pability of supplying by art, what Nature has left un-
done, and how the lands, from being parched up and
burning, may be made verdant and productive. This
capability exists in an abundant degree ; the undula-
tion of the country is such, that the collecting of


winter rains may be commenced on any scale of mag
nitude, ascending from the lowest valley to the high-
est mountain ridges. The country is well diversified
in hills and dales, mountains and valleys, in rivers
and creeks, and extensive plains ; so that the saving
of all the water, which now runs off the surface,
would not be a matter of much difficulty, though of
great magnitude. That can he easily explained on
account of its simplicity, while this can only be mea-
sured by its vast importance. That can be formed
according to the first notions of the necessity for pro-
viding for future wants, even in a state of rude
economy ; while this would become the admiration of
the world, and fit for the greatest philosopher to look
upon and wonder.
In order to save the winter rains, in a country like
Victoria it will be necessary to combine art and na-
ture, The one offers facilities for forming dams and
reservoirs, and for conveying the water through the
country in the present channels of the rivers and
creeks ; while the other must be resorted to, in order
to form those dams and reservoirs in the most sub-
stantial and judicious manner, and to select the most
suitable channels to convey the water from one reser-
voir to another, and from each reservoir on to the
contiguous lands.
The great reservoirs should be constructed at the
foot of the mountain gorges, and so as to command
the levels of all the minor reservoirs, and should be
so arranged that all the mountain surface water would
be retained in them, after making provision for let-
ting quantities off, where facilities for supplies are
already in existence.
From these reservoirs, the natural channels of the
rivers, and most suitable creeks, should be chosen as
passages to the next lower set of reservoirs, which
should be so arranged and constructed as to com-
mand the levels of the plains in the district where
they might be formed, and in a similar manner to collect
all the redundant rain which might fall above their res-


pective levels, and not retained by the principal reser-
voirs, —which process wonld be very simple, as the
rain now passes through the same channels in
uninterrupted courses to the sea ; there would, there-
fore be only this difference, that in place of the
redundant rain running off through these natural
channels, it would be retained in reservoirs, con-
structed at suitable places along those channels, and
so as to command the levels of all the table lands,
down to the lowest plain. These reservoirs being
gradually of less and less extent, proceeding down-
wards, should only be constructed on the present
channels of the rivers, and necessary creeks, in order
to economise labor.
By these means, all the surface water which at
present runs uselessly and perhaps devastatingly to
the sea, would be impeded in its progress, and pre-
served for, a better and more economical purpose.
This system of reservoirs could be so arranged
that, beginning with the larger ones at the summits
of the cultivable lands, and gradually lessening them
in size in descending to the lowest plains, and by
letting the waste water of one, make up the scarcity
in another, so that a constant supply of water in all,
might be depended on; and this almost never-ceasing
running and changing of the water vrould prevent
its becoming turbid, and as a further security against
results of that character, artificial channels could be
made from the higher levels of some of the principal
rivers not actually embraced within the range of the
reservoirs, which would be a source of an additional
supply of water, besides preserving its purity.
1 bus the face of the country would be dotted with
small artificial lakes, each formed at the compara-
tively small expense of a dam ; the waters would be
let off for manufacturing purposes, in the present
natural channels, at little or perhaps no expense.
Mill sites could be selected along the banks of these
channels, and the flow of water to them would be
constant and equal both in winter and summer. The


sudden floods which are often so fearful in their cha-
racter, would never occur, as the waters would be
kept back, and only let off as they might be required.
This would be a most important consideration, with
regard to the erection of machineries, as sudden floods
might often destroy them, —and, at all events, if par-
ties who might feel an interest in erecting manu-
factories had to guard against sudden floods, it
would greatly add to their expenses and dangers,
and might deter them altogether from erecting
such establishments ; but with the regular flow
from the reservoirs, a systematically-arranged power
would be in constant operation. Mills and manu-
factories being thus supplied, the next consideration
will be, how to convey water on the lands ?
The subject of irrigating the lands of Victoria is
a complicated one, embracing simple and difficult
modes of operation. The simple plan is the well-
known principle of conveying the water from the
main channels, in open cuts, through the higher por-
tions of the plains to be irrigated. This could be
easily carried into effect, and requires no further
elucidation ; but in most cases the plains are so flat,
or level, that water may not run on them even in a
straight course, without having a fall from the ex-
treme end from the source of supply ; and these cuts
would not irrigate more than a few yards at either
side of them. To get over this difficulty, pipes made
of wood could be laid from the reservoirs through
the flat lands, and so that advantage could be taken
of every rising ground, to let off the water, which
would run a considerable way along the flat, in conse-
quence of having got an impetus by starting from
even gently rising ground: on flat ground where the
water would not run freely, jets should be made in
the pipes which would throw the water a considerable
distance; and, in connection with the jets, different
lengths of leathern hose might very advantageously
be made use of, —so that any difficulty that may be
fancied to exist, with regard to irrigating flat exten-


sive plains, could be obviated. It may be said, that this
would bo expensive, but it would not cost as much as
the draining of an equal portion of wet land ; and,
if one would be remunerative, the other would be far
more so, —as, cceteris paribus, far more profits can be
derived from irrigation than draining, in a climate
like that of Victoria: however, it may very safely
be asserted that no sane agriculturist would neglect
irrigating his land, even by pipes and jets, wers there
once a facility of obtaining water for that purpose,
and a good market for his farming produce at a con-
venient distance, as the value of the crops of one
year would far outweigh the expenses of the irrigat-
ing pipes.
The next subjects for consideration, in the distri-
bution of water supply, are the local Townships ,
including the Diggings. Here there would be no
difficulty in selecting, or so arranging the reservoirs,
that water might be discharged frojn them at con-
siderable heights above the Townships and Diggings ;
and this being properly carried into effect, by supply-
ing water both in pipes and open channels, as might
be most suitable, the whole system of water supply
could be put in operation.
A question will now arise, how far this water sup-
ply could be depended on, in consequence of the
amount of evaporation ? 1 his subject being at pre-
sent under very elaborate discussion, and without
further referring to, or offering an opinion on that
discussion, the writer will only remark that this is
not altogether an analogous case, —for here the eva-
poration, though great in proportionate amount to the
rain-falls, is of incalculable benefit in promoting vege-
table existence, by descending in the shape of dew,
and plants derive, in maty cases, a greater amount of
nourishment from the air,than they do from the soil
in which they grow. It is a fact not controverted,
that in every habitable country, the rain exceeds
evaporation; and without entering into calculations,
as to the exact quantities of either, it may safely be


asserted that the overplus of rain will be sufficient for
all the purposes of water supply, and for all the pur-
poses which the writer has in view. And that the
returning dews, from the evaporated portion, will be
worth many times their volume in water, in the pro-
motion of the growth of plants and vegetable life.
A constant cause for evaporation will tend to
purify and mollify the air, and to establish a better
equilibrium between the extreme heat of the day and
the frigid coldness of the night. While on this sub-
ject, it will not be out of place to take a cursory view
of the cause of
HOT WINDS.
As the hot winds are considered to be so injurious
to' vegetation, a short description of them may not be
uninteresting. The lot winds always blow from
north to south, and, as fluids press equally every way ,
there must, of necessity, be some physical cause for
this extraordinary phenomenon. Outside the tropics,
the winds are found to move in parallels of latitude,
unless where they are interrupted by land ; and this
wind almost always blows from the west on Australia,
and having previously moved over so vast an extent
of ocean from South America, passing the Cape of
Good Hope, it becomes, of consequence, very cold on
its arrival at Australia, —and, when arrived on the
hot land, it displaces the rarified air, which is forced
to move off in the direction which offers the least re-
sistance. It cannot go north for there, the westerly or
cold wind, pre-occupies any space, that can be gained,
by its lateral pressure towards the torrid zone; it
cannot go east, for that would be contrary to the doc-
trine of the resolution of forces, and to the principle
of natural and defined laws, of both forces still main-
taining their ground as active powers —therefore the
proper direction for it must be directly south : in
addition to which, the direction towards the south
seems to be the point of least resistance, as southerly
winds are not very prevalent, for if they were, the


hot winds would have to blow in some other direction.
These remarks will apply to an easterly as well as a
westerly wind, or both. The velocity of the hot wind
depends on the amount and velocity of the cold wind
pressing on it; and onward it must move in a south-
erly direction, often-times burning up everything
before it: but its force becomes counterbalanced by
the southern cold wind, and a reaction is then the
consequence, by the clashing and commingling of
both, succeeded by lightning, thunder and rain, and
followed by a cold southerly wind ; so that from the
most extreme and almost insupportable heat, two or
three hours may bring about a change to very great
coldness. During the existence of hot winds, evapo-
ration must be very great; but the subsequent fall of
heavy rain will far outweigh that loss of water. And
supposing the face of the country to be studded with
artificial lakes, and the air moistened by evaporation,
the hot wind could not be so destructive in its course;
it would meet with two antagonistic principles, which
do not now exist, —they are, water lying on the sur-
face of the ground, cooling it, and the ground itself
teeming with vegetable life, containing within its
leaves an immensity of water, and the atmosphere
stored with water evaporated. These obstacles would,
to some extent, prevent the evil effects of hot winds ;
as, in the first place, greater resistance would be pre-
sented to their approach, and, in the next place, the
lands would be in a better position to render their
visits innocuous. It has been said that hot winds are
the cause of rain ; no doubt they are, but it by no
means follows, that if we had no hot winds we would
have no rain. With such a vast extent of ocean,
nearly all round Australia, the more that hot
winds shall be lessened in intensity and force, the
country will be the oftener visited by wdnds from the
west, south, or east, —and particularly that from the
south which is sure to bring rain.


SITES FOR RESERVOIRS.
Now that the plan of establishing reservoirs in the
Colony has been to a great extent explained, the next
position for the writer to take, is to consider, how far
these great principles of amalgamating the proper-
ties of earth, air, and water, in connection with the
promotion of animal and vegetable life, can be carried
out. To effect this, in a judicious manner, the im-
provements should only be carried out as the popula-
tion extended ; and so as to promote and encourage
the extension of husbandry, and the spreading of the
people over the agricultural districts. It would be,
at the present time, almost a wasteful expenditure of
money to construct reservoirs in a portion of the
Colony where there are no inhabitants, nor any
great probability of its becoming stocked with
people; unless such districts were to be given to cer-
tain companies for the carrying out of these, and
other improvements, on an extensive scale. For the
present, it is only necessary to consider how far these
improvements can be carried into operation in the
populous districts ; and with this view, the Counties of
of Bourke and Grant, and the Mining Districts, will
be selected for water supply only; which will form a
miniature of the whole of Victoria, as far as regards the
constructing of the reservoirs ; erecting mills, and irri-
gating the lands, —but not a true picture of the whole,
as there are some lands, outside those boundaries, which
far surpass either Bourke, Grant, or the auriferous
regions, in the richness of their soils, and at the same
time, their necessities for a water supply ; but com-
mencing with the Connty of Bourke, which is
bounded on the north by an extensive ridge of moun-
tains called the dividing ranges. About three miles
to the south of Mount Macedon , there is a large
winter lake, which may be made to contain 2,500
acres, and which is 1500 feet above thp level of the
sea. This would form the great northern reservoir,
for supplying a portion of this county, and which


would retain the water running off’ the southern
of Mount Macedon, and the adjoining hills, for that
purpose ; and with additional reservoirs, along its line
of discharge, would supply the townships of Gisborne,
Sunbury, Keilor and Melton, running by the channel
of the River Macedon, through Sunbury Reserve, on
to Keilor Plains, —and an artificial cut of about three
miles in length through the Parish of Buttlejork,
would pass it into the eastern, and thence into the main
Kororoit Creek , —and with smaller reservoirs along
those creeks and the Saltwater River, all the lands
situate between the latter and the Werribee River ,
and from Mount Macedon to the sea, could be pro-
vided with a constant supply of water.
Another very extensive reservoir which would con-
tain about 3,000 acres, could be very economically
formed, from a large winter lake, which at present
exists in the district about seven miles to the south of
Kihnore, and near to the township of Beveridge ; it
would be J,OOO feet above the level of the sea, and
would become the great central reservoir, for supply-
ing the middle portions of the County. The natural
outflow from, this is the Merri Creek , on which
smaller reservoirs could he constructed, and the lands
and townships along its course to the rivers Plenty
and Yarra, could he provided with a constant supply
of water ; and an artificial cut of two and a half
miles in length, through the parishes of Yaroke and
Will-will-brook, would open Merri Creek to the
small creeks immediately to the north of the township
of Broadmeadows, where a reservoir could be formed,
which with smaller ones, along the course of the
Moonee Ponds , would supply the townships of Broad-
meadows, Essendon, Moonee Ponds and Flemington,
and all the lands and other townships lying in the
district between the range of the Merri Creek, and
the line from Broadmeadows to Flemington. And, in
the Parishes of Mickleham and Bollinda, at the
junction of the Saltwater River, and Konagaderrin
Creek, about six miles north of the township of Bulla ,


a reservoir could be readily formed, which with
smaller ones along the course of the Saltwater River,
would supply the townships and lands from Broad-
meadows and Moonee Ponds to the Saltwater River.
Another reservoir could be constructed on the
River Yarra at its junction with the River Plenty,
above the village of Waringal; and others along the
banks of the Plenty, which would supply all the
lands between the river Plenty and the Merri Creek
district.
Higher up on the river Yarra, at its junction with
the Mullum-mullum Creek , and above the township
of Eltham , another principal or north-eastern reser-
voir, could be constructed; which would provide, in
connection with others of smaller extent, a constant
supply of water for all the townships and lands be-
tween that and St. Kilda, Brighton, and the districts
south and east of the river Y arra.
Thus, all the lands of the County of Bourke would
be supplied with a constant flow of water, running in
every direction, below their several and respective
summits, by means of natural and artificial chan-
nels and pipes, so as to meet the necessities of
its inhabitants, and to aid the promotion of agricul-
tural and manufacturing pursuits.
And, in a similar manner, the parched portions of
the County of Grant may fee afforded a constant
supply of water. The greater portion of the north
and west of this County is greatly diversified with
creeks, having extensive marshes along and con-
tiguous to their banks. The rocks of the district
being partially of a stratified character, and from the
great undulation of the surface (the effects of vol-
canic agency), the utmost facility for the formation of
dams and reservoirs is afforded, and particularly to
the north of the junction of the Moorabool river
with its western branch. At this junction, a
great central reservoir of a very extensive area could
be formed, which would retain all the winter rains
running southwards to it, and would discharge its


waters over the pastoral districts to the east and
west; in the one case to meet Williamson’s Creek,
and the Yarrowee River, and in the other the head of
the Little River. Along the banks of the Moorabool
River, down to Geelong, reservoirs of smaller extent
could be constructed, so as to discharge their supplies
both right and left, and afford the great central por-
tion of the county a constant supply of water.
Another large reservoir, for the uses of that portion
of the county to the west and south of Geelong, could
be formed at the junction of the Yarrowee and
Barwon Rivers , with smaller reservoirs along the
Barwon, which would supply the lands to the Warn
chain of ponds. These two great reservoirs, with
their auxiliaries, would afford a constant supply of
water, for the uses of the districts to the north, west,
and south of Geelong. And at the source of the Little
River , in the Parish of Parwan, another extensive
reservoir, in connection with the Parwan Creek,
could be easily formed, which with smaller reservoirs
down the course of the river, would supply the exten-
sive plains to the right and left; the latter would be
met by the waters from the River Werribee, upon
which suitable reservoirs could be constructed to sup-
ply the lands and townships within their range.
Thus, the County of Grant would be afforded a
constant supply of water, and without incurring any
unreasonable expenditure, or having to remove any
natural difficulty,—in fact, on the contrary, Nature
seems to have simplified the means ; as the water
which now runs uselessly to the sea, could by a com-
paratively trifling amount of skill and labor, be turned
to the greatest advantages, for the benefit of the in-
habitants, and making the lands valuable.
With regard to supplying water to the Diggings:
—as this, at present, would be only of a temporary
character, the most judicious plan would be, to begin
with small reservoirs, as near as possible to each of
the diggings, which could afterwards be made use of
on a more extended scale of operations, as the popu-


lation would become settled; and these small reser-
voirs might be constructed within a very short space
of time, so as to afford the digging communities, pro-
per facilities for carrying on their pursuits, and
thereby to hasten the time when the attention of the
people may be more legitimately turned to the de-
veloping of the agricultural resources of the country,
and to a well-arranged division and distribution of
labor. And the promotion of agriculture, in every
possible shape and form, although a second great
epoch in the annals of this country at present, will in
future ages be considered as the first dawn of the
light of substantial prosperity in the true develop-
ment of the natural resources of the country, and the
use and application of those resources to satisfy the
wants and relieve the necessities of man.
REPAYMENT OF COSTS.
Next to this great consideration of establishing reser-
voirs in the Colony is the liquidation of the expenses
which would be incurred in their construction. This
would, for a time, be a subject of much difficulty, as
taxes in every shape, even for the most useful pur-
poses, seem to be very unpopular; although to propose
a general tax on all the lands, according to their
value, and on Townships according to the number
and value, of the houses, would appear to be the
most simple plan, yet as there is no established stand-
ard for ascertaining the value of lands or houses, it
would be but a vain hope to expect to arrive at any-
thing like regularity,—or to that arangement in rela-
tive value, which would create any degree of satisfac-
tion, or afford any kind of reasonable cause of
contentment, in such a system ©f fixing the amount
of taxation, even if it were popular as a special pro-
ceeding.
We will, therefore, take another view of it; and,
as the Diggings’ population would, in all probability,
be the first parties who would be supplied with water,
the equivalent in payment for it may be first con-


sidered. This could be very readily ascertained, in
charging by measure for tbe water, or charging for
every individual who would receive a supply, and
making a separate charge for machineries ; and the
same principle, which would apply to the diggings,
would also apply to townships, and the mode ot
collecting money from one, may be equally carried
out in any other township.
With respect to supplying water on the lands, an
approximate measurement of it might be ascertained,
and a charge made, according to quantity, against the
parties who would make use of it, or an equitable
acreable charge could be made on the lands which
would be benefited; but a charge for the volume of
water, which would be consumed, appears to be the
more simple and just. It may be said that some par-
ties would use the water, while others would not; but
the reply to that assertion is this, that no one would,
for any great length of time, pursue such a vicious
course towards his own interests, as not to take advan-
tage of a benefit when it was placed within his reach,
as public opinion alone would soon deter him from
pursuing such an evil course. And, at all events,
in a mixed community, like that of Victoria, it would
be better to permit individuals of that description to
indulge their unruly tempers, and to have the willing
adhesion of the more sensible of the agricultural
population, by allowing freedom of trade in the pro-
viding of water, than to resort to any general or com-
pulsory taxation for liquidating the expenses. But,
in order to secure a proper amount of remuneration,
it would be only necessary to ascertain the opinions
of the inhabitants along tbe lines of the reservoirs,
before they would be constructed; and, by that
means, engagements with a due regard to payment
might be made, before any serious expense would be
incurred. In addition to this, where the lands are
still in the possession of the Crown, an equitable bar-
gain could be made for the general water supply;
and a company performing it might be remunerated,


tinier in money or land, or both, and the unsold lands
would become greatly enhanced in- value, in conse-
quence of the advantages of water supply.
It is, therefore, only in the settled districts that
any real difficulty would arise as to the collecting of
payment for the water ; but even this, after a few
years, would be forgotten,—as, once that agricultural
pursuits would become fully in operation, and that
land would become a trading commodity in the mar-
ket (according to its intrinsic value), a standard of
value would be fixed upon as the immediate result;
and the access to water would be one of the principal
items in the attainment of it, —and, when that time
shall have arrived, the principal opposing parties, at
the first, may be foremost in applying to have a rate-
able valuation made of all agricultural property, for
the purpose of raising an equivalent for a general
water supply.
The cuts, through the lands and expenses of
wooden pipes, and jets, for irrigating purposes, would
of course be altogether a matter of a private nature,
in every instance, and would be the result of indivi-
dual enterprise.
The supply to mills and manufactories would be a
subject, without any semblance of dispute, of such a
character, as they could not exist or be worked with-
out water ; so it would be only a question of value,
which could easily be arrived at, in proportion to the
extent of machinery in each case.
From what has been stated, with respect to a water
supply, it is clear that if funds can be provided for
the construction of the reservoirs, there will be little
difficulty in arranging and constructing them, that
they may become a national benefit, —and every sound
reason to believe, that remunerative profits can be
derived by any company which may be formed for
carrying out the projects.
The works can be executed in parts, and one part
could be made productive, before another would be
commenced; and by proceeding in that way, share-


holders in the company would always be receiving
periodical dividends, in proportion to the amounts
which would be paid up; and as the population ex-
tended, the interests of the company would advance.
Viewing the matter in every light, it appears to be
a subject of the most vital importance to the Colony :
—one, the promotion of which, it is to be hoped, will
receive the greatest encouragement from the Govern-
ment and Colonial Legislature ; and that being the
case, it is fully anticipated that a company will soon
be formed, with funds sufficient to enable them to
execute the works, —the practical results of which we
shall now enter upon, and, in so doing, commence by
noticing the application of
LABOR AS CAPITAL.
The principle of labor, as applied to a new country
is simple in its application, and wide in its influence.
For every shilling’s worth of labor, expended in the
culture of the soil, pounds’ worth of value may be
produced,—by the labor of one man, in agricultural
pursuits, food may be provided for one hundred el-
even more, —by the proper and judicious application, of
one man’s labor, fabrics for a thousand garments, may
be brought into existence! It is this labor which
enriches and ennobles a country, —this is the capital
which remains in it, —this the promoter of its
strength, the stimulator of its industry, the explorer
of its dormant perfections, and which, by its direct
influences lays bare the hitherto latent powers of the
soil. As,
“ Thoughts shut up, want air,
And spoil like bales unopen’d to the sun ! ”
So the unturned soil becomes a waste, and, in many
cases more of a nuisance than a blessing, until the
hands of the cultivator shall have operated upon it, and
exposed it to the softening influences of the other
matters composing our elements. All other labor,
compared to this, is as dross, “ as chaff before the


wind,” as snow under the radiant heat of a summer’s
sun ; all these pass away, to be forgdtten, but that
remains, a monument of vitality and worth, of
glorious activity, of natural and national industry, for
future ages to enlage upon and improve. To look
upon ,the labor expended at the gold fields as
capital, while the lands remain uncultivated, is
nothing more than an absurdity. The labor, no
doubt, is expended,—and, if the laborer should
happen to be successful, in getting an equivalent in
gold, what benefit is that to the country ? He pur-
chases food and clothing, hut both of these commodi-
ties are, for the most part, the produce of other
countries, and are brought here by foreign ships.
The money, the value, the capital for that amount of
labor, passes out of the country by the mere gain of
a per centage to a merchant or trader. And if a
digger for gold should succeed in obtaining more
than his necessities may require him to expend, he
may hoard it up for, the purpose of spending it in
another country ; and it is, therefore, of no consi-
deration as capital; and what one digger can do, all
may do. Consequently, the labor expended at the
gold fields, is not of itself productive of any capital,
further than what may be afterwards actually ex-
pended in improving and increasing the capabilities
of the country, both for supporting its own, and sup-
plying the inhabitants of other countries, and thereby
to help to contribute towards keeping at home, even
the value of the gold-diggers’ immediate wants.
Thus the gold fields labor is mpre of a stumbling-
block than otherwise, to the proper promotion of
capital by labor. And the labor at the diggings is
of a very fluctuating character, —sometimes valuable,
at other times not remunerative ; but, at all times,
sufficient to induce parties to spend a wandering,
and what is termed an independent life at the gold
fields, where a sudden chance may lead to fortune, —■
rather than quietly to depend upon steady opportuni-
ties, and openings, for the employment of labor of a


re-productive character. This disposition causes the
latter class of labor to he somewhat in the back-
ground ; and particularly so, as, in order to enable a
farmer to compete with foreign producers, it is neces-
sary, cceteris paribus , that he should produce at as
low a rate as the foreigner; and his prices for labor
must, of necessity, he of a settled and, afe far as pos-
sible, of a standard character, —and, consequently,
cannot, with any degree of reason, be expected to be
regulated by the various accidents of circumstance
and character, which may affect the gold fields labor.
Thus it is, that the labor at the gold fields which is
not productive of national capital, is retarding the
progress of that kind of labor which is itself the
capital; but this difficulty can he obviated by the
selling, or letting, of lands in small quantities, so that
every man, who would desire it, might have his own
farm, and his settled homestead. Here, then, is the
starting point for establishing the capital of the
Colony;—let a proper and an independent field for
labor be once opened, and it will be found in abund-
ance. That system of labor or.ee set in motion will
rapidly progress, and so wdll the capital of the
country increase. The labor attendant on cultivating
the soil is sure to have a steady return for it; the
first fruits will be in food for the cultivator, and the
equivalent in money, thus saved, will be so much
gained in capital. But that is not all, —for, supposing
a man to possess but twenty acres of land, and, even
before he could commence a rotation system of crops
(of which notice will be taken in the sequel), he cul-
tivated land for, and produced cne acre of wheat, —
this, at an average calculation, would produce about
2,QUO pounds of flour, which would be sufficient to
supply food, in bread, to four individuals for a year ;
but one man, with a little occasional assistance, would
have no difficulty in cultivating and attending to five
acres, every acre producing nearly the same amount
of nutritive food as the acre of wheat. And thus, by
the labor of one, food in bread would be produced for


twenty individuals, —and this by taking but one crop
in the year off the land! His labor in attending to
this would not prevent him from looking after the
rearing of stock, poultry, &c.,and cultivating the re-
mainder of his farm with hired labor. Thus from
five acres cultivated, the value of bread food for
twenty individuals would be preserved as capital in
the country; —the land being the principal, the la-
bor and seed being only auxiliaries to the obtaining
of such a result.
It is therefore clear that, as the arable lands of
the Colony shall have been turned up, and the hands
of the agriculturist applied to them, the capital of
the country will increase in the same ratio. It is no
unreasonable calculation to make, that the produce of
five acres would bring, at the present market prices,
£2OO per annum for one crop; and this for a market-
able commodity, the value of which would not to a
certainty, he taken out of the country, as it now is, in
purchasing the food from foreign producers.
The inference from this is, that even in promoting
agriculture, for the use of home consumption, about
one twentieth part of the entire population, should be
employed at it, in order to produce food for the
remainder, and supposing the population of Victoria
to amount to 300,000, there should be 15,000 engaged
in agriculture alone, and at least 75,000 acres of agri-
cultural produce, to meet the home w r ants, in the
article of bread for the population, which at the pre-
sent prices, (1856) would amount to three millions
sterling per annum or about seven pence per day
for every individual of the population.
This is exclusive of the cultivation which would bo
required for rearing stock, &c.
If the value of the present produce of the country,
for food in bread, could with any degree of accuracy
he arrived at, the balance to the amount of £3,000,000,
would be about the value of the quantity supplied by
foreign lands, and the amount is made up at the
current prices of commodities this year (1856) not


what prices may be, when all commodities shall be
regulated by an established system of trade, and
standard of value, and although all commodities may
be reduced in price ; yet the value tf labor will be
proportionately the same, as the value of money
will increase as other marketable commodities may
be reduced ; and when that time shall have arrived,
that a standard of value can be set upon every article
of home produce, then the promotion of agriculture
for the purposes of export, may be commenced, as a
steady pursuit, and carried out to any extent that the
increase of the population may warrant.
How far the promotion of agriculture may tend to
bring about manufacturing pursuits, it would be diffi-
cult at present to predict; but one thing is certain,
that as men become settled, as a steady yeomanry, they
will soon find means of satisfying their wants, in
establishing local manufactories, to suit the circum-
stances of the country ; it may therefore be safely
assei ted, that the employment of labor, in the promo-
tion of agriculture is only the first step towards
developing the great industrial resources of the coun-
try, and that capital to a very large amount will be
created by the reproductive labour attendant on
manufacturing pursuits, and also that a considerable
number of the population, will be gradually attracted
to undertakings of that character, lor the present the
subject can only be noticed as a sequitur to the culti-
vation of the soil. Thus agriculture appears to be
the great project to begin with, —the industry—the
employment of labor, —the providing of food, for the
inhabitants, and the creation of capital,—all depend
upon its due and rapid promotion.
How far a system of agriculture, may be pursued
beyond what may satisfy the wants of the inhabitants,
or how far the population may be increased, or a
greater amount than 15,000 out of the present num-
ber, may turn their attention to cultivate the ground,
is a subject of conjecture; but when a man will find
that he can, by cultivating in a proper manner, five


acres of land, for a portion of the year, by his own
industry and application (the expenses of ploughing,
reaping, &c., being balanced by equivalents, in value
from other portions of his farm,) procure £2OO for
the crop, irrespective of the hay, which he might
have on a great portion of the remainder of his land,
he will soon endeavour to extend his operations, and
instead of producing five acres of crop by his own labor,
may cultivate fifty by employing extra labor; and the
knowledge would soon spread, that a very great profit
was to be derived from farming, and as that know-
ledge extended, ready and attentive hearers, would
be found who would eagerly follow the same pursuit:
and in order to the greater diffusion of this informa-
tion, the Land should be sold in as small farms above
twenty acres as possible ? that is, where the land is
almost purely arable. By adopting this method of
dividing the land, agricultural lots would soon become
settled upon, and the occupiers would equally soon
become fully sensible, that in the cultivation of the
soil, hitherto latent treasures, would be opened for
their own immediate benefit, and that the gathering
of them together, depended on themselves, and thus to
every individual so circumstanced, comfort and plenty,
and profit, would be combined, to promote his happi-
ness, and encourage him in his industrial pursuits.
The advantages and benefits, to be derived
from pursuits of this description, might be extended,
with the population, to the utmost limits that the
lands of the colony*would permit of, and thereby an
annual accession of substantial capital, could be
depended on, for every laborer that commenced the
occupation. And in this would consist the wealth
and capital of the colony, —the use of every mans
hand in agriculture, and its natural auxiliaries, Mills
and Manufactories, would be so much of substantial
capital, while the labor expended at the diggings,
would be simply beneficial, as offering a market for
agricultural produce.
In the pastoral districts, the labor required is very


little, and tn addition, the only capital derived, is»
the rent of the lands, and the advantage of having
heme produce, in very inferior and ill fed steck for
consumption, these in reality arc the only com-
modities of any consequenc in connection with
Hay, the money value cf which, is kept in
the country: (wool exported in its raw state
only enriches the owner) and therefore the squatters
and few farmers that are, have become wealthy, not
altogether on account of great profits on their sales,
but that they have been able to store what value
received for their stock. No doubt, in many of the
pastoral districts, the lands could be turned to agri-
cultural as well as grazing purposes, and would there-
fore become the more valuable, as the population
increased: so that in increasing the capital of this
colony, with an industrious population spread over its
surface, while the squatting system would be gradual-
ly becoming less, —the simplest form of expressing
the amount of capital that would be created by so
great an extension of agricultural labor, is to say that
it would be enormous.
The next subject for serious consideration, will bo
in connection with agriculture.
THE KIND OF CROPS SUIT; D FOR THE SOIL AND CLIMATE.
Here indeed, is a wide field tor an experienced
eye to look upon ; in many instances the natural
strength of a fine alluvial soil, lies hidden beneath
the crust of a hardened surface, —hardened by
the atmospheric pressure of ages, —Virgin soil
which since it was deposited, in its present site, has
lain undisturbed, —unknown, —unseen :—neither the
suns ray, nor light, nor darkness, nor summer, nor win-
ter, has had any influence over it; dormant it has lain,
and inactivestillit lies, encased in its dried up covering,
and so parched and hardened is its surface, that in
many instances, it will not produce even grass, —and
in most cases very little of it. The soil varies in its
depths, and in numerous instances far exceeds what


would be required, for even the deepest of agricultu-
ral roots, and the climate is so favorable to vegeta-
tion, that altitudinal zones, for particular kinds of
crops, do not overrule the husbandman as in Great
Britain;'wheat may be grown at any reasonable
height, and a system of green cropping, may be estab-
lished to an extraordinary extent.
For green crops, the soil is peculiarly adapted, by
its being properly turned up, and for some time expen-
sed to the effects of the atmosphere, in order to its
becoming pulverized, and friable, and thus, land
which in its present state, appears sterile, could be
made most productive. \ heve arc portions of the
soil of \ ictoria, so rank, from not having been in use,
that it would require a succession of green cropping,
for sometime, in order to reduce them to a fit state
for proper cultivation.
And where the land in its present state, is not
sufficient for a general system of green cropping, the
manure which is scattered about, as waste and not
unfrequently presenting a most disagreeable nuisance,
might 'be made an important agent, in assisting the
cultivator, and by its use bad land could be made
good, and the nuisance would be abated.
i he climate seems to be greatly if not altogether
suited to the growth of green crops, as there is no
difficulty in getting two or three in the year: and the
ripening qualities of the climate, are beyond all
question, such as the most practical cultivator cf
cereal crops could desire, only that he should sow
early, and save his harvest before the commencement
cf any serious hot winds.
In order to save the crops from the effects cf hot
winds, earthen or good stone fences, would be of great
importance, the fences to be made in directions from
east to west, so as to cross the direction of the wind,
fences would also form a shelter, from the effects
cf the cold southerly winds, —which are so hurtful to
vegetation in its early stages. The fences at right
angles to these, might be formed cf Posts and rails,


or wire; but earthen fences, would be the best, both
for shelter and convenience, as with them, drains could
be formed for conveying water either on or off the
land.
In an open country like this, it may he supposed
that fences are not necessary to the promotion of
vegetation, —as well might it be supposed, that hot
houses, are not necessary for propagating some
plants and fruits, in England : the vegetable in germi-
nating requires all the shelter that can be given to
it, —both from hot and cold winds, and by being to
some extent freed from their turbulence, an observer
can almost perceive the vegetable flora, luxuriating
in an atmosphere of its own formation. An addi-
tional reason for the adoption of earthen fences is,
that the plains are so very extensive, there is no
variableness in the wind when it does come, no
undulating surface, to soften or divert it, or to break
its force, and the same may be said with respect to
the effects of either cold or heat, the plains offering the
one sameness all through their vast extent: without
fences all parts remain the same, being under the
same influence: with fences the enclosed portions
will become luxuriant, blow far the fences should be
made apart, would of course depend greatly on the
circumstances of every individual, in connection
with the size of his farm ; but ten acre fields, would
be sufficiently large for any purpose, and three and
five acre fields, for delicate plants, and garden pro-
duce.
In carrying out the practical culture of the land, it
may not be out of place, to consider more in detail.
THE MODE OF TREATING THE SOIL, AND ROTATION SYSTEM
OF CROPPING.
Where the surface is undulating, or so varied from a
level, that rain will not lodge on it, the beds, or
ridges, in which seeds or plants are to be sown, or
planted, may be of the ordinary description, but the
furrows should be both wider and deeper than usual,


in order to their being sufficient to receive the surface
water, no matter how rapidly the rain might fall, and
the sides of the furrows should be well sloped, in
order that the water running in them, would not
damage the ridges ; as these furrows would generally
follow the slope of the ground, there would be no place
for any lodgment of water, except at the lowest part,
or bottom of a field ; but this should be avoided, by
having cross furrows for the purpose of retaining a
portion of the water, so that it might be absorbed by
the subsoil, and thereby got at the roots of the plants.
The supplying of moisture to the root being the most
important consideration in the promotion of vegetable
life, where the sun’s rays play so active a part in
absorbing the surface moisture, —the evaporation
trom the cross furrows, and also from any main fur-
rows or drains, at the bottom of the field, would be
very considerable, but the more the scene for evapora-
tion would be extended, the greater would be the
effects of dews upon plants and leaves, and thus water
which would not find its way directly to the roots
through the sub-soil, might ultimately be absorbed in
another form by the leaves.
Where the surface of the ground is flat, or nearlj
so, as is the case on the great plains, composing for a
considerable part, the arable soil of this country, a
different plan of ridge, and furrow should be adopt-
ed, the ridge should be formed parallel to the fences
running cast and west, and should be, three to four
times the breadth of the common ridge, or about
twenty feet, with a transverse section, somewhat the
shape of a macadamized road, falling from the centre
to each side, at the rate of one inch of height for
every two feet of distance across. The furrows should
be about two and a-half feet wide at top, and suffi-
ciently deep, to let the water work its way into the
sub-soil, the bottom of the furrow should be made as
wide, as the nature of the soil would permit, in order
to lessen the surface of the water exposed to evapora-


tion, as compared with the quantity, and for this
purpose, where the furrows in all probability would
be permanent; the lower part of the sides might be
formed of loose stones. Cross furrows might also be
useful on flat lands; hut not so absolutely necessary,
except that they might be, when formed, nearly filled
with broken stones, and slightly covered with mould,
and thus be made depositories for water, free from
the direct influence of atmospheric heat, and at liber-
ty to find its way to the vegetating matter at each side.
This is—taking for granted, that the strata below the
sub-soil, are impervious, as where they are not so,
any improvement of the surface, would be altogether
inoperative, with regard to practical agriculture ; the
heavy rains would scarcely pass, or run off towards the
furrows, but would penetrate directly downwards, so
that in such cases, it would be much better to make
the most of the present surface, though parched and
withered. Therefore for the purposes of cultivation,
soil should be selected, having a good depth of sub-
soil, and under or sub-jacent strata of an impervious
nature, and lands with these characteristics, are more
abundant, than will be required for generations yet
unthought of; land for agricultural purposes being
easily obtained, useless expenditure in endeavourirg
to improve land, that will not produce, can be avoided.
And thus, the suitable lands being selected, —the
proposed fences commenced, —the ridges and furrows
put in a state of formation ; the next important move
would be, to make the soil friable, soil which had not
been exposed to atmospheric influences, will require
time to become pulverized, and fit for bearing crops.
Where the soil is light, or about twelve to fifteen
inches deep, good sub-soil ploughing would turn it up,
and it should be exposed for a winter in that state, or
a crop of winter cabbages, might be grown upon it, so
as to prepare it for a crop of wheat or barley. Where the
soil is two feet deep; turning it up by absolute digging,
would be the best mode of making the whole good fria-
ble and vegetable mould; frequently it might be


necessary to turn the soil two or three times, before
its strength and real bearing character would become
fully established, but during that time, crops of a
purifying or mollifying tendency, might be grown from
it, such as rape, vetches, turnips, cabbages, etc., —
but once, that the mould would be properly brought
to its bearing state, wheat, barley or oats should be the
first crop, in order to carry out the rotation system, as
while the cereal crops would be coming to maturity,
additional ground for other similar crops, might be in
course of preparation. Wheat, barley or oats should be
sown as early as the winter would permit of, and saved
as early as possible, and if properly prepared and
attended to, most of the land of this colony, ought to
be capable of producing as fine wheat, as that of any
country on the globe, —the best wheat growing coun-
tries of the northern hemisphere, are between the 25th
and 50th degrees of latitude. It appears doubtful at
present to the author, whether barley may not be as
suitable a crop as wheat: and that the soil and climate
are equally fit for both
After wheat, barley or oats, vetches and clover might
be sown upon the lighter soils, and upon deep soils;
mangold wortzel, or beet: turnips and potatoes can be
grown either in light or deep soils equally well, car-
rots and parsnips require the deepest; potatoes grow
best on lands of a sandy nature, —beans and peas can
be grown on any good arable soil, so that in every
instance, the crops could be arranged to suit the soil
and the season, and thus without intermission, the
land would be under crop for the entire year, and it
is not unreasonable to state, that by proper attention,
two and mostly three crops, might be grown from the
same land in a year, which at the present prices of
food, would be value at an average for £l5O per acre.
A good green crop would be more valuable than
wheat, as a greater amount of weight would be pro-
duced, and these crops would be of the greatest impor-
tance as fodder for cattle, etc., —and w’ould lead to


extensive rearing of pigs and poultry, and by such
means the cultivator could create a consumption for
the waste or refuse of his crops.
The growth of onions, tobacco ? hops, and grapes,
would form another subject for the consideration of a
diligent cultivator, for it is not to be supposed that
success in the first and courser kind of crops, would
deter him from entering on a new chance of further
prosperity. These crops grow most luxuriantly in rich
soils, with a favorable climate, and both are to be
found in Victoria; and the profits which can be reali-
zed from the produce of market gardens, are almost
beyond belief.
How long the lands may be sufficient to yield crops
without being replenished with manure, is not of
importance at present, as a farm can always be made
to produce a sufficiency of manure for itself, for the
purposes of reproduction, and the sooner any addi-
tional manure may be required for extraordinary pur-
poses the better, as it at present exists in both town
and country as an intolerable nuisance.
Now that the subject of cultivating the land has
been considered, the next in importance will be the
PRACTICAL RESULTS OF AGRICULTURE.
To a transient or passing observer of the present
unproductive lands of Victoria, it might be difficult
to depict, even the first dawn of infancy in the stages
of agricultural science, as it might be pioneered by
the marches of industry, and common sense. To the
over-cautious stranger, on perhaps his first tour
through the country, languishing under the scorching
heat of a summers sun—or deafened by the whistling
howls of a parching hot wind —enveloped in moving
clouds of dust—and half terrified with roars of thunder
claps, as if the heavens were opening around him —and
before the electric shock would have been dispelled,
finding himself nearly powerless to stand against over-


whelming torrents of denudating rain. 1 o him, the
idea of farming would appear a mockery ; a delusion ;
a snare; something that hards might sing of; or for
poets to expand their aerial thoughts upon, hut not a
project fit for him, particularly while a good opportu-
nity lasts of looking for, and finding gold.
But with all these apparent difficulties in the way,
it is to he hoped, that the first dawning of a prosper-
ous system of agriculture is at hand, that in the due
and proper promotion of it, the idea of it as a mocke-
ry, will be dispelled by the cloudless brightness of
agrarian magnificence, which will turn delusions into
granaries of wealth, and make the fancied snare, a
happy household and a home, that the thoughtful man
might wonder at; and which might lead him at length
to admire the wonderful laws of Providence, and to
look through the amazing operations of nature, up to
natures’ God.
Such will be the results of practical agriculture in
Victoria, hut to enter more in detail on the subject, is
a matter of much importance at the present juncture,
and apparent unbelief in the advantageous pursuit of
farming operations.
Let it he supposed, that a small farmer besides
having a portion of land for pasturage, could have ten
acres for cultivation, —his first business should be, to
plough and dig it all up, and divide and prepare the
ridges for receiving their respective crops, for this
purpose he could employ additional labor, and from
the time of sowing, and during the period of growth
of the crops, he could himself if necessary, make the
fences: but as it is supposed that ten acres would con-
stantly occupy the labor of two individuals, it would
be better to start with a second or even a third party
as assistants at first, and reduce their number as the
fences and other preliminary operations would be com-
pleted. The fencing and preparing the ridges, etc.,
would be the most important operations for the first year,
and in order to form an estimate of them, we shall


suppose the field to be made two of, that is, five acres
each; these would require three fences running east
and west, two hundred and twenty yards long each,
and would require for their formation the labor of one
man for one hundred days, or of four men at twenty-
five days each. The ploughing and shaping the ground,
would cost about £6 to £8 an acre, which would be
considerably reduced after the first year.
The expense of cropping ten acres will stand thus:
660 yards of Fencing at Is. 6d. per yard...£49 10 0
10 acres, ploughing, digging, furrow-
ing, etc 80 0 0
2J acres of cabbage seeds, plants, etc.
put in 6 0 0
2J acres of vetches, clover, etc 4 0 0
2J do. potatoes 20 0 0
2|- do. wheat 7 0 0
2nd rotation.
acres of beans 6 0 0
do. carrots 5 0 0
do. turnips 5 0 0
do. mangold wortzel, rape or beet... 5 0 0
3rd rotation.
2J acres of onions 10 0 0
2J do. Parsnips 6 0 0
2J do. peas beans, or vetches 5 0 0
2J do. to prepare for next year’s wheat
crop.
Allowance for the labor of two men for a
year 300 0 0
£5OB 10 0
And the price of labor must annually be growing
less, as competition will be increasing.


The probable value of these ten acres of crops will
be thus :
acres of wheat £lOO 0 0
2J do. cabbage ... ... 600 0 0
2J do. vetches and clover 150 0 0
2J do. potatoes 250 0 0
2J do. beans 100 0 0
do. carrots 250 0 0
do. turnips 250 0 0
2J do. mangold wortzel, etc 250 0 0
do. onions 800 0 0
do. parsnips 200 0 0
do. peas, etc ... 100 0 0
£2950 0 0
Deduct for Casualties 20 per cent 594 0 0
£2356 0 0
Cost of Seed and Labor 508 10 0
Shewing a clear Balance of ... £1847 10 0
On the produce of ten acres well and systematically
cultivated, and in this calculation, the profits arising
from the growing on a different part of the farm,
are not brought into account,
These profits appear without the auxiliaries of
poultry, pigs, etc., which would be of some con-
sideration, as every year will increase the economical
resources; but at the same time, these results can only
be considered as approximate, in consequence of the
present inconsistent price of labor, as compared with
its natural value; and further statements with refer-
ence to this very important matter of labor, in all its
bearings as to its vital consequences with regard to
the best interests of this country will be brought for-
ward in a separate and distinct notice,
But to pursue the Industrial Resources of the land;
during the second year of a farmers operations, an


orchard and vineyard, might be planted, and more
fences erected, the counterparts of which, would form
water channels for the purposes of irrigation. The
farmer might in this manner pursue his avocation, and
extend his culture, as he could command time and
means; as to the latter, every years profit would
enable him if he liked, to multiply his operations, and
to increase them three time their past extent.
It may be said, that ten acres would be too much
for a man with small capital to begin with; so much
the better for the future healthy state of the colony.
Let the small capitalist be encouraged by getting the
land on reasonable terms, and let him pursue the
rotation system of cropping on five acres or even less,
so that the lands may become cultivated and the
country enriched. A profit of £l5O to £lBO a year
on every acre under crops, at present prices (1855) the
advantages to the colony could only be measured by
the breadth of land under cultivation; it has been
already stated, that about one-twentieth of the inhabi-
tants would produce sufficient food for the whole, but
supposing that more than that number should become
desirous of settling on small farms: if half the popu-
lation at present engaged at the gold fields, were to
commence farming. Here w'ould be a victory for Vic-
toria —a God send —a great re volution —by simply turn-
ing the hands of wasted and unprofitable labor, to remu-
nerative and happy employment. If 50,000 men were to
commence expending their time and labor at farming
pursuits, and allowing that one mans’ labor would be
equal to the cultivation of five acres, with the assis-
tance of bullocks in the ploughing seasons, 250,000
acres would be put into immediate cultivation; and
more in extent if any of the parties had a sufficiency
of capital to extend their operations: the produce
of 250,000 acres at £l5O per acre profit, would
amount to £37,500,000 per annum, and the produce
itself in the shape of bread food, would be sufficient for
one million inhabitants.
The second year this produce might be trebled by


the occasional employment of extra labor, and parti-
cularly if any of the parties should have families,
which in all probability would be the case, as it is
generally people of that description who are disposed
to become steady settlers ; and the farmer with such
help at his disposal, could easily extend his operations,
and his family could attend to the minor portions of
his business, or those parts that would not require
much heavy labor, while he would be attending to the
more labor ious duties ; and thus farming once begun,
with a proper spirit, would extend more rapidly than
people would have time to prepare for disposing of the
produce, and this would consequently become greatly
reduced in price, and what would now bring £l5O an
acre, may not produce £SO when the intrinsic value of
every commodity shall have been brought down to its
proper standard.
At this stage of the subject the affairs of the
colony would stand thus ; the capital that is now sent
out of it for the purchase of a great portion of the
food of the inhabitants, would be kept at home, and
there would be in addition, an enormous surplus of
food, increasing every year, as the benefits resulting
from agriculture; in order to the ready disposal of this
surplus for the first few years, it will be requisite to
direct attention to
THE REARING OF STOCK.
In connection with green crops, the rearing of stock
will be a matter of very great importance to the small
farmer, in having a ready consumption for a good
portion of his produce, and a simple plan of making
profit of what really might not be the good portion,
but the refuse of the crops, such as the leaves and
other unmarketable parts of the produce; and one
pounds worth of food expended on stock on the land,
would be equal to the getting of two pounds for it at
the market, (even if a farmer were to use the mar-
ketable portions at home,) as it would be increasing
with the growing capital in stock, and would be of


further advantage in the accumulating of manure: as
to the kind of stock, which would best suit a certain
place, district, or farm, it would altogether depend on
local circumstances, and the’ proximity to good natu-
ral pastures; but certain it is, that stock of any des-
cription, house-fed, and near a good market, would be
most amply remunerative. Figs are found in Great
Britain to he very profitable stock, when they are sold
at thirty shillings a cwt., and the price at present
averaging here, is over £5, where land is compara-
tively cheap, and subject to no taxes. Beef would he
found almost equally remunerative, (except where
large pastoral runs may he permitted to exist for any
lengthened period without being to some extent appro-
priated for the uses and occupancy of small farmers),
and the size and quality of it, greatly improved by
house-feeding; and dairy produce where green crops
are resorted to for food, increases the value of the
food at least three-fold ; in fact the crops themselves,
though very profitable, are only the commencement of
the pecuniary advantages that may be derived from
them. In the management of sheep a new era might
he commenced in the growth of that description of
stock.
The life and adventures of a sheep in this colony,
would of themselves be sufficient for a subject of ridi-
cule and astonishment, —the unnatural plan of rear-
ing them an apparent burlesque on common sense;
opposed to all principles of either domestic or phisi-
cal and enlarged economy, without even an attempt at
resorting to artificial means of any kind for the pur-
pose of promoting their strength, and supplying
their wants, or of endeavouring to afford them even a
comfortable existence ; the poor helpless flocks are
left to wander, and for comfortable pens and folds well
stored with substantial food, they are marched and
counter-marched on desolate and parched up plains,
and perhaps driven one hundred or more miles to a
market.
Sheep in their natural state are not fitted for con-


stant and excessive walking, on the contrary they are
known to thrive best, when not exposed to such priva-
tions, neither are they like other ruminants fit for
offing* about looking for food. In the coat that nature
O O O
in her alwise system of suiting everything for its posi-
tion, and every back for its burthen, we have a proof
that the sheep is an animal fitted only for a comforta-
ble mode of existence, and wherever sheep are treated
and kept in this comfortable way, they are found to be
not only more prolific, but to have grown to twice
their usual size under bad treatment, and with their
bodily strength their wool increases both in weight
and texture, so that in the proper treatment of sheep
alone, a great revolution has yet to occur in the mone-
tary affairs of this country, both with respect to
the amount of animal food and the quantity and
quality of the wool which may be produced.
It thefore appears obvious, that cattle to be produc-
tive in value should be house-fed, or well provided in
food, and sheep should be fed in a similar, if not a
superior manner, in pens, folds, or well sheltered
paddocks ; but the food for fattening for the market,
need not be given till three or four months before the
time of intended sale, proper care having been pre-
viously taken in supplying food, water, and though
last, not least, in making shelter both comfortable and
convenient; and both cattle and sheep should be
house-fed, and fed in pens as near to their final mar-
ket place as possible : a bullock will eat about five to
six tons weight of green food, such as turnips, beet,
vetches, etc., in a year, and for fattening purposes one
fourth of that quantity for the three months.
It would be a very small average to take that, as
half the produce of an acre for one crop, and suppo-
sing three green crops in the year ; this would be
sufficient to feed twenty-four bullocks for three
months, and as five sheep will eat about as much as
one bullock, it follows that one hundred and twenty
sheep could be fattened on the produce of an acre for
one year in green crops : but good land under a pro-


per system of cultivation will often produce fifteen
tons of green food per acre ; and there is no reason
whatever for supposing that % there are not many por-
tions of the lands in Victoria capable of producing
most abundant crops of green food, and that being the
case, it will materially lessen the area or extent of
country, that will be appropriated for stock feeding,
for market purposes only; and the driving of cattle etc.
for long distances could be avoided: this leads us to
the consideration of
PASTORAL LANDS.
In adverting to this subject, it must be acknow-
ledged, that it is one of very great magnitude, though
not of that immediate importance, in the considera-
tion of the industrial resources of the country, in the
employment of labor, —extension and promotion of
agriculture, or the introduction of artificial power in
the establishment of machineries. It is one of mag-
nitude, as having been the only profitable pursuit that
existed in this country, —profitable not to the state ;
but to the individuals immediately concerned in it, —
to the squatters , who previous to the gold discovery,
had all the trade in tallow, wool, and hides, to them-
selves ;as to the then price of butchers meat; it was
next to nothing itself. There was very little expended
in labor, and consequently no demand of any amount
for laborers, except as herds, shepherds, and hut-
keepers, etc. Thus, the profits arising from the great
pastoral runs, in the country, were pocketed by the
squatters, without being of any substantial benefit to
any one but themselves ; but this was no fault of the
squatter, —he merely took advantage of the position
that he was placed in, and suited his occupation, to
the circumstances of the country ; he enriched him-
self ; but in so doing, did not make any one else poor,—
he did what natural inclination, will ever lead a
thinking man not to neglect doing ; therefore the
squatter should be regarded with respect, and esteem,
not that he did no harm in his day, and generation,


but that he effected a considerable amount of good,
as a very extensive amount of capital, is now under
the squatters control collectively, and they form a very
substantial body amongst the colonists.
But the time has arrived, when from the enormous
influx of immigrants, the circumstances and character
of Victoria, as a pastoral country must undergo a
serious change, and the squatter must either yield to,
or recede from, the rapid flow of popular enterprise
and industry, as both will be pressed ceaselessly on
towards the interior, in order to satisfy the reasonable
wants of an ardent and working class of people, who
may desire to possess the reality, and to rejoice in the
moderate acquisition of a habitation and a home.
And even this, perhaps rather disagreable position for
the squatter, has not arisen without its advantages to
him, for, ever since the first great tide of immigration
set in, butchers meat has rated at famine prices, and
the value of hay was up to £4O a ton. This was all
pocketed by the squatters, and few farmers that were ;
(after deducting the expenses) so that the very cause
of this pressure on them now, was a very fruitful
source of a vast amount of profit, and will be so, as
long as the prices of food keep up as they now exist;
how far therefore, the squatting interests may be led
to give way to the force of public opinion, will depend
on the due exercise of well arranged and prudent
judgment and discretion, canvassed by them as a body
and decided on as the motive power, by which their
future transactions in maintaining a balance of influ-
ence, between pastoral and agricultural lands shall be
regulated and controlled.
The balance of power at present prevails with the
squatting interests, this they may still to some extent
preserve, if they wisely turn with the popular tide,
and become even partly agriculturists, and afford a
constant field for employment to the laboring classes;
and add by that means more principal to their already
accumulated capital, by raising food to fatten their
own stock. There would be nothing derogatory in a


large stockholder with a most extensive pastoral run,
turning his attention to an agricultural farm, twenty
or thirty miles from Melbourne, Geelong, or other
market towns, and raising a sufficiency of green crops,
to enable him to house-feed and fatten all his cattle,
and to prepare and properly feed his sheep, for the
market. It would certainly look more respectable in a
holder of stock in cattle, etc., if he sent them cleaned
fed and fattened by people in his own employ-
ment, than to have it said, that he sold them in a
starved condition to a grower of fattening food, for
the purpose of saving himself the trouble or annoy-
ance of attending to the duties of a small farmer, and
affording employment and encouragement for labor,
and of treating with some kind of feeling of generous
humanity the poor animals by which he pocketed his
thousands a-year. This system if persevered in will
soon find an end, agriculture will go a-head. and with
it the proper treatment of cattle and sheep,—and if
the pastoral farmer, will fail or feel careless in pursu-
ing it, others will be found to take it up, and will be
both willing and able to prepare the animals for
marketable, or any other purposes.
The idea of exposing ill fed beef, and half starved
mutton, will he given up,—good growers of green
crops, will find the advantage and profit of purchasing-
sheep and cattle in a low condition, taking good care
of and feeding them well for three months, and then
selling them at fifty or perhaps one hundred per cent
profit. It is therefore clear;, with respect to pastoral
lands, —as the population settle down and become
agriculturists, the former must give way as the latter
may extend, as it will be only by husbanding and
developing the qualities of the land for agricultural
purposes, that the encroachments upon the pasture
lands may be preserved within something like reason-
able limits.
It is not to be supposed that pastoral interests arc
altogether to give way ; that would be next to folly to
think of. Grazing lands will always be required for


breeding-, and rearing, to a certain age, but the extent
will be lessened, and irrigation can be resorted to, for
the purpose of making that extent produce a greater
amount of nutritious food.
In connection with the interests both of pasture
and agricultui'e, is a subject of very great impor-
tance ;
MILLS AND MANUFACTORIES
The consideration of this subject,—vast in itself, —
irrespective of all others, cannot be even attempted
without a feeling of diffidence, lest the magnitude of
its importance, might be forgotten in a puisne
approach to describe a principle of active operation
and inherent wealth for a new country, by which
millions derive their subsistence in countries more
advanced. —To manufactures — England owes her glory
in connection with the inventive spirit and indus-
trious zeal of Englishmen. —By manufactures America
an off-shoot of England, will become perhaps the
greatest country in the world. The indomitable per-
severance, so inherent in the English character has
lost none of its energy, but renewed its vigor,—re-ani-
mated its never failing vitality, —and spread its limited
lustre to an expanded blaze of ever shining light by
its distant exploration across the Atlantic. And it is
to be hoped, that the same spirit which reared up
Englancfs glory to its towering height.—that wafted
its expansive wings,—raised its mighty head, and
spread an illimitable glow of splendor, and magnifi-
cence, over a Western Continent , will not fail in
instilling a spark of invigorating life, on the shores ot
this new born Continent of the east: and let \ ictoria
be foremost in the field of enterprise, —it may be very
well to say, in this respect; advance victoria, without
shewing or explaining the possibility of doing so.
In the infancy of agriculture, and something like
an itinerant population, it is not surprising that few
have thought much of home produce or manufactures.
With a good system of agriculture in extensive opera-


ticm, and a people becoming settled and resident on
the land, —the necessity for the manufacture of the
common necessaries of life, will soon become apparent,
and also the absolute want of a constant supply of
water for that purpose ; once that a large quantity of
wheat shall have been produced in the country, it will
not be likely to be exported for the purpose of being
manufactured, or that farmers will be inclined to
carry it to any great distance for that object; there-
fore local mills for the manufacture of flour wdll fol-
low in the wake of agriculture, and in this country
wind-mills would be of very serious importance, where
a want of water will almost at all times, and under
the most economical management of it, be occasion-
ally experienced, and at all events water should be
paid for, while wind would cost nothing. Wind-mills
would suit admirably for the purposes of grinding
wheat, chopping hay, manufacturing sugar from beet,
starch from potatoes ? and many other purposes: and
as they would be at all times useful, even after mills
on an extensive scale would be erected, —they would
be decidedly the most economical kind of mills to
commence with in this country. By means of such
mills the distant cartage of produce would be avoided,
and the saving in that respect would soon pay for
the outlay on a wind mill.
Even with wind-mills, manufactories, with more
steady power would soon be wanted, and with water
power at hand they would as soon bo erected ; and
good substantial flour mills once being set in motion,
others for different purposes would follow, and not the
least, would be those for the manufacture of wool.
There is no reason whatever, for supposing that wool
could not be manufactured here ; good manufactories
for spinning, weaving, etc., with natural power should
be most remunerative concerns, and in addition, what
employment would such manufactories create, for the
many artizans connected with the preparation, finish-
ing, cutting, and making up of woollen cloths, who
are now either in want of employment, or are obliged


to work at something else, or perhaps as laborers
in order to derive an existence; and artizans of
this kind can never expect legitimate employ-
ment in their several trades, until all labor shall
have been properly divided, and skilled labor
shall take its proper position by the establishing
of manufactories in this country: what a change
would this circumstance alone effect in the character
of the country ? what employment for any redundant
labor, not .employed at agriculture ?, what saving of
time?, —time and labor lost in first exporting wool in
its raw state, and again importing it manufactured, and
not only that: but the wearing apparel made up,—ready
made,—fit for the wearer, —this to saythe least of it, is
a proof that the system of employing and dividing
labor here, is not in a wholesome condition. It has
been said, that wool can be exported, manufactured,
re-imported, and the goods sold cheaper than they
could be, if they were manufactured and made up
here; this no doubt was the case when a sudden rush
to the diggingstook place, and when labor was at a most
extravagant demand, but those days are happily past
away, and for the good of the colony it is to be hoped
for ever; and that the price of labor will soon he at
such a relative standard, that wool can be manufac-
tured and made up at home; and now that the popula-
tion is becoming numerous, in order that employment
may be secured for labor of every description, it will
become necessary to settle the value of that labor, else
we shall never be able to compete with other coun-
tries in manufactures.
As the object of the writer is to treat of the com-
modities, the produce of this colony which might be
manufactured at home, mention will only be made of
what could afterwards be effected in the manufacture
of imported cotton, flax, etc., with protective duties
on foreign articles of a similar kind, to balance our
want of coal.
The tanning of hides, and manufacture of leather
ought to be a subject of very grave importance ; with


such a vast quantity of hides, it ought to be a very
profitable trade, and competition would not be so
great as in the manufacture of wool: and the vast
quantity of Wattle tree bark, which could be so very
readily obtained in the colony, and which is so highly
valuable for tanning purposes, would further enhance
the value of this kind of manufacture ; for tanned
leather a great demand would be made, and the em-
ployment which would be afforded by it to artizans
fit for that purpose, would be of vast importance; for
boots and shoes alone for a population of 300,000, at
two pairs each in the year, averaging the cost at the
low rate of ten shillings a pair, the amount would be
£300,000, and all this except the price of the skins,
and profits to the manufacturer, would be expended in
labor, if the value of that commodity were but once
settled; and as the matter stands at presect, most of
this labor is lost to the colonists, and its value in
money is taken out of the colony.
In the manufacture of tallow, in its various pro-
cesses, much profits might be obtained, and extensive
employment afforded for labor.
In the growth and manufacture of tobacco, for-
tunes might be made, and an ample field opened for
the employment of labor.
In the growth of hops, and barley for malting pur-
poses alone, extensive employment would be given to
labor, and liquors could be made, at least for home
consumption.
From grapes also a vast amount of stock might be
added to the accumulating capital of the colony ; if
all these were properly, judiciously, and economically
carried into operation ; but to do so labor must have
its value.
In the curing of fish, it would be impossible at pre-
sent to say what could be made ; but the fact is every
where admitted, that the coast abounds with multi-
tudes of fish, but no one to catch them.
It is therefore clear, that there is an ample field for
labor, an extensive opening for the expenditure of


capital, for the purposes of profit, and if this be pro-
perly laid out, and that held under sufficient and justi-
fiable control, and be properly divided and arranged
so that an unusual demand for it shall never be likely
to occur; Victoria may become wealthy, and her people
prosperous, happy, and free. An important auxiliary,
and one which attracts particular attention at present,
is the anticipated lucrative benefit which can be derived
from
QUARTZ CRUSHING.
Altho’ the Gold Regions should not be looked upon,
as the most proper places for the employment of
labor, or as of much importance, in the scale of con-
sideration of the great industrial resources of the
colony; still there is a value for labor to some extent
derived, —fortunes are made by some, while others are
left penniless,—to prove this, it is only necessary to
state something like the total amount of labor which has
been expended at gold digging, and the amount of
money which has been realized. If three years be
taken from 1852 to 1855, the average amount of labor
cannot be computed at less than 80,000 men per
annum, and supposing each man to be in a position
fit for earning ten shillings a-day, this would be
£40,000 for a day, or about twelve millions ster-
sterling per annum, or thirty-six millions in three
years, but this would be greatly above the
amount which has been actually obtained during that
period, and it may be well stated, that the amount of
labor has been much greater than that supposed for
the sake of argument; it may therefore be presumed,
and without much fear of contradiction, that gold
field labor, in the aggregate, is not remunerative ; and
therefore that were it to he placed in the hands of a
company, the profits arising therefrom, under the pre-
sent rude and expensive system of working, would not
pay the shareholders : but seeking for nuggets of gold
in an auriferous country, and pounding, pulverizing,
and extracting gold from its matrix the quartz, are


different operations ; the former can be effected by
rude labor, and merely sinking into, and quarrying
the stone, while the latter can only be conducted
under the immediate directions of scientific, and skil-
ful practitioners.
Quartz in its native form, possesses no gold, of any
consequence : but in auriferous regions, it is found
protruded, and impregnated with particles of gold,
and it only becomes necessary, to be able to form an
opinion as to the identity of auriferous quartz, in
order to enable any one to extract from it, a steady
and profitable payment for his labor.
The operation of extracting gold from quartz, is now
pursued with much activity by small parties or com-
panies, but the great drawback, is the want of good and
sufficient machinery. To grind quartz, one of the hardest
stones in existence in mills, is a matter of very consider-
able difficulty, but altogether of a minor consideration,
when it is made subject to the action of powerful
engines, after being calcined; and though the crushing
of quartz may not in many instances, re-pay the
amount of labor connected with it, as concerning the
puerile projects which are now in operation for that
purpose, there can no doubt exist, but that in the
hands of skilful parties, and with efficient machinery,
the riches of Victoria, as far as gold is to be consi-
dered, as forming an ingredient, have only commen-
ced, but that will be arrived at, not in withdrawing
labor from its natural and legitimate employment, and
rendering the country nerveless, as to its resources,
but by putting forward the powers of art, energy, and
skill, instead of rude and perhaps, misdirected labor,
in the production of gold.
The application of simple, because powerful and
efficient machinery for the production of gold, will, it
is fully expected, speedily and effectually supplant the
manual labor, which has characterized the working of
the gold digger, and the most productive veins of
auriferous quartz, instead of being partially and per-
haps injudiciously worked, on account of the scram-


hling and reckless propensities of the fortune hunter,
will hereafter be made the subjects of close, systema-
tic and careful investigation, through the powerful aid
and magic influence of well devised and efficiently
sustained machinery.
The grinding of quartz will form a speculative
subject for many future generations, in the annals of
this colony: but to he successful, and in order to
secure repayment for the amount of labor which may
be required for it, it should be conducted and carried
out by companies, and even here, there is an objection
in limine ; How can a company he protected from dis-
honesty in the quarrying of the material ? How in
the breaking of it, to make it fit for being ground
by machinery ? Many a nugget per-chance would be
found in either case, which could be purloined from
the proprietary ; these are therefore objections to be
seriously considered and overcome, before a company,
could with safety start in such a project, but these
difficulties being overcome, the prospects of success
would be indisputable and certain.
It is calculated, that even now, under the operation
of very rude and ill arranged machinery, three
ounces of gold is about the least quantity that can be
obtained from every ton of crushed quartz, and that
a much larger average amount, may be safely depend-
ed on, but this can only be true, where the rocks of
the immediate district, are generally auriferous; and
even counting only on the lowest calculation of three
ounces to a ton; a small set of machinery would
grind one hundred and fifty tons of quartz in a week,
at an expense of labor, and attendance, of about
£l5O, —leaving the balance to the value of four hun-
dred and fifty ounces of gold to be alloted amongst
the producers of the stones, the rents, taxes, etc.,
connected therewith, and the proprietors of the machi-
nery.
8b that as a business speculation there can he, not
even a shadow of doubt as to its perfect success, if
only conducted with practical skill, aided by the light


of scientific investigation, and the most improved
system of working by machinery.
In projects of this kind, the want of water, would
be one of the greatest obstacles ; water could be made
an important agent, in every stage of the work, from
the rough quarrying, and raising of the material, to
the final abstraction, and amalgamation of the pre-
cious metal. With a sufficiency of water, the machi-
nery might be driven by it, and the water could be
again used in the process of washing the quartz pow-
der, and in driving puddling machinery; and thus a
vast saving might be effected, in having a cheap sub-
stitute for steam power; and the positions of the
quartz reefs, are such, that water might with very
little difficulty be constantly supplied to them all; it
may therefore be truly stated, that with a good quartz
vein, a supply of water, and substantial and efficient
machinery, vast fortunes may yet be realized in Vic-
toria by quartz crushing.
THE PROSPECTIVE WAGES OF LABOR.
Enough has been stated, to lead the reader to infer,
that the present position of labor in this colony, is
one of a very peculiar character, —estranged in his
habits from thoughts of industry, the laborer looked
to the diggings as his working place, and the apex of
his ambition; as long as gold could be found in abun-
dance, the idea of looking after any other employment
was laughed at; he' was his own master and
employer at the diggings; every laborer in that
respect at that occupation was an independent
man, he could see no further than his own great-
ness in his self created idiocrasy, unrestrained
by the feeling, that labor in all civilized com-
munities, must have its proper place, and that,
altogether for the benefit of the commonwealth; he
fancied that measured labor had for ever vanished, he
had been in harness, and knew what labor was, and
therefore gloried in this nicknamed liberty ; he little
thought that labor is a matter that the world at large


is concerned in; and what specks on the world are all
the diggings of Victoria ? So little indeed are they,
that if the colony were in any way reasonably popu-
lated, the labor expended at the diggings would not
form the tenth part of a unit, as compared with the
more valuable and well arranged labor of the remainder
of the community ; so that the little impulse that has
been given to raise labor beyond its proper position,
will only redound to its own discomfiture; that would
merely be the case in a thickly populated country,
where a laborer would only have to return to his former
kind of work, and place of business ; but the discomfi-
ture here is a return to ? Nothing hut a disor-
ganized state of every business connected with labor.
Labor is private property as applied to individuals,
but it is public property, when the price of it is to be
considered, —a man is free to labor or not, but it is
not in his power, to regulate a standing price. In the
first stages of labor, it passes from individuals to com-
munities ; and the laborer is valued according to the
importance of his services to the community, as
compared with their necessities and power to perform
the same work themselves :—at this stage, labor would
be a very rude material, as every member of the com-
munity might be able to do the same work ; but, that
particular individuals are selected to labor for the
others, who may be performing different other duties.
And from communities, laboring classes are formed to
satisfy the wants of a nation, &c.: but then, and at
all times, the laborer only gives his time and strength,
those who require his services are generally the best
judges of the amount of value to offer for them,
according to the market price of other commodities,
the values of which are affected by the labor of other
communities, or other nations.
Labor is a rude commodity, and is always (with
few exceptions like Victoria) a drug in the market.
JRude labor requires no skill, —it requires no educa-
tion in order to become a laborer, it all consists in
strength and habit, and using his strength, and


affiliating his habits to such a purpose, he may
reasonably ask, how is a laborer to form an opinion
as to the value of his work ?
The value of labor is generally regulated by the
value of food, and as wheat is the most important por-
tion of mans’ food, the value of labor in corn growing
countries, is a good criterion to judge by ; and altho’
in times of scarcity of corn, this does not apply, as
labor does not invariably rise and fall with the price
of it; yet as a general rule, it is the same, as the
scarcity of one country is supplied by the plentiful
produce of another, and hence in countries even not
producing the great staple of food, the value of labor
may be regulated by an increase to the amount of the
expense of freight and insurance on the importation of
food, that is, in case there should be no over supply of
labor; which would cause a depreciation in proportion to
the redundancy : but on the other hand, where laborers
are scarce, the value of it is kept up to its proper-
standard : and whenever, by the accidents of some
unsettled circumstance, the price of labor in any
country rises higher than the price of food, in their
regulated proportions, then the growth of the material
of food in that country must be a loosing specula-
tion, —and food and other commodities manufactured
by labor, must be imported, as that will be the least
expensive mode of procuring them : in other words,
the world will go to the worlds’ cheapest market, and
therefore labor being the simplest of all commodities,
there can be no difficulty in setting a price upon it,
according to its regulated value in other countries.
From the earliest ages, a price was set upon labor r
in every stage of the worlds’ progress, labor has been
a marketable commodity; one country may have
afforded more protection for its own labor than an-
other did, but still the article was the same ; in a
foreign and disinterested market all would find the
same value. Now, an equal value for labor is spread
over the globe, and how puerile ? how absurd ?to
think, that the price of labor can be kept up here.


No, it is too ridiculous; let labor take its proper place,
and then the country will advance.
Labor to become applicable to this colony, should
be reduced in value to what it is in other countries
similarly situated where labor as a commodity is
scarce, and the principal portion of the food is impor-
ted, that is; it should be reduced from its present
false position, to the highest rate of labor where
freight, insurance, and other expenses attendant upon
shipment, are added to the first cost of the article of
food.
The scarcity of labor in America , still preserves a
high value for it, though food is plentiful, but the
price of labor docs not prevent the progress of agri-
culture, and manufactures there ; neither would the
same price prevent it here. A farmer here could
afford to pay the same rate of wages, and meet his
American neighbour in the market on vantage
ground, with any of his produce; and a manufacturer
could do the same : but before the farmer would be
likely to embark in such a pursuit, or before the
manufacturer would perhaps hazard a fortune in the
attempt, both should feel satisfied, that labor was a
fixed commodity as to value. There can be no diffi-
culty in the way of a business-man, calculating what
the proper value of labor would be in this colony in
manufacturing pursuits, or for a good agriculturist, to
tell the value of the labor' attendant on producing a
certain amount of crop, —the fault of labor not being
in demand is not theirs, —it is, that «f the laborer
himself, who so unconsciously stands in his own light.
Nofaultshould be found with any one for endeavouring
to obtain as good wages as he possibly could ; but that
desire to obtain much, when it results in his getting
nothing, should bo abandoned, and the laborer should
take a step downward; and if one step downward
would be found insuffic.ent to make labor a market-
able article, another and another step should be taken,
and in this manner, the value of labor both intrinsi-
cally, and practically, would be found out, and labor


at its proper value, would be in constant requisition ;
so much so, that it may be very confidently asserted,
that it would not be permitted to descend in price to
its true value, the demand for labor at its standard
value, would be so great, that good laborers would
always be able to obtain a bonus or premium, and the
employment would be constant, as men with capital
would embark it, and find an interest in doing so,
in any and every kind of business, by which the pro-
fits of stock, could be judiciously and systematically
increased.
Constant employment at a standard rate of wages,
would ultimately be more advantageous to the labor-
ing population, than the present precarious system of
depending upon occasional employment. A laborer
could live more satisfactorily on £6O or £7O for an
j w
entire year, at constant work, than he would by
depending upon chance employment, by which he
m ght make that sum in six months, and be idle for
the remainder of the year; and in addition to his
increased comfort as an individual, he would be assis-
ting to promote a general system of employment by
which all classes would be benefited ; as the more
extended the vast field of almost illimitable resources
for labor, which exists can be made, and the more that
those resources can be put into active operation, the
more certainty will there be, of sure, and steady em-
ployment, for every man that may repair to what
would then be the happy shores of Victoria , Laborers
should unitems one man, for the purpose of bringing
abought so glorious an object; it would be a blessing
to themselves, and the preparing of a happy home for
their children and friends, and for ages yet unknon ;
so that viewing all these circumstances, the laborer is
and ever will be, a very important individual in the
formation and progress of nath.ns wealth ; without
him nothing in industrial economy can be commenced
or carried forward : hut with him his price must be
valued by the standard of other countries.
The most direct mode of employment at present


for labor is at agriculture,—and should he be in a
position to become a small farmer, the laborer can
work at his land without having to submit to the
name (for it is but a name) of a reduction in his
wages, his work on his farm will be amply remunera-
tive, while the prices of produce hold their present
position, and during this period he will have such
means and opportunities of improving both his land
and his circumstance, that when prices shall have
failed, he will be in a position njt to feel much injured
by the reduction.
As agricultural labor will be extended, so agricul-
tural produce will be increased, and the value of the
labor will be as gradually decreasing, although the
occupant of a small farm may not immediately per-
ceive it, —as having constant employment for his time
he will under any circumstances be in a position better
than that of a laborer, and will have the improve-
ments upon his land free, beyond what he might consi-
der a reasonable remuneration for his time : but with
the reduction in the price of produce, the value of
most other commodities will also be lessened, and at
all events he can never be a loser, as farming labor in
this country will always command the highest market
price; therefore no matter what change may take
place, the occupant of a small farm is sure to be in a
safe and comfortable condition, as compared with even
a salaried laborer.
To be prepared for and meet the depression which
must inevitably take place in the value of labor, and
not only to make that change in the industrial econo-
my of the colony, as little felt as possible, hut to turn
it to public advantage in the most direct and rapid
manner that can be adopted, will be for laborers
to resort to farming pursuits without much delay.
At such engagements the pressure will not be felt,
but all other classes of laborers, will feel it, when
perhaps too late to retrieve themselves, —there is no
substantial employment for labor to any great amount
at present, beyond the digging for gold, and without


substantial employment, the price of labor will be
almost valueless, how then can laborers look up for
high wages? where is the money to be procured to
pay them ? Suppose the gold fields to become for a
while void of their treasures (and what sound reason
is there for supposing otherwise) what would become
of the people engaged there ? what would be the
value of labor, or what could the thousands now
engaged there be employed at? labor would be at a
discount indeed, —without any settled purpose, or
plan of proceeding,—without control, —without any
fixed object to-gain or overcome, —without any work
to carry out with a prospect of remuneration, —where
under such circumstances, would be, even the scintilla
of a spark of value for labor ? —to this disastrous end,
the present ruinous system, may imperceptibly lead,
and there is no stronger probability than that it will
lead to it, but not altogether in such a form that its
effect would be immediate, then the regrets will be:
that the only plan was neglected, which might have
been so easily and judiciously selected, of having a
safety-valve in the application of labor to cultivate the
land: this if put into operation, is the only chance
that exists, of keeping up anything like even a stan-
dard rate of wages, —employment at farming pursuits
there need be no end of, and where laborers cannot
become small farmers, and thus become their own
employers, they should be prepared and satisfied to
receive remuneration, according to a settled system of
payment, such as farmers can afford to offer, and
being regulated by the value of labor in other coun-
tries, such as America ; what strict analogy may con-
firm them in expecting, —this would bring about the
establishment of a principle, which would lead
to glorious results, —and more than glorious for
the laborers themselves, —for the question of labor, or
no labor, would be set at rest, and for ever, —want of
employment would be no more heard of, —distress
would be no more seen, —for the whole population of
Great Britain could find employment in Victoria;


there therefore need be little fear of any sudden
calamity, on account of a general want of employment;
if the labor of the colony be but properly directed at
a regulated standard of value.
It is not to he expected, that the profits of labor
will prematurely cease at the diggings: but it would
be contrary to all physical law to suppose that those
profits will be interminable, —the decline may in all
probability be very gradual, and the employment of
labor at other beneficial pursuits should be as
gradually got up. It would be next to an impossi-
bility to transfer in a short period, a very large body
of laborers, from one active and well known pursuit,
into the channels and labyrinths of another that
would be new to their hands and strange to their
habits, —this would be a subject for years to accom-
plish, but the preparation should be made, and then
no inconvenience could ever be felt by any party, who
might be in any way concerned in the due employ-
ment of labor in the colony.
In thus fully discussing the prospective wages of
labor, it is obvious that in connection therewith, the
price of food should also be considered; we shad
therefore make a few remarks on
THE PRESENT PRICES OF OTHER COMMODITIES.
The prices of almost all other commodities increa-
sed as the value of labor became exorbitant, —the
value of every thing produced in the colony rose even
beyond that relative price. As labor could not be
obtained at a steady value, the producers in most
instances preferred depending upon the spor. taneous
supplies of uncultivated nature, than to increase them
by an extravagant application of laborious andexpensive
skill. In consequence of this disposition, crops which
were easily produced, were those only attended to, such
as hay and oats, for the purpose of being used as green
fodder, and even these commodities, rose to an enor-
mous price, hay being at one period £4O a ton.
Milk and butter were either not to be obtained, or


the prices were so extravagant, that few people would
purchase them; milch cows might be seen running
half-maddened with suffering for want of being milked,
and yet the milk at its extravagant price, would not
pay the expenses attendant on conveying it to market.
All natural laws seemed as if set at defiance, and the
beneficent gifts of a Divine Providence considered as
nought, when compared to the insulted name of free-
dom, —the burlesqued independence, —the withering
influences of mid-night depravity, —the torturing
gangrene of bacchanalian remorse, and the soul des-
troying self-created magnetic and golden calf of blas-
phemous prodigality, all the boasted plenitudes and
Satanic beatitudes of the gold fields.
Colonial produce (little as it was) being neglected,
the supplies from Foreign countries were altogether
depended on, and the market price of every article
rose and fell according to the deficiency or abundance
of the foreign supply ; and articles such as clothing,
and such others as could be easily and quickly made
up, and exported to Victoria, were forwarded in such
quantities, that they became and are still a drug in the
market, —of so little value did they become, that it
was said, that goods of that description might be pur-
chased at the Melbourne auction rooms, be re-taken to
England, and pawned there, at remunerative profits,—
even now, after the shipment? of such goods to Victo-
ria has been for some time discontinued, clothes can
be purchased here at a cheaper rate, than the same
goods could be obtained for in London.
Hut almost every article in the shape of food,
maintains an exhorbitant price still; perishable
commodities cannot be forwarded thousands of miles
to a market, —and others are too bulky to be conve-
niently shipped for a long vovage, and therefore the
supply of food, is for the most part in the hands of a
few individuals.
The price of flour by which the value of most other
food is regulated, is still exorbitant; rating at a
bout five pence per pound; the value of a pound of


flour iu England in order to remunerate the grower
would be three half-pence. In England the farmer
has to pay taxes of different kinds, which are not
known here, and it may be reasonably said of him,
that were he free from taxation he .could afford to sell
flour at one penny a pound.
In England, four pence a stone will pay a farmer
for grow ng potatoes, and about the same prices for
other vegetables; and if an English farmer can do
this, under an enormous and oppressive system of taxa-
tion, with heavy rents, what should a Victorian not
be able to do, with as good a soil, and a better climate.
If an English farmer can become one of the most
valued and steady members of the community of which
be forms a part, what is there to prevent farmers in
Victoria, becoming much more so? No other profes-
sion leads so certainly to advancement in wealth and
honor, —none so well calculated to produce health,
peace, and happiness. Agricultural success depends
upon no favors dearly purchased, no fawning after
popularity,—no surrender of honorable or manly feel-
ing, but a systematic application of labor guided by
the light of scientific truth, to cause the earth to
yield a due and plentiful return.
While flour continues to hold its present price, and
other vegetable commodities in their relative propor-
tions, the farming interests may be said to be greatly
above their natural position ; that is, if the price of
labor were down to its proper standard, but consider-
ing the price of labor, and the careless manner in
which farming (little as it is) seems to be conducted,
it is probable that the profits from the scanty produce
may not be exorbitant, though greatly beyond what
an English farmer would expect.
It is however beyond all reasonable hope, for the
farmer to imagine, that the present price of flour can,
or will be continued ; previous to the seed sowing sea-
son of this year, it was well known in all the wheat
growing countries, that there was a great scarcity of
food in Victoria, and so sure as that fact was known,


as certain will there be a vast supply; as rapidly after
the harvesting of the corn in those countries shall
have been completed, and as ships can he obtained for
the purpose of conveying it to our shores. There will
therefore in all probability be a re-action in the price
of food, similar to that which has for some time
existed, with regard to the price of clothing, and of
articles, with which the market has been glutted, on
account of a superabundant supply.
It may consequently happen, and that before the
commencement of 1856, that the price of dour will be
as low as two-pence a pound,—and it may be less than
even that, the farmers of Victoria may therefore
expect to meet with one or two years of non-paying
prices for corn, and they should be prepared for it:
the prices of vegetables cannot be proportionately redu-
ced, as they cannot be conveyed for a great distance;
thus the loss which may be sustained in the price of
wheat, will be made up, by the profits on the more
perishable articles of fool, and on this subject they
may rest satisfie I, that prices beyond a fair value will
not be obtained longer than while the supply is not
sufficient for the demand.
Under these apparently confiicting circumstances,
and with a full conviction that a crush or panic, is
rapidly approaching with respect to the price of food ;
the real subject for consideration is, what ought to be
the price of dour in this culonv, as the principle arti-
cle of food, and considering it irrespective of any ex-
traordinary supply from foreign shores.
The price of dour being once reduced below a rea-
sonable standard, it may be said, what encouragement
is there in this for farming or for producing the same
article ; but the reply will be, that no foreign supply
of corn, can immediately affect green crops, ad vegeta-
ble food, though it will ultimately; and it is only in
corn and wheat that the Victorian farmer will have to
compete with foreigners, for the next two or three
years, and the writer has no hesitation in stating, that
the Victorian farmer will not be able to compete with


foreign producers even in the Melbourne market, —a
better system of farming and of cultivating wheat,
will first be required to be in active operation, before
old hands at farming, and countries and people long
in the habit of growing wheat, can be beat out of a
market, merely on account of the expense of freight
and insurance, besides the first cost price at home.
It is therefore clear, that the price of wheat and flour
in Victoria must be regulated by the prices in other
countries; the protective duty in favor of the corn
grower in England, was for a long time a bone of con-
tention, between the two strong parties in the state,
till the late Sir R. Peel’s tariff of 1846, settled the
matter, in abolishing almost all restrictive duties, with
regard to food.
The English farmer has now to submit to foreign
competition, and with that free trade feeling, he can
grow wheat and sell it at a profitable price, and that
will not exceed three half pence a pound for the
flour, —foreign flour, except in cases of some unfore-
seen scarcity, can be supplied at that price,—such
being the case in England , and it being clearly un-
derstood, that foreign flour may also be sent to
Victoria , what can be the result, but that Victorian
farmers must sell wheat and flour at the same prices
that others will. If therefore a foreigner can keep
down the price of flour in England , he can do the
same here, by adding the additional expense of freight
and insurance to the first cost price of the article.
It may therefore be very reasonably expected, that
foreigners will come to the Melbourne market with
flour, at not more than two pence per pound, and that
is all that a farmer in Victoria may hereafter expect
to receive for his produce in corn crops. And that
can only be the case while the colony remains in an
infant state as to farming, as when the produce of the
colony shall have become so great, that quantities of
it can be exported, then the prices must become
further reduced; competition will sufficiently exist
without the aid of foreigners, and the sur-


plus quantities of corn and wheat which may he
grown in Victoria, may become an article of competi-
tion with foreign producers in distant and foreign
markets, and that would make a reduction in the first
cost price at home, equal to double the amount of
freight and insurance.
How far the value of green crops may he kept up,
will depend greatly upon the prices of beef and mut-
ton, and the extensive rearing of cattle and sheep, and
these not being exportable articles, the prices will
almost altogether depend upon local competition; that,
that competition will soon commence, is as certain, as
that the lands will become occupied by an industrious
class of farmers, but until that time shall have arrived,
the prices of beef and mutton, and all other such com-
modities, must rule at an arbitrary rate, and depend
upon the amount of supply to meet the market
demand. This high price will continue, until the
stock in cattle, sheep, pigs, &c., shall have vastly in-
creased, and until more hands shall have become en-
gaged, in producing food for them, and in making it a
special trade to rear and fatten them. The first
impulse that such a movement is likely to receive, will
be in the reduced price of flour; farmers who may have
stock in cattle, will then find it more profitable to
cultivate green crops, than wheat, this being subject
to, while those would be free from foreign competition.
It may therefore be expected, that for the next few
years, after the price of flour shall have become redu-
ced to near its standard, a run will be made on the
breeding, rearing, and fattening of live stock; and this
will continue, till the supply shall exceed the demand,
and then the value of such stock, must fall to its rela-
tive standard, and with it the value of all green crops,
as food for cattle, &c. It will then become a question
with a farmer, whether he would prefer sowing wheat,
and be subject to foreign, or breed and rear cattle,
and be obliged to submit to local competition; one or
the other he must do, and therefore it may reasonably be
anticipated, that the quality of the land, will be a


subject of consideration on his arriving at a conclu-
sion, as to the difference in value of wheat, or green
crops ; thus the relative value of live stock, as compa-
red to flour, will soon become known.
At present, the prices of beef and mutton, range 50
per cent higher, pound for pound, than that of flour,
and if the price of the latter, is likely to be reduced at
least to one half, those of the former, (though not
making use of a substantial argument) can be equally
lessened, and in all probability will be more so, and
be sold weight for weight, at the same price as flour,
and even at that price, the feeding farmer would have
the advantage, in cases where young stock could be
purchased at a very low rate. It is perfectly within
the bounds of moderate calculation to suppose, that
live stock, and all other produce for the growth of
which the soil and climate of Victoria are suited,
whether they may be considered as luxuries, or essen-
tials of life, will be reduced to the same ratio or
relative proportion: but wheat will always command
the most steady value, once its standard price shall
have become .settled. In thus considering what the
prices of the different most essential commodities
necessary to human sustenance may be, a most impor-
tant article, remains yet to be explained,
THE VALUE AND RENT OF LAND.
During the feverish state of avaricious anxiety,
which pervaded peoples minds, while vast multitudes
were flocking to our shores, the exorbitant prices to
which all kinds of food got up, and the almost unlim-
ited demand, for even house room; land became a
commodity of rare and envied speculation. It was
purchased in large quantities, and cut up, and sold
again in small portions at enormous profits. A regu-
lar trade in land was thus carried on, and particularly
where there existed any, even the slightest chance, of
its becoming occupied as building ground, and it rose
in value, higher in its relative proportion, than any
other commodity, and with it the rent of houses also ;


speculators in land, who sold off rapidly, made for-
tunes without either trouble or delay: but it was too
good—too absurdly extravagant to continue long.
It is now as rapidly coming down, as it was foolishly
forced up in value, and great as was its rise, the fall
to its natural price, will be the greater : hut it may
be said, that the natural price of land, is what any
purchaser may feel disposed to give for it, and hither-
to the profit arising from it, in the shape of rents,
produce &c., created a valuable interest on the small
outlay, this is a truth of ephemeral existence, two or
three years have scarcely elapsed, and the ill omened
truth, vanishes, and becomes enveloped, in the almost
baseless fabric of a vision.
Land for temporary purposes, may he raised to any
value that speculators may wish to give, and deter-
mine on getting for it: hut for the steady uses of a
settled community, it cannot, and should not he
valued at a greater price, than a similar commodity
will bring in other countries, under equal circumstan-
ces. Where the population is very dense in propor-
tion to the extent of the country occupied, land brings
more than its intrinsic value, for, or on account of its
convenience: but with a thinly scattered population,
the reverse is the case. Land is likely to be sold
rather under the acknowledged market price, and such
must be the case in Victoria, for a long time to come.
What the market price of land ought to he in this
colony, is a subject of the greatest importance to have
determined, whether in its local character for the
purpose of its being made use of for the advantages of
a rising community, or its general and multitudinous
effects, on account of the distant and insolated position
of Australia , as the antipodes of the ancient world;
and Victoria as a part of the embryo continent, likely
to become the foremost, in the race for wealth, honor,
and renown, amid the rise and progress of nations, in
the southern universe, and the spread and rapid
strides of civilization, over the hitherto unknown por-
tions of the earth.


Land, as a portion of stock, is to be valued accord-
ing to the annual rent, which could be obtained for it,
and the interest of the money which would be paid
for it; thus if land were worth £2 an acre, per annum,
the purchase of it at 5 per cent interest, would be
£4O ; at 8 per cent, would be £25, and at ten per cent
interest, would be £2O ; the latter is likely to be the
market value of land for a considerable time in Victo-
ria, that is ten years purchase on the annual rent that
could be obtained for it, and as years shall have rolled
on, a greater amount of purchase will be realized, as
the interest of money may become less, the population
more extended, and the security and interest from
land, both more substantial, respectable, and determi-
nate, than the precarious profits, which may be deri-
ved from any other commodity, which would be fluc-
tuating in its character as to value.
Calculating the interest for investments in land, at
ten per cent per annum, the next subject for consider-
ation will be—what land is already fit, and what is in
that condition, that it must be made fit for cultiva-
tion : and the value of the labor which may be requi-
red for the latter purpose, will be looked upon as at
its legitimate and proper standard, not as it at present
rates, although labor at its present price, is well paid
for, in the equally high price of produce; but as this
cannot last, no reasoning or argument, can be based
upon it, therefore in coming to a conclusion, as to the
value of land, the wages of labor must be considered
in its true marketable bearing, in the promotion of
the industry of the country.
Land must be valued either in an improved condi-
tion, or in its natural state. In an improved condi-
tion, there is little land either to be let or sold: but
supposing land to be properly fenced in, and fit for
immediate cultivation, with a good supply of water,
and the necessary farm houses, &c., already erected
on it, and altogether in that state, that a farmer could
commence his operations, without any outlay, except
for seed, and the labor attendant on sowing; and sup-


posing a depth of from eighteen inches to two feet of
soil, on a retentive subsoil, and within a reasonable
distance of a market, what would a farm of 50 acres
of such land be worth by the acre per annum ?
It has been frequently said, and very often acted
upon, that the value of the produce was a good crite-
rion to judge by, in forming an opinion, as to the
value or rent of the land, and one-third was set down
for rent and taxes, one-third for seed and labor, and
one-third to the farmer : hut this will not hold good
here, in consequence of the difficulty of access to mar-
kets; the value of the land will thus be lessened, and
the labor increased: but supposing every acre to be
sufficient to grow wheat, 220 stone or about 50
bushels to the acre, would not be a bad crop, this
would not in its raw state, be worth more than £ll,
so that even allowing one-third for rent, etc., after
deducting a reasonable equivalent for waste, in fences,
head-lands, etc., there would be little more than £3 ss.
an acre, to be appropriated to rent: but it seldom
occurs, that every acre of a farm can he made equally
productive, farmers usually calculate, upon having
valuable produce, on only about half their cultivable
land, leaving the other half to rest, and to he used as
a run for cattle, etc., and in this case, the dividend
for the rent of 50 acres, would depend on the produce
of twenty-five, or £275. The profits which could
be realized from a rotation system of green crops,
could not be fairly apportioned in any shape towards
rent, beyond what a fair crop of wheat would be likely
to realize, as great labor and attention are re-
quired, in the cultivation of green crops, and ma-
nure must be supplied, at the expense of the farmer,
to which the owner of the land should have no claim;
besides which, a farmer may not be inclined to produce
more than a crop of wheat in the season, as that has
been the custom in the old country, and thus the land
should be valued only, as for one crop; this would
bring the value of this farm of fifty acres, to be worth
a little more than thirty-five shillings an acre, and


that is, for first-class ground, so that the marketable
value of such land, at ten years purchase may be set
down at a sum between £l7 and £2O.
Land under similar circumstances, and equally
valuable, is let in England at the rate of thirty shil-
lings per acre for arable, and £2 per acre for grass,
and the farmers of England, are pretty good judges of
the value of land, and can make as much of it as the
people of any other country; it is true, that in Great
Britain, there are taxes upon land, in addition to the
rent, but the land of Victoria , will not remain for any
long period, without being subject to taxation ; the
annual value of good land in this colony fit for imme-
diate occupation, is therefore as compared with land
under similar circumstances in England nearly the
same, —the total or purchaseable value, being greatly
different, on account of the small rate of interest that
is expected from investments in land in the latter.
The value of good land fit for immediate occupation
in Scotland, is at a higher rate per annum, than it is
in England, and Scotch farmers are the most econo-
mical men, perhaps in the world, in the management
of land, the increased or higher value of rent, is not
however more than from three to five shillings an
acre, and is such, that a judicious farmer, would not
regard much in balancing his annual accounts.
The rent of good land fit for immediate occupation
in Ireland does not vary much from that of England,
or Scotland, but is lower than either, —a little lower
than the rent of land in England, and rather consid-
erably less than that of Scotland, all being under
equal advantages and circumstances.
In Ireland, the land is valued according to its capa-
bility of producing wheat, but it is somewhat doubt-
ful, whether grass lands in Ireland, would not form a
better standard.
Grass lands generally rate higher by ten shillings
an acre, than arable, and particularly since the repeal
of the corn laws; previous to which time, the ordnance
valuation of arable and pasture land, was the same


under the same circumstances, though even then,
pasture land was let at from 10 to 15 per cent higher
than arable.
By the abolishing of the corn laws, the value of all
lands suddenly fell, but it was soon ascertained, that
the value of grass lands was not much, if at all less-
ened.
Pasture and green food, for cattle, etc., maintained
their former prices, while the price of corn became
reduced to its marketable value, as compared with
other countries; and with a humid climate, such as
exists over Ireland, advantage was taken of this cir-
cumstance in several districts, by the turning of land
which was in any degree fit for it into pasture: but
where the land was naturally arable, the owners had
to submit to about one-third reduction in its value;
and this established basis, placed the farmers of Eng-
land, Scotland, and Ireland, on an equal footing with
that of other countries, and enabled them to produce,
and dispose of, the food of man at remunerative rates,
even under the closest competition
Free trade in farming, has been one of the wisest
blessings of Providence to Great Britain, and Ire-
land ; it has made of most of the agriculturists, what
they were not before, —good farmers, —it has made
farming, a steady and scientific pursuit, and conferred
upon land, an unchangeable value; and that value
may now be rated in England at thirty shillings for
arable, and £2 per acre for pasture land.
As an instance of this, in Derbyshire a very cen-
tral county in England, the annual value of land,
on the Duke of Rutland’s extensive property, is
thirty shillings for the best arable, and £2 per acre,
for pasture land.
In Ireland, the final Report of the Devon Commis-
sion, as to the value of land, set down the rents, at
about the same, but generally a little less, and those
learned and practical commissioners, examined into all
the circumstances connected with the value of land in
Ireland.


The value of land in Ireland, is therefore a fair
criterion to judge by, in forming an idea, as to what
should he the value of land here; pasture lands in
Victoria, may be made valuable by irrigation, and
what nature supplies Ireland with in copious profu-
sion, art may aid, in procuring for the grazing lands
of this country, and thus make pasture equally valua-
ble as arable land. But all circumstances considered,
land cannot be made of greater annual value here,
than it is, either in Great Britain or Ireland , except in
having some considerable advantage, as to climate; and
the average price of the best farming land in those
countries fit for immediate occupation is about thirty-
five shillings per acre per annum, which at ten years
purchase would amount to £l7 10s. as the entire
value of similar land under equal circumstances
here.
Land in its natural state in Victoria, is altogether
a different kind of subject to treat of, it requires
much more consideration, and far more strict exami-
nation, in order to form a judgment, as to its value:—•
unknown, —uncleared, —unfenced ; —the first exami-
nation, will be, the depth and character of the soil,
and the nature of the sub-soil; if this should be of a
porous character, the land is worth little or nothing;
land to be fit for agricultural purposes, must have a
retentive subsoil; marl, or clay, makes a substantial
sub-stratum, but the best under strata, are lime stone,
gravel, over marl, or clay, the heat of the lime stone
gravel, keeps the under soil warm. Soil from eigh-
teen to twenty-four inches deep, with a good retentive
sub-soil, is fit 'for any agricultural purpose, that the
climate will suit, and may be considered land of the
first class, —lessening in value, in proportion to any
loss depth of soil, down to eight inches, below which,
it is more suited for pasture than for arable purposes,
r lhe land being found suitable for cultivation, the
next consideration will be, the expense of clearing
it, —it frequently occurs, that the clearing of land
costs more than it is worth, —here this may happen


too, —though the timber may be valuable, the stubbing
out the large roots, is a matter of considerable
expense, and if the value of the timber, will not to a
great extent, compensate for the expense of clearing
the land, the performing of it, will be of no compara-
tive advantage, as one season at least will be lost in
removing the timber, and every season lost in that
way, would be equal to two years of the purcbaseable
value : but to form a correct idea of the expenses, an
allowance of £4 per acre, should be made for the
purpose of erecting farm buildings, &c.; and £3 an
acre for fencing, an amount equal to two years rent
for every year that would be lost in stubbing or other
clearing, and the balance to £l7 10s. might be given,
as the purchase for every acre, that is, where the tim-
ber would balance the expense and labor of clearing;
if not, an equivalent reduction should be made in the
purchase money, and if it should do more than pay
the expense of clearing, a corresponding addition
should be made to the purchasing value.
If the land should happen to be stony, nearly similar
expenses will be the result, —with this difference, that
thestones might beusefulforbuilding purposes,fencing,
&c., and of course should be valued accordingly, —so
that in any case, the value of land in its natural state
can be easily ascertained ; but it may often occur, that
even the government upset price for land at one pound
per acre will be too much : —if there should be much
clearing and loss of labor as well as seasons for culti-
vating, besides the expenses of fencing, building, &c.;
this would also be the case, if a large portion or only halt
of the land which might be obtained under one pur-
chase had a porous subsoil; the time will soon arrive,
when all lands must be fenced in, and if the fencing
of worthless land is to be charged against the produc-
tive portion, it might make it an unprofitable bargain ;
or it might be more advantageous to allow the bad
part of the land to remain as a common, as it would
he but throwing away money to enclose it; —this
manifests the necessity for a purchaser to look to and


examine closely the qualities of the land which he may
be about to purchase.
It might be possible to form a tenaceous subsoil in
cases where a porous one exists, and where the land
may have a coating or covering of loam ; this by care-
ful digging could be turned to the bottom, and would
form a tenaceous bed or sub-soil when not exposed to
the air: however experiments of this kind are not
nece&ary where land is so plentiful and so much of it
of first rate quality: it is only necessary to exercise a
little discrimination in selecting land for purchase.
The annual value or rent of lands being once pro-
perly ascertained—the number of years purchase will
be the varying quantity ; it will increase with the
population;—though parties now purchasing will
consider ten per cent a small profit;—a time will come
when money will be invested in land at five per cent,
and perhaps less, consequently steady purchasers now
at ten per cent, will in case of re-selling when the
colony shall have become populous in some proportion
to her acres, realize cent per cent on their capital
besides having ten per cent on it till then:—it is
therefore clear that the most lasting and substantial
benefits are to be derived from a judicious investment
of money in land at a proper marketable value, accord-
ing to the present rate of interest which is expected
for money.
In Victoria the value of land for building purposes
will to a great extent he regulated by the amount of
the population, and their more immediate wants in
that respect. During the years 1853 and 1854 the
demand for houses was so great, that rents rose to an
extravagant height, and since then they are as rapid-
ly falling off, as there were more houses erected both
in Melbourne and Geelong than the necessities of a
steady population will for 'a long time require or
demand :—there is no constant employment for a large
mass of the working population in or about Mel-
bourne, or Geelong, and most of the working people
who existed by the sudden impulse which was given to


the employment of labor in the erection of buildings,
etc., have since then become scattered through the
interior, and at the various diggings; and whatever
may be the nature of their employment in the coun-
try, they will find it more advantageous than in en-
deavouring to obtain a precarious subsistence in or
about Melbourne, or Geelong; it may therefore be safe-
ly asserted that the value and rent of house property
will greatly decline, at least until the population'shall
have again become excessive, which is not likely, unless
by the rapid promotion of local trade and manufac-
tures. Without local manufactures, there will he
nothing for the inhabitants of the sea-port towns to
do. It may very naturally be supposed and expected,
that the inhabitants of the interior will soon discover
a more simple mode of supplying themselves, than by
performing unprofitable and unnecessary journies
either to one or the other of the sea-port towns, unless
attracted there in the hope of obtaining some other
advantage or in the pursuit of some object which can
only be secured where large masses of people are
assembled together, and where skill, intelligence, ca-
pacity, forethought, and labor, are all combined in
promoting every kind of handi-craft and turning the
rudest blocks of natures simplicity into the most
polished brilliancies of art; and making the din and
noise of business and all its attendant excitements
envelope and enshroud in a blissful sheet of exuberant
buoyancy and unsullied animation the apathetic
indifference which seems to exist with respect to
manufacturing enterprise.
In this heedless age of thoughtless inactivity as to
future prosperity, a time may arrive and that not far
off, when it will be almost too late to retrieve, and to
obliterate the consequences of past neglect: when
streets and houses shall have become forsaken—deso-
late and in ruins—it will bean ill chosen time to attempt
to have them re-occupied ; it will be more likely that
some more enterprising parties will start with new
bones and unrelaxed sinews, and change the sites for


more industrious pursuits: there will be nothing incon-
sistent in this, but every thing that can be considered
reasonable and prudent. Parties starting on a new
scene of speculation will take benefit by any failure
that may have attended any previous movements of a
similar character, and only make provision for what
could be considered permanent wants, with regard to
an urban population.
True, it may be said that many of the buildings
which were so hurriedly erected, are composed of
wood, and will be little loss to the owners, particular-
ly on account of the high rents which have been
obtained for two or three years ; so that the first cost
may in many cases be paid back; but that same argu-
ment would exist, if the houses were still to be con-
tinued as the abodes of an industrious and prosperous
people, though not being valuable to the same extra-
vagant extent as heretofore; and any other argument
will only tend to prove that with the loss of the
houses, the value and rent of the land will also be de-
teriorated ; and what will cause them to be much
more so, is the probability of local taxes being levied
for improvements which may not be found wanting at
a future period : on this subject alone it would be well
for those who are most interested in such matters, to
consider well before expensive public improvements
shall have been commenced, if there be any likelihood
of permanent occupation for the inhabitants of the
districts which may be taxed for the carrying out of
such projects.
In all objects of the kind the proper principle of
working should be, first to ascertain if there were a
certainty of constant employment and occupation for
the inhabitants, and then to lay out and carry into
effect all necessary improvements, in streets, roads, &c.
For want of energy, foresight, and skill, cities and
towns in the old world, have become desolate wastes —
and many cases might be cited, where what was not
long a ago the most important portions of a city are
now the most neglected, and their occupants living in


a state of misery and wretchedness. This is the case
at the present time both in London and Dublin ; ener-
gy, industry and skill, have succeeded against apathy
and indolence, and changed the business sites of those
cities; and these are only insolated instances of what
is generally occuring over the older portions of the
globe : therefore Australians should take warning, lest
what can be said of the old, may also be told of this
modern world.
The occupants of towns here may he much more
easily transferred ; —in the old towns of the northern
hemisphere, the inhabitants remained and lived in a
state bordering upon, if not of poverty altogether ;
while the business w T as leaving them; and then it
might be too late to think of following where it existed
in a flourishing condition, and had become a fresh cause
for establishing new theatres of life and action ; but
in this colony the case is different, there is plenty of
room for the inhabitants of a declining district to re-
move to another more prosperous place, and as long
as a rural population shall be wanted, there will be no
necessity for people to congregate in the vicinity of
towns, where there is no chance of employment for
them ; —and it is for the owners of such property to
canvas and consider that subject well, in setting a
value on their several interests.
Without local manufactories, the seaports will only
he of use in the transactions which may be connected
with imports and exports; and according as these will
he increased on account of surplus produce in the
colony, and those lessened by the promotion of local
manufactures ; the towns will be benefited: but if the
system of importing all manufactured goods shall be
continued, it will become easier for a merchant in one
of the interior towns, to import directly to himself,
and thus save the trouble and expense of Melbourne
or Geelong agency.
A good trade in exports will afford extensive em-
ployment for labor, and of course the more labor that
will be judiciously expended in bringing every article


for exportation to perfection the better will it be for
the colony and the towns where that labor shall be
most employed. It therefore appears manifest that
the only way of protecting and preserving the value of
houses and building property in such places as Mel-
bourne and Geelong, is by establishing within them
means by which the suburban inhabitants and the re-
dundant labor can be constantly employed. Then the
capital of the country will be concentrated in the
principal towns, and labor will become valuable, and
be productive of benefit wherever it may be found to
exist and in active operation ; and with it the value of
every other article will be fully ascertained, and then
the subject for consideration will be
THE STANDARD OF VALUE.
This may be considered a subject of very vast impor-
tance ; one upon the proper settlement of which the
future advancement of Victoria will mainly depend.
In all countries a standard of value has to some extent
at least been chosen ; and this from what may be consid-
ered natural productions. Metal from its compact-
ness of easy transport, seems to have been at all
times the favorite standard: —Iron was adopted by
the ancient Spartans —Copper by the Romans: but
Gold and Silver would seem to be those adopted by
most if not all other nations; and these being to a
great extent valued by the money price of corn, the
produce of which depends so much upon labor; —and
equal portions of labor can at all times be purchased
more nearly with equal quantities of corn, (the food
of the laborer) than with equal quantities of gold and
silver, or perhaps of any other commodity.
Gold and silver are more ready values—are more
easily transferred, or exchanged, and are more suited
for banking purposes, and articles more general in
their utility for purposes of barter; but no further.
Corn will always command a more steady value as
compared with, and being a concomitant to labor,
and will enable the possessor of it, to purchase more


nearly the same quantity of the labor of other people.
“ Gold and silver however like every other commodi-
ty vary in their value, are sometimes cheaper, and
sometimes dearer, sometimes of easier and sometimes
of more difficult purchase.” “ The quantity of labor
which any particular quantity of them can purchase
or command or the quantity of other goods which it
will exchange for, depends always upon the fertility or
barrenness of the mines which happen to be known
about the time when such exchanges are made.”—
Vide Wealth of Nations , Book /, Chap. V, Page 13.
So that a fertile field of gold would tend of itself to
raise the price of labor, and thereby to render the
production of other commodities either an impossi-
bility, or of that exorbitant character as to the
expense of labor that they could not be sold or ex-
changed at their true marketable value ; or otherwise
the market price of gold should be reduced so that
labor would still be the criterion of value.
“ The discovery of the abundant mines of America,
reduced in the sixteenth century, the value of gold and
silver in Europe, to about a third of what it had been
before. As it cost less labor to bring those metals
from the mines to the market; so when they were
brought thither, they could purchase or command less
labor, and this revolution in their value, though per-
haps the greatest, is by no means the only one of which
history gives some account.” “ Equal quantities of
labor at all times and places may be said to be of
equal value to the laborer, in his ordinary state of
health, strength and spirits; in the ordinary degree of
his skill and dexterity he must always lay down the
same portion of his ease, his liberty, and his happi-
ness : the price which he pays must always be the
same, whatever may be the quantity of goods which
he receives in return for it; of these indeed it may
sometimes purchase a greater and sometimes a smaller
quantity : but it is their value which varies not that
of the labor which purchases them. At all times
and places that is dear which is difficult to come at or


which it costs much labor to acquire: and that cheap
which is to be had easily or with very little labor.
Labor alone therefore never varying in its own value,
is alone the ultimate and real standard by which the
value of all commodities can at all times and places
be estimated and compared ; it is their real price,
money is their nominal price only.” —Vide Wealth of
Nations , Book 7, Chap,, V, Page 14.
So that in an auriferous country like Victoria, and
where gold may sometimes be very easily obtained, it
should not be considered a real standard of value, as
its own value must be altogether fictitious, as compa-
red with labor in the cost of producing it; gold must
he compared with other commodities, the produce of
labor, and those other commodities must be valued in
comparison with similar commodities which may be
supplied by, or produced from other countries.
Labor therefore it appears evidently, is the only
universal, as well as the only accurate measure of
value, or the only standard by which we can compare
the values of different commodities at all times and at
all places. We cannot estimate it is allowed—the
real value of different commodities from century to
century by the quantities of silver which were given
for them; we cannot estimate it from year to year by
the quantities of corn. By the quantities of labor
we can with the greatest accuracy estimate it, both
from century to century, and from, year to year.
“ From century to century, corn is a better mea-
sure than silver, because from century to century
equal quantities of corn, will command the same
quantity of labor more nearly than equal quantities of
silver. From year to year on the contrary silver is a
better measure than corn, because equal quantities of
it will more nearly command the same quantity of
labor.” — Vide Wealth of Nations , Book 7, Chap. V,
Page 15.
In order to enable the farmers of Victoria to pur-
sue a profitable system of agriculture; it will be
absolutely necessary to fix on something near the


values both of labor and corn ; and those being fixed
and steady, the real and unchangeable value of gold
would be ascertained.
To make a certain amount or measure of corn,
equal to the daily pay of a laborer would bring about
a standard, by which most other commodities could
be valued.
A desire to run upon chance and seek for gold,
might even then and no doubt will to a great extent
always exist amongst adventurers: but that specula-
tive disposition will be at best but ephemeral in its
character, and innocuous in its effect upon the values
of labor and corn, once that they shall have been
steadily fixed.
The seeking for gold will be nothing less than a
pure system of gambling; where many will lose and a
few may win, and can never again be the cause of such
excitement in Victoria as to raise the price of labor.
The values of labor and corn should be shipped in
the same vessel, and should be so determined on, that
they should sink or swim together ; and then the real
resources of this country would be started into exis-
tence ; all are now in embryo —enveloped in a murky
cloud of greedy speculation, and avaricious disregard
for the future prosperity of the colony, or the general
welfare of those who may hereafter feel inclined to
visit her shores.
Let this inauspicious cloud be but removed, and let
the opening dawn of liberty be but encouraged, cher-
ished, and at once satisfactorily brought into active
existence; and let the ship with labor and corn float-
ing upon her pendants be launched ; and if she should
become shipwrecked, or unmanageable and not trust-
worthy ; all the wisdom, knowledge and experience of
past ages will be set at nought and forgotten. But
what has never happened in any other country cannot
occur here, what one country is fit for under certain
circumstances, another country can be made fit for
under equal circumstances ; what one robust healthy
laborer is fit for under any circumstances, another,


robust healthy laborer should be fit for under equal
circumstances, or he would become a useless member
of his fraternity. What one white man can do under
his own suitable climate, another white man should be
able to perform in the climate which suited his con-
stitution and hahits. What one black man is known
to have performed, another black man should be able
to perform under equal circumstances. What one
Chinaman has been found able to perform, there can
be no doubt but that another chinaman could be pro-
cured who would perform the same work. The work
that one horse can be led to do, another horse can be
made to perform. The work that one locomotive
engine can be made to perform, a similar engine can
be made to perform; and almost ad infinitum this
argument might be extended. Therefore it is clear,
that labor is the real standard, not of value but of
produce which brings the value, and in a new country
like Victoria, labor and its produce in corn, should be
the standard of value, —the former being properly
proportioned to the latter, and the latter assimilated
to that of other corn growing countries. Gold and
silver and other representative commodities being
useful for the convenience of exchange and transfer.
CANALS.
The idea of forming canals in this country, will no
doubt be looked upon as chimerical by many, but the
more imaginary it may appear to those who are mere
worshippers' of present gain, the more it should
encourage the steady and settled inhabitants to consi-
der well, the feasibility of a project, which would form
the life-blood veins of glory to Victoria. That ele-
ment, the want of which is at present the greatest
impediment to all improvements—to be made subser-
vient to the domestic purposes of the inhabitants,
would be a master piece of science, —a victory over
Natures’ indifference to the wants and habits of man :
but to change a parched and waterless wilderness into
an active scene of aquatic movement: to form a back


bone and ribs for the country, and to fill the veins
with a fluid of life stirring vigor,—to form arterial
communications by water which is now scarcely ever
seen in summer, (except when rains fall) —to behold
merchandize wafted through the country in vessels
with industry on their prows, where water was pre-
viously almost unknown ; —would in reality establish
the monarchy of science over rude economy, and the
contracted ideas which are formed only for the pur-
poses of mere mercenary or ephemeral speculation.
That canals can be formed is as certain as that the
land exists upon which they would be made ; or that
water could be preserved for the purpose of feeding
them.
The water being preserved in reservoirs for the
general uses of the community —the formation of
arterial canals would not be a matter of much diffi-
culty. ,The country as far as levels are to be consid-
ered, is admirably suited for the construction of
canals. The expenses of their formation would not
be great; raising the banks and puddling w T ould be
the principal; and the expenditure which would be
necessary in the construction of Locks would be com-
paratively small; it may therefore be safely asserted,
that the most economical plan of interior communica-
tion would consist in the construction of canals, in
connection with the artificial reservoirs for a general
water supply.
It may be said, that the rate of transit is slow as
compared with other modes of communication : but
for the purpose of conveying heavy goods only, or
passengers who might not be pressed for time—this
slow mode of travelling should be no substantial ob-
jection ; —there never can be any great necessity for
hurrying on heavy goods at a rapid rate, except in
cases of famine: as in other respects —the convenience
and rapidity of transit would be the same for every
individual who might be concerned in it ; and what
would be suitable for one ; should be equally suitable
for another ; in addition the expense of conveyance by


canal is in comparison with all others, the least; and
a time will' soon arrive when the expenses of
carriage will form a very important item in the trans-
mission of goods :—as soon as the inhabitants of the
interior will be able to supply themselves with food,
the produce of their own localities ; the importer of
food to Victoria must fail in sending such commodi-
ties to the interior, except at very low rates for con-
veyance thither. As soon as the farmer in the interior
shall have it in his power to send surplus produce
to exterior markets, or for export; in order that he
may be able to compete with foreigners, it will be
necessary in the first instance that he should have a
cheap mode of conveyance for his goods: rapidity
w r ould not be a matter of much consideration. Heavy
goods cannot he put into a man’s pocket who might
have it in his power to travel at the rate of twenty or
thirty miles an hour.
Heavy goods can he conveyed as rapidly by canals
as they can by ships of burthen at sea; and to convey
them at a more rapid rate would only end in expense
or injury to the parties concerned. To travel through
a canal at the rate of twelve or fifteen miles an hour
would destroy its banks ; to do the same on a railway
with a heavy goods train would soon break up the
rails. It is therefore manifest, that a moderate
rate of transit is the most economical for the removal
of heavy goods ; and that being the case, canals will
always be the cheapest mode. This leads to the consi-
deration of the advantages of
RAILWAYS.
The formation of main lines of railway in Victoria,
should be an object of the greatest solicitude to all
those who really feel an interest in the welfare of the
country. By railways, cities in the interior will be
founded; and along them at every station, towns will
be started into existence. If heretofore, merchants
became princes, at the sea-port and importing towns ;
a time is fast approaching when by the construction


of main lines of railway, the business of the merchant
prince will he transferred to the interior ; to spread
its radiating influence for the benefit and prosperity
of the country. No matter how prosperous soever
the farming interests may become ; cities and towns
will be established at and near the lines of railway :
and as the population shall increase, the prosperity of
the agricultural interests will tend to promote the ex-
tension and wealth of the cities and towns. In every
agricultural country, the prosperity of a town depends
greatly upon the wealth of the neighbouring farmers:
hut in Victoria, the towns in the interior have been
established, and become prosperous without the aid of
agriculture.
The gold fields have become the sites for future
cities, and towns, and by the aid and impulse which
will be promoted and pushed forward by railway
intercourse; and with the rapid advancement and
improvement of agriculture ; they will have a treble
impetus to become extended, prosperous, and wealthy.
For the uses of cities and towns, railways will form a
most important adjunct; and the towns near them will
to a certainty be increased in magnitude. It is this
which ultimately pays the expenses of a railway:—
the passenger traffic. A railway made solely through
a farming district would not be remunerative, though
all the heavy goods of the neighbourhood were to be
transported on it. Railways are intended for rapid
transit on them, and rapid transit with heavy goods
would seriously damage the rails; therefore it would
be absolutely necessary to charge a higher price (than
the customary rate) for the conveyance of heavy goods
rapidly, and the people concerned in such traffic
would then resort to the old system of common road
conveyance.
Railways for passengers, may have quicker gra-
dients than would he required if intended for the con-
veyance of heavy goods trains: a light train can be
drawn rapidly up a quick gradient, when a heavy
train could not. There is an acknowledged principle


in physical science, that a locomotive may be in full
action, —the wheels revolving, but not moving for-
ward, in consequence of being overstrained by the
weight, and inclination. On the first starting of rail-
ways in England, transit by canals was greatly super-
seded, but it was soon discovered that the railway
companies were the sufferers, on account of the
damage occasioned by heavy traction on the rails.
The heavy goods to a great extent were again for-
warded by canal conveyance, or were transmitted by
railways at a slow pace.
It therefore appears plain, that transit by railway,
for heavy goods, is not the most economical; and that
to make a railway remunerative, passenger traffic
must be solely depended on.
CONCLUDING REMARKS.
Now that the leading features of the industrial
resources of this colony, have been in a greater or less
degree developed, and explained; a question may
arise ; what will he the motive power to be first put,
or brought into action, in order to the accomplishment
of most of those great practical results ? What sub-
stantial proceeding, towards the establishment of
agricultural enterprise, and of every manufacturing
pursuit, in connection with active and energetic life,
should be first started into existence ? What w T ould
a capitalist with a mind brought up and matured to
business habits, say with regard to a great expendi-
ture of capital in the country ? and the answer in each
cas6 will and must of necessity be ; —to provide a con-
stant supply of water, as a preliminary measure to
all great improvements ; without it to commence most
other industrial measures will end in disappointment.
That water which uselessly flows off the land in such
vast quantities ; and which could be so easily preserved
for irrigating and manufacturing purposes: which
when retained would tend to purify and mollify the
atmosphere; would change the face of animated
nature; —the cloud capped thunder and rolling tor-


rents, to midnight dewy freshness, and cause the ger-
minating bud to bloom and blow: and the din and
noise of incessant workings of machinery, to set this
world of the southern hemisphere, in a brilliant blaze
of ever shining light; and such as to cast into a shade,
all the brilliancies of older lands, and more advanta-
geously located people: and thus water one of the
best gifts of Providence to man may be made a natu-
ral blessing to Victoria.
THE END.
GEELONG!
T. BROWN, PRINTER, MOORABOOL STREET.


■
♦
*
• %
• %
•*
•


• ■ *
7
•
' • • -V C
• • t /
1 *
* ; v
i ’. r
’ f.
i
i*
• ■.
0 a s w
• *
• ’ *■-
• • •
, •.;
• ••
< # * 4
' • f
„
V % ; * : J, . "J
? r ’ ■-**. .
.. : . : v r ‘i
A *
% -♦
• £
•« -. . . *
'-'. V * ,
.* * *
v v . •• . , .■ • ...
'
>’ f . .
• . • . • A ,
-■"'V
• • *
• * '
•t **’•' •
