

The Scandinavians in
Australia, New Zealand
and the Western Pacific
BY
J. LYNG
(HARBISON-HIGXNBOTHAM SCHOLAR, MELBOURNE UNIVERSITY, 1Q27)
The number of Scandinavians (Danes,
Norwegians, and Swedes) who in the
course of time have left their native shores
to settle in Australia is little short of
50,000, but as northern Europeans are so
easily assimilated in British communi-
ties, their presence has been little noticed.
In this book the history of the Scan-
dinavians who came to Australia is told
in detail.
The part played by the Scandinavians
in New Zealand and the Western Pacific
has not been dealt with before.
MELBOURNE UNIVERSITY PRESS
IN ASSOCIATION WITH
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS


DEBT TO
A FAMOUS DANE
8y ... H.L.V.
CUGGESTIONS that New Zealand might recruit
immigrants from Denmark if insufficient workers
in special categories are available from Britain recall
the debt this country owes
to the men and women
from Denmark.
They pioneered Dannevirke,
Norsewood and other settlements
in the Wairarapa and Hawke’s Bay,
as well as contributing to the suc-
cessful settlement of the Manawatu
and other districts.
Undoubtedly the greatest Dane
among them was Ditlev Gothardt
Monrad, who had been bishop of
the provinces of Laaland and Fal-
ster before his revolutionary liberal-
ism brought him to the forefront in
1848 as one of the authors' of Den-
mark’s democratic constitution ac-
cepted by King Christian VIII. That
new constitution was the foundation
of parliamentary institutions in Den-
mark, institutions which were firmly
established by 1863 when Monrad
formed his own Cabinet.
He chose a bad time to become a
liberal Prime Minister. A few
months later Bismarck launched his
premeditated attack on a defence-
less neighbour, and the enforced
cession of Schleswig and Holstein
resulted in Monrad’s fall from
power.
Denmark’s loss was New Zealand’s
gain, for Monrad, his great faith
and spirit unbroken, decided to
cross the world and settle in the
primitive backblocks of a country
which, to a cultured western Euro-
pean, must have appeared savage,
crude, and uncivilised in the ex-
treme.
Harsh Years
\\7ITH his wife, son Viggo, and
** daughter-in-law, he arrived in
1865, and after visiting the settle-
ments at Nelson and Wanganui, de-
cided to take up land at Karere, not
far from the then undreamed-of
city of Palmerston North.
Monrad and his family went
through all the trials of those harsh
pioneering years. The Manawatu
River then offered the only high-
way to the holding they had selected,
BISHOP , statesman , pioneer —
Ditlev Gothardt Monrad.
and their household possessions
went to their new home by canoe. A
rough clay whare was their first
dwelling until they could pit-saw
sufficient totara timber for a more
permanent house.
Monrad enjoyed the breaking in
of new land no less than he had
relished the more academic life to
which he was accustomed. If poli-
tical changes in Denmark had not
given him the opportunity of re-
turning to the bishopric of Laaland,
he would almost certainly have
ended his days in Karere.
As it was, his son Viggo remained
to develop the half-cleared acres
which were the nucleus of what is
now one of New Zealand’s most
productive farming areas, and de-
scendants of some of the Danish
families which followed the bishop


into the unknown still farm the
land their forefathers cleared at
Karere.
New Zealand’s Debt
TAESPITE his relatively brief so-
here, New Zealand owes
much to the statesman-bishop who
spent his few leisure moments in
his rough bush . home translating
portions of Scripture into Oriental
languages, and of whom a contem-
porary remarked that “mind was
stamped upon his brow.”
His contribution is that he was
the real architect of the substantial
migration to New Zealand in the
seventies of several shiploads of
hardy settlers from Denmark and
elsewhere in Scandinavia, the van-
guard of the thousands who came
here in the next decade.
The general esteem in which set-
tlers of Scandinavian origin have
long been held by their neighbours
is the best tribute to the success of
the bishop’s migration project.
Priceless Gift
well known is Bishop Mon-
rad's generosity in making the
most priceless gift of art works to
New Zealand which the country has
yet received, including original etch-
ings by Rembrandt, Durer, and
other world-famous artists. After a
long sojourn ih the Turnbull Lib-
rary, the collection passed to the
National Art Gallery just before
the recent war.
One of the bishop’s grandsons,
Mr. Oscar Monrad, still lives in
Palmerston North. A granddaughter,
Mrs. Frieboe-Funch, came back to
New Zealand in more recent years
with her three children, and still
lives in the Hutt Valley. One of her
daughters, Mrs. A. Macfarlane, of
Eastbourne, has four children, who
are thus New Zealand descendants
in the fourth generation of the
Danish bishop to whom this country
owes much.




THE SCANDINAVIANS IN
AUSTRALIA, NEW ZEALAND AND THE
WESTERN PACIFIC




The Scandinavians
in Australia, New Zealand
and the Western Pacific
BY
J. LYNG
(HARBISON-HIGINBOTHAM SCHOLAR, MELBOURNE UNIVERSITY, 1927)
Author of Our New Possession,
Non-Britishers in Australia, etc.
( is{el bourne
MELBOURNE UNIVERSITY PRESS
IN ASSOCIATION WITH
Oxford University Press
Melbourne London Edinburgh Capetown
Bombay Toronto Etc.
1939


REGISTERED AT THE G.P.0., MELBOURNE, FOR TRANSMISSION
THROUGH THE POST AS A BOOK
[copyright]
WHOLLY SET UP AND PRINTED IN AUSTRALIA FOR THE BOARD OF
MANAGEMENT OF THE MELBOURNE UNIVERSITY PRESS, THE
UNIVERSITY OF MELBOURNE, CARLTON, N. ?, VICTORIA, BY D. W.
PATERSON CO. PTY. LTD., jgS COLLINS STREET, MELBOURNE, C.I


Dedicated to the Memory oj
J. A. HEYMAN
Through whose generosity
this book has been published




FOREWORD
MY book Non-Britishers in Australia, published by the Melbourne
University Press in 1927 and re-issued in 1935, describing the
influence of non-British elements on the peopling and development
of this country, was necessarily brief. The contribution by
other races than Anglo-Saxon and the Irish has not been great,
although greater than is generally realized. In the case of the
Scandinavians (Danes, Norwegians, and Swedes), the number who
in the course of time have left their native shores to settle in
Australia would be little short of 50,000, but as northern Europeans
are so easily assimilated in British communities, their presence has
been little noticed.
In this book the history of the Scandinavians who came to
Australia is told in more detail than in the chapter about the
Scandinavians in Non-Britishers in Australia , though, as far as
possible, repetition is avoided, since the earlier work is still obtain-
able. The part played by the Scandinavians in New Zealand and
the Western Pacific has not been dealt with before.
J. LYNCx.
MELBOURNE, AUGUST, 1939.




CONTENTS
Page
Foreword .. .. .. .. • • • • • • • • 7
Introduction . . .. .. .. • • .... n
PART i
Scandinavians in Australia
1. Settling Australia . . . . • . • • • • x 5
2. Scandinavians on the Gold-fields . . • • • • 21
3. Factors Influencing Migration (1871-1914) . . • • 2 7
4. Contribution to Development . . . . . . • • 3 1
5. Church Life . . .. • . • • • • • • 45
6. Societies and Their Origin . . . . • • • • 5 1
7. Scandinavian Press in Australia . . . . • • 61
8. Scandinavian Shipping to, and Trade with, Australia 71
(a) Norway.
(b) Sweden.
(c) Denmark.
9. Scandinavian Consular Service . . . . • • 93
10. Scandinavian Place Names . . . . • • • • 10 3
11. Two Outstanding Danes . . • • • • • • 10 7
12. Joseph Alexander Heyman . . . . • • • • XI 3
PART 2
Scandinavian Migration to Queensland
1. Early Days of White Settlement . . . . • • rl 7
2. The Coming of the Scandinavians . . . . • • 121
3. A Troubled Beginning . . . . • • • • • • 12 7
4. Church Life . . . . • • • • • • • • J 37
5. Social Life . . . . • • • • r 47
PART 3
Scandinavians in New Zealand
1. Their Arrival . . . . • • • • • • • • x 57
2. Racial Influence, etc. . . . . • • • • • •
3. Church Life . . . . • • • • • • • • x 73
4. Publications . . . . . . • • • • * • x 79
5. Two Prominent Danes . . . . . . • • • • r^s
PART 4
Scandinavians in the Western Pacific 191
Conclusion . . . . .. •. • • • • • • 20 5




INTRODUCTION
TO get Scandinavian migration to Australia into focus, let us
review for a moment the main features of European migration
during the last two or three hundred years.
The spearhead, of course, was the great maritime discoveries last-
ing from the latter end of the fifteenth century till towards the end
of the eighteenth. This was followed by political conquests, and
eventually resulted in the wholesale migration which, from the
population point of view, was to transform a large part of the world.
The movement of population from the Old World to the New
reached its highest in the nineteenth century, when many millions
of men and women voluntarily left their homes in Europe to settle
in foreign parts. The Scandinavians alone numbered over three
millions. Broadly, the Spaniards and Portuguese blazed the track
for white settlement in South and Central America ; the Anglo-
Saxons in what was to become the United States, Australia, and New
Zealand ; the French in Canada ; and the Dutch in South Africa.
The Russians spilt over into Siberia. Germany, which was neither a
maritime power nor had an empty Siberia at her back door, con-
tented herself by pushing her surplus population into neighbouring
countries. Italy, for political reasons, was out of the picture, and
the Scandinavian countries were too busily engaged in destroying
one another to find time and man-power for overseas conquest and
colonization. The feeble attempts made by Axel Oxenstjerna and
Christian IV to found settlements in America came to nothing.
Language and culture have followed the flag. The southern half
of America became Spanish and Portuguese, the northern half
Anglo-Saxon, with a French inclave in Canada ; South Africa
British, with an underlay of Dutch ; Australia and New Zealand
British. But racially the population became very mixed.
While the New World was divided politically between five powers,
of whom France and Holland were later eliminated, nationals from
any part of Europe were able to settle anywhere and to take up land
almost at a gift. It required the whole surplus man-power of the
entire Europe to populate and develop these new lands. The prin-
cipal question which the intending emigrant had to ask himself in
the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries was : “Where shall I go ?
Where are the prospects of bettering my lot in life the most promis-
ing ?” They all wanted him.
From the middle of last century emotional nationalism commenced
to develop ; but in regard to immigration, internationalism pre-
vailed. Trade and shipping followed the immigrants and became
international, too, with no tariff barriers and navigation acts to
impede them. The various currencies were stabilized, and London
was the financial centre of the whole civilized world.
This happy state of affairs changed with the rise of the labour
movement in the colonies, which, in the course of time, had become
self-governing nations, and it came to an end with the Great War.


Strangely enough, though the emancipation of the workers was
conceived as an international movement disregarding political boun-
daries, it quickly became nationalistic in its tendencies, the workers
in one country not caring much for the welfare of their comrades
elsewhere. Looking inward instead of outward, its leaders clamoured
for protection of local industries, local labour, restriction of immigra-
tion, and so forth, little realizing that their professed ideal of
Freedom, Equality, and Brotherhood could only be attained through
a world movement.
What has happened since the Great War is familiar to all.
Chastened by the unprecedented depression, which commenced in
1929, and lately by political developments in Europe, there is to-day
less emotional nationalism and infinitely more economic nationalism.
Formerly people talked nationalism and practised internationalism,
then for a while it became just the opposite. At present inter-
nationalism is neither talked nor practised. Every nation is sur-
rounding itself with barriers, tariff walls, and all sorts of restrictions,
as if it desired to close itself out from the rest of the world.
In consequence of the new spirit of nationalism, migration from
Europe has come to a standstill. Practically, there is no place where
immigrants are wanted to-day, though there are many places where
they are sorely needed, including Australia.
Should it be that the exodus from Europe to the New World is a
closed chapter in the history of man, it has served the purpose of
creating a number of self-conscious, virile nations, with an advanced
civilization in countries previously given over to scattered tribes of
more primitive races.
These new nations now say : “We are enough in ourselves —
indeed, our unemployment figures point to the fact that we are far
too many. We don’t want any more !”
Those of us who have retained faith in human progress believe
that the economic depression into which not just a country here and
there but the entire world was plunged was the Ragnarok before the
dawn of a new and better world. What this will be is still in the
lap of the gods, but it does seem likely that ultimately the freedom
of people to move from one part of our globe to another will be
restored, and that migration—albeit controlled migration —to ensure
a more even distribution of the world’s population, will be resumed.
Birth control to arrest increased numbers in over-populated countries
will be a feature of the new order, and will render migration on a large
scale unlikely in the future. Meanwhile the birth-rate shows some
strange vagaries. In Australia it has fallen from 43 per 1,000
inhabitants in 1864 to less than 15 in 1938.
Maybe some of these young, thinly-populated countries which now
have closed their doors to desirable immigrants will some day cry
out for them in vain.


PART i
SCANDINAVIANS IN AUSTRALIA




SETTLING AUSTRALIA
THE Dutch had discovered Australia, named it New Holland
and turned it down. They had seen little more than the
north-eastern fringe which appeared barren, inhospitable,
and thinly populated by a dejected-looking race of poverty-
stricken savages. Compared with the East Indies, with their
luxuriant vegetation, their spices, and intelligent, hard-working,
teeming population, New Holland must indeed have seemed
valueless. The coming of the Dutch, from the point of view of
populating this new continent, was negative. Still, they did a
great deal of coastal exploration, and generally Australian
history commences with the Dutch navigators. It is therefore
quite logical to begin a history of the Scandinavians in Australia
with their association with Dutch exploration. The following
is a reprint of an article from the Australian Scandinavian
journal Norden, 22/7/1939, written by H. P. Hansen ;*
The first authenticated visit of any Scandinavian to Australia was
when Johannes Bremer, of Copenhagen, came here with Captain
Willun de Vlaming, late in December, 1696. Captain de Vlaming
and his party were the first known white men to explore the lower
reaches of the Swan River, and they landed on, and named, Rottnest
Island. After leaving Rottnest Island, de Vlaming, with his ship,
Geelvinck, anchored off Cape Inscription, at the northern end of Dirk
Hartog’s Island, where Captain de Vlaming removed a pewter plate,
nailed to a post in the year 1616 by Captain Dirk Hartog. In place
of this plate de Vlaming affixed another plate, which is still extant.
The inscription on de Vlaming’s plate shows clearly that his first
assistant, that is, the second in command of the Geelvinck, was
Johannes Bremer, of Copenhagen. The earliest authenticated visit
of any Scandinavian ship to Australian waters dates back to the year
1718, when, from records found in Batavia, it was reported that the
Danish frigate, Fredensborg Slot, had sighted the group of islands off
the north-west coast, subsequently named the Montebello Islands.
The captain and crew of the Fredensborg Slot were undoubtedly the
first to report the existence of these islands, although it was not
until nearly one hundred years later that they were named
Montebello.
The English navigator, Captain Cook, discovered the south-
*H. P. Hansen served in the Air Force of the Australian Imperial Force. Shortly after his return
to Australia he became associated with the airways established between Perth and the settlements
along the north-west coast of Western Australia. In 1921 he, Kingsford-Smith, and Major Brearley
comprised the crew of the first aeroplane to fly along the north-west coast to Derby. On the return
flight the plane crashed at Cape La Touche Treville, and Hansen, having been in the north-west
before the war, set off on foot to try and get to the overland telegraph line. He got to La Grange
Bay Telegraph Station. A motor-boat set out from Broome ; it developed engine trouble and they
were picked up by the pearling schooner Mina, of which the skipper, Captain Kristian Kristiansen,
turned out to be a Dane.


eastern and eastern parts of the continent in 1770. From his
ship he observed the fertile, heavily-wooded coastal belt. He
found the climate to be pleasant, reminding him of southern
Europe ; and, without hesitation, he hoisted the Union Jack,
and annexed the country for His Britannic Majesty, naming it
New South Wales.
Following the British annexation of Australia came the ques-
tion of populating and developing it. 1 his problem had solved
itself in America, whither adventurous spiri ts, and persons perse-
cuted for holding unorthodox religious beliefs, went on their
own account. The long distance to New South Wales and the
slow means of transport rendered voluntary immigration out of
the question. It had to be forced, if a beginning were to be
made at all.
The American War of Independence had closed America as
a dumping ground for British and Irish law-breakers, and
resulted in the jails in Great Britain being lamentably over-
crowded. The thought naturally suggested itself to the authori-
ties that felons could be sent to New South Wales, and, as
pioneers in this empty land, actually render inestimable service
to their native country. So Captain Phillip was put in charge
of three shiploads of convicts, and a penal settlement was
founded at Port Jackson in 1788.
The peopling of Australia from this small beginning ; the
introduction of sheep ; the coming of the squatters, and the rise
of the wool industry ; the trickling in of free immigrants with
capital, and others ; the exploration to find new pastures for
the rapidly increasing flocks ; the extension of the boundaries
of New South Wales ; the splitting up of the continent into six
colonies ; the discovery of gold with its resultant influx of
immigrants from all parts of the world ; the gradual develop-
ment of agriculture ; the merging of the six colonies into the
Commonwealth of Australia —all this is common history and
need not be gone into here. What we mainly are concerned
with is the number of Danes, Norwegians, and Swedes who went
to Australia, and what they did there.
In Non-Britishers in Australia I have shown the contribution
rendered by foreigners towards peopling and developing
Australia, as distinct from the English, Irish, and Scotch. They
represent about 10 per cent of the blood flowing in the veins of
the Australian population, and of the 10 per cent 2 per cent is
Scandinavian. The contributions to the economic develop-
ment of the country would have been more than 10 per cent
except for the fact that the capital employed has been almost


exclusively British. Nevertheless they have played an honour-
able part, and amongst the foreigners Danes, Norwegians, and
Swedes, when taken collectively, have always been prominent.
If we use the rough divisions often employed in regard to
the economic development of Australia, viz., the period of cheap
convict labour and of squatterdom, gold-digging, decline of gold
production, and rise of agriculture in various forms—we find
that Scandinavians have always had a hand, though in conse-
quence of their small numbers compared with British and Irish
people, their importance must not be exaggerated.
Let us begin with the discovery of New South Wales
The voyage of Captain Cook was undertaken partly for
scientific purposes. For this reason Cook was accompanied by
a wealthy devotee of scientific research, Sir Joseph Banks, at
whose instigation the Swedish naturalist, Dr. Solander, a pupil
of the celebrated Linnaeus, was attached to the expedition.
Cook, Banks, and Solander formed the inner council of the
party, and Captain Cook’s journal bears ample testimony to the
importance of the advice received from his two learned com-
panions. When the Endeavour had anchored at Botany Bay,
the three aristocrats of the famous voyage were taken ashore—
an event portrayed in a painting at the New South Wales Art
Gallery, and, at the inauguration of the Commonwealth, repro-
duced on the back of the Australian pound notes. A Scandinavan
was thus one of the first white men to set foot on New South
Wales soil. Another Swedish scientist, Sparman, accompanied
Captain Cook on his second voyage. Finally, the Danish seaman,
Jdrgen Jorgensen, came to Sydney in 1801, in the surveying
vessel, Lady Nelson , rose to the rank of mate, and, as such, took
part in the founding of Hobart and in the surveying and charting
of the entire Australian coast line carried out by Captain
Flinders.
Though it is perhaps nothing to be proud of that amongst the
convicts our nations were also represented, such was neverthe-
less the case. Foreigners brought before a British court for
felony were deported with native-born offenders. The notorious
Jorgen Jorgensen, known in Australian annals as the Convict
King, was deported to Van Diemen’s Land in 1826 for pawning
some furniture belonging to his landlady. In a list in the
national library in Canberra of convicts dispatched in the
Portsea in 1838 are two Scandinavian names —Samuel Wolff, a
watchmaker from Copenhagen, for unlawful pawning, and
William Linivold, a Swedish ship's-carpenter, for stealing a gun.
The latter was sentenced to fourteen years’ penal servitude. A


perusal of such convict rolls as are still extant would, no doubt,
reveal more ; but the three names mentioned are sufficient to
establish the fact that amongst Australia’s earliest unwilling
pioneers was a sprinkling of Scandinavians. This may explain
the occurence of Scandinavian names such as Petersen, Lundin,
Jacobsen, Olsen, and others in early New South Wales Postal
Registers.
Jorgen Jorgensen is the most remarkable Scandinavian who
-ever came to Australia. Books have been written about him ;
an Australian lady, Mrs. Vernon Williams, honorary secretary of
the Australian Literature Society, has dramatized him, and he
has been accorded a lengthy space inth e Australian Encyclopedia.
Jorgensen was born in Copenhagen in 1780 and trained for the
sea, sailing mostly in British vessels. In 1801 he came to
Australia, where he rose to be chief officer in the surveying
vessel Lady Nelson. He returned to Denmark during the war of
1807-14, and was put in charge of a gunboat. In an encounter
with a British man-of-war he was taken prisoner to London.
While on parole he was engaged by an English merchant to take
a vessel to Iceland, loaded with provisions intended for barter.
Being obstructed by the Danish governor, he arrested him and
proclaimed himself dictator of Iceland. On this becoming known
in England, he was brought back and arrested for having left
the country while on parole. In the latter end of the Napoleonic
War he was employed by the Government on the Continent as
a spy. After the war he knocked about London for some years.
Having become addicted to gambling, he got into money diffi-
culties and pawned some furniture belonging to his landlady,
with the result that he was banished to Van Diemen’s Land.
In the beginning of the year 1826 Jorgen Jorgensen arrived in
Hobart, one out of 150 convicts, and was appointed to a clerk-
ship in a Government office. Routine work of that description
did not suit his restless temperament, and he applied for a
transfer to the service of the Van Diemen’s Land Company, a
wealthy corporation, two of whose directors had favoured him
with letters of recommendation to their principal representative
in the colony. He was attached to several parties that had been
organized for the purpose of exploring and opening up the
company’s extensive territory, and his adventures by flood and
field, amongst blacks and bushrangers, constitute not the least
stirring chapter in his chequered career.
We find him, on returning to civilization again, editing a
newspaper in the metropolis for a short time, but he soon
returned to the more congenial roving life of the country. On


the nomination of Sir George Arthur, he proceeded to the dis-
trict of Oatlands to take up the joint appointment of constable
in the field police and assistant clerk in the local court. His
district was no less than 150 miles in circumference, and its
scattered inhabitants were terrorized by hostile blacks and
sanguinary white desperadoes. Many of the latter he ran down
and captured, exhibiting conspicuous pluck and perseverance
and a characteristic disregard of danger and difficulty. The
local magistrates were enthusiastic in their praises of his un-
tiring energy and zeal in the pursuit of the outlaws. The Hon.
Thomas Anstey, M.P., chief magistrate of the Oatlands district,
publicly testified to his ‘honesty and fearlessness in the dis-
charge of his arduous duties/ The Hon. M. Forster, M.P.,
declared that he had ‘rendered great services to the community
by his successful pursuit of bushrangers/ and several other
justices of the peace bore witness from personal knowledge that
he had been chiefly instrumental in breaking up notorious gangs
of marauders. Still, all the while he was rendering these valuable
services, he was himself nominally a prisoner, but on opening
the Government Gazette one day he had the satisfaction of seeing
that stigma removed by the official proclamation of his pardon.
For his services he received a grant of 100 acres of land, with
a promise from the Colonial Secretary that this area would be
increased by a further free gift if he turned it to good account.
By holding out this inducement the authorities hoped that he
would be led to settle on the soil, but, with his customary
recklessness, no sooner did he obtain possession of his land than
he turned it into ready money, which he soon spent. A legacy
of £SOO in money and property, which he received from relatives
in Denmark, slipped through his fingers after a similar fashion.
He added to his thoughtless imprudence by wedding a terma-
gant wife. His latter days were passed in privation and obscurity,
and he closed his extraordinary and eventful career in Hobart
Hospital in 1845.
With the growth of population, and of the wool industry,
foreign nations commenced trading with Australia. Scandinavian
vessels in Australian ports can be traced back to the latter end
of the thirties. During the forties they became fairly common,
increasing in number from year to year. With foreign shipping
came the concomitant foreign-born stevedores, consisting of
sailors who had deserted from their ships. Danes, Norwegians,
and Swedes were well represented on the wharfs in Sydney,
Melbourne, and Adelaide in the forties —years before the gold
discoveries brought so many of our people to Australia.


Altogether there is reason to believe that the proportion of
Scandinavians in this country to English, Irish, and Scotch was
about the same in the hrst half of the nineteenth century as at
any time during the second. Still, as the total population was
small, their number cannot, in itself, have been great.


SCANDINAVIANS ON THE GOLD-FIELDS
The circumstances which caused the Scandinavians to be
more numerous on the Australian gold-fields than nationals
from any other European country save Great Britain, Ireland,
and Germany, are as follows :
First, there was a growing demand for Baltic timber in
Australia. Scandinavian sailors were much in evidence in the
various ports. The temptation to abscond from their ships and
make tracks for the gold-fields was irresistible. It is a well-
known fact that a considerable proportion of the floating popula-
tion at the mines consisted of runaway sailors.
Another factor was the nearness of Denmark to Hamburg.
The Danish dominion at that time stretched to the very gates
of that seaport. Hamburg—not Copenhagen—was the commer-
cial and financial centre of the Jutland peninsula—from the
Skaw to the river Elbe —and the opportunity of getting a ship
there for foreign parts was ever present.
A third cause is to be found in the fact that the Danish army
was disbanded in the autumn of 1851, after a three-years’ war
to quell the rebellion of Holstein and southern Slesvig. There
was the old difficulty of discharged soldiers, after a war, settling
down again to a quiet, ordered life. Consequently, many took
the road to Hamburg, and shipped for Australia and other
places where adventure and fortune beckoned them. Then came
1864. The war was lost by Denmark. The purely Danish
North-Slesvigers henceforth had. to take their orders from
Berlin, and their sons to don the detested Prussian militarv
uniform. To escape from this ignominy the young men com-
menced to migrate —mostly to America, but many to Australia,
where the lure of the gold-fields was still very strong.
It is not now possible to ascertain the number of Scandinavians
who were on the Victorian and New South Wales gold-fields.
The first census, worth calling by that name, was not taken till
1861, and it was very incomplete at that. Danes, Norwegians,
and Swedes were grouped with ‘other Europeans.’ Only
English, Scotch, Irish, Germans, French, and Americans were
enumerated separately.
‘Other Europeans’ in the two colonies numbered 9,680, of
whom 7,000 were in Victoria. Of these ‘other Europeans’ only
Scandinavians, Italians, and Swiss appear to have counted for
anything. If we assume that 25 per cent of the total were
Scandinavians, we get roughly 2,500. Of these, presumably the


2,000 would be in Victoria, most of them at the mines. The
correctness of this estimate is borne out by an examination of
the number of Lutherans in Victoria and New South Wales in
1861, and by assuming that the proportion of Germans adhering
to the Lutheran faith, compared with those embracing Roman
Catholicism, was the same as it is in Germany to-day.
But the census, naturally, took no account of those who had
succumbed to typhoid fever, dysentery, enteric fever, and the
other maladies prevalent in the unsanitary mining camps, nor
of those who had left the country again—a few after having
made their fortune ; a great many disappointed and disgusted.
Of the latter, the sailors would, in most cases, return to the sea,
and some of the remainder —the non-sailors —work their passage
back to Europe. As a matter of fact, if it had not been for a
cyclical movement of that sort, the ships anchored at Port
Melbourne and Port Jackson would never have got away again.
Bearing in mind this continual coming and going, and those
perishing on the various fields, the number of Scandinavians,
who, for shorter or longer periods, took an active part in this-
stirring chapter of Australian history, can safely be put down
at round about 5,000.
When the writer arrived in Melbourne in 1891, former
Scandinavian gold-diggers were quite numerous in that city,
some having retired, and others gone into business. From these
it was learned that there had been Danes, Norwegians, and
Swedes at every one of the diggings one might mention ; that
they had been numerous on the principal gold-fields, such as
Ballarat, Bendigo, and Castlemaine ; and that later they had
played an outstanding part in the minor diggings of Gippsland.
In Ballarat they had been sufficiently numerous to form a
Scandinavian Society in 1857, erect their own hall, and even
discuss the advisability of calling a Scandinavian-Lutheran
minister.
In Bendigo they had formed no society, but as late as the
sixties, thirty to forty Danish gold-diggers would forgather on
Saturday nights in the old Prince of Wales Hotel, conducted by
a countryman by the name of Hansen, and about the same
number in the new Prince of Wales Hotel, also conducted by
a Dane, Mr. Jensen.
Along Campbell’s Creek, Forest Creek, Fryer’s Creek, and the
other diggings around Castlemaine, there had been more than
two hundred Scandinavians in the fifties, and their number
increased during the sixties. Most of them hailed from North
Slesvig. One, Hans Appel, had an hotel, the ‘Golden Hope,’ at


Fryer’s Creek ; his wife, Esther, looking after the hotel while-
he worked on the puddling machine. Afterwards Appel bought
the Five Flags Hotel at Campbell’s Creek. This became a
second home for the young Slesvigers, and half a hundred could
be seen there at a time. Esther, who was the only Danish
woman on the field, mothered them all. Besides the hotel, there
were two shanties at Campbell’s Creek conducted by Slesvigers,,
Claus Gronn and Hans Moller ; and a combination of general
store, drapery shop, and post office, conducted by another Dane,
Carl Tolstrup, who was a kind of unpaid legal adviser to the
gold-diggers, and afterwards became a leading citizen in
Castlemaine. There was a hay-and-corn store and a blacksmith
shop owned by Thomas Petersen, and named Copenhagen.
Finally, there was a Danish tailor and a Danish butcher. In
the seventies, when alluvial gold-digging became less profitable,
many of the later arrivals went to New South Wales tank-
sinking, house-building, and fencing for the Riverina squatters ;
but they always returned to the Five Flags Hotel and to
Campbell’s Creek to spend their Christmas.
In Gippsland the Scandinavian gold-diggers have left a record
of themselves in the form of hve names : The Rose of Denmark
Reef, the Scandinavian Reef, Walhalla (at one time a pros-
perous mining town, though this prosperity ceased as the gold
production declined), Jorgensen’s Creek, and Danes Creek, both
tributaries to the Wentworth River.
No name is so closely associated with gold-mining in Gippsland
or figures so largely in old mining records as that of the Jorgensen
brothers —Niels, Laust, Andreas, and Hans. They were the
spearhead of the Haunted Stream gold-rush, and they discovered
and opened up gold-bearing quartz reefs sufficient to have made
them multi-millionaires if it were not for the patchy nature of
the gold deposits in Gippsland. As it was, they were eventually
able to retire in comfortable circumstances and to bring out
from Slesvig their parents and a younger brother and sister, the
old folk having been unhappy under Prussian rule.
In Tasmania none became better known in mining circles,
than Peter Balstrup, a Dane. He arrived in Tasmania in 1881
and, together with A. M. Monk (also a Scandinavian) went
prospecting, discovering the Argus tin mine, on the Wyniford
River. In 1885 Balstrup was connected with the first exploring
party that discovered the Zeehan field. In the following year
he was connected with the floating of the Crown Lyell, Prince
Lyell, South Tharsis, and the Central Mount Lyell companies.
Prior to his death he was largely interested in the North-Eastern


tin mines. He was a director of several companies, and a large
shareholder in the Tasmanian and Mount Bischoff mines.
Balstmp died in consequence of a cold contracted while pros-
pecting on the west coast for new mineral fields. The news of
his death was received with profound regret, as perhaps no one
had done more than he to foster Tasmania’s mining industry.
His name on the directorate of companies gave investors a
feeling of confidence. The Launceston Stock Exchange was
closed for an afternoon out of respect to the memory of the
deceased when he died in 1905.
What has been told about the Scandinavians on the Victorian
gold-fields has been gleaned from conversations with the old
gold-miners. There are hardly any printed records from which
to draw information. A leaflet lent to me many years ago con-
tained extracts from a minute book, and described a festive
dinner arranged by Scandinavians in Ballarat in 1869 to cele-
brate the marriage of Crown Prince Frederik of Denmark, the
later King Frederik VIII, to Princess Louisa of Sweden and
Norway. The promoters were permanent residents of Ballarat,
but as many gold-miners as could be present attended the
dinner. A Swede who shortly before had had a miraculous
escape from a flooded mine after having been in water to his
armpits a whole day was specially brought to Ballarat to partake
in the celebration. Some of those who had come together for
the occasion bore distinguished old names, such as Tuxen,
Baron Haxthausen, Bruun, Count Wedel Jarlsberg, Lofven,
Asche (father of the celebrated Australian actor, Oscar Asche),
and others, showing that young men of the best Scandinavian
families had been attracted by the glamour of the Australian
gold-fields.
Two books by a Norwegian, Carl A. Olsen, who came to
Victoria in 1853 and returned to Norway in 1861, tell a great
deal about the life on Australian gold-fields, but very little about
the Scandinavians there. An exception is the tragic fate of a
Swede, who went under the name of Robinson, which is narrated
in some detail. Robinson had been mate on a Swedish vessel,
but had left it when in Melbourne to go to the Avoca gold-field.
Dame Fortune smiled most graciously on him, and in the flush
of his luck he married the handsome daughter of a fellow gold-
digger, an ex-convict from Tasmania. Later on, at the
Maryborough gold-field, Mrs. Robinson developed loose and
intemperate habits, gradually dragging her husband down to her
own level of depravity. At one of their periodical quarrels,
when both were under the influence of drink, Robinson dropped


his better-half head-first down an empty shaft, and she broke
her neck. Though he had the undivided sympathy of all who
knew him or were acquainted with the circumstances of the
case, Robinson was found guilty of murder and shortly after
hanged in the Castlemaine Gaol.
Claus Gronn, in his memoirs, published in the Nor den in the
beginning of this century, tells about his own personal experi-
ences on the Castlemaine diggings and his varying degrees of
luck, leaving the impression that the game was a never-ending
gamble —a sort of perpetual lottery, with an occasional big prize
and a number of smaller ones, tapering down to a mere living
or sometimes not even that.
Other such old-timers may still be met with. Thus when
recently I visited Daylesford I met a relic of the past, an
octogenarian, A. Christensen, living very much as the old
alluvial gold-diggers lived, still wielding pick and shovel, but,
be it noted, for the purpose of converting the water power of a
nearby creek into electricity with the ultimate object of ex-
tracting the gold contained in the water. Everybody in
Daylesford knew ‘old Chris.’
Towards the end of the sixties the deposits of alluvial gold
commenced to show signs of exhaustion, and the number of
Scandinavian gold-diggers gradually declined, till at the end of
the seventies not a great many were left.
One naturally asks : What became of them all ?
To begin with, not every Dane, Norwegian, and Swede at the
mines was engaged in gold-digging. Probably all had a shot at
it when they first arrived. Digging for gold, like digging for
diamonds and diving for pearls, has a peculiar fascination about
it —but it is hard work and, as said before, not always rewarded
with success. The discomfort of tent life —of wielding pick,
shovel, and tin dish under the broiling Australian sun, of trailing
over dusty roads from gold-rush to gold-rush, at the journeys’
end more often than not to find all the best claims already
pegged out, soon dispelled the romance of gold-digging. So
those who were adapted for business or in their homeland had
acquired a craft, on the first opportunity (for instance, after a
run of good luck) withdrew from it, to grasp the easier and
more assured existence derived from serving the gold-diggers
and the communities in general which had congregated around
the mines. Hence we find in Ballarat, Bendigo, Castlemaine, and
other erstwhile purely mining towns, but now more or less pros-
perous centres in agricultural districts, Scandinavians established
in business as storekeepers, produce merchants, hotel-keepers,


sharebrokers, insurance agents, boarding-house keepers, and
so forth, or following a trade of some sort. Occasionally
they did remarkably well. A Dane, Jacob Cohn, became a
brewer in Bendigo on a large scale, was twice elected mayor,
and remained until his death one of Bendigo’s most prominent
citizens. His brother, Mortiz, founded a brewery in Talbot, and
was elected mayor there. Peter Alroe, a veteran from the sea
battle of Heligoland, became mayor of Sebastopol. The list
could be added to.
Of the other Scandinavian gold-diggers, some followed the
gold-rushes to New Zealand, Queensland, and even to the sun-
baked Northern Territory ; but a much greater number settled
on the land, and in time became successful farmers.
Just as at the mines the Scandinavians had been interspersed
amongst people from Great Britain, Ireland, Germany, and
many other countries, and only here and there had shown a
tendency to keep together, they now disappeared in the multi-
tude trekking from the mines to the soil. About a dozen Danish
gold-diggers settled around Castlemaine, particularly at
Muckleford. Another batch settled near Numurkah, in the
Goulburn Valley, while about half a dozen went to the Mitta
Mitta Valley, but the greater part appear to have gone to
Gippsland. Thus about thirty Danes, mostly from Campbell’s
Creek, and some Norwegians and Swedes, selected land in the
Korumburra district. At East Poowing arose a compact colony
consisting of thirteen Danish families and one Norwegian. It
took the advance party of this settlement two weeks to travel
the 68 miles from Melbourne. The families of those who were
married arrived within the next couple of years. In 1880 a
school was opened in a little wooden structure presented by one
of the selectors. There were then thirty schoolchildren. The
school was also used for meetings and for worship. When in
1893 1 was afforded an opportunity to visit The Danish
Settlement in Gippsland,’ by which name the colony by then
had become publicly known, the process of clearing the forest
was still in progress ; but all the settlers had comfortable home-
steads, and appeared to be prospering. A year before, a co-
operative butter factory had been opened in the nearby Poowing,
with one of the Danish settlers as chairman of directors.


FACTORS INFLUENCING MIGRATION (1871-1914)
An even greater factor in populating Australia than had
been the gold discoveries in Victoria and New South Wales was
the assisted migration to Queensland. (This is dealt with in
Part 2of this book.) Directly and indirectly it increased the
population of that colony from about 30,000 in 1861 to approxi-
mately 384,000 in 1891. But, although Queensland paid the
passage money for the immigrants, a great many were quickly
lost to her, the tendency to wander and the cooler climates of
New South Wales, Victoria, and Tasmania causing large num-
bers to trek south. This applied as much to those born in
Denmark, Norway, and Sweden as to the rest. While the
Scandinavians in New South Wales and Victoria in 1871
numbered only about 4,000, they had increased to upwards of
10,000 by 1891. A percentage of these people would have come
directly from their home country ; but as they had to pay their
own fare to New South Wales and Victoria, and had it paid for
them to Queensland, the percentage would have been small. It
is therefore safe to assume that the efforts of Queensland to
attract immigrants resulted in some 10,000 Danes, Norwegians,
and Swedes coming to Australia.
At later periods some minor efforts were made by Queensland,
the Commonwealth, and Victoria to attract Scandinavian
immigrants.
In 1899 the Queensland Government again commenced to pay
the passage money for Scandinavians, and, particularly in
Denmark, to advertise the opportunities Queensland offered for
dairy experts and young energetic men of the farmer class.
Some years after the inauguration of the Commonwealth the
Federal Government evinced considerable keenness to get
Scandinavians to come to Australia, using as its medium the
Scandinavian journal published in Melbourne. Some special
issues of the Novden , richly illustrated, setting forth Australia’s
many advantages for Danish, Norwegian, and Swedish immi-
grants, were subsidized by the Commonwealth.
Shortly before the Great War, when Victoria launched her
extensive irrigation schemes, the director of the Irrigation
Board, Elwood Mead, an American who had seen the achieve-
ments of Scandinavian settlers in the United States, strongly
advocated the encouragement of migration of Scandinavian
farmers to Victoria. He succeeded in persuading the Govern-
ment to send immigration agents to Denmark and Sweden.


Simultaneously a school paper, descriptive of Victoria and its
resources, was prepared by the Education Department, in the
Danish and Swedish languages, it being part of the plan to send
copies of this school paper to all the country schools in Denmark,
Norway, and Sweden. Meanwhile war broke out, and the school
paper never got beyond being set in type. The agent who had
gone to Sweden returned to Australia, after having received a
somewhat hostile reception by the Swedish press, which was
opposed to migration. The one who went to Denmark remained
there, eventually severing his connexion with the Victorian
Government. The total result of this immigration scheme was
two or three score of young Danish farmers. These went to
different parts of the State, some of them settling in the Maffra
district, where they took a prominent part in the revival of the
beet-sugar industry, with which they were familiar in their
homeland.
After the conclusion of peace, the necessity of increasing
Australia’s small population forced itself upon Australian
statesmen. How could five million people on the outskirts of a
large continent uphold a ‘White Australia’ policy in the face of
distressingly over-populated China and Japan ? The latter, at
the peace conference, had clamoured for equal treatment in
matters of immigration.
A bold immigration policy was embarked upon, aiming at
transferring Great Britain’s surplus population to this country,
England to provide the necessary loan money. The previous
chauvinistic tainted war spirit which had swept over Australia
was followed by a blend of common sense, unaggressive pat-
riotism, and fear. New settlers’ leagues, to strengthen the
hands of the Government and take a practical interest in the
immigrants as they arrived, arose in every State capital, and
soon had ramifications all over the country.
With an unofficial but kindly eye to Danish, Norwegian, and
Swedish immigrants, I was requested to sit on the committee
of the New Settlers’ League in Melbourne, of which Sir James
Barrett was president and Senator Guthrie vice-president, and
I made use of the opportunity to agitate for the invitation to
settle in Australia being extended to young men and women
from the Scandinavian countries. In 1923 I was going on a
visit to my native land, and to make a start with Danish
immigrants, backed by the New Settlers’ League, I applied to
the Closer Settlement Board of Victoria for a tract of suitable
land for a Danish settlement of about forty families, the settlers
to come from Denmark at a later stage. The request was


SCANDINAVIANS IN AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND
granted, and an area of considerable dimensions earmarked for
the purpose in South Gippsland. It had previously been
occupied, but most of it had reverted to the Crown, owing to
the general drift of the rural population to the cities. It was
offered on the usual liberal terms for Crown land. The Govern-
ment would build houses and provide money for fences and
roads. In return, each Danish family should be in possession of
not less than £4OO when landing in Melbourne.
Things were booming in Denmark when I arrived there, and
there was no desire amongst people with capital to migrate. In
addition, the Danish consular representative in Australia, who
happened to be in Denmark, reported unfavourably on the
project to the Foreign Office. It consequently fell through.
In the middle of the twenties a great influx of Southern
Furopeans to Australia commenced. Particularly, the cane-
flelds of Queensland were invaded by them. British labour was
largely displaced, and many cane farms passed into their hands.
Whole districts were on the point of being Italianized. Yielding
to a popular outcry against these aliens, who in America had
proved so difficult to assimilate, the Government had the
Immigration Act amended, making it a condition that each
non-British immigrant should possess £4O on landing in
Australia.* Not to give offence to any particular nation, this
restriction was made applicable to all foreigners. When the
economic depression set in, causing a great deal of unemploy-
ment here as elsewhere, the Immigration Act was again
amended. The inducement given British immigrants to come
to Australia ceased, while non-Britishers were denied entry,
unless provided with a special permit.
Except to Victoria, and to a lesser degree New South Wales
during the fifties and sixties of last century, and to Queensland
during the seventies and eighties, Scandinavian migration to
Australia has always been light. For many years it has been
insufficient to make good the wastage caused by deaths and
departures. Special inducement was required to make them
come. When that inducement ceased the long journey and the
expense it entailed made them stay away. The stir caused in
Europe by the gold discoveries in Western Australia in the
nineties was not comparable with that which had resulted from
the gold discoveries in Victoria in the fifties. It is true it
increased the population of that stagnant, empty colony con-
siderably, and brought the Scandinavians there" up to about
I his has since been increased to £ 2OO, but the Minister of the Interior has discretionary power to
reduce the amount, which is generally done in the case of Scandinavians.


1,500 ; but most of these came from Victoria, New South Wales,
and Queensland.
The number of Scandinavians in Australia was highest in
1891, with about 16,500. The Danes numbered 6,400, the
Norwegians and Swedes approximately 3,800 and 6,300 respec-
tively. Of the Danes, 25 per cent were women ; of the
Norwegians and Swedes only about 9 per cent.
They were distributed amongst the different colonies as
follows :
Queensland, 5,000 ; New South Wales, 4,900 ; Victoria, 4,600;
South Australia, 1,400 ; Tasmania, 325 ; and Western Australia,
275.
At the censuses taken in 1891 in the different colonies,
Norwegians and Swedes were in some cases grouped together.
However, an estimate based on available data gives about three
Norwegians to five Swedes.
In 1933 the Scandinavians had declined to 11,059. Of these
the Danes numbered 4,484, the Swedes 3,895, the Norwegians
2,680.


CONTRIBUTION TO DEVELOPMENT
Primary Industries
The Scandinavian gold-diggers who, after some years of
excitement on the gold-fields and a varying measure of success,
settled on the land, have been referred to. Their number
gradually increased, particularly in Queensland. In 1921, when
there were 14,000 Scandinavians in Australia, 40 per cent were
recorded as living in rural districts. They were too few to
greatly influence agricultural development, although in odd
localities they may have raised the standard of farming. James
Bonwick, the Australian historian, having, I imagine, agricul-
tural development in his mind, says : The progress of Australia
is in no small degree due to Germans and Scandinavians, who
make admirable colonists.’ Perhaps their influence has been
greater than I give them credit for.
One thing is certain, through Sir Edward Knox and the large
number of Danes he employed as mill managers and analysts,
and the large number of Danish, Norwegian, and Swedish immi-
grants who took up cane-growing, the Scandinavians played
a notable part in the development of Australia’s sugar industry.
Another field in which they made their influence felt was in
modernizing and developing Australia’s dairying industry. This
was described at some length in Non-Britishers in Australia ,
and will therefore not be gone into here. Sufficient to say that
scores of Danish dairy experts, in the course of time, have
migrated to this country and brought their knowledge of modern
dairying with them.
'{'heir contribution to the development of fruit growing, now
playing a considerable role in Australia’s economy, has not been
great. Still, it is worth mentioning that when the two Chaffey
brothers left California to found the flourishing fruit-growing
centres of Mildura and Denmark they brought with them, as
their right-hand man a Norwegian by the name of Johnson
(Johansen), who is still remembered, and that the service
rendered by the late C. A. Nobelius was outstanding. Born in
Sweden, Nobelius arrived in Victoria in 1872. In 1884
founded at Emerald a nursery, which gradually grew to be the
largest fruit-tree concern under the Southern Cross. He also
imported many new varieties from other countries. His goods
were sent to every part of Australia, and also found ready sale
in New Zealand, and even in India, South Africa, and America.
Besides his nursery, Nobelius in 1908 bought 600 acres on the


Tamar River in Tasmania, where he planted 40,000 fruit trees,
thereby creating the largest one-block, privately-owned orchard
in the world. His fruit-packing shed was capable of handling
250,000 cases of fruit annually. Later on he commenced flax
growing, and before his death in 1921 he had produced 100 tons
of the valuable Phormium Tenax, the first of its kind grown in
Australia.
The Scandinavian Sailors
The Scandinavian sailors, though now declining in number
and of minor importance, in former days were constantly met
with in Australian waters and on the waterfront. They ranged
from the perspiring coal trimmer to the dignified master mariner
on the bridge. They included such extraordinary characters as
Jorgen Jorgensen and J. S. Christensen, better known as
German Harry, whose exploits as a navigator, pearler, labour
recruiter, and smuggler gained for him the unbounded admiration
of the once lawless north, and the Norwegian, Engelhardt
Jorgensen, for many years a popular captain on the Australian
coast, who in 1890, with a compatriot, performed the extra-
ordinary feat of sailing from London to Adelaide in a life-boat
designed by himself.
The now fast-disappearing sailing vessels were to a great
extent manned by Scandinavians. Along the little dock in
Melbourne, where Tasmanian timber schooners once were
plentiful, the Scandinavian lingo was almost daily speech.
Others took to fishing, with which the Norwegian sailor in
particular is familiar from his childhood. The Australian fisher
population was in no small measure recruited from Scandinavian
sailors who had deserted from their ships. Incidentally, many
settled on the land or in the cities, and have been eminently
successful. One, a former ship’s cook, L. Hansen, was for years
a leading builder and contractor in Melbourne.
From amongst their weather-beaten ranks rises nobly the
figure of H. C. Dannevig, who gave his life in an endeavour to
create an Australian fishing industry,
H. C. Dannevig, a native of Norway, after having in his
native land and in Scotland gained experience in fish culture
and deep-sea investigations, in 1902 received an appointment
as fishery expert to New South Wales. In 1908 he was appointed
Commonwealth Director of Fisheries, his work being to examine
and report on the fish in Australian waters from every angle
bearing on their economic utility and value, and also to under-
take hydrographic survey work, etc., to ascertain the nature


of the sea floor, depth of water, currents, and sea temperatures.
Under Dannevig’s guidance a special ship, the Endeavour , was.
built for the work. Up to November, 1914, ninety-eight cruises-
were undertaken in the eastern and southern waters. On the
ninety-ninth cruise the Endeavour failed to return to port. All
that is known regarding the catastrophe is that Dannevig and
all hands on the ill-fated vessel met their doom in Bass Strait.
SeCON IMRY INDUSTRIES
In the furtherance of secondary industries Scandinavians,
have done valuable pioneering work. Thus S. Hartman,
managerof James Bell & Co.'s machinery department, Melbourne,,
pioneered the making of dairy machinery in this country, and
much of it is now being made in Australia. Axel Holmberg,
another Dane, who, together with his father and several
brothers, was confronted with the problem of clearing his
land in the quickest and cheapest way, invented the motor-
driven cross-cut saw. With other tree-clearing implements,
portable bush hre extinguishers, and concrete mixers, it is now
turned out in great numbers by the New Record Engineering
Works, which afterwards was established in Melbourne by the
Holmberg family. Another of the Holmbergs, Fritz, on moving
from the bush to town, discovered fuel was a heavy item, and
his inventive genius produced an air-conditioned heating
arrangement, now manufactured in his own factory. By this,
invention the biggest room is effectively heated at a small cost.
C. Raunsback pioneered an improved sink of stainless steel, and
is making it in his own factory in South Melbourne. C. Mauritzen,
in Western Australia, having discovered suitable clay for the
manufacture of porcelain, founded the Calyx Porcelain Co., but
his untimely death and the competition from Europe and Japan
frustrated the attempt. The art of making milk powder, now
a payable Australian industry, was introduced to this country
by a Swede, M. Eckenberg, a brother of the inventor. Another
Swede, O. E. Nycander, pioneered the manufacture of com-
pressed yeast. A Dane by the name of Moller, who had been
employed in Hellesen’s big factory in Copenhagen, taught
Australians how to make dry-cell batteries. Through the efforts
in Sydney of a Swedish engineer, John Sonnerdale, the manu-
facture of gear equipment for motor cars was commenced in
Australia, and in the course of time his engineering establish-
ment has grown enormously.
A few Scandinavian civil engineers have come to Australia,
either on their own initiative or representing firms in their


native country. S. Koeford and Bendiksen represented
Christian! & Nielsen, Copenhagen. S. Haunstrup, originally
the representative of Danelith, now has his own practice. As
for builders and contractors, they are met with everywhere.
A few Scandinavian technicians have in the past been
brought to Australia. The late Henning Helin came in con-
nexion with the establishing of paper-making in Australia. The
services of others were obtained when Australia commenced
making her own safety matches and brewing lager beer. Of the
latter, a Dane in Brisbane, S. Stenberg, M.Sc., is still associated
with the industry. In connexion with the making of cement, a
Danish expert, Mr. Tonnesen, M.Sc., spent some years in
Australia representing F. L. Smith in Copenhagen. In 1939 the
Victorian Government sought the advice of two Swedish
hydraulic engineers, B. Hellstrom and Dr. Samsiol, before em-
barking on the costly Kiewa River hydraulic scheme, and only
last year the service of another Swedish civil engineer, Professor
P. G. Hornell, was sought by the New South Wales Government
to advise on the difficult task of repairing the Burrinjuck weir.
Within recent years three or four Danish scientists have been
brought to Australia. Munch-Petersen, M.Sc., was engaged by
the New South Wales Government as a dairy bacteriologist and
dairy chemist. His services were afterwards secured by the
Federal Government, and he is now a member of the Council
for Scientific and Industrial Research, being attached to the
division of animal health. H. L. Jensen, B.Ag., was also
engaged by the New South Wales Government and attached
to the Linnean Society. P. Grage, M.Sc., was brought out from
Denmark by Compressed Yeast Co. in Sydney. Helms, B.Ag.,
is attached to the Forestry Department in Western Australia.
In the educational world a Danish lady, Greta Hort (Hjort),
M.A., University of Copenhagen, Doctor of Philosophy, Girton
College, Cambridge, is Lecturer in Philosophy and Principal of
the University Women’s College, Melbourne.
Art
It stands to reason that, in a new country like Australia,
with but a handful of people to develop its economic resources,
there was for a long period little time to enjoy art. With the
exception of musicians, such talented persons arriving from
Europe generally had to seek other avenues for earning a
livelihood. As the population increased and prosperity came
their way, the position gradually changed, and to-day Australia
has both art galleries and art schools, conservatories for the


training of musicians and singers, and at least the beginning
of book-publishing houses.
Artists in Australia of Scandinavian birth are easily counted.
The first appears to have been a Danish portrait painter,
Niels Habbe, who, in the sixties of last century, settled in
Sydney where he eked out a precarious existence by his art.
His brother, Alexander, a veteran from the Holstein Rebellion
in 1848-50, made his debut as a theatrical painter in the gold-
mining town, Ballarat, and afterwards developed into a leading
scenic artist in Melbourne, only rivalled by a Slesviger named
Henningsen, who was the first to introduce transformation
scenes to Australia.
Peter Hansen, a native of Aarhus, in the nineties and the
beginning of the present century, became outstanding in decora-
tive art. Many of the finest ceilings and wall decorations seen in
Melbourne to-day are of his design. During a sojourn in Munich
for the purpose of attending the Royal Academy there, he
copied Rubens’s ‘Day of Judgment’ which, on his return to
Australia, was hung in Melbourne’s art gallery. Of portraits
from Peter Hansen’s brush, may be mentioned one of a former
Lieutenant-Governor of Victoria, Sir John Madden ; another
of Jacob Cohn, of Bendigo ; and a third of an old Danish gold-
digger and war veteran, Claus Gronn.
The name of Oscar Fristrom, a Swede, is closely associated
with early art in Queensland. Starting out in life as a sailor,
he settled in Brisbane, where he developed his natural gift for
pictorial art. Most of his paintings, including landscapes, sea-
scapes, and portraits, are in private collections. One of his
portraits, ‘Duramboi,’ a white man who lived for many years
amongst the blacks, is in the art gallery of Brisbane. Mr.
Fristrom was one of the founders of the Art Society of
Queensland, and its vice-president for a number of years. Later,
a second art society, the Society of Artists of Queensland, was
formed, and he was elected president.
In connexion with plastic art expressed in gold, probably no
one in Australia has reached a higher level than Julius Hogarth
(Hougaard). Born in Copenhagen, he was trained as a gold-
smith, receiving tuition in plastic art from the famous sculptor,
Bertel Thorvaldsen. In 1852 he migrated to Australia, and went
to the gold-diggings, but after a while established himself in
Melbourne and Sydney as a jeweller and diamond setter. In
1864 he was commissioned to make a golden casket for Princess
Alexandra of Denmark in commemoration of her marriage to
the then Prince of Wales. An illustrated description of the


casket was contained in the Melbourne Illustrated Post for
March, 1864. The following is a brief extract :
‘The casket to be presented by the ladies of New South
Wales to H.R.H. the Princess of Wales reflects the highest
honour upon our fellow colonist, Mr. Julius Hogarth, a native
of Denmark, from whose atelier so many beautiful objects have
emanated from time to time. The casket is made of solid gold,,
weighing upwards of 100 ounces/
The figures, reliefs, and ornamentation of the casket represent
Australian fauna and flora, to the description of which half a
column in the newspaper is devoted. It ends with the remark :
Tt is, perhaps, the most perfect thing of the kind ever
designed and manufactured in Australia/
It is also worthy of mention that, commissioned by the
Government of Victoria, Hogarth designed and executed the
relief of St. George and the Dragon, which appears on the gold
sovereigns minted in Australia.
Music
It is probable that the first Scandinavian musician to reach
Australia was a Swede by the name of Johan Lundborg.
He arrived in Melbourne in 1853, where he became the
leading clarinet player. He was attached to several theatrical
companies, and at the age of 77 was still playing in the orchestra
of the Princess Theatre. He claimed to have introduced the
bass clarinet to Australia, and to have assisted, without fee, at
526 charitable concerts.
In the seventies and eighties, a Madame Simonsen was promi-
nent in musical circles in Melbourne as an operatic star and
singing teacher. Her nationality is unknown to me, but the
name suggests Danish or Norwegian origin. She was the leader
of the Simonsen Italian Opera Company when, in the eighties,
a young Swedish immigrant, T. O. Stenmark, was afforded an
opportunity to sing before her. Stenmark possessed a rich bass
voice, and it pleased Madame Simonsen so much that he received
an engagement in the opera. In 1888 he joined the Williamson,
Garner, and Musgrove Comic Opera Company. Eventually he
took up dentistry, which he found to be more profitable than
the stage.
About the same time two Danish sopranos, Mesdames
Steinhauer and Ebba Holm, both trained in Copenhagen,,
arrived in Melbourne. Madame Steinhauer had migrated to
New Zealand with her husband, a medical practitioner by the
name of Bahnsen. Dr. Bahnsen died in the Dominion very


shortly after their arrival, and Mrs. Bahnsen proceeded to
Melbourne, the leading musical centre in Australia, to make a
living there by her art. Under her maiden name, Steinhauer,
she became a favourite concert singer and the most fashionable
singing teacher of her day. In time she married the English
composer and organist, Mr. Albert Mallinson. In the middle
of the nineties Mr. and Mrs. Mallinson left Australia, and only
twice since did they visit this country —under engagement to
give a series of concerts in the principal Australian and New
Zealand cities.
Ebba Holm also attained success as a singing teacher, and
occasionally appeared on concert platforms. She had come to
Melbourne with her husband, Herman Christesen, a business
man from Copenhagen. Being unsuccessful in establishing a
business in Australia, Mr. Christesen started dairy farming in
the vicinity of Melbourne. He died shortly after, and Mrs.
Christesen continued the enterprise. Such are the vagaries of
life —particularly of immigrants —that she, brought up in a
refined home in Copenhagen and trained as a singer, became
an excellent dairy farmer.
Johannes Elmblad, a Swedish bass with European fame,
visited Australia and gave concerts. He married an Australian
lady.
To those contributing to Melbourne’s musical life in the latter
end of the nineteenth century should be added three
Scandinavian pianists—Miss Schultz (Norwegian), Mrs, Esther
Clausen (Danish, a sister of the once world-famous violinist,
Frida Schiitte), and Caroline Olsson (Swedish). The latter, as
Miss Lindstrom, had previously been outstanding in Adelaide,
and conducted a music shop there.
In 1900 a Swedish singer, Madame Agnes Janson, came to
Australia from Covent Garden in London as prima donna of a
visiting British grand opera company. She made herself
immensely popular particularly through her rendering of
Carmen. In 1906 she received an appointment as chief instructor
in singing at the Conservatorium attached to the Melbourne
University, a position she occupied with distinction for twenty-
one years. In recognition of her art the late King Oscar II of
Sweden bestowed upon her the Litaris et Artibus Medal.
During recent years the Swedish-born composer, Magnus
Lagerlof, for many years organist to the Swedish Church in
South Melbourne, but now retired, has devoted most of his
time to extending knowledge of Scandinavian music amongst
Melbourne music lovers. Through his influence in musical


circles, a number of concerts have been given with exclusively
Swedish or Scandinavian programmes, including several of his
own compositions.
Before Lagerlof s time the music of the three great Norwegian
composers—Grieg, Kjerulf, and Sinding—and the Danish com-
poser, Niels Gade, were already known in Australia, and their
names seldom omitted from concert programmes. Their com-
positions were, and are still, obtainable in all leading music
shops ; but had it not been for Mr. Lagerlofs enthusiastic
efforts Scandinavian composers of a later date would have been
unknown to the Australian public.
In recognition of the service Magnus Lagerlof has rendered
the music of his native land he was, in 1926, made an Associate
of the Royal Swedish Academy of Music, and in 1928 created a
Knight of the Distinguished Order of Vasa.
The influence of our people on the musical life in other parts
of Australia has been less noticeable. It should, however, be
mentioned that a Dane, by the name of Larsen, was at one
time bandmaster of Brisbane's Military Band ; that another,
Hagen Kohlenberg, as pianist, has won a reputation in Sydney ;
and also that a Danish impresario, Hugo Larsen, has been
instrumental in bringing several world-famous singers and musi-
cians to perform in Australia. Amongst these may be mentioned
Joseph Hislop, Scotch by birth, but brought up in Sweden.
In conclusion, it is worth mentioning the influence of
Scandinavian music in Danish, Norwegian, and Swedish homes
in Australia, wherever there has been the money for a piano
and children to learn to play it. Probably in every one of these
homes Scandinavian compositions and songs have been received
from relatives in the old country.
How can the extent of that ennobling influence be measured ?
And might not also the songs and music by Scandinavian com-
posers and song writers, rendered for more than half a century
in our churches, societies, and at festive gatherings, have made us
better men and women, with benefit to the community generally.
Literature and Journalism
In contrast to artists and musicians, the writers have been
handicapped by difficulties of language. Before the foreigner
could make himself understood he had to acquire an alien
tongue. For the need of everyday conversation this may be
within the easy reach of the average non-British immigrant,
but to write the language is a different matter. Nevertheless, a
great many foreigners in Australia have acquired the written


language sufficiently well for ordinary business purposes, and
have proved themselves able to hold their own with the com-
mercial class of British origin. A few hundred words correctly
spelt and used suffices for this purpose. When, however, it
comes to competing with the educated, scholarly Britisher, who
may have command of upwards of 10,000 words with all the
idioms and nuances of the English language, it is evident that
the foreigner is at a disadvantage. To write newspaper articles,
pamphlets, or books of a reasonably high standard the easy and
efficient use of language is obviously essential. When we hear
of some one being conversant with half a dozen languages it
does not mean that he or she can write a letter, let alone an
essay, in any one of them. Writing for the public is an art
requiring years of preparation commenced early in childhood.
I, myself, having battled with the English language for more
than forty years, admit, with regret, my imperfect use of it.
Under such circumstances it is not to be wondered at that
non-Britishers have contributed so little to Australian literature
and journalism. Rather, there is cause for surprise that they
should have made any contribution at all.
Regarding Scandinavians, it is safe to say that the first
Scandinavian in Australia to use the English language as a
vehicle for his thoughts was Jorgen Jorgensen, the ‘Convict
King/ or ‘ex-King of Iceland.’ He was a contributor to one of
the earliest journals in Hobart, and even for a short while its
editor. He wrote amongst other things (mostly translations
from Danish) The Future of Tasmania, which is mentioned in
his autobiography published in Van Diemen s Land Annual ,
1835 and 1838.
From the fifties and sixties come two translations from Danish
by W. Luplau, published in Ballarat, The Reformation in
Denmark and The Agricultural Teacher.
During the same period appeared in Australian annuals an
occasional story by Alexander Habbe and others.
In the eighties appeared a book by a Danish immigrant, Mr.
Whitemeyer, entitled Missing Friends. It was published in
London, and described the writer’s experience as an immigrant
in Queensland.
In the nineties a former Danish storekeeper on the Victorian
gold-fields, Valdemar Bannow, wrote and had published by the
Government of that colony Immigrant Guide and Victoria
Socially and Matertally.
In the twentieth century the Danish lady, Miss Marie Bjelke-
Petersen, has made a name for herself as a fiction writer. She


has written Ihe Captive Singer, Dusk, The Immortal Flame,
Jewelled Nights, The Moon Mistrel, The Monsoon Music, and
The Rainbow Flute. These books have been published in London
in about 200,000 copies, and some of them translated into other
languages. Jewelled Nights has been filmed.
My own contribution to Australian literature has been more
modest and mostly of an historical character. In 1907 I pub-
lished a patchy and somewhat incomplete account of the doings
of Scandinavian immigrants in Australasia ; then followed a
bush story, 7 eddy Wilkin s Trials ; Our New Possession (refer-
ring to former German New Guinea), Island Films, Non-
Britishers in Australia (awarded a prize by the Melbourne
University and re-issued in 1935). An historical novel, The Road
to Canberra, has appeared in Norden in serial form. The history
of Scandinavian migration and settlement in Australia, New
Zealand, and the Western Pacific has likewise been published in
the Scandinavian ]o\\rr\dlNorden, and now appears in book form.
Two books by Scandinavians in New Zealand, Pregnant
Yesterdays and (heerful Y ester days are referred to under
Scandinavians in New Zealand.
Regarding contributions to journalism, four names deserve
mention, viz., Fejlberg, J. H. Lundager, T. Hytten, and C. M.
Lindergren.
Of Fejlberg, a Dane, little is known, only that he was sub-
editor of the important Melbourne daily, the Age, in the
seventies.
Lundager, also a Dane, originally a photographer, became
proprietor of Mount Morgan Argus, editing it himself for a
number of years. Having sold the Argus, he took over the
Mount Morgan Chronicle. In addition he wrote articles for
Queensland’s several Labour papers. About the miners’ com-
plaint, phthisis, of which he made an exhaustive study, he
wrote more than 200 articles for the Queensland press.
Hytten, a native of Norway, was attached to newspapers in
Adelaide and Hobart. Studying in his spare time he eventually
took a degree at the Hobart University and became professor
in economics there. He is considered one of Australia’s foremost
economists of the present day, and several problems of national
importance have been referred to him for examination. His
latest contributions to journalism are articles in the Economic
Journal of Australia and New Zealand. Some years ago he was
appointed economic adviser to the Bank of New South Wales,
which position he still holds.


Lindergren, a Swede, who is a graduate of the Sydney
University, is editor of the Swedish-Australian Trade Journal.
Needless to say, he is a fluent English scholar. In his sphere of
commercial journalism he is probably second to none in
Australia.
My own dabbling in journalism, like my work in the literary
field, generally has been mainly a hobby. Most of my articles
in the Australian press have dealt with former German New
Guinea and with Australia’s population problems, and have
afterwards been incorporated in my books.
To Australia’s scientific literature the most outstanding con-
tributor is H. I. Jensen, a native of Denmark, Doctor of Science
of the Sydney University. Dr. Jensen has written extensively
on the geology of Queensland and the Northern Territory, and
on political economic questions. His best-known work is Rising
Tide of Labour.
It is also worthy of mention that Mrs. Harris (Miss Clio
Jensen, M.A.) has translated and had published in Australian
journals short stories of Scandinavian authors, such as Selma
Lagerlof, Henrik Pontoppidan, and others, and that H. W.
Blom is engaged in translating a number of popular Danish
folk-songs, some of which have appeared in Norden.
But the total contribution by Scandinavian immigrants to
Australian literature weighs little compared with that rendered
by descendants of Scandinavia. We need only mention the late
Henry Uawson (Larsen), son of a Norwegian sailor, whose
name appears destined to become to Australia what the name
of Robert Burns is to Scotland. Another popular Australian
author, Edward Sorensen, is also of Norwegian descent.
In connexion with the topic dealt with in this chapter it
might not be out of place to mention briefly a few of the more
important books written by Scandinavians who have visited
Australia. Amongst Cannibals , by Carl Lumholz, is the work
of a Norwegian naturalist, who spent the years 1880-84 amongst
aborigines in Queensland. The book was afterwards translated
into English, German, and French. Then there is Austr alien,
Natur och Kultur, by the Swedish geologist and economic
geographer, Professor Gunnar Anderson.
In Savage A ustralia the Norwegian anthropologist, Knut Dahl,
who spent a couple of years amongst the aborigines in
Western Australia, describes his experiences.
Various scientific and popular treatises have been written by
the Swedish naturalist, Dr. Eric Mjoberg, who in 1910-n led
SCANDINAVIANS IN AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND


an expedition to the northern parts of Australia for the purpose
of collecting specimens of Australian fauna and flora.
Australian, by J. L. Saxon, is the work of the editor of a
widely-circulated Swedish weekly. He visited this country in
1929.
Under Sydkorset (Under the Southern Cross) is by the Danish
publicist, Olaf Link.
It may be of interest to mention that a young naval officer,
Carl Skoglund, who visited Australia in the Swedish frigate
Eugenia in 1851, wrote an account of Sydney, and that a
Norwegian gold-digger, Carl Olsen, as previously mentioned,
wrote two books, published in Oslo more than sixty years ago,
about life on the Victorian gold-fields.
Gymnastics and Sport
This year the centenary of the death of Professor Ling was
commemorated in Sweden. To mark the occasion a congress was
held in Stockholm at which representatives from many parts
of the world were present. Professor Ling invented the system
of physical culture and health exercises now practised in every
civilized country, though here and there slightly modified for
climatic reasons. The system was introduced into Australia
through a number of Scandinavian immigrants, of whom the
two brothers Bjelke-Petersen are the best known. They started
institutes in Melbourne and Sydney. After a while the elder of
the brothers, Christian, was appointed by the Defence Depart-
ment as chief instructor in physical culture, and in this capacity
he trained a large number of teachers, who gradually brought
the system into every training camp and every public school
throughout Australia.
Medical massage, an offshoot of the Ling system, was first
practised in Australia by Scandinavian immigrants who had
been trained in Sweden, Norway, or Denmark. Most of them
have since passed away and they have been followed by
Australian practitioners. The popular Swedish masseuse in
Melbourne, Madame Abjornson, is an exception.
The introduction of the popular winter sport, ski-ing, was
due to Scandinavians. Skis were first used some forty years ago
by Norwegian miners in Kiandra, New South Wales. A
Norwegian lady, Miss Samsing, in charge of Mt. Buffalo Chalet,
who had served as a nurse in the Australian Imperial Force,
imported skis from Norway. Thus the sport commenced in
Victoria.


Scandinavians in Public Life
No foreigners assimilate so rapidly with the British as the
Scandinavians. They learn the English language quicker and
to greater perfection than all others, which may explain their
readiness to drop their mother tongue. In Australia it is quite
an exceptional occurrence for the Scandinavian language to be
passed on to the second generation, even where both parents
are Scandinavians. For this reason Lutheran congregations
on a Scandinavian language basis did not endure. Of about
a dozen such, founded in Queensland during the seventies and
eighties, only one had survived at the end of the century.
The Nor den, the only Scandinavian journal published in
Australia, is largely printed in English. The journal some years
ago offered a prize for the best original story written by a
Scandinavian in his own or in the English language. Out of
18 stories submitted 2 were written in Danish, 2 in Swedish,
and 14 in English. It will be seen that language is no hindrance
to the Scandinavians entering public life in their adopted
country, and since the public institutions in their homeland
and in Australia only differ in detail, they do so to no small
extent. A list of those who have been municipal councillors
would be a long one. Scandinavians have occupied the mayoral
chair in Eitzroy, Sandringham, Bendigo, Sebastopol, Sale,
Wonthaggi, Hobart, Bankstown, Townsville, Mt. Morgan,
Gladstone, and elsewhere, and they have occasionally been
members of State Parliaments. On two occasions Scandinavians
were selected as candidates for the Senate. J. H. Lundager, a
founder of the Queensland Labour Party, was one of Labour’s
chosen candidates for that State at the Federal election in 1907.
Dr. Harold Jensen enjoyed a similar honour in 1925. Owing,
however, to a setback of the Labour Party at these two elec-
tions, neither was successful. A Scandinavian, N. Nielsen, was
for a period Minister of the Crown in New South Wales. A
Swedish lady, Hilma Molyneux Parkes, was one of the foremost
champions in Australia for the emancipation of her sex. She
was vice-president of The Women’s Suffrage League in New
South Wales, and the first president of The Women’s Liberal
League, an institution which she was instrumental in creating.
Scandinavians in the Australian Imperial Force.
Owing to no statistics being available regarding place of birth
of the soldiers who served in the A.I.F. during the Great War,
the number from any particular part of the world can only be


estimated. The Scandinavian contribution may have been
approximately a thousand, about 6 per cent of the total number
of Danes, Norwegians, and Swedes in Australia. They enlisted
freely. No less than fifty-two members of the Danish Club in
Melbourne joined the A.1.F., of whom thirty-seven were natives
of Denmark. The same willingness to risk their lives, for what
they believed to be a good cause, was shown by sons of
Scandinavians. One old Dane in Melbourne, Hans Hansen, had
five sons and a grandson serving in Gallipoli and France, three
of whom were killed, and cases of Scandinavians with three sons
in the war were quite common. Several Scandinavians obtained
commissions, though none are known to have risen to a higher
rank than that of captain. The interpreter in German attached
to Admiral Patey’s staff, when German New Guinea was cap-
tured, was a Scandinavian, and so was the pilot taking the
troopship to Rabaul. A Dane who served in France, Corporal
J. Jensen, was awarded the Victoria Cross.
The Second Generation
According to the census of 1921, in the case of 4,424 native-
born Australians, both parents were Scandinavians and 32,057
had a Scandinavian father and 5,273 a Scandinavian mother,
the other parent, with few exceptions, being British.
Of Australians who on the father’s side are of Scandinavian
descent several have attained prominence. These include
besides Henry Lawson and Edward Sorensen, Oscar Asche, the
talented actor ; J. Jorgensen, the celebrated artist (son of the
previously-mentioned Captain Englehardt Jorgensen) ; Sir
Adrian Knox, former Chief Justice of Australia ; Sir Charles
Rosenthal, who ended third in command of the A.LF. ;
Brigadier-General Sir Carl Herman Jess ; M. B. Hansen, who
died as Director of Education, Victoria ; E. L. Sodersteen,
designer of Australia’s War Memorial ; J. K. Jensen, Controller
of Munitions Supply Board ; Hon. F. Hagelthorn, Minister for
Agriculture in the Watt-Peacock Ministry, Victoria ; Aug.
Jensen, Minister for the Navy during the Great War ; and
many others.


CHURCH LIFE
The first person in Australia to preach the gospel in a
Scandinavian language was a Swedish gold-digger by the name
Wideman, who in his homeland had qualified for Holy orders.
On whatever gold-field he happened to be, he gathered
Scandinavian fellow gold-diggers to religious service on Sundays.
As a strange contrast to Wideman’s self-sacrificing labour of
rendering religious comfort to early immigrants from Sweden,
Denmark, and Norway, years after he died (utterly destitute,
in some public institution in Victoria), relatives in Sweden took
steps to recover the large fortune which, according to para-
graphs in Swedish newspapers, poor Wideman was supposed to
have left.
The next Scandinavian preacher we hear of was a Slesviger
by the name of Hansen, married to a Danish lady, Miss
Jorgensen, a sister to the notorious Johanne Jorgensen, who,
having in South Australia had her face disfigured by the kick
of a horse, donned male attire and for the rest of her life posed
as a man, selecting land at Heathcote, Victoria, and entering
the Victorian Light Horse, in which she served almost to her
death, when her true sex was disclosed.
The Hansen family in 1859 came to Melbourne from Adelaide,
where they had been members of a German—Lutheran congrega-
tion. Being of a religious turn of mind, and speaking Danish
and German with equal ease, Hansen became a lay preacher,
preaching on alternate Sundays in Danish and German, in a
little hall in William Street.
In 1870, through the influence of the then Consul for Denmark,
Norway, and Sweden, I. B. Were, the Government made a free
grant of land in West Melbourne for a Scandinavian church and
parsonage. At a meeting convened by Consul Were, trustees
were elected. Most of the Danes, Norwegians, and Swedes in
Melbourne at that time were probably poor, nor can they have
been very numerous, the majority being at the gold mines, so,
as the gift carried with it the obligation to erect a church, at a
subsequent meeting of Scandinavians it was decided to hand
the land back to the Government.
In 1880 a Norwegian-Lutheran Church organization in the
United States sent one of its ministers, Lauritz Carlsen, to
preach the gospel to resident Scandinavians in Melbourne
and to visit Scandinavian sailors. The latter were getting
numerous, Melbourne having become the centre of the Norwegian


and Swedish timber trade with Australia. A congregation was
organized three years later with Lauritz Carlsen as its pastor,
and a building fund inaugurated in the hope of the congregation
some day getting its own church. From Melbourne the ever-
restless Pastor Carlsen paid occasional visits to Sydney,
Adelaide, Ballarat, Bendigo, the Danish Settlement inGippsland,
and other places where Scandinavians were met in any number,
fn 1887, to settle a dispute which had arisen in his old congrega-
tion in the United States he returned to that country.
For the next two or three years the congregation was without
a minister, and only occasionally religious services were con-
ducted by a Swede, Mr. Forsell, who afterwards went to
Morocco as a missionary. As nobody heard from Mr. Carlsen
it was taken for granted that he was not returning.
In 1890, through the efforts of one of the elders, Ihorkel
Faroe, who was on a visit to his native land, a Norwegian
minister from Christiania (now Oslo), Soren Pedersen, a graduate
from the Theological Faculty of the University there, was called
to serve the congregation.
Shortly after Pastor Pedersen had taken charge, Pastor Carlsen
unexpectedly returned. Finding his old position Filed, he pro-
ceeded to Sydney to found a Scandinavian-Lutheran congrega-
tion there. In this he failed, and therefore went back to America.
The church services were held in the now demolished Literary
Institute, the same little hall as had been used by Mr. Hansen,
and afterwards by Pastor Carlsen, but it soon proved to be too
small for the steadily growing congregation, and an arrange-
ment was made with the Church of England, whereby the
services were transferred to the old St. James’s Grammar School
in Bourke Street.
A petition to the Government for a site for a Scandinavian
church had already been made in 1880, but had been turned
down ; it was repeated shortly after Pastor Pedersen’s arrival,
but with no better result.
Undaunted by the rebuff, the congregation doubled its zeal
to raise funds for the purchase of a site and the erection of a
church. An annual bazaar, with sale of gifts provided by the
ladies, was held in the Athenaeum Hall, culminating in a big
concert with Scandinavian tableaux in the Hibernian Hall,
arranged by the Danish-born wife of the Belgian Consul, Dr. de
Vick, in collaboration with the Danish singer and singing
teacher, Madame Steinhauser. It was graced by the presence
of the Governor, Lord Hopetoun, and both from the artistic
and Fnancial point of view was a great success.


Occasionally the building fund was augmented by donations,
of which the most substantial came from Svend Foyen, the
Norwegian whaling king in Arctic waters, who, in the middle
of the nineties, sent a vessel to the Antarctic to investigate the
possibilities of whaling there.
Altogether the five years Pastor Pedersen laboured amongst
the Scandinavians in Melbourne were a period of growth, deep
piety, and resolution.
As a counter-attraction to the big racing carnivals, picnics
were arranged, and to take sailors and immigrants away from
the hotels a temperance and debating society was founded.
Through the generosity of the Norwegian timber merchant,
Otto Romcke, a reading-room was opened in William Street,
close to the wharfs, and provided with books sent out from
Norway, as well as newspapers from each of the Scandinavian
countries. There, too, Pastor Pedersen conducted a free labour
bureau for the good of Scandinavian immigrants.
The Danish settlement in Gippsland was made an annex of
the congregation in Melbourne, and visited once a month.
The economic depression following on the burst of the land
boom, and the closing of most of the banks in 1894, made it
exceedingly difficult for the congregation to raise Pastor
Pedersen’s modest salary, and, being a married man with a
family, he accepted a call in 1895 from a congregation in
Christiania.
For a while a Swedish lay preacher, Axel Nilsson, was in
charge of the congregation, and the various institutions asso-
ciated with it. Simultaneously inquiries were made in Norway
and Sweden as to the possibilities of getting a minister out for
the small salary the congregation was able to pay. The most
favourable offer was received from Sweden, where a foreign
mission organization ‘Fosterlandsstiftelsen,’ offered to send one
of their ministers, the congregation contributing £75 annually
to his salary. This offer was accepted, and towards the end of
the following year the new minister, Pastor Hultmark, arrived.
Karl Hultmark’s work was hampered in the beginning by the
Grammar School being required by St. James’s congregation
while their church underwent lengthy renovations. After having
for a short while held their services in the school’s gymnasium,
these were transferred to St, Patrick’s Hall. In 1898 the
Scandinavians bought the Congregational Church in West
Melbourne, whose congregation had got into financial difficul-
ties. It was a granite building capable of accommodating 250
worshippers. The price was £1,250, of which sum the


Scandinavians by now were in a position to pay £BOO in hard
cash.
Some years of harmonious, fruitful church work followed,
but then trouble arose. The strained relations between Norway
and Sweden, which, in 1905, culminated in a dissolution of the
union between these two countries, had at last entered into the
mixed Scandinavian congregation in Melbourne.
Friction in the Scandinavian peninsula had been going on for
years, but its effect had not been felt amongst Norwegian and
Swedish churchpeople in Melbourne. Pastor Pedersen and his
staunchest supporters were too deeply religious and too occu-
pied by their humanitarian work to be influenced by it. Besides,
the lofty aim of some day getting their own place of worship,
for which money had been laboriously got together for upwards
of twenty years, bound them together. They had now got the
church and had experienced the exultation of having reached a
great goal. A reaction was inevitable, and, unfortunately, it
coincided with the final break between Norway and Sweden.
Pastor Hultmark’s position as a minister to a Scandinavian
congregation became exceedingly difficult. He had always been
a good Swede, proud of the achievements of his native land,
and naturally he looked upon the rupture in Scandinavia witli
Swedish eyes. He did not conceal this, and it embittered the
Norwegian members of his congregation, whose nerves, like
those of the Swedes, were on edge, the result being that the
congregation broke asunder.
The church in West Melbourne was sold to the Roman
Catholics for a little more than had been paid for it. The money
was divided in the proportion in which each of the three nations
were supposed to have supported the church. The Norwegians
received 50 per cent, the Swedes 30 per cent, and the Danes
20 per cent.
The Norwegian share was put into a trust fund for the benefit
of a possible future Norwegian church in Melbourne, the Danish
share was made into a benefit fund from which the interest was
to be devoted to needy Danes, while the Swedish share was paid
into funds for a Swedish church.
The Swedes, after the breaking up of the Scandinavian con-
gregation, formed a church body of their own, and by a re-
adjusted agreement with the mission institution in Stockholm,
retained Pastor Hultmark as their minister. At a meeting held
in November, 1907, presided over by the Swedish Consul-in-
Chief, Count Morner, who had come over from Sydney, a com-
mittee was elected to devise ways and means of obtaining a


Swedish church building. At a second meeting, held a fortnight
later, plans and specifications were submitted for a church to
be erected on a vacant piece of land in South Melbourne close
to the wharfs. A request for monetary assistance was forwarded
to the mission institution in Sweden, with the result that a loan
of 30,000 kr. was obtained, free of interest. Simultaneously
funds were collected amongst resident Swedes and others. At a
meeting in March the following year a constitution was adopted
and church elders and trustees elected. The site was purchased,
and some months later the foundation stone laid by Sir George
Turner, then honorary Consul for Sweden. In January, 1909,
the church was opened for divine service.
The Swedish church in Melbourne is a red brick building
capable of holding between two and three hundred people. It
has a reading-room with a library of Scandinavian literature,
and accommodation for a caretaker.
By a collection taken up in churches throughout Sweden, in
aid of the sister church in Melbourne, the trustees were able to
reduce the mortgage considerably and place the institution on
a sound financial basis.
Pastor Hultmark, who is still revered by his countrymen as-
the father of the Swedish church in Melbourne, returned to
Sweden in 1920 in response to a call in the Swedish State Church,
and he died shortly after. His place in Melbourne was taken by
Pastor A. Guldbrandzen, a broadminded and likeable, though
somewhat unstable, bachelor, who lost popularity with a section
of the Swedes but succeeded in getting a number of
Norwegians and Danes interested in his work. Dissatisfied
with his conduct, some of the church elders made a complaint
to the mission institution in Stockholm, and he proceeded to
Sweden to defend himself. He must have succeeded in doing
that because, like his predecessor, he received a call in the State
Church.
The congregation had been without a minister for some con-
siderable time when one of the elders, Mr. E. Nylen, visited
his native land, and, during an interview with the Archbishop
of Sweden, pleaded the cause of the congregation in Melbourne
so successfully that it was decided to send a minister of the
State Church to take charge of it. As a result, Pastor S. A.
Sigland and his family arrived in Melbourne in 1926.
Pastor Sigland was a highly cultured man with a university
training, and, like Pastor Guldbrandzen, he possessed broad
Scandinavian sympathies. The ill-feeling between Norway and
Sweden had long since subsided, and such was Pastor Sigland’s,


prestige that what little was left of it in Melbourne was dis-
pelled. Pastor Sigland became the greatest influence for good
the Scandinavian colony in Melbourne has seen since the days
of Soren Pedersen. Unfortunately his term of service expired
in 1931, when he returned to Sweden.
His successor was less suitable for the position, and his stay
in Melbourne was short. After his departure the church work
was more or less at a standstill for a couple of years, when
Pastor R. Stjernquist arrived.
Pastor Stjernquist, a young enthusiast, quickly put new life
into the sick church-body. The damage previously done was
repaired, and the Swedish church has again become the centre
of Scandinavian culture in Melbourne. It enjoys the respect
and goodwill of all —not least of our sailors when in port —be
they Swedes, Norwegians, Danes, or Finns.
Although the Swedish State pays, for practical purposes the
church is Scandinavian.
In no other part of Australia except Queensland have
Scandinavian-Lutheran congregations been founded, but a
seaman’s mission was inaugurated in Sydney in the early part
of the present century. In 1902 Pastor Hultmark visited Sydney
and Newcastle, and he was impressed by the desirability of
mission work amongst Scandinavian sailors being taken up in
these two ports. He reported to the home mission in Stockholm
accordingly, with the result that in the same year one of the
leaders of Swedish mission work abroad, Pastor Fransson, was
sent to Sydney, where, by the aid of voluntary subscription, a
Scandinavian Sailors’ Home was founded. It was installed in
Agar Street, and put in charge of a Swedish lady, Miss A. Rasch.
In the following year she was joined by a countrywoman, Miss
H. Cederberg. A considerable amount of social work was done
by various laymen —Mr. Jonassen, Mr. Soderberg, and others.
In time it became self-supporting and carried on for quite a
long time. However, the interest taken in it weakened with
the speeding up of shipping. Gone are the days when Norwegian,
Swedish, and Danish vessels were in port for weeks at a stretch.
The modern liner arrives to-day and is gone to-morrow. Sailors’
Homes are less urgently needed, and the one established in
Sydney for the benefit of Scandinavian seamen has ceased to
exist.


SOCIETIES AND THEIR ORIGIN
At the dawn of man the desire for safety against all kinds of
perils caused individuals to band themselves together in tribes
or groups. The herd instinct developed. It survived throughout
the ages, and to-day manifests itself in multiple forms. Every
organization, from an empire to a sick-lodge, constitutes a herd.
The life of the herd, being determined by circumstances, is ever
changing.
We are here concerned only with Australia and the particular
groups or herds formed by non-British-born members of the
community, and of these mainly the Scandinavians.
The Anglo-Saxons amongst whom we have come are as
tolerant as any race. This, however, does not make them blind
to the possible danger this or that group of non-Britishers may
become to the continued peaceful development of the State,
more particularly as some of them have proved difficult to
assimilate.
For this reason the White Australia Policy was adopted. The
closing of the German schools and the check put on Italian
migration to North Queensland were the outcome of the same
fear of national disruption.
At the time when foreigners in any number commenced
arriving in Australia, and right up to Federation, that fear did
not exist, though towards the end of the century some alarm
was felt at the growing number of Chinese. Europeans of any
nationality were considered an asset, and no discrimination was
made against them. There were, however, certain psychological
factors which caused them to band together and form national
societies.
One of these was the rise of nationalistic feelings in the
nineteenth century and the tendency to imagine one’s own
people superior to all others. Owing to successes in war,
industry, and commerce, and to her insular position, the growth
of the superiority complex became particularly marked in
England. It was accentuated in still more insular Australia.
I remember as late as the middle of the nineties a police
magistrate in Melbourne, when fining some Norwegian sailors
for disorderliness in a Port Melbourne hotel, remarking : ‘You
foreigners ought to be grateful for being allowed into a British
country. The least you can do is to conduct yourself properly.’
And no person calling himself an Englishman doubted that one
Englishman was as good as seven Frenchmen. This nonsense


the Great War and the present facilities for travelling have
dispelled, but it existed when men of all nationalities flocked to
the Victorian gold-mines, and for a long time after.
A second factor was the sense of loneliness which only those
whom fate has led to a foreign land, speaking a foreign tongue,
and cherishing different traditions, can fully appreciate. The
feeling of being a stranger in a strange land, and the often
painful process of adapting oneself to a new environment made
them grow fonder of the land they had left and the people of
which once they formed part.
So they formed societies as an antidote against home-longing,
and provided for places where they could meet. There they
could display their national colours, speak their own language,
provide newspapers and books from home, forgather on days
important in the history of their race, and praise it in song and
speech. In these little corners of their native land transplanted
in foreign soil, the love of the old folks and the old country
could be kept warm, and by talking about the achievements of
their race and the great men it had produced, Scandinavians
or Germans or whatever they were, could reassure themselves
that a Scandinavian or a German, despite being nicknamed
‘Dutchman/ was not only as good as, but really a little better
than an Englishman, not to mention the native-born Australian
for whom the immigrants generally had little regard. To put it
briefly, they could stimulate the confidence in themselves which
is so necessary in life.
How else are we to explain that the scattered Danish,
Norwegian, and Swedish gold-miners around Ballarat, led by a
few Scandinavian business people, came together and founded
a society as early as 1857, that during the next forty to
fifty years Scandinavian societies were formed in every town
in Australia where Danes, Norwegians, and Swedes resided in
sufficient number to do so ?
Such societies have at one time or another existed in
Fremantle, Perth, Boulder, Adelaide, Port Adelaide, Port Pirie,
Ballarat, Geelong, Melbourne, Sydney, Newcastle, Brisbane,
Maryborough, Charters Towers, and Rockhampton.
Occasionally, though with little success, sick-lodges became
a feature of the societies. A couple of Scandinavian temperance
societies also proved unsuccessful.
For reasons I shall come to directly, very few of the societies
exist to-day.
We know it is a law of nature to which all living organisms
are subjected that when a certain stage of maturity is attained


decay and disintegration set in, and unless dead cells and tissues
are continually replaced, the end is not far off. The same applies
to organizations of human beings.
Let us for a moment examine the main causes of the dis-
integration of foreign societies in Australia. We have already
seen the forces which brought them into existence, namely a
sense of loneliness, and the need of standing together in order
to counteract the disadvantages of being foreigners. To these
gradually a third psychic force was added, to wit, the oppor-
tunity societies offered for the exercise of human kindness.
Those immigrants who had got a foothold and still remembered
the anxiety and hardship undergone by themselves as new-
chums, to attain that inner happiness friendly acts bring,
wanted to be helpful to new arrivals of their own kith and kin.
The disadvantage of being a foreigner is largely determined
by varying racial factors. The further foreign immigrants are
removed racially from the dominant race, the longer the sense
of loneliness and the need for standing together last. Racially
Scandinavians and Britishers are almost identical. Both people
are overwhelmingly of Nordic stock. Both are fair complexioned
with blond hair and blue or grey eyes. An Anglo-Saxon girl
will have no aversion from marrying a Scandinavian immigrant
as soon as he has dropped his foreign habits and mastered the
English language sufficiently not to make himself ridiculous,
and the tongues spoken on the two shores of the North Sea
being kindred, this does not take long. The Scandinavian youth
or maid marries into the British race and is soon accepted as
belonging to it. Much of the loneliness and many of the dis-
advantages previously experienced are thus dispelled, and the
immigrant inclines to drop out of his national society. Only
those of an emotional temperament or who are imbued with a
strong sense of gratitude towards their native land can be relied
upon to stick to their national society for life.
To make up the wastage caused by this change of mind, and
by deaths and departures, a constant flow of new blood from
the homeland is necessary. But for various reasons what once
was a creek of Scandinavian immigrants became a trickle, and
through the ban now placed on foreign immigration it has
completely dried up.
Another factor which even in the hey-day of immigration
made Scandinavian societies unstable was that Danes,
Norwegians, and Swedes, although racially one, speaking lan-
guages not wider apart than many dialects in England, with
common religion, and closely related cultures and institutions,


hail from three politically distinct countries, each with a
different history, albeit the histories of Denmark, Norway, and
Sweden are as intermingled as the histories of England and
Scotland. Sometimes they have been friends and sometimes
foes, and although there have been no wars between them
during the last couple of hundred years, right down to recent
times feeling now and then has been strained.
Political currents and cross-currents in the homelands are
reflected amongst their sons and daughters in foreign parts,
even though distance may tone them down a little. When the
relationship between Denmark, Norway, and Sweden has been
cordial, as it was from the middle of last century till Norway
towards the end of it commenced to feel the union with Sweden
irksome, Danes, Norwegians, and Swedes have joined in forming
societies or clubs. When Scandinavian brotherliness at home
has been torn by political storms, Scandinavian societies in
Australia have lingered, or collapsed and been replaced by
separate Danish, Norwegian, or Swedish societies or coteries.
The falling to pieces of societies, from any cause, has been
rendered so much easier by the fact that Scandinavian secular
organizations, with two or three exceptions of minor import-
ance, have not acquired fixed property. Unlike the Germans,
who possessed valuable club buildings and obtained licenses
to sell liquor, the Scandinavians have, more often than not,
met once a week in the dining-room of some centrally-situated
hotel. Otherwise premises have been rented. In such cases the
property, in addition to the usual little library of Scandinavian
literature and a few national emblems, has consisted of little
more than tables, chairs, and perhaps crockery and a piano.
If the society came to grief, the books were divided amongst
the members or sections of members or they were stored for
the benefit of some future society, and the furniture disposed
of to cover outstanding debts. As for cash, there was rarely
any to divide.
After the foregoing generalization, we may briefly survey the
individual societies which have been, or are, still in existence.
In the fifties Scandinavian societies were founded in
Melbourne and Ballarat. Neither appear to have lasted more
than a few years. The Ballarat body erected its own building,
of wood, in Bridge Street. It cannot have been very roomy nor
have had many conveniences, because its bigger functions were
held in the Adelphi Hotel, of which a Norwegian was the
licensee. In the minutes previously referred to of a festive dinner
arranged by the Scandinavians in Ballarat, in 1869, to celebrate


the marriage of Crown Prince Frederik of Denmark to Princess
Louise of Sweden and Norway, no mention is made of a
Scandinavian society.
In the early seventies a new Scandinavian society was
founded in Melbourne, of which the Vice-Consul for Denmark,
Mr. Howitz, was elected president, and a Swedish chemist by
the name of Sellgren, secretary.
The Scandinavian society of the seventies had long been dead
when a new one was founded in 1880, a Dane, Emil Petersen,
being elected president, and a Swede, Mr. Theorell, secretary.
Two years later it was reorganized with a Scandinavian male
choir as its nucleus, but already in 1884 it returned to its
original form. It struggled on, under Danish leadership, for
another couple of years, when a new society arose in which the
Norwegians and Swedes predominated. The final split came in
1887 through the Swedes forming their own society or club,
and the Danes theirs two years later. No distinct Norwegian
society was formed till the year 1900.
The Swedish club flourished for a number of years, but in
1900 a more broadly conceived Swedish society arose. The two
rival societies eventually amalgamated. A few years later the
disintegrating influences set in and the society declined. In
the end it became a not very virile appendage to the Swedish
Church, and has now practically ceased to exist.
The Danish club of 1889 also flourished for a while. Then it
lingered for a few years. Its weekly meetings had been sus-
pended when in 1896 some later arrivals from Denmark formed
a new society. Three years afterwards the two organizations
amalgamated under the name of ‘The Danish Club Dannebrog.’
For a number of years the club met in the Empire Hotel,
Lonsdale Street, of which the licensee was a Dane. The Empire
Hotel in early days had been Melbourne’s most fashionable
hotel. The old spacious dining-room was now put at the disposal
of the Danes. At the Empire Hotel a most intense social and
national life developed, even Danish plays and pantomimes
being staged. For the production of the latter the German
Turn Verien was hired. The library of Danish literature was
greatly added to, and the old Danish sport, ‘Fugleskydning,’
(bird-shooting) introduced. In 1910 the club rented its own
premises in Bourke Street and obtained a club licence. Within
a year it moved to the corner of Collins and King Streets.
Although the Danish Club may celebrate its fiftieth anniver-
sary this year, senility has by no means set in. It has upwards of
300 members, and in regard to equipment compares favourably


with any club of similar size in Melbourne. Besides the
bar it has a dining-room, billiard-room, parlour, a fair-sized
library of Danish literature, valuable paintings, up-to-date
conveniences, and so forth, the club has, however, for years
been Danish only in part. Before long the Danes discovered
that their number and aggregate spending power were insuffi-
cient to support the kind of club it had become, and it was
thrown open to Britishers as associate members. As years
rolled on the Britishers grew in number, while, owing to the
disintegrating forces previously referred to, the Danes got fewer
and fewer, till to-day they constitute a small minority.
Apart from occasional tussles in days gone by, the British
pressing for a bigger say in the management of the club and
the Danes opposing it, the relationship between the two elements
has always been cordial. The British members recognize that
it was started as a Danish club, and that the licence to sell
liquor, the basis of its existence, was given to it as a national
institution, nor have they ever raised any obstacles to the
holding of purely Danish gatherings. To the contrary, at
functions celebrating the Danish Constitution Day and the
birthday of the King of Denmark they have wholeheartedly
joined in and helped to make them a success. The club’s
Danish beginning is emphasized by a relief fund for Danes in
distress, inaugurated in the early part of the century and still
maintained.
At the latter end of 1938 the club bought an old mansion in
Beaconsfield Parade, Middle Park, where it is now installed.
Of the Norwegian society founded in the year 1900, A. T.
Schreuder was the promoter and first president. Besides Mr.
A. T. Schreuder the following gentlemen must be reckoned
amongst its founders : O. Kunig, H. Petersen, B. A. Bendiksen,
Ih. Berg, and L. Grundt. The society survived for a quarter
of a century. It always had its own premises, but moved occa-
sionally to a new locality. A couple of years ago a new society
came into existence.
Leaving Melbourne, we shall see what the Scandinavians in
Sydney have done in the way of forming national societies.
The first one we know of was founded in 1874 with a Captain
Blix as president and a Mr. Gjedsted as secretary. It lasted
about nine years, during which period the usual annual dinners
and occasional dances and picnics were arranged.
In 1880 a Scandinavian sick-lodge and relief fund was
founded, but it only survived a couple of years.
Out of the ashes of the society founded in 1874 rose a Swedish


society, ‘ Vikingen/ which was in existence for about seven years.
After a while Danes and Norwegians were admitted as members,
but as feelings between the three different branches of
Scandinavians became strained, the society was brought back
to its purely Swedish form. It established a relief fund for
Swedes in distress, and rewards for Swedish sailors doing noble
deeds. Starting off with weekly meetings in a hotel, the society
eventually got its own premises, which were always open to
members.
While the Swedish society was slowly dying, a Scandinavian
book club was founded with the object of obtaining modern
Scandinavian literature from home and circulating the books
amongst its members. However, in 1890 the book club was
absorbed by a new Scandinavian society founded for social
purposes. A Norwegian, Dr. Fjeldstad, was elected president,
and a Dane, O. 'R. Andersen, secretary. After a promising
beginning in the Cafe Frangais, of which Mr. Andersen was the
manager, and afterwards in its own spacious premises, it suc-
cumbed a couple of years later.
In 1895 a Danish club was founded, while three years later a
Scandinavian society came into being, catering for the economi-
cally less fortunate Danes, Norwegians, and Swedes, but it did
not last long. The Danish club had a longer life. For a number
of years it met in an hotel and afterwards on the premises of a
Danish business man. Eventually it got its own club rooms,
where liquor and light refreshments were obtainable. Owing
to laxity on the part of the man in charge, the police raided
the place, seized the stock of liquor, and brought the club to
court for offending against the Liquor Law. After the crash
the club was dormant for some considerable time, but was
eventually reconstructed. When I visited Sydney in 1924 it
held its meetings in a hall belonging, if I remember rightly, to
the Oddfellows Lodge. The Consulate-General for Denmark
was just then on the point of being transferred from Melbourne
to Sydney, and high hopes were entertained of the Consul-
General taking an interest in the club. It would appear that
he did not do so. In any case, within a year or two those who
had struggled for some sort of national unity threw up the
sponge. In latter years a loose organization named ‘Thor’
arranged festive dinners on the Danish Constitution Day and
the birthday of King Christian X.
A Swedish society was founded in Sydney in 1910, and re-
constructed in 1914. Of the latter society, A. Ringdal was
elected president and G. H. Benzon chairman of committee.


It met at Forbes Hotel and afterwards at City Hotel, corner of
King and Kent Streets. The introduction of the early closing
of hotels rendered it difficult for the club to carry on, and an
alteration of the constitution and a reconstruction generally
became necessary. The name was changed from ‘club' to
‘society/ and it was installed in the Oddfellows Building in
Elizabeth Street, with Mr. Benzon as president. It gradually
changed into a mixed organization of Swedes and non-Swedes
holding a monthly social, and it expired in 1925. The greatest
achievement of the club of 1914 was the erection of a monument
at Kurnell for Dr. Solander, Captain Cook's celebrated com-
panion.
In 1925 a new Swedish society ‘Svenska Foreningen* was
founded. Through the generous support received from the
Consul-General, C. O. de Dardel, and others, and the enthusiasm
of Mr. Ostberg, it is still very virile. The society meets every
first and third Tuesday in the month, and holds a social every
second Saturday.
In South Australia a Scandinavian society was founded in
1883. It held its meetings in a hotel in Pirie Street and lasted
till 1891, when it was dissolved.
Shortly after the death of the Adelaide society, a Scandinavian
society was founded in Port Adelaide, where Danes, Norwegians,
and particularly Swedes were more numerous. The majority
were sailors who had deserted from their ships and now were
employed as wharf labourers. The weekly meetings, held in a
hotel, were well attended in the beginning, and the membership
rose to about sixty. However, counter-attractions from other
hotels militated against its stability, and a couple of years later
it passed quietly out of existence.
The establishment of Scandinavian societies in Western
Australia coincides with the prosperity of that State after the
rich gold discoveries, and they came to an end when the boom
petered out. The society in Boulder, founded in 1900, with the
Norwegian, P. Methun, as president, had its own building,
whereas the societies in Fremantle and Perth met in hotels.
The Scandinavian societies in Queensland will be dealt with
under Scandinavian settlement in that State.
As will be seen from the foregoing, the history of Scandinavian
societies in Australia is not an illustrious one ; still, all these
efforts at standing together served a useful purpose in the years
of Scandinavian migration to this country, and are well worth
recording.
As a result of the social life of the Scandinavians, international


carnivals were, in days gone by, occasionally arranged in
Melbourne, Sydney, and Brisbane, the profit from which, in
most cases, was devoted to philanthropic causes. To com-
memorate the inauguration of the Australian Commonwealth,
£I,OOO was raised by Danes, Norwegians, and Swedes in Sydney
to endow a cot in the Children’s Hospital.




SCANDINAVIAN PRESS IN AUSTRALIA
• It was but natural that amongst the many thousands of
Scandinavians who settled in Australia and New Zealand there
should be some with journalistic inclinations and knowledge of
newspaper work, who conceived the idea of starting a national
newspaper. The difficulty of making such a venture a success
did not always occur to them till they had been taught by
bitter experience. They had possibly obtained, from the
Statistical Bureau, satisfactory information regarding the
number of Danes, Norwegians, and Swedes in this country, but
overlooked the fact that these were scattered over a whole
continent. Secondly, these enthusiasts did not count on the
difficulty of getting advertisements, without which no paper
can thrive. Somehow advertisers have an unpleasant habit of
asking questions regarding circulation, and where the bulk of
the readers reside. Under any circumstances, to establish even
a small weekly or fortnightly paper with any hope of success
requires a reasonable amount of capital, which seems always to
have been lacking.
Nor den (i)
The first idealist to attempt the venture was a Swede by the
name of Cronquist. He had gone to the Victorian gold-fields
in the fifties, and possibly was impressed by the large number
of Scandinavians he found there. So he started a Scandinavian
newspaper in Ballarat, calling it Norden , which name signifies
the northern countries of Europe. It was based on a cash
payment of a shilling per copy. A shilling probably meant very
little to the gold-diggers, but as they were widely scattered
and had no fixed abode, it may be assumed that Mr. Cronquist
had to cover a large area to 'make tucker/ let alone keep a
newspaper going. It goes without saying that Norden did not
last long.
Skandinavien
In 1887 a Dane, Soderberg, and a Swede, S. Franzen, founded
a fortnightly paper in Sydney, calling it Skandinavien. It was
produced by an English printing firm, and printed in Danish
and Swedish. After a while Mr. Soderberg withdrew from the
venture, and his place was taken by a Danish compositor by
the name of Christensen. The paper did not live to celebrate
its first anniversary.


Hjemlandstoner
In 1893 the minister of the Scandinavian Church in Melbourne
caused a periodical to be published, calling it Hjemlandstoner
(Voices from Home). At Pastor Pedersen's request I became
editor of the succeeding issues. It appeared twice yearly, and
in 1896 was succeeded by Norden, the second paper of that
name published in Australia.
Kirketidende
Out of sequence may be mentioned Kirketidende , a religious
paper founded in Melbourne in 1898 by Heinrich L. Neilsen.
It was printed in Danish, appeared monthly, and lasted less
than twelve months.
Norden (2)
Through Hjemlandstoner a desire arose amongst Scandinavians
in Melbourne for a more frequently appearing national paper,
and I was encouraged to take the lead in a movement for its
establishment. I obtained the signatures of twenty of the
better-known Danes, Norwegians, and Swedes in Melbourne on
a circular letter, convening a public meeting. At this it was
decided to found a fortnightly paper, and a committee was
elected to prepare a constitution and submit definite proposals
to be laid before a subsequent meeting of Scandinavians. The
committee consisted of two Danes, Henry Olsen and the writer ;
two Norwegians, Th, Faroe and H. Ottesen ; two Swedes, R.
Albrecht and Axel Nilsson.
The meeting was held on 16th April, 1896. The constitution
was adopted, and it was unanimously decided to get the paper
going as soon as possible.
By the constitution a company was formed, with 200 ten-
shilling shares, payable in quarterly instalments. The paper
was to be called Norden , and to be printed in the Danish,
Norwegian, and Swedish languages. To guard against friction,
religious and Scandinavian political controversies were banned
from its columns. I was engaged as editor, and it was decided
I should proceed to Sydney and Brisbane to gain support for
the venture.
The first number of Norden appeared on 6th June, 1896.
Armed with copies of that issue and letters of introduction, 1
proceeded to Sydney, and through advertisements in the daily
papers convened a public meeting of Scandinavians. Though
badly attended, it was quite successful in so far as a number


of shares were disposed of, and all those present put them-
selves down as subscribers to the paper.
in Brisbane I contented myself with personal interviews,
and also there the project was well received.
On my return to Melbourne a house was rented in Church
Street, City, in conjunction with the Scandinavian congregation.
Technical difficulties in connexion with publishing a national
paper in a foreign country quickly became apparent. There
was a shortage of such letters as a and o, while the particular
Swedish letter ‘a’ had to be obtained from Sweden. Then there
was no Scandinavian compositor about, and we had to pay the
English firm which produced the paper double price for setting
it in type. Proof-reading required no end of patience.
It soon became evident that if Nor den was to survive it
would have to be produced better and more cheaply than could
be done by people not understanding the language. As a
beginning, to achieve this, I became compositor myself, and
after a while did most of the typesetting, Axel Nilsson under-
taking to set the Swedish page. There was then only the
printing to pay for. But even then the ledger could not be
balanced, and all the partly-subscribed share capital had been
exhausted. So, to effect further saving, I purchased a small
secondhand printing press, capable only of printing one page
at a time. A temporarily disabled Danish sailor whom I had
befriended became Nordens machinist.
In the second year of Nordens existence I got an enthusiastic
assistant in Mrs. Lyng. She acquainted herself with the Danish
language, and in every branch of the business became a cheap
and most efficient helpmate. To get more accommodation, the
office was moved to King Street. I acquired the beginning of
a job-printing plant, and, as a sideline, commenced to execute
commercial printing.
Not so long after having moved to King Street, I was for a
while joined by a Swede, Christian von Scheele, who had had
his own printing office in Stockholm, but had failed there, and
come to Australia ; and as, simultaneously, the Scandinavians
in Sydney arranged a big carnival in Paddington Town Hall
for the purpose of providing the paper with a new and bigger
printing press, the position was much improved.
Although the circulation of Norden steadily increased, owing
to lack of advertisements it was a losing proposition. Much
unremunerative work was also needed at the Scandinavian
Labour Bureau, of which, at the inauguration of the paper, 1
had committed myself to take charge. To enable me to devote


more time to commercial printing and less to Nor den, a
‘monoline’ typesetting machine was installed at a price of £250,
raised by voluntary contributions amongst our people in all
parts of Australia.
The ‘monoline’ was a crude American invention which was
cursed by everybody who had bought one. Its only virtue was
its initial cheapness compared with the price of a linotype. To
an unmechanical mind it became a source of never-ending
worry and expenditure, and in my case the last straw that
broke the camel’s back. What with the responsibility of a
growing family, a paper, and a labour bureau that did not pay,
and my inability to compete for commercial printing effectively
with older and better-equipped printing houses, I was eventu-
ally worked to a standstill. In 1906, ten years after Norden
was founded, the worry of continuing it was taken over by a
patriotic Danish lady, Miss Olga Clausen. The jobbing plant 1
sold to somebody else, and with that I dropped into the back-
ground.
Miss Clausen was assisted by her brother, Hans, and sister-in-
law, Esther, all highly cultured and with literary interests,
and desirous of rendering service to their countrymen and
fellow Scandinavians. In addition, Hans Clausen possessed an
unmistakable journalistic gift.
While I had carried on the paper for what I could make out
of it, Miss Clausen and her assistants were guaranteed a weekly,
albeit modest, wage, August Bing, as chairman of directors,
taking upon himself the financial responsibility of keeping
Norden going. Through Mr. Bing’s generosity and untiring
efforts, it became possible to acquire a bigger printing press
capable of turning out four pages at a time and for Miss
Clausen to proceed to Queensland for the purpose of getting
into closer touch with the Scandinavians residing there. Alto-
gether, with my passing out, and the Clausens coming in, new
life was instilled into the venture. This was enhanced by the
Commonwealth Government, as well as the State Government
of Victoria, discovering Norden as an advertising medium for
attracting suitable immigrants from Denmark, Norway, and
Sweden to Australia. These Governments subsidized elaborately
got up and highly illustrated issues in which Australia was
depicted as the land of promise for young men and women from
the Scandinavian countries.
After about three years Miss Clausen left Melbourne for
Copenhagen, and Mr. Bing went on one of his periodical visits to
Denmark. While there, he and Miss Clausen, taking advantage


of their highly influential connexions, arranged a concert in
Copenhagen to raise funds for the struggling little paper in
far-off Melbourne. The Crown Prince, the later King Frederik
VIII, granted his patronage, and both from the financial and
the artistic point of view, the venture was a success.
Under great difficulties Mr. and Mrs. Clausen carried on the
paper until 1913, when they, too, had been worn to a standstill,
and were unable to continue.
An arrangement was now made with Mr. O. Petersen, the
descendant of a Dane, who conducted a printing office, and
happened to have in his employ a young Danish compositor
and linotype operator, Paul Fischmann. The service of Mr.
Clausen as editor was retained. However, this arrangement
soon proved unworkable, and Norden would have expired then,
had not Carl Fischmann arrived.
Mr. Fischmann had been a printer in Copenhagen, and the
mainstay of Kristeligt Dagblad’s printing office for fourteen
years. Two sons had migrated to Australia, and been fairly
successful there —Paul as a compositor, and his brother on the
land. Encouraged by them, Fischmann gave up his position in
Copenhagen, and, with the remainder of a large family, migrated
to this country, bent on settling on the land. Disheartened by
Mrs. Fischmann’s death on the voyage out, he was undecided
regarding future movements when he landed in Melbourne.
Meanwhile, being confronted with the fact that the only
Scandinavian newspaper in Australia was in its death throes, he
made up his mind, and offered his service to the national cause.
On Mr. Fischmann’s advice, the monoline —by now fairly
useless —was disposed of, premises were again taken in King
Street, and he reverted to where I had started seventeen years
earlier —handsetting the paper.
Within twelve months the World War broke out, and greatly
hampered the work of reconstruction. Many of the young
Danish, Norwegian, and Swedish immigrants went to the war,
including two of Mr. Fischmann’s own boys. Thereby the
number of subscribers dropped. What proved still worse was
that as the war intensified and the outcome for long was in the
balance, the feeling in Australia became one of great suspicion—
not merely towards German residents, but to all foreigners
whose countries were not in the fray on the side of the Allies.
Copies of Norden had to be submitted to the military censor,
and a demand for it being printed in English was only dropped
after the authorities had learned that two of the editor’s sons
fought with the Australians.


While, during the Boer War —waged by the mighty British
Empire against two small liberty-loving states —foreigners in
x\ustralia were openly defiant, and Nor den reached the peak of
its circulation, it was different in 1914. Although grateful to
Providence that their countries had been spared from the
immense suffering entailed by war, Scandinavian immigrants
grew timid at Denmark, Norway, and Sweden not taking part
in the fight to ‘make the world safe for democracy’ and ‘end
wars for good and all/
Mr. Fischmann’s heroic effort at saving Nor den might have
proved in vain had not a Danish-born chartered accountant,
Gustav Adolph Hornemann, stepped in. He convened a meeting
of Scandinavians in Melbourne, and at this a maintenance fund,
raised by donations, was inaugurated, and the annual sub-
scription to the paper increased from six shillings to ten
shillings.
In this manner Harden got through the difficult war years,
and as peace and prosperity returned to Australia, a period of
undreamt progress dawned.
Lack of well-paid advertisements had all along been Norden s
outstanding weakness, but now that everybody seemed to have
money and there was a veritable boom in all branches of
business, an opportunity arose which a Dane in Melbourne,
Arne Vanmehren, seized —much to the benefit of Norden. How
he did it I have often wondered, but the fact remains that he
got large advertisements from many leading firms at prices
which seemed fabulous.
Heartened by this success, and money being plentiful also
amongst Scandinavian residents, a subscription was opened for
the purpose of providing Norden with its own building. Consul
Holdenson opened the list with a cheque for £IOO. The retired
Consul-General for Denmark, F. W. Were, followed with one
for £SO. The Norwegian firm, Petersen & Larsen, came next
with war bonds worth £25, and so forth, totalling several
hundreds of pounds. Not only was Norden s present home
purchased, but it became possible to install a linotype, and to
engage an editor and publisher at a salary which, though not
unreasonable, might well have made previous editors a little
envious.
There is a touch of romance about Mr. Fischmann’s retire-
ment from Norden.
It happened that the Fischmann family had become closely
associated with a wheat-growing family in the Wimmera, of
which a widowed lady, Mrs. Trollop, was the head. One of


Fischmann’s sons married one of Mrs. Trollop’s daughters, and
one of Mrs. Trollop’s sons married one of Mr. Fischmann’s
daughters. By the latter union Mr. Fischmann was deprived
of his devoted housekeeper and assistant in the office. He was
left alone, all his children having married. What could be more
natural than his marrying Mrs. Trollop?—which he did. Norden
was now on a seemingly sound footing—there was nothing to
prevent him from realizing his old intention of settling on the
land.
A Danish compositor and linotype operator, Mr. F.
Zimmerdahl, at that time living in Sydney, in 1924 became
Fischmann’s successor.
The hey-day of Norden continued for a few years, when a
decline set in, and only with difficulty could expenses be met.
At last even that could not be done. A second mortgage had to
be obtained on the building, and afterwards an overdraft
arranged with the bank, four of Norden s friends being guaran-
tors. The editor’s salary and trading accounts fell in arrears.
Things looked almost as gloomy as they ever had done when
Mr. Zimmerdahl was offered a position as paid secretary of the
Danish Club, and retired from Norden.
In the intervening years Mr. Fischmann had been engaged in
poultry farming. He had only been moderately successful, and,
learning of Norden s plight, he went to Melbourne once more
to take upon himself the burden of its continuance.
If anybody could put the paper on its feet again, it was Mr.
Fischmann, although by now getting on in years. Besides
being capable of self-sacrifice in quite an unusual degree, he
combines a thorough knowledge of the printing trade with a
natural gift for journalism. But times have been against him,
and Norden s existence is still precarious. The general depres-
sion had set in when in 1931 he took charge for the second time,
and the paper lost all its advertisements except the few it
always had had from patriotic Scandinavians. Next, immigra-
tion to Australia was stopped, and death is continually thinning
the ranks of the old colonists. Between 1921 and 1933 the
Scandinavians in Australia declined by about 3,000.
Realizing that when Mr. Fischmann, now turned seventy-five,
left the ship, Norden would be finished, its directors, of which I
still have the honour of being one, in or about 1932 conceived
the idea of transforming it into a Scandinavian trade and
tourist journal printed in English. As such, it could become
useful to large-scale manufacturers in Scandinavia as an adver-
tising medium, and appeal to the second generation of Danes,


Norwegians, and Swedes in Australia. This plan, and a request
to the home governments for a moderate subsidy to bear the
cost of transformation were submitted to the Scandinavian
Consuls-General in Sydney. After a conference these gentlemen
rejected the plan, but they intimated that they would support
a petition for a grant from their respective governments to
preserve Nor den as a national newspaper printed in the
Scandinavian languages. This was acted upon, but as by then
the general depression had reached Denmark, Norway, and
Sweden, the petition brought no result.*
Conclusion
In the foregoing, reference has been made to the various
editors and half a dozen others, but nothing has been said about
the many hundreds of Danish, Norwegian, and Swedish men
and women who also made sacrifices to keep their national
paper going. I wonder how many socials have been held in aid
of Norden —mostly in Melbourne, but also in Sydney and
Brisbane, and even in Bundaberg and far-off Boulder. When
the distress signal has been hoisted money has been received
from all parts of the continent. It is true that only a minority
has responded, and that Norden failed to reach all the
Scandinavians in Australia. The obstacles to this have been
too formidable. Still, it has been circulated all over Australia,
New Zealand, and the South Sea Islands, and has been read,
I am sure, by a far greater number than any of us ever dreamt
of. And I imagine that when every fortnight it brought a
message from the homeland, and from countrymen in other
parts of Australia, it often relieved a deep sense of loneliness
and strengthened the resolve to stick to their guns and see
matters through. Success in life is largely dependent on self-
confidence —of faith in one’s own power to make good, and
self-confidence is stimulated by intercourse with kindred souls.
Further, it has helped to create goodwill and a feeling of fellow-
ship amongst the three branches of Scandinavians residing in
this distant land. As said in a poem written for Norden many
years ago :
‘Sig den var en fattig Loerke,
Den blev dog et Samlingsmoerke,
Som os hjalp ad Vejen frem/
Without Norden no record would ever have been written
about the life and doings of the many thousands of Danes,
*Two legacies left to Norden, one from an old Dane in Queensland, Hugo Lassen, and the other
from J. A. Heyman, have enabled the paper to keep afloat until now.


Norwegians, and Swedes who left their native shores to live,
labour, and set up homes twelve thousand miles distant, as
a contribution by the Scandinavian countries to the making
of a new nation. A few years hence little would have been
known about them, apart from a few figures regarding numbers
extracted from Australian and New Zealand statistics.
But why be apologetic ? Does not the very fact that, in
spite of obstacles, of which a newspaper proprietor at home can
have no conception, the paper has endured for more than
forty-three long years, prove that Nor den has been worth while ?




SCANDINAVIAN SHIPPING TO, AND TRADE WITH,
AUSTRALIA
At the time of the great maritime discoveries, and for a long
time after, international trade and commerce was hampered
by the then prevailing economic system known as 'Mercantilism/
According to mercantilistic doctrines, gold and silver constituted
the only form of wealth. It therefore became important for
those entrusted with government to hoard as much gold and
silver within the national boundaries as they could lay hands
upon. In pursuance of this way of thinking, it became the policy
of every statesman worth his salt to see to it that his country
sold as much, and as dearly as possible, and bought as little,
and as cheaply as possible, in return. The natural consequences
were state-controlled foreign trade, and the exploitation of
overseas colonies by the powers that owned them, to the
exclusion of all others.
Some 150 years ago mercantilism was discredited by a new
school of economists, the physiocrats, whose views were largely
shared by the celebrated Scotch economist, Adam Smith.
According to the physiocrats, gold and silver were only a measure-
ment of values, while national wealth consisted of an abundance
of the necessaries required by the nation. Consequently trade
was as beneficial to the buyer as to the seller, and free trade the
ideal state of affairs.
England became the foremost exponent of this new economic
gospel, which explains why non-Britishers, including
Scandinavians, commenced trading with Australia and other
British colonies as soon as it was worth their while to do so.
Shipping
Australian shipping statistics from the first half of last century
are very incomplete. Prior to 1837 they appear to have been
non-existent. In that year 260 vessels entered New South Wales
ports, of which 56 came from Great Britain, 182 from New
Zealand and other British colonies, or from various fishing
places, 5 from America, and 17 from other foreign countries.
The information continued to be meagre right up to 1858 or
1859, since when the nationality of foreign vessels commenced
to be recorded. Fuller particulars must be laboriously extracted
from old documents and newspaper files.
In 1838 a Danish vessel, the Zebra , brought the second batch
of German emigrants to South Australia.


Some valuable research work in connexion with Swedish
shipping has been done by G. M. Lindergren, secretary of the
Swedish-Australian Chamber of Commerce, and editor of its
monthly journal. Thanks to Mr. Lindergren’s efforts, we know
that a Swedish brig, the Mary Ann, of 135 tons burden,
navigated by Captain Werngren, arrived in Sydney in 1840,
coming from Stockholm with timber and other cargo, and that
she left a month later for Valparaiso, via Newcastle, where she
was loaded with 120 tons of coal. Mr. Lindergren writes :
‘The Mary Ann was probably the first Swedish vessel in an
Australian port, and as she arrived on the first of May, which
is celebrated all over Sweden, one can imagine the few Swedish
residents in Sydney celebrating the double event in customary
high spirits.’
The Mary Ann was followed the next year by another
Swedish brig, the Gurli, 169 tons, also from Stockholm, bringing
timber, iron, steel, and pitch, amongst other things. In 1842,
the Edward, 300 tons, brought an assortment of goods, including
timber, iron, steel, granite stones, and furniture 6f various
kinds, including 576 birch chairs, 72 bedsteads, 4 sofas, 100
ladders, 1 carriage, 1 wagon, and even 2 wooden houses. Mr.
Lindergren adds, as evidence of there having been Swedes
residing in Sydney at that early date :
‘One cannot help thinking that some of the cargo was
intended for Swedish settlers, especially as amongst the variety
of eatables were also such delicacies as 132 pieces of reindeer
beef and 615 reindeer tongues.’
Trade with Australia increased considerably during the
forties, and it received a tremendous impetus through the gold
discoveries and consequent rapid increase of population. At
this stage some of the seafaring nations, including the
Scandinavian, found it expedient to appoint consuls to assist
shipping and promote trade with Australia.
From 1858 Victoria recorded the nationality of ships arriving,
and whence they came. Melbourne was in that year visited by
12 Danish ships, 1 Norwegian, and 22 Swedish, all of them, no
doubt, with cargoes of building material, iron and steel, furni-
ture, and the hundred and one things required by a community
of primary producers. Of the Danish ships 2 came from
Copenhagen, 2 from Aarhus, 1 from Randers, and 1 from
Faaburg. Of the Swedish ships 14 came from Gothenburg and
5 from other Swedish ports. Ten Scandinavian ships came from
various non-Scandinavian ports.
New South Wales commenced recording the nationality of


visiting non-British vessels in 1859, an d South Australia in 1861.
Queensland did not follow suit till 1877, Tasmania till 1881,
and Western Australia till 1886.
In 1859 Sydney was visited by 7 Danish, 2 Norwegian, and
8 Swedish ships. In 1861 Adelaide was visited by 1 Danish
ship and 6 Swedish. In 1881 a Danish vessel and a Swedish
vessel arrived in Tasmania. There were no Norwegian ships.
Altogether the Norwegians seem to have been slow in dis-
covering Australia from the shipping point of view, but once
having discovered it they rapidly outdistanced both Denmark
and Sweden, reaching the climax during the period 1905-9,
with over 800 vessels, or an average of 160 annually. The total
number of Swedish vessels in Australian ports during the same
period was 55, and of Danish 30.
In the beginning the vessels were exceedingly small. A
windjammer of, say, 300 tons a hundred years ago was a notable
vessel. The Mary Ann was only 135 tons, and the first Danish
ship recorded in Tasmanian waters was only 144 tons, carrying
a crew of seven. Gradually the ships grew in size till they
reached a thousand tons and more, and they commenced to be
built of steel. Then steam-driven vessels came —British first,
and afterwards occasional French, German, and Dutch. The
Scandinavians doing business in Australia stuck to sail. It is
true that two Danish steamers were in New South Wales in
1882, but after that no Scandinavian steamer visited an
Australian port till the beginning of the nineties, when odd
Norwegian tramp steamers commenced to appear. In 1900,
out of 10 Danish vessels, 46 Norwegian, and 3 Swedish visiting
New South Wales ports, only one Danish and one Norwegian
were steam-driven.
In a little over a quarter of a century steamers and motor
craft ousted sailing vessels from the Australian trade, and only
a line of Finnish sailing vessels now remains as a relic of a
romantic past.
But the change goes much more deeply than from wind power
to steam or motor power. The whole structure and psychology
of shipping have altered.
Forty to fifty years ago the Scandinavian ships in the
Australian trade were owned generally by small syndicates, of
which the captain or his father or some well-to-do relative
formed a member. There was an atmosphere of individuality
about shipping in those days which since has departed. Having
picked up a cargo of softwood in a Norwegian or Swedish port,
the ship would proceed to Australia, no one worrying greatly


if it took three or four months to get there. Having discharged
the cargo, which was done by the ship’s own crew in their own
good time, the captain would look out for a new cargo —hard-
wood if he were in Western Australia, wheat or metal ore if he
were in South Australia, wool or wheat if he were in Victoria
or New South Wales. If he had to wait too long for the wool
or wheat season, he would move out from the wharf and drop
anchor where there were no harbour dues to pay, leaving only
the crew's small wages and the expenses of their frugal fare to
be defrayed. They all had an easy time, so why worry about
an enforced holiday ? In any case, better than going to the
expense of taking in ballast and proceeding to some other port
with no better prospect of success. As a last resource, they
could go to Newcastle and get a cargo of coal for Valparaiso
or some other port, or make a detour to the South Sea Islands
for a load of copra or guano. Anything for anywhere—there
was neither time-table nor any schedule of ports to bother
about.
This happy-go-lucky manner of shipping has passed. The
tramp steamer, being under heavier expenses than the sailing
ship, already began to adopt new methods, leaving less to
chance regarding cargo. The fixed line of steamers, with agents
ashore to arrange everything, and see to it that not a minute
is wasted in port, has completed the revolution.
In connexion with Scandinavian shipping to Australia, the
change commenced fairly early in the present century.
In 1903 the South African Trading Co. was founded as a
joint Swedish-Danish enterprise, the ships of the Swedish
Transatlantic Co. and of the Danish East Asiatic Co. sailing
in joint service to South Africa. A little later they were joined
by the Norwegian Africa Line (started by Wilhelmsen in con-
junction with Fearnley and Eger, but afterwards taken over
by Wilhelmsen alone), and their activity was extended to
Australia. Out of this erstwhile collaboration of Scandinavian
shipping interests has developed the direct Europe-Australia
line, conducted by the Transatlantic S.S. Co. (head office at
Gothenburg) and the Norwegian-Australia Line (head office at
Oslo), the latter with regular calls at South African ports.
Though the motor-boats belonging to the East Asiatic Co. at
intervals visit Australian ports, the Danish Shipping Co. has
not developed a regular shipping line to the Commonwealth
but has concentrated on the Far Eastern trade instead.
Before going into details regarding the Swedish and the


vasaj
m — r ——i —— ——--j— ..—
700 — — y 1
600 — i L
500 — -A 1 |_
400 _J 1 I j
500 — £- 1— J-
200 1 1 J—i&K V
M' / rjC 0 '' \ 1 V
J/ _ / ■>*/ \ 2
y / \ a
w hy N -Jn —
4 \ / * /
£Wr/> S^.s
o _m—X— j L A
/837&y8f0-H]pfS49 yS&Sf y2SS-Sjy3S9~6fy865-69 \/8M-71yS7S-79 \/8S0Jf \/8g5*9 \/890-9f yS99-93 \<)00-0i\/90S09 /9/0-/1 /9/J-/9 /920-21 ffZS-23
Norwegian lines to Australia, I should like, in the following
diagram, to show the general trend of Danish, Norwegian, and
Swedish shipping to this continent. The defect of the diagram
is that from 1837 f° 1859 the curve expresses merely an estima-
SCANDINAVIAN SHIPPING TO AUSTRALIA, 1837-1929
tion of the combined Scandinavian shipping to Australia, and,
secondly, that up to 1905, in which year the Commonwealth
took over the recording of shipping, there is a certain amount
of overlapping. The different colonies kept their shipping
statistics independently of each other. If, for instance, a vessel
brought cargo to Melbourne, and from there went in ballast to
Newcastle to load coal, she would be entered both under
Victoria and New South Wales, and appear twice in the aggre-
gate.
What was the Scandinavian share of Australia’s overseas
shipping ?
To be brief, let us take the shipping to Victoria in 1859-89,


which may be considered typical for the whole of Australia,
and to the Commonwealth in 1913, 1924-25, and 1931-32.
The total oversea shipping to Victoria in 1859 was 4 1 9^9 I
tons, ships’ burden, divided between the different nationalities
as follows :
Per cent.
British . . . . . . . . . . • . 63.51
United States . . . . . . . . • . 18.38
German . . . . . . . . • . • • 6.60
Dutch . . . . . . . . . . • . 3-53
French . . . . . . . . • . • . 3-3°
Swedish . . . . . . . . . . • . 2.40
Danish . . . . . . . . . . • . -9°
Norwegian . . . . . . . . . . . . .36
All others . . . . . . . . . . • . 1.02
By 1889, the position had been considerably altered :
Per cent.
British . . . . . . . . . . . . 75- 2 4
German . . . . . . . . . . . . 9.82
French . . . . . . . . . . • . 6.11
United States . . . . . . . . • . 4- 2 7
Norwegian . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.60
Swedish . . . . . . . . . . . . 1.05
Dutch . . . . . . . . . . • . .24
Italian .. . . . . . . , . . . .15
Danish . . . . . . . . . . . • .02
All others . . . . . . . . . . • . -5°
The tonnage to the Commonwealth in 1913, the year before
the World War, turned shipping topsy-turvy, was 4,288,363,
distributed amongst the various nations thus :
Per cent
British . . . . . . . . . . . . 66.18
German . . . . . . . . . . . . 14.29
Norwegian . . . . . . . . . . . . 5-5 2
French . . . . . . . . . . • . 4.19
Dutch . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.26
United States . . . . . . . . . . 1.78
Swedish . . . . . , . . . . . . .yz
Danish . . . . . . . . . . • . .12
All others . . . . . . . . . . . . 4.94
The post-war years showed a further readjustment of over-
seas shipping to Australia, as indicated by the figures for
1924-25. The total tonnage in that year was 4,761,382.


Per cent.
British 67.42
Japanese . . . . . . . . . . . . 6.25
Norwegian . . . . . . .. . . . . 4.60
United States . . . . . . . , . . 3.91
Dutch , . . . .. . . . . .. 3.41
French . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.19
Swedish . . . . . . . . . , .. 1.82
German . . . . , . . . . . . . 1.71
Italian . . . . . . . . . . . . 1.43
Danish . . . . . . . . . . , . ,91
All others . . . . . . . . . . . . 6.35
The position in 1931-32, with a total tonnage of 5,318,814,
was as follows :
Per cent.
British 59.01
Japanese 12.95
Norwegian . . . . . . . . . . . . 7.43
United States . . . . . . . . . . 3.86
Dutch 2.94
German . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.18
Swedish . . . . . . . . . . , . 2.09
French . . . . . . . . . . . . 1.70
Italian . . . . . . . . . . . . 1.28
Danish . . . . . . . . . , . . .87
All others . . . . . . . . . . . . 5.69
To us Scandinavians, it is gratifying to see that particularly
Norway, and to a lesser degree Sweden, are able to more than
hold their own in the competition with the State-subsidized
shipping of most other countries. Norway, Sweden, and
Denmark together account for more than 10 per cent of
Australia’s overseas shipping to-day. This is mainly due to the
excellently organized and skilfully-conducted Transatlantic
Line and Wilhelmsen’s Line, or, to put it in other words, to
Scandinavian brain and will to succeed.
Transatlantic S.S. Co.
The year 1907 is given as the commencement of a regular
shipping line between Sweden and Australia, the steamships
Tasmania and Australia (each 7,300 tons) having been built
specially for this trade. A year later these ships were followed
by the still more up-to-date Indianic and Helenia. Further, in
1918, the motor ships Bullaren and Tisnaren (each 9,250 tons)
were added to the Swedish-Australian fleet. These latter ships
have proved to be the most suitable for the Australian trade,


and, therefore, in essentials were imitated in the Mirrabooka
and the Parrakoola, which latter vessels were added to the line
in 1928. The improvements refer especially to speed, and at
the same time they have been fitted up to accommodate about
twenty passengers. The building of these larger and faster
boats was made necessary *by the growing trade between
Australia and Sweden and the other Scandinavian countries.
The combination of cargo and passengers has resulted in a
greatly increased traffic between Sweden and Australia.
In 1937-38 two new twin-screw motor ships were added to
the Australian fleet, the Goonawarra and Kanangoora (each
7,500 tons). These vessels, though slightly smaller than the
Mirrabooka and Parrakoola , have luxurious accommodation for
a limited number of passengers. The service speed of the
Goonawarra and Kanangoora is 17 knots, but both vessels are
capable of maintaining 19 knots.
The Transatlantic S.S. Co. has agents in the following
Australian and New Zealand ports :
Brisbane, Newcastle, Sydney, Melbourne, Geelong, Adelaide,
Wallaroo, Port Pirie, Fremantle,Geraldton, Hobart, Wellington,
Auckland, Dunedin, and Bluff.
The superintendent in Australia is Captain A. E. Lundgren,
c.b.e., Sydney.
Norwegian-Australia Line
This line of Norwegian ships, formerly called Norwegian,
Africa and Australia Line, conducted by Messrs. Wilh.
Wilhelmsen, Oslo, commenced operations with a regular service
in the trade to and from Australian ports and Norwegian,
Swedish, Baltic, and Continental ports in the year 1922, under
the guidance in Australian ports of Norwegian-Australia Line
Agency Ltd. as general agents for Australia. The style is now
Wilh. Wilhelmsen Agency Pty. Ltd.
The type of vessels used in the service were, at the com-
mencement, coal or oil-burning steamers, which vessels were,
as operations expanded, gradually withdrawn and replaced by
modern motor ships.
From a small beginning the service has grown until now it
is conducted per medium of about twenty-four vessels sailing
each way per annum.
The inauguration of the motor ships into the service com-
menced towards the end of 1922, with the Thalatta , a new
vessel of register tons, with accommodation for a limited
number of passengers.


1 he fleet of vessels engaged in the regular trade to and from
Australian ports at the present time, all motor ships, include
the following, ranging in gross tonnage from 6,465 to 7,230 ;
Tirranna, Talisman, Titania, Tarifa, Tamerlane, Talabot,
1 aronga, and Tricolor. The above list will be supplemented by
several more motor ships now being built and expected to be
launched in the near future. All these vessels provide excellent
accommodation for twelve passengers.
The average speed of the older vessels is 14 knots per hour,
while the vessels mentioned and those now being built have
been engined to develop 16 or more knots per hour.
The itinerary of the vessels employed in the service outward
from Europe include : Oslo, Fredrikstad, Brevik, Gothenburg,
Gefle, Sundsvall, Mantylnoto, Kotka, Hamburg, Rotterdam,
Antwerp, and Lisbon.
Ports of call en route to Australia, for discharging and loading
cargo, include : In Africa —Accra, Capetown, Mossel Bay,
Algoa Bay, East London, Durban, and Lourenco Marques. In
Australia the service extends to Fremantle, Adelaide, Portland,
Melbourne, Geelong, Sydney, Newcastle, Brisbane, and
Townsville, with occasional calls at Hobart, Launceston, and
Devonport in Tasmania.
The homeward service embraces Port Kembla in New South
Wales, Burnie in Tasmania, and Port Pirie in South Australia,
while the ports of discharge include Lisbon, Bordeaux, Dunkirk,
Antwerp, Rotterdam, Hamburg, London, Swansea, Leith, and
Belfast.
Already, by 1925, the Norwegian-Australia Line had attained
the distinction of being amongst the largest carriers of wool and
general cargo in the Australian trade, and it has remained so
since.
Amongst Scandinavian immigrants who at this end have
been closely associated with Scandinavian shipping and worked
for its expansion, O. E. Pauss, A. T. Schreuder, A. E. Lundgren,
and Niels Storaker are the most outstanding. The Swedish-
Australian Chamber of Commerce should also be mentioned in
this connexion.
Before leaving the subject of Scandinavian shipping to
Australia it is worth recording, as a testimony to Scandinavian
seamanship, that although thousands of Norwegian, Swedish,
and Danish vessels have been in Australian waters those
wrecked on the Australian coast can probably be counted on
the fingers of one hand. A Norwegian barque, the Joseph, was
wrecked on Prince of Wales Island, Torres Strait, in 1890.


Another Norwegian sailing vessel was wrecked at Port Victoria,
South Australia. The Swedish steamer, Lyngern, was wrecked
on Rottnest Island, West Australia, in 1928, while a Norwegian
steamer, the Selje, was sunk by collision off the Victorian coast
in 1930.
Trade
As my account of Scandinavian shipping to this country was
very incomplete and merely indicated the trend of Danish,
Norwegian, and Swedish activities in Australian waters, so the
following account of Scandinavian trade will be cursory also.
There can be little doubt that Swedes and Norwegians com-
menced to trade with Australia already in the thirties of last
century. The settlers required houses, and Australia lacked
soft wood. This had to be obtained from places where it grew
in abundance. Norway and Sweden were the world’s leading
timber-exporting countries, and naturally sent their product
to Australia as soon as it was required. In what quantity we
do not know, because no records are extant from an earlier
period than the fifties of the last century. We know that the
Swedish brigs, the Mary Ann in 1840 and the Gurlie in 1841,
brought timber to Sydney. In addition they brought iron, steel,
pitch, furniture, and various other articles which found a
market there. Though this trade probably lasted for some
years, it never attained any importance, and by the middle
of the fifties it had ceased. Only the timber trade survived.
Australian trade records from 1857 onward show that Norwegian
and Swedish timber —dressed and undressed or made into doors
and window sashes—has always formed a most important item
in the list of Australian imports.
Other lines for which a spontaneous demand arose or which
were sent to Australia as trial shipments, found a temporary
market. Thus in the latter end of the fifties a Danish merchant,
Mr. Melchior, established himself in business in Melbourne and
for some years imported Danish dairy produce, mainly butter
and pork. Also oats came from Denmark, in iB6O 30,000
bushels.
In the same year 25,000 bricks from Sweden were sold in
Victoria. In 1870 82,000 Norwegian bricks were sold (42,000
from Frederikstad, 30,000 from Tonsberg, and 10,000 from
Drammem) ; 363 gallons of beer (205 from Frederikstad, 144
from Christiania, and 14 from Drammen) ; and 15 tons of
salted fish from Tonsberg.
Timber was as yet almost the only article Australia imported


from the Scandinavian countries, and as Denmark produced no
timber for export, she did not participate. The Danish ships,
which came to Australia, generally carried Norwegian and
Swedish timber.
Up to the early eighties the sale of Scandinavian timber in
Australia had been in British hands. However, in or about
1883 timber interests in Norway sent a young Norwegian, Otto
Romcke, to Melbourne. Having studied the conditions there
he decided to settle in Melbourne permanently, and established
himself as an agent and importer of timber. When Romcke
arrived in Australia the usual way of selling timber sent out in
consignment was by auction. Romcke soon commenced to book
direct orders for whole or part cargoes, and also to establish
stocks in Melbourne from which to supply local wants. He was
also the first in Australia to keep stocks of dressed timber
under cover in his storage yards. Another of Otto Romcke’s
innovations, new to Australia, was the manufacture of the now
extensively used three-ply wood.
Some time after his arrival Mr. Romcke joined forces with a
countryman, Captain G. Gunnersen, who had been a timber
agent in Adelaide, the firm Romcke, Gunnersen & Co. being
the result. It was carried on for many years, until the two
partners separated, each carrying on business in his own name.
Mr. Romcke eventually retired from business, but his nephew,
E. O. Romcke, is still carrying on, under the name Romcke
Pty. Ltd. Captain Gunnersen, on retiring, was succeeded by
his son, the business being continued under the name Gunnersen,
Nos worthy Pty. Ltd.
Of other Norwegian immigrants who have been interested in
the importation of Baltic timber should be mentioned Morten
Dahle, who arrived in Melbourne simultaneously with Otto
Romcke, Alstergren and Petersen Larsen, and, in Sydney,
Mr. Augensen.
From about the middle of the eighties other Scandinavian
articles commenced to find a permanent market in Australia,
such as preserved fish, matches, paper, and hardware ; but it
will be advisable henceforth to deal with the Scandinavian
countries separately.
(a) Norway.
As already stated, Norwegian timber has been exported to
Australia for close on a hundred years, but not till 1870 did
the Norwegian Government really do anything to foster this
trade. In that the Government of Norway caused one of


its consuls, W. J. Christophersen, to visit Australia to promote
a more intensive timber trade with this country. On his return
to Norway the Consul wrote an interesting report about the
possibilities of such a trade. This was read by the young,
enterprising Otto Rbmcke, who was to become such an impor-
tant factor in developing not only the Norwegian timber trade
in this part of the world, but also that of other Baltic countries.
During the eighties attention commenced to be drawn to
the opportunity for selling other Norwegian articles in Australia,
particularly preserved hsh and iron. To these two lines were
added safety matches, preserved milk, carbide of calcium, and
some minor articles.
Amongst the pioneers in the fish trade Rasmus Parelius
stands out prominently. He arrived in Melbourne from Norway
in 1885, carrying with him a varied assortment of fish products.
Once having been introduced, the fish trade rapidly attained
considerable proportions. Rasmus Parelius seems to have
lacked the necessary business acumen to benefit by his activity.
Still, he plodded on for many years, continually introducing
new lines of exports from his native land and popularizing the
old ones. Shortly before the Great War he returned to Norway,
where he died a few years later.
Amongst Norwegians in Australia who have played an im-
portant part in promoting the paper trade with this country
should be mentioned the late Carl Steakmest, S. Due of the
now defunct firm Nordskog, Due & Co., Lie, and, in Sydney,
Consul Storaker.
The appended table shows the value of the principal
Norwegian lines imported by Australia during the latter years.
It will be seen that while metal manufactures and certain lines
of paper have considerably increased, matches, wood-pulp, and
calcium carbide have disappeared from the list.


1933-34
1934-35
1935-36
1936-37
I937-3 8
Fish—
£
£
£
£
£
Preserved in tins—
Continental
80,891
89,065
131,017
118,608
88,044
Other
• • .
876
1,648
2,453
3.527
1.427
Metal, manufactures of
19.947
54,984
27,841
47.511
47.742
Oils (in bulk)
gal.
7.541
9.408
9, I 5 I
5.451
9,140
Ores . .
ton
2,4 2 7
1.285
3.186
3,000
2,454
Paper—
Fruit wrapping
cwt.
2 .744
8,169
5T59
2,675
10,563
Printing
ton
59.583
43.520
38,234
4 i . 8 97
37.643
Wrapping . .
ton
21,224
14,172
W.375
27.479
38,179
Writing and typewriting
ton
79,125
74,800
95.259
79,126
68,475
Other
20,043
24.015
21,101
33. i8 9
43,660
Timber —
Dressed
sup. ft.
33.931
37.242
42,850
40.973
58,928
Undressed (a)
sup. ft.
i,7 l6
5.726
267
169
1,621
Other, and manufactures of
623
310
187
605
224
Wood Pulp . .
ton
2,762
12,021
7T45
1 5,377
22,984
All other articles
6,892
6,306
14.027
21,230
64,476
0
340.325
382,671
4 I 5. 2 5 2
440,817
495.560
(a)
Exclusive of timber not measured in super feet.
Trade of Australia with Norway —Years 1935-36 to 1937-38.
Imports
Exports to Norway
In 1935-36 amounted to £ 10,052 (wool, ; cattle hides, £2,215 ; and
fresh apples,
In 1936—37 to (wheat, ; fresh apples, ; wool,
In 1937-3 8 to £56,573 (wheat, £45,577 ; fresh apples, £3,513 ; and wool,
£4>59 8 ).
(b) Sweden.
It has previously been mentioned that Swedish goods were
brought to Sydney as early as 1840. To be sure, an old trade
list shows that Swedish tar was sold in that remote settlement
in 1829. Still, apart from timber and a little pitch and tar, up
to about 1890 the trade between Sweden and Australia was
negligible. Round about 1890 hardware and pig-iron were
added, while other lines followed in quick succession, as shown
by the following list :
1892 —Iron bars, agricultural implements, and cutlery.
3:895 —Printing paper.
1896 — Chemicals and telephone materials.
1897 — Glassware.
1898 — Machinery, matches, and wrapping paper.
1899 — Nails.
1900 — Electric appliances.


1906 — Dairy implements and calcium carbide.
1907 — Wood manufactures.
1908 — Other paper and cardboard.
In the year 1910 the value of Swedish exports to Australia
had reached the comparatively high figure of £360,633, while
the value of exports from Australia to Sweden was only £2,375.
Three or four years earlier Sweden had made a change in her
consular service in this part of the world by sending a paid
consul, Count Morner, to Sydney to take charge of her consular
affairs in Australia, New Zealand, and the South Seas. Morner
soon received a large number of trade inquiries from Swedish
exporters, who were naturally anxious to know the possibilities
of trade now that a direct shipping line had been established
between Sweden and Australia. Count Morner realizing his
own commercial incapacity sought advice on the possible open-
ing for Swedish trade from the few Swedish business men at
that time in Sydney, amongst whom may be specially men-
tioned J. H. Anderson, W. Kopsen, Ivan Nelson, and A.
Ringdahl. It became the practice to hand over the trade
inquiries received from Sweden to one or other of these gentle-
men for their advice and attention, and Count Morner would
often refer to them as his commercial council or chamber of
commerce.
When Count Morner in 1910 left Sydney, he bequeathed
many of his ambitious plans for the future to his successor,
Consul-in-Chief S. T. von Goes. With a zeal and energy that
overcame all obstacles, von Goes succeeded in communicating
his enthusiasm for a Swedish Chamber of Commerce to all
Swedes of any commercial standing in Australia, and finally
an auspicious event occurred to usher in the inaugural meeting
of the proposed institution.
On the 13th March, 1911, one of those dinners for which
Swedish ships have become famous in Australian waters had
been arranged on board the Indianic, then at anchor in Sydney
Harbour, and a large and representative gathering of Swedes
and their Australian friends had been invited. After the dinner
a meeting was held on board the steamer with the object of
establishing a Swedish Chamber of Commerce, Consul von Goes
presiding. A resolution was passed to the effect that the
chamber be inaugurated for the purpose of promoting trade
relations between Sweden and Australia, the head office to be
in Sydney. A committee was appointed to further the plan,
and before long the institution was an established fact, the
name chosen being The Swedish Chamber of Commerce for


Australasia and South Sea Islands. Consul von Goes was
elected president.
At the first annual meeting, held on 30th June, 1911, the
chamber had twenty-five members.
Amongst the more interesting matters discussed at the
meetings during the first twelve months was the desirability of
establishing a Swedish trading company and a Swedish match
factory, neither of which materialized. The main business of
the council was, however, to deal with the trade inquiries
received from Sweden, and to consider means by which to enrol
new members and improve the financial position of the chamber.
Indeed, the whole of the first years of its existence was a
struggle against economic difficulties. Had it not been for the
great enthusiasm of its founder and first president, the history
of the chamber would probably have been a short one. But,
like his predecessor, Count Morner, von Goes considered it one
of his principal duties to bring the Swedes in Australia together
to work for some common ideal and to achieve something that
could be of practical benefit to the country of their birth as
well as to the country of their adoption.
In 1913 the Chamber of Commerce was much encouraged by
the commercial attache to the Swedish Legation in Tokio,
Mr. Sahlin, arriving to report on the possibilities of extending
trade between Sweden and Australia. He remained twelve
months, and through his reports did much to promote trade
intercourse between the two countries. In this connexion men-
tion must also be made of the activities of the two Swedish
trade stipends, Nils Ljungberg and C. G. Svensson, who both
introduced new Swedish lines to the Australian market.
The outbreak of the war meant, of course, a particularly
active and strenuous time for the chamber, Australian im-
porters in many cases being unable to obtain goods from their
usual sources of supply. Their predicament afforded a great
opportunity for extending imports from Sweden, of which
opportunity the Swedish Chamber of Commerce made good use.
The struggle of the Swedish Chamber of Commerce came to
an end when, in 1919, it received a grant from the Swedish
Government of 5,000 kronor annually. Two years later this
subsidy was doubled. This enabled the council to engage for
the first time an organizing secretary who could give his whole
time to the chamber. Hitherto it had, in a sense, been part of,
or supplementary to, the service of the consulate, with the
secretary of the consulate generally also secretary to the
chamber.


The Chamber of Commerce was fortunate in getting a singu-
larly able and energetic secretary in Mr. G. M. Lindergren.
When he took over the position in 1920 there were only
37 active members. Before the end of the year the number
had increased to 108, and is now over 200. It fell to Mr.
Lindergren to organize a sample room of Swedish goods. From
a small beginning the sample room has become an important
factor in extending Sweden’s trade with Australia. Finally he
became editor of the trade journal established in 1914. From
a modest beginning this publication has become an illustrated
monthly journal of 32 pages, and is indispensable to the
chamber’s activity. In 1931 appeared a 20-years’jubilee number
of 430 pages, which for all time will remain a monument to
Swedish enterprise in Australia. Apart from its commercial
importance it is of considerable historical value.
It is probably also due to Mr. Lindergren’s enthusiasm and
organizing talent that the sphere of the chamber’s activity has
been extended to the various State capitals and that a sample
room was opened in Perth, supervised by the Swedish Consul
for Western Australia.
In perusing the lists of office-bearers since the Swedish
Chamber was founded, it becomes evident that a small number
of business men in Sydney has been its mainstay. Presidents
in order of succession have been : Consul von Goes till 1917,
when he was transferred to Chicago ; J. H. Andersson, John
Sonnerdale, Torkel Siwerts, and Captain A. E. Lundgren. Of
other Swedes who have given their best should be mentioned
J. B. Nelson, W. Kopsen, J. Osterman, B. O. England, C. A.
Fahlstedt, Fred. Warberg, Ivan Nelson, C. D. Johnson ; in
Melbourne, I. D. Waern, H. Helin, and G. W. Petre ; in
Adelaide, E. Osterman and Fromen ; in Perth, E. C. Stenberg.
The office and sample room of the Swedish Chamber of
Commerce are located at 38 Carrington Street, Sydney.
The imports to Australia from each of the three Scandinavian
countries are indicated in the accompanying diagram.


k I
2.500.000 (I
2.000. t-l -K
1 A (Swedes?
1.500.000 lh 11 - / \ V-4
' 11 A l
1 I \ • \ \
i ; /i \ \
I \Ui \
L HM \
Jl ' 1 \ 1
I \ I ]
I 1 1 1
1.000. 1 f —\j \
< \ I ll vjs-
/ / \ I i \ /K
-7
\AM
500,000 -V // A" ’r
/ > / /(V \ i «
' n \
Z)es?/r? arAy\ . ' / \
1905 1910 1915-16 1920-21 1925-26 1930-31 1935-36
Diagram showing Imports from the Scandinavian Countries to
the Year 1935-36
The curve for Sweden rises fairly consistently up to the
outbreak of the Great War. During the war it drops to about
the 1910 level, after which it rises rapidly, reaching its highest
peak in the financial year 1920-21, when Swedish goods sold in
Australia realized slightly over £2,750,000. The following year
it drops considerably. Still, compared with the pre-war period,
it remains high till the world depression reaches Australia
about 1930. The vagaries of currencies have played some part
in determining the values of imports, but the great drop in
1:930-3 r is mainly due to economic nationalism or the policy
of buying as little as possible from other countries.
It is interesting to notice that the values of imports from
Norway to Australia moves in sympathy with those from
Sweden, whereas those from Denmark follow a course of their
own. In 1915-16, and again in 1920-21, there was a great sale
in Australia for Danish cement. The fact that at intervals


Trade of Australia with Sweden—Years 1935-36 to 1937-38.
Imports of Swedish Origin
1935-36
193637
1937-38
£
/
£
Pulp for papermaking . . ton
177,760
23L458
434.295
Machines and machinery—
Dairy implements and machinery. .
68,168
83.927
80,619
Electrical machinery and appliances
23080
29.423
44,891
Ball and roller bearings
35,006
4L464
7U735
Other
75,667
87,023
127,782
Metal, manufactures of—Iron and
Steel—
Bar rod, etc. . . . . cwt.
13>3i a
10,673
18,184
Other
6.333
7.3H
15.077
Lamps and lamp ware . .
12,030
13.537
28,738
Nails .. . . . . . . ton
3.513
2,917
3.183
Screws . .
5.205
5,060
7,061
Tools of trade . .
18,569
19,574
27,420
Other
25.731
23.313
42,695
Furniture
4.701
7.351
8,560
Timber—
Dressed . . . . sup. ft.
14,610
22,765
14.872
Undressed (a) . . sup. ft.
13.390
15,882
57.429
Other and wood manufactures
39.644
4 7.633
50.099
Paper—
Boards . . . . . . ton
55.203
48,482
6i,493
Fruit wrapping . . . . ton
25.629
33.967
40,565
Printing . . . . . . ton
50,828
33,201
49.694
Tissue and tissue cap . . ton
50.531
38,876
55.682
Wrapping . . . . . . ton
73.6oi
93.865
98,766
Writing and typewriting , . ton
20,712
18,914
20,731
Other
6,292
5.614
12,004
Stationery
2,802
4.893
1,966
Glass and glassware
12,208
13,119
9.247
Potassium salts . . . . cwt.
9.075
8,270
5.092
Pitch and tar . . . . . . cwt.
844
1,224
888
Matches and Vestas, gross of boxes . .
160
523
197
Vacuum cleaners
103,067
70,409
109,276
All other articles
23,926
27,984
53.092
972,096
1,048,655
1.55U333
(a) Exclusive of timber not measured in super feet.
during latter years an Australian shipping company has had
ships built in Copenhagen accounts for the otherwise low import
values from Denmark having been considerably increased.
The table shows the kind of goods, and their value in
Australian pounds, imported by Australia from Sweden, and
vice versa, for the last three years.
Exports Thereto
In 1935-36, £264,918 (fruits, fresh apples, £39,147 ; hides and skins, cattle,
£27,427 ; wool, greasy and scoured, £182,091).


In 1936-37 to £344,839 (fruits, fresh apples, £36,059 ; cattle hides, £29,170 ;
wool, greasy and scoured, £246,223).
In 1937—38 to £472,657 (fruits, fresh apples, £41,775 ; cattle hides, £41,586 ;
wool, greasy and scoured, £275,251).
(c) Denmark.
While prior to round about 1890 practically no trade had
existed between Denmark and Australia, Danes who had settled
in Sydney and Melbourne now commenced seeking a market
for various products of their homeland, such as Christian
Hansen’s junkets, butter colour, Hirchsprung’s cigars, Tuborg
and Carlsberg beer, terra-cotta, Copenhagen porcelain, various
seeds, and other odds and ends. The only one who succeeded
was Mr. Gommesen in Sydney, who had got the agency for
Christian Hansen’s junkets, which quickly became popular with
the Australians.
In 1897 the Danish Export Trading Co., founded in
Copenhagen a year or two earlier, sought an agent in Melbourne.
This was accepted by a Dane, Henry Olsen, who had come to
Queensland as an impecunious immigrant during the assisted
immigration to that colony, and who at the time was managing
a business for herbal remedies in Melbourne. To establish better
business connexions, and also to be instructed in the making
of artificial marble, a recent Danish invention, he proceeded
to Denmark. The artificial marble did not take on in Australia,
but several agencies Olsen had secured during his sojourn in
Copenhagen found a market. These included seamless milkeans,
butter-salt, buttons, etc. To these lines he later added cement,
Carlsberg beer, and Norwegian sardines. Times were in Mr.
Olsen’s favour. The sardines in particular were a great success,
and eventually dominated the Australian market for several
years. Also the Danish cement found a ready sale, while
Carlsberg beer, during and after the war, was disposed of in
great quantities, and took the place of the popular German
beer, 'Beck’s Lager.’
In 1909 the business was formed into a company, Henry
Olsen & Co. Ltd., with himself and members of his family as
shareholders. Shortly after, branches were opened in Sydney
and South Africa, and business connexions established with
India, the Dutch Indies, and the Far East. In 1914 the firm
became agents for the East Asiatic Co. So rapidly did the
business expand that in a few years it developed into an import
and export concern of considerable magnitude, with ramifica-
tions in many parts of the world. Eventually Henry Olsen


settled in Copenhagen, from there to direct his extensive enter-
prise. While in Copenhagen he was tempted to merge his
business with a new Danish company with far-reaching world
commerce in view. A slump overtook the venture. It crashed,
and with it Henry Olsen & Co. came to an end. The branches
in Melbourne, Sydney, and South Africa passed into other
hands. The strain of it all told so heavily on Henry Olsen that
his health broke down. By his death in 1921 a truly remarkable
career closed.
Of others who in the nineties and later opened up a market
in Australia for Danish articles, should be mentioned Holdenson
& Nielson, Jorgen Pedersen, P. W. Heyman, James Bell, and
F. L. Smidth.
Holdenson & Nielson became agents for the 'Perfect’ separa-
tor manufactured by Burmeister & Wain in Copenhagen, So
successfully did the firm push the Danish separator that it
had become a serious rival to the Swedish separators, when
Burmeister & Wain sold its patent rights to Alfred Laval in
Stockholm, and the 'Perfect’ separator ceased to be manufac-
tured.
The Danish-Australian Chamber of Commerce
To promote trade between Australia and Denmark, a Danish-
Australian Chamber of Commerce came into being in 1920.
The wave of patriotism caused by the reunion of North-
Slesvig with Denmark naturally spread to Danes living in
foreign parts, creating amongst them a desire to render service
to their native land. In Australia one helpful circumstance was
that a branch of the Transatlantic Company, founded a little
earlier in Copenhagen, had been opened in Sydney. The out-
come of it all was the above-mentioned chamber of commerce.
It was founded in Sydney by Danish business people there
and delegates from Melbourne. Poul Holdenson, then acting
Consul-General for Denmark, was elected president, Hans Kjser
(manager of the Transatlantic Co.’s branch in Sydney) vice-
president, and Johannes Jensen (a former Danish vice-consul
in Hobart) organizing secretary. Members of the council were :
In Sydney —M. Christopherson, W. Halberg, C. W. Kofoed,
C. Olsen ; in Melbourne—G. A. Hornemann, S. Hartman C.
Hasforth, L. Lauritz ; in Adelaide —Consul V. Stacy ; in
Brisbane —Consul T. W. Bouchard; in Perth —Consul P.
Fraenkel; in Hobart —Consul Sir Henry Jones.
The following Danish-Australian firms were associated with
the chamber : In Sydney—L. Bach & Co., Pacific Supply Co.,


and Transatlantic Co. ; in Melbourne —Hawkins & Bendixsen,
Holdenson & Nielson, L. S. Lauritz & Son, and the successor to
Henry Olsen & Co., H. Hanna.
In addition there were a number of non-trading members
who had joined up to lend their moral support to the under-
taking. Finally two distinguished members of the community
were elected life honorary members —W. M. Hughes and Sir
Adrian Knox, the former the Prime Minister, the latter Chief
Justice of the Commonwealth of Australia.
The object of the Danish-Australian Chamber of Commerce
was ‘to foster trade and shipping between Denmark and
Australia, and other overseas countries.’
An elaborate Trade Review appeared in 1921. The front
page was a work of art, in colour print, designed by a Dane
in Sydney, Emil Nielson. On it were the Danish and Australian
flags side by side. Underneath the national symbols was a map
of Australia from which was suspended, in a red and white
ribbon, little Denmark. Mr. Hughes gave the publication his
blessing in a letter, in which he said, amongst many other
things
‘ . . . A Danish-Australian Chamber of Commerce is being
organized, and there need be no fear regarding lack of energy
on the part of Danish business men settled in the Common-
wealth. To them we may look in full confidence for initiative
tending to develop results of practical value. . . . There is
room for more people of the right type in Australia, and the
hope may be expressed that the inauguration of the new
chamber of commerce will encourage suitable immigration, and
thus tend to strengthen Danish-Australian commerce.’
After the Prime Minister’s letter followed a suitable Foreword
by the president, Consul Holdenson, fully illustrated articles
about Denmark and Australia, records of Danish-Australian
enterprises and personalities, etc.
Altogether it was a most creditable publication, and it is to
be regretted that only the initial number appeared.
Misfortune dogged the progress of the Danish-Australian
Chamber of Commerce almost from the beginning. The once
so vigorous firm, Henry Olsen & Co., had come to grief ; the
Danish Transatlantic Company went into liquidation, and Hans
Kjaer was recalled to Denmark ; Johannes Jensen left Australia
never to return. These losses would probably have been made
good had the new Consul-General, Ove Lunn, who arrived
shortly after in Melbourne from San Francisco, been sym-
pathetic to the chamber, but, unfortunately, he saw in the


Trade of Australia with Denmark —Years 1935-36 to
Imports of Danish Origin
1937-3*-
—
1935-36
£
1936-37
£
193 7.3 8
£
Sausage casings
9.7 61
—-
—
Liquors
2,295
2,334
2,434
Seeds ,.
1,329
1,806
2,791
Oils —Lubricating (mineral)
1,152
—
624
Cryolite
2,933
2,095
2.351
Cement-making machines
2,i3 I
1,209
772
Cream separators
1,007
1,232
2.239
Churns of all kinds ; cheese presses
2,568
912
i,73°
Dynamo electric machines . .
L432
1,546
1,229
Engines—Diesel type
3.662
241
470
Other machines and machinery
2,422
2,285
5,358
Tools of trade
748
833
1,103
Rennet
io,975
10,389
11,581
All other articles
8,699
12,680
11,223
Total . .
51,114
37,562
43,905
institution a rival to one of his own functions —that of fostering
trade with Denmark. Not only did he keep aloof from the
chamber, but he did not support an application to the Danish
Government for an annual grant, the result being that the
chamber was only subsidized with a trivial £SO. All these
adversities caused the patriotic fervour which had fathered the
Danish-Australian Chamber of Commerce, gradually to evapor-
ate, and an effort made by Consul Holdenson to put new life
into it by transfer of the headquarters from Sydney to Melbourne
having no beneficial result, it succumbed.
Exports Thereto :
In 1935-36 came to £40,525 (fresh apples, £342 ; hides and skins, cattle,
/19,871 ; wool, greasy, £532 ; wool, scoured and washed, £18,905 ; all other
articles, £875).
In 1936-37 to £40,748 (fresh apples, £374 ; hides and skins, cattle, £37,029 ;
all other articles, £3,345).
In 1937-38 to £29,285 (fresh apples, £'2,053 ; hides and skins, cattle.
£15,150; wool, greasy, £6,195; wool, scoured and washed, £1.817; all
other articles, £4,070).


SCANDINAVIAN CONSULAR SERVICE
The first foreign country to be represented by a consul in
Australia appears to have been France, a Mr. Arnold having-
been appointed French Consul in Sydney as early as 1838.
Shortly after followed consuls for the United States, Belgium,
and the Free Towns of Germany (Hamburg, Lubeck, and
Bremen).
Swedish-Norwegian Consuls
In 1851 consuls for Sweden and Norway were appointed —
in Sydney (George Were), Melbourne (I. B. Were), and Port
Adelaide. Other Australian seaport towns, though growing,
were as yet of too little importance to be considered, and not
till 1859 was the consular service for the dual monarchy ex-
tended to Geelong, where a vice-consul was appointed under
the consul in Melbourne. In 1865 a Swedish-Norwegian vice-
consulate was established in Hobart, also under the consulate
in Melbourne. In 1868 a vice-consulate was established in
Newcastle, and placed under the consul in Sydney.
As shipping increased and other seaport towns came into
prominence, the consular service of Sweden and Norway was
further extended. Thus a vice-consul was appointed in
Launceston in 1877, and Brisbane became the seat of a con-
sulate in 1883, while a vice-consul was appointed in Port Pirie
in 1890. Already in the seventies the consulate in Port Adelaide
was moved to Adelaide, and Port Adelaide had to be content
with a vice-consulate. Under the consul in Melbourne a vice-
consul was appointed in 1894 to serve Perth and Fremantle.
The dissolution of the union between Sweden and Norway
in 1905 brought the partnership in consuls to an end. The
separation of the consular service was rigidly carried out, no
consul being suffered to hold the dual position of consul for
both countries longer than was required for setting up inde-
pendent consular establishments. Some consuls chose hence-
forth to represent Sweden and some Norway and each country
appointed its consul-in-chief, or consul-general, to take charge
of its service for the whole of Australasia.
Swedish Consuls
Sweden's first Consul-in-Chief, Count Carl Birger Morner,
arrived in Sydney in 1906, the capital of New South Wales


having been chosen as the headquarters of Sweden’s consular
service in this part of the world. He was succeeded in 1910 by
Sigurd Theodor von Goes. In 1916, von Goes left Australia, and
a local business man, J. H. Andersson was put in charge as
acting consul-general. Von Goes was transferred to Chicago,
and in 1918 Einar Henrik Lindquist was appointed to the
Australasian office, which he held until 1933, when he was
transferred to Shanghai. He was succeeded by the present
Consul-General, Carl de Dardel.
To assist the consul-general in consular affairs pertaining to
Sydney, a vice-consul was appointed, and he became acting
consul-general whenever the chief of the office had to go to
Sweden.
The position as vice-consul in Sydney has in turn been filled
by T. B. Dibbs, C. H. Ross, J. H. Andersson, W. Kopsen, and
L. J. Sonnerdale. While vice-consuls are placed under the
consuls in the respective State capitals, the one in Sydney is
directly under the consul-general.
To the office of the consul-general was in 1913 attached a
commercial attache, who was succeeded by a chancellor.
Swedish consuls are located as follows :
Sydney . . . . . . . . Consul-General
Sydney . . . . . . . . Vice-Consul
Sydney . . . . . . . . Chancellor
Newcastle . . . . . . Vice-Consul
Melbourne . . . . . . Consul
Melbourne . . . . . . Vice-Consul
Brisbane . . . . . . . . Consul
Rockhampton . . . . . . Vice-Consul
Townsville . . . . . . Vice-Consul
Adelaide . . . . . . . . Consul
Port Pirie . . . . . . Vice-Consul
Port Adelaide . . . . . . Vice-Consul
Perth . . . . . . . . Consul
Albany . . . . . . . . Vice-Consul
Hobart Consul
Of Swedish immigrants who as consuls in the past served
their native land honestly and well, mention should be made
of Carl Fahlstedt in Sydney; James Dickson Waern in
Melbourne, from 1906 to 1925 ; G. E. Stenberg in Perth, from
1924 to 1935 ; Henning Helin in Melbourne, 1925 to 1935*


Norwegian Consuls
Otto Romcke was appointed honorary Consul-General for
Norway in 1906. To assist him he was given a paid vice-consul,
the first being Hans Jorgen Gundersen (previously Consul for
Norway and Sweden in Melbourne), the second Sigurd Bentzon,
and the third Hans Fay. Melbourne thus became the centre of
Norway s consular service in Australasia, which it remained
till 1929.
In 1915 Mr. Romcke resigned, and the office was henceforth
occupied by a paid consul-general. As Otto Romcke’s successor
Arne Scheel, the permanent head of the Norwegian Foreign
Office, was appointed. However, he never took charge of the
position. In the following year Finn Koren, then Consul in
Montreal, was appointed Consul-General; but he did not
arrive in Melbourne till 1921, and was succeeded by Erik Arntz
in 1922, a Norwegian business man, A. T. Schreuder, filling the
gap as acting Consul-General. Mr. Arntz resigned in 1929, and
was succeeded by Hans Fay, who, in turn, has recently been
succeeded by F. S. Platou.
Shortly after the arrival of Hans Fay from the United States,
where he had held a consular position, the Consulate-General
was transferred from Melbourne to Sydney. The transfer
coincided with the death in Sydney of the Consul, Olav Pauss,
who, in recognition of his service to Norway, had been allowed
to remain independent of the Consulate-General in Melbourne.
Norwegian consuls are located as follows :
Sydney . . . . . . . . Consul-General
Sydney Consul
Newcastle Vice-Consul
Melbourne . . . . . . Consul
Geelong . . . . . . . . Vice-Consul
Brisbane . . . . . . . . Consul
Rockhampton Vice-Consul
Port Adelaide . . . . . . Consul
Port Pirie . . . . . . Vice-Consul
Wallaroo . . . . . . . . Vice-Consul
Fremantle . . . . . . Consul
Albany . . . . . . . . Vice-Consul
Bunbury Vice-Consul
Hobart . . . . . . . . Consul
Launceston Vice-Consul
Of Norwegian immigrants who as consuls have deserved the
esteem of their native country, Otto Romcke and A. T.
SCANDINAVIANS IN AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND


Schreuder in Melbourne, and Olav Pauss and Niels Storaker
in Sydney, stand out prominently.
Danish Consuls
The Danish consular service in Australasia developed differ-
ently from that of Sweden and Norway inasmuch as Melbourne
was made consular headquarters, which it continued to be for
many years.
The first consul to be appointed (1852) was Jonathan Binns
Were, a prominent merchant. Under him, and on his recom-
mendation, vice-consuls were appointed in the following year
in Sydney, where his brother George was chosen, as well as in
Adelaide and Hobart. To assist him in his consular work a
vice-consul was appointed in Melbourne in 1854. In 1859 a
vice-consul was appointed in Geelong and one in Perth. At
Port Pirie also a vice-consulate was established a little later.
In the course of time changes and extensions took place.
Thus in 1865 the vice-consulate in Sydney was elevated to a
consulate, with the Danish merchant, Anton Tange, as the
first consul. A vice-consulate was established at Newcastle a
few years later, and placed under the consul in Sydney. In 1867
a consulate was established in Brisbane to serve Queensland.
I. B. Were, who exercised authority with regard to Victoria,
South Australia, Western Australia, and Tasmania, had the
title of Consul-General conferred on him in 1880.
In 1891 an independent consulate was set up in Adelaide,
and the vice-consulate in Port Pirie was placed under it. In
1897 Perth got its own consulate, with a vice-consul in
Fremantle. Vice-consulates were established in Brisbane in
1922, and in Townsville some years earlier.
Danish consuls are located as follows :
Sydney . . . . . . . . Consul-General
Sydney Vice-Consul
Newcastle Vice-Consul
Melbourne . . . . . • Consul
Geelong Vice-Consul
Brisbane . . . . . . . • Consul
Brisbane . . . . . . . . Vice-Consul
Townsville . . . . . . Vice-Consul
Adelaide Consul
Port Pirie Vice-Consul
Perth Consul
Fremantle . . . . . - Vice-Consul
Hobart Consul


As with Swedish and Norwegian consuls, the names of Danish
consuls since consulates were first established have been omitted.
They run into scores, and mean little to us to-day. Only some
of them have been really outstanding men, such as I. B. Were,
who was one of Melbourne’s earliest pioneers ; F. W. Were ;
T. A. Boesen, a leading merchant in Sydney ; and P. J.
Holdenson.
Of Danes who have been, or still are, consuls may be men-
tioned : In Sydney—Anto Tange (merchant), L. V. Marcker
(merchant), C. V. Koefoed (surveyor) ; in Melbourne —D.
Howitz (draughtsman), Jorgen Andersen (bank clerk), P. J.
Holdenson ; in Brisbane —P. C. Poulsen (photographer), Jacob
Christensen (dentist), Vilh. Larsen (retired public servant) ; in
Townsville —C. Sparre (contractor), H. Horn (jeweller) ; in
Perth —P. Fraenkel (university professor) ; in Newcastle —R.
Rasmussen (newsagent).
The above shows the variety of occupations followed by
Scandinavian honorary consuls in Australia.
Honorary consuls-general in Australia have been : I. B. Were
till 1885 ; F. C. Rowan (a civil engineer, who had worked on
the railway bridge across the Limfjord and spoke Danish) till
1891 ; F. W. Were (son of I. B. Were) till 1916. Then followed,
in turn, consuls-general sent out from Denmark: Otto Wadsted,
Ove Lunn, and G. Host.
Duties of Consuls
Scandinavian consuls have often been criticized by the
immigrants for not knowing the language of the country they
represented, or for lack of sympathy towards this or that Dane,
Norwegian, or Swede who had fallen on evil days and gone to
the consul of his native land with his troubles. Quite erroneously
each believed the consul was there for the sake of the immi-
grant, when in reality he had been appointed solely to assist
shipping.
If a vessel flying the flag of the country he represented was
wrecked, it was the consul’s duty to take charge of the crew,
care for them, and provide for their return to the home port
at the first opportunity. If a sailor took ill and had to be left
behind, the consul was responsible for his being cared for.
Sailors, to replace deserters and disabled seamen, were signed
on at the consulate. If they were paid off, it was done at the
office of the consul. If trouble arose on a vessel in port he acted
as a justice of peace. Letters from home would be waiting for
the ship’s crew at the consulate. At a later date sailors could


send money home through the consulates. These duties, with
such modihcations as greatly improved means of communica-
tions have made desirable, are still in vogue.
As the captain and his officers, and indeed most of the rank
and hie, could make themselves understood in English, there
was no need for the consuls to understand Danish or whatever
language was concerned. For this reason all the qualifications
required for becoming a consul were that he be a person of good
repute, and sufficiently well-to-do to make advances in con-
nexion with shipping till such a time as he could be reimbursed
from the home country.
The position of consul was an honorary one, but he was
entitled to fees which, when shipping was brisk, would at least
pay him for his time. Otherwise his only reward was the social
standing the office gave him. He would gain admittance to
State or municipal functions, and on such occasions could shine
in consular uniform —sometimes embellished by a decoration.
A consul has always been important at social gatherings, and,
consequently, as a rule, consular positions have been, and still
are, eagerly sought after.
From an economic point of view the office of consul occasion-
ally led to the obtaining of profitable agencies from the country
he represented.
That an Englishman should desire to become consul for a
foreign land out of love for that country and its nationals would
be unreasonable to expect, and with comparatively few excep-
tions, all the Scandinavian consuls in Australia have been, and
still are, Britishers.
The Consuls and the Immigrants
As stated in the foregoing, originally the consuls had no
responsibility whatsoever towards immigrants, and even now
they function only in certain matters connected with immigrants
who have retained the nationality of their native land.
The reason for a country nursing its shipping, while showing
comparative indifference towards those of its sons and daughters
who settle in foreign lands, is natural enough : the former is a
source of revenue, and the latter are a loss.
Nevertheless, it is true that up to a point migration nowadays
is welcomed to relieve the pressure of over-population ; that
immigrants often have pioneered new markets for the products
of their native land ; that some do return with wealth gathered
abroad ; that more money is sent home by the immigrants


than flows in the opposite direction ; that in the case of inheri-
tances the balance has always been in favour of the old country,
and that as tourists they also are a source of revenue.
All this is now being realized in the Scandinavian countries,
and the present feeling is that the immigrants are not necessarily
lost to their native land ; that they possess a certain economic
value which might be exploited ; that from the cultural point
of view also the emigrants may enrich the country which gave
them birth and to which by sentiment they still belong. In
Denmark, Norway, and Sweden people now talk about ‘the
greater Denmark/ ‘the greater Norway/ and the 'greater
Sweden/ which include all Danes, Norwegians, and Swedes
wherever in the world they may be domiciled.
But the present friendly feeling towards emigrants by people
at home has not always existed. From about the middle of
last century till comparatively recently, those who left were
looked upon as irretrievably lost to their native land. What at
first was moderate migration became an exodus growing from
year to year till in the seventies and eighties of last century it
went as high as 107,000 in a single year. By about 1890 one
third of Norway’s small population had migrated to foreign
lands, one-fourth of Sweden’s, and one-sixth of Denmark’s.
There was hardly a home in any of the Scandinavian countries
without one or more chairs standing empty. And it was the
young and strong, the energetic and enterprising, the immediate
hope of the future, who left. Small wonder the authorities and
leading men became alarmed and commenced opposing migra-
tion.
It was quite natural under such circumstances that immi-
grants had to shift for themselves, and that consuls were given
no instructions to help them in any way whatsoever. If they
received any assistance, it was given out of the consul’s good
heart.
Not every consul has been a philanthropist, nor have their
purses in many cases been long enough to allow them to be so ;
still, it is only fair to say that many of the consuls showed
kindness towards the immigrants. The consuls of old were
mostly immigrants themselves, and sympathetic towards
fellow-immigrants from wherever they hailed. To mention one
instance, the Swedish-Norwegian and Danish pioneer consul,
I. B. Were, who represented the Scandinavian countries for
thirty-four years, was a good friend to many of the immigrants.
The same can be said of his son, F. W. Were, who was consul
for Denmark for forty-one years. Where the consul has been a


Scandinavian, his interest in the fate and doings of his country-
men was often generous.
Paid Consuls
With the arrival of consuls-general sent out from home a
new era started.
Although the change would scarcely affect outlying places,
the announcement of their coming went like a thrill through
the whole immigrant population. It was as if their native land
by one stroke had moved a few thousand miles nearer —as if
after all the immigrants were considered worth while.
Probably the Norwegians did not feel that thrill for the
reason that a local man was made consul-general, but the
Swedes and the Danes did.
Never shall I forget the welcome Count Morner received
when passing through Melbourne. In my mind I still see him
at the banquet given in his honour, responding to the toast of
welcome. He was a true type of the Nordic race, the scion of
an old aristocratic Swedish family, tall, handsome, and a
finished orator. He brought, he said, a greeting to the Swedes
in Australia from all that was good, and true, and beautiful
in their native land. Morner, besides having been endowed
with the gift of speech, was a writer of no mean attainment,
and possessed a poetic vein in his make-up. When he finished
the best after-dinner speech it has been my privilege to hear,
by saying ‘ I bring you a personal greeting from your King, and
I bring you a greeting from your mother/ tears welled to the
eyes of many a hardy immigrant, while the applause was
deafening.
The welcome Morner received in Sydney would not have
been less enthusiastic. Although during his four years' sojourn
in Australia Count Morner enjoyed a considerable amount of
popularity, I cannot help thinking that his behaviour must
occasionally have filled with misgiving the minds of the more
solid Swedes in Sydney. Temperamentally he was akin to
Sweden's immortal bard, Belman, to Denmark’s Holger
Drachman, to England's Lord Byron —a man of the world, a
rebel against convention, charming and in some respects weak.
But, like Belman, Drachman, Byron, and others of their tribe
he possessed the gift of inspiring. There can be little doubt
that Morner’s infinite pride in, and love of, Sweden, with his
matchless oratory, contributed powerfully to the erection of a
monument to Dr. Solander at Botany Bay, the building of a
Swedish church in Melbourne, the founding of a Swedish society


in Sydney in 1910, and to the establishment of the Swedish-
Australian Chamber of Commerce the year after. Morner created
the enthusiasm and the will to do things which Pastor Hultmark,
von Goes, and other practical Swedes built upon.
The welcome accorded the first consul-general sent out from
Denmark, Otto Wadsted, more than a decade later, was also
most enthusiastic. Yet, the Scandinavian immigrants were
destined to pass through a period of disappointment.
The consuls from home had been sent out to co-ordinate the
consular service in Australia, New Zealand, and the Western
Pacific in order to make it more efficient, and also to promote
trade between their respective country and Australia. They
were permanent Government officials with a job entirely
different from that of fathering the immigrants. The whole
affair had become business-like. If, say, a Dane took his
troubles to the consul, the latter would start by ascertaining
if the person approaching him was still a Danish subject ; next,
he would make up his mind if the matter was one for the consul
to meddle in. The consuls-general are mostly juridically trained,
and know exactly where they stand. It is evident that the
immigrants had to adjust their ideas of what they had a right
to expect from their consul-general. If they receive more-
such as a friendly interest in their national societies and church
affairs —it is because the consul-general, besides being the
official representative of their native land, is a good Dane or
Norwegian, or Swede, as the case might be.




SCANDINAVIAN PLACE NAMES
The Scandinavian place names in Australia are not very
numerous. This is a natural consequence of the Scandinavian
immigrants having been scattered all over the continent. Thus,
they were unable to make their presence felt in any particular
district. Such place names of Danish, Norwegian, and Swedish
origin as we know of have often risen accidentally or have been
of transient nature. For instance, a number of gold reefs were
given Scandinavian names by early gold-diggers of northern
race, but as these reefs and mines became exhausted, the men
who had worked them dispersed and the names disappeared.
As previously stated, when I arrived in Victoria in 1891 a
district in Gippsland was known as the Danish Settlement,
and was often referred to as such in the press. It had had as
much right to have been called ‘New Denmark' as a district
in New South Wales to be called ‘New Italy/ which name still
prevails although there is nothing Italian about it to-day.
It is often strange how place names do arise. For instance,
studying a tourist map of the mountainous country north-east
of Melbourne, published some years ago, I discovered that the
gully in Kinglake where I myself used to live, and a little
waterfall where we used to go for shower baths, bore the names
of Carlsen’s Gully and Carlsen’s Waterfall respectively, after
an old Dane, Rudolph Carlsen, who pitched his tent there in
the eighties of last century and for years was a resident of the
place. The gully, which is picturesque but narrow, was owned
by four Danes —R. Carlsen, J. Johansen, P. Petersen, and
myself. Should the slopes abutting on to it be some day sub-
divided and occupied by summer residences, a store and a post
office may be opened and the name Carlsen’s Gully become
more widely known than at present, without anybody a few
years hence being aware of how it originated.
By studying the Commonwealth Postal Guide I have picked
out a score of place names which suggest direct association
with Scandinavians, while, in addition, there are others which
are indirectly associated with Denmark, Norway, and Sweden.
These are the frequent place names ending in ‘by/ ‘thorpe/
‘ford/ and so on, of which the flourishing township of Dalby
in Queensland is the most outstanding example. They have
been named from old Norse and Danish settlements in Great
Britain and Ireland founded during the Viking period of Anglo-
Saxon history.


The names I suggest as in some way or another directly
associated with our countries are :
In New South Wales —Bredbo, Greenland, Norway, Uppsall's
Creek.
In Victoria —Alexandra, Greenland Dam, Fryerstown,
Peterson, Walhalla, Moe.
In Queensland —Archer, Birkdale, Eidsvold, Lower Tivoli,
Marmor, Point Archer.
In South Australia —Lyrup.
In Western Australia —Bornholm, Bowgade, Denmark,
Norseman.
In Tasmania —Drik Drik.
A place in Queensland was called Bergen, but it is now known
by the aboriginal name Murra Murra. Bergen shared the fate
of the sixty-odd German place names in Australia which were
changed into British or aboriginal names during the Great War.
Up till then the knowledge in Australia of European geography
was limited, and the error committed by the Surveyor-General
of Queensland in considering Bergen a Teutonic name is perhaps
excusable. Bergen, as we know, is the second biggest town in
Norway.
Except in odd cases we do not know why and how these
places were given Scandinavian names, nor is it at this stage
easy to ascertain. In the case of Eidsvold, a prosperous little
town in Queensland, and also of Archer, we do know that
these names are due to one of the Archer brothers, who were
amongst Queensland’s earliest squatter pioneers. The father
of this enterprising brood of immigrants had moved from
Scotland to Norway to engage in the lobster trade. His children
were all brought up in Norway, and some of them born there,
and all were at heart Norwegians.
The growing town of Denmark, in Western Australia, is, of
course, named after the Denmark River on which it is situated.
Many years ago the explorer and statesman, Lord Forrest,
suggested to me that the river was named after the doctor on
board an English man-of-war which had navigated the hitherto
unknown stream for some miles up its course, and that the
doctor had been a Dane by birth or of Danish descent.
Alexandra we know was named in honour of the Danish
Princess Alexandra at the time of her marriage to the Prince
of Wales, afterwards King Edward VII.
Apart from the Scandinavian place names appearing in the
Postal Guide, occasional geographical features bear Scandinavian
names, such as Cape Solander in New South Wales ; Mount


Sleipner, Mount Berserker, and Denmark Hill, in Queensland ;
Jorgensen's Creek, in Gippsland, Victoria ; and the municipal
sub-division Jutland, in South Australia. Also there are street
names of Scandinavian origin, of which Denmark Hill Road,
Denmark Street, and Alexandra Avenue, Melbourne, may be
mentioned as instances. Nielson Park in Sydney was named
after N. Nielsen, a Dane by birth, who became a Minister of
the Crown in New South Wales.
Just as Scandinavian place names in the British Isles indicate
the extent to which they were settled by Scandinavians a
thousand years ago, so the names cited above —and possibly
some omitted —will, for all time, testify to the presence of
our people in Australia, if written or printed records become
lost.




TWO OUTSTANDING DANES
Edward Knox
Of all the Danes, Norwegians, and Swedes who in the course
of time have left their native shores to seek their fortunes in
Australia, Edward Knox ranks foremost. None of them has
contributed more to the economic development of this country
or risen to the same level in the social scale, Knox being the
only Scandinavian to have been knighted for meritorious service
to the British Empire.
As his name suggests, his ancestors were of British blood.
His father, George Knox, carried on business as a shipping
agent in Elsinore. It was in the days when all the ships passing
through the strait between Denmark and Sweden had to drop
anchor at the entrance to the narrow waterway and pay toll
to the Danish Crown. As about one-third of the vessels trading
in the Baltic hailed from the British Isles, it was natural that
a number of enterprising Britishers should settle in Elsinore to
share in the lucrative business of clearing the many ships before
they could proceed on their journey. When in 1857 the Sound
Dues were abolished, most of these old commercial houses had
to switch over to other ways of making a livelihood, and to
this day such familiar English surnames as Brown, Taylor,
Fenwick, Mullin, Howden, Knox, and many others are common
in Danish city directories.
Edward Knox was born in Elsinore in 1819. He and his
elder brother, John, were educated at the old historical college,
Soro Academy. On leaving school, Edward was apprenticed
to a commercial house in the old Hansa town, Lubeck, and
afterwards went to London for further commercial training.
In 1839 h 0 migrated to Australia, arriving in Sydney the same
year with a hundred pounds in his pocket.
He settled on the land, married an Irish lady, and went in
for vegetable gardening, he and his wife selling their products
in Sydney. In 1845 he got a position as manager of a small
sugar refinery. A year after he was associated with the
Commercial Banking Co., of Sydney, in which institution he
gradually rose to the highest position. When, many years
later in 1894, a crisis shook Australia's financial structure and
most of the banks had to close, Edward Knox's genius saved
the Commercial Banking Co. of Sydney from sharing their fate.
It is, however, through Knox's organizing and developing
Australia’s sugar industry that he made himself most


deserving of his adopted land. The opportunity to do great
things came his way, and he possessed the requisite mental
alertness to see and to seize it.
While managing a little sugar refinery, he learned what
was to be known about sugar. He knew that Australia imported
her raw sugar from abroad and that sugar cane on a small
scale was successfully grown here and there in the coastal belt
of Queensland.
What was needed was to acquire the various refineries which
had come into being in different parts of Australia, to co-
ordinate the scattered efforts at cane-growing in Queensland,
and sufficient capital to further develop the industry. The
plan having matured in his mind he was ready to move in
3:855, when he took the initiative to found the Colonial Sugar
Refining Company with a capital of £150,000, and with himself
as chairman of directors.
Despite serious setbacks in 1857 an d again in 1884, when
sugar prices on the world market slumped, the company made
steady progress. Up to 1869 sugar had only been grown in
Queensland, but in that year the industry was extended by the
company to the Northern Rivers District of New South Wales,
a large area being planted with cane on the Clarence River.
In 1878 planting was commenced on the Tweed River, and a
few years later on the Richmond River. In 1888 the New
Zealand Sugar Company was gathered in, and the capital
increased to £750,000.
When, in 1905, the Colonial Sugar Refining Co. celebrated
its fiftieth anniversary, it possessed sugar refineries in Sydney,
Melbourne, Adelaide, Brisbane, and Auckland ; thirteen sugar
mills in New South Wales, Queensland, and Fiji ; 33,000 acres
had been planted with sugar cane by the company, and large
quantities of cane were bought from small growers. In a
pamphlet issued on the occasion of the anniversary we are
further told that, besides providing work for an immense staff
of people, the company employed 2,500 horses and mules,
34 locomotives, 7,200 trucks, 35 steam tugs and launches, and
267 lighters and punts. The capital by then had been increased
to £2,000,000.
The company kept progressing under Edward Knox's eldest
son, Edward William, and his nephew, W. N. Rothe, as manager
and sub-manager respectively, till Australia became an ex-
porter of sugar and entered the world's market as a competitor.
Edward Knox was knighted in 1898. Besides his service as
founder of the sugar industry in Australia, throughout his life


he was a pillar of strength to the Commercial Banking Company
of Sydney, a founder and friend of the Prince Alfred Hospital,
and a member of the Legislative Council of New South Wales.
He celebrated his golden wedding in 1900 and died the year
after. On the occasion of his death papers in Sydney were
unanimous in calling him a gentleman in the true sense of the
word, a noble personality, and a benefactor to Australia.
Sir Edward’s wife bore him nine children, of whom the
youngest son, Adrian, was knighted and became Chief Justice
of Australia.
His affection for the land of his birth, where all his relations
lived and one of his nephews attained the position of high
court judge, remained unchanged. Three times he visited
Denmark —in 1879 together with his wife and four of his
children, and again in 1884 and 1891.
Paul Jorgen Holdenson
Of Scandinavian immigrants still amongst us none has played
so big a part in Australia’s economic development as Paul
Jorgen Holdenson. While Sir Edward Knox’s domain was
sugar, Mr. Holdenson’s has been dairy produce. The out-
standing characteristic of both has been organizing ability. The
former organized the sugar industry, the latter has done more
than any one else to organize Australia’s butter industry. It
is true that at any given moment this or that politician,
administrator, or expert has been more in the limelight, but
none has been so closely identified with the industry and made his
influence so widely felt, for so long a period, as Mr. Holdenson.
He was associated with it half a century ago, and, like the
immortal Johnnie Walker, is still going strong.
Mr. Holdenson was born in 1863 in a little village called
Sejstrup, on the west coast of Jutland, not far from the old
historical town Ribe. At the age of sixteen he left home,
together with his brother and a school-mate of his own age, in
order to make their way in the world. They went to Hamburg
and from there to London, where they booked their passage
to Australia, landing in Melbourne late in 1879.
Having in his own land received only a State school educa-
tion, and being acquainted with no other work than that on
his father’s farm, he had no hesitation in taking a job in the
country as a farm hand.
Tempted by the higher pay of a builder’s labourer, he next
tried his hand at that ; but when harvest time came he returned


to the land. After harvesting, he proceeded to Melbourne and
got a job in a chemical works.
Victoria had treated him well in so far as he had never been
idle, and had been able to lay money by. However, he wanted
to see Sydney, so he went there and got work in a hay and
corn store.
Returning to Melbourne, brimful of self-confidence, he bought
a shabby-looking sixpenny restaurant, spent some of his savings
in renovating it and making it attractive. Provisions were
cheap in those days, and he did well. After a while he sold
the restaurant at a good profit, and opened a wholesale produce
store in the Eastern Market.
At this time his old mate from Denmark, Andreas Nielson,
who had been tank-sinking and fencing in the Riverina, came
to Melbourne. Having exchanged experiences and, we may
assume, celebrated the reunion in a suitable manner, they
decided to join forces in the produce business. Thus the firm
Holdenson & Nielson began.
In 1889 Holdenson & Nielson moved to Flinders Lane, and
shortly after installed a butter-making plant in order to manu-
facture their own butter.
The cream separator had at that time been invented in
Europe, and had come to Victoria from Sweden. The
Government wished to make the colony a dairying country on
modern lines, and gave the industry every possible encourage-
ment. Several big companies came suddenly into being, and,
with the introduction of freezing chambers a little later, com-
menced to export butter to London. Most of these companies
flourished for a while and then ceased operating ; but Holdenson
& Nielson survived.
In the early nineties the firm had to look out for more space,
and moved to their present roomy premises in Flinders Street.
In 1902 Nielson’s health failed. He died in Switzerland
eighteen months later, and Holdenson took over the business
on his own. In 1908 he gathered in a competitor firm which
had got into financial difficulties, and the name was changed
to Holdenson & Nielson Fresh Food Pty. Ltd., by which name
it has since been known, Mr. Holdenson being the managing
director and principal shareholder.
A few figures will show the startling growth of the business.
It owns well-equipped butter factories in every dairying district
of Victoria (the home of modern dairying in Australia), a cheese
factory, a condensed milk and dried milk factory, in addition
to supplying a large quantity of fresh milk to Melbourne. As


a sideline the firm deals wholesale in bacon, eggs, and honey,
and it is the principal exporter of tinned butter to the East,
apart from the bulk butter sent to England and a fair share
of the local market. Its annual turnover exceeds £1,000,000.
It produces some 7,000 tons of butter annually, and absorbs
the milk and cream from more than 7,000 farms. Its fleet of
motor trucks numbers more than sixty. As a testimony to
Mr. HoldensoiTs genius for organizing, it should be stated that
the whole extensive enterprise is worked by only 240 hands.
In the course of time several co-operative companies have
come into existence, some of them on a large scale, but the
firm of Holdenson & Nielson Fresh Food Pty, Ltd. has kept
on growing.
It is but natural that a man like Mr. Holdenson should be
asked to go on all kinds of boards, both Government and
private. The following are some of the boards on which he has
had, or still has, a seat : The Australian Produce Pool Com-
mittee, established during the war ; the Australian Produce
Control Board ; the Australian Dairy Produce Stabilisation
Committee, and the various Victorian State bodies incorporated
therewith. He is chairman of Peters Ice Cream and chairman
of The Equitable Probate and General Insurance Co. Ltd.
Self-made men are prone to be blinded by false values, and,
on the whole, they are unsympathetic people. But there are
exceptions, and Mr. Holdenson is one of them. He is the same
plain, industrious, unassuming man he always has been. He
abhors ostentatious displays of any kind. When on one occasion
he was consulted by the Danish Government as to what was a
fair amount to pay a Danish consul-general in Australia in
housing allowance, he mentioned £2OO annually, which was
considered quite inadequate by the consul-general, who arrived
shortly after. Yet, £4 a week at that time would procure a
more expensive dwelling than Mr. Holdenson and his big family
themselves occupied. High society has never appealed to him,
and he attends only such functions as he considers it a consul's
duty to attend. When he married, he selected as his partner a
country girl, of Danish descent, and a good partner she made
him, mother of half a dozen healthy, sturdy children —four
boys and two girls. Three of the sons served in France during
the Great War.
In 1901 Mr. Holdenson was appointed honorary vice-consul
for his native land. After the war he became full consul, and
for the next three years he acted as consul-general with juris-
diction over Australia, New Zealand, and the Western Pacific.


He is still consul for Denmark, and as such immensely popular
—always courteous and helpful to those who need him.
For his long service to Denmark in the capacity of honorary
consul, the Danish King in 1933 bestowed on him the highest
decoration awarded ordinary mortals Commander of
Dannebrog.*
Mr. Holdenson is a striking example of those immigrants who
ungrudgingly give their best to their adopted country, and yet
retain the sincerest feelings towards the land of their birth.
Still, strange as it may seem, he has never visited the old
country. Since he arrived in Melbourne sixty years ago, he
has not been out of Australia.
On mentioning this fact to him recently, he remarked :
‘When I was young I never thought I could spare the time,
and now all those I knew and loved when I was a child are
dead —it is too late.’
But Mr. Holdenson has been a happy man without travelling.
The basic elements in human happiness are his —health, work,
achievement, and kind deeds.
* Dannebrog is the name of the Danish flag which dates back to 1219 when the Danes conquered
Esthonia.


JOSEPH ALEXANDER HEYMAN*
During the latter years no Scandinavian in Melbourne has
been more in the public eye than J. A. Heyman. He has two
strings to his bow —art and philanthropy. His art in bronze
is well known ; his philanthropic activity has been the subject
for paragraphs in the daily papers from time to time. Quite
recently the Melbourne pictorial Sun contained a picture of
Mr. Heyman sitting in his sick-bed in Mount St. Evins Hospital
handing gilt-edged securities worth £1,500 to representatives
from the Blind Institute, thereby making up his gifts to this
noble institution to £4,500. A few weeks earlier he gave £5OO
towards a children’s playground in Fitzroy, with the promise
of another £5OO if the plan of a playground was realized.
Previous to that he presented £5OO to the returned soldiers
in Fitzroy towards a contemplated club building. This lavish
generosity might give the impression that he is immensely
wealthy, but that is not really so.
Heyman was born in Copenhagen in 1856, where his father
owned a brewery and considerable property. Joseph was
trained as an art metal worker, and did so well that when a
prize was offered for the most ornamental bell, to be used by
the Lord Mayor at council meetings, he gained the award.
The bell is still in the town hall of the Danish capital.
As a young man he went abroad, visiting all the leading
countries of Europe, earning his living by his art. Eventually
he went to America and settled in Los Angeles. Much of the
finest work he executed while in America he gave to the Los
Angeles Museum, where it still may be seen.
Heyman came to Melbourne in 1924 under a contract with
the American Geographical Society. Being enamoured with the
place he severed his connexion with the society, instead of
proceeding to South America, as intended. He set up a factory
in Fitzroy, and before long became known for his artistic metal
fire screens and other works of art.
His most enduring works are his exquisite plaques. On the
occasion of the Centenary of the settlement of Victoria, he
made an impressive plaque of the two first settlers, Henty and
Batman, which he presented to the City of Melbourne, and
which now has an honoured place in the Town Hall. A plaque
*Since this book was written Heyman suddenly passed away on the morning of 19th September.
His body, fully dressed, was found on the floor of his little cubicle.


he executed of Hans Christian Andersen he presented' to the
National Library in Canberra, while replicas have been pre-
sented to the Children’s Library in Prahran, the International
Club, and the Danish Club. One of Captain Cook has been
placed in the Fitzroy Gardens ; another of John Gould (the
‘bird man’) he has multiplied and presented to a large number
of public schools and colleges in order to stimulate interest in
the movement for protecting Australian bird life.
Until Heyman’s health failed, some months ago, and a sub-
sequent accident in which, while still convalescent, he was
knocked down by a motor truck, he worked in his factory
early and late, assisted by two or three men he himself has
trained.
In the rear portion of his factory he has had made two
tiny rooms where he lives by himself, doing his own cooking
except the midday meal, which he has brought to him. He
begrudges spending money on his own comfort, yet old Heyman
is ever ready to write out substantial cheques for charity or
causes he believes in.
How much he would have been worth to-day had it not
been for these cheques, no one can tell, as he does not keep
account of what he gives away. He inherited considerable
means from his parents, and made big money in America by
his art and industry, and through successful speculation.
His humanitarian work, from which also Danes have bene-
fited, was recently recognized by the King of Denmark con-
ferring on him the distinguished order Knight of Dannebrog.


PART 2
SCANDINAVIAN MIGRATION TO QUEENSLAND




SCANDINAVIAN MIGRATION TO QUEENSLAND
Early Days of White Settlement
THE forerunners of the white race in Queensland were the
convicts, a detachment of these unwilling pioneers having
been planted on the Brisbane River in 1824. Three years
later New South Wales squatters moved their flocks and convict
shepherds north to the Darling Downs. By the middle of the
forties they had occupied all the pastoral land of the south-
eastern portion of the Moreton Bay Province, by which name
Queensland was then known, grazing their sheep and cattle
as far north as Rockhampton. Wool, tallow, and hides were
practically the only sources of wealth at the time, and, natur-
ally, those who controlled them —the squatters —became domi-
nant in the community, forming themselves into a strongly-
entrenched aristocracy. There were the beginnings of three
or four small towns, ministering to the needs of the big stations ;
but being little more than appendixes to the pastoral industry,
they carried no weight. Finally, a few timber getters had
commenced to tap the wealth of the coastal forests.
A great blow befell the squatters in 1840: the cessation
of deportation to New South Wales, and the abandonment of
the prison settlement on the Brisbane River. This change was,
as we know, due to the agitation of the rising democracy in
Sydney and Melbourne. In lieu of a supply of labour furnished
by an abundance of convicts assigned to responsible employers,
having the attraction of being exceedingly cheap as well as
necessarily docile in consequence of the stern discipline to
which they had been, and still were, subjected, there was now
available only a limited number of free people, either immi-
grants or persons who, by expiration of the period for which
they had been sentenced, had regained their liberty. These
required full wages, exercised their rights of withdrawing or
transferring their services, and were prone in manners and
bearing to emphasize their independence, as compared with
their servile predecessors. Thus afflicted equally in their
pockets and pride, the squatters looked for relief in every
direction. An agitation to get the Moreton Bay Province pro-
claimed a separate colony, with deportation reintroduced,
having brought no result, experiments were made by importing
kanakas from the South Sea Islands, and coolies from India
and China, but with little success.


To make matters worse, gold was discovered in New South
Wales and Victoria in 1851. Such floating population as
existed in the Moreton Bay Province drifted south towards the
gold-fields, and no one came from overseas to take their place.
To be sure, Queensland offered few temptations to new-comers.
Part of the year the climate was uncongenial to Europeans,
and the land laws of the time were framed as if for the direct
object of discouraging any but pastoral activity.
Under such conditions progress towards development of a
community was almost impossible. Meanwhile the agitation
for separation from New South Wales went on ; and the
squatters having dropped their claim for the renewal of deporta-
tion, it gained momentum, till finally, in 1859, the Colony of
Queensland came into being, with a white population of about
25,000.
The Problem of Population
Amongst the Acts passed by the first Queensland Parliament
perhaps the most important was one dealing with the alienation
of Crown lands. At different places in the southern coastal
belt large agricultural reserves were set aside for the promotion
of closer settlement, and provision was made for adequate
town sites. As a result of this Act, £45,000 was received by
the Government for land sold during the first year. During
the same period £2,000 was obtained from immigration remit-
tances. This is of particular interest because it marks the
beginning of Queensland's immigration policy, which, within
a decade, caused a large number of Danes, Norwegians, and
Swedes to leave their native shores for the youngest of the
British colonies.
The remittances were sums paid by immigrants or persons
nominating others for passage to the colony, and entitled the
payers or their nominees to certificates assuring them grants
of land to a corresponding value. The process was, of course,
too restrictive to have great results, and it was not until the
whole system of land alienation came to be liberalized by
successive enactments that any real progress towards popula-
ting the colony ensued.
In 1861 a loan was raised in England for public works, a
second loan followed in 1863, and a third the year after, totalling
roughly £2,000,000. Of these and subsequently borrowed
moneys, a part was devoted to promote immigration. The
movement was regulated by the Immigration Act of 1863.
This provided for an agent-general in London with power to


appoint sub-agents to make known in Great Britain, Ireland,
and Germany the great opportunities Queensland offered to
young men and women prepared to go there, to select the
desired type of intending immigrants, and arrange for their
dispatch to Australia. In the case of Germans the number was
restricted to 2,000 statute adults in any one year. Free passages
were granted to farmers and farm labourers, vine-dressers,
labourers, mechanics, and domestic servants. Mechanics in-
cluded artisans of every description. For those not fulfilling the
vocational and age conditions necessary to get free passage, a
liberal system of ‘assisted’ immigration was provided, while
such immigrants as paid their own passage in full received a
certificate entitling them to 40 acres of land on their arrival in
Queensland.
The result was immediate, and by 1865 30,000 immigrants
had been added to Queensland’s population. To promote land
settlement a beginning was made at sub-dividing the fertile
Darling Downs into 160-acre blocks. Meanwhile, squatters were
swarming over other parts of the colony with their sheep and
cattle, as if a native population had not existed.
Those were years of progress and prosperity in Queensland ;
but, unfortunately, owing to a sudden drop in prices of rural
produce, a depression followed, and it was not relieved until
the discovery of great mineral wealth in the colony.
Up to the end of 1867 minerals in Queensland had contributed
but little towards providing its people with employment or its
investors with wealth. In that year a genuinely rich gold-field
was discovered at Gympie Creek on the Mary River, and other
discoveries quickly followed.
With the return of prosperity the task of inducing more
people from overseas to proceed to Queensland was vigorously
resumed. The white population still numbered only about
100,000 people ; yet, the colony was as big as France, Germany,
and Italy put together. Large areas were still unoccupied
except by blacks, who did not enter into the scheme of develop-
ment. The immigration agents in Great Britain, Ireland, and
Germany again got busy, and at this stage the immigration
field was extended to Denmark, Norway, and Sweden.




THE COMING OF THE SCANDINAVIANS
That Germans hitherto had been preferred to Scandinavians
was probably due to the fact that their excellent qualities as
colonists were better known to Australian politicians. As far
back as 1838 German missionaries had come to Queensland to
preach the gospel amongst the aborigines and had founded a
mission station on the Brisbane River. Being unsuccessful in
their religious work they devoted themselves to farming, and
became Queensland’s first agriculturists. Later on a consider-
able number of Germans trickled north from the southern
colonies, where they had founded strong settlements as early
as the forties and had attracted attention through their industry
and thrift. At the census taken in Queensland in 1861 more
than 2,000 of them were recorded. At the inauguration of
Queensland’s immigration policy a German merchant in
Brisbane named Heussler was dispatched by the Government
to Germany as an immigration agent. He afterwards was
appointed a member of the Legislative Council, and as he also
became consul for Germany, he was in a particularly favourable
position to augment the number of his countrymen in
Queensland and promote their interests. By 1871 they had
increased to over 8,000, and by 1891 to 15,000, forming
numerous settlements on the Downs and in the Coastal Belt,
constituting 9 per cent of the total immigrant population.
Compared with the German migration to Queensland, that
from Scandinavia, though not inconsiderable, was on a more
moderate scale. It commenced later, and there was no out-
standing pioneer of Norse birth to accelerate it or take a
friendly interest in the newcomers on their arrival.
In 1861, apart from Germans there were only 285 non-British
Europeans in Queensland, of whom, presumably, one-half were
Danes, Norwegians, and Swedes. In 1868 our people probably
numbered about 600. In 1871 they had increased to 925 ; in
1881 to 3,245 ; and in 1891 to 5,026, when they constituted
about 3 per cent of the total immigrant population.
By the middle of the eighties the Government had spent
some three million pounds on immigration, and as the sum
voted annually for that purpose was greatly curtailed, the
movement slowed down. Assisted immigration in some form
or other, however, was continued. In the closing years of the
century an active propaganda was carried on in Denmark in
order to attract to Queensland Danish farmers and dairy


4000 p ; v - : ,7'r? ■ 7 r j 6000
3500 / 15260
3000 *' S& * J — 4500
2500 i£ £ .. : ' ry : i- r ■ : ~ ., !/ ——— ETTr"
2000 -Jt 1 ■• 3000
1500 / —2250
/ / \ Swedcs_
1000 ~T~ .^,1500
500- 750
i L 10
1861 1868 1871 1881 1886 1891 1901 1911 1921
experts, but only a few hundred had come out, when, as pre-
viously stated, a severe drought occurred and put an end to
further efforts. With the federation of the various colonies into
the Commonwealth of Australia all immigration was made a
Federal matter and regulated by the Immigration Act of 1901.
The diagram shows the growth of the Scandinavian popula-
tion in Queensland. The rapid rise of the curves between 1871
(Scale on left signifies Danes, Swedes, Norwegians. On right,
Scandinavians.)
and 1886 marks the period of free immigration. When the
immigrants had to pay part of the passage money themselves
the curves immediately flatten. Yet, there was a small surplus
of new arrivals from Scandinavia over deaths and departures
until the year 1901, whence the curves take a downward trend.
A strange phenomenon is the rapid rise of the Norwegian
and Swedish curve between 1881 and 1886, and the sudden
drop between 1886 and 1891. (I use the term ‘curve’ in its
singular form, because at the censuses taken in 1886, 1891,
and 1901 no distinction was made between Norwegians and
Swedes. The dotted line is my own estimation of the proportion
of the two nationalities.)
It also strikes one as being strange that while the exodus
from Norway and Sweden to America was much greater than
from Denmark, to Queensland the position was reversed.


1871—
Male
Female
Total
Danes
418
136
554
Norwegians
96
22
118
Swedes
225
28
253
1881—
Danes
• M4°
783
2,223
Norwegians
285
157
442
Swedes
456
127
583
1886—
Danes
• 1,885
1,004
2,889
Norwegians and Swedes
• 2,370
417
2,787
1891 —
Danes
• 1,956
1,115
3,071
Norwegians and Swedes
. 1,491
464
1,955
1901
Danes
. 2,102
1,056
3-158
Norwegians and Swedes
• 1,634
508
2,142
The explanation is simple : The immigrants were shipped in
Hamburg, and as it was cheaper and more convenient to bring
Danes there than Norwegians and Swedes, the propaganda
carried on from London was more intense in Denmark than in
Norway or Sweden.
The rapid rise of the Swedish-Norwegian curve between 1881
and 1886 must be ascribed to a special effort having been made
during that brief period to get Norwegian and Swedish immi-
grants. The fact that after their arrival in Queensland so many
left again, would be sufficient reason for terminating the effort.
The inset shows the proportion of English, Scotch, Irish,
German, and Scandinavian immigrants in 1891. Black indicates
Scandinavian ; the hatched strip shows other European immi-
grants who had come to Queensland at their own expense.
During recent years a heavy migration to Queensland of
southern Europeans has taken place ; but this is a different
story.
The proportion of males to females from the three
Scandinavian countries, as shown in the following table, were
similar to those in New Zealand. The smaller number of females
from Norway and Sweden is, probably, to be accounted for by
many of the Norwegian and Swedish immigrants having be-
longed to the seafaring class. They had neither wives nor
sweethearts to take with them —or in some cases they may
have had too many sweethearts from which to make a choice.


IQII
Male
Female
Total
Danes
. .
• • i,732
909
2,641
Norwegians . .
• •
478
207
685
Swedes
840
214
1.054
1921 —
Danes
. .
• • 1,697
856
2,553
Norwegians . .
. .
• • 404
176
580
Swedes
• •
724
187
91 1
1933—
Danes
• • 1,214
614
1,828
Norwegians . .
• • 403
127
530
Swedes
• .
585
120
705
The Voyage Out
Let us skip the touching scenes when the emigrants said
farewell in the thousands of homes in Denmark, Norway, and
Sweden to their parents, brothers, sisters, friends, and all that
was dear to them in the old country. Such scenes have nothing
new about them, although the fact that Queensland was so
exceedingly far away and so little known may have made the
break seem more severe.
Having got as far as Hamburg, the emigrants were received
by an agent, who took charge of them and made sure their
travelling outfit was in order. According to regulations issued
by the agent-general the outfit was to contain : For men —six
shirts, six pairs of socks, two warm flannel or guernsey shirts,
two pairs of strong shoes, two complete suits of exterior
clothing.
For women —Six shifts, two warm and strong petticoats,
six pairs of stockings, two pairs of strong shoes, two strong
gowns, one of which had to be warm.
Children had to have nine shirts or shifts each, four warm
flannel waistcoats, and so forth.
In the case of immigrants proceeding to the colony by the
way of the Torres Strait route the outfit could be varied at
the option of the agent-general.
A second outfit was prescribed. It could be obtained on
board by paying 10/6, and consisted of one bed, two sheets,
one water bottle, one wash-basin, one plate, one pint drinking
mug, one knife and fork, two spoons, 3 lbs. marine soap. By
paying 20/- a pair of blankets, a pillow, a counterpane, and an
extra pair of sheets were added.
Everything in order, and the emigrants safely lodged in the


German sailing vessel, chartered by the Queensland Govern-
ment, the long voyage, with all it meant of tediousness and
hardship, was entered upon.
To travel 12,000 miles or more in a small overcrowded sailing
vessel is no pleasure trip, and we can admire the courage of
the men and women who undertook the voyage. Their faith
in what the new country offered them of earthly happiness
must have been great indeed. Poorly fed, tossed about on the
waves for about four months, cramped accommodation, a
minimum of conveniences, and insufficient equipment in case
of sickness, all reminds us of the primitive conditions under
which convicts were transported to Australia in former days.
About the human cargo carried in one of those German
emigrant vessels, a Danish carpenter by the name of Weitemeyer,
who came out in 1871, tells in a book he afterwards produced,
entitled Missing Friends (published by Fisher Unwin, London) :
What a motley crowd we were : Germans, Danes, Swedes,
Norwegians, a Russian Finn, and an Icelander. . . . In the majority
of cases extreme poverty was evident in their dress and stamped in
their faces, and it was easy to see that the same spirit of recklessness
which filled me had somehow also been instilled into them. ... Not
a single individual amongst us understood English, and none had
the faintest idea of what Queensland was like or what we were going
to do there.
Such was the vanguard of the flow of immigrants going to
Queensland and New Zealand in the seventies of last century
—poor and reckless. Had they been in a position to pay their
own passage money, the bulk of them would have gone to the
United States. They had nothing to lose, and —provided the
emigration agents had told the truth —everything to gain. If
they lied, Queensland could scarcely treat them more niggardly
than their native land had done, be it as grossly exploited
rustics on a nobleman’s estate, or as journeymen slaving four-
teen hours a day for the right to exist. A desire to be free in a
world stretching far into the realms of their happiest dreams,
spurred them on to embark on the great adventure of their life.
Regarding the treatment on board, Weitemeyer says that,
contrary to what was set out in the prospectus, the food and
water were bad and insufficient, and the bedclothes supplied
by the company so scanty that those who had not brought
blankets with them were compelled to keep on their clothes
when they went to bed at night. Later on conditions improved ;
but apparently they never were good on the German vessels.


Another early immigrant, A. Nielsen, in Rockhampton, in
describing his experiences, writes :
I came out together with George Sass (of whom more will be told
later) in 1873, in the sailing vessel Reichstag. There was much sick-
ness and distress on board, which I put down to the poor medical
attention. No fewer than 36 of the passengers succumbed and were
buried at sea. My wife was in bed nearly all the way out, and the
day we were transferred to a tender, to take us up to Maryborough,
she fainted from weakness. A fortnight in a hospital ashore put her
right again.
There can be no doubt that the trip made by the Reichstag
in the above year was particularly ill-fated, nevertheless it
gives an indication of the risk taken by immigrants going to
Australia in sailing vessels sixty to seventy years ago.


QUEENSLAND
MILES /Tk
0 ,? ° ?(?0 300
fezdsvoJd >4r
I -fj aro ffwdrybororjj//?
JO *
Cap e York
W% I , . 'SSi;.;/
j r, | * j
LaidJey /
I \ 9 Yhnyd// I
Vr ' /2 ‘ >vi^c \ c —
'Chqr'Mp^ \ MILES
i| W '%^.c ! <.n / *P
' mm 2 COO feet avd * j
E2 .. . HI* ■ ' ' jp%* hm,ptm
• ' iVAere *!>W//jwjjdr/?.y V. r .
A TROUBLED BEGINNING
On arriving in Queensland the immigrants were landed in
Brisbane, Maryborough, Bundaberg, Townsville, or some other
of the widely distributed ports, and taken to barracks erected
by the Government. Here they remained till private employers


required their services, or they could be settled on the land,
or the Government could place them in connexion with various
kinds of public work. As the new arrivals knew nothing
about the ruling rates for the different classes of occupation,
and were anxious to make a start on the road to the imagined
ultimate prosperity, they accepted whatever wages were offered
them, and as a result their stay in barracks as a rule was short.
Britishers and non-Britishers were treated alike, and their
subsequent fate differed little. The new tongue to be acquired
by Scandinavians and Germans was only a temporary handicap,
though in the beginning the disadvantage of it may have been
real enough. In every other respect English, Scotch, Irish,
German, and Scandinavian all started off scratch.
And what a wonderful opportunity they had. The most
richly endowed colony in Australia lay open to them, vacant
land beckoned them everywhere, work was plentiful, everything
was saturated with youth and growth, and the very air throbbed
with pent-up energy suddenly set free in the wide expanse of a
slightly-developed, sparsely-populated country. True enough,
as they were more or less impecunious newcomers, who had to
find their bearing and adapt themselves to unwonted conditions,
generally the road to prosperity was long and arduous. Still,
the possibilities were there for those who saw them and had
the perseverance to follow them up.
From the depots in the various ports the immigrants were
broadcast over the Coastal Belt and the Darling Downs. The
remainder of the country, not lending itself to closer settlement,
was still held by sheep-owners and cattle-kings, as most of it
has been ever since. Some of our people selected land ; others,
skilled in handicraft, obtained employment in their respective
trades ; again, others gradually drifted to the gold-fields, the
balance accepting whatever work was offered, such as road-
making, railway construction, bridge building, fencing, farm
work, and so forth. Like the proverbial beggars, they could
not be choosers.
Soon the one great drawback of Queensland as a home for
northern Europeans —the climatic conditions —had its effect.
Working in a temperature to which they were not accustomed,
they felt uncomfortable and filled themselves with water at the
nearest pool, with the consequence that typhoid fever and
dysentery became prevalent amongst them. Dengue fever, at
that time a common malady in the Coastal Belt, was another
scourge exacting toll from the unwary newcomers. A consider-
able number gravitated south to the cooler colonies of New


South Wales and Victoria, where the number of Scandinavians
during the free immigration to Queensland, and immediately
after, rose by more than five thousand. Altogether it was a
period of becoming acclimatized, of moving about, of trying
one thing after another. A struggle to adapt themselves to the
new environment—an effort at getting a footing and settling
down.
Gradually adjustments were made. The weaklings and un-
wary had succumbed, the ever-restless and such as could not
adapt themselves to the climate had left the colony, the artisans
and those with aptitude for business congregated in the rapidly-
growing towns, the seafaring section entered the coastal naviga-
tion service, while the remainder were permanently absorbed
in the mining industry or had joined for good and all the great
army of ‘jacks of all trades.’
Rural Settlers
Those of our countrymen who settled on the land were
largely intermixed with immigrants of other nationalities.
Unlike the conditions in New Zealand, there were no exclusive
Scandinavian settlements. Still, at some places considerable
numbers selected land so closely together that it approached
compact colonies of Northmen. Such was the case in the
Burnett River valley a few miles from Bundaberg, in an area
south of Mackay, in the Nikenbah and Pialba districts where
they numbered over fifty families, in Tiaro and Tit ana, in
Edenvale near Kingaroy, in Laidley, Yangan and other places ;
but Scandinavian settlers in ones, twos, and threes were met
with all over the Darling Downs and in the Coastal Belt.
While the large majority of the Scandinavians—mostly Danes
who selected land succeeded, their initial struggle was prob-
ably as keen as that experienced during the same years by
their compatriots in New Zealand. Here, too, the bush had to
be cut down. In Queensland as in New Zealand the immigrants
had little or no capital. There was, however, one difference :
In New Zealand they went in for dairying, and in time took
their place amongst the Dominion’s foremost dairy farmers ;
in Queensland they mostly started as maize-growers. The
Coastal Belt is eminently suited for that crop, whereas the
prevalence of tick amongst cattle frustrated all attempts made
at dairying. Sometimes they embarked on the production of
such sub-tropical fruits as bananas, pineapples, lemons, and
oranges, for which commodities Queensland soon became
famous. Finally, with the development of sugar-growing, many
SCANDINAVIANS IN AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND


switched over to that industry and blossomed out as plantation
owners employing gangs of kanaka labourers. Those in the
higher altitudes around Kingaroy, Laidley, Yangan, and the
Darling Downs generally, being outside the sugar belt, took
up wheat growing or kept to mixed farming.
Queensland’s sunny climate also produced a brighter outlook
on life than did windswept New Zealand. The following
description by George Sass of the home of a Scandinavian
pioneer in the Maryborough district is quite idyllic and, despite
the inevitable slab-hut and poverty, breathes of extreme con-
tentment :
On visiting the home of a Scandinavian settler, one discovered
in a clearing in the dense forest a hut built of slabs, with a gigantic
chimney of the same material. Inside, the furniture was most
primitive, consisting of home-made beds and tables, with boxes or
crude forms taking the place of chairs. The clearing contained a
maize-field varying in size, and protected by a picket-fence against
the inroads of wallabies. Closer to the house one noticed the bright-
green, broad-leafed banana trees, the prickly pineapples, sweet
potatoes and arrowroots, while vines loaded with juicy grapes clung
to the walls of the hut. No shelter was provided for the domestic
animals and none was required. The lord of the manor met the
visitor with typical Danish warmheartedness. His attire was the
scantiest possible, but suitable to the climate, and consisted of
white pants, woollen singlet open in front, a broad-brimmed hat
with fly-net, and a pair of heavy working boots.
How often in the course of my missionary travels have I not
been refreshed and have found rest in such a home, a fact which 1
still remember with deep gratitude. Everything reminded one of
the ‘simple life.’ It did not appear poor, because food was always
plentiful, and of clothes little was required. When I asked these
people how they liked Queensland, I generally received the same
answer : T don’t regret having come here. What chances had 1 as
a poor farmhand at home compared with my chances here ?’
About daily life in another centre of Scandinavian land
settlement, the Burnett River district, a Danish resident in
Bundaberg has given the following description :
They were all new chums with no more money than went to pay
the first year’s rent, consequently they had to live on credit till
after their first harvest, or the wind had been raised in some other
way. It goes without saying that their earliest homes were primitive
to a degree. They consisted mostly of tents or bark-huts —anything
better than that was considered swanky indeed. Having provided
the necessary shelter for themselves, the trees on four or five acres
were cut down and left to dry, the men meanwhile taking work


away from the settlement. The dry timber burnt and maize sown,
the men again departed till such time when the crop was ripe for
harvesting. In this manner they progressed by small steps, being
always a little better off this year than they had been the one
before. But with all their toil and self-denial, the Scandinavian
immigrants were a cheerful lot, and often met to make merry.
Christmas was observed by a round of parties. ‘Fastelavn’ was
celebrated in the manner of their homeland with ‘Katten af Tonden’
and ‘Ringridning.’ It lasted three days, sports and games being
indulged in during the day, and dancing at night. The womenfolk
provided the eatables and the men the drinkables.
The buoyant spirit reigning amongst the Scandinavian immi-
grants is further illustrated by a number of small incidents
which have been related to the writer. A couple of jokers made
a practice of circulating false rumours about conjugal infidelity
and piquant love affairs, alleged to have been perpetrated
during the absence of this or that husband. In the end the
truth was revealed, the slandered persons were exonerated,
and everybody had a good laugh.
On one occasion a wit conveyed faked invitations from a
certain family to a large number of Danish fellow settlers, to a
festive gathering at which the fatted calf would be killed. The
surprise and despair of the unsuspecting house-mother, when
load upon load of guests drove up, can readily be imagined.
However, the instigator of the joke was found out ; it was
taken in a jolly spirit ; forage parties were sent to the neigh-
bouring homes, and the day became one of great glee.
With hard toil, interspersed with hours of exuberant joy, the
years went by. The bush was gradually cleared and planted,
the dwellings were improved, children came along, grew up,
and took a hand in the work. Many a settler, who had arrived
empty-handed, could write out a substantial cheque before his
life's work was done.
A contributor to my first attempt (in 1901) at a history of
the Scandinavians in Australia, wrote :
I was one of the Danes who in 1875 selected land in the Pialba
district. We were upwards of forty Scandinavian families, and more
arrived later. Most of these early settlers are still there. Ihe dense
forest has disappeared, and the district presents a beautiful land-
scape covered with luxuriant fields of maize, sugar plantations, and
vineyards. ... In the Mary valley are many Scandinavian farmers,
of whom several are orchardists and wine growers on a large
scale.
Though not all came out on top, taken as a whole the


Scandinavians who settled on the land, and stuck to it, did
fairly well for themselves, simultaneously earning the goodwill
and respect of their British fellow colonists, and the apprecia-
tion of those responsible for the development of the colony.
Town Dwellers
Of the Scandinavians who became town dwellers by far the
greater number were to be found in Brisbane, but they were
also numerous in Warwick, Maryborough, Gympie, Bundaberg,
Rockhampton, Mt. Morgan, Charters Towers, Cairns, and
Mackay, even as far north as Cooktown Scandinavian immi-
grants settled.
Though there were some common labourers amongst them, the
great majority were artisans —blacksmiths, carpenters, cabinet-
makers, bricklayers, bootmakers, tailors, bakers, butchers
and whatnot. The sudden demand for such people could only
be supplied by the newcomers themselves, there being very few
artisans amongst the native-born Queenslanders. In the towns
were men from Great Britain, Ireland, Germany, and
Scandinavia, skilled in all sorts of handicraft, rivalling each
other as to who should remain journeymen, and who become
masters.
To us Scandinavians it is gratifying to know that in the
scramble that ensued our kinsmen ably held their own against
Britishers and Germans alike. Most of them have now retired
or gone to their fathers, their children bearing the heat
and the burden of the day after them. In the latter end of last
century, and the beginning of the new, as late as the outbreak
of the Great War, in every town and hamlet in Queensland,
Danish, Norwegian, and Swedish artisans set up in business
of their own, became employers of labour, and by their integrity
and skill attained to an honourable position in the economic
life of their adopted country. Occasionally they rose to become
-outstanding leaders in their particular craft. One, C.
Christensen, became a boot manufacturer in Brisbane on a
large scale, and another, P. C. Poulsen, the most fashionable
and prosperous photographer in that city. P. Thomle gained
for himself a name for artistic furniture. In Charters Towers
Ivar Petersen for years carried off all the prizes for superior
vehicles. A. Nielsen and N. P. Nielsen became the leading
coachbuilders in Rockhampton. N. P. Willmann, a Danish
blacksmith in Mackay, became widely known for agricultural
implements, some of them being the result of his own inventive
genius. In the same town another Dane, Westergaard, started


making cordials, hawking his product about in a wheelbarrow,
and ended up by creating the biggest cordial factory north of
Brisbane. Others attained prominence as builders and con-
tractors. If lesser successes be included, yet embracing men
who made good and became employers of labour, the list would
be a long one.
Not a few got into the public service in some capacity or
other. As a sample of these may be mentioned a Dane by the
name of Mark. He was a millwright from home, and had come
to Queensland with his family in 1871. Finding no opening for
his trade, he joined the Railway Department as a bridge car-
penter. This occupation he followed until 1892, when he retired
to a farm at Yeppoon, which he had taken over seven years
before. His family comprised five boys and one girl. All the
sons entered the Railway Department, and four of them rose
to be inspectors.
As could be expected of men reared in such democratic
countries as Denmark, Norway, and Sweden, the Scandinavian
immigrants took an active and intelligent part in the affairs
of their adopted towns. Several rose to become Justices of
Peace. Others were elected municipal councillors. At least in
hve towns —Townsville, Mackay, Mt. Morgan, Gympie, and
Glaststone —men of our race were elevated to the mayoral
chair. Some stood for seats in Parliament. One, P. Mau, a
prominent sugar grower in the Mackay district, was narrowly
defeated for a seat in the Legislative Assembly. Another, J.
Lundager, photographer, bookseller, and newspaper pro-
prietor in Mt. Morgan has previously been referred to. A
third, F. Nielsen, who had qualified as a lawyer, was a member
of the Legislative Council till that chamber was abolished in
1921. A Minister of the Crown, J. C. Petersen, if not born in
Denmark, was of Danish parentage.
On the Gold-fields
Of Scandinavians who tried their luck on the diggings—
generally as a means towards an end —we do not know much,
though their number cannot have been inconsiderable. The
several hundreds of our people who came to Queensland in
the latter sixties were mostly diggers from the Victorian gold-
fields, attracted north by the reports of rich finds and inex-
haustible wealth hidden in the earth. As is the habit of
gold-diggers, they moved from gold-field to gold-field, and the
percentage who struck it sufficiently lucky to attract attention
probably was small. Mr. Willmann, himself a gold-digger


before he became an implement maker, has told the writer that
in the seventies Scandinavians were met with on every known
gold-held in Queensland, and that some of them did remarkably
well. One, Georg Thomsen who had arrived from Denmark in
the sixties and been on the Gympie gold-held, followed the
Palmer rush and discovered the Alliance Reef, near a gully
afterwards called after him. Having made his fortune he
bought an hotel, but after a while sold out and went prospecting
anew, this time discovering the Comet Reef. Another, Christian
Pedersen, discovered and opened up the Louisa No. 1 Mine,
famous in Queensland mining history, after which he retired
to a sugar plantation he bought near Mackay.
Frederik Petersen, having met with success on the Palmer
held, set himself up as a storekeeper.
Jens Abrahamsen in one day picked up gold specimens to
the value of .£1,200. He kept them in a billycan till he could
proceed to Cooktown the following morning. During the night
a fellow gold-digger stole the billycan, and Abrahamsen,
awakened by his dog, attempted to rescue his treasure, but
he was dropped by a bullet through his leg. There were no
police on the gold-held, and Abrahamsen, being wounded but
hopeful of new hnds, remained at Palmer. Nemesis overtook
the thief —he lost his way in the bush and perished. The
billycan of gold was found some time after alongside his decay-
ing body. No one knowing how he had come by it, and nobody
claiming it, it was paid into the Queensland Treasury.
Our Seamen
A fair number of Scandinavians, particularly Norwegians,
entered the coastal navigation service, and a proportion of
these rose to become master mariners.
Most of Queensland’s extensive coastal trade was, and still
is, carried on by companies registered in Sydney, Melbourne,
and Adelaide. Soon every steamer plying for trade between
Fremantle in Western Australia and round the seaboard to
Cooktown in Queensland, had its complement of Norse sailors.
Of Scandinavians who ascended to the bridge may be men-
tioned a Swede by the name of Strom, a Dane by the name of
Anthon, and a Norwegian by the name of Berg. The last named
arrived in Brisbane in 1889, became captain of a small steamer
belonging to the A.U.S.N. Co., but changed later over to the
employ of the Adelaide S.S. Co., running in the Melbourne to
Cairns trade. He eventually became their senior captain, and
was very popular with his many passengers.


Of Scandinavians who confined themselves to Oueensland
waters may be mentioned A. T. Schreuder, who for a while had
charge of a Government steamer, but afterwards established
himself in business in Melbourne, and in time was appointed
consul for Norway. Another Norwegian, Oscar Svensen, became
master of the steam ferry running across the Brisbane River to
Kangaroo Point.
Out of a bunch of enterprising Norwegian ship’s captains
two brothers Nerdrum and Theodor and Oscar Svendsen,
and who arrived in Brisbane in the early eighties, went
to the Solomons and established coco-nut plantations. On the
death of Theodor Svendsen and one of the Nerdrums, and the
return to Norway of the other Nerdrum, Oscar Svendsen con-
tinued on his own, and in time became the leading planter and
trader in the group. Eventually he sold out his extensive
interests in the Islands and retired to Brisbane, where he
became consul for Norway.
Later Arrivals
In the foregoing I have mainly dealt with the contribution
rendered to the development of Queensland by those
Scandinavians who had arrived by the middle of the eighties.
As shown by the diagram, reinforcements from the Scandinavian
countries kept corning, though in small number, till the end of
the century. Amongst these later arrivals was a thin sprinkling
of professional men. One, a civil engineer, V. Larsen, was
appointed chief draughtsman to the Railway Department, and
in that capacity played an important part in the construction
of Queensland's railway system. Another, K. Rahbek, was
engaged by the Government as a hydraulic engineer, and was
lent to the Government of Tasmania to report on the water
power resources of that State. His last work was that of pro-
viding Thursday Island with a water system, the enterprise
being carried out under his supervision by a Danish contractor,
Mr. Sparre. A third, Jacob Christensen, Bachelor in Pharmacy,
became a teacher in analytical chemistry at the technical
college at Maryborough, and afterwards at the principal institu-
tion of education in Bundaberg.
One could keep on, but sufficient has been said to make good
my point that Scandinavians have served in all ranks of
Queensland’s economic and social life, and, in proportion to
their number, rendered a worthy contribution towards the
development of that State.




CHURCH LIFE
The European immigrants adapted themselves to Queensland’s
warm climate and the economic and social conditions of their
new home, but wherever groups of newcomers had settled in
sufficient number, old customs lingered. In the case of religion,
it more than lingered, it persisted, each body of nationals
clinging tenaciously to the religion of their childhood. The
English built Anglican churches ; the Scotch, Presbyterian
churches; the Irish, Roman Catholic churches ; and the
Germans, Lutheran churches —the central organizations of these
various denominations generally seeing to it that the pulpits
were suitably filled.
There being no benevolent mother church behind the
Scandinavians to take a friendly interest in their spiritual
well-being, they would probably have united with the German
Lutherans had the service in their places of worship been con-
ducted in a language the Scandinavians understood. The two
races had religion in common, and at least the so-called ‘Alte
Lutheranen’ used the same Liturgi as is practised in Denmark,
Norway, and Sweden. Under the circumstances the Scandinavian
immigrants had to do the best they could for themselves.
Unfortunately, there were amongst them no spiritual leaders
who could organize them into strong, living congregations, let
alone erect the edifice of a wide Scandinavian Lutheran
brotherhood. To be sure, the scattered nature of the settle-
ments, the great distances, and the primitive means of transport
in those days, rendered organization on a large scale difficult.
From the very nature of things, the efforts of such spiritual
leaders as did appear were doomed to be intermittent.
Two Norwegians commenced religious work among the
Scandinavian immigrants in the opening years of the seventies,
the one, Pastor Gaustad, in Brisbane ; the other, I. H. Hansen,
in Maryborough.
Christopher Gausted was born in the diocese of Trondhjem,
and had married a girl from Romerike. Having studied theology
in Norway and Germany, he was accepted by a German mission
society to proceed to India as a missionary. The Gaustads
remained in India some years, and several of their children
were born there. They then went to Queensland, where Gaustad
received a call to a German Lutheran congregation in Brisbane.
As he found a number of Scandinavians already living there,
and more coming from month to month, he commenced


occasionally to preach in the Norwegian language in the two
German churches of which he was in charge, the one situated
at Spring Hill and the other in South Brisbane. From Brisbane
Gaustad went to Mackay, where he organized both a German
and a Scandinavian congregation. The two congregations in
conjunction erected a church and a parsonage. From Mackay
he proceeded to New Zealand to take up religious work there,
and he ended his days as a farmer in the Halcombe district.
I. H. Hansen was a ship’s captain who turned lay preacher.
In his home in Maryborough he provided a meeting place for
religious service, and for several years attended to the spiritual
needs of the Scandinavian immigrants. By 1876 sufficient
money had been subscribed to procure a site for a church, but
the church itself —like all subsequent Scandinavian churches
in Queensland constructed of wood —was not built till 1883.
At that time I. H. Hansen had left the district, and a Danish
missionary, Ditlev Hansen, had taken charge of the congrega-
tion.
About the middle of the seventies George Sass came along
as a budding propagator of Lutheran doctrines, but, though
he afterwards became prominent amongst the Scandinavians
in New Zealand, neither his entry into the church in Queensland
nor his career there were very successful.
As stated before, he came to Queensland in 1873 in the
ill-fated immigrant vessel, the Reichstag. For a couple of years
he roamed about as a jack of all trades, in his spare time
preparing himself for missionary work. A couple of years
later he appeared in the Scandinavian settlements around
Pialba and Nikenbah, where a countryman, Christian Hansen,
gave him a shack and a few acres to cultivate. From there he
sallied forth at intervals, preaching the gospel amongst the
Scandinavian settlers in Tiaro, Tinana, and along the Mary
River generally. Encouraged by Sass the settlers at Nikenbah
started a movement to get their own church. A piece of land
was obtained from the Government for a church site and a
graveyard. Money was collected locally and in Maryborough,
a working bee was formed and the church erected, the Danish
coachbuilder, A. Nielsen, who had selected land at Pialba,
being the carpenter-in-chief. It was a proud moment when the
church was completed and Sass arrived solemnly to perform
the opening ceremony. A large gathering had congregated for
the occasion. Men and women had travelled a long way —
even from the twenty miles distant Maryborough —to share in
the happy day when they could listen to the word of God in


their own church, in their own language, in the old fashion.
I hen it was whispered that Sass on a recent visit down the
river had been converted and baptized into the Calvinistic sect
of Plymouth Brethren. Ihe whispering and murmuring grew
into loud protest at a Lutheran church being opened by a man
who, in the eyes of many, had turned a heretic. The con-
sternation was great, and the opening of the church had to be
postponed. Soon after Sass left the district and went to
Brisbane. His slip not being known there —or maybe he had
repented—he was ordained into the Lutheran ministry by
Pastor Gaustad, and called to serve the Scandinavian Lutheran
congregation in Brisbane at an annual salary of £6O. He did
not remain there long before he crossed the Tasman Sea, to
make a fresh start amongst his countrymen in New Zealand.
In his memoirs he admits failures in Queensland, but excuses
himself by saying that he was young, inexperienced, and
depressed through sheer poverty.
So far, Scandinavian church work in Queensland had been
feeble and faltering. Churches had been built in Brisbane,
Nikenbah, and Mackay, and casual congregations were formed
in Maryborough, Tiaro, Tinana, and one or two other places,
but there was not a single ordained minister. Nondescript
lay preachers plodded wearily on, to the best of their ability
heartening the dispirited Scandinavian Christians. The immi-
grants were themselves becoming a kind of Plymouth Brethren,
in so far as the main characteristics of that sect are a repudia-
tion of all ecclesiastical organization, with no special distinction
between clergy and laity, and an absence of formal worship ;
any brother might preach and pray, but those not gifted with
utterance would be quietly discouraged from officiating. The
Scandinavian congregations in Queensland had become a dis-
jointed collection of small, leaderless, groping units.
Then a Danish missionary, I. C. Petersen, came to the colony
from Santos in Brazil, where he had been in charge of a seamen’s
mission. It was he who organized the only congregation which
has endured until this day, accepting a call as its minister on
30th August, 1880. When he arrived, the body of Scandinavian
Christians in Brisbane was torn with strife and on the point of
falling to pieces. Having established peace and goodwill in his
hock, he set himself to consolidate, organize, and extend the
church work begun by Scandinavians throughout Queensland.
For this purpose he got the previously mentioned missionary,
Ditlev Hansen, out from Denmark, ordained him to the priest-
hood, and sent him to the Maryborough district with head


station in Maryborough. Through Pastor Petersen s initiative
Scandinavian congregations were founded and churches built
in Laidley, Yangan, and Edenvale. These were included in the
Brisbane diocese, and were served by himself and a lay preacher,
Rose Hansen, whom he ordained and engaged as a collaborator.
To strengthen his work, he got the Scandinavian Church in
Queensland united with one of the German Lutheran church
organizations under the name of ‘The German-Scan dinavian
Lutheran Synod/ an arrangement which lasted till 1889. do
promote Sunday School work amongst children of Scandinavian
parents, few of whom had learned the language of their
ancestors, he translated Luther’s catechism into English.
Unfortunately, Pastor Petersen suffered from indifferent
health. He had had an attack of yellow fever in Brazil, and
had never fully recovered. The strenuous work in Queensland,
and the trying climate, commenced to tell on him, and aftei
some years he left the colony for Denmark, but later proceeded
to the United States, where he had received a call to a Danish
congregation in Minneapolis.
With Petersen’s departure the hey-day of the Scandinavian
Church in Queensland came to an end. The strong hand which
had guided the movement was in America. I here were not
enough ministers to go round, and none capable of rising to
the position of leader. The Scandinavian immigrants were
slowly but irresistibly being assimilated. The livelihood of the
ministers, at no time very lucrative, became more and more
precarious, and offered little inducement for any others to
come out from home. The story of the next decade is one of
decay, of disintegrating congregations, of Scandinavian churches
disposed of or standing empty.
Briefly, the records of the individual churches are as follows :
The church in Mackay, in which Germans and Scandinavians
alternately worshipped, after having been served by Pastor
Gaustad, was for a time without a minister. Eventually Ditlev
Hansen was transferred by the Synod from Maryborough to
Mackay, but after about three years he returned to the
Maryborough district. With an empty pulpit the Mackay con-
gregation naturally declined, till it was little more than a
name. Seeing no prospects of a revival, the Germans and the
Scandinavians drew lots as to who should have the church and
who the parsonage. Our people retained the church. Being
prevented by the constitution from selling it, they let the
Germans have the use of it, till some years later it was blown
down in a storm.
SCANDINAVIANS IN AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND


I he story of the Scandinavian church in Maryborough differs
from that of Mackay inasmuch as the building did not blow
down, but was sold.
When Pastor Hansen was transferred to Mackay, the con-
gregations in Maryborough and Nikenbah were included in the
Brisbane diocese, which was already too big for its two over-
worked ministers to attend to properly. Then Pastor I. C.
Petersen left, and his place was taken by a Pastor C. Christensen,
who had come out from Denmark. Owing to a roaming dis-
position, to undue interference in his work by church elders,
to inadequate remuneration, or for some other reason, Pastor
Christensen soon left Brisbane and settled in Maryborough.
Having served the Scandinavians there for a couple of years,
he proceeded to Bundaberg, preaching to his countrymen in a
hired hall, and making occasional visits to the Scandinavian
settlements on the Burnett River. He next devoted himself to
missionary work amongst the South Sea Islanders employed on
the sugar plantations. Under such conditions the Maryborough
congregation could hardly be expected to flourish, and when
eventually Pastor Ditlev Hansen returned, the disintegration
was too far advanced to be stemmed. Eighteen months later
the church was sold to the Plymouth Brethren for £45 —only
a fraction of what it had cost. Pastor Hansen, who had been
a cigarmaker in his homeland, set himself up in a little business
in Maryborough, but continued to preach the gospel to his
countrymen in the neighbourhood.
The Nikenbah and Pialba congregations shared a minister
with Maryborough. Consequently, when Maryborough was
without a minister, so was Nikenbah. The church continued to
be the property of the Scandinavian settlers, as it has remained
till this day, but it is rarely used.
1 here is still a Scandinavian church in Edenvale, and a con-
gregation consisting mainly of Scandinavians and their descen-
dants, served by a minister of the German Lutheran
Synod.
I he churches in Laidly and Yangan stood for years as silent
witnesses to futile efforts —as decaying monuments to a genera-
tion of Scandinavian immigrants fast passing away. Both have
now disappeared altogether.
Ihe foregoing consists of little more than obituaries. What
follows is a continuation of the brief record of practically the
only congregation that has withstood the stress and strain of
changing fortune during more than half a century, namely, the
one in Brisbane.
SCANDINAVIANS IN AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND


The Church in Brisbane
A church was built in the metropolis in 1875 on a site at the
corner of Melbourne and Boundary Streets, purchased from the
Government the year before. To liquidate the congregation s
accumulated debt the site was sold in 1883, and the church
removed to a cheaper ground at Kangaroo Point. There,
12,000 miles from our native land, the old familiar hymns,
‘Vor Gud han er saa fast en Borg,’ 'Du Herre Krist,’ ‘Dagen
gaar med raske Fjed,’ and the rest of them, could be heard
each Sabbath Day for many years. Then evil days fell on the
congregation, and for a while the beautiful melodies of our
homeland ceased. But we are anticipating events, and must
return to the point of Pastor C. Christensen’s departure from
Brisbane for Maryborough.
For a couple of years lay preachers filled the pulpit. 1 hen in
1880 a Norwegian clergyman, Pastor Larsen, arrived —the first
full-fledged minister to come to Queensland from one of the
home countries. It would seem that Pastor Larsen was rather
too cultured and broad-minded for his flock, and was not at
ease in the ultra-pious atmosphere created by Pastor 1. C.
Petersen. Congregation and minister gradually became
estranged, and, in the beginning of the nineties, Pastor Larsen
returned to Norway. Shortly afterwards, the ever-restless
Pastor C. Christensen came to light again and served the
congregation for a little while till, in 1896, he, too, set his
course for the old country.
Shortly after, Pastor Ries, head of the Scandinavian Lutheran
Synod in New Zealand, visited Brisbane, with the result that
the congregation was linked up with the Scandinavian church
organization in the Dominion. One of the Synod’s ministers,
Pastor Bjelke Petersen, accepted a call to Brisbane, and re-
mained there for six years, when he resigned.
There was a repetition of the Plymouth Brethren state of
affairs, inasmuch as the congregation was without a minister
and depended for religious solace on men in their midst ‘gifted
with utterance.’ This lasted till 1910 when, thirty-seven years
after his first landing in Australia, Sass reappeared in Brisbane
and took charge of the leaderless flock. However, in 1912,
the now aged Pastor Sass installed as his successor Pastor
Menzig, of the German Lutheran Synod, and at the beginning
of 1914 he left Brisbane. The following year the present
minister, Pastor Ligaard, arrived in Queensland’s capital.
Pastor Ligaard was born in Nykobing (M), Denmark, in
1880. He had graduated at Trinity Theological Seminary, Blair,


Nebraska. While there, he received and accepted a call from
the congregation in Brisbane, which he has served since October,
1915-
The church work in Brisbane revived. Sunday School, Young
Peoples' Society, and Mission to Seamen all were taken in
hand. The scattered Scandinavian settlements were again
visited—Kingaroy and the Warwick district alternately every
month, while Maryborough and Nikenbah received occasional
visits.
Owing to unsuitable location and the fast deterioration of the
old wooden church, it was decided at a meeting held in January.
1918, to buy a property in Dock Street, South Brisbane, which
locality was considered more suitable for the work. To finance
this scheme both properties were mortgaged for £650. The old
church at Kangaroo Point was afterwards sold for £175. The
total liabilities were brought down to £SO, and in 1919 the
actual value of the church property was £9OO.
The congregation had, long before, sought incorporation with
the Danish Church in America ; but apart from some financial
support through private channels, nothing definite came out
of the repeated applications for membership. In 1919 Pastor
Ligaard's health gave way under the strain of his work, and
he was ordered to refrain from preaching for several months,
He then decided to combine a rest with a trip to America,
hoping to accomplish in person what so far had failed by
correspondence. Defraying his own expenses, accompanied by
the good wishes of the congregation, and armed with full
authority in America to act for and on behalf of the church,
he took boat at Sydney in March the same year, in order to
attend the church conference in Cedar Falls, lowa. He was
eminently successful, and returned to Brisbane in August with
the following official letter to the congregation there :
To the congregation of the Scandinavian Lutheran Church,
Brisbane. It is with great gratification, on behalf of the United
Danish Evangelical Lutheran Church of North America, I have to
inform you that our Church has adopted the ‘Queensland Mission’
amongst its other branches of work in the Kingdom of God.
Rev. P. C. Ligaard will give you detailed information according
to the realization of the work hereafter.
Rev. Ligaard has made a good impression on our people, and by
him a new solid tie is created between you and the United Danish
Lutheran Church in America.
May God bless you and the work of salvation in Queensland.
(Sg.) G. B. Christensen,
President.


A financial support of 800 dollars per annum was granted to
Brisbane, and the promise made to send another minister to
work in the Kingaroy districts. All this stimulated renewed
efforts. In Brisbane the building proposition was again taken
up, and in Edenvale a congregation was organized. In
September, 1920, Pastor C. B. Larsen was installed in that
congregation. His stay, however, was not of long duration,
and as early as in March, 1923, he went back to America. As
previously stated, the congregation in Edenvale has since been
served by a minister of the German Lutheran Synod.
It soon became apparent to the church in America that
self-support by the Brisbane church was not within sight, and
also that the congregation of the latter could not render
financial assistance to the missions and objects of the church
in America. In Brisbane it commenced to be felt that ‘the
solid tie’ between the church in America and the one in Brisbane
might snap at any time. Fearing discontinuance of the ‘adop-
tion’ into the powerful Danish Church in the United States,
the congregation in Brisbane decided to offer to the former all
the property it possessed. The legal preparations for the
transfer were made, and the matter submitted to the church
in America.
By this time migration from the Scandinavian countries
to Canada was on a rather large scale, and the church felt it
should extend its activity to Canada. This meant increased
expenditure, and economy had to be exercised in other direc-
tions. One of the working principles of the Danish Church in
America is that all help given is ‘help to self-help,’ and as the
congregation in Brisbane was not likely to be able to stand on
its own feet for a long time, if ever, the reply to the offer from
Brisbane was that they had decided not to continue the work
in Queensland.
Although this cutting of the painter was anticipated by some,
it came as a blow to the congregation as a whole. It became
clear that Pastor Ligaard would have to leave. He received
.from America his fare to that country and the assurance of a
charge there, and made his plans to return to the United States.
With the end of the congregation in sight, the problem arose
what to do with the church property. Finally, it was decided
to sell it. The next question was what to do with the money
realized by the sale. Many proposals were advanced, but most
of them were found to be illegal. At last the money was
deposited in the Commonwealth Bank for possible future
religious work.


In the hope that some connexion with the mother church in
Denmark might be effected, the congregation offered to pay
Pastor Ligaard’s fare to Denmark, if he would go there before
returning to America. This offer was gladly accepted, and,
refunding the money he had received from the United States,
he embarked with his family for his native land in October,
1923.
His mission succeeded. The congregation was taken under
the wing of the branch of the State Church known as ‘Dansk
Kirke i Udlandet’ (the Church of Denmark Abroad), and
Pastor Ligaard was appointed emissary of the church. The
following is an extract of the letter of appointment :
Capser Frederik Johannes Wegener, consecrated bishop in the
National Church of Denmark, and now Primate of the ‘Church of
Denmark Abroad’ hereby makes known ; that whereas Johan Peter
Christensen Ligaard, formerly in the ‘United Danish Evangelical
Lutheran Church of America,’ ordained minister for the Scandinavian
Evangelical Lutheran congregation in Brisbane, Queensland,
Australia, after negotiation with the ‘Church of Denmark Abroad’
has promised on Evangelical Lutheran ground, and in conformity
with the National Church of Denmark to take up a ministry among
Danish men and women in Queensland, with Brisbane as head-
quarters. So is he hereby appointed ‘Emissary of the Church of
Denmark Abroad’ to the above-named ministry, and as minister
for the congregation in Brisbane, and for such congregation or
congregations which under his agency might be organized. Which,
on behalf of the ‘Church of Denmark Abroad’ and as overseer of its
congregations, I hereby certify.
(Sgd.) C. Wegener,
Bishop.
Thus appointed, Pastor Ligaard returned to Queensland, but
via America, in order as the emissary of the Danish ‘Church
of Denmark Abroad’ to attend a conference of the Danish
Church Synod held in Fremont, Nebraska. An extensive travel
programme was arranged, and —as he had done during his
visit in 1919 —Pastor Ligaard toured the States, visiting the
Danish congregations and stirring up interest in the work in
Queensland which they had relinquished only a year ago. He
collected a substantial sum of money towards starting again
the work in Brisbane.
He returned to Brisbane. There was no church and no
congregation, but he soon found suitable accomodation for
future religious work, and in October, 1924, a church-room and
reading-room were dedicated to the service of God. Simul-
taneously a little church paper, The Messenger, was started,


while work in Sunday School amongst the young people, as
well as amongst seamen and immigrants, was taken up by
the congregation with renewed vigour. The country districts
were again visited, and for a while Danish church services were
broadcast once everv three months.


SOCIAL LIFE
It was perhaps natural that non-religious organizations
founded by Scandinavian immigrants in Queensland should
have been a combination of national society and sick-lodge.
The two feelings uppermost in the mind of an immigrant fresh
from home are tenderness towards the land of his birth, and
apprehension as to what his adopted country has in store for
him. As pointed out in Part i, together they produce a sense
of loneliness which presses the immigrants into groups of kindred
souls with the hazy object of nourishing love of the past, making
the present tolerable through the comfort derived from com-
panionship, and insuring themselves against the uncertainties
of the future. If they happen to live in sufficient number closely
together, and amongst them is found a man who seeks self-
expression in organizing and leading and is qualified for that
kind of work, a society is bound to arise. Immediately it has
come into existence, a further motive is discovered —that of
being helpful to later arrivals who, as they know from their
own experience, for a while stand bewildered and overwhelmed
by the new, strange surroundings.
A man qualified to organize the considerable number of
Scandinavians who had congregated in Maryborough was found
in a Danish journalist by the name of Fejlberg. Mr. Fejlberg
had received part of his education in Scotland and was editor
of the Wide Bay and Burnett News. His social position thus
made him well suited for leadership. At Fejlberg’s instigation,
a Scandinavian organization was founded in 1872, and he was
elected the first president. To begin with, it was in the main a
sick-lodge, into which each member paid ninepence weekly,
receiving in case of incapacity through illness £1 per week for
six months. After some years it was discovered that the lodge
could not compete with the bigger and older established Anglo-
Saxon sick-lodges, such as the Oddfellows and the Foresters,
and it was changed into a purely national and social organiza-
tion, with a lending library of Scandinavian literature as one
of its features. It was a great loss to the society when Mr.
Fejlberg left Maryborough to accept the position of sub-editor
of the big Melbourne daily, the Age ; still, national sentiment
and the need for brotherhood was sufficiently strong to insure
its existence for more than twenty-five years. Towards the
end of the century the need for such an organization became
less pronounced. The influx of immigrants from the


Scandinavian countries had greatly diminished, and the older
immigrants, who by then had taken firm root in Maryborough,
had formed all sorts of associations with their British-bom
fellow-citizens. Many had taken British wives and adopted
English speech exclusively. All in all, their struggle for place and
position in the economic and social life of the wider community
of which they had become members unavoidably weakened
sentiments which to many appeared of little or no practical
value, if not actually a hindrance to progress. The one essential
condition for the continuance of a national society —a steady
flow of new blood from the homeland —was lacking. Gradually
the membership declined, till in the end there were only
sufficient stalwarts left to perform the funeral rites of the one-
time flourishing organization.
A society at Rockhampton, founded as a sick-lodge in 1873,
promised well for a while ; but after the discovery of gold at
the Palmer there was a general exodus from Rockhampton,
including so many of our people that the lodge succumbed.
In the once prosperous gold-mining centre, Charters Towers,
a Scandinavian society of a national character came into exist-
ence in the eighties. At one time it had a fair number of mem-
bers, and was even able to boast of its own club building.
Unfortunately the building was situated outside the town, and
the effort required to get there was, undoubtedly, one of the
factors that caused the membership to diminish. In 1897 the
number of members had dwindled to seven, and an attempt
at reconstruction having been fruitless, the society came to an
end and the building was disposed of.
The record of the Scandinavian society founded in Brisbane
is considerably longer and consequently of greater interest than
any of the others. Although the organization in the course of
years has undergone various changes, it is still in existence,
and celebrated its sixtieth birthday some years ago.
The Scandinavians in Brisbane were of no great number
when in August, 1871, the German vessel Friedehurg was towed
up the Brisbane River with its cargo of way-worn immigrants,
many of whom had come the long distance from Denmark,
Norway, and Sweden. Those of our countrymen who remained
in the capital found their first meeting place in an old-fashioned
and somewhat dilapidated weatherboard structure at the corner
of Queens and Albert Streets, where a jovial German by the
name of Meyer conducted a lodging-house. There, every
Saturday evening, Scandinavian men and women and a few
Germans congregated to forget their woes and worries (if they


had any) in a whirling dance. The climax of these weekly
dances came with a masked ball, at which the costumes worn
were more fantastic than picturesque or dazzling. The affair,
nevertheless, became a huge success.
A month after the arrival of the Friedeburg an enterprising
Norwegian, Mr. Jappe, opened a lodging-house in an old hotel
at the corner of Edward and Union Streets, and Meyer’s week-
end visitors transferred their patronage to Jappe, whose
premises henceforth became the accepted rendezvous of the
Scandinavian immigrants. The Saturday dances were con-
tinued —sometimes well into the Sabbath day. Often Jappe
was put to his wits’ end to accommodate his many visitors,
and had to prepare beds on tables, forms, floors, and wherever
vacant space could be found.
, The more regular and well-attended gatherings naturally led
to the formation of a properly-organized society, and as the
great majority of the Scandinavian immigrants in Brisbane
were artisans, who in their childhood had become familiar
with the old trades guilds, the organization was bound sooner
or later to get a certain guild-colouring.*
Having decided to form a society, the chief promoter, a
Danish mechanical engineer by the name of Brasch, and a
watchmaker, J. F. Simonsen, undertook to draft the rules, the
result being that at a meeting, called on 23rd September, 1872,
the society was founded with Mr. Brasch as its first president.
Simultaneously a letter was written to a Mr. Rimestad in
Copenhagen, editor of Dagstelegrafen and a personal acquaint-
ance of Brasch, asking him to procure some Scandinavian
literature for the new-born society.
The society’s first notable expenditure was the purchase of
three large Scandinavian flags, and the erection of a flagpole.
There was some argument as to which flag should be on top.
The national sensibility displayed on that occasion was, of
course, typical of the difficulties which all efforts at unifying
Danes, Norwegians, and Swedes, at home and abroad, have
had to contend with. However, the problem was eventually
solved by the immigrants having the good sense to draw lots.
Chance decided that the Danish flag should be first, and the
Swedish next ; and so, on a bright, pleasant Sunday morn
♦These guilds, which lasted in Denmark until 1862, besides protecting the interests of the individual
crafts, were for mutual help in cases of distress, and for promoting recreation. When the more serious
business of the guilds had been dealt with, the tankards were filled, and the members made merry.
Once a year a shooting carnival was held —the celebrated ‘Fugleskydning’ at which the quarry was
a huge wooden bird, and the bringing down of any particular section of it was rewarded with a prize.
Amidst great rejoicing, the member who brought down the last part of the bird was proclaimed the
season’s Bird King.


the Scandinavian colours were hoisted amidst great jubilation.
As it happened, the order in which the three flags were displayed
corresponded to the number of members of each nationality.
The society, which had been founded mainly as a ‘friendly
society,’ met at Jappe’s place. For a few months all went well,
but then Jappe’s business commenced to slacken, and shortly
after Christmas he had to sell out. Thereby the society was
rendered homeless. It also lacked leadership, and member
after member dropped out, till there were only eight left. At
this juncture a meeting was convened at Meyer’s lodging-house
to discuss the position, but only a few disheartened individuals
attended, and nothing was done.
When the institution was all but dead, a certain Mr. Baruell
appeared, aspiring to lead his countrymen. He called a general
meeting, at which he propounded a plan for a new society,
embracing an evening class and a Scandinavian labour bureau.
A committee was formed to investigate the practicability of
Mr. Baruell’s proposals. This committee included the leaders
of the old society, and as it was mainly due to them that pro-
posals for an evening class and a labour bureau were rejected
as being too ambitious, Baruell grew angry and declared that
if he could not start a new society, he would at least have the
satisfaction of smashing the old one. Naturally such arrogant
language had the opposite effect to what was intended. It
caused the old society to rally, and as at the same time a box
with a hundred books* arrived in Brisbane, dormant national
sentiment was stirred, and the future of the society commenced
to look brighter than it had ever done.
As stated before, the organization had originally been founded
mainly as a sick-lodge. For a start the weekly subscription was
6d., the weekly sick pay 12/-, and funeral expenses £5 ; but
after a while it became 1/- and £1 respectively, and the com-
mittee was given the power to raise funeral expenses to £ls.
For a short time the lodge was united with the Scandinavian sick-
lodges in Maryborough and Rockhampton, and it had a small
branch in Benleigh, a German colony some 18 miles south-east
of Brisbane, where a number of Scandinavians had settled.
The most important happenings during the remainder of the
century will be seen from the following brief extracts from old
minute books :
In 1876 the society granted a loan towards the building of a
Scandinavian church. The social features were eliminated, and
the institution became a sick-lodge pure and simple.
*A gift from the Workers’ Society of iB6O, on whose committee Mr. Rimestad had a seat.


In 1877 Pastor Sass was made an honorary member.
In 1878 the constitution was again altered, and the name
changed from ‘Scandinavian Sick-Lodge’ to ‘Scandinavian
Society/ A song-quartet and a theatrical coterie were founded,
the latter for the purpose of reproducing some of the panto-
mimes from Copenhagen’s Tivoli, the memory of which was
still dear to many of the immigrants.
In 1879 a rupture occurred, resulting in the formation of two
new societies —a Swedish-Norwegian society under the presi-
dency of the joint consul for Sweden and Norway, Oscar
Netzler, and a Danish society, the latter being founded to
introduce ‘Fugleskydning’ into the social life of the Danes in
Brisbane. Both organizations, however, soon crumbled away.
In 1880 a catalogue of the society’s steadily-growing library
was printed. In 1883 the society and the sick-lodge separated.
In 1884 £l2 was voted for more books from the Scandinavian
countries.
In 1886 the sick-lodge succumbed.
In 1887 a second Danish society was established to promote
‘bird-shooting.’ It did not endure, but from that time onward
an annual bird-shooting carnival became a fixture in the enter-
tainments of the Scandinavian society.
In 1889, £ls was voted for additional books, and a new
catalogue printed in Copenhagen.
In 1898 the consul for Sweden and Norway in Sydney, Mr.
Falstedt, visited Brisbane to find a suitable successor to the
deceased consul there. At a dinner given in his honour, it was
decided to found a society of Swedes and Norwegians. This
new separatist movement, however, also broke up in the com-
petition with the firmly-established Scandinavian Society.
In the same year a gift of books was received from ‘lndustri-
foreningen’ in Copenhagen.
In 1899 another £ls was voted for new Scandinavian litera-
ture.
There were, of course, many other events that agitated the
minds of the members —stormy meetings, anniversaries, festive
gatherings, picnics, and so forth —but which were only of
momentary significance.
In trying to trace the main currents in the social, religious,
and national life of the Scandinavians in Brisbane up to the
end of last century, one notices that the same old-fashioned
people, with their keen appreciation of human enjoyment,
who founded the society, also built the first church, engaged
the first minister, and showed him the respect of making him


an honorary member of their society. With the advent of
Pastor Petersen traditional religion fell into disfavour, and the
Scandinavian immigrants split into two distinct bodies, the
one rallying round the church, the other round the society.
In the former, religious sentiment was paramount ; in the
latter, national sentiment, manifested in devotion to
Scandinavian literature and traditions.
When the nineteenth century closed, the immigrants who
had founded the Scandinavian Society in Brisbane had reached
middle age ; but the institution was still going strong. A
certain rivalry between the church organization and the society,
which at times had been little short of animosity, probably
added virility to both. Besides, while in many of the provincial
towns the Scandinavian population had gone back, in Brisbane
it had increased through a steady, albeit small, immigration
from the homelands.
The present century has seen a steady growth of the library
—partly through sharing in the library grant made by the
Danish Government to Danish societies in foreign countries —
till to-day the society can boast of the most comprehensive
collection of Scandinavian literature in Australia.
Two important events have occurred :
The wave of patriotism occasioned in our native land by the
reunion of North-Slesvig with Denmark echoed throughout
Danish settlements in Australia. In Brisbane it found expres-
sion in the society realizing an old cherished dream of some day
meeting under its own roof, after for so long having forgathered
in hotels or hired premises. A building fund had been in-
augurated in 1909, but money was slow in coming in. Now,
stirred by the patriotism thus revived, and led by the Danish
builder and contractor, C. R. Schriver, the movement to provide
a permanent home worthy of our people became irresistible.
Money was collected from all over Queensland, an art union
(sanctioned by the Government) was held, and a building pur-
chased and remodelled to suit requirements.
The building is situated in Grey Street, South Brisbane, and
comprises an assembly hall with billiard table and card tables,
a committee and reading room which can be converted into a
stage, spacious verandahs, cloak rooms and other conveniences,
and in the basement, accommodation for a caretaker. Into
this building the society moved in 1920, the opening ceremony
taking place on 13th November.
Though from the beginning Danish immigrants had been
the main supporters of the institution, a number of Norwegians


and Swedes had helped to found it, had loyally stood by it in
storm and stress, and at times had been its leaders. But new
arrivals from Norway and Sweden were few, and as the spirit
of Scandinavian fellowship, so prominent amongst the early
immigrants, weakened, the society became more and more
Danish. At last the name ‘Scandinavian Society’ was felt to
be misleading, and it was altered to the ‘Danish Society
Heimdal/ though this did not preclude Norwegians and Swedes
from retaining, and newcomers from Norway and Sweden from
attaining, full membership.




PART 3
SCANDINAVIANS IN NEW ZEALAND




SCANDINAVIANS IN NEW ZEALAND
Their Arrival
THE first Scandinavians to see New Zealand were sailors on
board Abel Tasman’s ships, the Heemskerk and the Zeehan.
The roll of the crew of the former is still extant, and in it
occurs the name of able-bodied seaman Pieter Pieterszoon aus
Kopenhagen. The roll contains other typical Scandinavian
names, such as Hendrik Pieterson (first mate), Franz Jacobzoon
(carpenter), Pieter Jacobzoon, Tobia Pieterzoon, Claesen, and
others. Ihe sea-borne trade of the Scandinavian countries
was at that period in the hands of the Dutch, and there can be
little doubt that a large number of Norwegian, Swedish, and
Danish sailors were employed in the Dutch mercantile marine.
1 hat only Pieter Pieterzoon is mentioned as being a native of a
northern country, we may imagine was due to his—as is the
case of Copenhageners to-day —being immensely proud of his
native town and neglecting no opportunity to tell his shipmates
that he was ‘Kobenhavner.’
In Captain Cook’s expedition our race was worthily repre-
sented by the Swedish scientist, Dr. Solander, whose name in
New Zealand is perpetuated by an island called after him.
There were men of Scandinavian blood also amongst the
whalers and sealers who were attracted to New Zealand waters.
1 hus we know from his memoirs that Jorgen Jorgensen was
captain of a whaling vessel there. We can imagine him taking
an active part in the boisterous pleasures of the Kororareka
settlement, the rendezvous of the whalers, with other light-
hearted sailors frequenting the rum shops and seeking the
company of Maori belles.
A Danish whaling ship, the Concordia (Captain Sodring, a
native of Aalborg) was hunting in New Zealand waters in 1839.
On its way it called at Hobart, where the Danish flag attracted
two visitors, a Danish watchmaker, Hekscher (born in Aarhus),
who had arrived in 1832, and Jorgen Jorgensen.
Amongst the fortune seekers attracted to New Zealand by
the gold discoveries in the sixties were a sprinkling of
Scandinavians. Some went there from the Victorian gold-
fields, others were sailors who deserted from their ships in New
Zealand ports, and a few came direct from their respective
homeland. According to a census taken in 1867 there were,
in that year, 2,283 Germans in New Zealand, 553 Frenchmen,


and 2,196 other Europeans. The number of Scandinavians in
that year may be estimated at about 500.
Bishop Monrad
By far the best known and most interesting Scandinavian in
New Zealand in the sixties was the Danish bishop and ex-
premier, Monrad.
Monrad was at the head of the Danish Government when the
war with Germany broke out in 1864, and the result —so fatal
to Denmark —had rendered him very unpopular. Several hos-
tile demonstrations took place outside his residence in
Copenhagen. To get away from it all and find relief from his
worries, he decided to leave his native land. Accompanied by
his wife, two sons (Viggo and Johannes), a daughter, and
daughter-in-law, five young Danes —Hail (an agricultural expert
engaged by Monrad), Rordam, Kornerup, West, and Bloch (all
sons of clergymen) —and a Norwegian servant girl, he left
Denmark in midwinter, 1865, travelling over Hamburg to
London, whence, after a short stay, the party proceeded to
New Zealand. Arriving in Wellington, the fugitive bishop was
received with great sympathy, more especially by the Governor,
Sir George Grey, to whom he had brought a letter of intro-
duction from the English Cabinet Minister, Lord Russell. On
the Governor’s advice, Monrad selected land on the Manawatu
River. His sons were enrolled as ‘military settlers,’ and after-
wards took part in the war against the Maoris.
After a tedious journey in canoes up the Manawatu River,
Monrad took possession of his New Zealand bush estate,
naming it ‘Karere,’ and with his family he worked as an
ordinary settler. He roughed it for three years, then returned
to Denmark, and in part regained his old position, being re-
appointed bishop in his old diocese and re-elected member of
parliament ; but his sons remained in New Zealand. After
some years Viggo’s wife died, and he, too, returned to his
native land. Johannes qualified as a dairy expert, and in time
became one of the pioneers of the New Zealand dairying
industry.
Of the young men who went with the Monrad family to New
Zealand, Kornerup, clubbed by a Maori, managed to drag
himself to the homestead to be attended to, but died soon
after from his wound ; Hail, the agricultural expert, directing
the work at Karere, was drowned in an attempt to swim some
horses across the Manawatu River ; Rordam went to the gold-
digging at Invercargill, where he was lost sight of ; West


selected land on the other side of the Manawatu River and
went in for farming ; Th. Bloch after a while proceeded to
Victoria, where he married the daughter of a Danish-born
school teacher, and reared a big family, and one of his sons
fought against the Germans in the Great War, revenging—
as he says —his father’s defeat as a young lieutenant in ‘Dybbol
Skanserne’ in 1864 ; Bloch, to whom I am indebted for the
above particulars, died in Gippsland, Victoria, a few years ago.
In New Zealand Monrad 'slogged’ like any other bushman,
helping to clear the forest and build the homestead of material
hewn in the bush. Karere soon became the rendezvous of
new-comers from Denmark, and of Scandinavians living in the
district. The bishop took a fatherly interest in them all, and,
on Sundays, attended to their spiritual needs by conducting
church service in Danish. He also won the goodwill of the
Maoris in the district, who called him 'the Bihop,’ being unable
to pronounce's.’
Amongst the Danes whom Bloch met at Karere, one in
particular—a nephew of Count Friis, Monrad’s successor as
Premier of Denmark—has left an indelible impression on his
mind. Good-looking, reckless, and adventurous, he was exiled
to New Zealand for foolishly having attempted to elope with
Countess Danner, the mistress of Frederik VII. In New
Zealand he was interested in getting a big tract of land set aside
for a Danish settlement, and by using Monrad’s name succeeded
in getting the ear of one or two politicians, who brought the
matter before Parliament. The idea of giving foreigners prefer-
ence over Britishers was, however, so strongly denounced, that
Monrad, reading about it in the newspapers, thought it advisable
to inform the New Zealand Government that he had nothing
whatsoever to do with it. The adventurous young nobleman
thereupon bought a schooner and went labour recruiting in the
western Pacific, eventually meeting his death at the hands of
ferocious cannibals.
Of other Scandinavians in New Zealand at that early period
Bloch mentions a Danish architect by the name of Toxward,
who had been at the Ballarat gold-diggings but afterwards
went to Wellington, where he became a prominent citizen, one
of the pioneers of freemasonry in New Zealand, and the first
consul for Denmark in that part of the world.
Influx of Scandinavians to New Zealand
At the census taken in New Zealand in 1871 the Scandinavians,
being still of little importance, were grouped with ‘Other


Europeans/ By the same method of estimating their number
as for 1867, they had now increased to about 600. In the
seventies a heavy migration of Scandinavians to New Zealand
took place, and as they came to play an honourable part in
the economic growth of their adopted country, at all subse-
quent censuses count was kept of them. At the census in 1874
Norwegians and Swedes were grouped together, but henceforth
they, too, were recorded separately.
The coming to New Zealand of so many of our countrymen
is closely associated with the endeavour to develop and popu-
late that colony.
The leading statesman in New Zealand in the latter part of
the sixties, Sir Julius Vogel, gained support for a bold venture
in economic progress. In September, 1870, he got the so-called
‘lmmigration and Public Works Act’ passed by Parliament,
whereby the Government was empowered to raise a large loan
in England, to be spent in promoting immigration and settle-
ment, and in opening up the country by constructing railways,
roads, and bridges, and improving the seaports. An agent-
general was appointed to proceed to London with power to
engage commissioners to assist him in his work. The opinion
being publicly held that an element of hardy Norsemen would
be a valuable leaven to the expected large body of British
immigrants, it was decided to extend the immigration campaign
to the Scandinavian countries.
A young New Zealand scholar and research worker, Mr.
J. W. Davidson, in 1938, wrote a thesis (not published) about
Scandinavian Settlement in the Dominion, from which the
following is an extract :
During the year 1870 contracts were made with immigration
agents in Denmark, Norway, and Sweden to secure publicity for
New Zealand, and, for a start, to arrange for ten families from each
country to go there.
Settlement in the Manawatu
In part execution of this preliminary scheme, seventeen married
couples from Norway and one from Sweden arrived in Wellington
early in 1871. After a week in barracks, while they purchased tools,
and rations to last them for several months, they embarked for the
small seaport of Foxton, 70 miles north of Wellington. Thence they
walked the 20 miles to Palmerston —a settlement, still, of little but
surveyors’ pegs and high hopes —while their possessions followed
them in drays. Forty acres of bushland had been reserved for each
of the settlers on the edge of the natural clearing which was to be
the town. And there, among the ‘totara’ and ‘rimu’ beneath a


canopy of tree ferns and trailing vines, they began to build them-
selves homes.
Within a few weeks the men began work for the Government in
the construction of 9 miles of tramway between Palmerston and
Ngawhakarau, which latter place, it was hoped, would serve as a
river port for Palmerston and the surrounding district. Six weeks
after the arrival of the first settlers, a party of Danish and Swedish
immigrants, married couples and single men, arrived at Palmerston.
They, too, were given work on the tramway and allotted land,
forty acres to the married men and twenty to the single. The land
was to be bought at a pound an acre, which, though only after long
delay, it was decided should be paid in instalments. These settlers
had been given free passages to New Zealand, but in addition to
finding money to pay for the land they had to repay the advances
which had been made on their arrival for the purchase of stores.
For over a year, therefore, they remained working for the Govern-
ment, in order to pay their debts and supply their needs, felling and
clearing the bush from their land in their spare time. But
Palmerston, it was becoming increasingly clear, would one day be
a business centre of considerable importance ; land was sold and
houses and shops erected in considerable numbers. For the
Scandinavians there was soon ample work at good wages with
private employers. And while their numbers made it possible for
them to remain for a considerable period a distinct element in the
township, speaking their own languages among themselves, yet they
were quickly assimilated in the economic life of the growing com-
munity.
But the Palmerston settlement had never been intended as more
than a preparation for the larger scheme which was to follow. And
from this point of view it was highly satisfactory. ‘On their first
arrival/ reported Arthur Follett Halcombe, who had been placed
in charge of the immigrants, ‘there was a great popular prejudice,
amounting almost to indignation, against them, but this feeling
has been changed by the example of their steady, persevering
industry into one of entire approbation.’ The success of the 1871
settlers had given invaluable help to those who were to come in the
following years —it had made New Zealanders ready to receive them
gladly and to regard them with respect.
Organizing the Larger Scheme
Meanwhile, the General Government and the Provincial Councils
of Wellington and Hawke’s Bay were completing arrangements for
the placement of Scandinavian settlements in the Seventy-Mile
Bush. Until then the bush had remained undehled by the wood-
man’s axe and the roadman’s shovel. For 70 miles it stretched,
north and south, between the sea and the central dividing range of
the North Island. In the north it reached to within 50 miles of
Napier ; its southern wall was 80 miles from Wellington. Its soil


was fertile and well watered ; it lay athwart the only line of com-
munication between Hawke’s Bay and both the south and west.
For years men had talked of roading it and opening it to settlement.
In 1870 its purchase from the Maoris had at last been completed,
and a decision to build a road through it from north to south and
to connect it with the west by way of the Manawatu Gorge had
been made. On the line which the main road was to follow through
the bush six Scandinavian settlements were to be established. The
settlers, in their early days, would be given work in forming the road.
In September and October, 1871, instructions were sent to
England for the recruiting of immigrants for the first of the Hawke's
Bay settlements. The immigrants were to pay a third of the cost
of their passage, either in cash or by a promissory note. Each
settlement would consist of about five thousand acres of land, which
would be paid for over a period of six years. At the same time,
Bror Eric Friberg, a Norwegian resident in New Zealand, was sent
on a visit to Norway and Sweden, where, by means of lectures, he
did much to stimulate the stream of emigration to New Zealand.
In December, 1871, and the three months which followed, seventy
Scandinavians sailed for Wellington to establish the first of the
settlements in the southern half of the bush ; at the end of May,
1872, the Norwegian ship Hovding left Christiania for Napier with
over three hundred and sixty Norwegian emigrants to begin the
settlement of the northern half of the bush ; and a fortnight later
the Ballarat from London embarked eighty Danish emigrants also
for Napier.
The Settlements in Hawke’s Bay
On Sunday, 15th September, the two ships bound for Hawke’s
Bay arrived at Napier. After a few days in Napier the men began
the four days’ march to the bush. They camped in a clearing a mile
from the proposed settlement of Norsewood, where the majority
of them were to take up land. Friberg, who had returned to New
Zealand on the Hovding, remained with them as Government agent
at the settlements. Within a fortnight the women and children
began the journey in drays. For many of the men disillusionment
and despair had replaced the highest of hopes when they saw the
land on which they were to settle. Fertile, perhaps ; who knew ?
but lost beneath a dense entanglement of shrubs and vines growing
beneath the giant trees of the forest. How could they clear it ?
They had no money. Many had spent the last of their small savings
while they waited in Christiania for the sailing of the ship. They
must work on the roads to keep their families from starvation, to
pay the Government for their passage and for their land. To the women
the shock was even more severe. Some wept when they saw the forest;
others became hysterical. As they lay, sheltered only by fallen trees,
or by the foliage of the shrubs, on that first cold night at Te Whiti—
for the ‘whare’ there was too small to hold them all —some of them
must have glimpsed the bondage in which the forest was to hold them


until they died, or until, in its last act of self-destruction, its flames
consumed the patient savings of their years of toil.
But early despair soon gave way to a determination to succeed.
Houses, built of slabs roughly hewn from trees just felled, or of the
boles of tree ferns, were soon completed. Their floors were earthen
and strewn with fern leaves. The furniture—tables, stools, beds,
and cupboards—was constructed of the same rough timber.
Three weeks after the arrival of the men at Te Whiti twenty-one
families were taken 14 miles further into the bush to found the
settlement of Dannevirke.
When their slab huts were completed, the men at both settlements
began work for the Government. They earned between fifteen
shillings and two pounds by working for three or four days a week ;
on the remaining days they were thus free to work on their own
sections. Crops of cabbages and potatoes were grown from seed
provided by the Government; several cows were bought by settlers ;
and by the following spring a number of two- and three-roomed
‘whares’ had been built. Pigeons and ‘tuis’ were plentiful, as were
wild pigs. A few sheep were brought in ; at both settlements a
store was opened. But the clearance of the bush was difficult ; the
cost of bringing in goods from outside was high ; the purchase and
production of food remained long a continuing anxiety. It was
almost impossible to produce anything for sale outside the settle-
ments, and when road work ended in the spring of 1873, indebtedness
to the storekeeper increased alarmingly. A few had early left the
bush, and forfeited their sections, but now all were compelled to
seek work elsewhere. During 1874 some were in the Wairarapa
building the road through the southern half of the bush ; others
were at work on the railway south from Napier. A new era in the
life of the settlements had begun—an era in which both forest and
road dominated their lives. Up and down the road the men tramped,
with tools and blankets on their backs, seeking work—north to
Napier, south to Masterton, west to Wanganui. For all of them
it was the same—a job and money saved, the return to their wives
and children in the bush settlements, a few weeks with their families,
while, probably, they cleared a little more of their land, and then
away again for more work.
At the end of 1874 there was a break in this procedure, and for a
year there was sufficient work in proximity to the settlements in
the cutting of sleepers for the railway from Napier. But it was only
when the railway entered the bush that their ceaseless wandering
came to an end. It reached Kopua in 1877.
And between 1880 and 1890 sawmilling was carried on extensively
in the Seventy-Mile Bush, and provided work for a big proportion
of the Scandinavians who found in the mills work in which many
of them were skilled before they left Europe.
Health and Education
Houses of rough-hewn wood, scarcity of food, and the dampness


of the bush added to feelings of loneliness and longing for home in
producing much illness and not infrequent death. Accidents in
felling the bush swelled their misfortunes. And, though the settlers
had been provided with medicines and other aids, they remained
without any one skilled in their use. When a low fever became
prevalent at Norsewood, three months after the settlers’ arrival,
they were compelled to arrange at considerable expense for a doctor
to make the difficult and dangerous journey of 20 miles over bush
tracks and unbridged rivers from the nearest town. Then, and for
many years, death and permanent disability were caused by the
mere lapse of time before skilled attention could be obtained.
Dannevirke developed rapidly after 1875, and, losing its exclu-
sively Scandinavian character, gained the benefits of civilization,
and among them that of regular medical service.
The settlements of Norsewood and Dannevirke preceded the
beginning of free education in New Zealand. And while for these
children who could speak no English schooling was more than ever
necessary, it was apparent that the settlers could spare no money
to provide it. The General Government, therefore, agreed to bear
the expense of schools during their first year. The Dannevirke school
was opened in June, 1873, and that at Norsewood a month later.
At both settlements progress was delayed by the frequent necessity
of keeping children at home to help on the land, and, according to
the provincial inspector of schools, because the teachers understand-
ing the children’s native tongues were disposed to allow their use
instead of English. At Dannevirke the school was closed for the
whole of 1874 through lack of a suitable teacher, but in 1875 it
was reopened, and with the appointment to Norsewood also of a
teacher who spoke only English, a period of rapid advance began.
Further Settlement in Hawke s Bay
In December, 1873, the Norwegian vessel Hovding arrived again
at Napier. On the voyage a misanthropic captain had tormented
his passengers with stories of the horrors which awaited them ; and,
on landing, the enthusiasm of a party of Maoris served to fix only
more firmly the concept of a race of fierce cannibals, with which
in the nostalgic solitude of the ocean they had filled their minds.
In spite of their fear built upon their misunderstandings, they
quickly settled down to life in New Zealand, and some months later
many of them settled at Makaretu, a settlement south of Napier,
in the heart of the bush which skirted the Ruahine Mountains. To
this settlement came more immigrants from Scandinavia in the
following two years, but it was never, as Norsewood and Dannevirke
were, an exclusively Scandinavian settlement. But life was much
the same at Makaretu ; men sought work on road and railway, and
women suffered and died in their solitude. It was the usual story
of the bush country.
In 1874 and 1875 three ships from Hamburg brought more settlers
from the Scandinavian countries. A large party of Danes and


Swedes, which arrived on the Fritz Reuter in the spring of the latter
year, was settled on blocks of land adjoining the original Norsewood
settlement. Many of the immigrants on the other ships bought
land in the bush country, which was now being opened up rapidly,
and, like the earlier settlers, worked on roads and railways during
their first years.
Settlement in the Wairarapa
In April, 1872, live months before the first settlers for Norsewood
and Dannevirke arrived at Napier, seventy Scandinavians had
arrived at Wellington to found the settlement of Mauriceville, in
the southern half of the Seventy-Mile Bush. For nearly a year and
a half they lived in temporary huts on the edge of the bush, while,
working for the Government, they formed and cleared a road to
their settlement. In March, 1873, they were joined by a further
party of Danes and Norwegians, who were to establish the settlement
of Mellemskov, or Eketahuna. Five months later another seventy
Danes arrived, and soon afterwards the three parties moved to
their permanent homes.
Life in the Wairarapa was very similar to life at Norsewood and
Dannevirke ; but the rate of change was slower at Mauriceville
and Eketahuna. The land was more difficult ; roadwork lasted
longer ; the settlements were without a railway for over a decade,
and consequently sawmilling was later in establishing itself. But
it was not only the greater ruggedness of the country which hindered
the development of the settlements, but the relative indifference
also of the Wellington provincial authorities. The growing capital
and port was busy with larger schemes, and as a result Mauriceville
waited three years for the Government to establish a school; at
Eketahuna the settlers waited six.
Settlement Elsewhere
The largest groups of Scandinavians were in the special settlements
in Hawke’s Bay and in the Manawatu and Wairarapa districts.
But among the Hawke’s Bay immigrants a considerable number
remained in Napier. Among those who arrived at Wellington, also,
several hundred remained in or near the city, working at their
trades or as labourers in private employment. Others travelled
north from Wellington. In 1875 a party of thirty-six adults settled
at Patea, in southern Taranaki, and, later, others settled in the
bush district of Inglewood, near New Plymouth. But in the South
Island, also, there was considerable activity. Well-organized
colonizing ventures, unbroken peace, and the comparative abun-
dance of bush-free land had given Canterbury and Otago much
greater population than the northern provinces. There was less
need here for men to found new settlements, but greater need of
labour for existing holdings. A hundred and seventeen Scandinavians,
the first group to land in the South Island under the Government’s
scheme, arrived at Lyttleton in the spring of 1872. In the following


NEW ZEALANd\VL
MILES IT
iyO \ \
/nyjew/tf* x / ‘‘Mf
O / ffijNgpier
<fc& ■ | |j^2
I wvo d Jj
, JtZfannevjrke /
Jj
f M£ke2-afima j
/
m/faurUevfUe J
Ip %mr miles
two years several hundred more landed at Lyttleton ; and one ship,
the Palmerston, took a hundred and twenty settlers to Dunedin.
But the greater population of the southern provinces, which made
the Scandinavian influx less significant, also made the immigrants
less suited to conditions there. Their lack of English, which hindered
them little in the bush settlements of the north, was a great dis-
advantage in the more closely-settled south. And so it was that only
one ship brought Scandinavians to the South Island after 1873.


Province
H
Oc
OO
1921
Auckland . .
. .
345
1,273
Taranaki
119
217
Wellington . .
• • 1.307
i,4 I 3
Hawke's Bay
■ • 1,056
587
Marlborough
79
40
Nelson
210
134
Westland
235
73
Canterbury
647
321
Otago
496
309
Total
0
0
VO
4"
4,367
In 1876, owing to the exigency of reducing Government ex-
penditure, the whole scheme ended. During the half-dozen
years it had operated, the number of Scandinavians had risen
to 4,600, of whom the Danes accounted for nearly one-half,
and the Norwegians and Swedes for about 25 per cent each!
They were distributed amongst the nine provinces of which
New Zealand consists, as follows. Alongside the figures for
1878 are given those for 1921 :
In Hawke’s Bay Province in 1878 the Scandinavians formed
7 per cent of the population, and in the Wellington Province
2\ per cent.
Comparing the figures for the two years, we find that, during
the intervening forty-three years, in Auckland the Scandinavians
had nearly quadrupled, in Taranaki and Wellington they had
slightly increased, while in all the other provinces they had
decreased. In the Hawke’s Bay Province, once the stronghold
of our people, they had dwindled to about half of their original
number. In Westland and Canterbury also the decline was
conspicuous, but there the number of Scandinavians compared
with that of Britishers had always been insignificant.




N.Z.I906 MALES FEMALES
DANES
SWEDES
RACIAL INFLUENCE, Etc.
For two reasons the ethnic influence of Scandinavian
immigrants in New Zealand has always been slight. In the
first place, comparatively speaking, their number was never
great, and, secondly, the Anglo-Saxons and the Scandinavians,
as we know, are so closely related racially that at times
it baffles the keenest observer to tell the one from the
other. In either of these ethnological groups the Nordic strain
predominates, and the only difference is an admixture of
Mediterranean blood in the British, and of East Baltic in the
Scandinavians. The Mediterraneans being dark and the East
Baltics fair, flaxen hair and light-blue or grey eyes occur more
frequently amongst the Scandinavians than amongst the
British. Also the average stature of the former is slightly
bigger than that of the latter.
There is thus actually a small physical difference, while
from the psychological point of view the different histories of
Scandinavia and Great Britain must have produced variations
in the mental make-up.
In 1878 the Scandinavians in New Zealand accounted for
about 1 \ per cent of the total white population. There would,
however, already then be a percentage of non-British blood in
the veins of the native-born New Zealanders and of Australians


1878 —
Males
Females
Total
Danes . .
. .
•• M37
788
2,225
Norwegians
. .
761
452
1,213
Swedes . .
. .
963
199
1,162
1881—
Danes
• • 1,409
79°
2,199
Norwegians
823
448
1,271
Swedes . .
. . 1,049
215
1,264
1886 —
Danes
•• M7*
76l
2,178
Norwegians
901
437
1,338
Swedes . .
• • 1,243
196
1,439
1891 —
Danes
• • 1,324
729
2,053
Norwegians
.. 883
405
1,288
Swedes . .
• • 1,217
197
M* 4
1896 —
Danes
•• D373
752
2,125
Norwegians
892
369
1,261
Swedes . .
• • 1,310
204
i,5i4
1901 —
Danes
. .
•• 1,384
736
2,120
Norwegians
. .
931
348
r,279
Swedes . .
• •
•• 1.337
211
D548
who had crossed the Tasman Sea. Basing an estimate of the
proportion of the various stocks comprised in the New Zealand
people to-day on the birthplaces of the immigrant population,
in 1878, we find that about 47 per cent is English or of English
descent, 24 per cent Scotch, 20 per cent Irish, and 9 per cent
non-British. Of the latter, 3 per cent is Scandinavian or of
Scandinavian descent.
The Scandinavian immigrants were all young, healthy, and
vigorous. Their infusion of new blood into the Anglo-Saxon
body amounted to approximately 3 per cent. Though small,
biologically even such an admixture is not unimportant—a fact
to which stockbreeders will testify.
Influence on Economic Development
Economically the value of the Scandinavian immigrants to
New Zealand is more easily measured, though even there con-
jecture must be resorted to.
Let us begin with a survey of their number at the various
censuses since 1878.


1906 —
Males
Females
Total
Danes
• • 1,526
75i
2,277
Norwegians
• • 1,032
364
T39 6
Swedes . .
• . 1,412
206
I,6l8
1911 —
Danes
•• D503
759
2,262
Norwegians
. . 1,004
340
1.344
Swedes . .
• • i,3i4
204
1.518
1916—
Danes
• • D523
721
2,244
Norwegians
914
319
1,233
Swedes . .
. . 1,192
199
I ,39 I
1921 —
Danes
• • 1,422
691
2,113
Norwegians
776
272
1,048
Swedes . .
• • 1,033
173
1,206
1926 —
Danes
.. 1,264
583
1,847
Norwegians
637
193
830
Swedes . .
. .
821
i43
964
Let us assume that the average age of the immigrants on
their arrival in New Zealand was 25 years. The expectation
of life at that age is approximately 44 years in Australia and
New Zealand. By this process of averaging, we find that only
a few of those who had been counted in 1878 were alive in
1921 ; yet the Scandinavians in that year numbered 4,367 souls
—only 233 less than 43 years previously. This shows that
Scandinavian migration to New Zealand had been heavier than
a hasty glance at the census figures suggests. It may perhaps
be estimated roughly at 10,000 —the same number as it is
estimated migrated to Queensland.
The general rule that men migrate more readily than women
applies to the Scandinavians who went to New Zealand. The
accompanying diagram shows the proportions of males to
females for the individual nationalities. Each figure represents
about 200 persons. The disparity between the two sexes is
particularly marked in the case of the Swedes, with only one
female to seven males.
The economic value to New Zealand of the approximately
10,000 Scandinavians added to her population is difficult to
appraise. It may be based on the cost of rearing a child from
the day it is born until as adolescent it takes its place amongst
breadwinners, and it may be based on the productive value of


the average person, though the result either way varies according
to time and place. What made the Scandinavians of particular
worth to New Zealand were the facts that the colony before
long was destined to draw its main revenue from agriculture,
and that the majority of the Danish, Norwegian, and Swedish
immigrants settled on the land, and, almost from the day of
arrival, toiled assiduously at developing farms out of the bush.
When in the nineties of last century prices of agricultural
products improved, the efforts of the Scandinavians resulted in
New Zealand having so many more farms to build her future on.
In New Zealand’s development of a dairying industry enab-
ling her to supply 20 per cent of the butter and 5° P er cent of
the cheese to-day imported by Great Britain, the Scandinavian
immigrants rendered special service. Modern dairying is
Denmark’s contribution to the progress of mankind. Danish
dairy machinery has been supplied to, or imitated in, many
lands ; Sweden has given the world the best separator ; Danish
dairy experts have sallied forth and taught others modern
methods. Of all this New Zealand wisely took advantage.
Regarding machinery, her import statistics during the last
fifty-five years tell their own unmistakable tale. As to the
experts, a large party of New Zealand farmers who a few years
ago visited Denmark, admitted the great service rendered to
their country by Danish dairy specialists. With forgivable
pride in the achievements of their native land, they thought the
quality of New Zealand butter surpassed that of Danish. If
such is the case, it only confirms the old truth, that the pupil
often excels his master.
These were plain men and women who in days of yore sailed
out from Denmark, Norway, and Sweden to render their modest
contribution to the founding of a new nation in the Pacific.
Most of them now slumber under the green sward of New
Zealand. On their tombstones could suitably be inscribed ;
‘They honoured their native land by willingly giving their
best to the country of their adoption.’


CHURCH LIFE
Several years went by before the Lutheran Church —of which
in their homeland the Scandinavian immigrants had become
members when as whimpering babies the local clergyman
baptized them —was to arise in New Zealand. Yet many of
their dearest memories were associated with that church. Who
amongst them had forgotten the day when mother took them
by the hand and, for the hrst time, led them to the little village
church, close beside which slumbered their ancestors of genera-
tions as far back in time as records were preserved of them ;
or the day of ‘confirmation,’ when in front of the congregation
they had avowed their faith in the Lutheran creed, and before
God pledged themselves always to lead decent Christian lives ;
or, in the case of those who were married, the day when kneeling
at the altar they had taken the holy vow of matrimony.
I imagine that in the hush of the evenings—the day’s toil
over, the moon sailing solemnly above their lonely home in the
New Zealand bush—a faint echo of distant church bells many
a time vibrated through their souls. It has often echoed in
my own ; it has at times echoed in the soul of every one of us.
At long intervals an old Dane by the name of Honore, who
in his young days had been a member of the Reformed Church
in Fredericia, but who through a strange fate had become a
missionary amongst the Maoris in distant New Zealand, visited
the Scandinavian settlements and preached the gospel. Occa-
sionally they would listen to a Norwegian Methodist lay
preacher, Edvard Nielsen, who had settled amongst them. Yet
it was not quite the religion of their childhood. Probably none
of them had grasped the subtle differences between the various
Protestant creeds, but the arrangement of the church service
was different, the hymns were not the old familiar ones, the
grave-looking Lutheran parson robed in his black gown was
missing.
Then one day in 1878 their old church was restored to them.
Amongst the Scandinavian emigrants, who had arrived in
Queensland in the seventies, was a young Dane by the name
of Sass. Like the rest of them, he had gone to Queensland to
make his fortune ; but on the voyage an epidemic broke out
on the ship, resulting in much suffering and many deaths. The
sight of one fellow-traveller after another being committed to
the waves made so deep an impression on Sass that he resolved
to serve the Lord for the remainder of his life. Having safely


landed in Queensland, he commenced studying for the ministry,
and was eventually ordained as a minister of the Lutheran
Church by the German Lutheran Synod in that colony. As we
have seen, for a while he was in charge of the newly-formed
Scandinavian congregation in Brisbane, but left after a few
years, in order to proceed to New Zealand.
Of his work amongst the Scandinavians there, Pastor Sass
has himself left a record of which the following is a translation.
He modestly ascribes the stir his coming occasioned, and the
manifest success accompanying his efforts, to the great need
of religious comfort and spiritual devotion on the part of the
immigrants.
‘The rumour of my arrival/ he says, ‘went like wildfire from one
settlement to the other, and, regardless of what day in the week
it happened to be when I arrived at a place, the settlers crowded
to the meetings in numbers defying the capacity of any private
house. It was a strange sight towards evening to see men and
women turning up, each armed with a candle in a broken bottle,
so that after the service they might find their way back over the
muddy bush track. Young men with beards, and married women,
presented themselves to be “confirmed/ ’ and mothers brought their
children from long distances to be christened.’
He tells that on one occasion he baptized seven children
from two families, five of them standing barefooted, with folded
hands, around a three-legged stool on which was placed the
wash-basin serving as baptismal font.
Proper roads and bridges were as yet few, and on his journeys,
sometimes extending over weeks, Pastor Sass was travelling
under medieval conditions —on horseback where possible, on
foot where only pedestrians could pass —swimming his horse
across rivers, or riding in carry-overs suspended from wire ropes
stretched from one bank to the other. However, he was young
and strong, and the hearty welcome extended to him at the
journey's end by the settlers made him forget the hardships
endured.
Before long church buildings arose. The Scandinavians in
Makaretu set the example in 1880 by buying a building allot-
ment in the centre of the settlement and erecting a chapel. In
time a church with tower and spires was built alongside it, and
the chapel became a mortuary. Napier followed by erecting a
church in 1881. Then a church was built at Norse wood. Sass
resided at Norsewood, and a beginning had been made by
providing a rectory. The church was completed in 1882 ; it
provided accommodation for 500 people and could boast of


being one of the finest country churches in New Zealand.
Unfortunately, five years later it was razed to the ground by
one of the bush fires which from time to time swept the settle-
ments ; but it was rebuilt and is still an ornament to the
district. Mauriceville, Dannevirke, and Palmerston North came
next with somewhat modest wooden churches. Last came
Halcombe and Hastwell with chapels.
The question now arose of filling the pulpits. The church
buildings having been erected, it was but natural that the
settlers desired more regular services than was within the power
of a single, travelling minister to give. Sass, therefore, took
steps to get assistance, and as a considerable portion of the
settlers were Norwegians, he invited the Norwegian-born clergy-
man, C. Gaustad, who, as it will be remembered, for a number
of years had ministered to one of the German Lutheran con-
gregations in Queensland, to join him. They had been personal
friends in Queensland, but they did not go well in double
harness in New Zealand. The relationship between them became
more and more strained, and eventually resulted in a complete
break, whereby Gaustad was forced to sever his connexion with
the church work so well begun.
In 1883 Sass visited Denmark to make known to his country-
men at home the spiritual needs of the Scandinavians in New
Zealand and to solicit aid. He was eminently successful. The
church in New Zealand became associated with the Danish
inland mission, known as Tndre Missionen/ which undertook
to find the requisite number of young, zealous Christians as
missionaries beyond the seas.
It took some time before the promise could be honoured, and
not till 1886 did the first aspirant to priesthood in New Zealand
depart. This was a Slesviger, H. M. Ries, who had been fre-
quenting a mission school to qualify for missionary work in
India. He now accepted a call to New Zealand, and was
ordained to be minister in Norsewood. In the same year M.
Christensen was called to serve the congregation in Mauriceville.
In 1888 J. Legarth received a call to Makaretu. Two more
followed —N. Topholm and G. Bjelke Petersen. They were all
ordained by Pastor Sass.
In 1894, after sixteen years of fruitful work, Sass returned to
Denmark. Before leaving he had the great satisfaction of seeing
the scattered congregations united in an organization, known
as the ‘Evangelisk Lutherske Imanuel Konvent/ with himself
as its leader. On his departure the leadership passed to Pastor
Ries. Simultaneously other changes took place. Ries took over


the congregation in Dannevirke, and attended also to the reli-
gious needs of the Scandinavians in Napier and Wellington.
Topholm went to Norsewood, Bjelke Petersen to Makaretu,
Christensen to Palmerston North with Halcombe as annex, and
Legarth to Mauriceville with Hastwell as annex. Inglewood and
other outlying settlements were served by three lay preachers
—J. Storring, Lauridsen, and Hans Fabrin.
Further rearrangements afterwards took place, occasioned by
the Scandinavian congregation in Brisbane for a while being
attached to the New Zealand Synod, and to the death of Pastor
Ries. Only the church at Napier has disappeared. Owing to
the severe economic depression in the eighties so many of our
people left Napier that it was impossible for the few who
remained to carry on, and the church was disposed of.
In his memoirs Pastor Sass —afterwards attached to ‘lndre
Missioned in Denmark —is apprehensive about the future of
the Scandinavian Lutheran Church in New Zealand. He said
that Scandinavian schools there did not thrive, and expresses
the regret that the second generation spoke English only, neg-
lecting the language of their ancestors. ‘Already now (1903) it
is only spoken by the old colonists, and as these pass out, and
the intermixture with Britishers become more profound, it dis-
appears altogether. Whether the Lutheran creed is able to
survive the loss of language, and permanently add to the
spiritual values of the new-born nation in the Pacific is a
question I do not venture to answer/
To ascertain the present position of the Scandinavian church
in the Dominion, I communicated some years ago with the
minister in Palmerston North, Pastor Christensen, son of the
previous minister. Pastor Christensen directed me for informa-
tion to the then head of the synod, Pastor Legarth, but for
some reason or other a letter to that gentleman remained un-
answered.
Regarding his silence as a bad omen, I turned to the New
Zealand census reports for information, and I learned that
whereas in 1896 there were 15 Lutheran churches (Scandinavian
and German), in 1926 there were only 10. Of these, 9 were
constructed of wood and 1 of concrete. These ten churches,
together with a public school used for Lutheran worship,
accommodated 1,255 persons. There were in the same year 13
Lutheran Sunday School teachers with 141 pupils.
What particularly struck me was that at the census of 1886
close on 6,000 men and women had designated themselves and
their children ‘Lutheran/ and that since then the number had


decreased steadily from census to census, till in 1926 it was
only 2,483. As the numbers of Scandinavians and Germans in
New Zealand are about equal, it may be assumed that only
half of the 2,483 persons were of Scandinavian origin.
It is quite evident that the stout-hearted apostles sent out
from Denmark between fifty and sixty years ago, who gave of
their best and served the Scandinavian immigrants in New
Zealand so well, have been fighting a losing battle all along.
A Danish journalist who visited New Zealand in 1938 told
us that all the old Danish pastors were dead. Scandinavian
Lutheran church work had practically come to an end in New
Zealand, except in Palmerston North, where a virile congrega-
tion still existed, though the services were carried on in the
English language.
Like the other small denominations in New Zealand, including
Baptists, Congregationalists, Church of Christ, Seventh Day
Adventists, Christadelphians, and so forth to the number of a
couple of dozen, the Lutheran church is continually losing
ground to the better-equipped Anglican, Presbyterian, and
Methodist churches.
Compared with most Christian nations, the New Zealanders
are a conspicuously religious people. But even they are getting
too enlightened to draw the sword for such mysterious shadows
of a superstitious past as consubstantiation and transubstantia-
tion, besprinkling versus immersion, Saturday or Sunday as
the proper day of rest, and choose the road of least resistance
—the road taken by the greater number.




PUBLICATIONS
It is strange that there should be no regularly published
Scandinavian journal in New Zealand. The old maxim that the
pen is mightier than the sword still holds good, and the written
word is more effective than the spoken* because it can be more
widely diffused and reach the remotest member of a community.
Most denominations have a church paper of some kind, and
attach much importance to it. In addition to having served as
a strong link between the scattered Scandinavian settlements,
a paper in the mother tongue would have helped to preserve
the language, a factor of no small importance to the well-being
of churches planted abroad. If simultaneously such a paper
had contained news from the old countries, the ties with what
the immigrants had left behind would not so easily have been
severed, while their self-consciousness as Scandinavians would
have been strengthened. The love of one's native land is as
much a sentiment as is the love of Christ. Neither are rooted in
reason. Yet both are life forces to be reckoned with.
To understand why the first-mentioned sentiment was starved
by the Lutheran ecclesiastics in New Zealand, especially when
from outside the Dominion an offer was made to nourish it
but was not availed of, one must know something about the
Lutheran church in Denmark, whence the ministers had come.
As in all Scandinavian countries, the Lutheran creed is the
State religion in Denmark. Practically every Dane is a
Lutheran. But although outwardly uniform, inwardly the
church falls into three divisions. At one end of the scale are the
Grundtvigians with their liberal exposition of the Christian
faith, combining love of Christ with love of country, of fellow-
man, and of life itself. At the other end stand the promoters
and supporters of the inland or ‘Home Mission/ a deeply -
religious cult akin to the dour, pietistic Free Church of Scotland.
In between these two extremes the large body of the population
is ranged. To them religion is neither an inspiration nor an
experience, but a habit. They go to church and to communion
because their fathers did so before them. Their ministers are
not spiritual leaders in a deeper sense, but are more in the
nature of public servants with a corresponding mentality.
As stated before, five years after its inception the Scandinavian
church in New Zealand became a branch of the Danish home
mission, and its ministers were chosen by that organization.
*With the advent of the radio this may be disputed.


Naturally they were, on the whole, uncompromisingly pietistic.
A religious periodical, printed in a Scandinavian language,
actually appeared in New Zealand before the influence of the
Danish Home Mission became dominant there. It was called
‘Brevduen’ (the carrier pigeon), and emanated from the
Norwegian lay preacher, Edvard Nielsen. Its life was short,
probably because Mr. Nielsen was a Methodist.
In the same period (about 1875) a young Norwegian with a
journalistic turn of mind, H. Graff, launched a Scandinavian
newspaper. Mr. Graff was one of the immigrants who had
come to New Zealand in the early seventies. He resided in
Palmerston North, where he had obtained a position in the
Public Works Department. The paper, which he named Scandia,
appeared fortnightly, and was produced in the office of the
Manawatu Times. Graff was its editor and publisher. He wisely
retained his position in the Works Department, but he intended
to leave it as soon as the journal proved a success, and to
devote his whole time to journalism. The venture failed, and,
after a brief period, the Scandia ceased publication. Most of the
Scandinavian immigrants who had come out up till then were
too busy clearing the ‘bush’ and too impecunious to support
a newspaper of their own.
Since then no attempt has been made to establish any kind
of a Scandinavian paper in New Zealand. Yet the ministers
did not lack the spirit of enterprise. Three of them secured land,
and in their spare time devoted themselves to farming. In
addition, one of the three, Pastor Ries, became a successful busi-
ness man in Dannevirke, and an outstanding figure in public life.
In 1896 Ries visited Brisbane to make arrangements for the
Scandinavian congregation there to join the Lutheran Synod
in New Zealand. The little congregation in Queensland —the
last surviving out of more than a dozen —had for some time
been without a minister, and the prospects of calling one from
any of the Scandinavian countries were slight, owing to insuffi-
ciency of funds. Having successfully negotiated the amalgama-
tion, Pastor Ries proceeded to Melbourne, the Scandinavian
congregation there being in the same predicament as their
brethren in Brisbane. His visit to Melbourne had no result ;
but it so happened that a movement was on foot in that city
for establishing a newspaper to serve the scattered Scandinavian
immigrants in Australia. Pastor Ries was approached with the
object of getting the synod he represented interested in this
movement, New Zealand being as near to Melbourne as
Queensland and Western Australia. He was supplied with


copies of the secular Scandinavian periodical, Hjemlandstoner ,
which had been published at long and irregular intervals under
the auspices of the local Scandinavian church. The projected
fortnightly journal was in the main to be an enlargement of
this little periodical. Pastor Ries himself was favourably im-
pressed by the undertaking ; but on the matter subsequently
being discussed at the quarterly meeting of the synod he was
overruled, and it was decided that the synod should not be
associated with it or encourage the circulation of such a paper
amongst the Scandinavians in New Zealand.
Two years later a gifted but unstable Danish adventurer with
journalistic proclivities saw an opening for a religious paper
printed in a Scandinavian language, and, making arrangements
with a small publishing firm in Melbourne, succeeded in getting
it established. He thereupon went to New Zealand to enlist
the support of the Scandinavian Lutheran Synod, pointing out
that one of his aims was to counteract the worldly influence of
the secular journal founded in 1896. His paper, named
Kirketidende , was approved with much enthusiasm by the
ministers, and its originator returned to Melbourne with suffi-
cient funds to carry on for a while, and with many subscriptions.
When the capital obtained in New Zealand had been exhausted,
and an effort at gaining support in Queensland had failed, this
religious paper succumbed. The secular journal, the Nor den,
again approached the synod and offered to add to the paper a
religious supplement, on the condition that the enterprise re-
ceived reasonable support from the Scandinavian congregations
in New Zealand. This offer, however, was rejected.
That a closer co-operation between the Northmen on the two
shores of the Tasman Sea would have arrested the decline of
the Scandinavian Lutheran church in New Zealand is, when
all is said, doubtful. As it is, it is doomed to a lingering death.
It served a useful purpose in rendering religious comfort to a
generation who, living under particular conditions, sorely
needed it, and in a language they understood. But beyond that
its mission has failed. Pastor Sass’s speculation as to its adding
spiritual value to the life of The new-born nation in the Pacific’
can now be answered in the negative.
One wonders if it would have been otherwise had the mini-
sters sprung from the opposite wing of the Danish State Church.
Could the strong love of country characteristic of the
Grundtvigians have been made to persist in their adopted land,
and would it with the second generation have been completely
transmitted ? Would they have established a people’s High


School in New Zealand on the pattern of the many founded in
Denmark by the Grundtvigians ? Would they have succeeded
in proving to the New Zealand people the educational, moral,
and national value of such schools ?
No one can tell. In a modified form the Danish people’s High
Schools have been copied by other nations.
Societies
While Scandinavian congregations in New Zealand persisted
for upwards of fifty years, societies of a national and social
character have not found conditions in the Dominion favourable
for growth. The former got a footing early and afforded little
opportunity for the latter to arise. As stated before, funda-
mentally the force drawing people together into herds is the
feeling of security and comfort derived from the intimate con-
tact of a multiple of kindred souls. That comfort the
Scandinavian church organizations offered.
Although there must have been a number of Danes,
Norwegians, and Swedes in the New Zealand cities, neither
Pastor Sass or anybody else appears to have attempted to
organize them in congregations. Only the small towns of Napier
and Palmerston North were exceptions. Even had the oppor-
tunity been seized quickly, the larger centres of population
were less congenial for the purpose than the bush settlements.
Mingling freely with British townspeople, the Scandinavians in
places like Wellington or Christchurch would speedily acquire
the English language, and those with religious inclinations
would be absorbed by British Protestant churches, so much
akin to the Lutheran denomination. The remainder would draw
together in circles of varying sizes and where of sufficient
numbers to warrant it, one of these circles would become the
nucleus of a society.
But the only city where Danes, Norwegians, and Swedes
were sufficiently numerous to supply the requisite material for
a society was Wellington, and for this reason it was the only
place where societies came into being.
A Scandinavian society was formed there in the early eighties,
with the usual aims professed by national societies in foreign
lands —of keeping the love of one’s native land alive, being
helpful to one another, and to promote social intercourse. It
did not endure long, and for the next ten years or more the
Scandinavians reverted to their little circles. Then in 1892 an
idea of holding a Scandinavian social evening got abroad and
stirred the desire for national self-expression. So successful


was the gathering resulting from it that it was decided to
make it an annual event. The one in 1895 was particularly
brilliant. The Governor and many prominent citizens took
part, and the papers accorded it lengthy and flattering reports,
one daily describing it as the most outstanding social event in
Wellington of the season. This triumph was bound to stimulate
Scandinavian self-consciousness, and it resulted in a national
club being formed. Spacious accommodation was secured in a
centrally situated building in one of the main streets, elaborate
furniture was provided, and arrangements were made for good
and efficient management. Nothing was spared to make the
institution worthy of the Scandinavian race.
But again the effort at a wider Scandinavian fellowship
failed, and after a brilliant but short life the club ceased to be.
Nor did a Danish society founded in the early years of the
present century succeed.
After this, no further attempts have been made. The
Scandinavian element in Wellington has become assimilated.




TWO PROMINENT DANES
Hans Madsen Ries
H. M. Ries was born in Slesvig in iB6O, and was one of
eighteen children. He was trained as a State school teacher,
but, as previously stated, afterwards qualified as a missionary
with the intention of going to India. Instead he accepted a
call as minister to the Scandinavian Lutheran congregation in
Norsewood, New Zealand. In 1888 the settlement was swept
by a fire, which devoured forty-four buildings, including the
church and parsonage, and strained the resources of the
colonists almost to breaking-point. The minister’s modest
salary could not be paid, the result being that Pastor Ries,
with the approval of the congregation, took up farming as an
adjunct to his religious duties. In 1890 he paid a visit to his
native land, and on returning to Norsewood brought back with
him his widowed mother and three sisters, and twenty-four
young Danish men and women. Shortly after, in conjunction
with two Danish experts, he started the first butter and cheese
factory in the district, after a while taking it over and managing
it himself. He thereby earned for himself the name ‘Father of
the butter industry in the Hawke’s Bay Province.’ In connexion
with the butter factory he also founded an up-to-date piggery.
The factory in time was enlarged and passed over to a company.
In 1895 Ries accepted a call as minister to the Scandinavian
congregation in Dannevirke, and there also he took up farming,
and in addition established a depot in farm implements,
waggons, harness, and other articles required by the man on
the land.
It stands to reason that a colonist of Pastor Ries’s education,
integrity, and capacity for work would be drawn into all manner
of public activity, and having the welfare of Dannevirke sin-
cerely at heart, he soon became one of its leading citizens. He
was appointed a Justice of Peace and elected a member and
sometime office-bearer of the United Districts Charity Aids
Board, the Waipawa County Council, the Dannevirke Borough
Council, the Hawke’s Bay Education Board, the Licensing
Committee, the Hospital Board, and the Dannevirke Chamber
of Commerce. He was made governor of the Dannevirke High
School, trustee of the public domains and the local drill hall,
to mention only some of the positions he held for years. From
1903 to 1910 he occupied the mayoral chair, and had a second
term of office later on in life.


It almost goes without saying that a man of so outstanding
ability should also be asked to stand for a seat in Parliament.
However, he refused the honour —the affairs of his beloved
Dannevirke, the very name of which must have acted as an
inspiration to him, were as much as he could take on his
shoulders. He died some years ago, loved and respected by
everybody.
Oscar Thorvald Johan Alpers
Of all the Scandinavians who came to New Zealand as
immigrants in the seventies, Alpers had the most brilliant
career. His life is an inspiring testimony to what a keen
intellect, untiring energy, and healthy ambition may lead to.
It is true that he was only a child when he came to the Dominion
and had the advantage of attending an English school; but
as against that his parents were poor, and from his twelfth year
he earned his own living.
He was born in Copenhagen in 1867, and left Denmark with
his parents and a sister in 1875. After a sea voyage extending
over 108 days, the family arrived in Napier and settled there.
Entering the public school, the high mental endowment of
young Alpers soon aroused the headmaster’s attention, and
resulted in the boy being appointed a junior teacher before he
had attained his thirteenth year. To augment his income he
undertook clerical work for a draper, a butcher, and a baker.
At the age of 16 he started an evening class for adults. His
success as a pupil teacher brought him a bursary of £IOO, and
this, together with what he had saved, enabled him to proceed
to the university at Christchurch. By coaching, serving as a
relieving teacher during the long university vacations, and
gaining a second stipend, he succeeded in financing his studies
and becoming a B.A.
While an undergraduate he was appointed assistant teacher
in English at the university, and when the professor in that
subject went on a visit to England he became his locum tenens.
Amongst the men who attended the English class during that
period were several who afterwards made marks for themselves :
The young Maori, Apirana Turupu Ngata, the first of his race
to take a university degree, who became Minister for Native
Affairs and received a knighthood ; F. J. Rolleston, who became
Attorney-General, and later won distinction in London and
Edinburgh ; and Sir William Marris, who was appointed
Governor of the United Provinces of India. Alpers’s pupils also
included the famous scientist, Sir Ernest Rutherford ; and a


dozen future barristers. English was not his mother-tongue,
and at the time of his university appointment he was only
22 years of age.
Having taken his Master of Arts degree with the highest
distinction, he was appointed co-director of the Boys’ High
vSchool, Christchurch. In his spare time he became leader writer
for a local daily, and a frequent contributor to English maga-
zines. In collaboration with R. F. Irvine (later appointed
Professor of Economics at the Sydney University), he produced
New Zealand in the Nineteenth Century.
In 1904 Alpers decided to qualify for the legal profession,
and shortly after took his Bachelor of Law degree. Starting as
a lawyer in Timaru in partnership with the Crown Prosecutor,
Mr. J. W. White, his ability and eloquence were soon recognized,
and he conducted several sensational court cases. Three years
later he entered into partnership with Garrick and Cowlishaw,
Christchurch, and soon became the most prominent member of
the firm. His extensive knowledge and forceful personality
made him a formidable opponent for even the best members
of the Bar.
During the Great War he did much patriotic work, and his
efforts for the soldiers were recognized by the action of New
Zealand ‘diggers’ in making him a life honorary member of the
Returned Soldiers and Sailors’ League.
In 1925 he was appointed a judge of the Supreme Court,
quite an unusual honour in the British Empire for a foreigner.
He was left little more than sufficient time to prove himself
eminently fitted for that high office. He became ill with a
cancer. He had surrendered a growing practice at the Bar to
assume the honour of a judgeship, despite the fact that three
children of tender age were dependent on his salary. He under-
went a serious operation. A year of fluctuating hopes followed,
and then ‘leave of absence.’
While a sick man he wrote his memoirs—a bright document
produced by a lofty character, whose courage not even the
shadow of death could curb. The work was afterwards published
in London under the title Cheerful Yesterdays * In the preface
Lord Birkenhead, of whom Alpers had become a personal
friend, paid him the following tribute :
T confidently recommend his book to the Press and to
readers of all ages as a worthy record of a fine personality and
a valiant career.’
*Not to be confused with Pregnant Yesterdays, written by another Dane, G. M. Hassing, a sailor,
who ended his roving career as a State school teacher in New Zealand.


Particularly to Danes his book makes pleasant reading. It
commences with a chapter on Denmark and its people, and
testifies to a faithfully preserved love of his native land. The
book ends with the following statement of how and why he
became consul for Denmark, though almost immediately after
having received the appointment he had to resign the position,
through having been elevated to the bench of the Supreme
Court of New Zealand.
‘The Consul-General for Denmark in Australasia had recently
visited New Zealand and induced me to accept the position of
Honorary Consul for Denmark, with jurisdiction over the South
Island. I felt that a consul should have commercial rather than
professional training, but I was, after all, the leading repre-
sentative of my country in the Dominion. I had never lost
touch with my native land, and I still spoke and wrote my
mother tongue. I felt, therefore, that I might be of some service
to my country, and formally applied for the vacant consulate.
Through a strange coincidence, within twenty-four hours I was
appointed to a post of honour by the Government of my native
land as one of his Danish Majesty’s consuls, and by the
Government of the land of my adoption as one of his Britannic
Majesty’s Judges.’


PART 4
SCANDINAVIANS IN THE WESTERN PACIFIC




SCANDINAVIANS IN THE WESTERN PACIFIC
THE morning after a dark night in August, 1914, having
boarded the Australian troopship the Berrima in Moreton
Bay, I noticed on the bridge a tall, stoutish, sunburnt
elderly man in civilian clothes of white drill and wearing a
broad tropical hat. On making inquiries I learned he was the
pilot, and his name was Captain Strasburg. A couple of days
later at Palm Islands, a little south of Townsville, I was
transferred to the cruiser Sydney, and eventually at Port
Moresby to the flagship, Australia, where I reported for duty
as interpreter in German to the Admiral. Admiral Patey was
in command of the Australian fleet and of the joint naval and
military expedition which had been set the task of seizing
Germany’s colonies in the Pacific.
So many events were crowded into the next few weeks that
I had almost forgotten those whom I had been with on the
Berrima, including Captain Strasburg, when one day I met him
in Rabaul. By that time the whole of the German New Guinea
Protectorate, including the Bismarck Archipelago (now the
New Britain Archipelago) and Germany’s share of the Solomon
Islands, had been captured by the Australians, Captain
Strasburg having piloted various minor expeditions to some of
the outlying parts. He was now harbour master in Rabaul—
the first harbour master under British rule.
T am pleased to make your acquaintance,’ Captain Strasburg
exclaimed and shook my hand warmly. T have been told you
are a native of Denmark, and I always liked the Danes.’ He
invited me home to his bungalow for a chat and a glass of beer.
In the course of a pleasant talk on the verandah, each of us
at ease on a long chair left behind by the German official who
previously had occupied the bungalow, I learned that Strasburg
was a native of Sweden, and that he had spent upwards of
forty years as a trader in the Western Pacific. Owing to his
extensive knowledge of the waters in these parts he had been
engaged by the Australian Government to pilot the troopship
to Rabaul.
‘Rather a strange coincidence,’ he remarked, That one
Scandinavian should pilot the Australians through the coral-
strewn sea to Rabaul and another through the intricacies of
the German language.’
Having ordered a black boy to bring refreshments, Captain
Strasburg commenced telling about his experiences in the
Western Pacific, including New Guinea, the New Britain


Archipelago, the Solomon Islands, the New Hebrides, Fiji, and
various minor groups and scattered islands. Leaving out the
French possessions, the Western Pacific has in the main been
opened up and developed from Australia. Sydney has been,
and still is, its commercial centre.
‘Times in the South Seas are not what they were in the good
old days/ Captain Strasburg said with a sigh. ‘A skipper would
leave Sydney with a hundred pounds worth of those particular
articles coveted by primitive man, such as gorgeously coloured
print, necklaces, beads, mirrors, tomahawks, knives, mouth
organs, umbrellas, clay pipes, and tobacco. Perhaps as a sideline
he would take with him some scores of dogs. These he bought
from street arabs in Sydney for from two to three coco-nuts
apiece, always exercising sufficient tact not to question the
boys as to how they got the dogs. With a motley collection of
mongrels and pure breds howling a melancholy good-bye to
Sydney, the South Sea trader steered through the Heads, and
set his course for the Islands. Arriving at his destination he
would drop anchor opposite a populous native village, and ere
long the place would be alive with excitement, canoes and
catamarans incessantly moving to and fro, and bartering con-
ducted with tumultous noise. For a dog we got ten green
parrots —dogs were much in demand, the natives at a pinch
eating them. The natives in that respect were not particular,
and the dogs were not asked. After a short cruise amongst the
Islands, if not sticking on a coral reef, the trader returned to
Sydney with his cargo of coco-nuts, oil, tortoise shells, feathers,
birds, curios, pearls, and other odds and ends, and had a
glorious time.
‘As the value of copra, or dried coco-nut, rose, overseas firms
commenced placing permanent traders amongst the natives,
afterwards to plant coco-nuts and establish plantations them-
selves. Sooner or later the trader would get killed, and perhaps
eaten, and his place taken by some other adventurer, ignorant
of what he was up against.
‘When they started to plant sugar-cane in Queensland and
Fiji, labour recruiting or blackbirding, as it was called, became
another profitable business. Perhaps it was not much chop,
but those engaged in it were courageous and resourceful—
what they lacked in regard to conscience they made up for in
grit. It was a life that appealed to reckless, adventurous spirits,
to men of the Viking breed. There was little or no authority
in the Islands in those days. The traders and the natives settled
matters between themselves/


‘Were there many Scandinavians amongst the early traders/
1 asked.
‘A fair few/ he answered, ‘but most of them were British
seafaring men who, like the Scandinavians, had left their ships
when in Australian ports. There is as much Viking blood in
the sea-coast population of England and Scotland as in the
Scandinavians. Capitalists in Great Britain, Australia, and,
later on, Germany may have supplied most of the capital
required to open up the South Seas, but descendants of the
Vikings did the rough pioneering work.’
‘Are our people still represented in the Islands ?’ I asked.
'They are, but times have changed. They are now mostly
owners or managers of coco-nut plantations, with odd traders
and recruiters of native labour for local requirements thrown
in/
During my four years’ service in German New Guinea, first
as official interpreter, foreign mail censor, and Government
Printer, and afterwards as magistrate and officer in charge of
the Madang district, I came to know every planter and trader
in the Protectorate, if not personally at least by name. I
estimate them as having numbered between 200 and 300, of
whom 5 were Danes, 4 Norwegians, and 11 Swedes.
In New Britain were two Swedish plantation owners, Horgren
and Captain Rondahl, the latter possessing three large planta-
tions. Both had originally been in the employ of the famous
Queen Emma, a half-caste Samoan who in about 1879, with a
lover of New Zealand birth, came to the Archipelago in a
schooner laden with trade goods, and who was destined to
become the wealthiest and most outstanding figure in the
Western Pacific. Having got a firm foothold in New Britain
she sent for her brothers and sisters, the offspring of a one-time
American consul in Samoa, and two native women. The sisters
she married to Europeans —Horgren married one, Captain
Rondahl another, and a planter named Parkinson a third.
Parkinson’s father had been stable master to the Duke of
Augustenburg, and he was born under the Danish flag. He,
too, had founded a plantation in New Britain. Another
Slesviger, Meincke, married to a Danish lady, also had a
plantation.
In New Ireland a Norwegian, Julius Johansen, was managing
a plantation for an Australian company.
In New Hannover a Norwegian, Carlsen, and a Dane,
Johansen, were creating a plantation, Johansen managing it
and Carlsen providing the means as a labour recruiter.


At Buka, one of the German Solomon Islands, a Norwegian,
Carl Frost, was making a plantation for a Sydney syndicate.
On the New Guinea coast a Swede, Ulberg, had vainly
attempted to establish a plantation for another Sydney syndi-
cate, mainly consisting of Scandinavians.
'On the Matty Island a Dane, Ortoft, managed a trading
station for the German magnate, Rudolph Wahlen, who was
Consul for Sweden and married to a Swedish lady.
In 1931 the Scandinavians in what by then had become
‘The Mandated Territory of New Guinea’ numbered 24, of whom
13 were Danes, 2 Norwegians, and 9 Swedes.
In Papua or British New Guinea the Scandinavians were
more numerous, and had played an even greater part in
economic development than in German New Guinea. Here, as
elsewhere in the Pacific, they had taken no part in Christianizing
the natives, and with a single exception had not been engaged
in the administration of the colony. They were planters,
traders, labour recruiters, pearlers, and gold-miners.
I was introduced to all of them in an indirect sort of way
in 1916 when travelling from Rabaul to Sydney in one of
Burns Philp’s steamers. As usual the steamer called at Samarai,
where I was lucky enough in one of the hotels to meet a
Norwegian labour recruiter, Captain Beck, whom I had met
in Melbourne some years earlier. Beck introduced me to a
Swedish colleague, Mr. Dahlgren, and a young Dane by the
name of Rasmussen, who was in charge of a pearling schooner.
After a while, tired of tobacco smoke and beer talk, we four
Scandinavians withdrew from the hotel and rowed out to
Captain Beck’s schooner, the Gilli-Gillie (named after the plan-
tation he worked for and of which he later became manager).
The moon smiled to us, a full, friendly face. The stillness of
the evening was deepened by the rhythmic kluck, kluck of
small billows breaking on the schooner. A gentle, cool breeze
stirred life forces in us which in the glare of the tropical sun
a few hours earlier had been more or less dormant. In short,
we felt as near heaven as it is possible to get in this pitiful
world of strife and struggle.
‘Now,’ I said, when we had talked at some length about our
homelands and blue-eyed, flaxen-haired maidens, and there was
a lull in the conversation, ‘tell me something about my country-
men and fellow Scandinavians in Papua. It is a queer hobby
of mine to collect information about our people wherever I
meet them.’
They were all agreeable, and before I was taken back to the


steamer in the small hours of the morning I knew the name
and occupation of every Dane, Norwegian, and Swede in
Papua, and also of several who were dead after having rendered
their humble contribution to the white man’s conquest of the
Western Pacific and the glorification of the European race.
The number of Scandinavians in Papua at that time was
between twenty and thirty. Denmark was represented by Mr.
Jensen, plantation inspector in the service of the British New
Guinea Development Co. ; Neil Andersen, pearl fisher, and
owner of three pearling schooners, of one of which Rasmussen
had charge ; J. Jensen, plantation manager ; A. Jorgensen,
P. Larsen, P. Bondesen, P. Bork, and Johan Sorensen, gold-
miners, each of the latter employing a considerable staff of
native boys.
Norway was represented by Einar Johansen, plantation
owner and recruiter, and at one time captain of one of Burns
Philp's steamers ; Captain Blaight, patrol officer and assistant
police magistrate ; T. Ludvigsen, plantation owner and trader ;
J. Andersen, plantation manager; Captain Beck, labour
recruiter ; Anderson and Gunnersen, in charge of trading and
recruiting vessels; C. Nielsen, trepang fisher; Franklin, gold-miner.
Sweden was represented by Gus. Nelson, storekeeper, planta-
tion owner, mining promotor, and speculator, and a member
of Papua’s Legislative Council; C. Nilson, who built the first
jetty in Port Moresby ; J. Benson, who started the first sawmill
in Papua ; J. Johnson, plantation owner and trader ; Holmes,
plantation manager ; Dahlgren and Bomgren, in charge of
trading and recruiting schooners.
At the census of 1921 the number of Scandinavians in Papua
had slightly decreased. There were then 6 Danes, 7 Norwegians,
and 4 Swedes.
In the Solomon Islands and Fiji also Scandinavians have
been amongst the early pioneers. I have at another place
referred to the four Norwegian sea captains who went out from
Brisbane and founded plantations in the Solomons. Later on a
Swedish captain, Frank Hasselgren, went out from Sydney and
likewise became a planter and trader in the Solomon Islands.
One Dane, Herluf Hansen, and two Norwegians, Carl Frost and
Rudolph Tofte, personal acquaintances of mine, were at one
time managing coco-nut plantations in the British Solomons,
and I have heard of others, whose names I do not now remember.
Of the early pioneers in Fiji two Swedes, N. S.
Hedstrom and W. Kopsen, and one Dane, Captain Kaad,
became outstanding. Hedstrom came to Australia in or about


1850, and for some years traded between the mainland and
Tasmania. Having married an Australian lady, he proceeded
to Fiji in 1868 and established himself in business there. His
son became one of the leaders in Fiji’s business and public
activities as a director of various companies, a Justice of Peace,
a member of the Legislative Council, and consul for Sweden.
For his service to the British Empire he was knighted in 1922.
William Kopsen arrived in Australia in 1868, and went the
following year to Fiji, where he engaged in cotton growing.
In 1878 he founded the firm of W. Kopsen & Co., ship chandlers.
Four years later he transferred his business from Levuka to
Suva, where he remained till 1889, when he settled in Sydney.
While in Suva he occupied the mayoral chair twice, and was
appointed consul for Sweden.
Captain Kaad also became a notability in Fiji. His sons are
still carrying on the business established by him. Numerically
the Scandinavians in the Western Pacific have been, and are
still, few ; but then the whites all told are a mere handful in a
world of blacks. They did not go there to extend European
settlement, for which the climate is unsuitable ; but, in the case
of missionaries, to Christianize and civilize the natives, and in
the case of the traders and planters, to make them work and
bring them within the orbit of the white man’s economic life.
Apart from the few facts recorded in the foregoing, little is
known of the lives of our countrymen in the Pacific. No doubt
many of them experienced strange fates. Take as an
example the career of Edward Christian Ortoft, as recorded
by Count Birger Morner in his book Arafis Tropiska Aret.
Morner spent a year in German New Guinea as the guest of
Mr. and Mrs. Wahlen, part of it on the New Guinea coast and
the remainder on the little island of Matty, where Ortoft traded
for Wahlen and was the only white man. The first trader in
Matty, placed there by the German firm Hernsheim & Co.,
Rabaul, a Dane known by the name of Schelkov, who in
his native land had been a cavalry officer but for some obscure
reason had migrated to Australia and in Melbourne been reduced
to beggary, was speared to death by the natives shortly after
his arrival. Ortoft, who succeeded him, knew better how to
take these primitive savages. He became their uncrowned
king, with three of the prettiest brown maidens as his consorts.
According to Morner, Ortoft was born in the island of Lseso,
Denmark, in 1870, his father being postmaster there. His
parents were very religious, and so serious a view did they
take of his having attended a dance when at the age of fifteen


that he cleared out from home. In Copenhagen he shipped as a
cabin boy, thus beginning life as a sailor. Years later he
deserted in Valparaiso and took work in the nitrate mines of
Chili. From there he went to Australia and became a gold-
miner, afterwards proceeding to German New Guinea to trade
in New Ireland for Hernsheim & Co. In a skirmish with the
natives he nearly lost his life. Having recovered from a severe
head wound, he went to the Solomon Islands, establishing
himself as a trader at Tambu-Tambu. His trading station was
attacked by head-hunters from a neighbouring island, and most
of his staff of native boys were left behind minus their heads.
He then went into partnership with a German in a trading
schooner ; but misfortune again pursued him, the schooner was
sunk at Nouma-Nouma by treacherous savages and Ortoft’s
partner killed. On returning to Rabaul he re-entered the service
of Hernsheim & Co., and was sent to Matty, where he died in
the middle of the twenties, loved and honoured by everybody
on the island.
About Peter Hansen I have written in Our New Possession
and also in Island Films. He was born in Langeland, Denmark,
and went to sea as a boy. In 1881 he came to the New Britain
Archipelago, then a no-man’s-land, and commenced trading for
a German firm. Having made his first pile in the Islands, he
returned to Sydney to spend it. In 1884 he joined Dr. Finsch’s
expedition, which was getting ready to secure a share of New
Guinea for Germany. Eventually he settled as a trader in the
fertile French Islands, a little group off New Britain. In 1888
a tidal wave swept his trading station into the sea. However,
he got going again, and, being able to speak the native language
and having the whole group to himself to exploit, he made big
money. He became widely known for his hospitality, his reck-
lessness, and the large number of his wives, to a total at one
time, so it was stated, of about thirty. He had opportunities
which could have made him the wealthiest man in the Western
Pacific ; yet through his devil-may-care mode of living Peter
Hansen died lonely and poor in Rabaul in the latter end of
the twenties. The beautiful harbour in the French Islands,
Peterhaven, where once his trading station stood, is named
after him.
Peter Hansen's luck came to an end when in 1903 he con-
sented to buy the islands from the chiefs for the New Guinea
Company, on the understanding that he himself was to remain
the sole trader in the group. The price was only £SO worth of
trade goods. The chiefs afterwards resented the bargain, as


well they might, and one day burned down the trading station
and killed all hands there. Peter Hansen happened to be
absent from the place at the time and made good his escape to
the New Guinea coast. There he undertook to make a planta-
tion for a Sydney syndicate. Afterwards he went to Buka,
one of the German Solomon Islands, and started a small planta-
tion of his own, which afterwards fell into the hands of the
British Government.
On meeting Peter in Rabaul in 1917 I asked him if he did
not regret his wasted opportunities. ‘No/ he replied, T have
had a glorious time ; what more can a fellow get out of life ?’
That was Peter Hansen all over, and typical of the traditions
of the old-time South Sea traders, of whom he was the last
survivor in German New Guinea.
Under the heading 'A Danish Sailor alone on a Coral Island
for 35 Years/ the leading Brisbane daily, the Courier, in its
issue of 4th February, 1933, contained a description of the life
of Henrik Enevoldsen as a hermit on Deliverance Island in
Torres Strait. It is related that originally he was on board a
sailing vessel engaged in more or less unlawful trading ventures,
such as pearl poaching, smuggling, and black labour recruiting.
On the way to Thursday Island to unload a cargo of pearl-shell
the vessel stranded on a coral reef and several of the crew were
drowned. Amongst the survivors were Enevoldsen and a ship-
mate, French Louis.
Together they bought a lugger and started trepang fishing
on the Barrier Reef ; but Louis became homesick and decided
to leave, so the lugger was sold, and Enevoldsen settled on
Deliverance Island, where he erected a hut of driftwood and
started poultry farming and vegetable gardening, bartering his
products with pearlers and trepang-fishers in adjacent waters
for clothes and necessities, including newspapers and magazines.
His end came in 1928. Apparently he was badly mauled by a
shark and bled to death while trying to crawl from the beach
to his hut, probably to obtain bandages. His dead body was
found some time after by a trader from Dutch New Guinea,
who usually called on Enevoldsen when on his way to Thursday
Island. The trader buried the body near the hut and placed
a row of sun-bleached coral boulders around the grave. In
Enevoldsen’s well-kept hut was found a diary. In it the hermit
commented on the creatures of the sea, the island plants and
flowers, also the many migratory birds that halted there for a
time and then continued their journey to other climes.
Enevoldsen (mostly known as old Harry) reached the ripe


age of 78 years. He had started his hermit life in 1893, and
never afterwards left the little island, of which he was the sole
inhabitant.
German Harry
His name wasn’t really Harry, but Jeppe Soren Christensen,
and he wasn’t a German but a Dane. However, it was as
‘German Harry’ he made a name for himself.
When I visited Port Moresby and Samarai in 1916, I heard
all sorts of stories about Harry. One was that he had dived
down into the wreck of the Quetta and secured the ship’s money
box. The gruesome sight of the drowned people had a particular
appeal to the morbid-minded section of the audience. Another
story was that in a ht of rage he had thrown his mistress over-
board and only escaped a number of years in jail for attempted
murder by bribing the' judge or the jury or the mistress (opinion
differed as to whom he had bribed). A third story ran that on
one of his occasional visits to Sydney he fell in love with, and
courted, a charming barmaid, when to his amazement he dis-
covered it was his own daughter, who had come out from
England in search of her father. Other yarns were associated
with booze and brawls in various ports of call. Most likely all
these stories had been enlarged upon at hotel bars in the
peculiar world he lived in.
Although German Harry had only been in his grave a few
years when I was in the Islands, he had already become a
legendary figure whom it was considered a distinction to have
known personally.
The pioneers in this out-of-the-way part of the world were
largely made up of adventurers. It was jokingly said of them
that they were all D.S.O.s, which meant that they had all done
something or other either before or after they had gone to the
Islands. It is not likely German Harry differed much from
his kind. He gained their unbounded admiration because of his
extraordinary resourcefulness, his courage in the face of danger,
and his reputation of being the most daring and skilful navigator
in the Western Pacific.
German Harry’s most notable achievement was the opening
up of the first regular shipping line between Australia and
Papua, which later on was developed and extended by Burns,
Philp Steamship Co. in Sydney.
Albert F. Ellis in his work Adventuring in the Coral Seas ,
published in 1936, devotes a chapter to a voyage he made with
Harry, from Cooktown to Reine Island, in 1891. A brief extract
will serve as a picture of this extraordinary character :


German Harry was widely talked about as a bold navigator and
a lively character ashore. As to the latter feature, after a few glasses
he was quarrelsome and sometimes dangerous. At sea he became a
different man altogether, and could not do enough for any of us
who were travelling with him. . . . The crew consisted of several
Malays. . . . We were not prompt in departing from Cooktown by
reason of the potent nature of the farewells . . . I was having
breakfast with the captain (Harry). He had a dish of dried uncooked
fish and was fairly wolfing it. 'You know/ he said, this is the best
thing for a man after he’s been on the booze.’ The dried fish certainly
worked wonders on this occasion. . . . German Harry was one of
the best men among the reefs I have ever known. He made quick
trips, but nothing was left to chance. He would be up at the mast-
head time and again, a shout and a wave of the hand to the man
at the wheel and we would pass within a stone’s throw of a reef.
Even at night time he would steer safely between the reefs. He
declared he could smell them. Sometimes a bad squall would come
up ; then with a feeling of relief we would see him take the wheel
himself, handling the vessel in a way one could not but admire. . . .
W. S. Maugham in an article in the Cosmopolitan (1924)
tells that he met German Harry on Deliverance Island in the
Torres Strait, as a castaway from a shipwreck, and that he
had lived on the tiny island all by himself for thirty years,
brooding over the wickedness of the world and his own mistakes
in life. But the English writer confuses him with Deliverance
Harry. German Harry had been dead many years when Mr.
Maugham visited the hermit on his little island. A Danish
writer, Count von Rantzau, in a book published in Copenhagen,
relates what he had heard when in the Pacific about his
notorious countryman, German Harry.
Prompted by the inaccuracies of these tales the then vice-
consul for Denmark in Townsville, the late C. Sparre, wrote a
somewhat patchy but apparently quite reliable record of the
life of German Harry. According to Consul Sparre, he was
born in 1850 in or near Varde, a little town on the west coast
of Jutland, and his name was Jeppe Soren Christensen. At the
age of 13 he ran away from home and shipped as a cabin boy.
The ship got wrecked in the North Sea and he came to Shields,
where the Danish Consul took charge of him and had him
apprenticed to a barque trading between England and the
Black Sea. After the expiration of a five years’ apprenticeship,
he became runner for a sailors’ boarding house, and was
initiated into the 'shanghai’ business, in which he soon became
an adept. So valuable did he make himself that the landlady
gave him her daughter in marriage. In Shields he was known
as Shanghai Peter.


We next find him in Callao, where he joined the Peruvian
Navy. Not finding the job to his liking, he deserted, but was
caught and sentenced to be shot. He managed to escape and
fled to Chili where, after having knocked about for a while on
the waterfront at Iquique, he got work at the saltpetre mines.
He remained in Chili a couple of years, and then returned to
England.
In Shields things had not gone well during his absence. His
mother-in-law had lost her boarding-house, while his wife,
after having given birth to a daughter, and not thinking ‘Chris’
was coming back any more, had re-married. He re-established
his mother-in-law in her old business, and having provided for
the bringing up of his child, shipped for Australia. He arrived
in Melbourne in 1874 or 1875, and from there proceeded to
Cooktown. It was in Cooktown he received the name of
‘German Harry,’ which, as a good Dane, he hated, and it
sometimes caused him to lose his temper.
The Hodgkinson gold-field had been opened up a little earlier,
and a reward of £2OO was offered to any one discovering a
suitable port closer to the gold-held than Cooktown. Harry
fitted out a boat, and, accompanied by C. Sparre and two
other Danish immigrants, set out to gain the reward. In their
quest for a new port they discovered the site where Cairns now
is situated, and claimed the reward. Meanwhile a party of
gold-diggers, led by a certain Bill Smith, had come from inland
and picked a site at what became known as Bill’s Point, and
although Cairns was finally chosen by the Government, Bill
Smith contrived to get the reward.
Sparre settled in Townsville, where he established himself
as a builder and contractor, and eventually became a prosperous
timber merchant and a leading citizen. Harry remained in
Cooktown, but the friendship between them, begun when in
search of a port to serve the Hodgkinson gold-held, lasted for
life.
For a year or two Harry did well with his boat. He then
took to ‘packing’ over the range, and made good profit until
a road was constructed and bullock teams took the place of
‘packers.’ Once more he turned to the sea, and only then did
his Australian maritime career really begin.
He bought a schooner called Captain Cook and a number of
whale boats, and commenced trepang fishing. Stations were
established on sandbanks on the Barrier Reef, and some forty
Chinamen were engaged. The sea-slugs were cured at the
stations, and fuel and water obtained from the mainland. The


finished product was taken to Cooktown for transhipment to
China. Besides this industry, Harry found time to run an
occasional cargo of explosives from port to port, and to buy
and break up the New Zealand brig, Maggie, which had
stranded on the Daintree Bar.
He next bought a bigger vessel and turned it into a factory
ship. This enabled him to go to more distant places for trepang.
Some time after the Captain Cook was lost in a storm. This
made Harry give up trepang fishing from island stations.
Instead he turned his attention to the opportunity offering
itself by the discovery of gold on the St. Aignan, Sud Est,
and other islands on the Papuan coast, and afterwards on the
mainland. Anticipating a big rush of Australian gold-diggers,
he went to Brisbane and bought a former Government surveying
vessel, the Hygeia, for a Cooktown-Papuan passenger and cargo
service.
For some years Harry made a rich harvest. If steamers
gradually forced him out of one service, he would find another
and go on increasing his business. His schooners were every-
where. He made Cooktown the erstwhile centre for Australia's
regular trade with the Pacific.
At this time Harry had many irons in the hre. He dealt
extensively in sailing crafts ; he had pearling stations here and
there, worked by Malays and Australian blacks ; he recruited
kanakas for sugar plantations in Queensland ; he bought from
native chiefs land in New Guinea and whole islands off the
coast, and occasionally he travelled to Sydney to sell parcels
of pearls and buy schooners.
The strenuous life Harry had led eventually told on him.
Sick and tired, he withdrew to Sydney, anchored his last
schooner in Rushcutter Bay, and lived there as a hermit for the
latter part of his life, battling with spiritual problems while
slowly dying from cancer. He passed away in 1912, and was
buried at the South Head Cemetery—the special resting-place
for veterans of the sea.
PACIFIC ROMANCE
Under the above heading the following appeared in a
Melbourne daily for 13/11/1929 :
Swede Who Became King
A letter to Sweden from the island of Tabor, in the Pacific,
tells a wonderful adventure of the king of the Polynesia tribe,
who is a Swede by birth, and now wants to resign in order to


settle down in his home country. Karl Pettersson, as his name
is, was a sailor on a ship which, thirty years ago, capsized not
far off the coast of New Guinea.
Pettersson was the only survivor, and succeeded in reaching
a small Pacific island, where he was at once surrounded by a
tribe of cannibals. During the preparation of the feast the
daughter of the tribal king fell in love with the prisoner, who
was thus saved from a cruel fate, and she actually persuaded
her father to marry her to Pettersson, who, after the death of
the native king, became the ruler of the island. Being a clear-
sighted man, King Pettersson realized the commercial value of
the island’s natural resources, and brought prosperity to the
huts of his subjects.
His brown wife having died some twenty years ago, King
Pettersson travelled to Sweden and married there one Miss
Simpson, of Gevle, who accompanied her royal husband to
Tabor, and became as popular as the king.
Being now sixty-five years of age, King Pettersson has
decided to abdicate and to return to his native city of
Gothenburg. The succession of the Tabor throne is secured,
but his subjects are disconsolate at the decision of their ruler.




CONCLUSION
IN the foregoing the history of the Scandinavians who came
to Australia and New Zealand has been told. It could
have been made much longer, and it could have been con-
densed to a single sentence : They came to this country,
struggled, loved, suffered, and died/ It all depends on the
point of view. Some people think everything matters , and others
that all is vanity . Generally, the middle view is the sanest.
For instance, it is of some importance for the Australian people
to know how the different racial groups of immigrants reacted
to their new environment ; what percentage of the English,
Scotch, Irish, Germans, Scandinavians, Italians, and so forth
made good ; what percentage of each group committed suicide,
went to jail, or the lunatic asylums. This could be investigated
so that the immigration problem might be dealt with rationally.
It is only a question of employing a sufficient number of
qualified statisticians. The material to work on is here. Life is
complex and strenuous, and not every group of nationals stands
up to it equally well. Some immigrants break down morally,
others physically, and again others mentally.
In the absence of statistical data only a rough idea can be
formed from where to obtain the most suitable immigrants—
whom to encourage to come to Australia, and whom to dis-
courage from doing so.
My book about the Scandinavians in Australia and New
Zealand, founded on notes collected during a period of forty-four
years, leaves the impression that the Danes, Norwegians, and
Swedes have made good citizens. I hope they have. I believe
they have, but I really do not know with any degree of pre-
cision, because I have only been interested in those who suc-
ceeded. Many failed. For a variety of reasons they were not
equipped to stand up to the stress and strain of life.
The Scandinavians should make good in Anglo-Saxon coun-
tries. Their kinship of blood and language with the inhabitants
of the British Isles is in their favour. The harsh climate and
poor soil of their native countries have made them hardy and
hard-working.
Have the Scandinavians been happy in Australia ?
I honestly believe they have, when taken as a whole. We
often talk of the hard life of the pioneers—the long hours they
worked, the scant measure of comfort they derived, the anxiety
they experienced —forgetting that pioneering has its compensa-
tions. I am of the opinion that the old pioneers were happier


than their descendants in the second and third generation,
who have more pleasure and less real happiness. It is true they
wore out their bodies in ceaseless toil; but does not everybody's
body wear out, without in many cases there being the slightest
achievement to show for it ?
I have often in my mind's eye seen the old pioneer and his
worn-out wife mooching about at the homestead on a Sunday,
looking over the clearing with its fences and gates, its horses,
cattle and sheep. The old pioneer takes the old woman’s hand,
and says: ‘Look at it, Maggie. You and I have done it/ Their
eyes fill with tears —they experience moments of true happiness.
But perhaps I see only the successful pioneers.
However that may be, Pastor Sass, who moved a great deal
about amongst the pioneers in the coastal belt of Queensland,
has left it on record that the Scandinavians there were happy
and contented. Probably all the pioneers were, irrespective of
place of birth.
What, in broad lines, is the lot of the immigrant ? In
answering the question I shall confine myself to the
Scandinavians, whom I know the best.
Believing I am a fair sample of their kind, I shall briefly
outline my own experience :
I longed to get out and see the world. The urge to roam is
as common in the Scandinavian countries as it is in England
and Scotland. This urge was accompanied by youthful dreams
of adventures and easily-acquired wealth —afterwards to return
home to be admired and envied by my friends.
So I came to Australia. I was disillusioned, but shrank back
from returning in defeat. So I‘stuck it.' I married an Australian
girl and took on the responsibility of providing for a family.
I had struck root in Australia. When I visited Denmark many
years later I found that time and force of habit had made me
an Australian. Most of my old friends were dispersed or dead.
Having been with my people a couple of months, I was glad
to return to Australia.
An old Greek philosopher expressed the experience of a man
in these words : ‘Youth is a folly, manhood a struggle, and
old age a regret.’
I have reached old age, and should commence to regret, but
I don't. I have made mistakes —many mistakes —but when I
think of the frailty of human nature, of the pitfalls surrounding
all of us, and the bewildering, crazy world I have passed
through, I merely wonder I did not make more.
As for wealth, I never gained any and do not need it. The


grains of wisdom I picked up on my journey through life are
worth more to me. I have discovered that wealth in itself is
not conducive to happiness, and that a shilling spent on a
poppy on Armistice Day probably gives me as much satisfaction
as a substantial cheque donated to charity gives a person
possessing great wealth. One thing I have noticed is that,
whereas during the struggle of manhood I did not think much
of my native land, now that I can sit back and 'chew the cud'
1 have pleasant memories of it. That is how it is with most
Scandinavians, and other immigrants as well. As I have no
future worth while, I live in the past, particularly in my child-
hood and early youth, before the struggle began —a harking
back to youth which, alas ! has departed for ever.
Probably a greater percentage of later arrivals met with
disappointment. All the good land had passed over to private
ownership, secondary industries became the monopoly of well-
equipped factories, and the small shopkeeper was suffocated
by big stores. The opportunities held out to those who were
first in the field had gone.
During latter years the bogy of unemployment has made the
entry of the newcomer still more difficult. Though in one sense
Australia is still a new land, economically and socially it is as
old as any country in the world.
As the conditions have changed, so has the type of
Scandinavian immigrant. The few who have arrived since the
World War mostly hail from middle or better-class homes in
Denmark, Norway, and Sweden, and are easily disillusioned.




OMISSIONS
The will of the late Joseph Alexander Heyman
was disclosed too late to be mentioned in its
proper place in this book. It reveals that after
Heyman had provided for three daughters
living in Europe, and had made a legacy of
£3,000, the interest of which goes to needy
Danes residing in Australia, or to objects of a
national character, the residue of his estate was
left to the Rationalist Society, Melbourne, of
which he was a member.
It was omitted to mention under the con-
tribution made by Scandinavian immigrants to
Australian literature that a Dane took the
initiative to provide the Commonwealth with a
national magazine. The Australian National
Review was founded in Canberra at the latter
end of 1936 by Dr. R. Tillyard, Mr. Farmer
Whyte, and myself. Unfortunately, its publica-
tion has recently been suspended for the dura-
tion of the war.
J. LYNG.
Melbourne, December, 1939.










BY THE SAME AUTHOR
Non-Britishers in Australia
INFLUENCE ON
POPULATION AND PROGRESS
A hitherto unwritten page in the history of Australia
BY
J. LYNG, F.R.G.S.
Author of “ Our New Possession,” “Island Films,” etc.
With a foreword by Professor Ernest Scott.
Crown Bvo - - 249 Pages - - Cloth, 6/-; postage, 3d.
MELBOURNE UNIVERSITY PRESS, UNIVERSITY OF MELBOURNE, CARLTON, N. 3 ,
VICTORIA, AUSTRALIA, in association with OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS,
MELBOURNE, LONDON, EDINBURGH, NEW YORK, CAPETOWN, BOMBAY,
TORONTO, ETC.
“OUR NEW POSSESSION”
Farmer and Settler. —“Captain Lyng has certainly succeeded in
making an instructive and entertaining book. He has compressed into
a volume of fewer than 250 pages an astonishing amount of information,
including historical data and statistics. He has covered the whole
field —historical, ethnological, sociological, political and economic, and
he has made his story as bright as a romance.”
“ISLAND FILMS”
Telegraph (Brisbane). —“The writer gossips and philosophizes very
entertainingly ; he speaks with intimate knowledge of planters, sea
captains, recruiters, pearlers, and natives. The book, therefore, can
be read with pleasure as well as with considerably enlightening results.
It covers much ground, and gives us sidelights which are sometimes in
the nature of revelations. It reveals the Soul of German New Guinea
during British military occupation.”
“TEDDY WILKINS’ TRIALS”
Western Mail (Perth). —“ Teddy Wilkins' Trials has much of that
naivete of view of life that makes the Scandinavians such excellent
tellers of stories. The author very plainly knows all about what the
impecunious settler has to go through owing to the law’s delay, the
proud man’s contumely, and the attacks of vermin and birds and the
fluctuations of the market and the chicanery of buyers. Teddy is
typical—in peril all the time, and yet always keeping up a good heart.
Mr. Jens Lyng has produced a most interesting and graceful story. He
finds all the material he requires in the quiet doings of a group of
commonplace people—their little struggles and losses and victories,
their home-comings and partings, and rough, but kindly, social gather-
ings. He is in sympathy with them all, and has a deep sense not only
of the world-sorrow, but also of the underlying and supporting world-joy,
which makes life worth living under the most cheerless lot. Taken all
round, this is a first-class story of Australian life.”
