

Sept.Oct^^^^
/
5


*
.
;
t •• ;; : ~ - ■ , * ■ ' > ' ■ ■'.'>■>
• - ;
. ■ /
'
*
\
■ ■
* -
• .-- ♦
r


/p & Gbe
ffsl BAR AM BAH t^l
||j SOUVENIR Hi
SEPTEMBER-OCTOBER
dMa 8H3BB


I By Major J. M. HAWKEY, M.C. I
r o .e.7Z*r/*
|N introducing the u Barambah Souvenir" of our journey
H Home to "the Land of the Southern Cross," I beg to
thank our Souvenir Committee, Cartoonists, and
contributors of literary, verse, photographic and other matter,
to whom we are indebted for this production; and especially
Privates S. Perks, B. Bragg and L. J. Romero, to whom we
owe much, for cartoons, sketches and cover designs; also
Capt. R. A. T. Wilson (Ship's Master) and officers of the
H.M.A.T. " Barambah " for their assistance in the cause of
this little souvenir. 1 feel sure that this publication will
serve the object of its producers in being, for all on board,
a happy collection of scenes and incidents of a pleasant
voyage homeward, amidst congenial companions. And in
those days of health and prosperity which I sincerely hope
await us all in our Homeland, I trust we shall all regard
this souvenir as a very pleasant momento of our happy days
together on board, forming a fitting finale to our service
with the A.I.F. Overseas.
■i
§
i


gJI 10
Jin .
From the Magazine Committee, room for information. At all times To the Bosun and his Seamen
on behalf of all ranks, we wish to we found them generous in their we extend a glad hand. We foun 1
offer and place 011 record our explanations and demonstrations. them always ready to do anything
esteem and thanks to Captain R. To the Bakers, Butchers, and and at any time. Their cheerful
A. T. Wilson and his Officers for Cooks we owe much. They have manner and the great interest taken
the kindness and courtesies that contributed largely to the excellent in the ship's sports helped in no
they have extended to the conditions that prevailed through- small way towards success.
" Diggers " throughout the voyage out, and have given every satis- To the Officers and Crew
from England to Australia, and faction. Their efforts have exceeded generally we offer sincere thanks
also for the keen interest and oar expectations. for their efforts in all directions
assistance given by them in pro- To the Chief Steward and his 011 our behalf. We are now about
moting sport entertainment. Staff we tender our thanks for the to launch out again into civilian
To the Chief Engineer and his interest so willingly displayed fo' life and we shall cherish the know-
clan we probably owe an apology. our welfare and comfort. It will ledge and memory that it is to
The " Digger" is naturally curious indeed, be hard to forget Steward them, as sailors, who kept the seas
and nothing delights those of a Smith who contributed so mucii clear, that we owe the fact that we
mechanical turn of mind more than towards the entertainment of the were able to complete our duty as
to beard the wizards of the engine " Diggers."
soldiers.
Acknowledgments.
f® The Souvenir Committee desire Gun. W\ Mowles, 2nd D.A.C.
to place on record their thanks to pte. Mason, 16th Batt.
Major J. M. Hawkey for the *pte. p Romero, 12th F.A.
LVA RFIRRRM F.-V RVIL Ull CVL TIL 1 C _
journey to the Sunny South and a
reminder of the happy we
spent 011 the Barambah."
wg permission given to publish this p^ e p a y] plying Corps. The Committee wish to thank
/&\ magazine and for the encourage- Somerville M T ie printers of this Souvenir
v|< ment and help afforded in their v ' (Hortors Ltd., of Cape Town) for &
H work. To Captain R. A. T. so tQ QUr m any contributors the courtesy and attention they ||
Qy Wilson and his ship's officers our Q £ photographs which were un- gave us 011 our arrival at a week
® thanks are also due for assistance avoidably held over on account of end in the midst of a busy time. W
|| and support. lack of time and space. In spite of this, they met us and IS
® They especially wish to thank The Committee nuich rcgrct that "saw us through," which was no
H the following artists to whom they rnany contributions received could mean task, and thereby making it f)
H are very deeply indebted for tlm be published as ii mite d time at possible for us to produce this ®
tnack and white illustrations which g Town compe lled them to Souvenir of our voyage homeward. m
H "pages ' L' 10 ' ' confine the Souvenir to its present Hortors Ltd. need no advertise- (®
I Pte s! Perkst 28th Bat? size ' ment. Their efforts to produce our $
-P, , -T-, „ TioH ATAI 1 1 1 Souvenir are sufficient proof that
m Pte. Bragg, 59th Batt They have been much encouraged . . 1 „ f .
H Pte. L. J. Romero, 12 Field Ami). ]- ) V the enthusiastic manner in fr() ",, & ' ' 1 ||
II For photographic work thanks which all on board this surprise
H nrfdiiPto- packet" of ours took up The Committee wish you, one
1® ' and smrnorted the susrsestion of and all (not forgetting themselves, ®
and supported the suggestion of and all (not torgettmg themselves,
producing this little Souvenir, of course), good health, happiness,
They trust that in after years we and all prosperity in the years to
may all look back on it as a come. Cheerio!
pleasing momento of our return THE ROUGH EDITOR.
Spr. Caterer, Railway Corps.
Spr. Gibson, sth L.H.
Pte. Gines, nth Batt.
Dvr. R. Johnson, sth M.T.
Souvenir Committee.
LIEUT. E. C. STEPHENS, 12th Bafct. Editor.
Clip-Major A.J. B. King, Bth Bde. W./'O. W. F. Partridge, nth Pte. L. J. Romero, nth F. Ami).
Chap. Bradbury. A.L.T.M.8., Joint Sub-Editor. Pte. B. Bragg, 59th Batt.
Tpr. S. F. Cusack, A.A.S.C.
(A.L.H), Joint Sub-Editor.
Corp. Chas. Newman, 16th Batt.
Pte. S. F. Perks, 28th Batt.


fil a s»» A v.« P K» OAT A WTTTTT? HNR .M? \
*>
Digger (late on Pay Parade and considered that a hundred times tional calm sea through which the /
searching for his position in alpha- daily aboard the " Barambah " " Barambah " ploughed in the \
betical order in the line) : "Aye, the "house" problem has been succeeding days convinced that ;
mate, where's the end of the C's?" solved for, at the most, a " tray- Digger that the skipper had taken
One of the crowd : " There ain't bit." Sometimes for even " baach- the hint. ;
no end to the seas, Digger, they sheesh." The discussion was the excep-
go right round the globe." gf gjf tionally smart twenty-four hour ?
$$ Blighty had just faded from run our steamer had put up one (
" What did you do in the great vision. There was a big ground day. The nautical expert (ad- ■
war, dadda?" " Shut up, you swell, and our vessel was inclined judged such by reason of two sober
inquisitive young beggar, and go to "jazz" a trifle. Leaning on week-end rowing-boat excursions i
and clean all my medals." the starboard rail was a Digger 011 Serpentine when on London
ggjP ggjP with pale face and a peculiar leave) ascribed the smart run to the ( i
The (Crown and Anchor) King feeling in his " Little Mary." For fact that the vessel had struck a \
can do no wrong. He has no the umteenth time he had been four-knot current. Then up spoke ;
Peers. ~ doing a bit of involuntary catering a man with apparently lively recol-
for the denizens of the deep. He lections of the first day or so out : l!
Obviouslv hungrv Digger hear- gazed at the a PP arent calm to be " 0h ' she struck a four-knot i|
ing tangleSes S'to the discerned on the horizon-as far as current, did she ? Well, I suppose
mess: < 'Aye, Tess orderly coo* the eye could reach Then he the first day out when she stuck j
house door's gone." M.O. : "Go turned to his mate : Look here, ker nose m the sea and the ;
011 who took It?" ' Bill, I reckon the skipper of this propeller was trying to screw down
'ere boat don't know his business. the funnel she must have struck a f
I
i
i
I
i
l
UUct.L UUII L iviiuw IJLJLO UUSIIICSS. Silt 111 110 L llctVC SLI it ;>
Here we are getting tossed about knot of raisins."
The thousands of pounds that in this rough sea and over there '
the Australian Repatriation Com- (pointing to the skyline) it's as Long Bill, our barber, was
mittee is spending, or going to smooth as anything. Why don't singeing a Digger's hair in his shop \
spend, to try and solve the house he take the boat over there where aft when another Digger poked his ;
problem, so that every returned it's calm and get out of this stuff? head in the door: "Hello, Bill,
soldier may have a home, seems He don't know his game, that's chasing 'em with a light now, i'
so much waste of money when it is what it is." No doubt the excep- eh?" ' (
_ ... ~_ ~ _ . . . . . .. ~.r .......... *


w■ ini » >i n ■ ■«■ i» * i m, '' ' i i > «■ n.» - .. ..... ; ; f f f f | | c 1
{
| Going Home
! (By V.8.E.)
I
| They are long miserable weary
| that we waste hanging round the
j Camp at Sutton Veny, waiting
f always waiting for that list to be
( posted. That list means we are
I going home. Here our thoughts
jf break, and a little lump rises in our
j throats and our hearts miss a beat,
| as we think of it —" going home."
: Home, to the land of sunshine ;
( home to the dear old grey-headed
( Mother, who we parted from so
j1 sadly, and whose tears wet our
5 cheeks as we said our last " good-
? bye." How many years ago ? Only
: three ; and it seems like thirty-three.
j And we think, with dreamy eyes
: of the welcome that same dear grey-
l haired Mother is keeping for us, her
( tears will wet our cheeks again, but
j what different tears, and whac a
;j different hug she will give us as she
• clasps us again after all her fears
and dreads.
; We sigh deep down and turn
wearily and lazily to wander down
the road and see if there's any mail
| at " Greenhill House," and we re-
-1 member the days of grim tragedy on
'i the Somme, and elsewhere, where
our mail made a ray of sunshine in
days and nights of toil, hardship and
!. suffering
But our mail is getting thin now,
! for they're expecting us home soon,
1 and many think we're on our way.
ji Oh ! Why won't " they " put us on
a Boat Roll.
But the day comes when " they ''
; do, and we stand in front of the
Orderly Room, and gaze, and gaze,
! and gaze, at our names showing in
tiny type with the old number before
it, and we know that at last the end
ji is coming and we're really going
i home.
I Somehow we fail now to realise
<; it. It doesn't seem believable or
!■ possible or true. It seems some-
( thing we had dreamed and thought
II of so much, and so many times —
it just seems too good to be true,
I to realise we're going home.
| But it is true and we are really
: going, and soon we know it, for the
Doctor has a " go " at us ; from the
t Q. M. S. we get the dungarees to
l! wear-on board; we draw our boat
pay, and with shining eyes and beat-
i ing hearts, we mark " W.A." on the
bottom of our kit bags.—We're
going home !
" W.A." —the good sunny old
West —and we're on our way there
again ; on our way to the land of
gold, sunshine and freedom.
We are told we are on the
" Barambah," and horrible and
terrible are the tales we hear of her;
her awful iron decks ; her death
trap Mess Decks ; her slowness; her
ability to roll, and for a minute, we
quail before all these horrors and
then . What matter what she's
like for we're going home. And so
we pass those last few busy days of
inspections and roll calls and issues
in a maze and a mist, for aren't we
going home ?
At last on a rainy dismal early
morning we are marshalled into a
train and away we go for Devonport
—and the " Barambah." That
evening we are on her and find her,
to our surprise, comfortable, roomy
and clean. So we sleep in peace
that night, dreaming in our ham-
mocks of the " girl,'' the home and
all that " Aussie " means. And in
the morning, under England's grey
skies, we creep down the harbour,
pass cheering sailors, who wish us
well, on out into the open sea, and
lo —the old " Barambah " doesn't
roll like a tub, and is getting through
the water quite well and strong.
Soon the cliffs of old " Blighty "
are fading away into the distance
and we turn to look over that great
grey sea, at the other end of which
is all we long for. We're going
home, We think of the sun shining
on the ripe wheat, and our own old
horse swishing flies with his tail as !
he stands in the shade of the " big
gum near the slip rails.'' Near |
those same slip rails we see an old
grey head with anxious eyes, an old ■;
figure that is waiting, waiting, always
waiting and , We bend j!
our heads to hide unmanly tears that
will rise. We sigh deep and soft, ,
lift our heads again, look across the \
grey waters ; look long and longingly ■■
towards the sunny South and
Thank God we're going home.
Nearly a Tragedy.
(By F.W.A.H.)
He was standing there when I saw |
him. On his face was written in-
tense, suffering and despair. How '
long he asked himself was this agony
to last. Then his eyes wandered /
about him, and as he noted them his /
face lighted up, with something akin ; j
to pride. How he had toiled in the
past, what task-masters they had ! (
been he reflected. But he contented j!
himself with the thought that in the j
dim future was a silver lining. He j
started, "what was that ?'' Footsteps |
approached him, and then a soft
suave voice was addressing him, its
dialect tones seemed to penetrate ;
through his being with such purpose i 1
as to leave him cold with apprehen- j
sion. He swore silently to himself.
Would the agony never cease. Sud- ;
denly he braced himself to receive
the blow that was coming. His face 1
looked haggard in the dim light. i 1
At last! It was over. The shame i|
had been too great and he sank into |
a seat. But on his face was a \
look of satisfaction. The Inspection
of the Mess Table Competition had !
finished. ]!
Many and novel the competitions
introduced on our boat to help to
while away the time. One was a
hair-drilling contest, i.e., a finger ••
massage of the scalp where there
happened to be a hair famine. \
Victory rested with the lofty i 1
aviator, whose experiences of air ji
in the A.F.C. stood him in good ;
stead. ;
The " Barambah " Jazz Band f
made good from its inception, but (
it would have gone with a bigger
bang had the originator only |i
" Buzzard-er." i


I ****** *
■f
All's well that ends well.
jj I got the good oil ter pick up me kit on August
| 7th, was rushed from Camp 9, Sutton Veny, into
s Camp No. 6 and was told in breathless confidence that
I was just in time to catch a boat for W.A. During
| my sojourn in Blighty I had heard and read quite a
J lot about what " Demob and Repat " was doing to
| speed up the return of the diggers to their native
| land, and having had enough of London's ways and
| women, was anxious, very anxious, to get out quickly.
So I caught the hustle fever and hopped round to
{ hut No. 6 more like a racing gohanna than a groper,
drew a pannikin and paliasse, and got back to test
j the feeling of the mob.
| Strolling in the direction of the Q.O.R. the first
j pea I hit was Murphy. I put it 011 him immediately
? somehow like this : " Good day, Sahmaj, know any-
; thing about this boat biz ? ''
j " Boat biz be damned," he said, " we're Q63A,
f if that's any news, and don't come 'ere tunnelling
( and sapping at me for information."
\ Next morning it was announced on parade that
1 1 we were "Q63a." Three days later this was cancelled
ji and we were known as " Q65 two days later still
\ the " Macedonia" was ours. Next morning the
" Macedonia " was scratched, machinery gone bung,
!■ and there was no further entry so far.
While in London on N.M.E. I, like most diggers,
met a rather decent girl, and an intimate friendship
| sprang up, but suddenly developing a desire for
j " Aussie," I went into camp with the idea of getting
ji home at the " tout." My explanation to Peg was I
j had been ordered to camp 011 duty. The parting was
!t painful. Every night I wrote her swearing undying
!. love and devotion, mentioning I was trying to tear
1 myself away, but the Colonel couldn't spare me. One
,| morning the O/C announced the "Barambah" was
•1 to be given the honour of conveying " Q65." At
; first she was to sail 011 August 20th. We drew our
boat pay—at least we all went up for it. Some
clicked. In the meantime Peg had pestered me to
come up to London to fix up certain little matters.
1' Writing back, I mentioned the Colonel had agreed to
;i do the work himself, and as he was a cobber of mine
'J in civvy life he'd let me have leave, so I should be
up on the 21st by the first train, and, above all, not
! f to worry, everything would be jake. We could then
11 make all arrangements that were necessary.
Little did I know fate was working against me.
11 The " Barambah " was postponed until the 24th. It
| was said she'd struck a bundle of straw in the Thames,
i Never hesitating over anything connected with the
; girl that meant so much to me, I wired one word :
" Scabies." Peg's mottles had a horror of contagious
j' diseases, so I knew things were right until the 24th.
j! I didn't bother myself with " phurphies " con-
1 1 cerning the " Barambah." My thoughts were else-
ji where. Some coots reckoned she was only four
j hundred tons, a hotbed of disease, and the subject of
•j a big enquiry at the Peace Conference. Others swore
!' her engines were too powerful for her frail hull, and,
l! besides, the skipper had ringworm, and the crew had
i f broken out in a rash.
Bitterly disappointed and worn out with worry
because the advance party didn't move off, I got the
news she would definitely sail on the 28th. Could I
stall dear old Peg off for another four days ? My one
aim now was to keep her as far away from Warminster
as possible, and prevent her mother from demanding
too much with regard to my intentions.
Every morning I crept over to " Greenhills " for
her letters, thankful in my own mind she was content
to swallow the yarns I had put up.
As soon as I knew the boat sailed 011 the 28th I
promptly wired. " Released isolation 28th, be with
you 29th. Love. Steve." (I hoped to be at sea by
this date.)
A few hours after this wire had been despatched
the A.M.C. advance party, which had proceeded as
far as Paddington, was recalled. Rumour had it that
plague had broken out amongst the workmen on the
"Barambah" and she had been postponed indefinitely.
My head seemed in a whirl.
When the advance party returned I interviewed
several members and found that a nigger working
aloft had fallen through the bottom and the work of
repairing would easily be finished by the Ist.
I have experienced some sticky moments in France
but nothing has come up to the anxiety and anguish
of waiting for the " Barambah " to sail—especially
under my circumstances. Absolutely at my wit's end,
I slunk about the camp, miserable and dejected. It
was impossible for me to bear the sight of skirts near
the camp. Some of you remember Titch, of Rowland's
Concert Party. Well, Peg was of similar build —only
when I saw her last she had put on more weight.
Cobbers I met in the " Woolpack," and other
places, told me over the usual glass, they had only
been in camp a few days and were on th 9 '' Plassy ''
or " Euripedes " and were sailing 011 the 6th and 9th
respectively.
Satisfied in my own mind the gropers were getting
a rough spur, I determined to write to Billy Hughes
about it when I returned.
Could I find a reasonable excuse until the Ist, the
date 011 which the " Barambah " was now due to sail ?
After all she must sail on that date. We had reasoned
and argued it out in the hut. As the pongo lance
stripe who sleeps in the corner said, " The cost of
keeping a boat like the "B " was terrific. She had
been fumigated four times since we had been allotted
to her."
Next morning I went into Warminster and sent
Peg the following wire : " Breaking leave, coming
first train. Steve." I found a cobber who was going
to London and asked him to hand this wire in at
Westbury. " Caught by Jacks. Steve." Naturally
these wires cost money, but I was prepared to pay
anything within reason to stall off the evil moment.
At last, thank heavens, we got the " Dinkum Oil."
moving off 011 Wednesday, the 3rd. Forty-eight hours
to go—could I weather the storm ?
Orders were : reveille five a.m., and as usual in the
Army we didn't leave Warminster until nine-thirty
o'clock. On the train I felt fairly secure, Peggie and
the last wire occupied most of my thoughts.
!
i
i 1
I
I
i
"1
i
I
\
I
)
I
I
I
1
I
I


I scaled the gangway as quickly as I could and
! asked one of the crew what time the old punt sailed.
I " Six a.m. termorrer," he replied. If he had been
Beckett himself the dealing out couldn't have been
) more complete. Twelve hours to run. I thought of
j what might happen in one, let alone twelve. Thank
j goodness, to the ordinary person docks are almost
( inaccessible, the chances of her getting me on the
{ boat were a hundred to one. Of course, Horseferry
\ Road might wire for my detention.
Somehow I got to sleep that night. A blast on
the siren and the coarse voice of the mate aroused me.
A tug was alongside. Springing up to the deck 1
glanced fugitive like around the deserted wharf. At
last we were off ; but once again disappointment
played a part, we came to a standstill in midstream,
and did not weigh anchor for Aussy until nine a.m.
Here you see " Narrer " and "Fat,"
Their shift is from eight to twelve ;
When " Narrer " goes aloft as lithe as a cat,
And "Fat." to the engine room will delve
By now I was feeling safe, but the launch coming
alongside to take the pilot off put the wind up
slightly. Visions of Headquarter's wires and
messages of recall floated through my mind.
Eventually we put out to set. I had been reflecting.
I wonder what Peggie is doing now? How is she
taking her oil Who's buying the wine? We didn't
have such a bad time together. Of course I paid
for my fun. At any rate sbe was worth it. I'm
sending the following radio to-night, it may square
up matters somewhat : " Shanghied aboard by Jacks.
Good-bye. Steve." To-morrow lam tearing up her
photos and letters, it wouldn't do to let the w 7 ife know
too much Cobber.
CHAS. NEWMAN,
I 6th Battery A.I.E.
Off Tenerieffe, 12/9/19.
MiDLMAWSINO.
DEAR MR. EDITOR,
Talk about '' swinging.'' The
ship's Education Department is going
with a great swing just now. I went
to see them yesterday, and asked them
what subjects they could teach me,
and they said that they could put me
through any of the courses taught in
the modern university, or, in fact,
anything that was mentioned in the
'' Encyclopaedia Britanica," and could
complete it before we reached Aus-
tralia. I told them I wanted to take
a post graduate course in " Melman-
ising " —no I didn't say Pelmanising;
I said " Melmanising." Eh, don't
you know what " Melmanising " is?
Well, who'd have thought it? 'Spose
I'll have to explain. It's like this.
" Pelmanising " is SUPPOSED to make
you remember all things, whereas
"Melmanising" makes you forget
everything. I can thoroughly recom-
mend the system. If one's got a
sticky and lurid past—er, well, one
forgets it. If one's got debts —one
forgets 'em. It is needless for me to
go on enumerating ad infinitum the
inestimable advantages of such a
system, as they are obvious and full
details are contained in the set of
little pink books. Before I took up
" Melmanising " my epistles were the
acme of instruction in philosophy, or
any other old osophy, or ology, you
could think of. Now —er, well, you
can see what it has done for me.
However, this beautiful morning I
sezs to meself, sezs I, " Will I rite
that letter," and I replies, " I will."
And here I am willing, but the cheer-
ful " Melmanising " system makes me
forget everything I wanted to " rite
to vou about.
With best respects,
Yours forgetfully,
LAPSUS.
)
I
I
1
I
I
)
i
j
i
}
I
\
1
I
i


11!I
.. i. ■ >. 111
'<ML
*2*
*—•« f
I
\
I
j
I
?
Messing up the Messing State
BY V.B.E.
Our company orderly room is situated on
table 21, and I'm that unfortunate individual,
the Orderly Room Corporal, whose duties are
many and varied, and who is expected by
most " diggers " to be a walking encyclo-
paedia on all sorts of knowledge. I am
expected to know what the ship did yester-
day ; how much pay will be given a man
who is three shillings and ninepence over-
drawn ; where missing kits are; when the
weather will change; an ability to recover
lost hammocks; will we call at Adelaide;
who won the revolver raffled last week;
when will the band be able to play a tune
that sounds like a tune; what is the Captain's
pay; is the O.C. married; what is the
High Field where's the hospital; who
is that " ginger " bloke; and why did
" Nugget " hit " Bluey," and so on for
ever and ever.
But picture yourself sitting on my hard seat
at table 21, trying to find out how it is that
a company of two hundred and fourteen men
can stretch itself out until we want rations
for something near three hundred, and your
ration or messing state is a horrible jumble
that would scare an accountant.
So you tear your hair and add long strings
of poorly written figures, and you add and
add until you are near the umpteenth
hundred, when some unhappy individual
comes and asks you if he'll be given a free
rail warrant to go and see his girl at
Kooweerup. You gaze at him with hard,
glittering eyes, and consign him, with a free
warrant, to a much warmer place than
Kooweerup, and he mutters " Gor blimey,
carn't a man arst a blanky question; whatcher
'ere for, anyhow?" You gently inform liim
that j'ou know no more of the intentions of
the authorities in " Aussie " than he does,
and he'll find out when he gets there, and
perhaps the girl will come up from Koowee-
rup anyhow. So he departs with growls and
mutters of " blarsted red tape."
Again you bend your shoulders over those
mysterious figures, and, again, have added
some millions, when a " runner " —God bless
the " runner "—arrives at your table with a
rush, a bundle of papers, a stamp on your
corn, and a naughty little book for you «'o
sign. When you've signed it he gives you
a bundle of ugly, dirty, sickly, yellow forms,
known —oh so well known—as " five-three-
fours," and with them an endlessly long list
of names of men in your company who're
wanted to. fill in their " five-three-four."
You glance at the questions on the form and
wonder if you'll come safely through asking
some of those impertinent and personal
questions, or will you be reduced to a mere
pulp after asking the twenty-seventh man
what he earned and what his wife's christian
name is.
You sigh and put your five-three-fours on
one side and, with a deeper sigh, return once
more to that awful messing state —which is
plainly in a " state of mess " —and again
those strings of figures dance and hop and
jazz before your eyes. I go on adding and
re-adding and being interrupted times without
number, and after writing many notes, and
taking off, and putting on, and chasing
information from the hospital forward to the
isolation aft, and from the engine room deep
down to the canteen high up, searching in
the galley, the butchers, the bakers, and the
candlestick makers; and after searching for
that last missing man in the crow's nest, and
behind the mine sweepers, you eventually find
him curled up in a ventilator and utterly sea
sick.
Then you start with a flourish, a beautiful
Messing State," and just as this lovely
document has received the last magnificent
twirl that completes your signature (warranted
unforgeable) an innocent, kindly individual,
commonly known as the ship's sergeant —and
still more commonly known as a (Weil !
just imagine it.) This individual, anyhow,
arrives, and with streaming hair and protruding
eye, says that those seventeen men who were
transferred from you to the concert party, and
from them to hospital, then to D Company on
to J Company, thence to the band—well
those seventeen men are still on your messing
strength.
Do you faint ? No ! Orderly room
corporals never faint. Nothing disheartens
them; not even if, after receiving this awful
information, you see the " specs " of the
ship's O.M glittering like headlights as he
approaches you for your " Messing State."
Do you tremble ? No ! What you do is to
stick those seventeen men in anywhere, here
and there, on your "Messing State "; rise
from your seat as though you'd been waiting
hours for him, and with a flourish of your
arm and a polite " Good morning " hand him
the document that he knows no more about
than you do.
And that's how you mess up the Messiuo
State.
Made in Germany.
This transport " Barambah " was originally
known as the S.S. " Hobart " of the German-
Australian Line.
She was one of twenty enemy-owned vessels
interned in Australian waters on the outbreak
of war nineteen being German and one of
Austrian origin. These were principally
named by the Germans after some capital
cities and islands of the Dutch East Indies
a few being blessed with names from the
Faderland."
These ships were converted into troop and
horse transports and put into commission by
the Naval Department under orders of the
Commonwealth Government, being renamed
after towns and stations of Australia. Recently
they were transferred to the Commonwealth
Government line of steamers, consisting in all
of thirty-five vessels. Since December, 1914,
these vessels have taken an active part in the
transport of our troops and horses to all
Allied countries, being manned principally by
Australians.
Out of the twenty vessels originally con-
verted from the enemy use to our service, only
two have been lost, viz., the " Barunga "
and the " Conargo," which were torpedoed
in 1918 off the coast of England.
H.M.A.T. " BARAMBAH."
LIST OF OFFICERS.
R. A. T. Wilson, Master.
C. P. de la Motte, Chief Officer.
E. W. Evans, 2nd Officer.
H. B. Hodges, 3rd Officer.
C. E. Smith, 4th Officer.
H. W. Farrell, Purser.
M. L. Robertson W./T. Operator.
E. M. Tait, Asst. W./T. Operator.
C. F. Noonan, Asst. W./T. Operater.
E. D. Livingstone, Chief Steward.
F. I. R. Smith, 2nd Steward.
J. Bowran, Chief Engineer.
A. Porter, 2nd Engineer.
C. A. Ferguson, 3rd Engineer.
J. Henderson, 4th Engineer.
T. Robinson, sth Engineer.
J. Anderson, 6th Engineer.
A. Lovig, 7th Engineer.
A. R. Haslett, Refrigerating Engineer.
C. Servan, Electrician.
An Apology.
[When the " Barambah " was allotted Lo
65 Quota such startling stories were circulated
concerning her condition, speed, and what-not
that, to use a familiar phrase, everybody got
the " wind up." Fortunately, like the first-
reported story of the late Mark Twain's death,
the accounts were grossly exaggerated.]
They said you were rotten and cranky, old
boat;
The dirtiest, greasiest trooper afloat;
That there ne'er was another tub running so
slow,
And they pitied us all who on you had to go.
Your speed it was reckoned at eight knots
bare,
And wherever you were going you'd never
get there,
For your engines were ancient and wheezy
and worn,
And your sides full of holes whence the rivets
were torn.
San Feryan," you much maligned craft,
The experts who damned you must have been
daft;
Though you are a bit slow, we can say
nothing more ;
And we wonder whatever they libelled yo l
for.
A Photo Mystery.
Though there are innumerable camera fiends
and art critics aboard the " Barambah," none,
as yet, have succeeded in solving the mystery
set in an array of photographs adorning the
wall of the tonsorial establishment aft con-
ducted by Long Bill. Upon all who have
glued their eyes to the collection for even a
minute it has had a striking effect; indeed, in
some instances, it has been so striking that it
has rendered the critic temporarily blind. It
hits you right in the eye, filling the optic with
a rush of water greater in force than the
squirts from a syphon. The most egotistical
of art and photographic critics, after even the
most casual glance at the collection, have
been compelled to shrink back from the force
of the catch and made to feel very small.
The whole is such that it defies description,
even were we disposed to give one. In a
way, this is just as well, for it would be a
pity to unlock the secret before everybody
had had a chance at attempting a solution.
If the " Barambah's " complement fails to
eludicate the mystery, possibly someone 'n
Australia may succeed. We'll see.
I
i
i
1
j
I
)
I
\
i
i
I
i
l
)
<
i
I
i
i
i
i
I
)
I


DEPARTURE OF MAIL BOAT, TABLE BAY. ROGGE BAY, CAPETOWN.
ENTRANCE TO CASTLE, CAPETOWN C,TY HALL CAPETOWN.
i
i
!
i
In and around Capetown.
i
1
i
!
i
i
i
|
i
Did you See these
Places, "Dig.?"
i
!
i
i
I
i
1
i
l
i
I
I
i
i
}
i
\
i
!
j
I
I
|
.4
MUSEUM. CAPETOWN.
VICTORIA ROAD.


, « <f
t>' 'YV*L£~ ' ■ _ "' , . ' I
:~"J ' I
: i t0frf' |
k
The "Barambah"
Educational Stunt.
A disorganisation formed at Horse-
ferry Road, Grosvenor Place, Bel-
grave Square, Victoria Street, St.
George's Square, Regency Street,
Sutton Veny and thereabouts, and
not forgetting Tidworth, where they
hold up your applications for a
month or so-
1
\
Object ? To trick the troops.
The instructions to Officers and
N.C.O.'s of the Education Service
are
1 Never allow an opportunity of
boring the troops to pass.
2 Remember you are there to
know nothing : sign your name
to everythihg possible and
when there is no news on the
wireless issue it as frequently
as possible.
THREE HEADS ARE RIGHT
Ihe Barambah " 8.8. Depart- There is a young man, I declare,
ment " fits men for the following His name it is Newman, Til swear,
civilian jobs : On the literary staff he makes the
3 Plave your name on the
Y.M.C.A. Lantern Slides as
often as you are allowed.
(a) Governor-General or State troops laugh ; ,
Governors. Both he and Cussey s a pair. j
(b) Public house " chucker TTTA TT . *
out » TPIE Y EMMA.
4 Have all the books the men
don't want, and if you are
asked for anything you have
got refer the inquirer to the
Port of Disembarkation.
(c) Management of State fish This Souvenir would be ineom-
and chip shops. plete without reference being made
(d) Bottle collecting (full or to the work of the Australian
I
I
5 Whenever possible issue a
Syllabus which should be un-
intelligible*
empties). Y.M.C.A. amongst us. ji
(e) O.C. dodgers for the next . T . , ~
war Hie representative is Lieut. C.
(/) Bookmaking at Rajidwick. M ' LVYS'' ahl - v su f '
(g) Search party to rediscover P orted b >' P e ! J J- Widdowson, A. j
Tasmania Hunter, and H. Salmond.
6 Keep your Office Door closed
if you think there is any like-
lihood of doing business.,
7 Discourage men to learn any-
thing. If they do learn any-
thing you 11 soon be out of a
job.
(h) O.C. Swans in the West. A library of seven hundred ■ ■
But the main job the department vol f ncs was P la f d on board and !,
can fit vou for is overseer of hoboes a ( g anc ? round decks at ko g
at Federal Capital. of the day V ! S ° f the u MI (
G-T-7 R use WPllc h these books have been i
put to while away the hours. j
In addition, we are indebted to j
A certain Digger on board was Association and its representa- j
greatly surprised when someone tives on board for a piano, an
said to him, " Say, Digger, did you organ, all the usual deck games, f
know that you have got a debt of sporting and boxing gear, writing'
£.2 Bs. m your pay book?" The material, lantern slides,, songs, I
Digger (very inquisitive) : "What gramaphones, and records. J
for?" " Well; tw T o quid for horns _ :
and eight bob for polish." Trophies have been generously £
distiibuted for winners in sports, j
etc., and the staff has materially ?
BIRTHS. At sea on the Austra- aided in all amusements and sports
lian ship u Barambah," on the meetings. t
2ist September, to "Nigger," the , nt f
"Missus" of Thomas Tabby-Cat, Not only some of us, but all of s
Esq., of Royal Albert Docks, usa 7 good 010 Y Emma. .
London —of three kittens (Clarence, the Y.M.C.A. says little and (
Cuthbert, and Claude). does much. (
8 Start the following classes :
(а) Hebrew 7 .
(б) How to do without drink,
(c) Deportment for mess
orderlies in rough
weather.
(d) Artel'asses for mess
orderlies' tables.
(e) How to be seasick.
(/) The theory of high and low
fields.
(g) Pitfalls in sw 7 eepstakes.
(h) How to avoid marriage.
(i) The art of dodging wives
and creditors (on
landing).
(j) The choice of civilian ties.
(k) The gentle art of de-
mobilising.


I
*
I
| "Warnie's" Wireless, etc.
|i Concerning the above, the editor
\ makes the following comments :
; (i) With reference to your enquiry
about wireless, please answer the
following question : "Do you
| really receive messages on your
i wireless set, or is it a fact that the
| dinkum wireless office on board
write out a message for you and
! then you sit on your bunk and
\ dream you've just received it 011
11 your set? Several of our readers
11 are curious—many others are d—d
'1 inquisitive. (2) This passage from
your book has been responsible for
! many deaths among our staff. '' His
(! concatination of inductive and de-
ij ductive ratiosination clearly demon-
strated that he was afflicted with a
I multitudinous assortment of dis-
arranged ideas." We are relieved
to hear this book was not an auto-
biography, though we regret to
state that several of the office staff
I say it is. Nothing personal meant,
j though !
Why is a Digger, who has just
' drawn his deferred pay, like the
? " Barambah " at sea?
'I Because lie has a roll.
Digger to M.O. : " Sir, I can't
go on this route march, I've got
hammer toes."
M.O. : "Nonsense, man, just
the thing to knock the nails out of
your boots."
A table in No. 1 troop deck
possesses an appropriate combina-
tion of mess orderlies : A Layman
for the table and a Lock to guard
j the gear.
; The "ninety-mile sharp shooter"
and the trooper from Palestine were
I on the hatchway exchanging
p opinions and arguing regarding
Captain Wilson's handling of the
! "Barambah," and on nautical
;! matters generally. Making no
i|. headway with the views lie was
II advancing, the first-named quietly
; j asked of the other, "Aye, wot lot
did yer said yer was with over in
! Palestine ?" " Me,'' replied the
trooper, "oh ! I was with the Light
1 Horse at the finish ; before that I
'i was with the Camel Corps."
j " With the Camel Corps?" replied
"the ninety-miler "I suppose
! 1 that's why yer reckon yer know
{ all about ships—'cause yer were
I one time on a ship of the desert."
Bill j 1111 (reckoning his turn on Digger : " No, sir, a different
fatigue was coming around too state.
often): " Say, S'major, am I the Officer: " Well, then, what
only bloke in our company yer've- State?"
got to pick from for fatigues?" Digger: "Sober, sir. I was
S.M. : " Yes, dig., you're 1111- drunk when I enlisted,
lucky ; all the rest o' 'em's sea-
s^v ' Rainbow, very wrath with a
cobber of his who just hit France
and talked a lot about what he saw
Fatty, the "masquerading and did there, burst out at length
madamoiselle," was admiring his to a few of his cronies. "He gets
dimples in a mirror in the ship's on my nerves, always talking about
dispensary the other night when a what he did, etc., I suppose if the
Digger thrust his head through the truth was known he never saw the
door: "Ave, ' Fat,' give us some line, and was only a stretcher
more of those number nines I got bearer."
last night ; blime, they're good ;
they bloomin' near killed me." , . A • A
* Digger (who met and married 011
furlough): " What'll it cost to
Officer (making up State quotas) ~ '« A ( Us f,
" What State do you want to be Cleik . about £3O, Dig.
discharged in, lad ? Same as the Digger : Thirty quid, not fer
one you enlisted in?" mine. Why, she ain't worth it.
_ L _ ( , ( t —n..ti-U. Tt -itri -i-'j-t T —i —— *—^
)
\
t
i
)
\
(
)




w V# Lr Jp p-/• '
Swg£ 5| ,-vr' , - . •_ t | *. .>.*r > •-• .*» v cawMRM •'%*■ .* * * . ' * »/-••, jppij«


ihelea
">0 oe fSynd at r Iroop Gdle^
»-*►<
The Old Man.
When men from two units met, it
was customary to discuss the merits
and demerits of the old Man.
"Our old man is a old -."
"Ours is worse."
i And numerous lies were told to en-
force the contention of either side.
| ÜBut ours is a game old
I "Oh, so is ours."
\ And more lies followed.
I In addition to these usual qualities
j our old man was "a old wowser."
: That is to say his moral sense revolted
( at a word and a game both common in
j the A.I.F. The unit's most cherished
s memory was of the first time the old
I man swore. It was Tiny Ryan's fault,
j Tiny was a. nark. He had just return-
ed from one of his periodical trips to
( hospital with some convenient illness,
j "Well Ryan, have you come back to
: box on?" was the Old Man's greeting.
( "Oh no, sir, just come back for my
) mail."
* He stood that, but shortly after Tiny
\ made a reference to some " Tom-
-1 mies."
i "What sort of Tommies, Ryan?
j "Oh, ordinary Tommies, sir."
; He even stood that. "Now Ryan,
( I have told you before, you must not
j use that word."
I "Didn't know you were there, sir.'
( That was too much. " and
1 i s Ryan, it doesn't matter whe-
? ther I'm here or not. You musn't use
( the word."
| Bottk-o-Kin§s
] »V "Wi B
1 The " bottle o' " Kings are we,
1 And at the canteen we both stand
I Seeking empty bottles lk buckshee
] For spending silver when we land.
Then at the old Chateau, at Heilly,
nut started a Salvation Army ring
and in course of time outsiders came to
it and found financial salvation —or
otherwise.
One day, when there was much
money in the ring, the Old Man hap-
pened along. He was big and choleric
and carried a huge waddy in lieu of
a cane. Pointing this accusingly at
one after the other of the outsiders, he
said: "You and you and you! Two-
up with my battery! Off with you!"
And they went, and the Battery
gathered in what they had left in the
ring.
One dark night, the Old Man was
tracking along a trench with his bat-
man behind him and suddenly flopped
into a still hole full of water. Need-
less to say, the batman landed on top
of him. First thing we heard, when
the splashing subsided, was a furious
voice addressing the batman "Why
the don't you look where you are
going?"
The old Man hated to crime any-
body, and was most assiduous in look-
ing after the welfare of his men, but
he was a champion at peitting over a
verbal barrage, mixing sarcasm with
it. If a man had straw in his pack
on a route march, it was, "Mm, hello,
what have you got here? Your rations?
Bit of an ass about you, eh?"
Consequently wherever anyone said
that first thing he would do when he
got into civvies would be to punch the
old Man's nose, he was warned from
all sides that he would have to stand
in the queue and wait his turn.
But when, after the armistice, the
unit was prematurely broken up they
got un a petition to have it brought
together again and every man Jack
of them signed it. The old Man was
a old but he did see that a
man had a decent feed.
A FEW CONUNDRUMS.
Why is the troop deck of the Baram-
bah like the Federal Parliament?
Because there are representatives of
all States there.
Why is the Barambah like Bulle-
court ?
The Huns had both till the "Aus-
sies" took possession.
What is the difference the
Padre when inspecting in the Mess
competition and Monkey Brand Soap?
One looks for dirt; the other gets rid
of it.
SOUVENIRS AND CURIOS.
The consignment of war trophies,
souvenirs and curios which the Baram-
bah is carrying to Australia is indeed
unique. Unfortunately the ship's
manifesto is not available; consequent-
ly one is unable to enumerate the col-
lection of guns, aeroplanes, etc., which
repose in the vessel's hold. However,
there are to be observed on deck many
strange, remarkable and (perhaps one
might be permitted to characterise
them as such) inexplicable curios.
Taking them in alphabetical order.
Here they arfe:
Bell —undoubtedly properly cast and
obviously iiossessing tone, yet one can-
not ring it.
For thirteen men it is ; away yer go,
Hop yer frame down below,
When I fill yer dixies from this scoop
Chock rmht full of tea or soup.
80lt —Properly constructed nut and
grooves, yet it cannot be turned or un-
screwed.
Burns —A remarkable species with-
out the least semblance of heat.
Cleaver —Sharp, yet too blunt for cut-
ting even the most tender carcase.
Lily white —Though this particular
species of floriculture is shown on
"Q.T. Form" as written and is un-
doubtedly its true designation, it is
unique in that its color is a ruddy
brown.
Major —shown on Ship's nominal roll
as " Private."
Mason —Knows nothing of the intrica-
cies of the masonry trade; only laying
knowledge possesses: "laying" in a
hammock.
Tucker —A peculiar species, though
wholesome looking and inviting; yet
unfit for human consumption.
Weir —Minature size, but of remark-
able holding capacity; claimed that it
has never yet been found possible to fill
it.
There are some others, but as it is
not desired to have a rush of curio
seekers when we reach Fremantle, those
given will suffice to show how unique is
the " Barambah's " freight—human and
otherwise.
"Pious" prattles thusly: What is
the best thing in Digger religion ? May
I suggest "Mormon ;" but, of course,
I don't live up to it. Or perhaps a
better suggestion might be "Wheel-
barrow" won't go anywhere unless
pushed.
i
\
\
i
i
i
i
I
i
\


I
« - —< < . .
*b~'
In my callow days of military life,
the man I envied most was the
permanent mess orderly. To me
his job consisted merely of carrying
a dixie of tea or stew from the cook
house to the mess shed at meal time,
and, after the meal, with a crumbled
discarded piece of newspaper sweep
bread crumbs, and smears of jam
and stew, off the table- I was sure
he never resorted to the use of water
because, after each meal, I always
came away from that table with
samples of the previous meal's menu
on my sleeve, and, sometimes, on the
nether part of my garments. It
wasn't because it was a " cushy " job
that I was envious. What appealed
was that he was exempt from guards,
pickets and fatigues.
I had never been able to even fluke
a mess orderly's job during the time
Kaiser Bill was trying to Germanise
the world. My first chance came
when I boarded the Barambah. I
thought of guards, pickets and
fatigues —and grabbed the job with
both hands. I soon wished I hadn't.
It isn't all beer and skittles being a
mess orderly. Well, no; perhaps
I'm wrong in saying that there aren't
any skittles. We have skittles often
when trying to descend the com-
panion way with a dixie of tea in
one hand and a tray of roast beef,
stew or something in the other.
From the way she rolls I should say
the boat gets all the beer.
I wasn't long in the job ere I
discovered that in believing " mess
orderly" was a cushy job I was
labouring under a delusion. It was
those daily official inspections that
woke me up. Those inspections are
a perennial joy to the deck habitues,
but to the mess orderlies —a night-
mare. The washing up's nothing.
It's the scrubbing of the table and
" bath-bricking " the knives and
forks that gets my goat. Any fool
can scrub a table, I suppose you
think ? Yes ; will you have a try on
a table or a form on which half a
dozen Education blokes do
their lessons; some engineering
enthusiasts work out the problem of
how the reverse gear of the ship's
steering apparatus is worked, and
the bridge enthusiasts, too tired too
look for a piece of paper, do their
scoring. To look at our table when
these fiends are finished makes you
wonder what becomes of those
pencils and paper given by the
Mess Orderly. His Trials and Tribulations.
Comforts Fund, and whether there hop, and the only air we get is
are any housewife's in the kit bags the tune of Housey, housey, who 11 j
with any pins and needles, and have a buckshee' card,' followed by
whether before we left camp the a chant of numbers, and concluding f
rule was rigidly enforced regarding in a rancous chorus of House. i|
all jack knives being handed in to And the "mug-in-us" prevails and i
the Q.M. Then when there is a we scrub and clean. Aye we clean! j
Concert'tween decks the crowd vault Our tea dixies and trays we ve |
the tables for a better view of the rubbed till they have become as thin
proceedings or a seat beside a as some, if not all, of the tales they j|
clobber. The mess orderlies only used to put up on us at Sutten Veny j
know how many men aboard wear as to why the West Australians
slippers or go bare footed. The could not get a boat to take them ;
tables and forms keep a tally of the home. ;
hob-nailed boots. Ah, those inspections ! The main
It's scrub and clean from break- body of inspectors aren't bad; you V
fast to inspection —nearly dinner can bluff em. I hey re only surface (
time. The poor mess orderlies workers. It's the mob that follows
literally gasp for air. The " heads " them. They're delvers. Their daily
seek to alleviate matters by removing presence is supposed to be because
tarpaulins from the lattice wooden of a competition whereby (if you are
hatchway. Then on to that lattice lucky) you'll get half-a-crown.
work the Gros(e) " house" kings Watching an ecclesiastic attached
\
1
I
\
* —*—*—— ———*


:>-W.
i
I
\
sea, now that Peace has been signed.
Besides soup and stew makes such
a mess.
I set out to show the trials and
tribulations of a mess ornerly. ? I
could go on for a year, but those 1 ve
given will do to go on with.
SCRUBBO.
Our Concert Party.
C.D.N
It would be an injustice to issue
this souvenir without a word of
thanks to the concert party. Back
in the days of Sutton Veny it was
thought desirable to create a concert
troupe to help entertain the''digger"
during the voyage to Aussie At
that time nobody could be found to
organise or manage the proposed
party. A meeting of one or two
enthusiasts was held, and after many
difficulties Lieut- Reid was asked to
be manager, with Corporals Horton
and Jeffryes as a joint committee-
The trials from the outset were dis-
heartening ; talent had to be literally
dug out of the Quota; pianists
found ; suitable music secured; a
piano for rehearsals had to be bor-
rowed or stolen: costumes stolen
or begged—in fact, trials presented
themselves at every turn. Through
the persistency of Lieut Reid and
Cpl- Jeffryes, music was purchased
and Gunner Warmari and Cpl. Hall
persuaded to officiate at the piano.
Gradually the party grew. Com-
paratively little time was spent re-
hearsing in camp and it was not
until we came aboard that the real
work of the concert party began-
Many concerts and sing-songs have
been held while at sea, and many an
hour has passed lightly, all due to
the excellent efforts of all the mem-
bers of the troupe. For this, special
thanks are due to Copl. Hall and
Warman, pianists ; Coporals Horton
and Jeffryes, humourists; Gunner
Solomon, female impersonator;
Gunners Burrows and Lovell, ballad
singers: Gunner Tomlinson, tenor ;
Gunners Steadman and Jacobs,
baritones; Private Bateman, co-
median ; Steward Smith; the
'' Barambah " Hebrew impersonator
and good all round comedian.
which to allay the pangs of hunger.
Then there is another member of
i : HUB that second party who is so fond of
r Wtm looking at himself in the reflection
| afforded by our polished knives that
* n nun .' jr mm if the roll of the ship causes a knife
I I jaSSßStik to move onlv a fraction of an inch
to move only a fraction of an inch
( design °f cutlery we arrange,
} can discern it. Then when he
j alights upon knives of an exceptional
j to this second party has convinced reflection at one table he makes us
» me that their daily visits are only a alter our design of cutlery to that of
: "stall." This ecclesiastic worries that particular table. 'Spose he
( only about the cupboards in which reckons he'll then get a better view
j we keep our bread, jam, cheese, etc. of himself.
) Into these he jabs the index finger However, we don t mind all these
j of his right hand which he inspects things. You see some day we might
j in the light showing through the port get half-a-crown as a prize. The
: hole, and there is always an obvious blokes we've got snouted are those
I look of disappointment on his dial boxing fiends who always pick meal
I when nothing sticks to that finger times to indulge in " medicine ball "
j after jabbing it in the cupboard. on the mess deck hatch. You know,
j What we mess orderlies think is it aint too nice (after having success-
that, being a " good doer "he finds fully negotiated the companion way
( the rations vn the saloon inadequate, with two handfuls of tucker) to be
( and he uses the finger in the hope of hit on the side of the head with a
I securing a little " buckshee" bread misdirected ball. You don't get
) crumbs or a smear of jam with wounded stripes for casualties at
I
Diggers readily appreciate any
movement intended for their amuse-
ment, welfare or benefit, and offer
their sincere thanks, and a wish of
good luck, to all the members of the
" Barambah Concert Party "
* , —•


/Q
ck~ '
HH
£9 7 !
| Things I Want to Know.
J (By Inquisitive).
: What the mess orderlies said to the
( education bird who scribbled on his table.
f The Gros(e) receipts of a certain
J "house" king since the " Barambah "
I left Blighty ?
} Don't the " Babs " know another way
5 to dish up "Murphies." [No, try
( " Bill the Barber." —Ed.]
( Who is the two pipper who comes
j " Larkin " round at 7 ack emma, knock-
; ing men out of dugouts?
| Why does " Bluey '' of the " Y " Em-
' ma look so worried ? Has he been read-
r ing two many deep books?
|! Does the man in " C " Company with
i 1 the "Abel" voice practice in civvy life
| as a fog horn or a fire alarm?
!: How 7 a certain Padre will be regard-
i| ed by his congregation on his return,
I and if he will shock the maidens among
his flock?
| How many bottles of red ink have
i been used by the Pay Book auditors
since they started work on board the
i 1 "Barambah"?
;i How do the A.M.C. Details manage
'■ to provide cream for their supper; if it
' skimmed from the Red Cross, and if
/ they are not indiscreet to discuss such
- things in places where they are likely
1 to be overheard ? ,
| After the temporary obliquity of
vision sustained by the taller of the two
'! Padres, when dissecting a much discuss-
ed photograph, will the aforesaid Padre,
when viewing similar productions in the
!. future, chance only one eye?
( If the weekly carrying of hammocks
11 and blankets on the parade deck is sup-
posed to be an inspection or part of an
i| Education stunt initiating troops into
the art of carrying " Matilda " so that
- they won't feel amiss in the event of
!| having to trudge Australia looking for
y a job.
i;
Horlon
amuses -The
i
i
!
Georgy Porgy Horton am I,
I make Diggers laugh and almost cry
When on the beards my frame I sling
And do a dance or joke or sing.
much has
Trilby" won at
How
poker?
What will the the "podgy " Corporal
in " B " Company do with all those silk
badges he's collecting, if his girl's
chucked him?
Does a certain Staff Sergeant think it
beneath him to lend a hand in enter-
taining the Common diggers. Good
Kay ins ?
Is it hard to win sweeps after consult-
ing the sextant ?
If Bosun Winter is an expert
"Fandango" dancer.
Is it true that "Brickie," of the
scullery is a professor of languages ?
Who is the "A" Company sergeant
who- is waster ing away to an elephant ?
If it was nervousness that prevented
an " Abe " nosed " C " Company N.C.O.
from entering the Bridge Tournament.
If the chief engineer got lockjaw
through laughing, and that his merry
haw, haw disturbs the fireman on duty ?
Is it a fact that Sgts. Farmer and
Commins have been nicknamed " Lemon
and melon?"
. Is it a fact, that the Skipper w 7 as
overcome by Cynthia's beauty, and did
the cork pop ? Shurrup !
What the Sergeant said when after
elaborate preparations and much
trouble in photographing Cynthia de
Vere he came to develope the film
and it wasn't there —" Great Scott."
Is it a fact that one of the ship's offi
cers nightly scans the floor of the smok-
ing room after the card players have
retired, and how much has he picked
up ?
If a padre w T as heard to mutter
" Here, Here," in the presence of Aus-
tralians on the word " Hobart " being
mentioned at a lecture some few days
ago? Where is " Hobart " Mr. Editor?
What is the name of the Groper in
one of the "Thirty" Messes who flog
ged a pair of " Comforts " Sox and is it
true that he invested the proceeds in
the " High and Low " and lost?
Oh Tell Me ! j
Baldy: (1). We regret that our refer- (
ence to you of S.S.M. Murphy's query j
on " How to grow Hair " should have :
drawn such abusive replies from you. (
We cannot see that your contention |
that all the great men —that is really s
great—like yourself, the 0.C., the j
5.M.0., Napoleon and others have j
suffered from a lack of top covering is »
any answer to our correpondent's ques- f
tion. 2. We note you have not answer- |
ed our Bridge Queries, Nos. 17568, 50-50 *
and C. Please explain. We trust you »
are not anticipating defeat in the 2nd f
"Barambah" Tournament. (3). No »
Padre Bradbury assures us that he has (
not got those razors, never had them j
and has given up hope of getting them. j
We have never had reason, to doubt
his word but w ere open to reason (and
suggestion). •
2nd Officer: (1). The 12.10 a.m. train {
from Liverpool St. Station leaves at 12 j
minutes past twelve, not as you contend 1
at 12.20 a.m. See Bradshaw's Guide
and numerous Wine Lists in London. j
2. Tube carriages were not devised for j
the purpose you mention. We advise
you on such occasions to travel on the j
platform. 3. We have referred your j
Query as to Red Cross Fairs in Hobart
to Padre Bradbury who is an authority f
on the place. We think that, like 5
Heaven, no one really knows where Ho- s
hart is. Padres pretend to know about f
Heaven, so don't be deceived about our 1
expert Padre's opinion as to Hobart. :
Corns: (1). Yes; your system of re- I
moving warts from the Head (or |
" Heads ") seems excellent. A High J
Authority from the A.M.C. Deck has I
sent us a long opinion on the subject. |
2. We can assure you corn removing in j
no way affects a man's efficiency in the I
Band. At any rate not in " our Band," }
of course in some Bands. . . See next j
edition or this journal.
Yah, I 'spose yer think that I'm Yid,
Well, I'm not; it's only kid.
I ain't an Ikey Moses, me name is Smith;
Me as a Yid is just a myth.
Hoflon


I "r:£E : lli:^ 1 ;:;!;:; L /ct/r 8ozs.#&c> ei'zz/M5 /?0{s/v/?jffl^ iiiiijjlfl'i
j "-- -v, \(//iSi\ >m o/v we wc»r G/tiL. i :; |'| '
| '~ : "£/?£ /s nsr/svol//*£ /MBKk :;i ! < wr- ]'
| ss/tOKe S£'?v//ve oi/r '^^ '
—-«f
\
I
1 The Ball.
I By C.N.A.
Larf ! I've got furrers in me stummick as big " Fatty" Chapman's impersonations so familar) Pte. Penglase as Adam create an uproar.
! as front-line trenches. I can t help thinking of '" Fatty ' was the only one on board who could This character was unique —the airy ea ures
that ball of ours on the 12th of September. do justice to the Madamoiselle, with his big and swathy skin, to say nothing ote ea . n
i 1 Everybody had been waiting for it : some were limbs, his big round red face, the beautiful the "'Prehistoric Cannibals Mr. uzzar
'j enthusiastic, but the majority, as usual, with an curves of his back and front, and his form. certainly merits a mention, his first an l-p ay
J Aussie '* push, took everything pretty easy. Oh! "Chappie," you must have studied hard of cannibals habits, the arrangement o e
i 1 Long before the appointed hour, the crowd to so faithfully portray such a character. leopard skin, and the professiona jUS l"^
] congregated on the aft-deck and took up positions. It's a long way from France to Aussie, as the spiked club, his blood-bespatte oy, o
It was a good humoured crowd and full of ex- most of us are finding out, but Smith and Head say nothing of the bone, was effective an we
) pectancy* Cripes ! " Digger," when I think of brought back bush scenes of long ago in depict- carried out. Did you catch 1m s a owing
£ Madamoiselle d' Armentieres I can't help giving ing "An Aboriginal Couple. ' From the crude " Miss Ruby Queen across t e
way. Everything seemed so real. (How vivid materials at their disposal they fashioned truth- An extremely novel dress was isp aye y
| those memories of long ago seem: those won- fully an old gin and a buck, complete even to "Father Neptune. Ihe beauti u mass o
| derful days, or nights, in France which made the cat. fair CU) dy hai*" was really unrave e rope,
s
I


I ?«**** * * 'TI^ °' Af 0 EgyPtia " j
I S.O.S. device thai shone from Neptune's head >'? Zd a charminn ex .can bandit., sailors, women (good, bad
j reminded one of ihe perils of the sea, and the , y • ' •. . , j;. c lo Sec t ' row „[ nea ? and indifferent), aboriginals,' natives, and even a j
i = i
j Gunner S £ lo ™° n * ma § n ! ' shocking! 6 and"ln intimlte "know- & 1
and taste, enhanced by a beautiful and extra- plete mastery of the art of make-up. During the latter part of the evening Mr. (
S ordinary make-up, u Ruby " was affable, '' The Abdullabs (Cpls. Horton and Hall) Buzzard kindly supervised the distribution of t
( fashionable and chic. Even a woman would as members of a harem, contributed greatly biscuits. Supper was served at 9 p.m. and
j have envied her, those large expressive eyes— towards the merriment of the evening, and the dancing was indulged in until after midnight. i
)
I
Sea Worn.
BY VSEA WORM.
To Captain Wilson this poem I wrote,
To let him know I'm sick of his boat,
And tired as hell of all things that float ;
I'm
To me the glamour of travel's gone stale ;
I'm like a dog with a well-jambed tail ;
And long to cuddle some sweet female ;
I'm
There's some who've travelled and still want more ;
Who talk with pride of towns galore ;
I'm hanged if I know what they're returning for ;
I'm
When my Blighty girl said " Good-bye " to me,
She said she was sure I'd enjoy the sea,
And, 'struth, I've just got rid of my tea ;
I'm
Oh, Captain, how I hate your ship ;
Your darned old hooker gives me the pip ;
When we get to Fremantle I'll give her the slip ;
I'M
A Digger's Dirge.
I'm not a bloke ter grumble
Or get right out of sorts ;
But I'm going ter take a tumble
And let 'em have some snorts.
'Tain't of cobbers that I rouse,
Or anyone I want ter bash.
The cove wot's made me grouse
Is the pea wot holds our cash.
They made us all fall in one day,
And down below all lob.
They chatted us we'd get a pay—
A PAY. A lousy seven bob !
Very little sympathy we got
About our 44 deferred" in hand.
They sez : 44 No, Lad, that's the lot,
It's all yer book will stand."
Very soon we all were broke,
And had no dough to spend ;
So when we " Diggers " want a smoke
We've a stick with a pin stuck on the
end.
The Fields of the Sea.
BY V.B.E.
It's neither paddock, nor pasture, nor grazing land, r
To bet 011 you go, with a (4 bob " in your hand. i 1
Two chances you take, and wishing a yield, i
You plank 'em both down on the lucky " high field."' ;
And as you come back to your mess at midday j
You are filled with horror, and sick with dismay.
You tear your fair locks, and shriek in your woe, ?
And you wish you had backed the field that was low. j
|
Oh. the 4 4 high field" and "low field," they puzzle ,
us quite
As we lay in our hammocks and think in the night.
Now, what is the 44 high field " and which is the low?
And echo it answers : 44 I'm d d if I know."
The tote maker tells you it's as simple as light, ?
If the ship, it goes fast, the " high field's " all right ;
But if the wind's " forrard " and she's hit by the sea,
Then the "low field's" the thing for him, you, and ;
me.
So to-morrow you'll try on the " low field " a bet ;
You'll be hoping at last a big " divvy " to get. ?
But though speed it was slow, and distance was short,
You do not receive that big " divvy " you ought. '
So nobody knows what'll happen to you |
When you put down a seventh of last week's "screw."
On the 44 high field " or 44 low field," which ever you
choose,
Pick one or both, and you are certain to lose.
So we go on to 44 Aussie " by field high and low,
And which one it is we really don't know.
But what does it matter as miles they both yield
To where its 44 Top Paddock" and not the "High
Field " ?
I
\
I was on sentry duty
One windy moonlit night.
I saw a thing that waved its arms,
A ghastly thing, in white.
But when I went and looked next day,
All in the bright sunshine,
It was just the Padre's nightshirt
A hanging on a line.
———— ———
I
i
I
I
i
i
i


T " !
i I
' I
J v »*= •
\
i
Amusements.
i A very satisfactory programme We congratulate the winners of the as the voluinptuous strains arise
i of sports and amusements has been various weights on their success from the instruments of our gallant
carried out during the voyage and all the competitors on the good fourteen. We congratulate all
' Having allowed sufficient time for fights they have put up. members of the band on the good
the recovery of all hands from The Deck Games Committee progress they have made.
i 1 mal-de-mer, a general sports com- have been responsible for a great
;i mittee and sub-committee were display of energy about three after-
formed with the object of utilising noons a week, when they cajole SPORTS AND AMUSEMENTS
! all branches of sport to their thousands to risk their lives in COMMITTEES.
|! fullest. This, we think, has been cockfights, bun and treacle races,
i| achieved. Although some affirm and the like. President : Major S. B. Cox.
|i that we were a trifle slow in Our fancy dress ball was a huge Vice-president : Chap. V. R. Brad-
;! opening up our wares at the start, success. Where all the costumes bury, M.C. >
it will probably be found that they came from was the surprise of the Sports Officer : Lieut. R. R. Rail. *
!: are limited to those few who were evening, although the winner of Boxing and Deck Games.
;! unable to attend our general meet- the original costume, "Adam " Lieut. McGregor.
1 ings held at any old time daily (Pte. Penylase, A.M.T.) did not Lieut. Buzzard. |
1 during the first week on the high have to search long for his. Beetson. '
seas. Ask any of those present at CONCERT PARTY. Our thanks Pte. S. L. Chapman, ist A.G.H. ;
; any of our meetings, and he will are due to all the members of the Pte. W. Hughes, A.B.D. •
l' assure you that he had enough Concert Party for the excellent Pte. P. C. Voting, 4th Div. Eng. .
! " Sport and Amusement "in one entertainments they have given us. Troop Deck Games, etc.
) hour to satisfy him for the remain- There are already some vague Lieut. Hookway (Y.M.C.A.). i ;
j der of the voyage. However, we rumours about wondrous concerts Cpl. T. M. Fleming. i|
j have managed to spare a little of and revues to come in which our Cpl. G. Towlie.
our time between committee leading lad yis appearing to 2nd A.M. S. W. Smith.
• meetings to running off several wonderful advantage—not to Pte. L. Buttfield.
( programmes of sports and the mention Cuthbert, Clarence, and Pte. E. Sykes, ist A.L.R.O.C.
\ Boxing Committee has given us Claude. Pte. R. S. Solomon, 2nd F.A.B. i
] some highly interesting exhibitions THE BAND. "Some Band "is Pte. N. E. Hudson, 4th Div. TI.
| of the gentle art of self-defence. the oft-heard comment on the deck L/Cpl. Macdonald, A.B.D. 1
'—'—


\Vho is fond of a |
quiet (SamWe 1 /^
\
I;
PRIZE; WINNKRS.
Deck Games.
Cockfight : 5430 T. Sheridan, 10th
Batt. and 5055 Brown, 58th Batt.
(5/- each).
Potato Race : 4781 D. J. Fitz-
gerald, 1 ; 1160 E. Sykes, 2.
Bun and Treacle Race 12276 G.
Dawson, 10th F.Amb.
Sack Race : 32 Sergt. G. H.
Beetson, 44th Batt. and 3735 G.
H. Wade, 32nd Batt.
Bun Fight : 3735 G. H. Wade,
32nd Batt.
Hop, Skip, and Jump : 56038 C.
H. Dale, Ist F.A.B.
Carry Your Chum : R.S.M.
Murphy, 3rd Tun., and 20014 S.
E. Chapman, A.M.C.
Skipping: 21766 E. J. Souter.
Standing Jump : 56038 C. H.
Dale, Ist F.A.B.
Boxing.
PYatherweights : Final 6763 a
Pte. F. W. Fowles, nth Batt.,
defeated 3260 H. Grigoliet, sth
Batt.
Lightweights : Final— 59595 J.
E- F. Stevens, Ist D.A.C., defeated
2059 Gnr. C. W. Nelson 3rd A
Bde.
Welterweights : Final 1160
Sap. E. Sykes, Ist A.L.R.0.C.,
defeated 6006 Art. B. F. Da we,
A.M.T.S.
)
I
I
\
\Vho fond of a flLjfl
(ramble 1 /
f In me the Purser you -see,
i Of athletic form and snowy hair :
i Where there's a gamble and fight to be,
I You can bet your life that I'll be there
i
Middleweights : Final 53569
Pte. R. E. Webb, 53rd Batt. 011
forfeit from 1160 Sap. E. Sykes,
Ist A.L.R.O.C.
Heavyweights : Final— 3222 W.
PL 2nd M.G.8., on forfeit
from W. O. Murphy, 2nd Tun.
Fancy Dress Ball.—Most Original
Costume.
Penglase.
Best Couple.
433 C. Smith, 56th Batt., and
1705 A. F. Heerd, 2nd Pioneers.
Of this '' pitcher " get a fill,
The dial belongs to old Bill,
Who all day doth recline
In a bin near Mess No. 9.
We had just anchored in Table
Bay. There was a slight ground
swell and as the boat had anchored
—the steady roll of the vessel was
puzzling the Digger. He thought
for a time, and then blurted out :
" Strike me pink, this is some boat,
why when she is standing still she
is moving."
The Education Staff of the
Barambah," as is customary in
these days of military abbreviation,
is known officially simply by the
initials, " E.S." The continual
spilling* of ink on the mess tables
by the classes, however, has led
the mess orderlies to christen the
section The 8.8.8.5." Brainy is
the word meant by the middle B.
The words which the other two B's
spell appear with merely a dash
when they must be used in respect-
able papers.
Buzzard is my name,
And Buzz'ard is my style;
As a buzzer I've gained some fame,
I beat all others by a mile.
Very Various Verse.
Tune j "Sweet and Low.
Pligh and Low !
High and Low !
These are the names of the field.
Major Cox !
Major Cox !
Tell us ! Oh, tell us the yield.
Disaster will come in our iDerplexed
state.
Be to us all a good cobber and
mate.
Over us cease to gloat,
Make very clear to us,
All us dopes,
The Tote !
Comforts Fund !
Comforts Fund !
Where, gods, are the goods?
Diggers say !
Diggers know !
Off'cers, sergeants get the cigs,
Thus the Diggers havn't a smoke ;
And they all are mostly broke.
" Aussies " you've slipped, believ-
ing
Bogus yarns,
Latrine reports,
B-a-a-a-a ! ! ! ! !
Souvenir !
Souvenir !
What is the date of your birth ?
Brainy blokes !
Brainy blokes !
See that it is full of mirth.
Immortalise our Bar am bah "
trip,
Show why we never get the pip,
Good old Skip. Wilson
Always cared for us,
Came and danced with us,
He's jake !
I
I
I
\
«
\
I
i
I
)
\
i
I
(
I
I
i
i
i
\
i
i
i
—4
p, ——.— -~


Answers to Correspondents.
BY " HOWvSTHIS."
CORRESPONDENCE HOBOE.
I
I
I
»
I
i
Stevo : Your query as to the phrase Belles Lettres: No, we cannot find
"Too Rightski leaves us m puzzled, o pi s tl es mentioned by "Ninny" in
but interested suspense and doubt. Me touc bi n g scene at the Concert a
have referred the question to the ni hts ago We doubt if they
"B 8.8. Department, but we can ever ex | s ted, and our correspondent is
didly don t expect an y brainy e worried. All oapers have been handed
from that quarter. We trust you g M w lio is inquiring into
agree? the matter.
I
I
I
'«
{
th2 U^h C T? nC but "21." (1) We hav t the services of
think you need fear that the "lady" an authority named P"LeCftTow
at the Albert Docks, London, referred these queries. AY hat he doesn t know
to your unknown family when "Aus- about this you'll never have time ox
a ~\' \x7-ni wqc mine 1 "W© 11TOH6V to I©SIII. ( ) o lIJIVG
If® 1 ctLh that the song should heard of false keels and false bottoms
U ISn L 'the nast for ships, but the name you suggest
have been in the past tense. fo) . a c^4hl lucky man is withheld for
Bottle Kings: (1) From the balance obvious reasons,
sheet you sent us, Ave quite agree that
this could be turned into a profitable Buzy: (1) Yes, there are worse places
business by the introduction of Sand- for boils than where you mention.
1 bagging methods. For the rest Ave But don't forget there are worse places
i refer you to the Canteen Sgt. (2) We than where you are now. You are cre-
suggest "Dealers in Dead Marines" dited with not having heard about the
for a business sign. Picquet on the Medical Comforts just
■j put on. Sorry you slipped. (2) try
! Prid: (1) We are advised by our less Prehistoric red meat. Its too
i l legal luminary that Kings Regs, do heating for the blood,
not expressly forbid picture galleries
i n officers' cabins. Our private opin- Chief Stew.: (1) Your Patent for
|> ion is that you're a lucky dog. (2) hitting time gongs at boxing matches
■j Photos should not be thrown as you ] ias received the Seal. (2) Our Medi-
\ contend out of portholes into bath- ca i Correspondent recommends us to
) rooms. We deeply sympathise Avith advise you" against the practice of eat-
the person you mention. We have ing hot potatoes at the troops' galley;
! heard of such cases. (3) See reply to whilst our Criminal Investigation De-
i "21." (4) We Avill arrange for a partment, under the Police Sgt., warns
"word of encouragement." YOU through us, to avoid the company
' Robbie AY T • (1) We refer vou to of that little chef man who has the
i' answers 1 and 2to "2nd officer." It Military Cross. AYe can say no more.
i covers your case —a good thing too. ~, , , . . Th« position taken
(2) No dairying pursuit The C HMM .The
{ carried on nea:r one ing match you mention was faulty in
Re pre,ni-obably know of < Yas-
i f the
X 1 nA' Al . f nr Qoilnrs As to P an > T was on one nank, but altfiougli
\ y n f d rtl we know vou well enough you had no cover at the time, you were
I vour Commendation well roped in. But the Boxers attack
I We suggest tooth paste for the pur- PP
j pose. 1
(3): Your application for reinstate- Beet: We wish you luck in the Ar-
ment in the position of Back Duster gentine. But Australia will do us,
and Dresser to Miss Cynthia was re- thank you.
j ected. You hold too many qualifier C() . (1) If this man insists on
ons or tlie 1° • sketching you we advise you to grin
The Pay Master: Your description an( q bear it. (2) It is your own busi-
of the horrors of a 7/- pay are too ness, but a good motto is "Never trust
gruesome for publication, but it seems a p a( ] re nor have Patience with him."
to confirm the horrible rumours we
have heard from the usual source. Bunny: Regret to hear you've got
r*< n/r V 7" it, chest eomolaint. But we quite ex-
S.S.M. : Your query on the subject - pu certainly looked f ar f rom
oi growing golden locks has been re- strong on the night of the Fancy Dress
ferred to one of ; our correspondents gall. But we are relieved to know that
known as Baldy. Up to the piese tightness in the chest you've got.
we have received only abusive replies Jf it were . Well, you've a Doc
from him. an( j y, ou should know.
I
\
High and Low Field : This corres-
pondence is now closed.
"4th" : Yes, officers should always
rise when the President enters the
Mess under the circumstances you
mention.
Murph: Yes, we agree that to call r
you "Bluebeard" or "The Aussie Lan-
dru" is bordering 011 libel. However, (
the law at Havre is different on these
questions.
Scotty, Provost Corp.: We believe
with a name like that, you couldn't
be a Norwegian. But how did you /
like being inoculated with the ear j
syringe. ;
Chief officer : (1) Yes, the reference :
to "satisfying a curiosity" is from r
Boccaccio. (2) Ice cream makes a good j
finish at Queens Hotel, Bombay, as s
you say. But its unkind of you to (
mention such things this weather. j
Log: No this position of "Log
Reader for the Tote" is no longer
sought after. The last man on the job
is quite insane and is employed (most
fittingly Ave admit) in counting brain
Avaves in the Education Office (you knoAv
—the "8.8.8. Department"). A soft
cop too.
Van Tromp: Your account of fool-
ing rabbits Avith cayenne pepper so
that they sneeze till they break their i
necks is very interesting, but one or
tAVO on board have seen rabbits before.
We hope you find your back bungaloAv (
complete Avitli treacle tins, billies, and j
your 750,000 head of stock.
Craine: (1) We don't see Avhy you
should be able to lift weights better
and carry more because of a name like
that. But Ave thought the Engineers
never carried anything —let alone the
10th Field Coy. (2) Yes, cranes and
, albatrosses have some points in com-
mon, but Avhy keep company down aft
Avith the albatross looking for dead
meat.
Red Cross: The latest instructions
we have seen, state "inter alia" —Ave
don't know what it means, though it
seems suggestive—that "officers of the
A.1.F., about to embark for Australia,
and on leave in London, for financial
bsuiness reasons, are under no circum-
stances to break the young Susceptible
hearts of lady Secretaries to Red Cross
Commissioners." The last instance of
a tragedy of this kind is full of inci-
dents Avhich are appaling.
Note. —Much correspondence of a
violent and insulting nature has un-
avoidably been held over.
Good Bye-ee.


, O . , " -—
I
I
I
!
i
1
i
i
!
!
i
!
i
#>—
SHIPMATES O'vAINE
— *
I


0
24
Found aboard the "Barambah "
Believed to be the late Hun crew.


.
* \
V
J
- ; ' '
- ■ ■■ - •
■
,'v ' > • , . •
• ;
j
/
• -, ; . '" - ■ " _ ■ i
.
/ .
, f , .
' . V''_; * _' .
f
i \ - .'- "■ '
\v :^: x . . • :_ ■'• - •
*
i
*
.
•:<y •- / * »iv
,
—— -
■ ; :Jte? $>&■&£-' .... - -.


■ ,, -T - -T
»
• /
v'- V .r
- *" '"". ■ '""" ■"■■'. -■' ' "* ■•'■
■ '
.
*;• / . . • • . > ; - .
■ / -. .:■•■ • • '•
- : . ' ' • •
- _
'
/
■ / : , . . : v ' v : -' 1
■
'
p
\ ' • 1
' > i - " . v.. ' - m
V • ' ' ' ■ i
■
1 ' , . ' . - ' 1 . . . /
t . ' ■' ■ ' ' v ■ ; " x ' ' ' - !
'
> r * ■ ' ' . A .- r ' . ■
' ' ■ ' I .
■ WtimslmPA « ■ ' '• ■- ' '-•• ' ' ■ ' ■ ■■'"■' ■ - - : .»••• •. ;-.*•* ' .*• ? ) '• ■■■'■
■■■ / ■■ , g
i
■
'
'
■*
,
,
■ ■ ■ m ■. . , • . ' - < «• v,-- ' >v
.
\
i
} f /', ', ' ■ : • .. V . \ • - ■■
t >..? ■<■
*
'
if •'■ / . ' - . i
V • '
'
$0 1 1 "'■ ■':• .. ■' : > ' M .. ; ■ 1 ' >
.
, i
' : :0^ ,
HORTORS LIMITED. CAPE TOWN.
,
