

THE TOBACCO INDUSTRY
IN AUSTRALIA
W.D. & H.O. WILLS (AUSTRALIA) LIMITED




/ w's/ioy/bz/a
THE COMPANY
W.D. § H-0, Wills (Australia) Limited is the
chief manufacturing subsidiary of Allied Manufact-
uring and Trading Industries Limited (AMATIL),
operating throughout Australia with more than 100
subsidiaries, with substantial holdings in the
printing, packaging, snack foods, frozen foods,
soft drinks, pastoral, hotel and meat industries.
W-D § FLO, Wills (Australia) Limited is the
largest manufacturer and distributor of cigarettes,
tobacco and cigars in Australia, and to date
manufacture has been confined to two areas, Raleigh
Park Manufacturing Branch in Sydney and Virginia
Park Manufacturing Branch in Melbourne. This
latter Branch is situated at 246 East Boundary
Road, East Bentleigh in an attractive garden
setting on a 12 Hectare site.
Virginia Park was officially opened in October
1957, by the then Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies,
but the Company's history in Melbourne goes further
back than that, as W,D. § H.O. Wills began operating
in Melbourne in 1904.
Today the Company employs approximately 1,200
people at Virginia Park, whose working conditions
and amenities compare more than favourably with
those obtainable elsewhere. The Company has a proud
record of long service employees, as each year a
number of employees receive presentations for service
of 20, 30 and 40 years, which is noteworthy evidence
of the Company's record as an employer.




HOW SMOKING BEGAN
It is impossible to say with any degree of
certainty exactly when or where the custom of
smoking tobacco began, but how it first came into
use is a matter if simple deduction.
Most of the primitive religions and cultures
incorporated fire ritual in one form or another -
either the worship of the mystic flame itself, or
its use in propitiating some other god - and an
early refinement of this cult was the feeding of
the fire, at an appropriately dramatic stage of the
ceremony, with various aromatic herbs.
In sub-tropical countries, tobacco, in its wild
state, would naturally be among the plants used.
From that point it is but a small step to imagine
a priest accidently inhaling the smoke from the
smouldering leaves, and so discovering the "magical"
properties of the herb.
It has been established quite definitely that
tobacco was known to the Mayas, a highly cultured
people who flourished six hundred years A.D< One of
their ruined temples contains a remarkably well-
preserved carving of a priest smoking a tube-pipe
(a cast of this carving is in the possession of the
British Museum) and several of their "Picture-
writings", somewhat akin to the Hieroglyphics of
ancient Egypt, carry similar figures in minature.
One particularly human example shows a resigned-
looking individual lying flat on his back with his
pipe pointing directly sky-wards, evidently the
only position in which he was able to keep the
tobacco in the straight flute-like pipe long enough
to enjoy a good smoke.


Anthropologists are o£ the opinion that the
Mayas did not themselves discover the use of tobacco,
but probably inherited the custom from some still
more ancient civilisation. Nevertheless, the Mayas
were to a great extent responsible for the spreading
of the habit in Central America,
Between A,D, 470 and 620, some unknown disaster
drove these people northwards from their great cities
in Southern Mexico to Yucatan, and westwards in the
direction of Oaxaco, From the "New Empire" which they
founded in these regions, their culture soon began to
spread among the neighbouring tribes - the Toltec
people of the Valley of Mexico, themselves immigrants
from the north, being particularly impressed by the
ways of the highly civilised Mayas, From the Toltecs
in turn was derived the great Aztec Empire, which
endured for some five hundred years until its overthrow
by Cortez in 1519,
Long before the rise of the Aztecs, smoking had
ceased to be a prerogative of the priests, and had
become a universal habit; nevertheless, tobacco still
continued to play an important part in religious
ceremonies,
It is believed that early itinerant Mayas were
also responsible for the spreading of the tobacco
habit among the aboriginal Indians still further north,
since excavations of ancient "mount-homes" along the
Mississippi Valley have revealed pipes carved with
effigies of animals and birds which are native to
Central America,
The Indians, too adopted the practice of using
tobacco in religious ceremonies. During storms, the
leaves were thrown into lakes and rivers to pacify the
angry spirits and, in ceremonial smoking even the
filling and lighting of the pipe was carried out in
accordance with the strictest ritual after which the
first smoke was offered to the spirits.


In Pawnee ceremonies, the tobacco was always
packed into the pipe with an enemy arrow - never
with the fingers, lest the Great Spirit should
think that the warrior was offering himself with
the tobacco, and take his life.
So intense was the North American Indians’
belief in the mystical relationship between tobacco
and the super-natural powers that eventually no
ceremonial meeting, religious or otherwise, could
take place without it, and pipes of war or peace,
once smoked, represented sacred bonds which no
power on earth would induce them to break.
In 1492, Columbus, attempting to find a
western sea route to Asia, came ashore at San
Salvadore in the Bahamas, where friendly natives
presented him and his crew with gifts, including
some withered, strange-smelling leaves which the
Spaniards threw away as worthless as soon as they
were out of sight of the natives. A month later,
two of his crew - sent ashore to explore the
interior of the Cuban jungle - reported having
watched the natives kindling certain leaves, which
they kept alight by alternately blowing on them
and inhaling the smoke but still the significance
of the action was misunderstood by the Spaniards
who imagined that the Indians were merely
perfuming themselves with the leaves.
On Columbus’s second voyage his chronicler,
Fra Romano Pape , recorded that the natives of
San Domingo inhaled both smoke and powdered leaves
through a hollow, fork-shaped piece of wood which
fitted into the nostrils, but did not make it
clear that it was tobacco which was used for this
purpose. Oviedo, in-his ’’Tistoria General de las
Indias" published in 1526, was the first author
to describe the custom in detail.


He mentioned, too, that when forked canes
were not obtainable, "a straight reed or hollow can
be used, and this implement is called Tabaco by the
Indians” - emphasising that the name did not refer
to the herb, nor to its effect, as some people had
supposed,.
Rodrigo de Jerez, one of the two men sent by
Columbus to explore the interior of Cuba in 1492,
was the first man to smoke tobacco in Europe, He
was immediately imprisoned by the Inquisition on
a charge of consorting with the Devil, but other
sailors and missionaries returning from expeditions
to the New World continued to spread the habit
among their friends and acquaintances, until within
a short space of time the sight of a man smoking
in the streets of Spain was no longer a cause for
alarm, but a commonplace occurrence.
Tobacco had gained its first foothold in
Europe.


TOBACCO IN AUSTRALIA
By the time the first whites settled in
Australia, smoking was already such an established
western custom that tobacco was listed, along with
food and clothing, as one of the "necessities".
When the first four grants of free land were
allocated, in 1791 - just two years after settlement
began - one of them was the site of the first
experimental tobacco crop to be sown in this country.
While the actual history of the tobacco industry
in Australia is obscure it has been established from
newspaper records that tobacco was being manufactured
in the early 1840's.
The first grower is believed to have been
Phillip Schaeffer, who was born in Germany and went
to America as a mercenary in the War of Independence.
It was here that he may ivell have become acquainted
with the valuable tobacco industries of Maryland
and Virginia, which between them were exporting
50,000 hogsheads of leaf a year to Britain. He later
returned to England and applied for a passage to the
new colony of New South Wales, arriving in Sydney
in June 1790.
In March 1791 Schaeffer was granted 140 acres
of land "on the north side of the creek leading to
Parramatta". He settled on the property in April and
by December had 14 acres under cultivation, one acre
of which was in vines and tobacco.
A convict named Magee, who too, had lived in
America, was also growing tobacco across the river,
but he had no official grant of land.


Although the early crops proved to be stunted
and of poor quality, home production was encouraged
over the next thirty years by such prominent men as
Sir Joseph Banks and Governor Macquarie, But,
probably due to the lack of both suitable fertilizers
and trained farm workers, only the patient Chinese
market gardeners were successful in nurturing a
plot or two beside their rows of vegetables.
These early attempts at growing tobacco were
not to prosper and by the 1840’s all leaf used in
Australia was imported.
During this century, the progress of the
tobacco industry suffered extreme fluctuations, with
all the attendant difficulties and setbacks, until
the 1950’s when production and markets began
steadily to improve, encouraged by Government and
manufacturer support and the stimulus of research
programmes. In 1964, production had reached record
sales of 31,500,000 lb., providing the major
source of supply for the Australian market.
Regularity of production and market support
was seen by growing and manufacturing groups and the
Government to be critical to maintaining a viable
industry. As a result, a 4-year Industry Stabil-
isation Plan was introduced in 1965 under the
administration of a Statutory authority, the
Australian Tobacco Board, created by the Commonwealth
Government o
The Plan has worked very successfully and at
the end of the 4-year period in 1968 was re-
negotiated for a further 5 years.


BOTANY
Tobacco is a member of a big plant family
Solanceae, and is related to the potato, egg-plant,
capsicum, tomato, belladonna and the mandrake (once
believed to be a magical plant and to cry out when
plucked).
Different species of tobacco are to be found
in many parts of"the world, but the most important
commercially is a South American native, from which
the smoking tobaccos of today have been developed.
Under good conditions, this species grows to
a magnificent 1.829 metres in 10 weeks, with 20
or 30 large shiny leaves with a handsome cluster
of pink or red flowers. In some parts of the
world, it is grown as an ornamental garden shrub.
The seeds are prolific and minute. In one
season, a plant can produce 360,000 seeds whose
total weight will be less than 28 grammes. But,
in contrast to this abundance, nature covers each
seed with an extremely hard shell which makes
germination difficult. It is, of course, impossible
to plant such tiny things individually for a
commercial crop, so the 28 grammes of seed required
are watered into a bed 33-41 sq.metres in size and
from this should grow sufficient strong seedlings
to plant out approximately 4 hectares of land.


ENVIRONMENT
Tobacco will grow in almost any warm climate
with an adequate rainfall. But it will produce leaf
of good commercial quality only in certain areas of
Australia which meet a stringent combination of
conditions. These are sandy, well-drained, low
fertility soils, uniform warmth during the growing
period, little winds, no frosts, fairly high
humidity and either an excellent rainfall or regular
irrigation in summer.
The Mareeba-Dimbulah district of northern
Queensland has always been considered ideal for the
production of choice leaf. But good though natural
conditions are, the industry did not approach full
potential until the Tinaroo Dam irrigation system
was constructed in 1959. No longer dependent on rain
for good results, production leapt. In 20 years,
the annual value of the crop has risen from less
than $500,000 to approximately $17,000,000 in 1969.
Queensland farmers poineered many areas before
the ideal districts were narrowed down to Mareeba-
Dimbulah in the north and, in the south, around
Bundaberg, Glasshouse Mountains and Texas.
In N.S.W. the crop has been successfully
cultivated for many years at Ashford and the
Dumaresq-Severn river systems.
Around 1931, many Victorian farmers decided
that tobacco was a crop which might make their
fortunes. After years of hardship and disappoint-
ment, it was realised that only the Buffalo, Ovens,
upper King and upper Kiewa River valleys provide
excellent conditions for commercial crops; and
even within these areas, soil and water conditions
vary, so that farm sites must be chosen with care.




PLANTING AND CULTIVATION
Tobacco demands more hard physical labour
from its growers than almost any other crop. It
will thrive only under certain narrowly defined
conditions and, from seed to maturity, requires
constant care and cultivation. There is no rest
period, for after harvesting, the land should be
soil-tested, so that the farmer can replace, with
carefully measured amounts of correct fertilizers,
the plant food absorbed by the previous crop and
necessary for maximum growth for yet another year.
When the seedlings are about six weeks old,
they are transplanted to land which has been
previously disced, levelled and suitably re-enriched
Mechanical transplanters open furrows and drop a
plant every 457 millimeters, in rows approximately
1 metre apart, with 18,000 seedlings to approxi-
mately 1 Hectare. This is a critical stage; with
their"fine roots disturbed and broken by separation,
the small plants must have water and favourable
weather conditions until re-established. At this
stage, the availability of irrigation will often
be the determining factor in whether or not they
survive,
If all goes well, the crop will mature in 60
days in Queensland and SO days further south,
depending on climatic conditions. From planting
(in August in Queensland and late October/early
November in Victoria) until harvesting is completed,
the growers face weeks of dawn-to-dusk husbandry
and manual work. Among many essential tasks,, there
will be hand-hoeing and cultivating to control weeds
and keep the ground open for maximum water absorp-
tion, protecting the plants from attacks by insects
and other environmental hazards, removing flowers
and suckers, supplementing natural rainfall by
irrigating the rows with moveable spray lines and
picking progressively over a period of weeks.


HARVESTING
Commercially grown tobacco is seldom allowed
to remain in flower. The bud cluster is cut off
and the sideshoots (suckers) pinched out so that
all the vigour of the plant goes into the leaves.
About 18 - 24 of these, each 609 millimeters long
by 381 millimeters wide, should be produced with
a total leaf area of approximately 2 metres per
plant. The crop needs adequate quantities of
water and irrigation must be constantly available
during the whole of the growing period-
When the first leaves show yellow against the
sun and are sticky to touch, it is time to begin
harvesting. Pickers start at the bottom of each
plant and continue up the plant through six or
more harvests as the upper leaves mature.
Leaves from the very bottom of the plant are
called ’’lugs”; those immediately above are
high-quality ’’cutters”; higher still is designated
’’leaf” and the topmost ones are "tips".
Once picked, the leaves must be protected from
direct sunlight and drying winds and loaded into
the curing kilns as quickly as possible in order
to safeguard them from any blemish which could
affect quality.


BREAK-UP OF PRIMARY GRADEB ON THE
TOBACCO PLANT


CURING
Virtually the whole of the Australian crop
is the Virginian variety and this leaf is "flue-
cured” .'
Curing begins immediately after picking. The
leaves are tied in bundles and "strung" on short
sticks either by hand or machine„ The laden sticks
are then suspended on racks in enclosed barns or
kilns where heated air is circulated by up or
down-draught systems. During the first two dags,
the leaf wilts and turns golden yellow in a 32
37°C temperature and 1001 humidity. Then the barn
is progressively opened to ventilation and the
heat is gradually increased to 65 C until the
curing and drying process is complete.
This should take about 6 to 7 days. The leaf
will then be dry and brittle and must be either
steamed or exposed to dewy night air to absorb
sufficient moisture ("condition") to enable it to
be handled from the barn and packed in "bulks"
At this stage, it is left to mature and, like good
wine, to improve in colour and texture until
grading commences.


RESEARCH
Australian tobacco research has been largely
concerned with leaf quality de ve 1 opme nt. , and In
the space of a relatively few years has made
considerable progress in establishing tne techniques
needed to produce high quality crops in the differing
environments found in tobacco growing areas through-
out eastern Australia c
Crop nutrition is a potent factor in deter-
mining the physical and chemical attributes of
tobacco leaf, and research effort, has been directed,
at all centres, to crop nutrient requirements and
soil fertility status. The study of crop rotation
overlaps partly on this field, while the evaluation
of cultural operations such as irrigation, spacing,
and topping, is an integral part of tobacco
agronomy and has by no means escaped attention,
Related studies include curing requirements and
methods, leaf chemistry, and the physiology and
development of the tobacco plant.
A second important field in which much research
activity has taken place is that of tobacco path-
ology, All available artillery was initially
aimed at control of the damaging disease, blue
mould, and the success of this programme has now
ensured that no grower need suffer significant loss
from this source. Recent attention has been turned
to other tobacco diseases such as tobacco mosaic
virus, yellow dwarf, various nematodes, and several
minor bacterial and fungal ailments to which the
crop is prone.
Plant breeding for disease resistance has also
had success, and varieties of acceptable quality
and resistance to the common strain of blue mould
are already available. At the same time the
introduction and testing of new varieties from
traditional overseas sources has continued.


GRADING
In tobacco grading, the leaves are examined
one by one and sorted into bundles of 20 (called
’’hands") according to colour, texture, thickness,
maturity and size,. This is determined by the
position in which they giew on the plant and also
by the individual quality of each leaf, for there
are 118 "quota" grades, varying in price from
82 to 197 cents per half Kilogramme,
Years of training and knowledge are necessary
before a grader can sort leaf with speed and
correctness, and both appraiser and buyer are
dependent on his skill to set a fair price
When all has been graded, the "bands" are
compressed and sewn into hessian bales and
forwarded to Mareeba, Brisbane or Melbourne selling
centres for sale by auction. Each bale contains
leaf of one quality only and weighs between 68
and 90 Kilogrammes,


MANUFACTURING
With all the care that this tiny seed has had
to bring it to the stage where the farmer has sold
the leaf grown from it, the story is only half told.
Now modern technology and highly automated manu-
facturing processes take over.
The leaf, sweet and ripe after curing, still
has to go through another very important phase before
it comes up to the level of taste and aroma demanded
by Australian smokers. This process is called
maturation and this can take up io two years - __
depending on the style of leat - before the desired
peak of mellow quality and flavour is reached.
From the selling floors, the tobacco moves
continuously to the manufacturers’ pre-maturation
processing plants. Here it is put througn a series
of threshers and air separators where the stem is
separated from the leaf (lamina), ihe cleaned
lamina, free of stem, is then conveyed through
tunnel driers and, after cooling and gentle recond-
itioning to very exact moisture contents, is
compressed into cases and put away for its maturation
’’sleep”. The maturation process is so important
that manufacturers carry stocks of leaf years ahead
of the actual time when it will be put into prod-
uction and sold as cigarettes or smoking tooacco.
Approximately fifty million dollars worth of
progressively maturing lamina is held at any one
time against future consumption.
Although this is a technological age, art still
plays its part with science in deciding how best the
different sorts of leaf from different regions (and
valleys and pockets within these regions) should be
blended together to produce those subtle differences
of flavour and aroma which the discriminating smoker
requires.


Once the blending formula has been decided for
a particular brand of cigarette the mature leaf in
its different grades and qualities is brought
together, conditioned with moisture to make it
pliable and then mixed in exact quantities in massive
automated blending lines. From here the blend is
pneumatically fed into storage silos where it evens
out and settles before being cut and dried ready for
the semi-automated, high speed cigarette making
machinery.
These machines produce (complete with filter
and cork tip if required) over 2,000 cigarettes
per minute. Automatic scanners eliminate any faulty
manufacture. Electronic weighing heads ensure that
each cigarette has the exact amount of tobacco in
it for even burning and regular drawing. Still
untouched by hand, the cigarettes move in carriers
to the packing lines, where they are foil-wrapped,
packeted and cartoned ready for delivery to
consumer outlets.
The standards of quality control and hygiene
practised in Australia’s modern cigarette and tobacco
manufacturing plants are meticulous and under constant
supervision and review. Manufacturing specifications
are so exacting and the modern machinery used so
sensitive to irregularities in the feed of cut
tobacco, in its size and moisture content, that
careful monitoring and control is required right
from the stage the leaf is blended and conditioned
to the time the produce is packaged. For this
reason, the manufacturing sections of the plants in
all Australian factories are fully air-conditioned
and the air is kept completely free of dust and other
atmospheric impurities.


Vast sums of national revenue are raised
through Excise charges on the tobacco industry.
Before a grower can produce tobacco he must be
registered with the Customs and Excise Department
and, at every stage of its progress from farm to
brokers* auction floors, to manufactuiers
maturation storages, through the factories and up
to delivery of the finished product from bonded
stores, officers of the Customs and Excise Depart-
ment supervise and keep careful check of the
weights of leaf handled, processed and manufactured
Not only do producers of leaf have to be
registered but the brokers, manufacturers and
bonded stores come under Customs and Excise control
until Excise has been paid on the manufactured
product. Then the cigarettes and smoking
tobaccos are free to move from point to point
throughout the Commonwealth to consumer outlets*
NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA




