

THE OLIVE:
ITS CULTURE AND PRODUCTS
IN THE
SOUTH OF FRANCE AND ITALY.
By WILLIAM B. BOOTHBY, Esq.,
Sheriff of South Australia.








THE OLIVE IN EUROPE.
INTRODUCTION.
The extensive cultivation of the olive in South Australia has been
frequently urged. The similarity of soil and climate between this
Province and Southern Europe is remarked by every traveller who
has visited both places; and this conviction has induced patriotic
colonists like Mr. Davenport, Dr. Schomburgk, Mr. Page, and
others, to endeavor to introduce into South Australia, as a sup-
plementary industry, what in Italy and Southern France forms one
of the principal sources of national wealth. The cultivation of
the olive, and the manufacture of its fruit into oil, form staple
industries in those countries; and there is no reason whatever why
the. industry may not attain in this land fair proportions, if
agriculturists and persons of means would display the same
amount of intelligence and enterprise as have characterised them
with, regard to many other matters affecting their interests and
the interests of the country. The principal difficulty which the
advocates of olive culture have had to contend with hitherto,
has been the supineness with which this important question
has been viewed by those whose interest it should be to give
attention to it. The slow growth of the tree, and the neces-
sarily long time before olive trees become productive, undoubtedly
tax the patience of men whose experience has been to sow,
and harvest, and sell their corn within the limits of a single
year ; but viewed as a supplementary industry—one which can be
carried on concurrent with the usual agricultural operations of the
country, and without materially interfering with them—it is a
matter for surprise that it has not engaged more notice than has
been given to it. It is gratifying to know, however, that the
industry, small as it is, is progressing, and that annually the olive
plantations in the Colony are being increased, and the production
of oil becoming year by year larger.
It will be known that I have given a large amount of attention
to. the subject of olive culture;, and, as Sheriff of the Colony, and
with a view to provide means of useful employment to the short-
sentenced prisoners, it has been my duty to superintend the olive
plantations which have been formed near the Adelaide Gaol. This
being the case, it was matter of much gratification to me, when.


availing myself of a holiday, in the years 1876 and 1877, to visit
the olive countries of Europe, and make myself acquainted with
the processes of olive cultivation and manufacture of oil. Being-
favored, through the kindness of Earl Derby, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, with an open letter of introduction to the British
Consuls on the Continent, I had special advantages for seeing these
processes as carried on in Italy and France ; and the following
notes have been compiled from information gained during my tour.
The information which I gleaned is altogether too voluminous to
be published in full; but from the mass of particulars which I
collected, I have eliminated those points upon which it appeared
to me intending olive cultivators or manufacturers might require
information. If my object has been gained, it will be matter of
sincere pleasure to me that I have been enabled to collect such
information, feeling, as I do, most thoroughly convinced that the
olive should be, and may be, in South Australia, as it is in other
countries, possessing similar characteristics, an important factor in
the sum of national wealth and prosperity.
IN SOUTHERN PRANCE.
The olive is cultivated in France in eleven Departments, covering
an extent of 303,072 acres—
Yar et Alpes Maritimes ..
Hectares of two and
a-half acres each.
57,784
Bouches du BhSne ..
24,475
Gard
10,234
Herault
11,233
Pyrenees Orientales
5,706
Corse
4,430
Yaucluse ..
4,039
Basses Alpes ..
2,395
Drome
2,208
Aude ..
1,204
Ard5elie ..
516
The annual value of the olive oil was estimated by Royer at
20,266,488 francs; value of the marc, 2,509,950 francs; amount
paid in wages in fabricating the oil, 2,509,000 francs. The above
is exclusive of the value of pickled olives.
According to J. Reynaud (du Nirnes):
For
FRANCE Hectolitres (= 22 gallons).
Francs.
f Production, 167.000; @ 140 francs l’hect.
= 17,368,000
In 1847 < Importation 140,000; “ “
= 14,500,000
Exportation, 35,000 ; “ “
= 4,900,000
f Production, 300,000; @ 160 francs l’hcct.
= 48,000.000
In 1860
<! Importation, 196,730; “ “
41,408; “ “
== 27,170,396
= 8,696,825


Varieties of the Olive, Climate, and Soil.
The varieties of the olive, in the South of France, are very
numerous. They differ as to size, shape, direction of the branches,
the color and form of the leaves, fruit, &c. Each district has,
however, adopted insensibly that particular kind the most suited
to the soil or climate; and it is very rare to see more than one or
two varieties cultivated. In France alone, under different names,
more than fifty are specified: many of these, however, I believe to
be one and the same. Climate, soil, and mode of culture change
slightly the character of the olive.
I shall mention first the varieties I saw growing in the Department
of the Var and the Alpes Maritimes. This district alone, as will
be seen on referring to the previous returns, contains nearly one-half
the trees grown in France and is, without doubt, that which, so
far as climate is concerned, approaches nearest to that of South
Australia. In the eastern end of this territory may be seen large
groves of healthy lemons and oranges, which ripen their fruit in
the greatest perfection. The existence of lemon trees in groves,
from twenty to thirty years old, proves that where they grow there
must have been freedom from severe frost for many years. In the
other districts of the South of France, these trees will not flourish
in an equal degree. The olive tree in Gard, Herault, and many
parts of the Bouches du Rhone, are small and dwarfish compared
with those in this Department: here, in the hills,it is allowed to grow
as a forest tree, and reaches a size -which surprises those who
have only seen the stunted specimens of the above districts. The
olive is only destroyed by a frost of 15° or 16° Fahr.; so that it is
not injured, or killed, in the Riviera by exceptional winters. The
young shoots and the fruit are frozen, and irremediably injured,
when the thermometer falls 6° or 7° below the freezing point. At
Mentone it is said that no frost to which this region is exposed,
even once in a century, can injure the tree; so that it goes on
growing indefinitely, and attains its natural period of longevity.
There are olive trees still alive at Monaco, and Cape Martin, and
elsewhere, which are supposed to be coeval with the Roman empire.
The healthy full-grown olive tree is often seen here as large as a
fine oak, but with fewer limbs and more sparse foliage. An evidence
of similarity of climate, and the exceptional warmth of the winters,
is the presence of large Carouba trees growing much the same as
in South Australia. Dr. Bennett says “The Carouba, or Locust
Tree, is really one of the glories of this and of other barren but
warm regions in the south of Europe. It is a beautiful evergreen
tree vigorous, fresh, and graceful, with abundant light-green
foliage. It grows in the most arid and burnt-up places on rocks,
and on mountain sides, where there is scarcely a particle of soil.
Indeed, the Carouba may be considered as an emblem of evergreen
vegetation, and a perfect botanical demonstration. The Carouba
Tree bears beans, in pods, very useful for the feeding of cattle:


these beans have been introduced of late into England for this
purpose. Each tree is said to produce, one year with another,
twenty francs’ worth of fruit. In the almost rainless region on the
south-east of Spain, between Valencia and. Malaga, the Carouba
Tree is one of the principal features of the scanty vegetation. In
many sunburnt scorched districts this tree, with the olive and the
opuntia (or prickly pear), are all but the only products of the. soil.”
Many of the trees and plants that thrive in South Australia are
to be seen growing here in the open air. The Australian gum
tree (Eucalyptus) grows and thrives wherever there is a certain
depth of soil. At Nice various avenues have been formed of the
Eucalyptus globulus, and are all growing with great vigor. It
is being planted in many parts of the Mediterranean shore.
Dr. Bennett, of Mentone, to whom I am indebted for assistance
in my inquiries, spends much time and money in the cultivation
of plants and horticulture, says, “I am now trying to cultivate
some of the flowers belonging to the lower latitudes of the southern
hemisphere of Australia and South America, which bloom. naturally
in winter and which are cultivated in winter conservatories, and I
have found that the winter heat is sufficient to flower many of them
in the open air.” .
“During the summer but little or no ram falls. In some years
the drought lasts without cessation for six or seven months—from
April or May to October or November; hence the absolute necessity
of tanks, for the irrigation of the lemon and orange tiees, which
cannot thrive and bear fruit without irrigation during the. dry
season. The exceptional dryness of the summer along the wwa*
in the South of France, in Spain, and in the Mediterranean
generally, is explained by the fact that this great inland sea lies on
northern limit of that part of the earth’s surface to which, in
physical geography, is given the name of the ‘rainless tract.
This similarity of vegetation indicates similarity of climate,
dryness, summer heat, and winter mildness.
The soil of this territory (Var) is essentially calcareous. Some
of the lower, or secondary hills, are formed of loose, sandstone.
With this exception, the soil may be said to be principally of
limestone formation, with here and there aluminous clays. Where
the sand joins the limestone, and there is a mixture of both, with
a proportion of clay, the olive succeeds very well. Very similar
soil is to be found in many parts of South Australia. I conclude,
therefore, that the varieties of the olive grown in this Department
are more likely to succeed in Australia than those grown m any
other part of the South of France ; and that the mode of planting
here, pruning, and manufacture of oil, would be the best for us to
follow.
In Var and the Maritimes Alpes.
The varieties cultivated in Var and the Maritimes Alpes:—
1. Le Caillet-Olivier de Grasse-Olivier pleureur. —At Nice, it


takes the name of the Neustral , or the Pendouglie: it is called Oliole
at Villefranche, Correggiulo in Tuscany, and Gentile in several
parts of Italy. The peasants here call all other varieties wild ones.
Its branches are long and pendant, somewhat similar to the weeping
willow; fruit black, oblong, of a medium size, more thick at the sum-
mit than at the base; the pulp is less bitter than in other varieties.
It grows well in nearly all kinds of soil, but flourishes least in stony,
sandy soils: strong soil, and situations exposed to the south or
west, are the best. In the deep bottoms it does not succeed so
well. It requires plenty of air and sun to nourish and set the
flowers for fruit. It is very productive, and makes the fine oil of
Nice. It is the tree for the slopes of the hills, where it grows to a
large size. In 1846 this variety, on the report of M. Ronbandi, of
Nice, was recommended for Algiers, after the French Government
had called for reports from Italy, Spain, and the South of France
as to the best kinds for that country; and on the report, the French
Minister of Agriculture issued instructions to plant this with other
varieties in the Government nurseries in Algiers; he also took other
measures for aiding the introduction into Algeria of the most suitable
kinds of olive mills. This fact recommends it strongly for South
Australia. I have brought photographs, of this tree —also samples
of the fruit preserved in bottles, together with specimens of the
leaves gummed on sheets of paper —with a view of ascertaining,
by comparison, if the variety is amongst those growing in the
Colony. [I cannot identify any specimen of this variety in the
Colony.] I noticed at an exhibition in Paris the gold medal was
taken by a manufacturer at Grasse for oil made from this variety.
Steps should be taken to secure it for the Colony.
2. La Blanquette is cultivated at Antibes, and has a preference
for dry soils. The olives are more round, and but slightly
colored at maturity. The leaves are short, the branches vertical;
and the tree itself is not so large as the Caillet. The blossom
is in the form of grapes; the oil is of a lighter color, and more
delicate, but does not keep so well. This olive takes the name of
Blanquetier at Antibes. It is grown but little at Grasse—but was
strongly recommened to me by the cultivators there as being very
suitable for dry plain country, as it stands the heat well. M. Barbe,
the father of the Vice-Consul at Cannes (a great authority on the
cultivation of the olive), has strongly urged, in a pamphlet, the
growing of the Blanquetier; and in the most arid soils, an Italian
variety called Le Calabrais, grown near Bari. I have preserved
specimens of the fruit and leaves.*
3. Le Brun. —Common in the neighborhood of Oullioles, Toulon,
and Hyeres: called so on account of the dark color of the wood.
It dreads dry places: requires good soil and careful culture. It
* Imported by the South Australian Company. Copy of invoice—“ 30 Oliviers Salonneu,
1.7 Oliviers Blanquet, 1 Oliviers Verdale, 2 Oliviers Bouquettier, 1 Oliviers gros Bedonnau.”
Sent here by s. Commodore, Captn. Mathewson, in November, 1844.


takes a long time to grow, but at last reaches to a large size. The
oil is fatty, and used chiefly for manufacturing purposes. Specimens
brought. Not recommended, on account of its slow growth.
4. Le Cayon, plant d'Entrecasteaux, is the original kind of the
River Gene district. It grows very well about Hyeres, where it
is preferred to any other variety. It offers the advantage of a
rapid growth, and is of a hardy nature. The branches are straight
and long, the leaves narrow, the fruit small and oval. It grows
in dry and stoney places, and requires less manure than others.
Its maturity is rapid, and the fruit abundant and of excellent
quality. It requires a frequent pruning. I saw many plantations
of this tree, and the mode of pruning adopted. The tree is
of small size about twelve to fifteen feet high, and may be
planted at distances of about fifteen feet. This, and the first
variety mentioned (the Drooping Olive), yield regularly and
abundantly, produce the finest and most delicate oil, and their
fruit always sells at the best price. These two varieties are specially
alluded to and recommended in the pamphlet published by Mr.
Page in South Australia, in 1871. Mr. Page did good service in
translating portions of M. Riondet’s work, “L’ Olivier.” I made
inquiry relative to the latter at Hyeres, where he lived for many
years as a successful cultivator, and as one whose judgment and
opinion was valued.
5. Miscellaneous Varieties. —Among the olives cultivated in the
Department of Var are found—but not so frequently as the above
—the Saurin (or Picholine) , Verdale , the Curnet d'Espagne (a good
kind for pickling), the Pibie. At Luc they cultivate the Bouquet-
tier, a variety growing well in the Colony, introduced by the South
Australian Company in 1844 : at Lorgnes, the Bern— a variety that
resists the frost well, and grows on soils of middle quality : at Arcs,
the Saurin : at Draguignan, the Curnet. At Mentone, through the
kindness of M. Palmera, the British Vice-Consul, I visited a large
estate of olives belonging to his brother. Ihe varieties grown
were known to him only by the local names La Pignoire, La Neirane
and Espagne. The Pignoire is grown more on the lower slopes west
of Mentone, and produces large crops. La Neirane is the favorite
tree for quality ; it is very similar to the Caillet of Grasse.. The
tree grows to a considerable size, and bears well; the berries are
oblong, and the branches pendant. As to the Espagne , it is inferior
to both, and not grown by the best farmers. M. Palmera gave
me some of the finest oil of the Mentone district of his own making.
His property is all terraced out (vide Figure 1), and covered with
olives, oranges, and lemons. M. Palmera has been engaged in the
oil trade for many years, and gave me some very useful information.
I have endeavoured to preserve specimens of the fruit and leaves of
the above. Mr. Warwick, British A ice-Consul at Nice, kindly took
me over several large olive properties, and pointed out the different
varieties—visiting several mills, and the process of making oil.


He also introduced me to M. L’Abbe Montelivo, of Nice,.who is
admitted to be one of the best authorities on botanical subjects in
the district. This gentleman afforded the greatest assistance, and
took the trouble to write out for me a description of the best
varieties. I wish to make this acknowledgment of the attention
and assistance rendered me by these gentlemen.
Bouches du Rhòe.
The following varieties are cultivated in this department: —
1. Cayane de Marseille—Plant de Figaniere. —The leaves and
wood are light-colored; the boughs are slender, long, and often
directed towards the ground. Ihe fruit is early, large, and plump,
the oil fine and abundant. It suits high ground and light soil, hut
is very sensitive to the frost.
2. Aglandaou—Plant d’Aiv—Pounchude— Fruit somewhat like
an acorn, from which it takes the name Agland. Ibis is the variety
from which the celebrated olive oil of Aix is made. Its leases are
slightly bulged towards the centre, and are of a deep green color
above ; the wood is grey, with a yellow tinge ; the shoots are short,
the branches bushy. The berry is oval, covered with a fine skin
spotted with small white points up to the time of its maturity; at
this period the fruit turns of a yellowish hue, then it is veined with
a violet color, and takes this last tint ai the time of gathering. Ihe
olives are disposed like grapes to the number of five, or six, and
sometimes more. The fruit ripens late, dhey plant sixty trees to
the acre. It loves dry places of a gravelly nature, and resists well
the frost. The tree is not the most productive ; but its oil has a
remarkable flavor, and is of a fine quality. It occupies the fiist
rank among the olives of the Bouches du Rhone, and is called
by Couture, “Le grand olivier franc.”
3. Plant de Salon (“ Olea media oblong a fructu corni ,” called
Sergie by the Homans) — Corniaou. —lhe berry is of a medium size,
the end terminating in a point placed on one side. The leaves are
few, slight, and pointed. Around Saint Ghamas, Marseilles,
Salon it is very abundant. It resembles the weeping willow. The
lant du Salon and the Olivier de Grasse —or the Pleureur— are
classed as being one and the same kind by Signor G. Cappi. It
produces in great abundance a fine oil, and bears fruit every other
year. Planted even in a dry soil it does not fail to bear fruit.
4. Saurine —Plant Martigan — Vermillau. Pickling Olive
Saunne , named thus on account of its affection of the sea-coast,
far from which it does not succeed. In rich soil it grows to a
large size ; but in light dry soils, and away from the influence
of the sea breezes, it languishes and produces but little. It is
grown chiefly about Berre, St. Cliamas. dhe fruit is large, oral,
oblong, and nearly black at maturity. It has the preference for
pickling. It bears large quantities of berries. It averages in good
soil, when full-grown, twenty-two gallons of fruit. Couture


mentions one that gave twenty-nine “enimes d’ olives.” In
several parts of Provence, Couture says, “they do not know
this kind, but give it the name of the Verdale, or the Plant de Salon.
It is easy to distinguish these two kinds from the first: the Saurine
is twice as large as either of the two others. Its branches point
directly upwards, but when charged with fruit bend towards the
ground. Quite ripe it gives much oil, of a quality less fine and less
perfumed than the Aylandaou. It has one drawback —it is the
slowest in its growth of any kind. Couture called this variety
“ The King of the Olives.”
5. Verdale —Oulive pounchude — Verdaou Pourridale Olia
viridula media rotunda —lt is less sensitive to frost than any
variety, and on this account is cultivated in many places. It is
well known in the Pyrenees Orientates. The fruit is large,
round, and pulpy: the oil is of medium quality. The fruit
often falls to the ground before being ripe. It is the very re-
markable deep green of its foliage that gives to it the name of
Verdale. It is cultivated in Yaucluse, and in Herault: it is there
described as being one of the most robust the trees being small,
with straight stems. The berries are of a deep red at maturity ;
leaves narrow and short, and of a greyish green. It is called the
Berdal in the Pyrenees Orientales, where it grows on the light
soil of the plains, as also on the hill sides. Left to itself, it takes
the form of a goblet, and is easily pruned. The shoots and
branches, which are long, are slightly inclined. The vigor of
its vegetation and its large crops make up for any slight inferiority
in the price of the oil. It is one of the smallest varieties culti-
vated. M. Belleval says that on a surface which should he occupied
by fifty of the ordinary kind, you may put eighty Verdales. It is
thought by Mr. Davenport to he growing in South Australia :
imported by the South Australian Company in 1844.
MULTIPLICATION OF OLIVE TREES.
1. By cuttings.— The Romans adopted the method which the
French call “le bouturage” propagation by cuttings of branches.
To-day this method is still practised in certain localities in Italy:
in Provence they have abandoned the plan as being too uncertain.
The Abbe Rozier says that parts of branches of young and fresh
wood, planted vertically in new ground, take sometimes; but he
adds, “ I have lost more than I have saved.” Pieces of one-inch
diameter, and ten or twelve inches long, young and fresh, placed
horizontally and covered with four inches of earth, have succeeded
better. They should be planted early in the spring. (Vide
Figure 5.)
2. By seed. —Olive trees grown from seed have always a long
pivot and a number of lateral roots —a very straight smooth stem,
which shows the vigour of the plant; while plants raised in any
other way have not these advantages. Another important con-


sideration is that from the seed commences a life, while the others
are, so to speak, only the extension of the life of the trees from
which they may have been taken. Two origins so different cannot
fail to have a great influence on the vigour of the trees.
In 1872, the Congress of Italian Agriculturists meeting at Bari,
arrived at the following conclusion: —“That persons be recom-
mended to raise their olive trees from seed, in preference to any
other method—either from plants growing wild, or from seed grown
in nurseries.”
In 1874, at a Congress meeting at Chiavari, the same preference
was shown. “ Sow in rows, in fresh ground well prepared —not
too wet —and sheltered from the wind, the stones without pulp,
and gently bruised. Water as required. At the third year place
them out in the nursery, and graft them at the sixth, preferring the
methode de I’anneau.”
M. Laure, a distinguished agriculturist at Toulon, adopted
the following plan :—“ When it it is desired to multiply the
olive by sowing the stones, you must take care to use only
such as have thoroughly ripened; otherwise they will not germi-
nate. I put the olives in a tub with a little water. After
remaining sufficiently long to decompose the pulp, and facilitate
its removal, I place the olives on a flat stone, and rub over
them several times a heavy brick, which detaches the whole ot
the pulp; then throw the whole into water, and the stones
fall to the bottom and the pulp floats at the top. I then put
them in a caustic lye of lime and ashes. The stones are then
in a state to be sown. The olives are not thoroughly ripe until the
end of the winter. M. Laure does not sow these stones immediately
after they have come from the tye ; he finds it more advantageous
to keep them about eighteen inches under the ground all the
summer—sheltered from light and heat, and plant them out in
autumn.”
M. de Sartous, near Grasse, places the olives for several days in
diluted sulphuric acid—the oil disappears, the wood is rendered
soft, and the seed is not difficult to raise.
Riondet says:—“ Feed domestic birds in cages, and keep the
stones for sowing, is the least trouble.”
The wild olives, common in the woods from Toulou to
Antibes, Nice, and Genes, spring from seed scattered principally
by a kind of thrush, very fond of the berries, and which leaves the
mountains in the winter for the olive regions. They find often in
the gizzard of one of these birds five or six stones peifectly
deprived of the pulp. Those which are too hard to be digested,
fall to the ground and germinate. At Nice, M. Bremond has
grown, in a few years, large nurseries of olives from these young
wild plants, which children have gathered for him at fifty cents the
hundred. These he grafts after a year, and plants out at six years.
Abbe Jamel say T s—“ Take the seed from trees that have not been


grafted—the largest and best kinds, and having taken off the pulp,
sow them in rows at a slight depth, leaving a space of 2 inches
between each stone, and water them occasionally during the first
two years. Choose the olives of the largest variety, and quite ripe,
because in these the kernel is larger and more sound.”
The berries of grafted trees, as to their stones, follow the nature
of the trunk which nourished them, and only wild varieties would
be the result; but there is no fear that an olive sprung from a good
ungrafted tree can produce a wild olive. Abbe Jamel says, “It
will grow varieties of the same kind.” The plants, if carefully
tended and occasionally watered, will give good sound young trees
for transplanting at the end of ten years. This space of time should
not be discouraging. All nursery olive plants should be left to
themselves for the first three years; “ Menez le lentementpour le
faire aller vite,” is an old saying with regard to the olive.
3. By souchets. —The undergound portion of the olive tree is
composed of two parts, quite distinct—the roots, properly so
called, and which do not shoot of themselves, and the founda-
tions (or souche ) formed of a a ligneous mass of tubercles, from
which spring the roots in one direction, and the stem in another.
The portions split from this are called souchets , and produce the
same kind of tree. M. Couture says : —“ I take them from the
trees which, at the time of pruning, I determine to take up. An
old tree is utilized in this way and furnishes a large number.”
The souchets ought to be taken from an olive tree that has
never been grafted, otherwise wild varieties will only be the result.
These pieces of the souche ought to be sufficiently large to have
in them plenty of sap to sustain the growth of the plant; a piece
as large as the palm of the hand is the best size, and about 1|- inch
thick. The ground should be well dug, and prepared for planting
in rows kept about 3 feet asunder. They should be planted in
the trenches about 18 inches apart, with the bark uppermost.
The earth must he pressed above, below, and around the souche ,
and then covered with 4 inches of earth. When planted, there
should be left about 4 inches of the trench not filled in with earth,
which should be covered or filled up with chopped straw, to shield
the young shoots from the fierce heat of the summer. The ground
around the plants must be kept free from weeds, by hoeing at the
commencement of winter, in the spring, and in the summer—care
being taken not to approach too near the plant. A little manure
should be given in two years time, and slight watering to keep them
fresh during the summer time. The nurseries planted with souchets
will give, when they have not been watered, young trees for
transplanting at the end of nine or ten years. A souche of the
size of the palm of the hand will make probably many shoots, of
which only two should be allowed to grow at the pruning at the
end of three years.
Pruning the Young Plant . —With a young plant that does


not require grafting the first care when the roots are well
developed is to form the head of the tree, by cutting off the lateral
branches; during the first five years these only are suppressed,
At the end of the fifth year it is time to determine the height
of the trunk : this depends a good deal on the kind grown, and
the nature of the soil where the trees are to be put. For deej)
rich soils, one to one-and a-half yards; in dry soils, or exposed
to wind, one yard. Six or eight branches are left to form the
head. Seek to give the tree a spherical or vase form, to offer
the most surface to the sun. It is not in a single year that this
result is obtained; and the plant by some is trained until its
twelfth year before it is fit to be transplanted.
The young plant shown in Fig. 6 is, in the spring, pruned down
to C. The four branches in the form of a cross underneath
develop in the following year several shoots, as in Fig. 7. They
are cut again at C at the end of the branches of the second growth,
and the shoot A then grows in a more vertical direction, and the
shoots B and D are shortened. At the third spring, each of the four
branches appear as shown in Fig 8. Then if we prune at C, Fig.
9 will indicate the result obtained by the successive prunings at the
fourth spring. The suppression of the branches B and C, and the
shortening of the branch A, gives more vigor to the branch D, and
makes it grow more vertical. We thus arrive at the desired form.
The young branches that spring in the form of a cross on the
more vigorous branches bear only wood buds ; the others, -which
are weaker, bear fruit buds on their -whole length, and burst into
blossom at the spring of the second year, 'i he latter never blossom
again in the same place, but the shoot extends itself and forces two
lateral ones. These new shoots bear fruit the following spring—
and so on. It must, therefore, be always borne in mind that the
olive bears only on the two-year-old wood.
If the new shoots are formed every year, the olive will bear
annually; but in years of good crops, the sap employed to nourish
the fruit only produces a number of very diminutive young shoots,
and the next crop is a short one. The pruning ought to favor
the growth of young lateral shoots, either by shortening the
terminal ones, suppressing the gourmands shoots, or by reducing—
in a certain proportion each year—the fruit-bearing shoots if we
wish for a crop every year. The shortening of a branch is made
immediately above an outside bud, in an oblique direction; the
interior one being suppressed. The young shoots springing at the
foot of the tree must be constantly cut off. Recollect that the up-
right branches make most wood, and the longitudinal, or pendent,
the most fruit.
Grafting. The olive can be grafted in several ways ; two are the
most appropriate crown and shield grafting. In crown grafting
the operation is performed when the buds are grown a third of an
inch long. Cut horizontally the head of the stock or the branches


only of the second or third order, according to the age of the tree,
at about eighteen inches from their spring. Then cut through the’
bark to the wood in a vertical line about two and three-quarter
inches long. Cut the lower part of the graft in a pointed form,
with a notch on the upper part. Raise the bark of the stock and
introduce the graft between the bark and the wood ; surround
with a bandage, and cover with mastic. This sort of grafting is
used for old olive trees. If you use more than one, leave a clear
space of three inches between each.
In Budding or Shield Grafting .—The piece cut from the bark
to form the graft is most frequently in the form of a shield. This
piece of bark must have upon it, near its centre, an eye or bud.
These giafts are especially used for young stocks or branches from
one to four years of age, having thin, smooth, and tender bark.
Shield grafting, with a dormant bud, is practised towards the end
of the summer, according to the vegetation of the subject. The
head of the stock must not be cut off until the following spring
—when it will be seen whether the graft bud has been successful
The following are the principal points to be attended to :
Ist. Cut from the olive tree a branch having some leaves or eyes
at its base, or buds well constituted. Take off the leaves, leaving
only a small piece of the stem of one of them to hold the shield
by between the fingers. Keep the grafts or buds when thus
prepared in a dark, cold, and damp place until the time that they
are required for placing upon the stock.
2nd. Make an incision in the form of the letter "]", penetrating
to the wood, and separate with the spatula the two lips of the
bark towards the top.
3rd. Separate the shield from its branch in such a manner as to
take off with the bark the smallest possible portion of the wood
preserving, in every case, the green tissue behind the bud—unless
this be attended to, the success of the graft is impossible.
4th. Slip in this shield between the bark and the wood by means
of the incision, then bring the edges of the bark together by means
of a ligature, in such a manner that the base of the bud press
closely to the wood of the stock—this is an essential point.
sth. Some time after budding look at the buds, and slacken the
bandages if they have become too tight.
6th. On the arrival of spring, if the buds have taken effect,
cut off the stem or branches of the subject about three inches
above the bud. This is done to stimulate the development of the
bud.
Oh. Cut the head of the subject grafted the following winter.
The first, or crown grafting, is employed on the large trees from
the Esterel to Genes. In Provence, Avignon, and Gard, shield
grafting is preferred. At Grasse they graft the young trees at the
age of five or six years—in spring time when the sap mounts,
and when the bark is easily detached. They choose the graft from


the gourmands shoots of two years old—wood well grown, smooth
bark ; selecting those in which the eyes are well marked. Follow-
ing the form of the branch, or the trunk if on the trunk, they
place two scions with advantage. The scions having been placed,
the whole is enveloped with clay, confined with a bandage. The
best time is the spring, when the trees are already large and full of
branches; they leave some branches ungrafted as ducts for the
sap, when the accumulation of it over the shoots placed in the
crown would be hurtful. At Grasse they call these branches
des respirails ; they are cut off or grafted the following year.
In Bouche-du-Rhone shield grafting is the most common; they
call it now, as in the time of Columelle, greffe d V emplatre.
Grafting upon very young trees is rarely profitable—not from any
difficulty in the process, but because as the roots of this tree remain
a long time before taking hold of the soil an abnormal disturbance
of the sap occurs, and the tree is sometimes condemned to a
stunted growth. The Abbe Jamet says : —“I never graft before the
sixth year. At the time of gathering, I accompany the verger.
I examine the trees, and mark those of which the shape, the
fruitfulness, the variety, &c., does not suit me. The year following,
fifteen or twenty days after flowering, I place tw r o shields upon
each of the branches forming the head of the tree. Above the
graft I make a double circular incision, and take off the bark
between both. The end of this incision is to stop the ascending
sap, and to bring it to the shoot and facilitate its starting.”
The best time for winter pruning is that which follows frosty
weather, and which precedes the first movement of vegetation.
By early pruning the sap is made to act upon the buds unfavor-
ably situated upon the tree—brings them out, and also develops
latent buds upon the old wood. We are thus, by early pruning,
enabled to prevent the tree being covered with naked stems. We
may operate with advantage by waiting even to the period when
the shoots begin to lengthen upon trees that possess too much vigour,
and which would not otherwise be easily put into a fruit-bearing
condition. Grafting in wet weather the tree is likely to run ; a fine
day in spring the best. The new shoots are generally not touched
until the year following the lopping of the branch after the graft has
taken. Manured and placed in good earth, the olive requires only
three years to form after having been grafted.
The grafts should be taken from the part of the tree opposite
the mid-day sun. They are chosen from the shoot that would
bear fruit the following year. Those who graft the young tree
upon the trunk and not upon the mother branches take the scions
from the shoots which are about to flower.
Transplanting . —ln Provence this is generally done in association
with the vineyard. It offers the great advantages of getting some
return from the soil during the lengthened youth of this tree, which
when it has grown to a sufficient size, the vine plot commences to


age, and, disappearing by degrees, leaves the olive sole occupant
of the soil. “It is thus,” adds M. Conture, “ that the wise
father procures for his children fine olive trees nearly without
expense to himself, and without depriving himself of his own
crop.” The soil which suits the vine is also good for the olive—“ My
advice [Abbe Jamet] is to marry the olive and the vine.” This is
what is seen throughout the greater part of Italy: there they say
it does not prosper in celibacy. The deep soils can support both
the olive and the vine. In such case it is necessary to reserve
around the olive, for manuring and digging (or ploughing), a space
of ground the diameter of which is equal to that of the periphery
formed by the branches of the description cultivated. In a poor
soil, a single row of vines should be planted between two rows of
olives. When the olives are pruned small, eighteen feet every
way is considered a proper distance to plant them. At Grasse,
where the trees are larger, they are planted twenty-five to
thirty-five feet apart—the distance depending on the kind of tree,
the fertility of the soil, and the moisture of the climate. They
should not be allowed to approach each other, but be well exposed
to the sun and air.
Where the tree is to stand, a hole should be dug about a yard
deep, and a yard and a-half square ; and left during the winter
exposed to the atmosphere. Then, in the spring, place the plant
as near the surface as you can ; taking care to put in each hole a
supply of good manure. Care should be exercised in selecting those
for transplanting ; the largest are not always the best. Care must
be taken about the roots—-without souche the tree is a long time
forming itself. When it is too thick there is not sufficient harmony
between the branches and the roots, and the vegetation of the tree
suffers. The plants are better if they have been raised in a
nursery, as the multiplicity of roots enables them to stand a rough
life in the dry situations they may be transplanted to.
They transplant ordinarily at the end of winter. Place the tree
in the ground in the same position relative to the mid-day sun as
it had in the nursery. Four inches of earth above the root is
sufficient; where the soil is very dry nine inches. The hole
having been previously filled up three-quarters, place the tree in
the centre, and cover little by little all the roots with fine earth;
pressing it down with the foot, breaking the clods, taking out the
stones, and filling in all the void places. Shake the tree from time
to time to give it a good bed. Fill in the hole ; leaving around the
stem a small basin shaped hole to receive the rains. It is rare to
water a new plantation, but where there is unusual dryness it is
very useful to aid the first vegetation of the plant. To manure at
planting is good, when there is moisture. In Italy they make a
little furrow round the young trees to collect the rain water. In
general, trees transplanted from good to indifferent soils do not
succeed, but the contrary plan is the best. The olive is an exception.


The souche acts as a reservoir, storing the sap necessary for the
life of the tree, and is not sensibly affected by transplanting. An
olive taken from a rich deep soil, and placed in a more meagre one
will flourish perfectly, provided that it is planted properly and is
supplied with suitable manures according to the nature of the soil.
Tree Pruning. —The olive should be pruned every two years.
At Grasse they allow their trees to grow naturally—cutting out the
close wood, and admitting air and light into the centre. Towards
Hyeres, Aix, and Marseilles they are much reduced in size by
pruning, and cut to a globular shape; in some places—to the form of
an orange, in others quite flat in the crown. In Spain they cut
off a mother branch every five or six years, and in the intervals
content themselves with simply keeping the tree open and cutting
out any dead wood. By this method (practised to day in Roussillon)
the trees renew themselves gradually, and are kept in a state of
great production.
The olive produces fruit on two years’ old wood only. This
point the pruner should always bear in mind, and his efforts directed
to multiply these shoots to increase production.
The pruning will have to be varied with the kind cultivated.
The Verdale will bear much pruning ; as also the Aglandaou of
Aix. The Saurin but little. Aim to distribute the sap equally
throughout; keep the extension of branches within proper limits ;
give air to the interior, and carry the vegetation to the
periphery. Take out the dead wood and fruitless branches
called gourmands, or “ teta'ires ” by the French peasants —because
they say they absorb the oil of the olive. Cut out those parts
of the tree that are not sound or subject to canker. Do not
allow the branches to cross each other; favor new shoots by
lateral pruning when there are vacant places to fill. In Provence,
contrary to the custom elsewhere, they prune their trees each year,
keeping them near the ground. This practice, besides rendering
the fruit more abundant and fine, permits a more careful gathering
by hand. The trees thus treated will not last so long it is true,
but this inconvenience is largely compensated by the other advan-
tages attending this mode of pruning.
The olive has precisely the same mode of vegetation as the
peach, with this difference only, that new shoots are easily formed
from old wood.
Treatment of the Tree and Soil.
After the planting of the olive, its future development depends
upon the care and intelligence expended in its treatment. Columelle
says its fruits are imiltiplied in proportion to the labor expended on
it. For a long time experience has shown that to maintain the olive
trees in a good state, and with increasing crops, it is necessary to
dig or plough under them—manure, prune, and sometimes even to
irrigate them.
B


1. The Soil—Labor.—ln a dry soil frequent ploughings are
necessary. Get rid of parasites that wither the roots, and let air to
the soil, and preserve its freshness by frequent digging. This is
the most assured method of obtaining an active vegetation and good
crops. If the olives are planted in rows, the single horse plough may
he used with advantage. I saw this used largely about Cannes and
Hyeres—care being taken not to approach too closely to the trees.
Digging is then resorted to at the foot of the trees. At Grasse,
Nice, and in some parts of the Riviera, the soil is so covered with
vines, figs, and olives that it is impossible to use the plough. The
digging is then done in December or January, with manuie ; and
another in spring before the arrival of hot weather. All recom-
mend frequent stirring of the ground. The fork for the olive was
considered by Couture the best instrument to use ; it stirs suffi-
ciently the ground, and does little or no injury to the roots.
At the time of the first digging the shoots at the foot of the tree
must be suppressed.
2. Manures. —Without manure the olive gives but small crops
of berries. This is so well known in the districts where oil is the
chief production, that the greatest care is taken of anything that
can be used as a fertilizer of the soil. The proprietors at Grasse
and Nice not only use manure from the stables, but collect all the
decayed vegetable matters and nightsoil they can find. Old rags
and shoes, bones, hoofs, guano, fowl dung, are excellent manures.
Vegetable matters decomposed are used. At Grasse, the manures
most approved are old woollen rags and bone dust eight kilos
of the latter suffice for a medium sized tree for four years. Sheep
dung is excellent, but lasts only two years. The manure is placed in
a hole or trench around the tree, at the distance of two yards
or less, according to the size. The water used for soaking flax in
is an excellent manure ; also the water and refuse matter fiom the
oil mills. When the olives are planted a sufficient distance apart,
they make use largely of green manures. They sow during the
first rains in autumn plants of rapid winter growth as beans,
lupins, and vetches—which, in the spring, they bury at the foot of
the trees, thus affording to the olives a manure procured without
transport, and at small expense, and returning to the soil a large
amount of moisture, tlhese manures are absolutely necessaiy in so
dry a climate as South Australia, and the practice of using them
will ensure more certain crops If not manured largely, Riondet
says it would be better to pull them up.
Whatever may be the nature of the manure, it is important not
to place it at the foot of the trees, but bury it under the periphery
at a slight depth, that the rains may dissolve it, and. the roots
w r hich are near the surface nourish themselves. Manures that
decompose rapidly ought to be employed at the time of the year
that the tree starts into vegetation.
Signor Cappi, writing of Italy, strongly recommends vegetable


manure, growing broad beans and lupins especially for dry
climates ; and adds, “It is a matter of absolute necessity to manure
the olive, under the penalty of losing all produce if abandoned to
itself, and remembering also that the produce will always be in pro-
portion to the manure applied.”
Supplementary Culture.
The growth of the olive being so slow, it is usual during the youth
of the tree to raise other crops off the same land. Where the
olives grow to a large size, and are planted near to each other, or
in places where the ground is poor, other crops are not usually
grown. With these two exceptions, the ground under the trees is
generally utilized. At Grasse, Nice, and the Riviere de Genes, they
associate together the olive and the fig, and other fruit trees; as
also the vine. In such cases the trees are planted in rows, about
20 feet apart, and they sow one year beans or maize, and the other
corn.. In many parts the vine is planted. Many instances can he
seen in Tuscany of olive trees cultivated with vines (vide Fig.
11). The Inspector General of the Government Plantations of
France says:—“ The system could not be sufficiently applauded,
both because, in many years of failure, all the interest of the
capital in the ground would not he lost, and because the olive trees
would benefit from the earth given'to the other plants ; and even
because the more distant the trees are planted in the rows, the
more are they loaded with fruit, and pay better.” “This culture,”
Signor Cappi says, “may very well exist, and has been used in
various provinces in Italy, especially in vast plains, with excellent
results. On plains they should be planted twenty-five feet apart,
and not less than fifty feet between the rows if vines are cultivated.
Experience, some say, has shown that the olive cultivated alone in
rich soil grows vigourously; makes each year a great number of
new shoots, but gives little fruit - the sap, being too active to fix the
blossom, is carried to' the extremities, and the flower falls. To
obtain quickly good trees, one should never sow underneath, but
however, afterwards, to get good fruit it is advantageous to do
so ; but only then the year of the crop. Thus one should prune,
manure, and cultivate to force shoots or young wood to bear fruit.
The season following sow under the trees to moderate the flow of
the sap, stay the growth of wood, and cause the blossom to set.
In an indifferent soil this would be hurtful, as there is never an
excess of vegetation. However, in similar conditions, in place of
sowing an exhausting cereal, they sow vegetables—beans, lupins,
peas, &c. Green crops, as manure, are often dug in, and the
olive thus, during summer, finds sufficient subsistence to help it
to bring a crop to maturity.”
In growing other crops with the olive, it receives benefit from
the frequent labor that the ground receives in their cultivation, as
it loves to vegetate in a soil often stirred and largely manured.


In very dry soils it is a good plan to make a hole near the foot
of each tree —into which is led by small channels the surplus rains
-—to enable the moisture to penetrate to the deepest roots.
Gathering the Olives, &c.
Upon the shores of the Mediterranean, at Cannes, at Genes, the
olive flowers towards the middle or the end of April, according to
the situation. At Grasse, they say it is ordinarily in the month of
May. The blossom lasts about five days. A moderate wind at
this time is very favorable—dry weather or prolonged humidity
being otherwise. The crop is always favored by rains in March or
April. Rains in the middle of summer are of great utility to this
tree. Towards the end of September the olive berry is well formed;
of a good green colour, the skin fine and smooth ; the pulp firm,
and very bitter. According to the varieties, the olive berries
become successively yellow, red, and then black. The formation
of the oil is more or less rapid. In the Caillet, or weeping variety,
at Grasse, or the Nostrale of Nice, the olive is perfectly ripe in the
months of March, April, and May; whilst the Angladaou of Aix
ought to be gathered at the end of November. In warm countries
the olive remains a long time on the tree. At Grasse they say the
olive is ripe when, on being pressed gently between the fingers, a
drop of oil exudes. The gathering commences in the Departments
of the Var and the Alpes Maritimes when the berries fall naturally
from the tree. The first about October, when a few only are found.
They continue thus to pick up the olives blown down, which are all
more or less sound, until the end of January, when they commence
to knock them off with flexible rods. At Nice this is often deferred
until March. Knocking fruit down with rods is by many strongly
condemned, for, whatever precaution is taken, the young shoots
which would bear fruit the next year are injured. At Grasse,
however, the frees are so large that it would be almost impossible
to gather the berries in any other way.
The gathering of olives is done by the day, or the task. At
Grasse, at Nice, and in the district of the River Genes, where the
properties are subdivided, the cultivator with his family, and a little
aid when pressed, ordinarily suffice to gt in the crop. A woman
working all day can gather five or six pannanx—from eighty to one
hundred litres, or from 18 to 22 gallons—Avhen the crop is very
good; if light, fifty litres, or 11 gallons. On large properties
labor has to be engaged.
The olives are then put into sacks, and taken directly to the
mill and deposited in cool dry places, in layers of forty to fifty
thick. Thus placed, some say they ought to be turned over
every day to prevent fermentation setting in—at Lucca I was
strongly advised against this pra tice. At Hyeres I saw the
sacks of olives shot into bins to the depth of 2ft. 6in., and
after being covered with a mat of Esparto grass the workman got


in and stamped the mass down with his feet to exclude the air and
prevent it heating. It is said that this practice—adopted as well
in many parts of Var —is a bad one, that the fermentation is not
thus stopped, and that the oil is had. At Grasse and Aix, where
they make the best types of the oil of the South of France, they
are against this practice.
The Italians say the olives should be gathered when the ground
is dry—freed from leaves, and not bruised or soiled; care being
taken that they are uniformly ripe, picking out the damaged ones:
transported in baskets, not in sacks, to avoid fermentation; and
afterwards stored in thin layers in a dry and airy barn.
Olives gathered late produce the white oil so much sought after
by those who regard sight more than palate. This oil does not
keep well. The general consumers prefer the amber-colored oils,
such as the fine Tuscany and those made in the Riviera. It has
been ascertained from experiments that an equal quantity
of olives gathered in the autumn and in winter give almost the
same quantity of oil—the difference is about ore per cent, only; but
the quality of the oil made from olives gathered in the autumn is
better, both for colour and taste.
As a general rule, more oil is obtained from medium-sized berries
of a spherical form than from the pointed kinds the latter giving
very little oil. The best are those that are larger at the summit,
or end of the berry, than at the stem ( vide Figs. 13 and 14).
Those used for pickling contain less oil, in proportion to their size.
They say in Italy that the pulp should weigh at least three times
as much as the stone the oil not less in quantity than the tenth
part of the olive.
Fabrication of the Oil.
In the South of France, at Grasse, and the whole of the River
Genes District, the oil is of the type called “Z’ Huile douce,” but
at Aix it has the flavor of the fruit. I give the mode of manufacture
for each separately :
Huile de Grasse. —Grasse is situated in the hill country about
eighteen miles from Cannes. There are over forty oil mills situate
on the River Fons. Grasse is, without doubt, tbe region beyond
all others where the olive thrives best. Here too may be seen
growing, in perfection, the orange and lemon, and the whole tribe
of perfume plants.
The mill is composed of a circular basin of stone, of about
3 feet deep, and about 7 feet in diameter. A stone, 6 feet in dia-
meter and 10 inches in thickness, is placed vertically in this basin,
and is put in revolution by a stout upright piece of timber to which
it is affixed, and turns in pivots by power communicated through
wheelwork from the waterwheel. In the same part of the mill
are seen the presses: most frequently the screws are of w r ood,
although iron is generally admitted to be better. These are


put in motion by a simple lever, or bar, of several yards in
length. A method so imperfect for expressing oil would never be
persisted in if the interest of the mill owner was not directly opposed
to that of the proprietor whose olives are being crushed. At Grasse
the mill owner looks to his remuneration chiefly from the marc
which is left with him, and not merely to the amount—which is
slight—paid for the pressing. At Nice the proprietor pays nothing;
often they pay him to send his berries, or they grind his wheat free
(nearly every mill has a pair of s',ones for grinding corn). They
thus leave in the marc as much oil as possible; and at Nice the
custom is to give only three turns to the bar of the press.
At Grasse they never leave the berries any time before they crush
them. The crushing is done by a measure called the motte (=BB
gallons, or 400 litres) ; this name is given to four sacks of olives of
one hectolitre each. Sometimes the sacks are five panals, say 16
gallons, or eighty litres. During some years the local measures are
put on one side, and they replace the panal by the double decalitre
(20 litres), and then the 820 litres the motte is raised to 400.
The stone is made to revolve after they have placed four sacks in
the basin, and the crushing goes on regularly with a slow motion.
They know the operation is complete when the paste is soft
to the touch, and the oil will escape on the slightest pressure of the
hand. For this quantity it takes about three-quarters of an hour.
A man then gets into the basin, and fills half of the Esparto grass
bags called “ scourtins” : they are about 24 inches in diameter, and
are pierced in the centre with t>vo corresponding holes of sin.
diameter. I made inquiry, and find they can be bought for about
from ten to fifteen francs per dozen at Marseilles. Two workmen
are employed in filling them, and taking them to place under the
two presses necessary for the pressing at one operation 400 litres
(or a motte) of berries, or 88 gallons. These fill, commonly,
twenty-eight bags (or scourtins ), of which one-half is divided into
two piles of seven for each press. A single screw acts on these
double piles by the aid of a stout flat piece of hard wood, which
is attached to it underneath. The lever, or bar, applied to the
head of the screw by means of a collar, is put in motion by
three men of the mill and the farmer for whom the oil is
made. At the first pressure is obtained the virgin oil, or the
most pure and the most delicate. After the virgin oil, the pressure
causes all the liquid part of the olive to flow out. This liquid, to
which is added a sufficient quantity of very warm (though not
boiling) wa'er, is put into a large tub lined with tin; and after the
whole has been allowed to repose, they skim the oil off the top
with flat tin scoops, and, as soon as it has cooled, they put it in
stone jars or tin tanks. At the bottom of the tub is deposited the
parenchyma of the olive that the pressure has extracted; this
thick matter, mixed with water, goes under the name of “bnrbes” ;
they place it in a warm place, and obtain from it, after a lapse of
time, a certain proportion of oil very good for lighting.


"Where newly bought scour tins are used, it is necessary to have
them first well soaked in running water to extract the odour common
to Esparto grass.
At Grasse the pressing is done all at one operation, without the
addition of boiling water. They obtain in this manner oil of a
single quality. The mill owner gains the advantage, and the
proprietor consoles himself that the oil is better.
Three men suffice generally for an oil mill with the aid of the
owner of the olives. The effective work for the day is twelve
mottes, or 1,056 gallons.
The useless water, and all the matter contained in it, is carried
by a conduit into a tank underground, called “ enfers ,” from which
the mill owner obtains, when the summer comes, a proportion
of oil for burning, or for making soap.
They class their oils at Grasse thus :
Surfine de
provision
Surfine de
commerce
Fine
Mi-fine
Commune superieure
Bonne mangeable
Mangeable ordinaire
Lampante.
Eor several years a modified plan has been introduced at Grasse.
Sometimes the olives are crushed on account of the proprietor,
who sells the oil himself; this is the exception, however, as the
master of the mill is frequently the speculator, buying the olives
at the price of the day.
The olives of a motte, after having been crushed and pressed,
are reduced to two sacks of about 50 per cent, of marc, in which yet
remains ten or twelve kilogrammes of oil, which is extracted by a
series of operations designated by the name of “ ressenq age.” That
part of the mill set apart for the ressengage contains two basins
with vertical stones for crushing, a washing pit, a strong press, and
different tanks—destined to receive the muddy, oleaginous, watery
matter from the washing pit. The marc from the oil mill is carried
to the ressence. It is taken from the floor of the oil mill, where
it is first deposited when taken out of the bags. They leave it
there until about eighteen inches thick. They water it from time
to time, to hasten an active fermentation, which carbonizes the oily
particles: it is the result of experience that this simple preparation
facilitates the ressence. The marc manipulated, in a fresh state,
does not yield so good a return.
The operation is executed in the following manner: The
“grignons noir” or marc are put under the millstone until the stones
are reduced to nearly dust; they then take this paste and place it
in the washing-pit—which is like a small well, and about ten feet
deep, with iron rakes kept revolving and constantly stirring up the
mass. A stream of clear water is kept running into the pit, diluting
the paste and taking out of it all the light mucilaginous particles
and carrying them while running into a first tank, placed beneath,
whilst the stones being heavier fall to the bottom of the pit, from


which they are taken out when quite white and clean. The ordinary
size of these tanks, or stone basins, is three yards in length,
eight feet in width, and four feet in depth. The first being
full, the liquid forces itself into the second (below the
first, about two feet to two feet six inches) by a syphon placed
below and constructed in the thickness of the wall of the
tank. From the second the water is taken to a third tank,
in the same manner, and so on to the last—ordinarily the seventh.
The more there are of these basins formed in steps, the better is
the result, especially if the stream of water is sufficiently strong to
agitate the contents of each. In this manner all the oily particles
of the marc mount to the surface, with the skins of the olives and
other light matters, and form a thick scum, which is collected with
a large iron strainer, or colander; this scum or crust is turned into
a boiler, and heated until the point of boiling. They then take it
out with a large ladle, and place the whole boiling into scourtins
of which the web is much stouter than those used previously.
These are placed (in a single pile this time) under the press to the
number of twenty.
The press of ressence is generally made with an iron screw, and
requires to be more powerful. The opposite effect to that on pressing
the olives results from the pressure : the first liquid obtained in the
ressence is water, the oil comes next. This oil is named “pate de
ressence;” it is very thick. Put in jars, with heat it becomes, on
the top, more clear and liquid; this is called “ clair de ressence” —
this quality realizes one franc more the rup (8 kilos 100 gr.) than the
'■'■pate de ressence.” The “ clair de ressence” has a slight odor, and
is employed for lamps. The “ pate de ressence” as also the “clair”
enters into the fabrication of soap. That which remains in the
bags (or scourtins) after their pressure, forms the “barbe” —a black
unctuous matter, which the poor people buy for burning.
The ressence having been finished, they drain off the clear water
of the basins, and leave the thick matters at the bottom to dry.
This deposit constitutes an excellent manure for olives, but should
not be employed in its fresh state for fear of burning them: it is
generally placed in little heaps at the foot of the trees, and buried
five or six months afterwards at the time of digging. At Grasse
this manure sells for about sixpence the mule load. The bruised
olives are called “ grignons blancs”; they are sold for fuel at the
rate of one franc the double decalitre; nothing is better for giving
a live fire. A motte of fresh olives (400 litres) produces about a
sack of “ grignon blanc.” One hundred kilogrammes (2 cwt.)
of good olives, quite ripe, give at Grasse
Haile mangeable
Iluile d’ enfer
2
(t
Giignonnoir
50
u
Eau de vegetation
28
<(
—
10


One hundred kilogrammes of “grignons noirs” passed through
the ressence process yield—
Huile de fabrique .. .. .. ■.
50 “
Depots et porte
45 “
100
The quantity of oil extracted is about twenty-eight per cent.
The weight of a hectolitre of olives is estimated at from sixty-two
to sixty-six kilogrammes at Grasse, or a gallon of good olives
wouldweigh not quite 71bs.; the average quality elsewhere not
more than 6lbs. The oil here is sold generally by the local
weight called a “rup,” representing 8 kilos 100 gr.
The Oil of Aix. —The mode of manufacture differs from that
employed in the warm parts of the South of France. At Grasse
the olives are thoroughly ripe before pressing; at Aix the flavor
of the fruit is preserved by pressing them immediately, before their
maturity. This is, however, more likely a matter of necessity, as at
Aix frosts have to be feared. The variety cultivated is an early one,
and any delay would result in loss. At Grasse the saying is, “The
longer the berry hangs the more it gives” —and the frosts there are
little feared.
- The mills about Aix consist of a horizontal circular stone, slightly
concave and raised at the edges, in the centre of which turns a
vertical stone, of eleven inches thickness, and from four feet
ten inches to six feet in diameter. The latter is fixed to a stout
vertical post, free to turn on pivots, which is put in motion by
wheelwork connected with horse-power gear-work, or by water-
wheels, as the case may be. The vertical stone turns in a space
limited by the thickness of the upright to which it is attached.
Such is the ancient mill in use yet nearly everywhere.
The oil of Aix is prepared with good sound olives, of the variety
known as Vaglandaou gathered with care in the month of
November, and not allowed to ferment before crushing. In many
localities, before the crushing, they heap up the berries for one or
two days to soften them, and cause them to sweat a little. This
preparation, done with caution, and stopped at the moment they
commence to heat, is, they say here, more useful than hurtful—the
oil is less bitter and yields better. When the action of crushing
has rendered the paste soft and unctuous, they put it (as at Grasse)
under the iron screw presses. To increase the action of the press,
they often separate each bag by an iron plate.
The oil obtained by the first few turns is the best and most
delicate. It is received into wooden pails, and, without undergoing
any further process, is put into jars, where it is allowed to settle
gradually and become limpid. After this the oil escapes from the
scout tins, or bags, mixed with the watery and dark-colored matters
of the fruit—ordinarily bitter. This is run into special tanks near
the furnace, where, by repose and warmth, the oily particles rise


to the surface and are gathered. The cold pressing having been
finished, the scourtins are emptied, and the paste subdivided, and
filled afresh, pouring over them several pails of boiling water prior
to pressing a second time. The oil then obtained is of inferior
quality, and kept separate from the other; it is placed in similar-
receptacles, and the oil skimmed off from time to time. All the
useless water, &c., are run into a tank. At Aix they get twelve or
thirteen kilos of oil for an hectolitre of berries—weighing sixty
kilos, or 26lbs. 6ozs. of oil for 22 gallons of fruit, or about twenty
per cent.
The storage of the oil is a most important matter; according to
the care bestowed upon good oil will it keep its quality. The oil
is kept in cool and dry places, where it is placed in jars varnished
inside. Biot, a village between Cannes and Antibes, is well known
as the place where these are largely manufactured : the largest
contain 300 kilos. I measured some ; they averaged four feet in
height and one yard in diameter at the bottom. They cost ten to
twelve francs each. The merchant stores the oil in underground
tanks, generally three to four yards deep, and about four and
a-half feet wide. In several places they supply the place of the
jar by tin tanks of different sizes, the largest being of about
two cubic yards capacity; they are less exposed to accident than
jars, and, provided the cellar is of a uniform temperature, answer
equally well.
When the oil has reposed several months they rack it off, pumping
it out of one tank into another. At Nice the merchants filter it
through a strainer or sieve of tin, upon which has been placed a
ream of thick cotton, and over this another sieve. Mr. Warwick
(British Vice-Consul at Nice) gave me dimensions and full details
as to use of these filters. This clarification is necessary to give it
that limpidity required for many of its uses, and also to ensure it
keeping. Water mucilage and parenchymous matters are the
substances required to be got rid of. In some places layers of
cotton, interlaid between beds of animal charcoal, compose the filter.
One of the most intelligent manufacturers of Tuscany (M. Isnardi,
of Leghorn) took a prize at the Vienna Exhibition for the best
filtering process. The machine is described by Sigr. Cappi—the
patent being for filtering without contact with the air, and em-
ploying a moderate degree of heat, which facilitates the operation.
( Vide Fig. No. 25.)
The best oil will turn rancid at the end of a certain time,
whatever means are taken to preserve it. It has been shown
that this disagreeable taste is coincident with a thickening of the
oil, and arises from the absorption of oxygen; the discoloration,
thickening, and rancidity progress with its absorption, of which
81 - 7 centimetres cube are transformed into carbonic acid. There
are regular tasters of oil, as there are judges of wine. They will
tell you whether the rancidity was originally due to the soil, the


variety of olive, bad process in making, or rancidity due to time;
they know the peculiar flavor of oil made with olives attacked by
insects, or injured by damp, or frost, &c.
Adulteration of Oils.
The article in the Penal Code has been insufficient to check
adulteration. The adulteration of olive oil is, happily, limited. in
its processes; they can only substitute particular kinds of oil with
certain analogies, and the number is limited, and it is rare that the
substances are dangerous to the consumer. Olive oil can only be
adulterated with such as may be cheaper. They mix, at Marseilles,
the “Oil of Sesame,” which arrives at that place free of duty.
Poppy, arachide, rape, and sesame oils are used. Olive oil has a
specific gravity of 0-917, and poppy oil 0-9253. Gobley’s oliometer
is used to test them: there is also the densimeter of M. Massic.
They were not considered as being very reliable, as good oil varies
with age. Nitric acid is also used as a color test. Upon 292 kinds
of olive oil experimented upon, one was adulterated with poppy,
six were adulterated with sesame, 100 with arachides, and 20
samples only were of olive oil of the first quality.
The Expense of Cultivation and Yield of Oil.
For the following facts and figures I am indebted to the Public
Records of France for 1868 :
Alpes Maritimes. —An hectare of olives is valued at 7,000 francs,
and 10,000 francs if thirty years old. At Grasse the proprietor of
the land has two-thirds of the produce, and on the coast three-fifths.
The expenses of pruning are borne by the proprietor in the same
proportion. An hectare acres), on the hill sides, contains two
hundred trees, and on the plains only one hundred and twenty-five.
In order to calculate the expense attending the culture of the olive,
150 trees are taken to the hectare; the crop is supposed to be
biennial; and, to form a correct estimate, only half of the general
expenses and produce is used. Thus, to cultivate an hectare of
olives—
Digging—50 days, @ 2 fr. 25
62 fr.
50 c.
Manuring-@ 75c. per tree
112 fr.
50 c.
Pruning, every two years, @ 1 fr. per tree
Gathering [each tree gives, on an average, three double
decalitres (13 galls. If pints), and the double
75 fr.
0 c.
decalitre costs 40 c.] .. ..
90 fr.
0 c.
Total
340 fr.
0 c.
An hectare of olives, under favorable circumstances, produces
450 decalitres of olives every two years; which, at the normal
price of three francs, produces 1,350 francs the half of this sum
constitutes the produce of one year, say 675 francs: deducting the
expenses, 340 francs, there remains the sum of 335 francs. Two-
thirds of this sum belong to the proprietor, and one-third to the


tenant. But to arrive at the exact share of each, Ave must re-divide
in the same proportion the 340 francs, for these expenses are
unequally borne by the two parties. All the expenses for digging
and gathering are at the cost of the tenant; those for manuring are
borne exclusively by the proprietor; and those of the pruning are
at the rate of one-third for the farmer, and two-thirds for the
proprietor.' Thus, upon the tAvo-thirds of 675 francs, which is 450
francs, the proprietor Avill have to pay 50 francs for his part of the
pruning, and 112 francs 50 cents for manuring, and there Avill
remain 228 francs (£9 2s. 4£d.) net per annum per hectare.
Var. —In this district the expense of cultivation in places Avhere
the plough can be used is estimated thus :
Four ploughings
Manure, every two years
Pruning, ditto
80 fr.
Gathering, pressing, &c. ..
150 fr.
Total
362 fr.
The biennial return is ten hectolitres, at 120 francs—say 1,200
francs, or 600 francs (£24) by the year.
Monpellier. —At Monpellier the expenses for the hectare are
given thus:
Ten days’ pruning, at 2fr. 50 fr
Eleven days’ digging
25 fr.
0 c.
66 fr.
0 c.
Manuring, every four years
Gathering and pruning, 6fr. the decalitre—say for
28 decalitres’ annual produce
67 fr.
50 c.
168 fr.
0 c.
826 fr.
50 c.
Produce of 28 decalitres, at 15 fr. 50 c
434 fr.
4 c.
Net profit
107 fr.
50 c.
The green olives are sold at from 35 francs (£1 8s ) to 60 francs
(£2 Bs.) the 100 kilogrammes (2 cwt.)
; M. Riondet says—“ The expense of cultivating the olive varies
greatly. If they are never manured or pruned, the expense will
not amount to more than £4 the two and a half acres per annum, or
£8 for two years—for this is the period that always enters into
these calculations, since the tree ordinarily only gives a crop every
two years. If it is desired to have regular and abundant crops, Ave
should not fear to spend £4O during every two years for the
two and a half acres. Immediately after an abundant crop it is
necessary, in the winter, to manure heavily, at an expense of £l2
the tAvo and a half acres. Three francs’ worth of manure is given
to each tree, if there are 100—sixty centimes only if there are 400 ;
pruning £B, and ploughing £B, the tAA 7 o and a half acres; Ave thus
arrive at an expense of £2B, to Avhich adding the expense of
gathering, taking to the mill, &c., another £l2, we come to £4O
per tAvo and a half acres in tAvo years. But then the large trees


should give us not less than 130 to 150 litres (from 28 galls. 5 pints
to 33 galls.) of olives.” Again, “ The olives occupying only about
twenty-five yards square ought to give thirty to forty litres (from 6
galls. 4f pints to 8 galls. 6£ pints), some of them giving even ofle
hundred litres, or 22 galls. There will be a produce of not less
than one hundred and forty hectolitres, or 3,080 gallons, of olives
every two and a half acres every two years; and, the olives being
of a good kind and gathered with care, should sell always not less
than 15 francs the hectolitre, or 6|d per gallon, which gives a
produce of more than 2,000 francs (£80).
“ If we make it into oil, as olives give ordinarily in oil one-eighth
of their volume, four hectolitres (88 galls.) of olives ought to give
fifty litres (11 galls, of oil) —there will be 1,750 litres of oil:
1,000 litres (220 galls.) fine oil at lfr. 50 c. (5/5 5) per gallon
£
.. 60
750 litres (165 galls.) inferior oil at 75 c. (2/8'f) per gallon ..,
.. 21
£81’ :
It should he remembered that the oil has always a relatively
higher value, as compared with grain crops, for its bulk, as an
article of commerce ; and the freight and transport are less, in
comparison. Nor should the fact he lost sight of that it is during
the winter, after ploughing, that the crop is gathered: women,
children, and old people finding work during several months after
the crops of grain are sown.
If the olive is well cultivated, and by the growing of green
manure the ground kept moist and in good tilth, it will have
nothing to fear from the climate of South Australia, and will
eventually become a great element of prosperity—as it has been
for centuries to the people dwelling on the shores of the Mediter-
ranean.
Data Collected as to Yield of Oil.
Quantity of oil from different varieties of olives —fifty of each
Variety: Oil, in grammes.
Olives collidsses do Nimes
91
• • • *
it
Saourins de Marseille..
2|
i £
Tripardes d’ Avignon
.. n
it
Negrettes de Nyons .. .. .
2i
it
Vermillaou de Toulon
..3
it
Nigrettes de Nimes ..
2
it
Verdales de Nimes .. ..
2
it
Plants de Salon .. .. .
H
tt
Saourins Grasse ..
3
a
Yerdales de Gignac ..
2
n
Verdales de Clermont
.. .. 2j


Quantities.
Variety.
Department.
Oil.
Value at
162 francs
per
100 kilos.
Kilos.
2,400
.... Picholines
.... Gard
kilos, gram.
288 700
fmcs. cnts.
468 35
2,400
.... Plants de Salon...
Bouches du Rhone
361 0
585 65
2,400
.... Yerdules
.. . . Herault
260 400
422 66
2,400
.... Saourin
....Var
291 200
472 50
Or, taking an average, 2 tons 7 cwts. 1 qr. 1 lb. of berries gave
5 cwts. 3 qrs. 17 lbs. of oil—say one-eighth.
Respecting a return from an old tree, which must, however, be
regarded as exceptional, M. Reynaud says that in 1850, at Var, an
old tree (250 years) gave 278,020 olives, or 350 kilos (7 cwt.),
which returned 42 kilos of oil; and, at 170 francs per 100 kilos,
was 71 francs 40 cents., or £2 17s.
At Beaulieu, near Villafranche, I saw an olive tree (a Pignole)
which is called in French u le doyen” (the dean, or elder) of all
the olive trees in this district. Its age is variously estimated at from
600 to 1,000 years. It was known to be very old in 1515. At the
height of a yard from the ground, the girth was nearly eight yards.
It resisted the terrible frost of 1516. It is now partly hollow, and
the branches are not wide-spread, though it is still vigorous. It is
shown as one of the celebrities of the district, and belongs to M.
Palmera, British Vice-Consul at Mentone, who very kindly rendered
me all the assistance in his power. The Director of the Gardens
at Toulon gives the measurement of one at thirty-nine feet at the
base, and twenty-one feet at the height of a man. The first-named
tree has given, in good years, 100 kilogrammes or, say, 2 cwts.
of oil.
At Grasse they reckon that a tree of ten years ought to give a
gallon of berries, and at thirty years eleven gallons; after which it
may go on increasing, until arriving at a time when it produces a
“motte”—or 40 decalitres, or 88 gallons of berries. There are
trees which, in a good year, have been known to give even double
this quantity. The return from an olive of a certain age it is almost
impossible to give: it depends not only on the climate and the
nature of the soil, but also on the vigour of the plant, and, above
all, the care with which it has been tended.
The price given for olives varies in different localities. At Grasse
and Nice, where they are pressed when fully ripe, and produce
excellent oil, the mean is 80 francs the motte of 400 litres—or 4
francs the double decalitre; i.e., £3 4s. for 88 gallons, or Bfd. per
gallon—or say 12s. per cwt. In years of scarcity, the price has
risen to 5 francs (10-Jd. per gallon) the double decalitre. The
difference in price between localities results from the yield varying
with the kinds cultivated. At Grasse, the double decalitre (4 galls.


and —pint) often produces 3 kilogrammes (6 lbs. 9f ozs.) of oil, and
in Gard only 2 kilogrammes (or 4 lbs. 6 ozs.)
Huile d’ olive, extra sup.
Huile d’ olive, superfine ..
Price per Litre. X:
2 fr. 40 c. to 3 fr
.. .. 2 fr. to 2 fr. 40 c.
Huile d’ olive, common
. .. 1 fr. 75 c. to 2 fr. 25 c.
The specific gravity of oil is 0 - 917 according to Lefebre ; 0'91647
according to Clocz; and 0-9176 according to Schulber. The
temperature influences its density as follows (apres Sangsure):
At 12 degrees cent, it is 0‘9192 1
At 25 degrees cent, it is 0*9109 |
At 50 degrees it is 0’8932
At 94 degrees it is 0‘8621.
Mr. Ellmore, lately British Consul at Nice, says that in this dis-
trict the olive is planted over an extent of 15,000 acres, and the pro-
duce in a fairly good year is 180,000 to 200,000 gallons. 1 his is,
perhaps, the richest product of the district— certainly that which
obtains the most consideration from the inhabitants. The soil that
produces the best grapes will, as a rule, produce the best olives.
Ten gallons of good olives will give from one to one and a-half
gallons of oil; but the average quality will give rarely more than
ten per cent.
There are nearly 800,000 olive trees in the District of Nice; and
each tree will give, in a good year, from 50 to 150 kilos of olives,
according to size—say from 1 to 3 cwts.
The produce of an olive yard varies according to the seasons.
As an indication of this uncertainty, Mr. Ellmore supplies the
following as the actual yearly returns from a small property :
francs, cnts,
1860 ..
1,512
0
1861..
.. 1,512
0
1862 ..
3,215
60
1863..
.. 3.215
60
1864 ..
1,598
90
1865..
.. 1,626
45
francs.
ents.
1866 ..
3,071
15
1867..
.. 730
10
1868 ..
5,354
20
1869..
.. .. 240
0
1870 ..
, .. 2,501
90
Rossi says that 100 kilos of olives give about one-fifth of good
oil, and a little more than one-sixth of the oil of “ressence ; and
that the same quantity of olives yields less than from one-tenth to
one thirteenth in had years.
Riondet states that, with careful treatment, about Hyeres the
large trees will give eight bushels of olives each, and that many
yield more: that the smaller kinds give one and a-half bushels—
some yield more than two and a-half bushels: that the olives in
that district give one-eighth of their volume in oil, so that one
bushel of fruit will yield one gallon of oil—of which five-eighths
will he virgin and three-eighths common. One bushel is eight
gallons, and is equal to 36-347 litres.
*rrice per Gallon.
Bs. BJd. to 10s. 10|d. 7s. 3|d. to Bs. B|d. 6s. 4|d. to Bs. 2|d.


The wholesale prices of olive oil in Marseilles, in December,
1876, is given as follows :
Oil, superfine of Aix .. .. from 200 to 220 francs 100 kilos.
fine “ “ 140 to 150
U
100
u
“ inferior 100
u
100
<(
“ de pulpes et de grignons ext! aites) po
par lo sufure de carbone .. } J 11 “ 5
u
& 100
u
Soap, guaranteed, made with olive oil, 81 to 88
u
W ioo
a
The following return shows the produce of the District of Nice
at a comparatively recent date :
Very good cron.
Ordinary crop.
Bad crop.
Huile a couche
Iluile a ressertce pour I
fabriquer j
Huile d’enter 1
Huile pour eclairage . /
Totals
11,700,000 kilos
634,000 “
23,400 “
3,900,000 kilos
390,000 “
15,600 “
390,000 kilos
93,600 “
3,120 “
12,357,400 kilos 1 4,305,600 kilos
1
486,720 kilos
Yield of olives in District of Nice, per 100 kilos (or 2 cwt.) :
Good year. Medium year. Bad year.
Oil, first pressure .. 29 kilos (641bs.) 24 kilos (531bs.) 11 kilos (2olbs.)
Oil de i essence .. 1| “ 2| “ 3 “
Maximum. Minimum.
Mean product of a free in olives .. 96 kilos (2111bs.) 32 kilos (701bs.)
Mean product of a tree in oil .. ..24 “ (o31bs.) 8 “ (171bs. 9oz.)
The mean capacity of a hectare (2J acres) of olive trees is 150
trees; and its average produce in oil, 1,200 kilos (value, at 1 franc
30 centimes per kilo, £62 8s).
Quantity in
kilos.
Rate kilo.
Value in francs.
Huile a couclie
“ a. ressence
“ d’enfer
Totals
3,900,000
390,000
15,600
1 fr. 30 cnts.
0 80 “
0 90 “
5,070,000
312,000
14,400
4,305,600
5,396,400
Forty litres of ripe olives yield, on an average, from 4 to 6 kilo-
grammes of oil; or 601bs. of berries give from, say, 91bs. to 13Ibs.
of oil—or from one to one and a-half gallons of oil.
According to Mons. G. Henze, in the Southern Departments of
France, after a careful estimate, the following mean values were
obtained: That 780 litres (or 171 gallons) of olive berries are
necessary for 100 litres (or 22 gallons) of oil; and the price of
the hectolitre (22 gallons) of olives has been 18 francs 89 cen-
times (about B|d. per gallon).


At an exhibition in Paris of olive oils, I found the following
description of the soil, and yield in oil, of one of the prize exhibi-
tors (M. Mouret, proprietor at Tarascon, on the Rhone), on the
card attached to his specimen bottles of oil —
Selling value of clayey calcareous lands ..
“ stoney calcareous lands ..
Per hectare, 2J acres.
.. 3,400 fr. = £136
.. 3,200 fr. = £128
The return varies between four and five hectolitres (88 to 110
gallons) of oil by the hectare, or two and a-half acres—or forty-four
gallons the acre, which would be £22 per acre at 10s. per gallon.
The trees produce front two and a-half to three litres (five and
a-quarter pints) of oil; and, according to the year, eight litres (one
gallon six pints), ten litres, or twelve litres (two gallons five pints)
of olives are required to produce one litre of oil (one and three
quarter pints). The trees here are much smaller than those
grown at Grasse, and a greater number to the acre.
At this exhibition the oils from Grasse gained the highest prizes,
made from the pleureur , or weeping olive.
A. Young, F. R. S., Secretary to the Agricultural Society of
England, in 1794 went over the same ground that I have visited in
the South of France and Italy. He says, “At Toulon the crop of
a large tree was then from eight to ten pannaux. A panal is a
basket measure containing about gallons of berries, or 30fbs.
At Hyeres the trees produce large crops in twenty or thirty years.
A good tree of thirty years gives, when it bears, three pannaux of
olives. They have great trees that give a motte, or twenty pannaux,”
or 88 gallons. He adds—“ With the olives, the most important
point is their thriving upon rocky soils and declivities slightly
covered with soil, in which spots too much encouragement cannot
he given to their culture.” He extended his travels to Florence,
where he found, he says, “ That in an indifferent stoney soil it took
twenty trees of twenty-five years’ growth to yield a barrel of oil;
but that in a fine soil, and with very old trees, a barrel a tree has
been known.” He further adds—“ This year the Grand Duke,
for the first time, has given a gold medal for the greatest number
planted: no claimant to be admitted for less than 5,000. In conse-
quence of this premium, above 40,000 trees have been planted. It
will be continued annually.”
Pickled Olives.
The olives are gathered when in a green state, and the pulp well
matured. At St. Chamas this is about the end of September, or
early in October. 'J he lye for extracting the bitterness of the berry
is prepared in readiness before the gathering. It is made with
potash and water, and they use an hydrometer to judge of its
strength. If the lye is too weak the olive remains bitter; too strong,
the berry turns yellow, becomes soft, and will not keep.
c


One way of testing whether the lye is suitable, is to fill four or
five jars with lyes of different strengths. When the bitterness
disappears after twenty-four hours’ immersion it shews that the lye
is too strong, and the jars are put on one side. The same with
these in which the action is too prolonged. The most suitable is
that in which the action of the lye is complete after forty-eight
hours of immersion. Having ascertained this point, a lye is pre-
pared of the proper strength, and the olives placed in it. This
vessel or jar is closed. The brine is made with water saturated
with sea salt ; to which is added coriander seed, cloves, nutmeg,
and cinnamon—the whole pounded and boiled several minutes.
When the liquid is cool it is strained. The natural hitter of the
olive having disappeared (which is judged of by tasting from time
to time), they draw off the lye water, and replace it by clear, fresh,
water, which is frequently renewed during five or six days,
until the water is very nearly clear, and not charged with any
colouring matters. The olives are then placed in jars, and the brine
added. The strength of the brine is determined by experiment.
The ripe black olives are preserved only in brine ; frequently they
are put in oil after having been salted.
IN ITALY.
Through all the Ligurian sea-coast the cultivation of the olive
is general. It is seen growing not only in the valleys, hut also on
the hill sides, and on the steep rocky declivities which plunge into
the sea. It would take too long to give all the different varieties
grown in this part; they have, however, been classified by the Abbe
Picconi. The author sums up their different qualities as follows:
—“ Ist. The Giuggiolina deserves the preference, provided it be
sheltered from frost when young. It is grown about Ventimiglia—
known as Pignola on the hills of Albenza, as Razzolci in the
Levant and at Spezia. Fruit elongated, not ripening all at one
time; the stone same length as the fruit; bulged out at one side, and
bent at the end. Large leaves, elliptical in shape; of a light green
when germinating, a grey white on the under side. Branches
pendent, knotty stem. Very rich, fleshy fruit, filled with a most
valuable oil. The famous trees of Basso Pomenti belong to this
species; and, among others, the so much celebrated one of Sacra-
mento, which at times produces more than three barrels of oil (180
kilos).
2nd. The Grappolosa mciggiore requires good soil. It is known
as Merlina at Albenza. Fruit of middle size, oval: an ebony
black, dotted over with white specks; somewhat black pulp;


stone swelling at the top, pointed at the base; leaves of a middling
length, narrow towards the stem—of a light green. Smooth, well-
arranged branches. Gives abundance of fruit and oil.
3rd. Others are cultivated, and are preferred in the following
order:—l, Mortellinor; 2, Papillari; 3, Pandolina; 4, Crognale;
5, Cimbiforme."
Lucca.
The olive is cultivated in thirteen districts. The soil in which it
flourishes best is generally calcareous. It is grown, however, in
sandy soil mixed with a kind of dark red stone. It succeeds on
the plains, but not so well as on the slopes. It is propagated by
seeds, grafting the young plants in the nursery grounds, and also
by souchets taken from the stocks of the old trees when grafting is
unnecessary. Preference is given here to a variety called Frontoiana,
which is the most common, and gives the celebrated Lucca oil. In
the Serchio Valley they transplant this variety in rows, leaving a
space of eighteen to twenty-four feet between each tree, rearing
with them vines, and cultivating also corn, vegetables, &c. Nearer
the sea-shore, they are kept in groves with about the same distance
between the trees. When other plants are cultivated with them, they
derive benefit from the manure given to the various crops. However,
once in every three years, they are manured directly with stable
manure, scalded lupins, bog earth, leather cuttings, old rags, and
brushwood. All the trees are carefully pruned—cutting out the
inner branches where too thick, freeing them from all dead wood,
reducing the length of the more vigorous branches, and carefully
clearing them from every parasite, moss, lichen, &c. They generally
reckon on a good crop every two years.
Nearly all the oil grown at Lucca is used for culinary purposes,
and the greatest care and cleanliness is used in its manufacture.
Through letters of introduction to Messrs. Fransisconi, bankers and
oil merchants, at Lucca, I was enabled to visit one of the largest
olive estates in the district, that of Count Spada, situate on the
slopes of the hills about four miles from Lucca. This fine property
is highly cultivated with only one variety, the celebrated Frontoiana
mentioned above. I had the assistance of Sign. Fransisconi, jun.,
as interpreter, and who took much interest in my inquiries. We
first visited the olive mill worked by water power, and with the
usual number of presses, Sec. The process did not differ
materially from that described as carried on at Nice, with the
exception that no hot water was used. One or two of the
presses were even made with the wooden screw. The olives
were kept in large, well ventilated lofts over the mill, and placed
in small heaps, so as not to ferment. Signor Bigongiari, the
manager of the estate for forty years, and whose father filled the
same position before him, most willingly gave me every information.
He strongly urged, after making inquiries as to the nature of the


climate and soil of South Australia, the trial of the Frontoianci, and
the necessity of persons limiting their efforts to the growth of the
best kinds only. He said if he noticed any other variety groAving on
the property he should cut it doAvn at once. The quality of the
Lucca oil depends, in his opinion, on the use of this particular kind.
He kindly undertook to forward to me to Brindisi, in time for the
steamer, two cases containing souchets to plant in South Australia.
He recommended souchets in preference to young plants or cuttings ;
they contain a great deal of sap, and can be kept for a long time
before being planted out. I hope these may be successful, and
oil equal to the far-famed oil of Lucca may be yet produced in
South Australia.*'
We visited the nursery plantation, and the young trees groAving
there Avere all raised from souchets , so as to ensure the same variety.
The manager sent for the gardener, and made him dig up several
young olive plants of different ages, Avith souchets attached,
from Avhich the young tree had sprung. He then sent for some,
and told the gardener to plant them, so that I might see the
process and be able to instruct others on my arrival.
The souchet is the collar or thick protuberance noticed as groAving
at the foot of the tree, and from Avhich springs the stock of the
tree on one side, and the root on the other. This is cut or saAvn
into blocks, about the size of the palm of the hand, and about
one and a-half inches thick. In planting, a trench is made, about
six inches deep, and these pieces are placed about tAvo feet apart,
the bark uppermost; carefully seeing that the earth is firmly
pressed on all sides, and leaving about four inches of the trench
open". The rows are kept about one yard apart, and the trench is
filled in Avith chopped straAV or litter to prevent too great heat from
the sun spoiling their groAvth. They are occasionally AA r atered.
After the first year the ground is made level, and the four inches
of the trench filled in. SeA T eral young shoots form themselves
above ground from the same block, the strongest of Avhich
is retained. The plants are kept in the nursery for six or seven
years ; and are pruned after three years, and the mother branches
regulated. The young trees I saAv groAvn in this Avay Avere fine
healthy looking plants. A certain number are planted every year,
so as to keep Avell fonvard trees to transplant, to fill up the
\ r acancies on the estate arising from the cutting doAvn of the
badly-formed or unproductive trees He said soils of a calcareous
nature Avere the best—that ground too fertile, such as alluvial
bottoms, force the tree to develop Avood at the expense of the fruit;
* These were packed in sand, in two large cases, and taken charge of hy the
P. &0. Company at Brindisi, who kindly undertook—the object being a, public
one—to forward them to South Australia free of any expense. On landing they
were handed over to the care of Dr. Schomburgk, and planted in the Botanic
Garden, where, I am happy to say, the majority are in a flourishing state.


at the same time it is useless to expect successful cultivation where
the necessary amount of moisture cannot be obtained. Sandy,
clayey grounds ; calcareous, stoney, gravelly, and others not un-
usually' light; rocky ground, where the roots can penetrate
to find moisture, will answ'er. Coiumelle says, “ The best is
that which, being gravelly to some depth, has the surface of clayey
mould mixed with sand. Should it only he clayey, it is to
be absolutely' discarded.” The digging or ploughing should be
extended for some distance from each tree, so as to encourage the
extension of the horizontal surface roots. The olive trees on this
estate are pruned carefully—and all dead wood cut out, and the
centre of the tree kept well open. The trees were about twenty-
five feet apart.
The utensils in the mill for storing the oil whilst the manufacture
was proceeding were of wood, lined with tin so as to be easily
cleaned. Great attention is paid to keeping everything clean—the
presses are frequently washed with hot water and soda. The berries
are not turned over from time to time before being pressed, as prac-
tised in many places the manager condemning the practice
as a bad one, and resulting in inferior oil. The heaps should be
small, and then untouched until being placed under the stones for
crushing.
We visited the lemon groves, and tasted the wine made on the
estate. After repeated assurances from Signor Bigongiari that he
would be happy to answer any inquiries by letter on the subject of
the cultivation of the olive in South Australia, and that I should
find the boxes of olive souchets at Brindisi on my return, we started
for Lucca. Here I inspected the large oil warehouse of Messrs.
Francisconi, and everything was explained as to the treatment of
the oil after being received from the grower until its exportation.
I was also presented with samples of the oils, of different qualities
and age, which I have brought with me. The finest of these oils
realize high prices, and rarely reach the general public.
Provinces of Leghorn and Pisa.
Near Leghorn, on the hills of the Montenero, the olive is culti-
vated. The varieties cultivated here and in the province of Pisa
are called Razza. Marajola, and Mignola. The best one is the
Razza, which produces a very fluid, aromatic, and sweet oil. No
olives are kept for salting. The soil varies in quality, hut much of
it is calcareous and clayey; and there the olive thrives the best in
many places on the slopes of the hills and on the plains.
The olives are kept in groves on the Pisan Mountains, and the
rows are divided by vines and other fruit trees. In groves four
trees, they say, are planted on every 100 square metres, and for
mixed husbandry two and a-half. They use the liquid arising
from the steeping of sheep dung for manure, and which is most


preferred; also stable and artificial manure. This manuring is
limited to once every three years.
In the Pisan hills the olives are gathered from time to time as
they fall or are beaten down. The gathering lasts from the middle
of October until the first of May—consequently the degree of
maturity varies according to the length of time they have remained
on the tree. The olive not perfectly ripe, but approaching njaturity,
they say gives the best—the most aromatic oil, and which can be
longer preserved. The berries are crushed here almost immediately
after they are gathered —as experience has taught them that should
they be kept for even a short time, and with all possible care, the
oil obtained is somewhat inferior. Hot water is not used, except
for the third pressure.
On the average, it may bo said that the Province of Pisa sells
annually 30,000 hectolitres of oil. The same system of crushing
is carried cn here as at Florence and Lucca, so it will be
unnecessary to repeat.
The Province of Siena.
In the Province of Siena the olive is cultivated in all the hilly
grounds, excepting in the soil which is too clayey. The varities
cultivated are known here as the Morajola and Correygiola. The
latter produces the finest oil. Young trees are transplanted into
holes of one yard and a quarter deep and three wide.
The Province of Cosenza.
In the Province of Cosenza, the mode of propagation is as
follows :—ln a piece of good fresh soil with an eastern aspect,
and well prepared, young pieces of branches or shoots are
planted. During the pruning of the olive trees, which here takes
place from October to March, care is taken to select from the
■fallen wood, ail the young tender branches with a smooth green
surface, and bearing tine buds. These branches are cut to the
length of eighteen inches, shaped on one side like the mouth of
a clarionet, and on the other side perfectly rounded. They are
kept buried under mould to preserve them in a proper state until
the end of March or the beginning of April. They are planted
in trenches of four to six inches wide, twelve inches distant from
each other. The rows are kept two feet six apart. During the
first year the shoots are not touched, hut in the succeeding April
only one strong shoot, which is nursed and supported, is allowed
to grow. In November, the ground is dug. In the following
April, the second year on digging, advantage is taken to remove
from the young plants every other shoot that they may have put
forth. On the third year, the young plantation is dug again and
manured. In the space of from six to eight years, they get a fine
plant about eight feet high, possessing fine roots, and which is
planted permanently.


The Province of Abruzzo.
In this district the olive is cultivated with very good results.
There are several varieties—the d grappolo (falling in bunches, like
grapes), la piccola, la grossa, la drilla. Each of these give good
oil, but the best is the last-named; la grossa is used chiefly for
pickling.
Nature of Soil and Mode of Cultivation.
The loose ground—calcareous, clayey, of a reddish color, and
well situated—is stated to be the most favorable. In this district,
in the hilly country, the trees are kept from eighteen to twenty-four
feet apart; in the plains, where they are equally distant in every
direction, from thirty to thirty-six feet. Everything is used for
manure —stable litter, sweepings of the roads, &c. They are
manured by opening a ditch on the upper side of the slope, one
yard or one yard and a-half wide, and a quarter of yard deep,
which is filled with manure. This ditch is kept open during
winter, and before the summer’s heat breaks forth it is covered
with a little mould, in order that the manure may not be scalded.
This is done every few years. They wait here until the olives
fall by the wind on the ground before gathering. ' Some private
persons gather them before full maturity, to obtain a sweet and
less fat oil for salads.
The olives are gathered from the ground by women, and are
carried in sacks day by day to the mill. Beating them down
with poles was general until recently ; now, however, they gather
them by hand with ladders and baskets, and in the plains spread
clothes under the trees. They are then emptied into brick cells
or compartments, and are laid in layers by treading them down
very often until the cells are quite filled, and there they remain
until their turn comes for being pressed. Thus it sometimes
happens, owing to the mill power not being equal to the quantity,
they must remain there heaped up for three or four months and
then the oil extracted, though fatter and softer, has a disagreeable
taste and smell.
Grounds too damp, or too compact, are not cultivated. Clayey
grounds, with which are combined, in fair proportion, calcareous
and silex matters, are preferred —particularly if the substratum is
permeable. Olive plantations are seen on gravelly soils also, and
from which the best oils are made. Two or more hoeings in the
year are given to the soil; one of them is done in full spring—of
all that part of the soil covered by the head of the tree— and another
one in the summer. Those who have olives in rows only, hoe after
the subsidiary crops have been taken off, as the work required in
their cultivation answers also for the olive. Before the winter, a
hole is made a yard long, half a yard wide, and half a yard deep,


and the manure deposited and covered with part of the earth from
the hole. This is done every two years —only care is taken to dig
them in different positions relative to the tree, and each time at a
greater distance.
When the olive groves are on ground somewhat dry and sloping,
the holes are opened in the higher part, and at distances of half a
yard from the stem. The trench is two yards long, and half a yard
deep and Avide. The earth taken out is placed on the lower side.
Three advantages are thus obtained —the water which descends into
the hole is absorbed by the soil, does good to the plant; the water
carries the best part of the upper mould into the hole, which gets
filled, and the mould thrown on the lower side takes the place of
that which was washed away by the heavy rains.
The average distance between the rows is forty yards, when other
crops are cultivated. Some persons use, as well as the common
manures, leather cuttings, tan, house refuse, woollen rags ; and a
great many also make use of green manures, such as lupins, broad
beans, &c. The manuring is generally renewed every three jears—
hv the most careful, every two years. During November and part
of December, the olives are gathered by hand, and when they are
on the point of ripening. It is not customary to beat down the
berries as in Calabria. The olives gathered later and perfectly ripe,
as well as those that fall down naturally, are used for common oil.
The olives which have been gathered the first and carried at
once to the mill and pressed, or that have been kept in the loft in
small layers of about three inches thick, in a dry condition for only
a few days, give oil for the table. The others, which are heaped
up for a month and sometimes two, as is frequently the case when
mill power is not sufficient, only give oil for common use.
The most common receptacles used are of earthenware, varnished.
I saw several oil wells made of varnished tiles set in with cement —
generally four tanks together—the mouths of each adjoining the
other, so as to facilitate the racking off from one to the other. I
have brought specimens of the sort of tiles used. Oil wells lined
with slate are considered good. Provision should be made for
hermetically closing the apertures.
Nine-tenths of the Italian producers free their oil from impurities
by simply allowing it to rest. In this way the impurities fall to
the bottom, and the clarified oil is racked off; but when it is
desired to give the oil a fine and very bright appearance they
make it undergo a filtering process through cotton wool.
Cotton wool is used by small proprietors for filtering purposes in
the following manner : —They use a glass or tin funnel—placing in
the narrow part of it a few layers of cotton wool pressed down, so
that the oil will drop gently. Should the oil cease to drop owing
to foreign matter embedded in the cotton, this must be removed and
another clean portion used. The oil which remains in the cotton
is used for lighting purposes.


Machinery and Appliances.
The drawing given fvide Fig. 17) indicates the improved Italian
grinding mill, with two stones, as constructed by Messrs. Guppy
and Co., of Naples, where all the most perfect description of
mechanism used in oil mills can be bought. One horse can work
this kind of mill; where great quantities are crushed, steam power
is adopted. In Italy they are using now an improved machine—
an iron cage for holding the paste —and better work is performed
(see Fig. 18). The bags are liable to slip under pressure, and
this difficulty is obviated. The paste is separated by discs of
tinned iron. These cages are more economical, as there is only
the first expense: they do not affect the oil, and are easily kept
clean.
- Fig. 19.—Shows the most approved form of an iron screw worm
and base, for those proprietors who cannot go to much expense.
Fig. 20. Oil presses, showing mode of filling up the same.
Fig. 21.—Screw press, as used at Lucca, where the best oils are
made. This machine is all of iron, with a cylindrical base and top.
It has a continuous movement by means of a ratchet and a fixed
lever. It is supported by four stout pillars.
Figs. 22 and 23 are easily understood.
These screw presses can be bought for from £3O to £36. The
hydraulic press is used by persons who wish to dispense with the
process of making “ washed oil.”
With the press in Fig,. Ban iron cage is furnished. This press,
the cage (Fig. 18) of which is capable of containing from 25 to 66
gallons of berries in paste, is loaded and unloaded from above. A
boy can get inside and compress the paste. Supposing the cage to
contain 60 gallons, it is divided into twelve parts of 5 gallons each.
The first part having been put into the cage, a little straw is spread,
and then the iron plate (of which there are twelve); then some
more straw ; then another portion of paste, and so on. Each part
is first compressed by the feet of the boy, or with a rammer.
Together with the press are delivered two pairs of top blocks
—B for raising the cover T, which closes the top, and for raising
the refuse when by the action of the press itself it is driven out of
the cage from the hole in the top This press is the most perfect
yet invented in Italy. B—Top block for raising the lid or bung.
T—Lid. V—Screw to compress the load before putting on the
lid. G—Cage. P—Dish for collecting the oil. R—Receptacle
for the oil.
Preservation of the Oil.
The oil, even when extracted from the olives by the best known
methods, is overcharged with mucilaginous matter, water, paren-
chymous and fibrous matters combined. These substances, if
D


subject to the action of oxygen, predispose the mass to ferment and
render the oil rank. It should be kept in dry, well-aired, and clean
places, at an equable low temperature, and where it can repose with-
out liability to being shaken. The place should be at a distance
from stables —and, the Italians say, even from cellars and kitchens.
The oil should be racked off twice in the year, to remove the
causes of fermentation.
Distances.
No. of Trees
per Acre.
Number of trees to tbe acre
18ft. apart.
134
19ft. “
122
20ft. “
108
25ft. “
69
30ft. “
49
Number of young trees for an olive
nursery, with a view to trans-
planting
3ft. “
4,84a


LIST OF AUTHORITIES CONSULTED.
In France:
Amoreux, P. J., on the Olive
M. Couture, cure de Miramas, on the Olive
J. A. Risso, Natural History of Nice
M. Reynaud, of Nimes, on the Culture of the Olive
M. Gustave Henze, Inspector-General of Agriculture, 1870—Reports
M. A. Riondet, Hyeres District
H. Raiband, L’Ange, on the Olive
A. Coutance, 1877, on the Olive
Signor Giulo Cappi, 1875, on the Cultivation of the Olive
In Italy :
Dr. Bennett, Shores of the Mediterranean
Reports—lB76—on the Condition of Agricultural Products in Italy, by the
Department of the Minister of Agriculture.




Fig. 2—CVi/nvAiKK Oi.ivk.
(O/oa Eurojxca, variety aativa) Branch in flower.
Fig. 3.—Branch hkahing frvit.
Fig. 4.—Oi.ivk Blossoms.




Fio. fi.
Fig. s.—Rooted Layers.
Fig. 1.
Fig. 8.




Fig. 10




Fig. 11.
Fig. 11 O i. ives planted in hows.
Fig. 12.— Slope arranged in terrace* for Olive cultivation.




Fig. 13.--Olives noun wed at tmf.ir fujve ettkkmity




Fig. 14. —Olives pointed at their free extremity.




Fig. 15. Oathkri ng Olives
Fig 16.—Olive or tile Maritime Alts.




Fro. 18




Fio. 19
Fio. 20
Flo. 21




Flo. 22.
Fig. 22,
Fig. 24.




CS3
O
£
Pietro Isnardi


