

THE
PERIL
OF THE
EMPIRE
COPYRIGHT.
.. BY ..
T. ALFRED STEPHENSON
In via recta celeriter.
ONE SHILLING.
MELBOURNE:
J. L. ANDERSON & SOMS, Printers and Stationers, 376 Flinders Lane.




THE PERIL
OF THE
..EMPIRE..
.. BY .. .
T. ALFRED STEPHENSON.
In via recta celeriter.
MELBOURNE:
J. L. ANDERSON & SONS, PRINTERS. 376 FLINDERS LANE.
1907.




Photo by Johnslone, O'Shaanessy & Co., Falk Studios.
Years Faithfully
J. Alfred Stephenson.




... PROLOGUE ...
Australia’s crying need is population. It is universally
admitted that one of the greatest and most urgent duties
which the Federal Parliament has to perform is to attract
a full tide of sturdy immigrants to our shores, so that we
may become as soon as possible an independent nation,
strong both in will and numbers to meet the national trials
that inevitably await us. Yet to do this we need land upon
which to settle the immigrants, and at the present moment
we have hardly a rood available for the purpose.
—Melbourne “ Age,” Jan. 10, 1907.
After God, I love dearly the British Empire. In spite
of all the corruption and the decadence of which there is
so much talk at the present day, it seems to me still to
possess the strongest force making for righteousness in
the world. Thank heaven that there are in the Empire
such men as Lord Roberts, Lord Charles Beresford, Lord
Kitchener, Sir Conan Doyle, Rudyard Kipling, and hun-
dreds of others in the old country, God’s men all, the very
salt of the earth, who give themselves heart and soul to the
maintenance of a high sense of patriotism and honour and
truth.
By a vast number of people in the Commonwealth these
things seem to be counted trifles light as air in comparison
with the accumulation of money or land, no matter how
foul the means by which they are obtained. This mam-
mon worship is the vile worm at the root which will inevit-
ably bring about the decay of the greatest Empire the
world has ever known, and every earnest man must feel
impelled to do his best to bruise its head.
The quotation given above from the Melbourne “ Age ”
reveals the existence of an extraordinary state of things
in Australia, which, in comparison to its size, has a popu-
lation whose sparseness furnishes terrible evidence of greed
and of governmental maladministration. The island con-
tinent has an area almost equal to that of the United States


of America, and the handful of people occupying- this great
country scarcely numbers four million; yet, by the confes-
sion of the Melbourne “ Age/’ there is “ hardly a rood of
land available ” upon which to settle the much desired
immigrants.
A stranger to Australia, on receiving this information,
would naturally ask—“ Why is this ? Who hold the land ?
How do they come to hold it?" And if such an one were
answered truthfully, with what a story of corruption, of
fraud, of trickery in each of the States would his ears be
assailed. Well might he exclaim—“ And these things have
been done by English people, and the descendants of Eng-
lish people? I had thought they prided themselves on
being honourable and straightforward. And so this is
why no small section of the white population of the world
is shut out from the opportunity of making an honest, inde-
pendent livelihood ?”
None of the States has suffered more from this exploi-
tation of Crown lands and supine indifference of its
Government to breaches of its Lands Acts than Tasmania.
It would be impossible to conceive of a more fatuous,
improvident, suicidal policy than that pursued by one Tas-
manian Government after another in the reckless disposal
of Crown lands for the purposes of a hand-to-mouth
revenue. No more striking example could be found of
the harm done, not only to the prosperity of the State,
but also to the morality of the people, by the encourage-
ment thus given to the breaking of the land laws than is
afforded by King Island, one of Tasmania’s most valuable
dependencies. This island, which lies to the west of Bass’
Straits and some forty miles to the south of Cape Otway,
is about 36 miles in length and 17 in width. In area it
comprises some 310,000 acres. It is nearly seven times the
size of all the Channel Islands put together; and these, in
1871, had a population of 90,326. It is more than twice
the size of the Isle of Man, which in 1901 had a popula-
tion of 54,758. The climate of King Island is one of the
most delightful in the world, and, as a health resort, the
place could not be surpassed. Over a large area the land
is fertile, and very productive. But, though the island was
thrown open for selection nearly twenty years ago, in spite


of the fact that there are many people looking for land
in Australia and in Tasmania, the population even now
only numbers 500, including men, women and children, and,
except for a few births, has been stagnant for the past
three years. Indeed, within the past year or two the depar-
tures have outnumbered the arrivals. And yet there
remains a fair area of very good land upon the island still
open for selection.
Why are these things thus ? The answer to this question
will show that the island indeed affords a remarkable object-
lesson in the evil results of land-dummying, for they are
present here in all their grossness.
At this point it would perhaps be as well to explain the
principal terms of the 1890 Lands Act, under which most
of the land on King Island was taken up. Under that Act,
any person over eighteen years of age was permitted to
take up on credit an area of 320 acres of first-class land
at a pound an acre on making a sworn declaration that he
or she did not already hold Crown lands on credit. Annual
payments were to be made during a period of fourteen
3’ears, and during the first eight years improvements were
to be effected on the land to the value of 2/6 per acre per
annum. Two clauses of the Act are more particularly
referred to later on. One of them distinctly states that
persons may not act as agents ” or take up land with any
agreement, “ express or implied,” to pass the land over to
others. Another details the penalties to which those render
themselves liable who conspire to defraud the State in this
way.
But, so far as King Island is concerned, these most
important sections of the Act have been a dead letter, and,
as a result, the perniciousness of the encouragement thus
given to fraud and forgery is only too apparent to any
thoughtful and observant person who has seen the inner
workings of the island’s local affairs. What is seen there
in miniature is more or less true of Australia at large.
How farcical becomes the administration of justice! how
the laws are brought into contempt! when the very magis-
trates themselves are flagrant and wilful lawbreakers!
How the progress of civilisation is checked when the lands
are locked up in the hands of a few, and men who might


otherwise be sturdy, independent yeomen, are reduced to
a condition almost of serfdom to these rapacious land
thieves. In former days there might have been something
to respect about the strong hand that took by force, and
held by force. There is that which gives rise only to a
feeling of loathing for the modern method, which employs
cunning and unscrupulous lawyers to discover flaws in the
Acts for the purpose of defeating the spirit of the law.
Had the Tasmanian Parliament taken due note of the
information given to them in April last in the circular
I forwarded to each member of the House of Assembly,
“ Some Side Lights on the King Island Land Question,”
which is reprinted in this book, there would have been no
need for its publication. The corruption existing in the
Assembly, however, caused enquiry to be smothered.
Necessity has therefore arisen for drawing public attention
to this miscarriage of justice.
When I set about stirring up public feeling last year it
was not long before I discovered that I had taken upon
myself a very heavy task, with very inadequate means at
my disposal. But the obstacles and difficulties which have
multiplied in my way have only served to convince me that
matters are very bad indeed, and that I must join hands
with those who spare no effort to bring home to the minds
of the people what terrible mischief is being wrought, and
how necessary it is for every citizen of the Empire to bend
his energies to securing better government, better laws,
better administration, and, above all, a more exalted sense
of public duty.
I am therefore determined, fearlessly, to tell the truth,
so far as I see it, no matter what the consequences. The
outset of my campaign was very painful to me, but I see
now that it is necessary to cast aside all maudlin sen-
sibilities in order to combat the utter unscrupulousness
of those opposed to right, who are rendered reckless in
their statements, and whose minds are clouded by their
anxiety to protect what they consider to be their vested
interests. In order to make my points clear, 1 have
decided to give perfectly fair summaries of conversations
which took place prior to my commencing my campaign.
The chapters which follow will show how I was led to


enter upon my task, and will serve to illustrate in some
degree the statements made above.
One more thing I want to' say before I close this chap-
ter. Frequently have I heard the opinion expressed that
the land dummying was “ all right, because the Govern-
ment knew all about it.” I would like to explain to the
foolish persons who, in self-defence, have advanced this
feeble argument that when any Government ceases to see
that the laws are kept which are framed directly for the
building up of the State, especially land laws, and, in fact,
winks at their being broken for the sake of temporary
revenue, that Government ceases to express the will of the
people—ceases, in fact, to be a Government at all, and
merely resolves itself into a corrupt little body of men.
who should have no power to give or withhold permission
from anybody to do anything.




CHAPTER I.
“O, get out of my office! Fm sick and tired of all this
swearing!”
The office in question was a little box, six feet by eight,
in the corner of the goods’ shed at the shore end of the
long jetty at Currie Harbour, King Island. The atmo-
sphere had become positively sulphurous, for that sturdy
bullock-driver, Tom Rush, was in a temper, and was giv-
ing vent to it. He stood there the very picture of vigorous
manhood, as he leaned on his heavy bullock whip. His
waistcoat was unbuttoned, and his sleeves, rolled to the
elbow, displayed sinewy arms the colour of mahogany.
His face was grimed with dust and sweat.
I learnt afterwards to like Tom Kush. In' spite of his
faults —and he had some serious ones—he stood to me for
something real and strong and true in that little King
Island world, where idleness, shams, frauds, and lies were
only too prevalent. He was not entirely alone. There
were some others like him—rough, unpolished diamonds;
to the casual observer, mere pebbles among the flashy cut
paste-jewels. Tom was not altogether the sort of person
I should have introduced into a drawing-room of finikin
fine ladies and gentlemen, but I think it would have been
more out of respect for him and regard for his comfort
than for theirs.
When this incident occurred, however, we had not got
to know each other very well, and were not altogether on
the best of terms.
Tom and his brother had brought in blackwood logs as
freight for the steamer “ Yambacoona,” of which I was
acting as agent. They removed the chains and chocks,
and levered them off their waggons near the shed. Then,
with the assistance of the bullocks, they parbuckled one
of them on to the two little trucks, upon which, with four
bullocks detached from one of their teams, they dragged it
down the jetty. The rails were very badly laid, and I had


been constantly urging the chairman of the King Island
Road Trust to have them put in order. They would spread
when a heavy weight passed over them. This happened
that morning, and the trucks slipped down between them.
Then, with much labour with screwjack and cantilever,
the log had to be rolled to one side of the jetty, the trucks
removed, and the line banged into place and secured in
a makeshift fashion with a few “ dogs.” Then followed
the labour of getting the log back on the trucks. The
bullocks were hitched to again, and at last the log was
delivered at the ship-end of the jetty. The same trouble
happened with the second log. It was very unsatisfactory,
and it took a long time.
Of course the trucks suffered, and, as I was held respon-
sible for the damage done to the jetty and its appliances, I
was, at first, a little inclined to blame the lumbermen for
carelessness. That morning 1 started the trouble, when
Tom Rush came into my office to make complaints, by
mildly expostulating—
“ I wish you’d be a bit more careful with those trucks,”
I said. “ You’ll have them all broken to pieces very
shortly.”
It was like a match to a barrel of gunpowder, and Tom
went off in a tirade in which he consigned the road trust,
the shipping firm, the jetty, the island, and myself to perdi-
tion.
I disapprove of swearing as a general principle, but there
was a robust thoroughness about Tom Rush’s language—
an all-round comprehensiveness—that made me think he
deserved to rank as a very king among “ bullockies.”
Still, there are limits even to my patience, and at last
I broke out in the manner indicated at the commencement
of this chapter. There was no gainsaying it, and Tom
went off still rumbling maledictions.
I heard the brothers yoking up their bullocks to the
empty waggons, the crack of the bullock whip, the “ Gee
orff, Major!” “Get up, Noble!” and I listened to the
crunching of the wheels till the sounds died away in the
distance. Then I pushed my account books on one side.


and, leaning back in my chair with my hands clasped
behind my head, ruminated somewhat in this fashion—
“ What a deuce of a temper that fellow was in, to be
sure, and what an ass am I to go pulling him up about
those trucks when I might have known his patience would
be pretty well used up with having to do his work twice
over because those rails are in such a wretched condition!
There’s no mistake about it, those two brothers do work
like niggers, and I’m afraid there’s not much in it for
them. They might be a bit more careful with the jetty,
though. I’ll just speak to them again about it some time
when the day’s work's done, and they’ve got their stomachs
full. But, after all, this log-getting is not a game you can
play with kid gloves, and if those rails were in order they
wouldn’t do half the damage. I’ve been on to Hardy again
and again about them. Well, I’ll try him once more, and
I’ll write a letter to the trust. Heigho! I wish I weren’t
such a lazy beggar. I’d like to be able to work like those
Rushs.”
Since then 1 have found out that the work set for me
to do is of a different nature, and that I have only to go
steadily forward without hasting, without delaying; and
I have learnt not to be envious of the energies displayed
by other people in the tasks assigned to them. That, how-
ever, is by the way.
A day or two after I met the chairman of the road trust
on the jetty, when the“ Yambacoona” was in from Laun-
ceston, and something like the following conversation took
place:—
‘‘ Oh! Mr. Hardy, I do wish you would get the trust
to have these rails put in order. It would not cost much,
and they are a perfect nuisance the way they are.”
” I wish you’d do your duty properly,” he replied.
“ Why don’t you prevent these log-carters from damaging
the jetty? There’ll be nothing done to the rails while this
log-business is going on.”
“ Why, the Rushs will probably be getting logs for
some time to come!” I answered; “ and Ido think this
timber industry deserves some consideration. The island
has not too manv sources of income.”


“ Well, I know better. This log-business won’t last.
Anyway, you ought to make the Rushs understand they
must not do the damage they are doing.”
It seemed useless talking to the man, and I turned away
to attend to some other business that had taken me down
to the steamer. A few minutes later I met the Rushs
at the shed. They had just brought in their daily log
apiece.
“ Oh! I was speaking to the chairman of the road trust
just now about you,” I said, with a twinkle in my eye.
“ He thinks you ought not to do so much damage with
your logs. Wait a bit—here he comes.”
i think Mr. Hardy would fain have got past unobserved,
but he could scarcely do other than stop when I called.
“ Ah! Mr. Hardy, half a minute, please,” adding sweetly,
as he turned round, “ here are the Rushs. Perhaps you
would like to explain your views to them.”
I slid off into my office, gurgling quietly to myself and
thinking—“ I’m almost glad for once Tom Rush can
swear. Now he’ll thoroughly enjoy himself for the next
bye minutes, and perhaps it will do Hardy good, though
he has got a terribly thick skin. How that fellow’s head
has swelled since he has been chairman of the road trust!”
From what I beard afterwards, the Rushs made the
most of the occasion, Tom especially quite surpassing him-
self. And from that time forward my sympathies were
with the log-carters, and I did my best to have improve-
ments effected at the jetty to make their work lighter.
For more than a year I tried to get a hearing from the
trust on their behalf, only to find myself perpetually
thwarted. I tell this because I was accused by foolish
people of having “ rushed into print ” when my first letter
in the Launceston “ Examiner ” appeared. As a matter
of fact 1 had really exercised the greatest patience and
courtesy till the chairman of the trust openly defied me.
Then I determined to have my way, and I got it.


CHAPTER II.
My cousin, Mr. F. H. Stephenson, the head of the firm
of Stephenson and Gunn, the owners of the steamer “ Yam-
bacoona,” usually drove down to Currie from his home,
twenty miles away, when she was expected in port. As
a matter of course, he would put up his horses at my place,
and have lunch with me whilst awaiting - the arrival of the
boat, for we were on excellent terms, although we might
differ sometimes on matters of business.
We were seated at lunch on one of these occasions when
Mr. T. Woods, the Government road overseer, knocked at
the door.
“ Oh! you’ve called for those copies of my letters to the
trust,” I said, going to my pigeon-holes. “ Here they are.
My own letter to the Engineer-in-Chief I'll send to the
‘ Examiner.’ ”
With a curt “ Thanks, Good-day.” Mr. Woods took his
departure.
“ What’s that you are writing to the ‘ Examiner ’ about?”
my cousin asked as I again seated myself at the table.
“ Well, Mr, Woods has received instructions to report
to the Engineer-in-Chief about the log-traffic and the
trouble at the jetty. I promised him copies of two of my
letters to the trust, which have been completely ignored,
to send with his report, just to show that the trust has had
its attention called to what is wanted. And I’ve just writ-
ten a pretty plain statement of the facts to the ‘ Examiner,’
because I think it’s about time the general public should
have an idea of how the King Island road trust carries
on its business.”
“ But you’ve no right to be writing to the ‘ Examiner,’ ”
he said, angrily,
“Good heavens, Frank! why not?” I replied, my fork
sharing my amaze and halting half-way in its journey to
my mouth. “ I should think I’m the best judge as to
whether anything I do is right or not.”
“ Well, it only means a quarrel with the trust,” he
replied; “ and that is not in the firm’s interests.”


“ But, don't you see,” I said, “ that the trust is interfer-
ing with the firm’s shipping business—the work I have to
do? It’s time the obstacle was removed.”
“ But the firm doesn’t want you to do that sort of thing.”
“ Well, I can’t help that,” I said. “It is time it was done.
Get someone else in my place, if you don’t like it. I
thought I had at last made it pretty clear to you that I
must be allowed to carry on my work in my own way, or
give up the agency.”
“ I never said I wanted you to give it up.”
“ Well, why do you interfere with me?” I asked. “ I’m
working all the time for the good of the firm and of the
public. What is it you are afraid of?”
“ You might know you’ll only cause trouble,” he replied;
“ and we have that agreement with the trust.”
“ Well, you can easily tell them the agreement is off.
I think it says a month’s notice on either side.”
“ But we don’t want it altered,” he said; “it sv.its the
firm well enough. And we don’t want any quarrel with
the trust.”
“ Yes. I’ve no doubt the agreement suits you,” I replied.
“ That’s simply because I’ve put up with it. But I’ve
tried to make you see it doesn’t suit me. It was unfair to
me and has caused so much friction, as I told you it would,
that I am not prepared to continue with you if you do not
leave me to make my own arrangements with the trust,
for I’ll act as their officer no longer under the present
arrangement.”
“ What’s the good of making a fuss about it ?” he said.
“ You can’t fight five men.”
“ Rubbish! I’d fight five or fifty or five hundred of
such wooden-headed chumps if I knew I was in the right.
But it is not fighting five men; it is only the chairman.
He leads the others by the nose. You leave me alone to
deal with them, and I’ll bring the dogs to heel fast enough.
You might remember that it was I that really made that
arrangement, so advantageous to the firm, in the first case,
before you fixed up that precious agreement.”
“ Oh! well,” he said, “it isn’t in the firm’s interests for
you to have a row with the trust.”


“ Now, what on earth do you mean by that?” I asked.
“ If it isn’t in the firm’s interests to have the work at the
wharf done more efficiently, and the people who are sup-
plying the ship with cargoes helped to get those cargoes
down the jetty more easily, I’m blessed if I can understand
what the firm’s interests are.”
“ But 1 don’t know,” he said, “ that Hardy isn’t in the
right.”
“ Well, I should think I’ve told you enough about the
beggar to convince you that he has tried to block these
log-carters every way. But lam tired of this. You must
choose between Hardy and me. I am perfectly ready to
give up the agency.”
“ But I don’t want you to give it up, and I don’t see any
reason for quarrelling with either of you.”
“ Well, it seems to me,” I said, “ you’ve got to make
up your mind one way or the other. I mean to quarrel
with that chairman for all I’m worth till he quits the road
trust. He’s a treacherous humbug, and a nuisance in the
position. He needs showing up. So, if you like to side
with him, we’ll have to part company. You can make your
choice.”
“ Well, I don’t see how you can hold the position you
do,” he said, “ and act against the firm’s interests in that
way.”
“ Very good. Don’t I keep telling you I’m perfectly
prepared to give up the position this minute ? I have been
ready, as you well know, to give it up any time these four
years. It is not a particularly choice billet, but, somehow,
I found it was the row set me to hoe, and I’ve hoed it.”
“ But when the firm’s paying you,” he said, “ I don’t
think you ought to act against the firm’s interests in that
way.”
“ Oh, d n the firm’s interests!”—the phrase was get-
ting on my nerves. u lf you can’t make your interests
harmonize with the interests of the public, as I have been
trying to do all along, I’m done with you. If you think
your miserable firm is going to buy me body and soul for
ii2o a vear, you are jolly well mistaken. I shall just do
what I jolly well please.”


So I sent the first of the letters reprinted in this book
to the “ Examiner,” and, with it, a list of the ratepayers,
to whom I requested the manager to send copies of the
issue in which the letter should appear. For this I paid
10/- out of my own pocket; and the papers were duly
received upon the island. Of course the matter was treated
with the usual silly chatter by most people—that there had
long been ill-feeling between the chairman and myself; that
I was just working off a grudge, etc., etc. I have heard
that sort of thing so often when, in the public interest, I
have denounced a wrong-doer and exposed a wrong that
I am growing indifferent to it. Only I am forced to
acquiesce in Carlyle’s cynical assertion that most people
are fools, and, of these. King Island certainly has its pro-
portionate share. As a matter of fact, I had no particular
feeling in regard to this man. I rather liked him than
otherwise, apart from his position as chairman of the road
trust. In that position, however, I adjudged him a stumb-
ling block and a nuisance, and felt it my business, in the
interests of the island, to use every effort to have him
removed out of the way.
The letter appeared in the “ Examiner ” of October 7,
1905, and was headed: —
KING ISLAND TROUBLES.
We have been requested by Mr. T. Alfred Stephenson
to publish the following letter, which was addressed to
the Engineer-in-Chief with reference to the condition of
the log-carting traffic on that island; —
Dear Sir, —1 met Mr. Woods, the road overseer, on
Saturday last, and he told me that he had been instructed
to report on the interference with the traffic caused by the
log-carting, and also about the damage done to the roads.
I have handed him copies of two of my letters to the trust,
which, may help to throw a little light on the subject. Now
that inquiry is being made, I should like to be permitted
to say something myself on what I consider to be the dis-
graceful neglect of the road trust to facilitate the work
of the log-carters.
The timber industry, which is only of very recent growth,
has, m my opinion, been likely to suffer a severe check,


owing to the trust’s utter indifference to the requests that
have been made to them for reasonable improvements at
the jetty. I have myself repeatedly reported verbally to
the chairman of the trust, and also by letter, the difficulties
under which the work at the jetty has been carried on. In
spite of my repeated appeals, the trust has done absolutely
nothing in the way of making the provision required. My
letters have been received and laid aside without any reply
having been sent to me. Again and again I have asked
the chairman of the trust to be allowed to state my views
at a meeting of the trust. I may say I am supposed to
be an officer of the trust in charge of the jetty, though the
position is a purely honorary one.
I felt sure that three of the members of the trust, whom
I believe to be fair-minded men, would be eager enough
to remedy the evils, if they were only made acquainted
with them. I had evidence of this yesterday in a con-
versation with Mr. W. E. Bowling, who found he was
ignorant of the real state of things, and who told me he
would have welcomed my presence at the meetings of the
trust to give evidence, but that the chairman had never
informed the trust that I wished to report to them in
person.
It has, unfortunately, become the practice of the trust
to pass resolution after resolution to the effect “ that the
matter be left in the hands of the chairman.” I allow that
Mr. Horace Hardy engages himself actively in the work
of the trust according to his lights, but the state of affairs
at present existing has, to my mind, become intolerable,
and I feel sure it could not possibly have existed if
the meetings and work of the trust had been exposed to
the light of day in the public press.
As agent for Messrs. Stephenson and Gunn I have found
the work of getting full cargoes of logs for the steamer
“ Yambacoona ” delivered at the end of the jetty exceed-
ingly difficult, and the steamer has more than once or
twice gone away with a much smaller freight than she
might have carried, owing to the trust’s stupid and obsti-
nate resistance to all appeals for better appliances, for
which, as I have already gently hinted, I consider the chair-
man to blame. In regard to this log-traffic, not only has


the trust refused to supply the conveniences required, but it
lias perpetually kept up a nagging, systematic complaining
about minor damages done by the log-carters—damages
most of which would have been avoided had proper appli-
ances been provided, and for which, therefore, the trust
itself was to blame. The consequent irritation I know to
have been excessively annoying to men who were honestly
trying to earn their living by strenuous hard work.
It seems to me it is quite time that matters should be
looked into, and I feel sure that, if all the ratepayers knew
as much as I do of the way in which the chairman of the
trust has been conducting affairs, the great majority of
them would be glad to see him resign his position. I
sincerely hope that the fullest inquiries will be made.
I have an idea that, within the last few days, the trust
has been thinking about doing something, because the
chairman’s hand has been forced at last, after he has posi-
tively declared to me again and again that nothing would
be done to the jetty, and no provision made to help the
log industry, because it would shortly cease.
Mr. McMahon, at any rate, gives me good reason to
believe that he proposes to continue getting out timber
for the next two or three years, and I know that there
are at least four cargoes of his logs ready cut, and wait-
ing to leave the island.
I trust you will pardon me for troubling you with so
long a letter. My excuse must be that I think no effort
should be spared to remove any stumbling block to the
progress of the island.
Yours, etc.,
T. ALFRED STEPHENSON.


CHAPTER III.
Anyone might have supposed that I should have ceased
from that time to have anything more to do with the
steamer “ Yambacoona.” But the work had to be done,
and no provision was made to fill my place; so I con-
tinued to attend to the business as though nothing had
occurred, except that I refused to have any further deal-
ings with the road trust.
Some three weeks afterwards, however, when the “ Yam-
bacoona” was again in port (at that time she was making
about a trip a week), my cousin was once more at my
cottage. He had transacted his business in Currie, and,
having obtained his letters and papers from the post office,
was preparing for the drive home, harnessing to the light
trap the two horses he drove tandem. I was just about
to go back to the jetty with some business papers, for which
I had returned to the house.
“ Oh, Alfred,” he said, as he buckled one of the traces,
you’ll see a letter of mine in the ‘ Examiner/ this time
in reply to yours.”
“ My dear Frank,” I exclaimed, “ you don’t mean to tell
me you have had the unutterable folly to attempt to reply
to my letter?”
“ Why?” he said, as I thought, a little nervously. “ You
can write letters to the paper; why shouldn’t I?”
“ Of course, you can do as you please about that,” I
replied. “ But I told you you would have to choose
between Hardy and me, and I am afraid you have made
your choice.” And I vaulted ever the gate and hastened
down the little footpath between the sandhills to resume
my work at the office.
It was not till late in the evening that I had time to open
the papers that had come for me by the mail, and I con-
fess I looked aghast at the letter in the columns of the
““ Examiner.” It was far from truthful, and, during the


days which followed, I heard it generally characterised
as “ crawlsome.” Here it is;—
KING ISLAND TROUBLES.
To the Editor “ Examiner.”
Sir, —A letter appears in yonr issue of October 7 headed
King Island Troubles. In justice to the King Island road
trust, we feel compelled to make explanations. It is stated
m the letter that the position of the officer in charge of
the jetty is a purely honorary one. An arrangement was
made by the road trust with us by which our agent was
appointed to act as officer in charge of the jetty at Currie
Harbour, the road trust in return granting us certain con-
cessions, which fully recompense us for any work done
for the trust by our agent.
We have found the arrangement work satisfactorily as
between ourselves and the road trust, and, far from think-
ing that the road trust has put intentional or unnecessary
obstacles in the way of the important industry of log-get-
ting, we believe they have every sympathy with it, and
only wish that it should be conducted with the minimum
of injury to the road and jetty.
Yours, etc.
STEPHENSON & GUNN.
The following week my cousin was down in Currie again,,
and came into the office.
“ You know I can’t allow that letter of yours to pass,”
I said; and I read him bits from the letter I had drafted
in reply.
“Of course this ends it,” I went on. “ I will give you
a month from to-day to get someone to take my place.
You can get fifty better clerks than I any day in the week
by just putting an advertisement in one of the papers;
but you’ll never again have a man here like me—never!
never! never!”
“ I know that, Alfred,” he replied, miserably.
“ Well, then, why are you so foolish? But it's no good
discussing the matter any further. Hardy seems to have


got the same mysterious influence over you that he exer-
cises over scores of other silly folk on the island. I can-
not understand it, though I allow he took me in for a
while. But, really, he is such a shallow fellow when one
comes to find him out.”
In my guileless simplicity it never occurred to me, then,
that the firm was afraid to irritate members of the trust
for fear they should turn crusty, and cease to wink at
certain irregularities which, I presume, the firm looked
upon as the “ interests ” I had heard so much about. For
instance, the complacent trust, although it had made other
people remove gates over thirty miles of the main road,
still allowed Messrs. Stephenson and Gunn to retain several
gates across that same main road on what they called their
“ property,” at the north end of the island. Several people
had grumbled about these gates, but they were not suffi-
ciently influential with the trust to secure their removal.
There were other ways, too, in which the road trust might
have made itself unpleasant to the firm without in any
way exceeding its powers, and so the firm found it neces-
sary to fawn upon and truckle to this pitiful little body.
How complicated life becomes when people are not running
straight! How simple—l do not say how easy—when
truth and honour are taken as guides!
However, as I have said, up till then I had not really
thought that there was anything more than an extraor-
dinary miscarriage of judgment on my cousin’s part, for
I always liked to believe that he wished to be just. Never-
theless, it did seem to me strange that he should prefer to
bolster up such an evil state of things as prevailed in the
road trust to taking my view of the matter, especially since
he knew I felt so strongly about it that I was giving up
almost the only reliable source of income I had. More-
over, apart from the little differences which cropped up
from time to time in the conduct of the steamer’s busi-
ness, we were on excellent terms. I, at least, never allowed
those differences to interfere with our private relationship,
and frequently put in the week end at my cousin’s house.
We were, in fact, bound to one another by many mutual
obligations. But my cousin was always aware that I dis-
approved the firm’s tactics in regard to the land.


Judging me liable to act, as I have since had reason to
think from the way in which he would himself have acted
under the circumstances, he said, to try my feeling in the
matter—
“ Now, I suppose you think you are going to show us
up?”
“ Look here, Frank,” I replied, “ I have always told you
I thought you were doing wrong in this land dummying
business, and you know it. I hate looking at the Lands
Department's chart of the island. It simply shrieks at
me with lies. But you are my cousin, for one thing, and,
putting business aside, we've been very good friends, so
I should not like to have to interfere. Anyway, I do not
feel called on to do so at present. The time may come
when I shall have to speak about it.”
“Why, what good will it do you?” he asked.
“I am not considering that. It is not a question of how
it concerns me. I look on the whole system as an infernal
piece of mischievous wickedness, and I think it should be
put a stop to. But, as I tell you, I don’t myself feel called
on to speak about it at present.”
“ Why, you’d do it yourself, if you had the chance.”
“ You know that is not true. If by any chance I should
have dummied land, I know I should be so troubled about
having done a discreditable and dishonorable action that
I should never be happy till I had made restitution. So
what good would it be to me?”
“ Oh, you’ve got too tender a conscience. It does not
pay to be so particular.”
“ Perhaps that’s so,” I replied, “ from your point of view.
But I made up my mind a long time ago that goodness
was the only thing worth trying for. I don’t talk cant,
and I’m not setting myself up as a plaster-of-Paris saint;
but I try to do what I believe to be the square thing.”
And now, before explaining how some six months after-
wards I did come to feel that I should be shirking my duty
to Tasmania, to the Commonwealth, to the Empire, if I did
not raise my voice as loudly as I could in protest, I must


insert my second letter to the “ Examiner,” which appeared
on October 31, 1905, and which was never replied to—
KING ISLAND TROUBLES.
To the Editor “ Examiner.”
Sir, —It is not without very real regret that I ask you
again to publish a letter for me bearing on the subject on
which I recently addressed the Engineer-in-Chief through
the medium of your columns. Only a strong sense that
the future well-being of King Island hangs in the balance
compels me, however sorrowfully, to reply to a letter from
the firm of Stephenson and Gunn, which was printed in
your paper a few days ago, and which purports to refute
slatements made in my first letter.
I feel most strongly that, especially in a new community
like this, it is of the utmost importance that men, who are
placed in positions of public trust, should not abuse the
authority given to them by the electors. Hence it is with
regret that I affirm, most positively, that there is not one
statement in my previous letter which anyone could rightly
ask me to erase in the interests of truth.
I have felt obliged to sever my connection with the firm,
because I will not give way where I believe an important
principle is involved. How much that means to me is well
known to people on King Island.
It is now four years ago since I was requested by Messrs.
Stephenson and Gunn to undertake the agency of their
steamer, and, on taking up the work, I found the state of
things at the jetty in an appalling muddle. The jetty and
the shed at the shore end of it were then in the hands of
the Government, and this really meant that they were under
no control whatever. Things were looking prosperous on
the island then, and large freights were being carried; but
all the firm seemed able to do was to land goods on the end
of the jetty, and leave it to the consignees to remove them
as best they could. Sometimes they lay for days exposed
to the weather, and often a cargo had to be placed on the
top of the remains of a preceding cargo. It was a sicken-
ing business. With my own hands I trucked many tons of
goods into the shed; but yet goods were often damaged


by the weather, much pilfering went on, and quarrels not
infrequently arose among consignees about the use of the
truck to get their consignments down the jetty.
Before taking up the work for Stephenson and Gunn,
I had suggested, as a remedy for all this, that the trust
should take over charg-e of shed and jetty from the Govern-
ment, and should let the shed to anyone willing to under-
take the work of trucking and caring for the goods. It
was not, however, until 1 had been at the firm’s work for
more than a year that Mr. Hardy approached me and told
me that the jetty had been placed in the hands of the trust,
and asked me if I could come to some arrangement about
locking up the goods. After many enquiries from those
who knew how work of this kind was carried on in other
ports, I formulated a scheme which I personally laid
before the trust, and this resulted in the firm’s being
allowed the use of the shed and the control of the trucks,
with a right to make a small charge for wharfage in con-
sideration of delivering goods to consignees at the shore
end of the jetty.
After going to all this trouble I found to my intense
indignation that the head of the firm and the chairman of
the trust, approving my scheme, had entered into and
signed an agreement by which the firm was to supply a
person to be the person in charge of the jetty, the final
clause of which reads —" The person in charge of the jetty
may be suspended by the trust without any notice or
explanation whatever.”
It was a gross indignity to put upon me, and for the
past two and a half years the chairman of the trust has
persistently taken advantage of my forbearance in this
matter. But when it amounted to blocking public business
(and I can furnish plenty of proof to show that it has done
so), I began to think it was quite time to speak with no
uncertain voice.
If the firm of Stephenson and Gunn have found their
arrangement with the trust “to work satisfactorily ” (I
quote their letter), they have to thank me for it, as should
be obvious to anyone, for I have done the work. It is
because I have done the work that I am in a better position
than anyone else, excepting, perhaps, the log-carters them


selves, to know how much the work of these men has been
hampered by the trust’s inattention to their requirements.
I maintain that the work I have done for the trust, out-
side the shipping business, has been of a purely honorary
nature, because I have never received a penny for it, and
I insisted on the firm’s paying me the salary I have been
receiving, if they wished to letain my services, before ever
the agreement was signed, or I knew anything of its terms.
As I hinted in the leader of the first issue of my little
paper, “ The Record,” there is an appalling ignorance of
the island’s public affairs among the ratepayers that is a
serious stumbling block in the way of progress. It was
really with a desire to get them interested that I started
the paper, and already 1 am pleased to see that my efforts
are beginning to bear fruit in the right direction.
It is not the first time, as many in Victoria may remem-
ber, that I have been ready to sacrifice everything for the
sake of principles. It may not be the last.
I often read over Tennyson’s “ CEnone,” and 1 seem to
understand something of the yearning earnestness of the
mountain nymph in her appeal to her lover that he should
listen to Pallas Athene’s claims to the golden apple;—
“ 0 Paris, give it to Pallas.”
“ Because right is right, to follow right,
Were wisdom in the scorn of consequence.”
Hoping that I have not trespassed too much upon your
space,
I am, etc.
T. ALFRED STEPHENSON.


CHAPTER IV.
Seven weeks went by before I finally gave up the ship-
ping agency at the little port of Currie, for my successor
was not appointed at the end of the month I had pre-
scribed, and I consented to continue the work till he came
down to the island. When he at length arrived, about a
week before Christmas of 1905, 1 was glad at last to shake
my shoulders free from all connection with the firm,
although I had nothing to trust to for a livelihood but my
tiny paper, “ The Record,” which had been started about
three months before.
Had it not been that, on first issuing the paper, I had
pledged myself ro run it for six months, it is not unlikely
that I should have at once left the island. There were,
however, still three months of the time remaining, so I
grimly curtailed my expenses for food down to the least
amount on which it seemed possible to retain my health,
and continued to bring out my newspaper fortnightly on
the Wednesday mornings, “ The Record ” was a qyaint
little paper, consisting of six foolscap pages, each of which
was divided into two columns. It was printed with the
cyclostyle, and I was at once editor, reporter, printer,
machinist, printer’s devil, and newsboy.
An interesting series of articles, giving some account of
40 years’ history of the island, from the pen of an old
resident, Mr. W. Hickmott, ran through the eighteen num-
bers I brought out. For the rest, each issue contained,
besides a number of advertisements, a leading article,
reports of the meetings of various local bodies, mining and
sporting notes, correspondence, and general news items.
As these copies of “ The Record” seem to have been found
very interesting wherever they made their way (and they
were sent all over the world), I hope before long to repub-
lish them, with illustrative views of King Island. I was
pleased that the Launceston and Hobart dailies drew
largely upon “ The Record’s ” columns for news of the
island.


Of course, in my leading columns, I made a
set at the road trust, and succeeded in arousing a good
deal of public feeling, with the result that two largely
attended meetings were held in the hall. Public opinion
made itself felt, and at last the appliances for which I had
so long been clamouring were placed at the jetty. But
what a heavy charge must be laid to the account of that
trust for all the lost time, lost effort, and wasted energy
caused by its neglect of duty!
Some digression must be made here for the purpose of
showing that my feeling in regard to the land-dummying
must have made itself pretty generally known upon the
island long before 1 actually began to move in the matter.
I just mention this, because my opponents freely accused
me of acting on a sudden impulse. For years I had quietly
protested, and when at length 1 was commissioned as
Justice of the Peace I determined to make a decided stand.
Rather more than two years ago, not long after I was
appointed to the bench, one of the large landholders called
at my cottage at Currie, It may be that my manner has
proved misleading to a good many people on King Island,
for, like the clown in “ Twelfth Night,” “ I am one of those
gentle ones that would use the devil himself with courtesy.”
At the same time, after I had admitted my visitor, I felt
somewhat surprised at what ensued, and was conscious of
a sudden stiffening in my manner.
“ I want you to witness this signature,” he said, handing
me a paper, either an application or some other form con-
cerning a land transaction.
“What's this?” I asked. “Where are you going to
sign ?”
“It is signed already,” he said. “ You’ve only got
to witness the signature.”
“Why, this is signed ‘Emily Jones!' You are not
Emily Jones.”
“ Oh, but it’s all right, isn’t it?” he said, in tones meant
to be ingratiating.
“ Confound your impudence!” I replied. “ Don’t you
venture to bring a paper like that to me again.”


1 was asked by one and another to witness two or three
other irregular papers, which, of course, I refused to do.
After that, though, owing to my being in a central posi-
tion on the island, during eighteen months, apart from land
business, 1 probably witnessed more signatures than the
other five magistrates put together, I refused to have any-
thing to do with land papers. My regular formula was—
“lf that’s land business, don’t bring it to me. I won’t
touch it with a pair of tongs.”
But I believe the papers got themselves signed ail the
same. I do not like casting reflections on my fellow
magistrates, but I am afraid that, in the pigeon-holes at
the Lands Department’s offices in Hobart, there is a store
of papers referring to King Island lands that would
scarcely bear looking into. What crooked things a man
may do if he is only respectable ” enough to drive a
gig!” With what righteous wrath did Thomas Carlyle
rave over that ‘‘ gig.” Pity it is Ids works are not more
widely read in the Commonwealth.
And now, having cleared the ground to some extent,
I must give, as briefly as possible, an account of the cir-
cumstances leading up to the drafting of my circular,
“ Some Side Lights on the King Island Land Question.”
Among the interests which lent a certain zest to my life
on the island was the education of the children. As chair-
man of the School Board of Advice, I had long been dis-
tressed that, owing to the scattered nature of the settle-
ment, the school at Currie was only serviceable to some
20 or 25 children out of between 60 and 70 of school age.
The others were unable to attend owing to the distances
at which they lived from Currie. The board had thought
of trying to persuade the Education Department to arrange
for two half-time schools. But this was felt to be only
a« makeshift arrangement, and, even if it had been carried
out, would still have left a good many children unpro-
vided for. Several times the thought crossed my mind
that, if the island were only properly settled, there would
be occasion for the establishment of several schools, and
all the children would be reached.
Another thing that kept impressing upon me the need
for settlement was the wretched communication between


the island and the mainland, which seemed to be getting*
steadily worse. The steamer “ Yambacoona,” owned by-
Messrs. Stephenson and Gunn, was the only boat trading
to the island, and her movements were most irregular.
During the season for shipping fat cattle, she might run
weekly trips with fair regularity. At other times the inter-
vals between her visits often extended to nearly three
weeks. Whilst I acted as agent, I had not any control
over the boat’s movements, but I strongly urged upon the
firm, as a business proposition, that she should be kept
steadily running to the island, even in the dull season,
for I had good reason for knowing that the passenger
traffic would have been very much greater if she had run
regularly between Launceston, Burnie, and King Island.
She might have dropped a little money during the quiet
time of the year, but I knew that she sometimes dropped
a great deal by taking outside freights, say from Mel-
bourne to Hobart or elsewhere, at a price that did not
anything like cover expenses. Besides, her lengthy
absences caused constant annoyance and friction to the
people on the island, as well as to their friends and to
business people on the mainland. In this, however, I was
not listened to; and, after I had given up the agency, so
wildly irregular did the boat’s running become that the
idea gradually shaped itself in my mind that the firm was
really indifferent to the island trade, so long as they could
keep off other boats without dropping too much over the
“ Yambacoona.” The dulness of trade, indicated by the
ever lessening cargoes brought to the island by the “ Yam-
bacoona,” forced upon my mind the conviction that the
purchasing power of the island was getting less and less.
1 had good reason to know that, whilst the few might be
prospering, the many were steadily growing poorer. It
was obvious that the efforts of the small landowner to
make headway were very much cramped by the poor boat
service maintained. Here, again, I was led to the conclu-
sion that legitimate settlement of the island would enhance
the prosperity of the many.
It should be noticed that there is no telegraphic com-
munication between King Island and the mainland. The
suggestion had several times been made by one and another


that perhaps the Government might be persuaded to make
trial with the Marconi system at King Island, and at
length, about two years and a half ago, at a public meet-
ing held at Parer’s Hotel in Currie, it was resolved to
memoralize the Federal Parliament. I drafted the peti-
tion, which was signed by a good many people on the
island, and which was entrusted to Mr. King O’Malley, as
the member of the House of Representatives for the dis-
trict of which King Island forms a part. He did his best
to keep the matter alive in the Federal Parliament, and I
presume that it is still under consideration. However,
when a year and a half had passed by, and nothing had
been done, I began to think that, if the island had been
properly settled, we should not have had to beg and pray
for the establishment of telegraphic communication—-it
would have come as a matter of course.
That the island was not generally prospering as it should
be doing was evidenced to me in other ways. Of six car-
penters, not one seemed fully engaged at his trade during
the early part of last year, and for some time prior to that
they had had very little to do. Proper settlement would
have meant constant employment, not only for these six,
but for many others. In general, the blacksmith seemed
to find that he could do all his work in three days of the
week, and during the other three days his forge remained
dosed. The bootmaker told me he could get any amount
of work to do, but payment for that work was very uncer-
tain. The business of the storekeeper seemed to be falling
off instead of increasing. The well-appointed and com-
modious hotel, built three years before, with the idea that
the island was going ahead, was doing anything but a pros-
perous business, for visitors were scarce. All these things
impressed themselves more and more upon the mind, and
all pointed to the one conclusion —that the inevitable
Nemesis of wrong-doing was making itself felt upon the
island.


CHAPTER V.
Something must be said about the petition for the
reclassification of lands on King Island, which brought
about a visit to the island from the Minister of Lands,
and to which I refer in my “ Sidelights,” given later on.
As already stated, a great part of the island has proved
fertile and very productive. One large landholder, who
formerly travelled over a good part of Australia and Tas-
mania, frequently told me that he did not believe that there
was a place in the colonies where more grass grew to the
acre in the course of the year than it did over some parts
of King Island. In the face of this he has since declared
that a man could not do anything with 320 acres. The
difference between the enthusiasm of the prosperous
grazier strolling through lush meadowlands where herds
of sleek cattle were grazing, and, later on, the anxiety of
the man who imagined his vested interests at stake, would
account for the alteration in opinion expressed by this
person at two different periods.
Another man, who, I believe, has of late considerably
modified his estimate of the value of land on King Island,
may be quoted in evidence against himself. From an
admirable article on the island, written by my friend, Mr.
de Crespigny, which appeared in the Melbourne “ Age ”
early last year, and which was written from notes taken
during a visit to the island some three years before, I
cull the following:—“ I met a dairy farmer from Victoria
who had recently taken up some hundreds of acres on the
island, and paid £1 per acre for it. He had sold out of
his farm near Warrnambool for £lB per acre, and he said
he thought the King Island land rather the better of the
two.” In fact, there can really be no disputing that there
is as good land to be found on the island as anywhere in
the colonies, whatever landholders may choose to say
just now.
But, naturally, there is also very poor land, and some
persons were unforunate in selecting as first-class land
blocks of this poor country. lam myself inclined to think


that, under skilful treatment, this land might be made pro-
ductive at no very great cost; but these people found they
could do little good with it.
A petition was sent to the Minister of Lands that this
land might be reclassified as second-class land at 10/- per
acre, or third-class land at 5/- per acre. The Minister of
Lands, in order to make himself familiar with the condi-
tions, visited the island in February of last year. He was
accompanied by Mr. McKenzie, M.L.A., and also by Mr.
E. A. Counsel, the Secretary for Lands. They stayed on
the island for about a week, and I did hear that, during
his visit, Mr. Hean was more than once approached with
complaints about the land-dummying. But I said nothing,
for I was still unwilling to move in the matter, because
I did not care to have names of people connected with me
dragged in the dust. However, to some things even family
pride must give way, and my name is one of which I am
proud. What man has better right? My father, the Rev.
Robert Stephenson, 8.A., was, to my mind, one of the
finest gentlemen that ever stepped, brave and tender and
true. There are still, I doubt not, people in the Madras
Presidency who remember the tremendous efforts which
he, in company with many another noble-hearted English-
man, made in the relief of the poor, sorely-smitten natives
during that terrible famine which took place in India some
thirty years ago. Years later, when he w r as Wesleyan chap-
lain at Aldershot, how well do I remember, when home
for my vacations, accompanying him to the military hos-
pital, where he cheered the sick and dying soldier, or to
the military gaol of a Sunday morning, where, like a great-
hearted brother, he talked helpfully to the poor, foolish
fellows who had got into trouble in their regiments. And
I was with him at the soldier’s graveside, when the coffin
had been lifted from the gun carriage, and the firing party
stood with arms reversed, whilst he read, with a light as
from another world upon his countenance, those glorious
words of hope that have comforted the grief-stricken hearts
of bystanders at many a graveside. As I have advanced
in life, I have felt that, in his example, he left me some-
thing worth far more than a great fortune.
His father before him, though I never knew him, was,
I believe, of the same type—a Wesleyan minister in the


old country, simple, courteous, and devout, “ more skilled
to raise the wretched than to rise.”
At eighteen years of age I was, for six months, employed
in secretarial work by my father’s cousin, Dr. T. Bowman
Stephenson, whose efforts to rescue the poor waifs and
strays of London and other great cities started about the
same time as Dr. Barnardo’s. His name has not, perhaps,
been quite so world-famous as that of his friend, Dr. Bar-
nardo, for his work was not advertised in the same way.
Nevertheless, under God, society owes to his efforts the
rescue of something like twenty thousand children, trained
to high and noble aims, and now useful and honourable
members of society, who would otherwise have been sucked
down in the world’s frightful maelstrom of misery. He
has himself been obliged to retire from active connection
with the institutions known by his name, but the work goes
on. I remember thinking, Avhen I left the “ Children’s
Home ” and my great-hearted, simple-mannered cousin
whom all children so dearly loved, “ I have known a great
man if I never know another.” Yes, I am proud of my
poor relations, and, penniless myself, I welcome poverty as
a sweet sister.
Some few weeks after this visit of the Minister, one
morning, when I was strolling to and fro along the gar-
den path in front of my cottage, thinking about the next
issue of my little “ Record,” I began to wonder if it would
ever grow into a decently printed weekly, bi-weekly, or
even daily paper. “Of course it should do so,” I argued,
“ if the population of the island increased as it ought to
increase. But, then, the population does not seem to be
increasing. On the other hand, here are people leaving
the island,” and I counted up ten who either had just left
or were about to leave for New Zealand or elsewhere.
“ Well, is it likely to increase?” I asked myself, and I tried
fairly to review the situation, and all suddenly the scales
seemed to drop from my eyes, and I saw that the insati-
able avarice of the few was closing its cruel grip upon the
island, and strangling the life out of the place.
“My God!” I exclaimed, “ this is monstrous iniquity,
infernal wickedness. It ought to be stopped. It is time
someone uttered loud and vigorous protest. But who is


ever likely to do it?” And then the thought was borne
in on me,
“You—you are the man to speak about it!”
“ But I do not want to.”
“ No matter for that,” the little voice seemed to say;
“this is your call. You know a good deal of the wrong,
and can find out more. You can speak! You can write!
You must protest!”
And then I said—“ God help me to take my courage in
both hands. I am only a little man, but the good God
cannot want this sort of thing to go on, and He will help
me.”
For two long, calm, sunny days I strolled about the
grounds surrounding my little cottage, my hands plunged
deep in my breeches pockets, thinking out every aspect of
the question so far as I could. The Sunday followed, and
I was engaged to dine at the house of some kind and
hospitable friends four miles away from Currie. After
dinner, others dropped in, and there was a pleasant gather-
ing for afternoon tea at 4 o’clock. At my request, a
charming and beautiful young lady took her seat at the
piano and sang for me, and when I was asked to sing I
chose the dreamy little ditty, “ Shells of Ocean.”
One summer eve, with pensive thought,
I stood upon the sea-beat shore,
Where oft in heedless infant sport
I gathered shells in days before.
The plashing wave like music fell
Responsive to my fancy wild.
A dream came o’er me like a spell
I thought I was again a child.
I stooped upon the pebbly strand
To cull the toys that round me lay.
But as I took them in my hand
I threw them one by one away.
“ O thus,” I said, “ at every stage
By toys our fancy is beguiled ;
We gather shells from youth to age
And then we leave them like a child.”
And a few minutes after I had finished the song I felt
the time had come for me to put pen to paper, and, resist-
ing a strong temptation to accept kind' invitations to
remain for the evening, I took my horse and rode back into


Currie. Sitting down at once, I wrote, without hesitation
and with scarcely a stop, my indictment, which was intended
as an open letter to the members of the Tasmanian House
of Assembly.
SOME SIDE LIGHTS ON THE KING ISLAND
LAND QUESTION.
King Island,
April 4, 1906.
Sir, —One of the first matters which will come up for
discussion when the House of Assembly meets at Hobart
will be the question of the reclassification of certain selected
lands on King Island. So unusual a proposition will pro-
bably afford subject matter for a lengthy debate, and the
proposition is indeed deserving of careful consideration
in the interests of the settlement of King Island.
The Minister of Lands on his recent visit made himself
thoroughly conversant with the disabilities under which
the holders of very inferior land labour, and he will, I pre-
sume, state the case to the House, and be ready to make
suggestions.
There are, however, some facts bearing on the matter
which are also deserving of attention, and it is because
members will probably be desirous to make themselves
as fully acquainted as possible with the state of things
really existing that I venture to furnish the information
contained in this open letter.
Most of the members are probably not aware that,
although a survey chart of the island shows that the land
selected is divided into a vast number of blocks, bearing
almost as many different names, this land is really held by
a very few persons. This is accounted for by the fact
that dummying has been rife upon the island.
A solution of the difficulty in regard to reclassification
might be found if the Government acted with a firm hand,
and carried out the law by forfeiting the dummied land in
accordance with the Act, giving bona fide selectors of the
poor land, for which reclassification is being asked, the
opportunity of throwing up their blocks, and the first
chance of selecting from such forfeited lands.
If the Lands Department, through the looseness of its
administration, has been blind to what has been going


on, those who hold dummied land have done what they
have done with their eyes open, for on the forms of appli-
cation to purchase, furnished by the Lands Department,
they have been confronted by the two sections of the Act
given below, which are surely so clearly worded as to
afford no possibility of misinterpretation.
Perso?is ca?mot act as Agents.
38. No person shall become the purchaser of any Crown
land under this Part of this Act who is in respect of the
land which he applies to purchase, or any part thereof, a
servant of or an 'agent or trustee for any other person,
or who at the time of his application has entered into any
agreement express or implied to permit any other per-
son to acquire by purchase or otherwise any such land
or part thereof; and all contracts, agreements, and secu-
rities made, entered into, and given with the intent of
evading, or which (if the same were valid) would have
the effect of evading the provisions of this Section, shall
be illegal and absolutely void both at Law and in Equity;
and if any person shall, in evasion of the provisions of this
Section, become the purchaser of any land, all the right,
title, and interest of the purchaser or of his assignee hav-
ing notice of such evasion, and all moneys paid in respect
of such land, and the land itself, with all improvements
thereon, shall, on notification to that effect in the Gazette, r
be absolutely forfeited, and the said land shall again become
Crown land.
Penalty for entering. into illegal Contract.
39. Any person who shall enter into any such contract
or agreement declared to be illegal and void by the last
preceding Section of this Act shall be guilty of a Misde-
meanor, and on conviction thereof be liable to be fined
in any sum not exceeding One hundred Pounds or to be
imprisoned for a term not exceeding two years.
Surely these two sections of the Act were not meant to
be utterly disregarded.
Now, as I happen to have a pretty good knowledge of
the way in which dummying is carried on here, and have
always quietly protested against it as not only illegal, but
utterly wrong and mischievous, I feel that the time has
come for me to speak out publicly. I have been told by
those concerned that it is absurd to protest, because it is


done all over the colony. As I have never resided in Tas-
mania, I do not know about this, but if it is true, it seems
to me it is high time the practise should be stopped.
That there are several mixed up in this business, and that
the drastic measures which I venture to consider the
Government ought to take will create a convulsion on the
island for the time being cannot be questioned. But it is
equally certain that, if such measures are carried out, the
island will before long be ranch more prosperous than it
is ever likely to become under the present conditions.
I visited the island some thirteen years ago, shortly after
settlement had commenced. The settlers were then bona
■fide selectors. Six years ago I returned to the island, and
have resided here ever since, and I have watched with
growing uneasiness the progress of selection on the lines
I have indicated.
One of the earliest settlers was Mr. F. H. Stephenson.
He was joined, later on, in partnership by Mr. M. M.
Stephenson, and also by Mr. T. Gunn, of Launceston, who
was able to find the money to commence the dummying
which, as will be seen, they have carried on pretty success-
fully. Messrs. Stephenson and Gunn, of “ Yambacoona,”
are now the largest landholders upon the island, and some
people will be surprised to learn that they have become
the holders of something like 10,000 acres (this is well
within the mark) of the best land of the island by the selec-
tion of blocks ranging in area from 19 acres to 320 acres.
The survey chart shows the names of numerous Stephen-
sons and Gunns, and other persons, mostly sisters, aunts,
and cousins of the partners in this firm —persons who do
not reside upon the island, who have never paid anything
either towards survey fee or purchase money on the blb©ks
in their names, and who have absolutely no interest in the
estate beyond the fact that they have complacently lent
their names to enlarge the area of land held by the firm.
The method pursued has been to secure the signature
of each of these persons to a form of application, and then
to get him or her to sign a form transferring the land to
the firm. This has been, as will be seen, in direct defiance
of the Act quoted above. To be sure, this transfer is
worthless in law, but it does, in a measure, secure the firm
with the people whose names have been used, preventing


them from putting- in a claim for their blocks, should they
take a fancy to do so.
With a view to keeping up appearances, all transactions
between the firm and the Lands Department refer to the
blocks dummied under the names of the dummies. Com-
munications pass backwards and forwards concerning
blocks held by A , B ,or C , all “ c/o Stephen-
son and Gunn.” On the assessment roll of King Island
will be found a long list of owners of property occupied by
Stephenson and Gunn. That these people are not, in any
real sense of the word, owners can be proved easily enough
if the matter is looked into.
If this shallow device is sufficient to exculpate this firm
and others in the eyes of the law, then it is plain the Act
needs further amendment.
Now anyone who has visited and travelled through the
island is well aware that the greater portion of the Yam-
bacoona Estate is exceedingly valuable land. If figures
were quoted as to the stock which some parts of the Estate
are capable of carrying, they would scarcely be credited.
But it is safe to state that the land held by the firm might
be divided into ‘at least thirty dairy farms, on each of which
a family might earn a comfortable living.
If special reference has been made to Messrs. Stephen-
son and Gunn, it is because they are the worst offenders.
Others seeing that Messrs. Stephenson and Gunn were able
to proceed in this fashion with impunity have followed
their example. One man, who does not reside upon King
Island, holds 4000 acres, and there are others who hold
very much larger areas than the law allows.
Now, it has been proved that, with the right class of
land, a family can do very well on a 320-acre selection,
for there are a few people earning a very fair living on
such an area, or even a smaller one. Recently, too, it has
been proved that very good crops of potatoes can be grown
on the island. There is, however, very little encourage-
ment for the small settler to attempt the growing of crops
on any considerable scale, for the boat owned by Messrs.
Stephenson and Gunn, who have succeeded in choking
off other traders from the King Island trade, is so erratic
in its movements that ft is impossible to depend on get-
ting the crops to market. It does not seem to be to the
firm’s interest to study the small selectors.
Since the cry now everywhere is for “ closer settlement,”
it is worth noting that this might have been secured upon


the island, if selection had been confined to its honest and
legal course, though I will not say that it would have pro-
ceeded so rapidly as it has done. Still, even this is open
to question, for within the past three or four years num-
bers of would-be selectors, from Victoria and elsewhere,
have come to the island looking for land, only to leave
it in disgust at finding the best land all taken up. Had
they been able to settle down, it is natural to suppose that
others would have followed in their wake.
It is plain that a larger population would mean better
communication with the mainland, greatly increased local
revenue from the rates for the maintenance of the roads,
and greater revenue to the Government from taxation. As
it is, progress on the island is strangled by the illegitimate
holders of large estates, and the bona fide selectors seem
to stand a good chance of being squeezed out.
lam not a selector—l am only an onlooker, and though
I do not wish to advance my own opinions as of any value
in themselves, only for the sake of the public welfare, and
especially for the advancement of King Island, I earnestly
hope that strict inquiry will be instituted by the Govern-
ment. The petition for reclassification about to be con-
sidered by the House seems to me to furnish an opening
for this inquiry as to the way in which land is held on
King Island.
Yours faithfully,
T. ALFRED STEPHENSON.
“ The Record,” Currie Harbour.
CHAPTER VI.
When I felt called upon to move in this matter, I recog-
nized at once the utter futility of merely sending a com-
plaint to the Lands Department. That, I knew, had been
done several times by one and another without effect, so
I resolved to strike at the mischief in 50 places at once.
For this reason, on Tuesday, April 3, 1906, I printed off
on my cyclostyle machine 50 copies of the circular, which
covered five pages of foolscap. Afterwards I printed 60
more.
The elections for the Tasmanian Assembly were in pro-
gress, and the next mail would bring the papers contain


ing the list of successful candidates, so I had the circulars
all ready, done up in wrappers. The “ Yambacoona ” put
in her appearance at Currie on Saturday morning, April
7, and on receiving my papers I was able to address the
circulars to all the members of the Assembly. I also
decided to send copies to the “ Examiner ” and “ Daily
Telegraph,” of Launceston, the “ Emu Bay Times ” and
the Hobart “ Mercury,” as well as to one or two other
papers, and to Dr. Delany, Bishop of Laranda, and Dr.
Mercer, the Anglican Bishop of Tasmania. I knew of
them both as earnest social reformers.
I was very glad when the steamer got away with the
mails on the Monday. Some years before, in South Gipps-
land, I had been blocked in an undertaking by well-mean-
ing but foolish people, who put me to almost endless
trouble, and I determined, if possible, to avoid a recur-
rence of such a calamity.
When the mails had gone I breathed freely, and, deter-
mining to let the island know of the steps I had taken, I
announced in “ The Record” of Wednesday, April n,
that I would lecture in the hall on the following Saturday
evening, taking as my subject, “ What King Island Needs.””
Only a very moderate audience attended. Probably by
the Saturday everyone had got to know what I had been
doing, for I did not trouble about secrecy, and already
hostile feeling ran very strong.
I give here the digest of my speech, which I printed in
“ The Record ” of April 25: —
“On the evening of Saturday, April 15, Mr. T. A.
Stephenson delivered a lecture in the hall on the ‘ Needs
of King Island.’ In the opening of his address he said he
had been giving much thought to the subject of late, and,
at the outset, he would say that the principal need of the
island was a deeper religious tone. A good many people
seemed to fancy that, because they were so much cut off
from the world, they were cut off from God, and could do
very well without Him. They never made a greater mis-
take. The old laws laid down in the Bible were just as
true as ever to-day, and as absolute in regard to King
Island as anywhere else. It was impossible to disregard
them without bringing about trouble and suffering and
confusion. Very few people seemed to grasp the idea that


the greatest happiness was to be obtained in the practice
of altruism—that to one’s own self everything qutside of
self was of infinitely more importance than one’s own self.
The principal object for which he had called the meeting
was to tell them of the steps he had taken in the effort to
rectify certain gross abuses on the island. He could not
say whether any results would follow, but he had done his
best, under the conviction that the thing was laid upon
him as a duty. He had always protested quietly against
the wrongness of obtaining land by false pretences, but
he had never until lately realized all the mischief that the
land-dummying was producing upon the island. He had
been forced to the conviction that the man who obtained
land by false pretences w r as a worse enemy to society than
a burglar—he was committing a crime against the state
and against humanity. If it were possible to put a stop
to this mischief, he would protest against it as long as he
had breath to speak, or strength to drive his pen across
the paper. The island, in his opinion, should be peopled
from end to end. As it was, the land was more and more
tending to get into the hands of a few’ large landholders,
whose selfish greed made them utterly careless about the
general welfare. Were the island peopled as it ought to
he, there was no reason why there should not be a proper
township at Currie, with its library and other equipments
of civilized life; no reason why there should not be several
schools throughout the island for the proper education of
the children; no reason why there should not be two or
three boats coming to the island every week, instead of
the wildly uncertain and erratic communication maintained
by the ‘ Yambacoona.’ It was all very fine for the firm
of Stephenson and Gunn to pretend that the trade did not
warrant a regular service. They themselves had choked
off other traders, and had ‘ cruelled ’ the trade. He did
not wish to be too hard upon those who had thoughtlessly
dummied land, especially since the Lands Department had
given them encouragement to do so. He could not expect
everybody at once to see things as he had come to see
them only after long and painful thought. He would
impress upon them, however, that it was impossible to
diverge from the strict truth, in the slightest degree, with-
out causing trouble to themselves and others. He read


the circular which he had sent to members of the House
of Assembly. It might not have any effect; but he ear-
nestly hoped that some honest men had been returned at
the elections who would not let the matter drop without
a fight to put things straight.”
My audience was very attentive, though some of the
things said must have cut home pretty deeply in the case
of a few of those present.
The Monday following, Easter Monday, at the races,
the air seemed electric with the thought that was engross-
ing the attention of most people on the island. Land-
holders gathered in knots, and gloomily discussed this
thing that had come upon them, cheering one another with
the hope that the Government would do nothing in regard
to the information given, and that, at any rate, it would
be difficult to prove anything against them. I felt myself
the one man perfectly at ease, notwithstanding the fact
that I knew well people w r ere diligently sowing reports that
I had become insane on the land question. To be sure,
they were obliged to allow that mine was a modified mad-
ness, which permitted of my editing of my little paper, and
of the transaction of my everyday duties in life. Still, it
was good, so they thought, to contend that madness and
malice w'ere there.
One little incident that happened on the racecourse may
as well be narrated here, as showing the views of one at
least of these landholders. We had been acquainted with
one another for many years, had camped for weeks toge-
ther on different occasions, and had known what it was
to share the hardships of the early days of settlement upon
the island. I felt most kindly towards him, and when I
came across him leaning upon the rails just prior to one
of the races, I held out my hand with a genial “ Good-
morning, Fred.”
“ I don’t know that I want to shake hands with you,”
he said, withholding his hand.
“ Please yourself about that,” I laughed; “ though wdiy
not, I don’t know.”
“ Well, wLat did you want to go and do this thing for ?”
he said. “ You’ll only do us a lot of harm, and you are
going against all your old friends.”
“ Yes? lam sorry for that,” I said. “ Still, you know.


if you have been doing right, I can't possibly hurt you;
but if you have been doing wrong, isn’t it about time
someone spoke about it?”
“Well, it need not have been you; and what you want
to hurt us for, I don’t know.”
I have no desire to do you any damage at all,” I replied,
“ But it does not seem to occur to you that you large land-
holders, who have dummied land, are doing a very great
deal of harm to the great majority on the island. You’ve
practically got the island locked up now. And though you
may be doing very well yourselves, what about the rest
of us? Suppose 1 take an entirely selfish view of it—a
thing I don’t like doing—and consider my own case. Here
am I doing my best for the island, running a little paper
which brings in a few shillings a week, on which I’ve got
to live. Just because there isn’t sufficient population here
for a large circulation that paper is a poor little sheet that
has got to be cyclostyled. I doubt whether anybody else
could make anything out of it at all. Well, now, if you
people hadn’t dummied such a lot of land there might be
a chance of getting the place properly settled, and I could
have a proper printing press, with, perhaps, two or three
men employed, to print a decent paper that would bring
me in a comfortable little income. Now you big land-
holders don’t care two straws whether I sink or swim.
So, when you come to think of it, why should not I fight
for my own hand, and try to get the place settled in the
interests of my paper?”
“ Oh, I can’t talk to you!” he growled, and turned away
in disgust.
A good many tried breaking a lance with me, but they
were not one of them able to produce an argument in
favour of the evil state of things which could not easily
be refuted, and I had occasion to murmur to myself again
and again—
“ Thrice is he armed that hath his quarrel just.”
Still, I must allow that all the unkind speeches and the
misunderstandings I met with on the island were a little
wearing, and I felt greatly uplifted when I received from
the two bishops the letters given below. Each of these
gentlemen has kindly given me permission to publish his
letter in this book.


Archbishop's House, Hobart,
April 18, 1906.
Dear Sir, — I thank you for your letter and the copy of
the statement regarding the method of land appropriation
on King Island, which you describe.
I am afraid that the remarks made to you, to the effect
that such procedure has been known to exist in other parts
of this State, are too well founded. Indeed, I am assured
that a considerable property, not very far from this city,
has been enlarged by the present owner at the public
expense in even a less circuitous fashion.
If, sir, the facts are as you state, I must congratulate you
on the spirit which prompts you to their exposure. I fre-
quently say that it passes my comprehension to reconcile
the demand for immigration with the obvious fact that
youths of this State, who are well qualified to work the
land, are compelled to emigrate because they cannot find
land of the right sort for the working man available in
their native land.
I wish you all success in your patriotic undertaking.
Yours truly,
►h PATRICK DELANY,
Bishop of Laranda.
Bishop’s Court, Hobart,
April 18, 1906.
My Dear Mr. Stephenson, —Thank you for sending me
a copy of your very interesting statement. I feel very
strongly that all possible facilities should be given for
“ closer settlement,” especially as you point out, when com-
munication with the mainland and other conveniences
depend upon it.
But, of course, I cannot enter into the details of the
King Island case in any direct manner, inasmuch as I am
not sufficiently in touch with them to express an opinion
of any value. Should you think that 1 can be of service
on the general question, in case of further developments,
I shall be glad to hear from you again.
With every good wish,
I am,
Yours v. truly,
J. E/ TASMANIA.


CHAPTER VII.
In the papers which came by the same mail which
brought the letters from the two bishops, I noticed that,
though reference was made to my circular, none of them
had dared to print it. Of course I did not blame them
for that, for certainly it would have been most risky to
do so without positive proof of the truth of my assertions.
A paragraph, however; caught my eye, which gave some
account of a conversation between Mr. Hean and a repre-
sentative of one of the papers, from which I gathered that
the Minister of Lands was not disposed to deal seriously
with the “Side Lights.”
“So that’s the way of it,” I said to myself. “ I shall
just have to come over to Tasmania and talk to some of
you people.”
Fortunately, Messrs. Holyman and Sons’ steamer
“ Koonookarra was due at the island, under charter to
the Marine Board, on her Mav trio with stores for the
lighthouses. She arrived about the 10th of May. I
managed to scrape together six pounds, and my good
friend, Capt. Jim Holyman, gave me a passage to Laun-
ceston. Though almost a stranger in Tasmania, my way
opened in a most wonderful fashion, and I was quickly
in touch with just the very people who could be most use-
ful to my cause. During the four days of my stay in
Launceston, I w r as fortunate enough to meet, among
others. Bishop Mercer, who has made his strong person-
ality felt in the Commomvealth in his efforts to raise the
tone of social life. I had a long chat with him, and received
much kindly encouragement. '
In Hobart, again I was guided to the people most likely
to be serviceable. Dr. Delany had been expecting me,
and when I visited him at the Archbishop’s House, he
received me most kindly and helpfully.
I would like to say here that, both in Launceston and
Hobart, I met with the utmost courtesy from the editors
of the papers, all of wdiom I had the honour of interview-
ing. They might be guarded about dealing with the mat-
ter in their leading columns—and I did not much wonder
at that, for 1 had come over to wage a fight single-handed


without any support from the island—and it was natural
that they should look just a little askance on a mission
not backed up at least by a petition of aggrieved islanders.
However, the meetings, to which reference will presently
be made, were very fairly reported, a larger space being
allotted to the reports than, as an utterly unknown man,
I had expected. This betokened to me a recognition that
I was not merely fighting the air.
When one has to act as one’s own “ advance agent,”
everything in the nature of help is most gratefully wel-
comed. Prior to my Hobart meeting, the editor of the
“ Evening News,” in order to assist me, sent round a
reporter to my lodgings to interview me, and published
a sympathetic report of the interview, which was undoubt-
edly of service. I was much touched by this kindly treat-
ment of a little brother-in-arms.
As the formal opening of Parliament was to take place
on May 28, most of the members happened to be in Hobart,
and I became acquainted with a number of them. The
man who impressed me as undoubtedly by far and away
the most capable amongst them, and as the one from whom
Tasmania had most to hope in the future, was Mr, Herbert
Nicholls, the leader of the Opposition. I found him warmly
in sympathy with me, and was very glad to secure him as
chairman of the meeting which I addressed in the Hobart
Town Hall on the. night of May 29. I was told the gather-
ing was a very representative one. Nine members of Par-
liament were present, including the Premier and the Minis-
ter of Lands, who astonished me more than ever during
the meeting by making hostile interjections, until I was
nettled into saying that Tasmania needed a very clear-
headed man to make inquiry into the state of affairs regard-
ing Crown lands —that I was quite sure they had not got
him yet, and that he would have to be a very clear-headed
man indeed to unravel all the miserable tangle existing
in the Lands Department. These remarks brought down
the house, and Mr. Hean did not seem as though he wanted
to say very much more.
I stated the position as clearly as I could in a speech last-
ing an hour and a half, and, after I had finished speaking,
the chairman declared to the meeting that I had made out
a very strong prima facie case for an inquiry, A mistake


which, as a novice, I fell into was the omission to secure
the passing of a resolution. However, the meeting seemed
to have had some effect.
On the day following this meeting I went down to
Sandy Bay, where for a week I was the guest of an old
schoolfellow—that distinguished mathematician. Professor
Macaulay, of the Hobart University. There I browsed at
will over the books in his well-stocked shelves, whilst he
pushed forward into, as yet, untrodden fields of mathe-
matical research. Pie told me that, having some time
before completed his work on “ Octonians,” he was then
busy producing a book about ‘‘ Multinians,” which was
to be published by the Royal Society, and which, perhaps,
some half-dozen people in the world might understand.
I did not ask him what would come next, but I suppose
it will be the “ Millennium.” At any rate, I spent a most
delightfully restful week, and gathered strength to take
iip my task again in Launceston.
Hobart has a reputation for a fine, old, crusted conser-
vatism, but I did not meet there with anything like the
hostile feeling that showed itself in Launceston. King
Island is a long way away from Hobart, and seemed a
“ terra incognita ”to most of the Hobart people. So my
attacks did not come home to them personally.
In Launceston, however, things were different. Most of
the King Island trade was done with Launceston, and,
besides, many of the Launceston people were, in one way
or another, mixed up with this land scandal. To illustrate
the callous indifference of certain people to this land-dum-
mying, and their failure to recognize the evil of it, I may
mention the following little incident, which took place in
the room of the manager of one of the Launceston banks
prior to my going to Hobart: —
I was pressed for time, and, being unable to pay a visit
to a sick man at the hospital during the regular visiting
hours, I went round to see this bank manager, who was
chairman of the hospital committee, to ask for a special
order. He readily wrote me the note, which subsequently
secured my admission to the hospital, and, after writing
it, began chaffing me about my campaign.
“ Why, you’ll never upset this dummying,” he said,
“ Everybody does it. Why, I’m a dummy myself.”


“By Jove! of course you are,” I laughed. “I remem-
ber the name now. You are C ’s brother-in-law. I
know he has a block in your name.”
Poor C ! If ever there was a man born with a
capacity for showing people how not to do things, surely it
was he. No doubt he worked hard enough when I was
on the island, but it would have been much better if his
bungling energies had confined their attention to a legiti-
mate 320-acre block, instead of spreading themselves in
futile fashion over some 2000 acres. And this is a point
I have strongly maintained for a long time (it seems so
obvious that it would scarcely be worth mentioning, only
so few of the island people seem to have been able to see
it) —that the thorough working of 320 acres, or even a
much lesser area, would prove much more profitable than
the slovenly working of 1000 acres. And, besides, one
might have helpful neighbours on the other two blocks
illegitimately filched from the State. The land is not given
a fair chance to do its best when held in these larger areas.
Anyone who wishes to know about the possibilities of a
small holding has only to read that charming American
book, “ The Fat of the Land,” which came out a year or
two ago. But I must get back to Launceston. This town
is remarkable as a great church-going place, and strikes
me, too, as a place where the smug, respectable class have
their attention much divided between the worship of God
and that of Mammon. Strange it is that, after all these
years, people have not yet found out the absolute truth
of Christ’s words —“ Ye cannot serve God and Mammon.”
Like a good many other people elsewhere, some of the
Launceston people, if they dared, would say in words, as
they do say by their actions —” O, yes we can. We know
better than that. We’ve found out the trick of it.”
Unfortunately for the man who thinks he has discovered
this trick; the result is that the God idea fades out of him,
and the man’s soul dies. And “ what shall it profit a man
if he gain the whole world and lose his own soul?”
For how much of this state of things are the clergy
responsible? I believe if Jesus appeared in the flesh again,
He would be terribly angry with lots of these men who
live in good houses and draw r comfortable salaries for pro-
fessing to teach people about Him, never having learnt to


know Him themselves, and disobedient to many of His
precepts —“ blind leaders of the blind.” No wonder the
“man in the street” doesn’t enter the church, though
always down at the bottom of his heart there is an unsatis-
fied hunger for the good God, and he would give anything
for somebody to show him the way back to the Father
of us all, “ who is not far from every one of us.” Thank
God! there are good men among the clergy. But how
few! and the harvest is so plenteous.
The Mayor took the chair for me at my Launceston
meeting on June 18, and the audience, which was only fair,
consisted largely of members of the Labour League. Had
it not been for their presence, there would have been very
few at the meeting, so I felt grateful to Mr. Guy, the secre-
tary of the Launceston Labour League, a working black-
smith, whose acquaintance I was proud to make, for I
found that, with good reason, he was greatly respected.
He had done his best to whip in members of the league to
the meeting. With all the hostile thought that was in the
air in Launceston, I did not feel so comfortable in speak-
ing as at Hobart. There was some little opposition in
the meeting, too, by friends of land-dummiers, but I was
told afterwards that I carried 95 per cent, of the meeting
with me, and that that was as much as any man could be
expected to do. A resolution, moved by Mr. Guy and
seconded by a Mr, Horne, was carried, to the effect that,
in the opinion of the meeting, a Parliamentary inquiry
should be made into the truth of my allegations. The
Mayor undertook to forward copies of this resolution to
both Upper and Lower Houses,
The “ Yambacoona ” happened to come in from King
Island on the day after this meeting, and that day and the
day following I came across more than one angry King
Island landholder. One of them did his to discour-
age me, something after the following fashion:—
“ No one’s taking any notice of you, except a few work-
ing men. What you are doing won’t have any effect. The
respectable monied people haven’t any sympathy with you.”
“ My dear chap,” I replied, “ if there’s one being on the
face of the earth for whom I have a respect it’s the man
who works. You see, I’m such a confoundedly lazy beg-
gar myself that the sight of an energetic working man


fills me with admiration. And, really, do you know, I
rather suspect that a good many of these ‘ respectable
monied people ’ have got their money very dishonestly.”
Another man I met in the Launceston streets said to
me —
“ Now, what did you want to kick up all this fuss for?
You're too fond of rushing into print. We were all get-
ting along very nicely and quietly together until you
created this disturbance.”
“ My good sir,” said I, “ I don’t belong to a ‘ keep-it-
dark ’ society! If everything is as it should be, I’m only
making a fool of myself, and that needn’t trouble you.”
“ Well, you’ve known all about it for years. Why didn’t
you do it before, if you wanted to? It looks very like
spite.”
“Yes, I’ve heard that a good many times. It makes
me feel tired. Now, there are some people that ‘ love
darkness rather than light, because their deeds are evil.'
Perhaps you are one of them,” and I turned on my heel.
He rushed after me, clutching my elbow.
“ Look here, Stephenson,” he said, his face working with
rage, “ if we were by ourselves in the bush I’d smash your
jaw for speaking to me like that.”
“If we were by ourselves in the bush,” I said, “ the
probability is I should speak to you very much more for-
cibly than I’m doing now. You might hit me as much as
you pleased. I don't know that I should take the trouble
to hit you back. It’s a fool’s game, and no argument, any-
way. Besides, it wouldn’t alter the facts.” And I left him
to chew the cud of his reflections.
The next morning I saw him at the wharf, just as the
“ Yambacoona ” was leaving for King Island. He did not
look too pleasantly at me.
” Come, come,” I said, “ it’s not the individuals that I’m
after. It’s the whole rotten system. Of course, I think a
lot of you need putting right. But there’s no need for us
to quarrel. We may as well shake hands.” And we did so.
He is dead since. 1 am glad I shook hands with him.


CHAPTER VIII.
No one need suppose that I derived any very great
pleasure from these passages-at-arms. On the other hand,
they somewhat jarred on my sensibilities, but they at least
served this purpose,, that every fresh discussion strength-
ened my position; for. in their anxiety to embarrass me,
these landholders only placed in my bands fresh weapons
for attack.
Probably I knew more about the island than almost any
of them. With the exception, perhaps, of some half-dozen
of the old hunters, I do not suppose that anyone has been
about and through the island so much as I. For a con-
siderable time I myself eked out a livelihood hunting with
a small pack of dogs, and this led me into all sorts of
out-of-the-way places on the island, known only to the very
few. Then, again, though not a farmer myself, 1 have seen
farming in many places, and under many conditions, both
in the old world and in Australia, and perhaps I am not
altogether unobservant. A dreamy philosopher will absorb
facts in a manner surprising even to himself, although he
has, apparently, been taking little notice. So that 1 rather
fancy even the professional King Island farmer, when he
wanted to beat me down with his superior knowledge,
found that I was not very greatly at a disadvantage, more
especially as, particularly during the nine months of “ The
Record's ” career, I had made it my business to gel a
fairly good idea of what was being done in the farming line
•all over the island.
At the same time, I should have been glad of a little
•sympathy and support from some of those on the island
who, for years, had been groaning under the oppression
of the land-dummying evil. The feeling may have been
weak, but it was human. For this reason I penned the
open letter given below, 50 copies of which I printed off
with my cyclostyle, and sent to the island for general dis-
tribution. This letter will serve to show how the horizon
of my vision, in regard to the land question, had already
extended itself far beyond the bounds by which it had
been limited when I started my campaign.


AN OPEN LETTER TO RESIDENTS OF KING
ISLAND.
Many people seem to find a difficulty in understanding
the motives which have actuated me in doing what I have
felt to be my duty in the interests of King Island, of the
State, and of humanity. Perhaps I may be excused for
thinking that the years of careful thought and study which
I have given to social matters have resulted in a deeper
insight into those things which affect the well-being of my
fellow-man than is possible to those whose judgment is
clouded by self-interest and by persistence in a wrong
course of action.
I carefully counted the cost before I entered upon this
campaign. I knew how excessively disagreeable it would
be to me. I knew the bitterness it would cause. I knew
that I should be treated with scornful abuse and with
malicious slander, and that the meanest motives would be
ascribed to me by mean people. These things I have had
to suffer, but they have not made me flinch, for I have felt
that I was doing right.
On the other hand, I have received much kindness since
I came to Tasmania, and I have been encouraged by many
to persist, in the hope that much-needed reform may be
brought about.
The trouble in regard to the land is recognized by all
the thoughtful men I have come across as being the root
trouble, not only of this colony, but of the Commonwealth
at large, and, for the matter of that, of the whole Empire.
I find I have engaged myself with a very big question, and
though I started with an effort to expose the irregularities
in regard to land selection on the island, King Island,
really, is a mere insignificant detail in the whole question.
Now, whilst I have made some bitter enemies upon the
island, I know that there are many who are in sympathy
with me in my efforts to secure the proper settlement of
the island, and to bring about a better state of things
generally. It would greatly strengthen my hands if such
people—l do not care what their position on the island
may be—would send me letters, or a paper bearing a num-
ber of signatures, expressing - their sympathy and desire
to encourage me. I am determined, now I have taken the


matter up, to spare no effort to have things sifted
thoroughly to the very bottom.
In conclusion, I would say that I have none but the
kindest wishes to all the dwellers upon the island. I only
wish that all could see with clearer eyes.
T. ALFRED STEPHENSON.
Launceston, June 12, 1906.
Only one person wrote to me in response to this letter;
a dear old widow lady to whom I had been able to show
some trifling kindness before I left the island. She had
three sons, working men, who, under proper conditions,
should have been farming their own land, but, as it was,
had to work for wages. And in her letter she told me that
four hearts upon the island, at any rate, beat in unison with
mine—a cheering little letter. Ido not keep account of
these things, but somehow I do not think this lady was the
only person on the island to whom I had tried to show
kindness.
The would-be reformer must have a large reserve of
philosophy to draw upon. Mine was pretty heavily taxed.
Having exhausted nearly all my money, I resolved to leave
for Melbourne, feeling that my efforts had been in vain.
I had foolishly allowed myself to forget for the time that
the battle was not mine, and that I was merely fighting
under orders. Very likely that is why I had to retire
hurt, and, for some months, to learn again what it was
to be smashed into Humility and utter self-distrust.
Friends, health, property, reputation seemed all dissipated,
and a great dissatisfaction arose in my mind, a feeling that
I had got off the track and was lost. Truly there are pas-
sages in the career of the would-be reformer that are not
easy.
The loss of my little property was a trifling matter.
Many years ago I proved entirely to my own satisfaction
that “ a man's life consisteth not in the abundance of the
things that he possesseth,” and more than once or twice
I have let go my hold of things. But the other losses made
up rather a bitter draught for the swallowing.
During this time I began to wonder if, after all, I had
not made a great mistake. Nearly every business man I
had come across seemed to think the whole thing so
unpractical. Who was I to set up my judgment against


that of men who had made a success in this world’s affairs ?
Then came “ the snowstorms of illusions.” Emerson
speaks about “ the mad crowd driving hither and thither,,
now furiously demanding this thing to be done, now that.
What was I that I should resist their will, and think or
act for myself?” And perhaps this passage may explain
to three people how it was I came to write letters to them,
expressing regret for harsh words used, though I never
wavered in my opinion as to the main issue—the wrong-
ness of land-dummying.
And at last, after all the feverish fretting and fuming,
I gave in entirely, and had to own up, like Job, that I
was nothing, and God could do everything; and the
thought forced itself upon me like an order given in stern
kindness —“ Be still, and know that lam God.” A great
calm stole over me, and I recalled the words of the poet
Milton, expressing bis resignation in his blindness —
“ God doth not need
Either man’s work, or His own gifts ; who best
Bear His mild yoke, they serve Him best; His state
Is kingly ; thousands at His bidding speed,
And post o’er land and ocean without rest;
They also serve who only stand and wait.”
The reason I have referred in this fashion to my experi-
ences is that perhaps it may help someone else clamber-
ing up the same track to find a blaze or two, showing that
it is possible to get by that way.
And then there seemed to come out of the stillness the
clear note of the bugle sounding the rally, and I knew it
was time to take my place once more in the fighting line,
never again, I hope, to forget that the supreme command
is in the hands of the great Captain, the strong Son of
God, immortal Love, who, ever since He gave up His life
upon the cross for us men, has steadily been gaining
ground in His fierce warfare against all the sin and wicked-
ness of this world. Oh, my brothers! the Christ is not
the poor, weak, maudlin, puny creature held up before
us in only too many of our churches! With all His
infinite Jove He is a great and terrible fighter. Won’t
you rally up under His banner? His service demands
that we make sacrifices, but remember He sacrificed all
for us, ” who, for the joy that was set before Him, endured
the cross, despising the shame.”


CHAPTER IX.
Before I enter upon an account of how my agitation
was dealt with in the Tasmanian Parliament, I want to
say one thing here. Frequently have I been taunted with
being unchristian for speaking so fiercely as I have had
occasion to do at times. Now, I say emphatically that
that is most damnable rubbish, and such taunts can only
be the result of the false teaching given in so many of the
churches which I have more than once referred to in this
book. I w r ould remind some of the clergy that the “ meek
and lowly Jesus ” they are so fond of holding up as an
excuse for that cowardly and hypocritical thing they call
“ tact ” said, “ I came not to send peace on the earth, but
a sword.”
I don’t believe in bullying men because they gamble,
or drink, or do a lot of other things better left alone. I
am only a sinner myself, and they have my sympathy
till they get clearer light. I would try to show them a
“ more excellent way.” But when I see a worthless man,
who has successfully intrigued himself, or has been foisted,
into a prominent position in which he is, unfortunately,
capable of doing almost incalculable mischief, deluding the
people into thinking him a very fine fellow, if I feel called
upon to do it, I shall, without hesitation, denounce that
man in the strongest language at my command, and in
doing so I shall be perfectly satisfied that I am treading
closely in the footsteps of my Master, who was unsparing
in Plis denunciations of those who, in His day, were lead-
ing people astray.
Not long after I first went to Hobart I discovered that
there was little to hope for from the Ministerial side of
the House. I will not say that the Treasurer, the Attor-
ney-General, the Minister of Lands treated me with any-
thing else but civility when I called upon them; the Pre-
mier I did not see privately, though I tried to do so. I
know he was worn out at the time, and very much over-
worked. Nevertheless, I could not help feeling that if I


had suddenly been translated to Jericho, not one of them
would have been very greatly grieved at my removal, or
would have looked forward with longing expectancy for
my return.
If a Select Committee to inquire were to be appointed,
it was evident that the motion must come from the Oppo-
sition. Mr. Herbert Nicholls, as leader of the Opposition,
and as an independent member to boot, would have been
the best man to move for such a committee ; but had he
done so, as a matter of Parliamentary etiquette, he would,
of course, have been obliged to go on the committee him-
self, and there is no doubt that the inquiry would have
taken a considerable time. In active profession as one of
the leading lawyers of Hobart, and besides having two or
three big reforms of his own on his hands, he asked me
not to press him to bring the matter forward, but promised
that, if I would get another member to do so, he would
vigorously assist him, should a debate arise.
The Labour Party seemed to me the most likely to take
the matter up, but I confess I had reason to be very much
disappointed in the representatives of that party in the
House of Assembly. Whilst I was in Hobart, Mr. Woods,
of the “ Clipper,” professed to be greatly interested, and
he certainly gave me to understand that he would press
for a Select Committee to inquire. At the same time he
urged me to memorialize the House, which I subsequently
did. I also furnished him with ample evidence to show
that my statements were incontrovertible.
After coming to Melbourne I repeatedly wrote to him,
but could get no reply, until at last I received a post card
with these words written on one side—
Dr. Sir, —The other side discloses Govt, intentions.
What next? Yrs., W. A. W.
I found, on the pasted other side of the card, a cutting
from “ Hansard,” in the following terms: —
Mr. Earle (for Mr. Woods) asked the Honourable the
Minister of Lands and Works—
i. Whether any official inquiry had been held as to the
allegations of dummying made by Mr. T. A. Stephenson
in connection with sales of Crown lands at King Island?


2. If so, with what result ?
3. If not, is it the intention of the Government to hold
such inquiry?
Mr. Hean replied—
“ 1. Yes.
2. That I am satisfied the charges made by Mr. Ste-
phenson are not warranted. No grants have been issued
unless the conditions of the Act have been complied with.”
It almost reads as though Mr. Earle had allowed the
questions to be framed for him by the Minister of Lands.
I do not like to make charges of insincerity, but Mr. Woods
certainly raised expectations which he did not fulfil.
It was on the receipt of this post card that I wrote ths
following letter, which appeared in the Hobart “ Mer-
cury ” on October 23: —
KING ISLAND LANDS.
To the Editor of “ The Mercury.”
Sir, —Had my attention not been drawn to the replies
made by the Minister of Lands to questions asked in the
House of Assembly relative to my circular, “ Some Side-
lights on the King Island Land Question,” I should pro-
bably have let the matter drop into oblivion, concluding
that those responsible for the conduct of the State’s affairs
were either too apathetic or too timid to deal with it.
Since, however, Mr. Hean has chosen to state that official
inquiry has been held as to my allegations, and that he is
satisfied that the charges made by me are not warranted,
I have been led to wonder what amount of inquiry pro-
duced in him that feeling of satisfaction. I am certain
that, if the inquiry had been thorough, he must have dis-
covered that the conditions of the Lands Acts laid down
in the section, persons may not act as agents,” have, in
many cases, not been complied with—have, in fact, very
frequently been evaded. Mr. Hean’s replies may be diplo-
matic, but there is not a very honest ring about them.
Since the matter is one of immense public importance,
not only for its own sake, but also as a test case, I do not
think that the House should allow itself to rest satisfied
with Mr. Hean’s complacent assurance that he is satisfied.


If proper inquiry is held—inquiry conducted with a real
desire to get at the truth —plenty of evidence will be forth-
coming to show that the charges made by me are war-
ranted. Those who have shown opposition to them (no
one. so far as I know, has attempted the hopeless task of
disproving them) have been directly interested in defeat-
ing the ends of justice. I foresaw that every effort would
be made to' smother the inquiry, and Mr. Hean seems to
have lent himself a ready tool for this purpose,—Yours,
etc.,
T. ALFRED STEPHENSON.
Melbourne, October 17.
I noticed that, immediately after this appeared, Mr.
Brettingham Moore got up in the House and challenged
Mr. Hean with reference to the remarks in my letter. The
Minister replied as he had done to Mr. Earle. I might
mention, by the way, that the inquiry he declared he had
made never reached me. He apparently did not seem to
think it worth while to ask me for the proofs of my asser-
tions, which I would most readily have furnished.
That seems to have ended all allusion to the subject,
except that, a little later, speaking in connection with the
petition for the reclassification of King Island lands, Mr.
Hean had got to feel so secure of his ground that he made
a jocular little remark about some people thinking they
knew so much more about the Lands Acts than the mem-
bers of the Government; and this, by the newspaper report,
seems to have raised an approving laugh in the House,
0 temp or a! 0 mores!
Mr. McKenzie, M.L.A., the member for Wellington, is
scarcely worth mentioning in connection with the affair,
as he seems to be a mere cipher in the House. I might,
however, say that I wrote to him three times without
receiving a line in reply. This was the man who
announced in his electioneering speech on King Island that
he was “opposed to dummying.” As he had been twenty
years in the House without lifting up his voice against
it, I did not think his opposition amounted to very much.
Still, by advice, as he was member for the district, I
entrusted my memorial to the House of Assembly to his


charge. But he never answered me, nor have I learnt
that the memorial was ever brought under the notice of
the House.
I wrote to Mr. Mean, especially when I forwarded the
circulars. He had made a favourable impression upon me
when he visited King Island as a man who at least wished
to be serviceable; and, in writing. I urged him to take
hold of the matter with a strong hand. I was quite pre-
pared to hope that the information I was giving was new
to him. He never replied to my letter. Still, I called
upon him shortly after arriving in Hobart, and my good
opinion of him rapidly waned when I found he felt him-
self aggrieved because I had sent the circular to every
member of the House of Assembly.
“ Well, Air. Hean,” I said, “ I do not think you should
be annoyed about that. I know complaints about this
land-dummying on King Island have repeatedly been made
by others to the Lands Department, and no notice has
been taken of the complaints. So I thought it was about
time to let everybody know.’’
And after that I heard of Air. H can's methods. How,
with nods, and winks, and oily leers, and fat shoulder-
shruggings, the Minister of Lands went whispering about
among the members of the House of Assembly—
“ There is nothing in it. I know all about it. Just a
bit of revengeful spite, you know, arising out of a family
quarrel.”
If my pen refuses to write other than savagely of this
poor, flabby creature, unmindful of his high office as cus-
todian of Crown lands, the most important asset of the
State and of the Empire, is it much to be wondered at
when it is remembered that the man, knowing differently,
had the impudence to get up in the House twice over, and
state, in reply to questions, that the charges I had made
were not warranted? What a splendid opportunity was
given to him to vindicate his office and to render such
service to Tasmania as had never before been rendered,
by a Alinister of Lands! The opportunity was there, but
the man was wanting.


The letter given below goes some way towards explain-
ing the attitude of the Minister of Lands, though it cer-
tainly affords him no excuse. The writer, previously
unknown to me, had seen in one of the Tasmanian papers
that I was editing “ The Record,” and sent me an order
for back numbers. When I decided to write this book,
I asked his permission to print the letter. His remarks
reminded me of Mr. McKenzie’s speech on King Island,
in which he told us that the Nicholls-Propsting Ministry
had managed to pass measure after measure through the
Lower House, only to have them thrown out by the Upper
House, so that they had to give up the reins of Govern-
ment in despair.
The Evans Ministry, of which he boasted himself a sup-
porter, had, however, succeeded in passing most of its
measures right through both Houses. When I came to
know what I afterwards found out, I was satisfied that
these men, greedy for office, could only retain their posi-
tions and their salaries by a crawling subserviency to the
Council. In response to some remark of mine about a
certain course of action in politics being unpatriotic, one
-of the Ministers wdth whom I was conversing said—
“ Well, it’s a man’s first business to look after himself,
isn’t it? You don’t blame him for that?”
It did not seem worth my while to reply to him; but
I wondered what hope there could be of good government
with men in office who held such grovelling ideals, or no
ideals. However, here is the letter —
Thursday Island,
October 24, 1906.
Dear Sir, —I must apologise for having failed to acknow-
ledge receipt of ” Records ” and circular at an earlier date.,
I must admit carelessness in having failed to do so, while,
to some extent, I can blame our mail service, which, though
somewhat irregular, is rather better than that enjoyed by
the residents of King Island.
I read the circular with great interest, as I am thoroughly
conversant with the methods adopted by the King Islanders
in obtaining land by unfair means. I have had conversa-
tions with several of the King Island settlers on the sub


ject, but few of them seemed to realise there was anything
wrong; and I am greatly afraid that, until there is a great
change in the personnel of the Tasmanian Parliament,
there is very little chance of getting reform in that direc-
tion.
I am quite at a loss to understand Mr. Mean’s state-
ment to the effect that your charges were unfounded, as
he knows, as well as you do, that dummying is rampant.
I look upon such a statement as not only unfair to you,,
but decidedly cruel. Whatever may be done by the Tas-
manian Lower House in attempting to carry the Lands
Act into effect, a glance at the names of the members of
the Upper House is sufficient guarantee that they will
block any reform. Messrs, [and here follow several
names, which I do not print, not knowing enough about
the men.—T. A. S. ] and several others are very large land-
holders, and I fear they obtained the most of it by methods
very similar to those adopted by Stephenson and Gunn,.
Hardman, McMahon, or other King Island settlers.
Thanking you for your kindness in forwarding circular,,
which I will keep as something likely to be historical,
I remain, yours very truly,
JOSEPH CLANCY.
How much longer are the people of Tasmania going
to content themselves with this state of things? From
my observation of what has taken place on King Island,
I am entirely convinced that men who stoop to these
fraudulent practices in land transactions entirely unfit
themselves either for the making of laws or for seeing
that they are kept. Not only does their judgment in
regard to matters of right and wrong become completely
fogged and utterly unreliable, but they may be expected,,
if placed in responsible positions, either as members of
Parliament or as magistrates, to use those positions at
every turn to their own advantage. Thus they become
a real and very serious danger to the community, which
cannot escape being poisoned by their evil influence.


CHAPTER X.
To what good purpose have these pages been written?
Well, I am demanding that the laws of the State of Tas-
mania be carried out. I make that demand as a citizen,
and also in fulfilment of the oath I took when I was sworn
in as Justice of the Peace for the district of Russell—that
I would do my level best to see that the laws were kept.
As the Tasmanian Parliament has refused to listen to
my demand, I appeal to the people. The political life of
the community is at stake, and it is surely only necessary
to arouse the feeling of justice, the consciousness of what
is right, latent in the hearts of the men and women of Tas-
mania, and to stir them up to a knowledge of the very real
danger that hangs over them, in order to persuade them
to join me in insisting that the men whom they choose to
represent them shall adopt a higher tone in their conduct
of public affairs.
If each elector in Tasmania into whose hands this little
book may fall, and who may feel with me that it is most
desirable to bring about a better state of things, will deter-
mine to urge upon the member representing his district
the necessity for searching inquiry into the way in which
the business of the State has been carried on in the Lands
Department, the truth will be brought to light, and much
good will accrue. The inquiry should especially be made
with regard to King Island, for there offences against the
law are of recent date, and can easily be sheeted home.
Surely no honest person will care to allow a continuance
of the state of things I have described. Surely there must
be those who would wish to remove the stigma at present
most justly attaching to Tasmania of being politically the,
very sink and cesspit of the Commonwealth.
Capt. Evans, the Premier of Tasmania, in the speech
which he delivered at Port Cygnet Wednesday (February
13), declared to his audience that the financial position
was much healthier than it had been; but can any thought-
ful person avoid a feeling akin to contemptuous pity for a
Ministry that does not hesitate to make public announce-


ment that it draws no small part of its income from “ Tat-
tersall’s ” —“ Tattersall’s ” kicked out of every other State,
to find a warm welcome in Tasmania? Is there any other
place in the Empire where such a disgraceful anomaly is
tolerated? There can be no doubt that the muddled con-
dition of Tasmania's finances are distinctly traceable to
the mischievous policy pursued in the disposal of Crown
lands, hence “ Tattersall’s ” and other iniquities.
In the speech referred to, Captain Evans spoke of the
observations he had recently made in New Zealand, and
of his determination to continue to push the closer settle-
ment policy. Now, as 1 have said, my object in writing
this booklet has been to press for an insistence upon obedi-
ence to the law already in existence; but whilst my printer
allows me a little more space, I cannot refrain from adding
a comment or two upon the methods pursued in this closer
settlement policy. Tasmania, like Victoria and other
States, has been tempted to imitate New Zealand in her
apparently successful land legislation. I am obliged to
limit my estimate of the success by the word apparent,
because I am forced to the conclusion that the methods
pursued will result in serious evils in the not far distant
future, because the initial principle is bad.
No one need be possessed of any remarkable degree of
acuteness to recognize the absurdity of a State’s burdening
itself with a heavy debt in buying back from individuals
land in many cases got by fraud in the first instance. Even
where the land has been honestly purchased by its owner
in strict accord with the spirit of the law, the State is pay-
ing the seller for the unearned increment in value which
should belong of right to the community.
But here I must restrain my pen, or I shall run on
beyond my space limit. A quotation, however, from the
Psalms, with a large landholder’s presumable comment
thereon, may help some people to think more correctly
than they do in regard to the land question.
The Psalmist, in the joy of his heart and the full confi-
dence that he was uttering a true word, sang, “ The earth
is the Lord’s, and the fulness thereof.”
“ Oh! the earth is the Lord's, is it?” says the large land-
holder. “Well, the rest of it may be. I don't trouble


myself with other people’s concerns. But this 100,000
acres belongs to me. His children are getting too
crowded in other parts of the earth, are they? Well, I
can sell Him 15,000 acres at £g an acre. There’s about
6000 acres of poorer land He can have at £6 an acre. The
rest I’ll hold till His children are a bit more crowded, and
He’s ready to pay a bigger price. Well, when I come to
think of it, there's about 3000 acres of extra good land
down by the river side. I can cut that up into small farms,
and rent it at £2 an acre. Oh, I wouldn’t think of selling
that right out. You see, if competition gets keen for the
farms, the rents'll have to go up.
What hideous blasphemy! you say. My dear reader, it
is hideous blasphemy; but the blasphemy is not mine.
Is there a solution to this land question? Certainly
there is; but not, I believe, on any of the lines followed
up to the present, in any one of the States, is that solution
likely to be arrived at. Until it is arrived at, the unpeopled
condition of the continent must continue as a very serious
menace to the safety of the Empire.
In conclusion, let me say that I yield to no one in the
earnest desire to secure a “ White Australia,” if possible, a
“ British Australiabut to my mind it is ten thousand
times more important to secure an “ honest Australia.” I
am optimist enough to believe that, spite of all appear-
ances to the contrary, Australia is steadily" improving in
respect of honesty. Nevertheless, I venture to conclude
with the reminder to all would-be statesmen, that not
policy, not “ tact,” not cunning, but
“ Righteousness €xaltelb a nation.”
2 Darling St., South Yarra,
Feb. 18, 1907.
J. 1.. Anderson & Sons, Printers, Flinders Lane, Melbourne.
