

|pr "“V
flov c,^
I'wmvv
Wl
WITH DIRECTIONS AS TO THE MANAGEMENT
OF THE
Bush House, Fernery, Conservatory,* Lawn,
and other Ornamental and Useful
Home Surroundings.
WILLIAM CLARSON, F.L.S.
GIBBS, SHALLARD, & CO., PRINTERS & PUBLISHERS,


IN THE PRESS, AND SHORTLY TO OE PUBLISHED,
PRICE Is,
(Uniform with “ The Flower Garden ” and
“ The Fruit Garden,”)
THE
KITCHEN GARDEN
AND
COTTAGER’S MANUAL,
A Complete Guide to the Culture and
Management of Culinary Vegetables and
other crops of economic interest to the
householder or to the Market Gardener.
By WILLIAM CLARSON, F.L.S,
For many years Honorary Director of the Experimental
Gardens of the Horticultural Society of Victoria.
Sydney: GIBBS, SHALLARD. & CO.,
Melbourne : A. H. MASSINA & CO.


HARDY FERNS, PALMS, & ORGHIDS.
S ARTIES furnishing new Bush-houses or Con-
servatories, or who may be renewing stocks, are
informed that the undersigned delivers special
collections of the Ferns, Palms, and Orchids of the
Hawkesbury and Mountain Districts at Circular
Quay, Carriage and Freight free.
The Fern collections embrace all the beautiful
forms of Adiantum (Maiden Hair),Todea, Asplenium,
Aspidium, Pteris, Alsophila, Doodia, Davallia, Dick-
sonia, etc-, etc., found in these extensive districts,
with also a few Orchids.
One Hundred Strong Plants, inclusive of pack
age and freight, £5.
Special quotations for Tree Ferns taller than
one foot in the stem, and for Palms, Cycads,
Orchids, and other indigenous ornamental plants.
A collection such as that named, if not suiting
the circumstances of one purchaser, could be
divided, and put up in two or more lots for friends,
on making such an arrangement with the order.
Printed instructions as to the management of
these Plants in the Bush-house, Fernery, etc., sent
with the package.
Payment by Cheque or P. O. Order,
Was. <SIfA,RSQN,
GOSFOED.
Sydney References—GlßßS, SHALLARD, & CO.
CHABLES C. SEARRATT, Esq.


SHEPHERD & €O.,
NURSERYMEN & FLORISTS
DARLING NURSERY,
BOliilKE STREET, SURRY HILLS
STDNBY,
INVITE attention to their extensive stock of Hardy Trees
and Shrubs, Choicest Florist Flowers, Stove, Green
House and Bush House Plants, Orange Trees and Fruit
Trees, etc., etc., which cannot be surpassed for extent, correct-
ness, and healthiness of condition.
Descriptive Catalogues gratis, and post free on application.
The Nursery is within five minutes’ walk of the Crown
Street Tram Terminus, and twenty minutes’ from the Redfern
Railway Station,
H. P. GREGORY & CO.,
GENERAL MACHINERY MERCHANTS,
77 PITT STREET, CIRCULAR QUA Y,
SYDNTEY,
Are Sole Agents for the New York Rubber Co., Manufacturers
of Superior Garden Hose (all sizes).
ALSO SOLE AGENTS FOR THE
ECLIPSE SOLID WHEEL WINDMILL,
Unrivalled for Irrigating Purposes.
LARGE STOCKS OF HANDPUMPS
OF EVERT DESCRIPTION.
Hydraulic Rams, Hose, Conductors, Hose
Couplings, &c.
INDENTS FOR GENERAL AMERICAN MERCHANDISE EXECUTED
Including Bee Masters’ Supplies, dc.


Gibbs, Shallard, & Go.’s Publications.
Illustrated Sydney News —the “Graphic” of Australia—a spirited
Pictorial record of passing events, aiming to raise the standard
of Art, and to cultivate a public taste for high-class literature in
New South Wales. Monthly, is.; Subscription, 13s. (13 issues).
Gibbs, Shallard, & Co.’s Pictorial Guide to Sydney and
Suburbs. Third Edition. This popular Guide contains over
50 engravings, and is found to be of great service to visitors and
strangers, who may rely upon the accuracy of its contents. Residents
will also find it extremely useful as a compendium of valuable
information on a great variety of topics. Crown Bvo. Price, is.
Gibbs, Shallard, & Co.’s Illustrated Guide to the Blue
Mountains, and to the districts between Parramatta and
Lithgow. _ This useful work, just published, is designed for Visitors
and Tourists to the Mountains, Gullies, and other popular places
of resort in the district. Imp. Bvo., 48 pp., with Maps and
Illustrations. Price, is.
Gibbs, Shallard, & Co.’s Weather Almanac for New
South Wales. A handy book of reference for Gardening
operations and other necessary information throughout the year.
Price, fid.
The Australian Journal. Published Monthly. Price, fid. Is the
only Domestic Magazine published in the Australian Colonies
which will at all bear comparison with the London Journal,
Family Herald, or other periodicals of that class. Its contents are'
similar in character to those of the English Magazines—first class
narratives, original essays and poetry, statistical and general
information, and the very cream of fun. Careful editing prevents
any but the best original writing finding a place in its pages, and
nothing of an unrefined nature is admitted even by way of witticism
or joke.
The Stamp Duties Act of New South Wales. Fcp. Bvo.
Price, fid.; per post, 7d.
Map of New South Wales. In cloth, folded in pocket form,
is. fid. ; posted, is. Bd.
University Calendar. Price, zs. fid.; posted, 3s.
Manual of Public Examinations. Price, is. fid.; posted, is. Bd.
The Fruit Garden —Parts I. and 11. A Practical Guide to the
Planting and Management of the chief fruit-yielding plants of
temperate and tropical zones. By William Clarson, F.L.S., for
many years Honorary Director of the Experimental Gardens of the
Horticultural Society of Victoria. Price, is. each ; including
postage within the colony, is. 3d.


GIBBS, SHALLARD, & GO.’S PUBLICATIONS —Continued.
Australian Plain Cookery. Second Edition. Specially compiled
and adapted for the Australian Housekeeper, containing the
Plainest and most Reliable Recipes for use in the Bush Hut as well
as the most Fashionable Kitchen. Price, is. ;by post, is. 3d.
The Farm and Selection. Third Edition, now ready. The most
useful Handybook to the Farmer and Selector. By Abraham
Lincoln. Price, is.; postage within the colony, is. 3d.
Our Doctor; or, the Colonial Medical and Surgical
Handybook. Full instructions for Families and those resident
in the Bush how to act in Emergencies, Accidents, and Common
Sickness. Price, is.; postage included within the colony, is. 3d.
Australian Melodist. Nos. 1 to 14 now ready. A collection of all
the Newest and most Popular Songs of the Day. Price, 6d.;
postage, id. additional.
Gordon’s Poems. New and Revised Edition. Complete in one
volume. Stiff cloth, neatly bound, 7s. 6d. ; postage, is. 6d.
additional.
Hew Man of Sydney and Suburbs, with Index for ready
reference, and showing the Distance of any place from the General
Post Office. This may be accepted as the standard Map of the
City and Suburbs. It has been carefully revised to date, and
furnishes the very information so much sought after by Visitors and
others desirous of knowing all about Sydney. Price, with Indexed
Key, as. ; folded, and in blocked Cloth Cover, 3s.
Gibbs, Shallard, & Co.’s Series of Christmas and Hew
Year Gift Cards. These elegant contributions to the artistic
chromo-lithography of the colony are essentially Australian in
conception. The wild flowers of New South Wales, which enter
largely into the designs, are faithfully drawn and colored, and have
their common and botanical names attached ; and the cards—in
addition to their value as works of art—form an interesting and
instructive present for the seasons they typify. The series embraces
120 cards, which are to be had, plain or furnished with silk-
fringed edges, singly or folded in pairs. Price Lists forwarded on
application.
The Madeira of the Pacific”—Lord Howe Island.
By “Linnyeus.” Crown Bvo. ; price, is. This is an account
of the present condition, capabilities, and prospects of the Island,
with a description of its Flora, and the advantages afforded by
the place as a sanatorium for New South Wales. Reprinted from
the Iliustrated Sydney News .
GIBBS, SHALLARD, & CO.,
70 PITT STREET, SYDNEY.


Percentage of Moisture @ 105° C
.. 14.37
Organic Matter*
.. 39.16
Sand
4.19
Phosphate of Lime
.. 31.00
Sulphate of Lime
.. 2.98
Carbonate
.. 2.38
Salts
5.12
Not determined and loss ..
.. 0.80
G-TT-A-UNTO.
MAC iiiHEii 4 BUSCH
312 GEORGE ST., SYDNEY.
ST. FRANCIS’ ISLANDS CAVES GUANO.
Mr. B. W. Emerson Mac Ivor’s Analysis
* Containing Nitrogen equal to 7.48 per cent. Ammonia.
An excellent cheap Guano for general farm and garden use.
(Signed) R. W. EMERSON MAC IVOR, F.1.C., F.C.S.,
Mem. Phys. Soc., Lond., &c.
Instructor in Agriculture, Technical College, Sydney, and
Registered Analytical Agricultural and Consulting Chemist.
Mr. Wm. C larson, F.L.S., reports upon this Guano as follows :
Carleton, Summerhill, April 30, 1885.
In the kitchen garden I have applied it to advancing crops of
cauliflower, turnips, and others of the Brassica family, and to
celery. Its effects have been most marked, notwithstanding the
dryness of the season, and you may refer anyone to this garden for
evidence of its value.
In the flower garden the dahlias, chrysanthemums, and roses
in the open ground have been greatly benefited by its use, while
for pot plants it is the best stimulant I have ever used. With the
coleus, bedding plants, palms, dracaenas, and ferns it acts like
magic if the surface soil is dusted lightly over with the guano before
watering. I have no doubt it will prove fully equal to Peruvian
Guano for all the Citrus family and similar surface-rooting trees and
shrubs.
The St. Francis’ Islands Caves Guano.
1 am glad to give my testimony with regard to the value of this
manure. I have found it after repeated trials to be one of the best
stimulants for plants I have ever used. It is more lasting than
any artificial manures I have yet had, and seems to give out its
properties as the plant needs it. It can be used for fruit trees,
more particularly the orange and lemon, and also for roses and
other plants in the garden needing high culture. 1 have found it
also of great value for vegetables.
JOHN G. TRBSEDER,
Seed Warehouse—l 9 Royal Arcade.
Nurseries—Underwood, Alt Street, Ashtield.


SQjQqo FRUIT- fllli,
120,000 FOREST & ORNAMENTAL TREES.
ROSES, SHRUBS, & PLANTS.
Genuine Seeds for the Farm, Garden, k Florist.
guides’ bouquets, hbsd bouquets ►
PACKED FOR ANY DISTANCE.
LANDSCAPE GARDENING A SPECIALITY.
PLANS AND ESTIMATES FREE.
Bush Houses & Ferneries Constructed & Furnished.
SEED AND PLANT CATALOGUES FREE
TRESEDER k BARTLETT
Nurserymen, Seedsmen, and Landscape Sardeners,
DOBROYDE NURSERY, ASHE!ELD.
Only City Address: 31 ARCADE, KING ST., SYDNEY.


THE
FLOWER GARDEN
SHRUBBERY,
WITH DIRECTIONS AS TO THE MANAGEMENT OF THE
BUSH HOUSE, FERNERY, CONSERVATORY, LAWN,
AND OTHER ORNAMENTAL AND USEFUL
HOME SURROUNDINGS
OF THE
COTTAGE AND THE VILLA.
WILLIAM CLARSON, F.L.S.,
Fellow Royal Horticultural Society; late Manager of the Farm and
Gardens at Hayes Place, Kent; for many years Honorary
Director of the Experimental Gardens of the
Horticultural Society of Victoria; and
Author of “ The Fruit Garden."
Sgbrug:
GIBBS, SHALLARD & CO., PRINTERS & PUBLISHERS,
70 Pitt Street.


This little work is dedicated to all who take an interest in
surrounding their homes with the salutary and health-
promoting influences of Shrubs and Flowering Plants.


INTRODUCTION.
At the solicitation of many old friends, the ■writer has
been induced to place before the public the present
volume of simple directions for the management of the
Flower Garden. It contains, in as condensed a form as was
possible to bring the matter within the range of space
afforded, the results of nearly thirty years’ association with
Australian gardens, and close observation and record of
seasonable operations to be performed.
Special papers will be found on topics whose importance
warranted more than passing notice, and the chief decorative
plants have also received pretty full treatment where it has
been deemed necessary. Articles contributed by the writer
to the weekly horticultural Press of Australia and Great
Britain during the past several years have been brought into
requisition, with such additions as a later and enlarged
experience has suggested. This acknowledgment is due to
the proprietors of The Australasian, The Leader, and The
Illustrated Sydney Neivs, in the columns of which journals
several of these sketches appeared.


It is a very gratifying feature in the newspaper Press of
these colonies that a portion of their space is devoted to
Horticulture; and the amateur can scarcely go wrong if he
follow up intelligently the practical directions given from
week to week by the Press for general garden management.
This work is intended for the requirements of all the
colonies, the treatment being modified to suit the exigencies
of the varying climates.
It will be a source of peculiar pleasure to the writer if this
book is found to smooth the path of the amateur, or conduce
in any way to the extension of a knowledge of Flowers,
a wider diffusion of taste for Horticulture, and a love of such
pursuits.


SHRUBS AND
Abelia
Abutilon
Acacia
Acmena
Adenandra
Adhatoda
Agave (or Aloe)
Ageratum
Agnostus
Agonis ..
Ailantus ..
Allamanda
Aloysia ..
Alonsoa
Alocasia
Amaranthus
Ampelopsis
Anchusa ..
Andromeda
Anemone Japonica
Angelonia
Annuals
Anopteris
Anthurium
Antirrhinum
Anthocercis
Aphelexis
Aphelandra
Aquatic Plants
Azalea
Arbutus
Arbour and Trellis
Ardisia ..
Arduina
Aristolochia
INDEX OF CONTENTS.
FLOWERING
PLANTS.
PAGE
Aspidistra .. .. 97
Asters .. .. .. 98
Aucuba .. .. .. 97
Auricula .. .. .. 69
Avenue and Shade Trees 99
Azaleas .. .. .. 83
Backhousia .. .. 97
Baeckia .. .. .. 97
Back-yard Gardens .. 47
Balsam ~ .. .. 58
Bamboo .. .. .. 97
Banksia .. .. .. 97
Barklya 97
Bauera .. .. .. 97
Bedding Plants .. .. 93
Begonia .. .. .. 91
Benthamia .. •. 97
Berberis .. .. .. 97
Bignonia.. .. .. 75
Boroma .. .. .. 97
Borage .. .. .. 98
Botryodendron .. .. 97
Bouvardia .. .. 72
Brachysema .. .. 97
Browallia .. .. 97
Brugmansia .. .. 97
Budding .. .. .. 37
Buddlea .. .. .. 97
Bulbs and Tubers .. 100
Bush House .. .. 24
Buxus (or Box) .. ~ 97
Cactus .. .. .. 100
Caladium .. .. 100
Calceolaria .. ~ 61
Calendar of Operations 101


PAGE
Caila 100
Callistemon .. .. 97
Calycanthus .. .. 97
Camellia.. .. .. 81
Campanula .. .. 98
Camphora .. .. 97
Cantua .. .. .. 97
Carnation .. .. 54
Catalpa .. .. .. 98
Ceonothus .. ~ 97
Celosia (Cockscomb) .. 98
Cerasus .. .. .. 97
Ceratonia .. ~ 97
Cercis .. .. .. 97
Cestrum .. .. .. 97
Chestnut.. .. .. 98
Chironia .. .. 97
Chorozema .. .. 97
Christia .. .. .. 97
Chrysanthemum .. 84
Cineraria .. .. 59
Cissus .. ~ .. 98
Clerodendron .. .. 97
Clematis .. .. 75
Clianthus .. .. 97
Climbing Plants .. 74
Coleus .. .. .. 87
Colletia .. .. . • 97
Composts .. .. 20
Conservatory .. .. 101
Conifers (or Pines) .. 95
Convolvulus .. .. 98
Coronilla.. .. .. 97
Coprosma .. .. 97
Correa .. .. .. 97
Corynocarpus .. .. 97
Cotoneaster .. 97
Cottage Foregrounds .. 46
Crataegus.. .. .. 98
Croton ~ .. .. 98
Crowea .. .. .. 98
Cuttings .. .. .. 35
Cycads .. .. .. 97
Cyclamen .. .. 100
PAGE
Cydonia .. .. 98
Cypress and its Allies .. 95
Cytisus .. .. .. 97
Dahlia .. .. .. 86
Daphne ~ .. .. 97
Dasylirion .. .. 97
Daubentonia .. .. 97
Deeringea .. ~ 97
Delphinium .. .. 98
Deutzia .. .. .. 98
Dianthus.. .. .. 98
Dielytra .. .. .. 100
Diervilla .. .. 98
Dieffenbaehia .. .. 97
Diosma .. ~ .. 97
Diospyros .. .. 98
Diplacus .. .. 98
Dipladenia .. .. 75
Dombeya .. .. 97
Doryanthes .. .. 100
Doryphora ~ ..100
Double - blossoming
Peach, Thorn, Al-
mond, Plum, Cherry,
and Eubus .. .. 98
Draining .. .. 17
Dracaena.. .. .. 97
Duranta .. .. ~ 97
Duvaua .. .. .. 97
Echeveria .. .. 98
Echium 98
Epiphyllum .. .. 100
Epacris .. .. .. 88
Erica .. .. .. 88
Eriostemon .. ~ 92
Erythrina .. .. 98
Eranthemum .. .. #8
Escallonia .. .. 97
Eucalyptus .. .. 97
Eugenia .. .. .. 97
Eulalia .. ~ .. 99
Euonymus .. .. 97
Euphorbias .. .. 97
Everlastings .. .. 98


Fabiana .. .. 97
Fartugium .. .. 98
Felecia .. .. .. 97
Fences .. .. ..31
Fernery .. .. .. 24
Ficus .. .. .. 96
Filbert .. .. .. 98
Fittonia .. .. .. 98
Flowering Currant .. 98
Flowering Gooseberry .. 98
Forsythia .. •. 98
Frames .. .. .. 23
Francisea .. .. 97
Fraxinus.. .. .. 98
Fuchsia . • .. ~ 56
Fugosia .. .. .. 97
Funkia .. .. .. 98
Garden Tools .. .. 17
Garden Appliances .. 30
Gardenia.. .. .. 97
Garrya .. .. .. 98
Gazania .. .. .. 93
Genista .. ' .. .. 97
Gentiana.. .. .. 98
Geranium .. .. 65
Gladiolus .. .. 100
Gloxinia .. .. .. 100
Godetia .. .. .. 98
Goldfussia .. .. 97
Grafting .. .. .. 39
Grasses (Ornamental) .. 99
Grass Plots .. .. 29
Greenhouse .. 102-113
Grevillea.. .. .. 97
Grewia .. .. .. 97
Guavas .. .. .. 97
Gynerium .. .. 99
Habrothamnus .. .. 97
Hakea 97
Halesia .. .. .. 98
Heliotrope .. .. 98
Hibiscus .. .. .. 97
Hollyhock .. .. 68
Hotbeds .. ». ..23
Hovea .. .. .. 92
Hoya .. .. .. 75
Hydrangea .. .. 98
Hymenosporum.. .. 97
Iberis .. .. .. 98
Hex 97
Illicium .. .. .. 97
Indigenous Plants .. 91
Indigofera .. .. 91
Iresine .. .. •. 93
Ixora .. .. .. 97
Jacaranda .. .. 97
Jasminum .. .. 97
Justicia .. .. .. 96
Kalosanthes .. .. 100
Kalmia .. .. .. 83
Kennedya .. .. 92
Kerria .. .. .. 98
Laburnum .. .. 98
Lagerstrcemia .. .. 97
Lantana .. .. .. 97
Lapageria .. .. 75
Lasiandra .. .. 96
Laurus . • .. .. 97
Lawns .. ~ .. 28
Layering.. .. .. 39
Lemon .. .. .. 97
Libonia .. .. .. 98
Ligustrum .. .. 98
Lilac .. .. .. 98
Linum .. .. .. 99
Liriodendron .. .. 97
Lobelia .. .. .. 93
Lophostemon .. .. 97
Loquat .. .. .. 97
Luculia .. .. .-.97
Lychnis .. .. .. 99
Macademia .. .. 97
Macrozamia .. .. 97
Macoya .. .. .. 97
Magnolia .. .. 96
Mahonia .. .. .. 97
Manures .. .. 21
Maple .. .. ..98


Marigold .. .. .. 98
Melia .. .. .. 98
Menziesia .. .. 88
Mesembryanthemum .. 93
Meyenia .. .. .. 98
Metrosideros .. .. 97
Mignonette Trees .. 64
Mimulus .. .. .. 98
Mitraria .. .. .. 97
Mulching .. .. 20
Mulberry.. .. .. 98
Muraltia .. .. .. 97
Musa .. .. .. 92
Myosotis .. .. .. 93
Myoporum .. .. 97
Myrtle .. .. .. 97
Nerium .. .. .. 97
Nierembergia •. •. 97
Oleander.. .. .. 97
Olive 97
Omphaloides .. .. 97
Osmanthus .. .. 97
Oxylobium .. .. 91
Pasony .. .. .. 98
Palms and Cycads .. 97
Pandanus .. .. 97
Pansy .. .. .. 52
Passiflora .. .. 75
Paths .. .. .. 22
Paulownia .. .. 98
Pelargonium .. .. 65
Pentstemon .. .. 98
Perennials .. .. 98
Petunia .. .. .. 93
Phlox 86
Philadelphus .. .. 98
Phormium .. .. 97
Picotee .. .. .. 54
Pimelia .. .. .. 91
jrmieiic* . • • • . .
Pink .. .. .. 54
Pittosporum .. .. 97
Plectranthus .. .. 93
Pleroma .. .. .. 97
Plumbago .. .. 97
PAGE
Podalyria .. .. 97
Polygala .. .. .. 97
Poinciana .. .. 97
Poinsettia .. .. 97
Potting .. .. .. 45
Primula .. .. .. 69
Populus .. .. .. 98
Propagation .. .. 38
Protea .. .. .. 97
Prostanthera .. .. 97
Prunus .. .. .. 98
Punica .. .. .. 97
Pyrethrum .. .. 93
Pyrus ~ ~ .. 98
Quercus .. . • .. 98
Quince .. .. .. 98
Raphiolepis .. .. 97
Ehamnus .. .. 98
Rhododendrons .. .. 83
Rhus .. .. .. 98
Ribes .. .. .. 98
Robinia .. .. .. 98
Rockwork .. .. 33
Rogiera .. .. .. 97
Roellia .. .. .. 97
Rondeletia .. ~ 97
Rootwork .. .. 33
Rose .. .. .. 77
Russellia.. .. .. 97
Rustic Appliances 30-32
Rubus .. .. ~ 98
Salix .. .. .. 98
Salvia .. ~ .. 98
Sansiviera .. .. 97
Sambucus .. .. 98
Saving Seed .. .. 105
Saxifrage .. .. 98
Schinus .. .. .. 97
Sedum .. .. .. 93
Seed Sowing ~ ~ 33
Shelter and Shade Trees 99
Soils 19
Sophora .. .. .. 97
Sorbus .. .. .. 98


Sparmannia .. .. 92
Spartium .. .. 98
Spirea .. .. .. 98
Statice .. .. .. 97
Stephanotis .. .. 75
Sterculia.. .. .. 97
Stocks .. .. .. 78
Swainsonia .. .. 98
Succulents .. .. 100
Syringa •. .. .. 98
Tacsonia.. .. .. 75
Tamarisk .. .. 98
Tasmannia .. .. 97
Tea 97
Tecoma ~. .. ..75
Templetonia .. .. 97
Tetratheca .. .. 91
Thunbergia .. .. 75
Thyme 93
Tilea 98
Torenia .. .. .. 98
Trenching ~ .. 18
Tropeolum .. .. 75
BULBOUS, TUBEROUS, Al>
FLOWERING
Achimenes .. .. 100
Agapanthus .. .. 100
Albuca .. .. .. 100
Allium ~ .. .. 100
Alstroemeria .. .. 100
Amaryllis .. .. 100
Anemone .. .. 100
Anomatheca .. .. 100
Antholiza .. .. 100
Anthericum .. .. 100
Apios .. .. .. 100
Arum .. .. .. 100
Babiana .. 100
Begonia .. .. .. 100
Belladonna •. .. 100
Bellevalia .. .. 100
Tuberose.. .. .. 100
Ulmus .. .. .. 98
Variegated Plants .. 93
Verbena .. .. •. 85
Veronica.. .. .. 97
Verticordia .. .. 97
Viburnum .. .. 97
Vincas .. .. .. 98
Violas .. .. .. 52
Violets .. .. .. 52
Virgilia .. .. .. 97
Vitex 97
Wallflower . • .. 99
Watering .. .. 44
Weeping Trees .. .. 47
Weigela .. .. .. 98
Wigandia .. .. 47
Window Gardening .. 43
Wistaria.. .. .. 75
Yuccas .. .. .. 100
Zamias .. .. .. 97
Zinnias .. .. .. 98
AND OTHER ROOTS OF
*G PLANTS.
Bletia 100
Bohardtia .. .. 100
Boussingaultia .. .. 100
Bravoa .. .. .. 100
Brodiasa .. .. .. 100
Bulbocodium .. .. 100
Calochortos .. .. 100
Camassia .. .. 100
Chlidanthus .. .. 100
Christmas Rose,. .. 100
Chronium ' . • .. 100
Claytonia .. .. 100
Olivia .. .. .. 100
Colchicum .. .. 100
Commelina .. .. 100
Crinum 100


Crocus
Crown Imperial.
Cummingia
Cyclamen
Cyrtanthus
Cyclobothra
Dahlia ..
Dielytra ..
Dog’s Tooth Violet
Doryanthes
Eucomis ..
Eucharis.
Erythronium
Freesia ..
Fritillaria
Galanthus
Gastronema
Geesortysa
Gesnera ..
Gladiolus
Gloriosa .
Gloxinia .
Guernsey Lily
Hedychium
Hemerocallis
Hepatica..
Hippeastrum
Hyacinth
Hypoxis ..
Imatophyllum
Iris
Jonquil ..
Lathyrus..
Lachenalia
Leucocoryne
Leucogum
Lilies 100
Lily of Valley .. .. 100
Morea 100
Muscari .. .. .. 100
Narcissus .. .. 100
Nerine .. .. .. 100
Ornithogalum .. .. 100
Oxalis .. .. .. 100
Pancratium .. .. 100
Peony .. .. .. 100
Polyanthus Narcissus .. 100
Ranunculus .. .. 100
Richardia .. .. 100
Sarana .. .. .. 100
Sanguinaria .. .. 100
Scilla .. .. .. 100
Schizostylos .. .. 100
Solomon’s Seal ~ .. 100
Snowdrop .. .. 100
Snowflake .. .. 100
Sparaxis .. .. .. 100
Spiraea ~ .. .. 100
Sternbergia .. .. 100
Tigridia .. .. .. 100
Tritonia .. ~ .. 100
Tritoma 100
Trillium 100
Tropeoleum .. ..100
Tritelia .. .. .. 100
Tuberose.. ~ .. 100
Tulip 100
Uvularia .. .. ~ 100
Vallota .. .. .. 100
Watsonia .. .. 100
Winter Aconite .. .. 100
Zephyrrjrthus .. ~ 100


THE FLOWER GARDEN AND SHRUBBERY.
By WILLIAM CLARSON.
GARDEN TOOLS.
Most of the tools used in the garden may be had of
American manufacture. They are lighter, and, as a rule,
better than English articles. A spade, fork, hoe, pickaxe,
rake, line, wheelbarrow, and shears will be necessary. Other
useful matters will be a strong pruning-knife, budding-knife,
hand-fork, trowel, and handy measuring rod. If much ground
is required to be under grass, a lawn mower, of suitable size,
will be indicated. All these implements should be got of
strength and durability for real work, and not of the fragile
construction of toy tools. After use they should be cleaned
and hung up in their proper place, and never be allowed to lie
about the garden; and the lawn mower should be wiped and
oiled after use. Half the damage to garden tools is a result
of exposure to the weather, which rusts the steel and rots or
splits the wood. If taken care of they will last many years,
and, besides, they will always be to hand when wanted.
DRAINING.
It is important that the land devoted to the flower garden
should not be liable to be surcharged with stagnant moisture.
This may be guarded against, if the surface is large, by pipe
drains at intervals; but if the fall is very decideo, and a good
outlet is afforded for any excess of rainfall, deep digging or
trenching to the depth of eighteen inches, and filling in the
bottom with brick, refuse, clinkers, cinders, stones, &c., will
suffice for all ordinary purposes. In the first volume of “The
Fruit Garden ” this subject of drainage is very fully dwelt
upon, and we commend that book to the attentive perusal of
all who may be entering on the cultivation of flowers. But,
as many will not have the book above mentioned, much of
the information there given will be reproduced in this.


It will be necessary, before commencing draining operations,
to first note the lowest point on the ground, and to be careful
that the eye is not deceived. Then cut drains leading in that
direction into an open ditch dug along the lowest end of the
ground. The depth, distance apart, and size of the drains
will depend altogether upon the extent and slope of the land,
but, as a rule, you cannot overdrain naturally damp, clay
land, and at all times the depth of drain should be well below
that to which it is probable you may go in the process of
trenching. Where the land is flat, or has but little inclina-
tion, the drains should be cut about twenty feet apart. They
may either be filled in with sticks or broken bricks, rubbish,
or, which is better, they may be built in by laying flat stones
or bricks on top of miniature walls running down the sides of
the drain. Better than all such contrivances, however, are
pipe drains, formed of common IJ-inch pipes laid on a hard
bed, and covered with a layer of rough stones and gravel, over
which the ordinary soil may be placed to the general level,
and through which the excess of water may percolate to the
pipes beneath.
TRENCHING- AND DIGGING.
Having thus secured the soil against stagnant water, the
next process will be that of trenching or deep digging, which
consists in the efficient breaking up of the soil to a proper
depth, in order that the roots of plants and trees may strike
deeply, without the natural obstruction offered by the sub-
stratum of hard clay or rock. It is customary in trenching to
place the first spit in the bottom, and bring the lower subsoil
to the surface, but it will usually be found better to keep the
surface soil on the top, and to merely remove it for the purpose
of breaking up the subsoil. Proceed as follows:—On com-
mencing, dig a trench, a full spade deep and three feet wide,
across the piece of land you propose to work, and wheel the
soil so removed to the other end of the patch; then turn the
whole of the subsoil in the trench over to the depth of twelve
inches. In this operation you may find a pickaxe necessary,
but see that it is thoroughly done. Now take the first spit
next the trench and turn it over, as in the ordinary digging,
taking care to preserve the general level. On returning to the
point at which you commenced, you will find it again neces-
sary to break up the subsoil as in the first trench. Repeat
this until your ground is all finished. As trenching has to
serve for all time, it is important that it be well done, and as


it cannot be done after permanently planting the ground, it is,
of course, more economical that it be the very first step on
forming a garden or vineyard. Undoubtedly the best time for
trenching land is during summer or very dry weather, and if
left to lie for some months exposed to the action of the sun
and the ameliorating influences of the air, incalculable benefit
is derived by the newly trenched ground.
For all subsequent purposes simple digging will be all that
is necessary. This is very simple, yet may be badly done. Be
careful, then, to observe that in digging you do not work your
ground into hills and valleys. Preserve your ground of even
surface; carefully cover all weeds or manure ; dig deeply and
pulverise the clods. On commencing to dig a patch of ground,
remove the soil from the first trench to that part you propose
to finish on, as in trenching.
SOILS.
On the character of the natural soil of the garden, of
course, everything will depend, and, as one can rarely have
a choice of ground, the best must be made of that we
happen to have. This may be an austere, untractable clay or
clay shale, or it may be a poor, loose sand. In both such
cases there will be an absence of organic matter, which can
be added in the shape of manure ; but the first step will be to
improve the general mechanical character of the mass. Clay
land must be pitched up roughly in the digging or trenching,
and thus allow the sun and air to crumble it to a condition
when ashes, sandy soil, and other opening substances may
readily be incorporated with it, or, if firewood be available, a
rough kiln may be built up with lumps of clay, alternated
with layers of wood, and the whole calcined or burnt. The
result will form the very best substance for mixing with the
soil. If of a sandy, sterile nature it should be heavily
dressed with sound loam or clayey soil, and peaty deposits
like that to be got frequently on the margins of lagoons and
swamps.
Soils so treated will yearly improve in character, and the
annual manuring of the ground for the crops will speedily
render them fit for the requirements of even the most
fastidious crops or the most delicate flowering plants. An
important point in dealing with soils is always to let the
weather do the chief work, and never to attempt their treat-
ment in wet weather, as far more harm is done by working
land when wet. When the natural soil is moderately good.


no such trouble as that here indicated will be necessary, as
the ordinary digging or trenching will suffice; always bearing
in mind, however, not to bring the subsoil to the surface, to
the loss of the naturally improved surface soil, which would
thus be buried too deeply to be reached by shallow-rooting
plants.
COMPOSTS
Aee formed of soils and manures of various qualities suited
to the special requirements of plants. The chief ingredients
used are peat, drift-sand, sheep or cow dung, crushed char-
coal, lime, old, decayed turf, bone dust, and garden soil.
Perhaps the sweetest and simplest substance for general use
is the paring from the surface of an old grass paddock, the
sods built up into a compact heap, with the turf side down, and
left to he until the whole of the mass is decayed and incor-
porated with the soil. This turned once or twice, and a
dressing of lime given, will, in a few months, be suitable for
all the choicer flowering plants, whether for the border or pot
culture, and it should be the aim of the gardener to always
have two or three such heaps in various stages of maturing,
for the resulting soil is equally serviceable for the germination
of the seeds of the melon, cucumber, egg-plant, tomato, and
other plants requiring to be brought healthily forward in the
seed-bed. Another useful substance is the accumulation of
charcoal and burnt soil, which may often be found at the foot
of burnt gum trees and other timber in the bush.
MULCHING-.
This matter has been so generally recommended that a few
details should be given as to what it means and the sub-
stances suitable. Mulching consists in covering to the
depth of an inch or more the whole surface of the flower-
beds, or just merely for a few feet round special shrubs or
flowering plants, with some material which intercepts the
direct rays of the sun and keeps the underlying soil in a more
or less moist condition. This material may be short, rotten dung,
or such as is not quite decayed, cut grass, the raked-up drop-
pings of pine-trees and sheoak dehvis , rotten wood, spent tan
bark, leaves and other fibrous substances which catch the
water, and readily admit of its percolation through to the soil.
As a rule it should be applied after the October rains, while the
ground is fairly charged with moisture, and before the sun has
had the power to dry and crack the surface to any depth. The


advantages are obvious enough, and the wonder is that the
practice is not universal, for there can be no doubt that mulch-
ing is the sheet anchor of successful gardening in such climates
as these. Very suitable for mulching flower borders is the
dung of a cow yard or sheep paddock which has been trodden
into a finely divided state during dry weather. This, if applied
to the depth of an inch, keeps the soil open beneath, and every
shower of rain carries the fertilising elements of the dressing
to the roots of the plants.
MANURES.
As a general preparation for the flower border and
shrubbery almost any class of manures, bones, and lime
rubbish may be incorporated in the first deep digging the
ground receives, but for after treatment more care will be
requisite in the selection of fertilisers. Having regard to
the foregoing remarks upon “ Soils,” the substances' for
general use will be thoroughly decayed hot-bed manure, dried
and crushed cow-dung and sheep droppings, with guano,
fowl, pigeon, and rabbit-house sweepings. These are to be
preferred in many ways to fresh horse-dung, as they may be
easily incorporated with the soil, and if left on the surface do
not present an untidy appearance from the presence of straw,
and, as a rule, are free from weed seeds. For forming
liquid manure, too, the substances named are excellent, as
the fertilising elements are readily dissolved. Bone dust and
superphosphates are also good for the plants, and are more
durable in their action.
The ground may be fertile and require little or no manure,
or it may be poor or sterile and need enriching. Of the
many fertilisers, the following will be easily obtainable, and
nothing like a waste of such substances should be permitted.
Not a leaf or stem but should be taken to the heap or pit, and
there be allowed to ferment and thoroughly decay. Sheep,
horse, cow, and fowl droppings are especially valuable, being
rich in all the fertilising elements; night-soil, soot, bones,
guano, and various purely chemical manures, such as nitrate
of soda, sulphate of ammonia, &c., road-scrapings, the parings
of hedge-banks, bog-earth, and peaty deposits, so prevalent in
swampy districts. An excellent dressing at all times and
under all conditions consists of the well-decayed compost
from a hot-bed or pit into which all garden refuse has been
thrown. All manures should be deeply dug into the ground,
unless, perhaps, such as guano, nitrate of soda, and other
soluble chemical manures, which may be sown lightly over
advancing crops previous to rain.


PLAN OF GARDEN.
Much will depend upon the shape and inclination of the
ground, but, with a view to the future econony of manage-
ment, avoid all intricate shapes of beds. The main paths
should be sufficiently wide to admit of the passage of a dray
ox hand-cart, and they should be well gravelled or asphalted.
Border edgings may be formed of chamomile, privet, rosemary,
box, or of any dwarf plant the fancy may suggest. Edging
tiles of various patterns are also obtainable, and are especially
suitable for small gardens and where neatness is necessary.
A neat edging may be also made of bricks set on edge and
cemented over. These edgings do not encourage slugs and
other vermin as do those formed by plants. Of whatever
nature, they should be kept well-trimmed and clipped. The
portion reserved for kitchen vegetables should be easily
approachable without walking over borders devoted to
flowering plants; and fruit trees should be planted sufficiently
far from the paths as not to overhang them when grown to a
large size.
GARDEN PATHS.
To make a durable path in the garden the soil should be
taken out to the depth of about a foot below the general level,
and loose stones or drain pipes should be laid down the centre
in a channel formed in the bed of the path. A base of about
eight inches of brickbats or broken metal should then be laid
down, and over this about four inches of gravel, shells, or
binding loam. Eunning along the sides a live hedge of box,
thyme, rosemary, or some other dwarf edging plant may be
Fig. 1. Fig. 2.
planted, as in Fig. 1. Another mode is shown by the section
in Fig. 2, where the walk is shown raised, the sides being
sustained in position by tiles or slate, and the gutters at each
aide being drained through the rough rubble into the main
drain in the centre. Another good method of constructing a


cart track is to make the main drain on one side, and a small
sub-drain on the other. In this also the base is filled up with
rough stone or rubble, and finer broken stone or gravel is laid
over this base. In all, the chief features are the drain and
the rough basement of metal to keep the path free from
springs and puddles. After construction the paths should be
well rolled and levelled with a line to secure the flow of
surface water. A very durable, permanent way may be
formed by mixing fine gravel, sand, or metal screenings with
hot tar, and spreading evenly over the base formed as above.
With this kind of path neither weeds nor water will afford
any trouble.
HOT-BEDS.
A vert useful adjunct to the garden will be found in the
hot-bed and frame for striking cuttings of tender plants, and
for raising seedlings of melons, cucumbers, tomatoes, egg-
plants, and other tender
garden plants. The an-
nexed diagram shows a
section of this bed and
frame. Fresh horse-dung
and litter from the stable
is built up in a nice
square heap of the required size, and about three feet high.
When it has settled down, another layer is added, and over
this a thickness of about six inches of a good garden soil is
laid. The frame having been procured of the proper size,
either glazed or covered with thin, oiled calico stretched
across, it is laid over the soil, and in a day or so, when the
heap begins to ferment, a steady heat is imparted to the soil,
which induces speedy growth of the plants contained. As the
heat subsides fresh litter may be added round the old bed, and,
by repeating this operation from time to time, a regular heat
is kept up as long as required, or until the young plants are
ready for transplanting in the open ground. Every garden
should have its heap of fermenting manure, as nothing is so
useful as the remains of an old hot-bed for enriching the
borders in the spring.
PROTECTION FRAMES.
One of the simplest and most useful structures in the flower
garden is the calico-covered frame. This is constructed by
securing the four sides of one-inch deal boards to corner


posts driven into the ground, or even an old packing ease
slightly tilted will serve the same purpose, the general outline
being that of the frame illustrated on p. 23. Calico sheeting
may then be procured of the required width, and should be
tightly strained over a rough frame formed of three-inch
battens. During cold weather, or when bottom heat is
required during winter for propagating cuttings, &c., this may
have a quantity of stable dung thrown in, and the surface be
covered with two or three inches of soil, in which the pots
may be plunged; but for the summer or spring propagation,
all such herbaceous matters as iresines, alternantheras,
chrysanthemums, pansies, begonias, &c., no heat will be
required, and the frame suits admirably for these. For the
protection of all plants liable to suffer from exposure to the
sun, and for the germination of tender flower seeds, nothing
is more suitable than the calico-covered frame.
THE BUSH-HOUSE AND PEHNEHY.
There is no nicer adjunct to the suburban cottage or
garden than the bush-house, or shelter shed for growing
plants; indeed, for the healthy growth of ferns, and for the
protection of many pot plants, in the absence of greenhouse
or conservatory, some such contrivance is absolutely neces-
sary. It may be roughly constructed of the straight stems
and branches of trees, or sawn timber, dressed or undressed,
may be used. In any case the first care should be that the
framework is firmly fixed, and such portions as enter the
ground should be well charred or tarred. It may with advan-
tage be placed as a “lean-to,” or it may stand alone; but in
the latter case greater care will be needed to have it free from


the full force of the wind by placing it within the shelter of
some existing belt of trees or buildings. A good, simple
design is that given on p. 24, but the constructor will adopt
any form convenient to the spot available, and we would
observe that, as we are not here dealing with an expensive
structure like a greenhouse or conservatory, any ornamenta-
tion will be quite out of place. Of course, if the expense is
not an object, a really pretty effect may be gained by having
the timber dressed for painting; by having a circular or
domed roof; and the interior may be faced with virgin cork,
and other decorations may be given at the taste or skill of
the owner. But for all practical purposes we prefer the
natural undressed stems of trees for the posts, and the
straight branches of ti-tree bush for the covering of the sides
and top; but where these are not available, then the roughly-
sawn quartering, battens, and laths may be used. It is
essential that whatever is used for the roof it should run
toward the eaves, and not longitudinally, so that a large
portion of any excessive rainfall may not fall directly inside.
This point is of great importance, as we have known many
expensive structures quite ruined through having the covering
laths running lengthways, thus throwing the whole of the
rainfall into the house, and causing a continual drip on to the
plants in wet weather.
For a structure 10ft. by 12ft., the uprights should not be
lighter than 4in. by 3in., and the cross pieces and rafters
about 2in. by 3in., the battens lin. by 2in., and the usual
building laths will do for the sides and roof, though we have
seen some very useful structures neatly made with the sides
to a height of 3ft. of Chinese sugar mats and bamboo
matting. The sketch given will convey a very good idea as
to the construction, and anyone at all handy with a hammer
could soon knock up such a house.
Having built, a few light creepers may be planted
inside at each post and subsequently trained to give
additional shade, but they must not be allowed to darken the
interior. The floor of the house should be above the general
level of the adjacent ground, so as to secure drainage, and,
after being well beaten down, it should be covered with
cinders, or fine gravel, or very coarse sand from which the soil
or clay has been washed. Near the roof on either side a
shelf a foot wide may be secured on which to rest the smaller
pot plants, and the centre of the house may, with advantage,
have a tier of stepped flower stands rising from the floor to a
height of 4ft. From the roof rustic baskets with creepers,


ferns, and mosses, etc., may be suspended. On each side of
the house a similar arrangement may be made for the display
of pot plants, or a flat table, 3ft. from the floor and 2ft. wide,
may serve to receive these, and the space underneath be
furnished with ferns, mosses, lichens, and other shade-loving
plants, running over whitened stones, quartz, or coral rock.
A very pretty arrangement of palms, ferns, and flowering
plants may be made to permanently occupy the centre or
the sides of the house by filling in with suitable compost to
the depth of a foot, setting the plants directly in the soil, or
by plunging the pots to their depth. When this is done, the
trouble of watering is to a great extent avoided, and there is
less danger of the plants suffering from fluctations of heat
and cold. Along the sides of the house, or upon the pillars
or posts, rustic brackets or plant pockets of cork or other
substances may be placed, in which orchids suitable for cool
culture may be placed, with epiphyllums and other succu-
lents. Cinerarias, calceolarias, azaleas, rhododendrons,
kalmias, ardisias, daphnes, mignonette trees, bouvardias,
epacris, ericas, gardenias, alamandas, begonias, coleus,
pandanus, ferns (not tropical), palms, selaginellas, mosses,
will all find in the bush-house suitable conditions for their
healthy growth. Many of these are serviceable for table and
house adornment, and by transferring them weekly from the
confined, gas, and dust laden air of indoors to the fresh,
cool, sheltered influence of the bush-ho use they will be much
benefited; and if, about every two months, the plants are
re-potted in a sweet soil, they may be kept in an improving
condition for many years.
The house may have an entrance at one end only, or the
passage may go right through. In either case a light door
will be required, so as to shelter the plants from the full force
of cutting winds, and to keep out cats, dogs, or stray poultry.
The paths should be nicely gravelled or bricked, a still
better plan being the tar-pavement so commonly adopted.
Under a shelter-shed such as here described a small glazed
frame may be placed for the striking of cuttings, or for the
germination of seeds of choice flowers, and for starting into
life the spores of choice ferns. Indeed, in a hundred ways
the bush-house will give additional interest to the garden and
pleasure to the owner. He will be able to raise many things
from seed which he could not hope to do in the open ground,
and he will succeed in striking cuttings of numerous plants
which otherwise he would have to pay dearly for or go with-
out. Such delicate seeds as those of the picotee, carnation,


pansy, verbena, calceolaria, cineraria, pentstemon, phlox,
petunia—all of which are so puzzling to the amateur, and
rarely germinate in the open ground—may be sown in pots
with the certainty of success in the bush-house and frame;
and, as soon as the seedlings are large enough to handle, they
may be potted singly or transferred to vacant places in the
garden flower-beds. In the process of transferring the seed-
lings care should be taken to secure a little ball of soil to the
tiny rootlets, and not to break any of these away.
In small gardens the bush-house should be kept for its
proper purpose—not as a store-house for tools, bulbs, roots,
etc. Palms, ferns, pandanus, mosses, and other plants
requiring tender treatment, or unsuitable for outdoor culture,
should alone occupy it; and none of those should be of too
large a size, as they mar the general effect, and damage by
their shade their smaller neighbours. Occasionally the pots
with plants should be moved, and the shelves cleaned down,
or the floor be well raked over and re-dressed with ashes, lime
rubbish, or gravel, to destroy worms and slugs. If any of the
plants have sent their roots through the holes in the bottoms
of the pots, it will be a good plan to cut off this root and re-pot
the plant, using a little larger pot and fresh soil. Each plant
should be examined, and, if the foliage or stems show signs Oi
scale, fly, or aphis, a good syringing of soap-suds should be
given, and the broad-foliaged plants be sponged over. A
pound of soft soap, dissolved in an ordinary bucket of warm
water, and left to cool, forms as good a dressing for blight-
smitten plants as any of the expensive insecticides advertised;
and in the free use of this the plants will never be injured,
for, whether suffering from insect pests or not, it is a part of
good management to occasionally syringe over the foliage.
The ova of the scale-coccus, aphis, bug, and red spider are so
minute that their presence frequently escapes the eye, and it
is at this stage that they may be most effectually dealt with.
By periodical syringing with very weak soap-suds pests of this
kind will be kept constantly in check. If slugs are found to
infest pots or frames, traps should be set for them by laying
lettuce or cabbage leaves near, and regularly clearing away in
the morning. A little dry wood ashes, lime, or charcoal dust,
scattered over the surface of the soil, is also an effectual
“ worry” to slugs as interfering with their locomotion.
The main points to attend to in such a structure are light,
air, and moisture. The light should be modified, not
darkened; it is the intense glare of the sun that has to be
guarded against. Free circulation of the air is necessary ; it


is the violence of winds which the plants require to be secured
from. Moisture is necessary, and must always be secured to
the plants, and with efficient drainage there is little danger
from overwatering; it is from the crushing rain-storm the
bush-house protects the plants. If the branches, rods, or
laths of the sides and roof are placed not more than half-an-
inch apart, all these desiderata will be secured to the interior
of the house; and the most casual attention will serve to keep
the contents healthy and pleasing to the eye.
A good-sized bush-house for an ordinary garden would be
one about twelve feet by ten, and not higher than ten feet at
the ridge, the roof sloping to the sides, which should be about
five feet high. A common plan adopted by nurserymen
requiring such structures on a large scale is to cover the sides
or walls with the rough bamboo or cane matting to the height
of eight or nine feet, and then construct the flat roof of ti-
tree branches and spray laid on the framework of quartering
resting on the posts supporting the whole. In the metro-
politan districts of all the Australian colonies nearly all
plants termed in England “tender, green-house, and con-
servatory plants,” are grown and maintained in health by
our nurserymen. As before remarked, a shelter-shed of
this kind modifies the temperature and other atmos-
pheric conditions ; the scorching heat of the summer north
wind and the chilling blasts of the winter south-westerly gales
are stripped of their terrors, and the plants enjoy an immunity
from all extremes. In large constructions of this kind, of
course, it is impossible to have the roofs sloping, so the full
fall of any showers of rain, however violent, reaches the
plants; but with a slightly-sloping roof, such as we have
suggested, much of the rain trickles down the sides, and the
plants, while getting sufficient moisture, escape the deluge,
and the violence of the downpour is much broken or modified.
Another use the bush-house serves is that on one’s occa-
sional rambles irvthe bush an interesting fern or other plant
may be removed with the certainty of its thriving, which in
the absence of shelter would certainly perish—a disappoint-
ment most people must have experienced frequently on trans-
ferring bush flowers to the open garden.
LAWNS.
There can be no doubt that nothing adds more to the
pleasantness of the outlook from the house than a well-kept
lawn, backed up by brilliant flowering shrubs and climbing


plants, and having for its foreground the neatly-gravelled
walk or carriage drive. Its utility, too, as a croquet-ground,
or for the modern game of lawn tennis, lends additional value
to the lawn, and renders it quite an essential to many estab-
lishments where the tastes and health of young people of both
sexes are matters of consideration or concern.
To form a good lawn a little patience and attention is
required, for the saying of the old philosopher—“ that which
is easily gained is lightly valued,” applies with a great deal of
force to the matter in hand. There are several methods
adopted : where closely fibred meadow turf is available, it may
be taken in strips and laid carefully down on the spot selected,
it being, however, necessary to carefully pick out all weeds,
leaving but the dwarf grass. Another plan, and that to be
most commended, is to sow the land with a good dressing of
lawn seed, specially selected by a respectable seedsman to suit
the soil and district. But in any case, whether turf sods or
seeding be determined on, it will be necessary to work the
land deeply, to drain it thoroughly, to enrich it with manure,
or add a better soil if naturally poor, and to level with preci-
sion. This work should be done early in the autumn—say
March—and as the autumn rains germinate weed seeds, the
surface should be gone over with the hoe, for on the freedom
from these will greatly depend the beauty of the lawn and the
ease of its future management. In the warmer climates of
New South Wales and Queensland the most suitable lawn
grass is the couch (cynodon dactylon), either laid in turves or
pricked in on the prepared soil and left to spread.
The soil thus cleansed, it should receive a slight forking,
and after the first rain in May the surface reduced to a fine
tilth with the rake, and the lawn seeds sown evenly with great
care. This should be lightly raked in, and when the grass
has grown to the height iof two inches, a light garden roller
should be freely run over it, and any weeds showing them-
selves should be plucked out. In another few weeks from the
sowing it will be necessary to use the lawn mower, and to roll
again to consolidate the surface. If very dry weather prevail
give the plot a good watering once a week. By the month of
August it should present an even surface of green, and to
maintain it in presentable condition for ihany years it will be
necessary to mow regularly, roll occasionally, and dress the
surface annually (in the month of September) with a light
coating of sifted compost, formed of bone dust, guano, and
well deodorised night-soil, with ashes.


In the laying down of turf the same attention must be paid
to the treatment of the soil, and it should be as carefully
rolled or beaten as the seed. It will also require greater
attention in weeding and watering to secure the continued
growth of the grass and the union of the strips of turf.
Couch and buffalo grasses, with care, form admirable sward,
and many bowling greens are composed almost entirely of
them. But they are essentially warm weather grasses, and
are not at all suited for keeping up the brilliancy of the lawn
during several months of the year in the more elevated
districts as they are green but a few months in the year, and
often die out during a severe winter. In the warmer districts
they stand better, and, indeed, it would be difficult to have a
lawn at all in such districts, in the absence of water, were it
not for the heat-resisting properties of the cynodon dactylon or
couch grass. It is to this grass especially that is due the
generally green aspect of the reserves and bowling greens
during the heat of summer.
RUSTIC GATE AND FENCE.
RUSTIC GATES AND FENCES.
This engraving represents a gate formed from barked poles
and branches of trees, screwed or bolted together, with some
little exercise of taste and judgment, and swinging on posts


formed from the stems of young gum-trees. The fence, too,
just shown in the engraving, is also formed of barked and
dressed timber, which would be of little other use, except for
firewood, but which, by a little industry and taste, makes a
substantial, ornamental, and durable fence.
TRELLIS FENCE.
This sketch shows a simple, durable fence, suitable for
subdividing a garden, or for cutting off a paddock or orchard
from the flower and kitchen garden. The posts should be
of red gum, and the rails, of 8 x 2 quartering, should be
morticed flush with the face of the post, so that the palings
or battens may present one unbroken line. These battens may
be cut of any size, but 2in. by |th in. is a good useful size.
Over a fence of this character climbers may be trained, and
the effect in the garden is very pretty. Any ordinary useful
hand may construct a fence of this nature.


RUSTIC SUMMER HOUSE.
We have given some pretty designs for rustic gates and
fences, in the making of which might be used the crooked,
“ugly” growths of branches unsuitable for any other purpose.
In ’ he present sketch we give a good notion of how ornamental


an arbour may be constructed of branches of trees in a similar
way. The top may be roofed as shown, or left with light
rafters only, to be covered in time by creepers; but it is well
to have the roof so that the place may afford shelter from a
shower. The floor should be laid with pebbles, bricks, or
wood, but better than these is a coat of asphalt.
ROOKWORH
Rustic arrangements of stones and tree roots and knotty
bends are very easily made, and form pleasant adjuncts to the
cottage or villa garden when placed with judgment. They
also serve to hide from view any unsightly outhouse or other
object, or to break the dead level outlook from the windows of
the house. After building a house or clearing the land there
is generally a lot of broken useless stone or brick or “fangy ”
roots of trees. These, if effectively arranged on heaps of
rubbish, and the spaces partly filled with good compost or
garden soil, may be planted between with all quick-growing
climbers and succulents, as recommended in the article on
Back Yard Planting.
METHODS OF PROPAGATION.
Plants may be produced from seeds, root and wood cuttings,
layers, by buds or eyes, division of the root, suckers, bulblets,
by leaves—as in begonias and gloxinias—and by budding or
grafting upon suitable stocks. The following, general rules,
with the illustrations annexed, will give the amateur a good
general idea of most of the processes adopted with the
commoner garden shrubs ; but in treating of the cultivation of
special plants specific instructions will be found given as to
each under their respective headings.
From Seeds.—lt may seem a small matter to speak of,
but perhaps, after the preparation and treatment of the soil,
the most important operation of the garden is the sowing of
the seeds from which it is intended to raise the plants, and it
is of the manner of this sowing that we propose to speak, for
upon it will depend all future success.
With the larger kinds of seeds, such as lupins, sweet peas,
and nasturtiums, of course there will be no difficulty, as it
will be but necessary to sow singly, making a depression of
about an inch with a blunt dibble or stick, or pressing the
seeds in singly with the finger and thumb at the spot selected,
and covering with soil. But it is with the very small seeds,


such as those of the lobelia, cockscomb, auricula, antirrhinum,
&c., that amateurs fail, and with which the greatest care is
necessary. The position having been determined upon for the
flowering patch, the spot should be lightly forked over and
fined down, and a little silver sand and fibrous, peaty soil
should be strewed over the natural surface of the soil, and
smoothed by gently patting with the back of the spade. A
pinch of the fine seed should be taken between the finger and
thumb, and lightly scattered over the surface of the spot
prepared as described. This done, slightly disturb the surface
by passing the hand over it, and gently press with a piece of
flat board. If the surface is forked or raked over, many of
the tiny seeds are buried too deep, and do not germinate.
This, indeed, is frequently the cause of so many failures in
sowing the finer flower seeds, while success generally attends
the larger kind of seed, such as balsams, convolvulus, and
mignonette, which stand the rougher treatment. It is a good
plan, after sowing, to place a light branch or piece of brush-
wood over the patch, as it protects the seeds from birds, and
the young seedlings from being beaten down by heavy showers
of rain or hail. But a still surer method of raising flowering
plants from seeds is to make a bed or border devoted specially
for them in some shady spot, which can be protected from
cold, chilling winds on the one hand, and from the burning
rays of the mid-day sun on the other, by some light canvas
covering stretched over battens, or made to roll upon a round
rod, like a window-blind. To prepare this bed the surface
should be raised well above the general level of the garden,
so that the drainage may be perfect, and some of the best
mould available should be wheeled to the spot, to form the
plot of the required size. When this has been done, and the
bed put in proper shape, the surface should be covered with
three or four inches of fine sandy peat soil, which has been
passed through a coarse riddle; or, in the absence of this
peaty soil, the well-rotted dung from an old hot-bed, mixed
with fine sand, or the soil which may frequently be dug from
the root of an old burnt tree-stump, should be used. After
raking down finely, take a wooden rod or the handle of the
rake, and mark with a slight depression the lines, at a
distance of a foot or so apart, all along the bed. Upon these
depressions sow the finer seeds thinly, and sprinkle along the
lines a very little of the soil, taking care to cover the larger
seeds with a greater depth of soil than the smaller ones;
thus the very small seeds, like lobelia, will barely need any
covering, while convolvulus and mignonette will need half an


inch of soil, and nasturtiums and sweet peas and lupins will
require fully an inch. Bearing this in mind, there will be no
difficulty in adjusting the depth at which seeds should be
sown to their relative size—a sort of rough rule which will
suit the circumstances of most kinds. It will be necessary in
all cases to mark with a tally the name of the seeds. The
whole bed should, if necessary, be lightly watered with a
syringe or fine-rosed watering-can. In the case of very
valuable varieties, such as selected auricula, verbena, or
carnation seed, it will be well to sow such in a pot or pan of
fine soil, instead of in the covered bed, and to place under
protection of the frame, never allowing the surface soil to
become dust dry.
When the plants are sufficiently large to handle they should
be transferred, singly or in patches of three, to their flowering
positions in the open borders of the garden; or, if the weather
is not suitable for this, they may be potted off for a few
weeks in small pots until they become strong and stocky, and
then put out in the borders, or re-potted in larger pots if
intended for window or house decoration. Great care should
be exercised in the watering, always using a fine-rosed pot,
and letting the water be exposed to the air for a day, so as to
obtain about the temperature of the surface of the soil. When
the water is taken from a deep well it will frequently, from
its coldness, injure the young tender plant growing in a
warmer atmosphere. A shaded bed of the kind here described
will be extremely useful for many purposes—for raising plants
of cucumbers, melons, celery, tomatoes, capsicums, or for
striking cuttings; and the covering may be of calico or oiled
paper, stretched on a rough frame, or made to roll up when
required. Some of the Australian seeds, such as the acacias,
Kennedays, and others, germinate more freely when they have
been soaked for a day or so in warm water; and in dry
weather sweet peas, canna, and other hard, shotty seed may
be soaked for a night before sowing.
Cuttings.—Most plants may be propagated by cuttings,
but it is essentially necessary that these be properly prepared.
The operator should bear in mind that until roots are formed
no healthy growth of foliage can take place, and the object
should be to promote the speedy formation of roots before
there is much demand on them for the foliage. The early
autumn is the best season for putting in cuttings of most
plants in the open ground. The soil at that time is usually
warmer than the atmosphere and more equable, so that, while
there is every inducement to form roots, there is little for the


formation of foliage, and thus we have the best conditions
for success. Care should also be exercised not to leave too
Pig. 1. Pm. 2. Fig. 3.
large a portion of the cutting above the ground. _ Fig. 1
represents a cutting of a vine, the dotted line showing the
surface of the soil in which it is planted ; Fig. 2 shows a rose
cutting, and Fig. 3 a cutting of the red currant. It will be
observed that but a few buds are left above the soil. Fig. 4
represents a cutting of an apple tree with a small bit of
Fig. 4. Fig. 5. Fig. 6.
fibrous root neatly inserted in its side, and secured with a bit
of matting. This is a common mode now of raising stocks
for the apple tree, and is very effective. Fig. sis a small slip
or cutting of the young growth of cypress; and Fig. 6 is a


cutting or piping of a pink prepared for planting. Cuttings
of the vine, rose, currant, and such plants may be readily
struck in the open ground in any sandy soil; but cuttings of
the cypress, the carnation, and the more delicate plants,
operated upon in their young growth in spring, should be
inserted round the margins of shallow pans or pots of silver
sand until sufficiently rooted for potting off singly, or
transferring to their places in the garden. Geraniums of all
sections are easily struck by selecting ripened shoots or the
young growths, and in this way a stock of any favourite kinds
may soon be raised. Fuchsias, bouvardias, verbenas, and
many plants are best raised from young shoots being stuck in
clean, sharp sand, and the pots placed in a frame with or
Fig. 5. Fig. 7. Fig. 6. Fig. 9. Fig. 8. Fig. 10,
without bottom heat. Coleus, iresine, alternan-
theras, plectranthus, and other bedding plants
root freely if cut at a joint and inserted thickly
over the surface of boxes or pots of sandy soil.
Budding.—This is a simple method of
propagating desirable varieties of fruit trees
and many flowering plants. It is always
adopted with the rose, and the description of
the process with the rose will serve for that
of any other plant. Unlike grafting, which is
practiced in the late winter with wood of last year’s growth,
and while the buds are dormant , budding is performed with


young shoots of the present season, and at a time when the bark
parts readily from the wood—that is, while the plant is in full
growth. Take a cutting of the variety of tree it is desired to
propagate: this will be fairly represented in Fig. 5. With a
sharp knife slice off one of the buds with a thin piece of the
wood, which will very nearly resemble Fig. 6; then cut the top
of the bark square, and carefully remove the inner slip of wood
without injuring the germ of the bud. This will be seen
at once on examination; if the wood has come clean away,
leaving a deep depression where the bud is situated, then
it will be better to discard and try another, taking care
to leave a little wood adhering to the bud, but yet not
sufficient wood to interfere with the inner surface of the
bark coming in perfect contact with the wood of the stock.
The bud being ready, it will present an appearance like Fig. 7*
Fig. 8 shows the stock which has been prepared by having
a T like cut made on its side, at a suitable spot, and by having
the bark raised with the blade or handle of the knife for the
reception of the prepared bud. In Fig. 8 this bud is shown
slipped into its position and fitting nicely within the raised
bark of the stock. This is then tied round with tape, or bass
matting, or, what is better, a piece of tailor’s listing, com-
mencing at the top, and bringing the ends of the tie to meet
at the bottom, the overlapping of the tie occurring just over
the inserted bud, as shown in Fig. 9. In a week or two the
bud will have “ taken,” when the tie must be loosened, and
the head of the stock shortened down at the winter time to
the newly inserted bud.
Fig. 10 shows the young shoot from the inserted bud held
in position by a tie ; but a better plan is to secure a light rod
to the stock, and then tie the advancing bud to it; then, at
the first pruning time, the point at which the bud has been
inserted may be pared away level, so as to leave no unsightly
projecting remnant of old wood.
Fig. 11 shows a modification of this process
»||pW| i n that termed “flute budding.” Instead of
Mlllli raising the bark of the stock, and slipping
JtoT the bud underneath, a ring of bark is taken
fejjl off all round the stock, and a corresponding
h Ijlll'i rin 8 of bark with a bud is taken from the
‘w® shoot of the desired kind. This is cut so as
Fig 11 -° exactl y the rin 8 on the stock, and it
is then secured in position by a band of bass
or listing, care being taken not to tie over the bud.


Layering.—This is a method generally applied to the
increasing of currants, gooseberries, and to soft-wooded and
herbaceous plants, such as verbenas, pinks, carnations, Ac.;
but it may also be practiced with roses, camellias, azaleas,
vines, and all the bushy low-growing shrubs of the flower
garden. The shoots of the season are pegged down firmly
into the freshly-dug ground around the plant, and a few
inches of soil is placed over the branch where so pegged
down, leaving the end of the shoot just out of the ground.
Sometimes a twist or wound is made at the spot where the
peg secures it; but if the ground be kept moist and the
surface mulched, the layer will soon take root. The time
will vary with most plants, the hard-wooded varieties taking
longest to develop roots. Early autumn-layered shoots of
most flowering plants will usually be sufficiently rooted for
removal in the following spring; and spring layers will, if
kept moist during summer, be ready for transplanting by
the autumn or winter following. Such soft herbaceous things
as verbenas will, if kept moist, be ready for separating from
the parent plant in a few weeks. A good idea of the process
will be formed on a glance at the diagram given above.
As a rule, the outer drooping or trailing branches root more
freely than the erect growths of a plant.
Grafting.—The ordinary season for grafting all kinds of
deciduous trees is August and September. The process con-
sists in so joining a young scion or shoot to the stock as to
secure a perfect union. Grafting is practiced where it is
required to perpetuate any given variety of tree, but it is
especially serviceable in securing a valued kind of tree which
cannot be grown from seed without danger of deterioration
or variation. It is always practiced in raising young stock for the


orchard, but is also practiced where it is required to supersede
an old or worthless variety of fruit tree with some better kind.
To raise young trees the following is the method: —Healthy
one or two year old suitable stocks, usually seedlings, are
Fig. 1. Fig. 2. Fig. 3. Fig. 4. Fig. 5.
selected, and in the position they have been grown are headed
or cut down near the ground, as at a, Fig. 1; then a slice is cut
smoothly off with a sharp knife, as at b, and a notch is cut in
the surface of this, as at c. It is then ready to receive the
scion, which is taken from the young growth of the tree
desired. This is neatly cut to fit the stock, and one of the
edges or bark of the scion must be brought exactly in contact
with the edge or bark of the stock. They are both secured in
contact by a piece of tape or bass matting, and the whole is
covered with prepared clay to exclude the air. Fig. lis the
stock, headed down and prepared to receive the scion; Fig. 2is
the scion, prepared to join the stock ; Fig. 3 shows the scion in
position; Fig. 4 shows it secured by the tie; and Fig. 5 shows
the whole covered with the clay.
But, as before stated, besides the raising of young trees it
may be advisable to supersede an old or worthless tree by some
good variety. To do this it will be necessary to head down the
tree with a fine saw to a suitable point, and there insert scions
of the desired variety. To effect this the sawn surface should
be smoothed over with a sharp knife; a broad, sharp chisel
should then be driven down just sufficiently far to force an


to admit the wedge-shaped scion. Fig. 6 shows the
I scion and the stock with scion in position. The
Fig. 6. Fig. 7. Fig. 8.
outer bark of the stock should exactly coincide with the bark
of the scion, and this should be bound with a strong band of
tape or matting. Clay should be placed over the junction, as
with the last process described.
When the stock and scion are almost exactly of the same
diameter, a very perfect junction may be effected, as shown by
Fig. 7 ; after being placed nicely in position, the joint is bound
with matting and clayed.
It sometimes happens that no suitable stocks are available
whereon to graft scions of valued varieties, and, where this is
the case, recourse is had to slips of roots from a growing tree.
Fig. 8 shows how this is accomplished, and it is found to
answer all purposes, giving good, robust, young trees in about
the same time as required for a graft on an ordinary stock.
The root used must, of course, be of the same kind of tree as the
scion ; an apple tree root for an apple scion, and so on.
Still another mode of grafting is that practiced where it is
ssired to substitute one variety for another, and where the
dinary mode does not readily succeed. This process is


called grafting “by approach” or inarching. The two
growing plants, usually in pots, are brought together, and an
incision is made in each so as to leave an interlockihg tongue,
Fie. 9.
as at Fig. 9 ; they are secured by
tape or matting, clayed over, and
when sufficiently united the head
is cut away of the one not re-
quired, and the other is left to
take its place. The stem of the
desired variety is severed below the
junction, and in a short time the
joint is concealed by new growth,
and the desired end attained. This
method is generally adopted with
camellias and other choice plants
difficult to treat by the ordinary
modes of grafting or by cuttings.
It will be observed that we have
laid great stress on the necessity
of the barks of the scion and stock
coming exactly together; this is
really the secret of success in
grafting, and any failure may be
attributed to carelessness in this
particular.
The clay referred to should be of a stiff, well beaten,
adhesive quality, and it is customary to incorporate with it
a little cow-dung or horse-dung; but this is merely with a
view to prevent it from cracking on exposure, and a little
chopped light grass answers the same purpose. A grafting
cement is also made of resin, grease, and pitch, and is
found to be better than clay for some plants; but a good
clay answers every purpose. Where the graft is below the
ground no clay will be needed, unless the season is very
far advanced.
Grafting is not much practiced in the flower garden where
budding serves the same purpose and better; but for such
things as double scarlet thorns and vines, grown for foliage
effects, it is a useful process. Succulents, such as the cactus
family, when of delicate habit or when required as standards,
are frequently grafted on the more robust and hardy kinds.


IOW GARDENING AND THE POT CULTURE
OF flowering PLANTS.
Having no winter to destroy the chief decorative garden
plants, and the climate being very favourable for those
usually found to be tender in English gardens, it perhaps
cannot be wondered at that but few people take an interest in
the indoor cultivation of plants. Still there are many people
living in towns and suburbs who have not gardens, but the
circumstances of whose surroundings would enable them,
with a little care and observation, to greatly add to the
beauty of their dwellings by the regular growth of plants;
and, really, there is such a choice of flowers for all seasons
that the grower may have his windows, verandahs, and
balconies kept gay the whole year round.
Apart from their great beauty there is a perpetual interest
attending the cultivation of plants, while it gives to the
young especially those habits of close observation which are
so useful in life. Every day some leaf or flower is expanding,
and this gives incident and variety to home life which perhaps
otherwise would be listless and aimless.
Of the flowers suited for pot culture, and easy of manage-
ment, we may mention the following, and these, when well
grown, will keep up a constant succession of bloom :—Dwarf
perpetual roses, fuchsias, pelargoniums (zonal, tricolour, and
ivy-leaved), geraniums, carnations and picotees, Chinese
primroses, auriculas, verbenas, stocks, polyanthus, pansies,
cinerarias, calceolarias, balsams, ericas, azaleas, camellias,
&c. To these may be added sweet-scented plants, such as
scented verbena, mignonette, wall-flower, boronias, &c.
Perhaps the most powerful scent-yielding plant is the boronia
megastigma, which may be got from any nurseryman.
We recommend amateurs in starting a collection of pot
plants not to purchase plants in bloom, as is usually the
case, for all such are not sold till they are perfectly bloomed,
and they rapidly decline when transferred to their new home.
It is better to get young, dark-foliaged, healthy plants ; these
will thrive well, and the owner will have the pleasure of
watching their gradual development, each day showing some
new beauty.
A few simple rules may prove very acceptable to many who
are cultivating window plants in pots. Ist. It is highly


necessary that, at the outset, the plants be young and
healthy. Diseased and debilitated plants will -bring dis-
appointment, and the labour expended on their culture will
be, to a great extent, labour lost. 2nd. Plants should be
properly potted; that is to say, good soil should be used—
something that will supply the plant with the necessary food
for its sustenance. There should also be ample drainage—
pieces of broken flower pots are used for this purpose—and
the plants should, as a rule, be firmly potted—that is, the soil
should be firmly pressed about the roots. 3rd. The plants
should never be allowed to get dry, and, on the other hand,
the soil should not be drenched too heavily. It is always best
that the water given to the plants be allowed to pass freely
from the bottoms of the pots, and thus to keep water
standing in the saucers occupied by the plants is generally a
bad practice, as it will often so sodden the roots that they will
rot, and the plant become unhealthy, if it does not die out-
right. 4th. Air must circulate freely amongst the plants if
they are to be made healthy and to thrive well; therefore
sash windows are always best for flowers, as a supply of air
invariably finds its way in from without even when the sashes
are closed. Plenty of light is as indispensable as plenty of
air, and the undue crowding of the plants should be altogether
avoided. Window gardeners are often what may be termed
“greedy” in this respect; they so crowd their window that
the inevitable result is the plants are all badly done, whereas
a few could be managed with the best possible results. The
cultivator of window plants is always open to one annoyance—
that of the presence on the plants of a small, green insect,
generally denominated the “ green fly.” When this appears
some soap and water should be applied, either by the use of
a soft brush or by the hand, carefully washing off the fly in
the act; or the plants may be dusted with snuff, or fumigated
with tobacco smoke.
Watering Pot Plants.—ln the operation of watering
potted plants persons not practically familiar with plant
culture are apt to make serious mistakes. Cultivators find by
experience that an excess of water at the roots is very
injurious to almost all plants, and hence it is usual to direct
that great caution be used in the application of water,
especially in the winter. The result is that frequently the
opposite extreme is fallen into, to the great injury of the
plants. From the moment that the soil becomes so far dried
that the fibres of the roots cannot absorb moisture from it,


the plant begins to suffer. Some plants can bear this loss of
water with more impunity than others; some, again, and the
erica family among the rest, are in this way soon destroyed.
The object of watering should be to prevent this stage of
dryness being reached, at least during the time the plant is
growing, and at all times in the case of those of very rigid
structure, at the same time that excess which would sodden
the soil and gorge the plant is also avoided. Within these
limits the most inexperienced persons may follow sound
directions for the application of water with safety; but when-
ever water is given to pot plants enough should be employed
to wet the soil thoroughly, and the difference between plants
that require more or less water should be made by watering
more or less frequently, and not by giving greater or lesser
quantities at one time.
On Potting Plants.—ln potting plants that require any
cutting or pruning, the two operations should not be per-
formed at the same time. Generally it is best to prune first,
and allow the plant to make fresh growth before the potting
is performed. Deciduous plants should never be re-potted till
they have burst into leaf; fuchsias, for instance, which have
been dried off in winter, should in no case be shaken out of
their old soil till they have expanded a few leaves, and all
pruning required in their case should be done before the roots
are disturbed. Evergreen plants, such as camellias, oranges,
and myrtles, have a particular season at which the roots
elongate or increase with more rapidity than is usual at other
stages of their growth, and, under ordinary circumstances,
that season is immediately they have made their growth in
branches and leaves, and it is the most desirable time to shift
such as require it into larger pots and more nourishing soil
just as the roots are extending and ready to lay hold of fresh
soil.
Shifting a plant into a larger pot often becomes necessary
when pruning is not called for. When it is desired to
increase the size of a plant, it should be shifted into a larger
pot as soon as the roots have circled themselves among and
around the soil in their present pot to an extent that renders
it safe to perform the operation without danger of the ball
falling to pieces. Generally speaking, a sure criterion as to
when a plant requires more pot-room and nourishment is
when the roots make their appearance through the bottom of
the pot. It is, however, much preferable at the near
approach of winter to leave plants a little cramped at the


roots than to shift them on at such a season. Under sue!
circumstances the operation should be deferred till earlj
spring. Azaleas and camellias should not be shifted till aftei
their blooming season is past, and they have made fresl
growth, and the exact season for potting such plants must, ol
course, be determined by the time at which they are forced tc
or retarded from making their growth.
Pots should always be scrupulously clean, and quite drj
when used. If they have been previously used, they should
always be washed before putting another plant into them;
every particle of mould or slimy matter which adheres tc
them and clogs up the pores should be removed, both outside
and inside. When a plant is put into a pot, the inside o)
which is covered with particles of earth, the mischievous con-
sequence, to say nothing of others, is that, in turning a planl
out of it, the ball is sure to be broken, and, of course, the
roots also injured.
HINTS AS TO FRONT GARDENS OR OOTTAG!
FOREGROUNDS.
In our next chapter we have dwelt rather fully on the
subject of Back Yard Gardens. A few words in reference to
the disposition of the space in front of the dwelling may be
useful. We would, however, warn our readers not to slavishly
follow a given pattern, or to adopt the precise style another
neighbour has observed, but to strike out of the beaten path
in selecting trees and shrubs of novel and striking character.
As the space available is usually a limited one, avoid all trees
or shrubs whose robust growth will, in a year or two, be too
large for the plot, or occupy the whole space, to the detriment
or destruction of the smaller shrubs and herbaceous flowering
plants. Have no intricate windings of paths or finicking
beds, but let the design be simple, and, where the walks are
not straight, let the curves be gentle and easily followed. li
the beds be cut out of a grass sward, avoid all sharp angles or
points, as such invariably break down, or the grass is killed
during summer, to the disfigurement of the general design.
A circular or oval bed, or one of some bold geometric pattern,
cut in a well-kept plot of grass, is always chaste and striking.
The centre may be occupied by a Camellia, Daphne, Azalea,
or some evergreen shrub of slow growth and floral beauty;
and this may be surrounded by a choice selection of eithei


bedding plants or showy annuals. Verbenas, Phloxes, Pent-
stemons, Nemophilas, and any of the numerous things men-
tioned as suitable for the back garden will be available here.
Pretty plants of dwarf habit or slow growth are the Biota
aurea, Picea Nordmanniana, Picea Webbiana, Ericas, and
Epacrises, Boronias, Hoveas, &c.; but any nurseryman will
give the planter the benefit of his advice as to the best kinds
for his special purpose.
Where ornamental vases are available, succulent plants,
such as the Cactus, Aloe, Echeveria, and Yucca, will be found
suitable, as not likely to suffer from drought or neglect; and
where rockwork is attempted, all this class of plants thrive
well in such positions.
BACK YARD GARDENS.
If there is one blot more than another marring the surround?,
ings of town and suburban life in these colonies it is the
perpetual mess and untidyness characterising that portion of
the premises known as the “ back yard.” People will take
some pains to tidy up the plot of land in front, or to make it
fresh and gay-looking with a few shrubs and flowers, but the
area at the back is too frequently made the receptacle for the
litter, lumber, dust, and rubbish cast from the house. In wet
weather the place is in a puddle, and in dry it is a fertile
source of dust and uncleanliness to the interior of the
dwelling.
In suggesting a remedy for this state of things we are not
unmindful of the difficulties and drawbacks to be encountered.
Cats and dogs, your neighbours’ fowls or goats, are all sources
of annoyance, but the danger to the garden from these causes
may be minimised by care, patience, and persistency, as many
cottagers may testify.
The fencing being pretty close and in a sound condition,
and the gate latch and bolt in good working order, a little
steady attention on the part of all the members of the house-
hold will keep the place free from vagrant dogs and goats;
and the damage done by cats when plants are fairly estab-
lished is not very serious, unless in the case where half-a-
dozen kittens are reared and allowed to disport themselves
on the soil. A drawback of a more pronounced character,
however, is that of your neighbours’ fowls, but even this may
be overcome, the following method being quite effectual: —
The fence and gate being attended to, nail firmly to each of


the posts of the fence a piece of batten extending fifteen
inches above the top of the line of the fence ; stretch lines of
stout pack-thread four inches apart on these battens, securing
them with nails, all round the garden, and at the top of the
gate nail a little frame of wire netting. This will effectually
check fowls from flying over, as they have a great aversion
to their wings coming in contact with the cord. Another
precaution may be taken by courteously explaining to friendly
neighbours your appreciation of their kindness if they would
clip the wings of their feathered friends. Of course, if goats
or fowls be kept by one’s-self, it will be a matter to consider
whether arrangements can be made for protection of the
garden from their ravages, or to weigh the relative advantage
between the comfort, convenience, and pleasantness of the
garden plot and the retention of the fowls or goats; and,
perhaps, to estimate at its proper value the sanitary improve-
ment of the place by their removal. Fairly secure from the
danger of outside disturbance, the next consideration will be
the general design the beds and borders shall assume. In
this we must, of course, be largely guided by the arrangement
and position of the outbuildings, and by the gate and wood-
shed, the approaches to which must not be seriously inter-
fered with. These should be reached by straight lines or by
well-defined gentle curves, as any intricate course renders
their approach in the dark awkward, and even dangerous.
The edgings of the borders and beds should be of some robust
and compact-growing hardy plant, like box, rosemary, chamo-
mile, thrift, or of golden variegated thyme, and these may be
more definitely marked by a margin of shells, coral, or other
such adornments which may be available. In the place of
these a line of bricks or ornamental tiles may be used, but
care should be taken to lay them firmly and in true line, as
nothing is more offensive to the eye than a crooked or uneven
edging.
The paths should be raised in the centre, beaten down to a
hard surface, and be made to slope in a direction whence
quick drainage may be secured. A good coating of fine gravel,
shells, or broken clinkers may be used, but if the premises are
a freehold, or held under a lease, or the tenant has an inten-
tion of permanently occupying the place, he might be able to
pave or asphalt the paths, or get the landlord to lend a hand
in getting this done.
The design having been defined and the line of paths
determined on, the next consideration is the character of the


soil; this may be poor—sandy, rocky, or clayey ; or it may be
rich, or of fair quality. In any case it must be deeply dug,
and if poor should be enriched by digging in a few barrow-
loads of cow-dung or horse droppings from the street, or a
load or two of good black sandy or peaty soil. As a rule, an
untidy yard is one in which there has been a long accumula-
tion of debris from the wood-heap, and ashes and other
rubbish from the house in a half or wholly decomposed
condition, and these when dug in render an average soil quite
rich enough to grow most flowering plants in good health.
In forming the beds they should be rounded or raised in the
centre, so as to allow excessive rain to drain off, and the
borders next the fence should slope towards the paths for the
same reason.
The fence, closet, and any other unattractive-looking
object may be speedily covered with climbers, and these, for
immediate summer effect, may be scarlet-runners, mixed
convolvulus, or nasturtiums; but for permanently covering a
given space, and giving no trouble in training, the little
creeping fig, the compact-growing Yeitch’s Virginian creeper,
and the English ivy, may be planted at intervals all round the
fence. Climbing roses, such as Cloth of Gold, Devoniensis,
white and golden Banksian, Marechal Niel, Solfaterre, or
Blairii, all of light or golden hues; and Charles Lawson,
Prince Albert, Victor Verdier, Lord Eaglan, Cheshunt hybrid,
and other dark-coloured, robust-growing varieties, may be
planted, so as to quickly cover the fence and yield constant
bloom until the more slow-growing and permanent fig, ivy,
and Virginian creeper are established. Other suitable plants
for training against the fence are tecomas, passion-flowers,
loniceras or honeysuckles, bugainvilleas, ipomeas, and
jasmines, of which there are many varieties giving great
diversity of colour in blossom, and that extending over a long
season. Pretty climbers from seed are the tropoeolums,
canary creeper, major convolvulus or morning glory, and the
Maurandya Barclayana, of which there are white, purple,
and crimson varieties.
But the article on “ Climbing Plants” will guide the
amateur as to variety and colours of other desirable plants for
this purpose.
Ornamental vases may also be used, but plants for these
should be rigid, hardy, compact, and slow-growing, like the
aloes, yuccas, echeverias or house-leeks, dracasnas or grass-


trees. Good, rustic-looking receptacles for plants are the
round hollow logs, to be got cheaply at any wood-yard or in
the bush, and sawn into lengths of about two feet. These
placed in suitable positions, filled with soil, are very
good for geraniums, heaths, fuchsias, begonias, and many
other plants. The soil being kept of a perfectly even tem-
perature, from the wood being a non-conductor of heat, rapid
root-growth takes place, and the flourish with a vigour
quite remarkable. In stocking tire back garden with plants it
will be well to give attention to dwarf shrubs and hardy
herbaceous plants, and to avoid as much as possible the sow-
ing of tender annuals, which the scratching of even a sparrow
will destroy. If these are desired it will be well to sow in
pots, pans, or boxes, and to guard until the young plants are
of sufficient size to transfer to the ,bed; but such robust-
growing things as sweet-peas, lupins, marvel of Peru, and
nasturtiums, cannas or Indian shot, may be sown at once in
the positions they are intended to fill. In this matter of
seed-sowing, readers are referred to the rather exhaustive
remarks on the subject in another part of this book.
Of the shrubs easy of management and effective in the
border a great variety is available for selection. Deep glossy
evergreen foliage characterises the corynocarpus, the
photinia, baloghia lucida or blood-wood, the coprosma lucida,
the pittosporums, acmena Kingiana, aucubas, hollies, the
Portugal laurel, thujas, the bay, and common lakirel; these
plants are chiefly useful for their foliage effect. Others valu-
able for their foliage and blossom are camellias, oranges,
daphnes, veronicas, statices, laurustinus, gardenias, azaleas,
abutilons, arbutus, magnolias, ardisia, ericas, epacrids,
berberis, boronias, bouvardias, ceanothus, escallonias, hahro-
thamnus, hibiscus, nandina, lasiandras. Chief among the
deciduous, or plants shedding their leaves in winter, are the
deutzias, philadelphus or mock orange, the double, flowering
cherry, prunus, peach and almond, fuchsias, lilac, tamarisk,
tecoma velutina, poinsettia, Gueldres rose, daphne Fortunii,
indigofera, kerria, lagerstroemia spireas, elder, and the pink
and sckrlet double flowering thorns. Of the culture of many of
these, reference may be made to the special articles in another
part of this book.
Of weeping habit we have the pendulous nectarine and
peach, the willows, the sophora, the ash, elm, birch, and
Siberian crab, but these should only be used where plenty of
space is available, which is rarely the case with a back yard,
for which these notes are mainly written.


The thick, fleshy or succulent-leaved plants suitable for
the use of the cottager, and especially for rockeries or raised
arrangements of rustic roots and stones, are the following:—
Yucca, aloes, sempervium or house-leek, pigs’ faces or mesem-
bryanthemums, of which there are many varieties all yielding
brilliant masses of every shade of colour on bright sunny
days; cactus, of varieties ; cotyledons, ice plants, and others.
Effective dwarf hardy joints are the sedums, the little
variegated mesembryanthfSnum; and, for shady places,
• violets, of several kinds, parties, daisies, primulas, poly-
and primroses ; * verbenas, pinks, picotees, carnations,
petunias, pentstemons, diplacus, chrysanthemums, phloxes,
afford a wide range of selection in flowering plants to alternate
with the evergreen shrubs and taller growing plants on the
beds. The rose',4oo, must not be forgotten; a good selection
of varieties affording effective contrasts in colour will be the
following :—Gloire de Dijon (buff); Souvenir de la Malmaison,
Boule de Neige, Lady Stuart, Lord Tarquin, Madame Alfred
de Eougement, Aim 6 Yibert, Devoniensis, Madame la Baron
nesse de Eothschild, Felicite Perpetua, Perle de Lyons (white) ;
Cloth of Gold, Marechal Niel, Sulphurea, Triomphe de
Eennes, Eeine de Portugal, Isabella Gray, Belle Lyonnaise,
Celine Forestier (tending to yellow) ; Persian, Austrian briar
(yellow); Alpaid Eotalier, William Griffith, Mrs. Eivers,
Paul’s Qu«jen Victoria (pale pink); Alfred Dumas, Baron
Gonella, Captain Christy, Charles Lawson, Elizabeth
Vigneron, French Moss, Crested Moss, Glory of Mosses,
Madame Victor Verdier, Annie Laxton (bright rose-colour) ;
Pierre Netting, Prince Camille de Eohan, Marie Baumann,
Charles Lefebre, Alfred Colomb, Empereur de Maroc, Boula
de Nanteuil, Geant de Batailles, Jules Margottin, are all roses
of dark crimson tending to rich purplish black. From the
collection named a selection may be made of perpetual
blooming kinds, which will keep up the continued interest of
the grower.
Very tractable and effective plants, too, are the double and
single pelargoniums of all sections; and the variegated-leaved
kinds in silver and gold zones are especially adapted for the
cottage garden; while the climbing ivy-leaved varieties are
very hardy and beautiful.
The bulbous flowering plants worthy of a place are gla-
diolus, lilies, crocus, daphodils, narcissus, sparaxis, ixias,
anemones, ranunculus, watsonias, and the amaryllus of


several kinds. The gladiolus is particularly useful, as by
planting the bulbs at intervals, the garden may be kept gay
the whole year round.
Finally, stocks, wall-flowers, zinnias, sweet-williams, mig-
nonette, and a long list of popular annuals and biennials,
may be sown in pots, and the young seedlings transferred to
the ground when large enough to handle. The work of
watering, hoeing, and transplanting will need attention from
time to time, but all the work here sketched out may be
accomplished by a few hours of steady application; and, the
garden once formed, it will afford pleasant occupation for
those numerous stray half-hours which every unoccupied
mind feels to hang so heavily when listlessly and unprofitably
spent in “yawning around.” The work of watering, trans-
planting, sowing seeds, and generally “ fixing up” matters
with most men may be done before going to work, or on the
return in the evening; and the wife and children will soon
learn to join in the duty of beautifying the place. But, besides
this, another advantage is gained; by accustoming the children
to assist, habits of observation and patience are inculcated;
the daily notice of the advancing bud and the expanding
flower gives to their young lives incident and variety and
colour, and frees it from the humdrum of a wearying time of
hanging about with nothing to notice or to do.
It may, perhaps, be well to add that if the premises be rented
some sort of arrangement should be made with the landlord
before entering on any work costing money in improving the
place, lest some fine morning, after all his trouble, the tenant
may be told that the place is worth more rent. But if a land-
lord has any policy it should be to encourage and assist the
tenant in improving the appearance and the sanitary condition
of his dwelling and its surroundings.
THE PANSY AND VIOLA.
This was always a favourite flower of the old school of
florists, and has of late years been growing more in favour by
colonial gardeners. The pansy is thoroughly hardy, yet in
very cold localities it needs wintering in cold frames ; but in
these colonies the real difficulty lies in summering the plants, as
the heat is even more destructive than the cold, though there
is no real necessity for covering the frames, as the frost never
hurts a pansy when in a dry state. As a general rule, it is
safest to winter all kinds bf florists’ flowers in frames where it


can be done, especially in damp localities. Supposing the
plants have been wintered in frames, or raised from seeds in
pots or prepared beds, they can be planted out in July,
to bloom from September forward, in a soil composed of
decomposed turf sods, matured leaf soil, and a small amount
of rotten manure ; if all have been well sweetened by having
been mixed for some time, so much the better. Some kinds
of pansies require to be grown poorer than others, in order
to get them into good condition for the exhibition table, but
this is the exception, not the rule, of pansy growing. Much
manure is objectionable where good leaf soil can be had;
manure is not wanted at planting time. Guano in a dry state
should not be applied, but it is safe to use it in a liquid form,
say about an ounce to three gallons of water, and then to
water round the plants and not on them. It is most essential
to the pansy that it should be protected from an excess of
moisture; but, when the weather is very dry, of course
watering can be had recourse to. The most destructive
results to the pansy will sometimes arise from heavy rain,
followed immediately by very hot weather. Protection from
strong sunshine should be afforded to the plants, not only to
benefit the flowers but the plants as well; they dislike
excessive heat, and strong healthy-looking plants will suc-
cumb to its influence in a few hours. Some framework
should be formed to protect the bed, over which canvas may
be stretched, but not to reach at the sides less than eighteen
inches from the beds. This allows a free circulation of air
and admits plenty of light; it will not do to shade too
heavily, or drawing will be the result. Top-dress or surface
the beds with a light rich soil occasionally during the sum-
mer, to encourage the rooting of the side shoots. The plants
can remain in shaded beds till April, when they should be lifted,
pulled to pieces, as all the young shoots will be found to have
taken root, and planted in the cold frame for wintering. To
have pansies in bloom in February and March, cuttings
should be taken from the plants in September and October,
or young pieces slipped off with roots and placed under a
hand-glass, or in a cold close frame with a south aspect;
these will soon be well-rooted plants, and, if planted out in
October and carefully tended, will produce fine blooms. The
fancy kinds are very handsome and showy, as they comprise
many shades of colour which the old varieties do not possess,
and a great many of them are boldly and distinctly blotched.
They are generally very robust growing, and should be
planted wide apart, and, being vigorous growers, are invaluable


for border decoration. Any good garden soil suits them;
avoid manure, and in forming a bed use decayed sods and
leaf soil. They, too, should be carefully wintered, and when
required for exhibition be planted out on beds in spring, as
recommended for the English kinds.
Seed of either kind can be sown in February, March, or
April in pans, and, when the plants are strong enough, prick
out into the smallest sized pots, and when these are established,
and the roots require more room, transplant into the beds or to
their blooming positions. If pots be not available, then the
young seedlings should be pricked out on a shaded piece of
ground until ready for removal. These seedlings grow strong,
and make capital border flowers. Any good flowers should be
marked for propagation. In moist and cold localities it will be
best to winter the seedlings in frames, and plant out in August,
or sow the seed in July, and plant out in September. In saving
seed, select only the finest and most distinct flowers.
The new race of Violas so effectively used for bedding
purposes in European gardens and grounds may be treated in
the same way as suggested for the pansy. As the viola is
essentially a plant for spring bedding effects, strong, well-
rooted cuttings should be available for use in April and May,
so as to fill the place rendered vacant by such tender plants as
alternantheras, which do not stand even a mild winter, and are
only useful for summer and autumn effects.
THE PINK, PICOTEE, AND CARNATION.
This popular plant of English and colonial gardens is a
native of all parts of Europe, and the many beautiful
varieties known to modern gardeners are the result of careful
cultivation and hybridisation. No flower is so well adapted
for Australian gardens; the plants are evergreen, perfectly
hardy, and resist with equal pertinacity the hot winds of our
summers and the cold rains of our winter months. The
flowers last a long time, and even when cut keep fresh for
many days, and give off their delicious dove-like odour to the
last. The last few years have added many improved varieties
to the stocks of our nurserymen, some of whom have paid
very special attention to the flower. Much confusion exists
in the non-professional mind as to the points which consitute
the difference between pinks, picotees, and carnations. The
pink is a term commonly used for all, but ought properly to
be applied only to the common clove and garden pink, which


possesses a white ground with maroon or claret bands and
blotches. The carnation is characterised by the marks or
stripes on the petals, proceeding from the centre to the edge ;
and of these there are five classes—the scarlet bizarres, the
pink or crimson bizarres, the scarlet flakes, the rose flakes,
and the purple flakes. The term “ bizarre ” is the French
for odd and eccentric, and is applied to the flower of the
carnation, which has three colours irregularly distributed on
the petals—a scarlet bizarre being a flower which has that
colour predominating, and a crimson or pink bizarre one
which has most of either of those colours. “Flakes” are
those flowers with a white ground, and they are termed
scarlet, crimson, or purple flakes just as these colours mark the
white ground with their pencillings. The picotee is dis-
tinguished by the flower being merely tipped or edged with
the colour on the margins of the petals, and there are of
these the red edged, light and heavy; the rose edged,
light and heavy; the purple edged, light and heavy;
and the yellow grounds, which may have any of the
colours mentioned on the margins of their petals. The
marginal markings of a good picotee ought to be continuous,
not broken or running into veins, and the petals should be
evenly folded over each other, or fluted evenly to the centre,
and thereby hiding the pistil. The same quality as to the
arrangement of the petals applies also to the carnation. The
soil suited to the carnation and picotee is an ordinary firm or
rich garden loam, and the manures best adapted for improving
the soil are old cow-dung and leaf mould. It is of little use
the amateur attempting to grow these flowers from seed, not
one in a thousand seedlings being fit for growing. He will
find in the catalogues of most of our nurserymen a good
descriptive list, from which he may make a selection to
begin with, and as these make growth plants may be
propagated by layering, by slips, and from cuttings, or
pipings. The last-named form the most shapely plants, and
are best adapted for pot culture, as they throw a single
central flower stem, and rarely give much trouble from
suckers and side-shoots. For garden purposes it will be
found convenient to peg down the outer or grassy growth
of the old plants about April, cutting the part half through
where the peg presses it into the ground. These layers will
be fully ready for removal about July, and if the old plants
have grown woody and hard, it will be policy to dig them
up and throw away, as the rooted layers will, if well tended,
give much more satisfactory bloom. Cuttings or “pipings”


are formed from the tops of the outer growths taken
during summer, cut at the third or fourth joint, and inserted
in pots or pans of silver sand and kept just moist until roots
are formed. This plan is to be commended, as it may be
used just at the time when the observer notes the high
qualities of a flower, and the plants are much better than
those from layers, whether intended for the border or for
pot culture. As the young plants develop their flower-stalks
these should be carefully tied to a rod, and where the plants
are older and throwing up a profusion of stems, these may
be secured to a light willow hoop mounted on three sticks,
in the tops of which slits have been cut for the reception
of the hoop. Watch should be kept for the caterpillar,
which especially affects this plant at the blooming season,
and occasional waterings of dilute guano-water should be
given. No plant is so tractable under rational treatment as
the carnation, and no flower offers a more enduring reward
to the cultivator. A new class of carnations has of late years
sprung into notice. It is called the tree or climbing carnation
from its robust and erect habit, and is of great value in
England for house culture, as it blooms freely during the
months of December, January, and February. Some very
fine varieties of this class of tree carnation of recent intro-
duction may be seen in the catalogues of our nurserymen.
They are of various shades of colour, profuse bloomers, and
have an exquisite odour.
THE FUCHSIA.
No finer plant can be seen than a well grown pyramidal
fuchsia; and whether required as a pot plant for the window,
for greenhouse decoration, or for the open border, it is equally
serviceable. The peculiarly graceful habit of the plant when
trained as a pyramid, its abundant pendant blossoms, the
vast varieties and colours and shapes of the flowers, the
ease with which it may be grown, tend to make it one of the
most effective and useful plants.
Perhaps there is no plant which, under the hands of the
hybridist, has made more rapid strides than the fuchsia. If
we glance at the catalogues of the varieties offered for sale
twenty years ago, and compare them with those now available,
the contrast will be very striking, and every season adds new
and striking varieties to the list.


Their culture is of the most simple kind. Assuming that the
grower wishes to raise his own plants, the following directions
should be noted. From an old plant just starting into fresh
growth in the month of April or May take top cuttings of the
strong young shoots and place in pans or pots of sand and
leaf soil, or of turfy compost, in which fine sand is the prevail-
ing element. In a few weeks many of these will be rooted,
and should be potted off in the smallest sized pots, and in a
mixture of soil formed by a vegetable mould in which well
dried cow-dung is present. If the cuttings have thrown more
than one shoot, the strongest only should be left, the rest
being pinched out. In this colony much heat will not be
necessary, and, as a rule, at this stage of the plant’s growth a
simple frame will be sufficient to induce speedy growth. Some
protection will, however, be needed to shield the plants from
extreme variation in temperature ; for though the fuchsia,
when old and woody, will stand almost any climate, when it is
young and sappy it is easily injured if exposed to intense sun-
glare, or if submitted to a night temperature below 40 degrees.
As the plants reach eight or nine inches in height they should
be given the support of small rods, and be tied loosely into
such. When from ten to twelve inches in height it will be
necessary to pinch out the top of the plant so as to induce the
growth of side shoots, that the plant may present a well-
furnished surface of bloom-yielding branches. From the
point where the leading shoot was “ stopped,” or pinched out,
another should be allowed to spring, in order to continue the
upright growth and to furnish another nine or ten inches of
lateral shoots. This shoot should again be stopped, or
pinched, when it has attained the required height, and the
result will be the springing out of fresh side shoots around the
upright shoot. By this time the plants should have been
gradually hardened by exposure, lifting the frame, or other
covering, for the free admission of light and air; and the
weather being warm and genial, the frame may be left slightly
raised at night. The plants should now have a “ shift,” or be
transferred to pots of slightly larger size, the soil being
formed of one-half chopped turf loam with cow-dung and
sand. In re-potting, press the soil firmly about the roots and
tie the shoots in neatly to a suitable rod. In another month,
say September, if the plants are required for border decoration,
they may be transferred to the open ground, and well watered
and mulched. But if required for pot plants, or to be grown
on as specimens for show purposes, they should again be
transferred to larger pots, and receive liberal waterings with


diluted sheep manure-water once or twice a week. The sub-
sequent treatment of the plant will be the proper tying in of
the shoots and the pinching out of the leading points so as to
induce denseness of habit, and as the pots fill with roots the
plants should be transferred to larger ones, always being
careful not to “ over-pot” or remove too suddenly from a small
to a large pot.
THE BALSAM
Deserves a high place in the estimation of the florist, and of
everyone who “loves a garden.” It is not too much to say
that they are so easily grown, and grown well, as to deserve
the term “ Everbody’s Flower.” While very useful and
suitable for the open border, they are of immense service as
pot plants in the greenhouse during the summer, making
it very attractive and pleasant with their numberless
gay blossoms. With attention balsams may be produced of a
very large size. The seed should be sown in September or
October in a close pit, but care should be taken that the
plants are not allowed to get drawn. When large enough they
should be potted off, and shifted into larger pots at intervals,
as necessity requires. The secret of growing balsams well, as
pot plants, consists in constantly surrounding them with a
sweet, moist, growing atmosphere. Syringe repeatedly, at
least three times a day, and especially during bright weather.
The best grower of the balsam we ever knew told us he never
passed his plants without drawing the syringe over them,
although sometimes he did so a dozen times a day. With
this treatment keep the plants close to the glass, and guard
against stagnant moisture at the root. The rationale of
culture, as given in the following remarks, may prove of
service to many. Free-growing, semi-succulent annuals as
the balsam require—firstly, when grown under glass all the
light the climate affords, which suggests clean glass, apd that
the plants, during all the stages of their growth ’up to
blooming, should be kept as near it as practicable, and
shading only during intense sun-glare. Secondly, a rich open
compost to grow in, through which the roots will readily
ramify and penetrate, and rich enough to furnish them with
food sufficient to keep the top growing freely; the great
demand made on the roots during the period of active growth
informs us that liquid manure is a useful auxiliary to keep
up the vigour of the plant, and may be applied freely when
the pots become full of roots. Thirdly, bottom heat, to give


every encouragement to a free growth. The application of a
mild bottom heat, from the first stage of the plant’s growth
till the bloom buds are formed, should be maintained ; when
the bloom buds are all duly formed, and any further extension
of growth unnecessary, the bottom heat should be allowed to
die gradually away, so as to harden the plants to bear the
comparatively cool temperature of the conservatory for
blooming. Fourthly, air during every stage of growth. The
balsam requires a large supply of air, that the plants may
not become drawn and slender, but keep a short-jointed stocky
habit, which will enable the lateral branches to support
themselves without stakes until the blooms expand, when
they may, perhaps, be required.
For late autumn bloom sowings may be made, under
protection, as late as December, and the plants, when large
enough to handle, may be transferred to well-mulched beds,
or be potted and treated as above described.
THE CINERARIA.
Where is there a plant, during the late autumn, winter, and
early spring months, so gay and beautiful as this popular
favourite, or which is so useful for exhibition or decorative
purposes, or for the embellishment of the flower vase or
bouquet ? By artifical light the colours of some of the rose,
crimson, and purple varieties are extremely brilliant; while
the white flowers, margined with the colours mentioned, are
matchless. There are two methods of obtaining young plants
of cinerarias—the one from old plants, the other from seed.
In regard to the first, we will suppose the old plants, after
blooming, have been cut down near to the pots, and are
standing in a shaded, sheltered place, the young growth round
the stem being strong and healthy. About the beginning of
October the old plants should be turned out of the pots, the
soil gently removed, and the shoots taken off with the point of
a knife with the young rootlets adhering—selecting them from
the roots, not from the stem, as the latter too frequently emit
suckers at the base. These should be planted singly into pots
three inches in diameter, in a mixture composed of leaf
mould, sand, and loam, in equal parts, sifted somewhat finely.
The plants should have a good watering and be removed to a
cold frame, and the pots plunged to their rims in coal ashes
or rotted leaves. Seed should be sown in January, February,
and March in heat, and the plants potted off when strong
enough to bear a shift, and, as in the case of the plants from


cuttings, be removed to a close, cool frame. In either case
the plants should be kept closely covered for a few days, until
they have thrown roots, sprinkling them overhead in the
morning, and drawing off the lights for an hour both in the
morning and in the afternoon if the weather should be suit-
able, to dry the foliage of the plants and prevent mildew.
When their roots have reached the sides of the pots they must
be shifted into a larger size, say pots four inches in diameter,
using soil as before, but with the addition of some good, rotten
cow-dung. Sprinkle overhead on fine mornings, drawing the
lights off on favourable occasions, and watch for the appear-
ance of green fly or mildew. In about six weeks a further
shift will be required, say into six-inch pots, because, if once the
plants get pot-bound, it throws them into flower. However
small they rjjay attention mufet be paid to pegging or tying
out the foliage, so as to admit a free circulation of air, and
qll superfluous or bad» foliage*should be cut out. The next
shift will be into the pot% in, which they are to bloom, say
pots nine inches in diameter, and the time for doing this must
depend upon when they are required to be in flower;
for exhibition purposes the middle of July is soon enough.
The soil for specimen blooming plants should be two
parts of good fibrous loam, one of leaf soil, and one of
cow-dung, with the addition of sand in sufficient quantity to
make the compost freely porofls. As a rule, cinerarias do
better in turf-pits, kept close fo the glass, than they do in a
greenhouse ; it is simply required that there be sufficient heat
to keep out the damp. In all stages of the growth of the
plants fumigate with tobacco or tobkcco paper, if green fly
makes its appearance ; and should mildew appear on the
leaves apply flowers of sulphur. When in the blooming pots
the plants should be occasionally looked over, pegging out the
foliage, and removing all superfluous growth. When the
plants have spindled two or three inahes, stop them at once,
which will cause them to brea£ into strong lateral growth. A
little weak manure-water will assist in the development of the
flowers; in the case of the tipped, or edged varities, pure
tvater should be substituted where the flowers show colour, as
otherwise they have a tendency to assume a muddy appear-
ance. Train the lateral shoots as they grow as near to the rim
of the pots as possible, for they will assuredly find their way to
the centre; by careful training and tying very handsome plants
may be formed. Shading will be requisite when the plants
show colour, to prolong the bloom. After flowering, the plants
may be cut down to about nine inches of stem, and placed in


a shady situation, giving protection from continuous rain.
These directions apply to the production of large specimens
for conservatory decoration or exhibition purposes; for
continuous decoration, plants in six-inch pots do admirably,
and by forcing some and retarding others a continuous display
can be made. Seedling plants force well, and some are
certain to betray evidences of blooming earlier than others.
Many of the flowers are also richly fragrant, and this adds to
their value for conservatory purposes. In order to produce
extra large specimens, it is necessary to put two or three
plants of one variety in a pot. As seedlings make fine orna-
mental plants, it is necessary to select' a few examples of the
most esteemed kinds, bearing in mind that those chosen
should be of the best possible form, clear colours and marking,
as much depends on this in producing new first-rate
varieties. As soon as the seeds are Yipe they may be sown
immediately; and when large enough be pricked off thinly
into flat pots or pans, and kept close for a few days till estab-
lished in the soil, and then treated as just directed.
As a rule in these colonies seedlings make the more robust
plants and are more easily treated than cuttings from side
shoots. Still, if a given sort be desired, it must be obtained
by cuttings.
THE HERBACEOUS CALCEOLARIA
[as now become one of the most highly developed of the
ist’s flowers of the present day, though it is, at the same
e, one too rarely seen at our plant exhibitions. Grown as
;e specimen plants,, they may be , truly denominated
orious,” covered with their numberless, bright, self-
mred and spotted blossoms; for it is in their gorgeous
sees of colour as specimen plants that the beauty of the
seolaria may be said ter culminate. A writer in a recent
aber of the Gardener's Chronicle gives an account of the
earance of ,the specimen house of calceolarias at Isle-
th, under the Cultivation of Mr. James, whose strain has
le to be regarded as the very finest of the present day.
3 account states: —“ The specimen house gives masses of
most striking colours allied to the best developed and most
shed flowers. There were twelve particular specimen
ats occupying the front of a fine airy, lean-to house, built
cially for these calceolarias. The plants were two years
, and averaged feet in diameter, with a t height of some


24 inches. Perfect masses of bloom literally covered eacl
plant: one was particularly striking, the flowers being of ;
rich, shining velvety crimson. The short, stiff, wiry foliag«
of the shrubby section is almost entirely reproduced in thi;
fine strain ; and being so stiff in growth, only a little tying o:
the exterior shoots is necessary to keep them in their places
■and so to form a shapely outline to the plants.”
Such plants as these can be produced if only due attentior
be given to their cultivation ; there is no secrecy about the
method, but it can only be successfully followed by those
having the time and space at their disposal. They are two
year-old plants, grown on liberally, and flowered in pots some
ten or twelve inches in diameter. Liberal feeding by liquic
manure has but little part in the process, though once
or twice in the season it may be applied freely. A
cool, airy house, plenty of room, and close attention will dc
wonders for the calceolaria. Seed sowing is the best anc
safest means of propagating the calceolaria. It should be
sown in a pan during February and March, using light soil.
Sow the seed as regularly as possible on the surface, cover il
slightly with very fine soil, give a gentle watering through a
fine rose pot, place the pan in a shady part of the greenhouse
and cover it with a piece of glass. Never allow the surface
soil to become dust dry, as germination will be retarded, il
not prevented. As soon as the young plants will beai
handling, prick them out singly about two inches apart ir
boxes. Place the boxes in a cool, shady situation, careful!}
water, and when the plants get crowded take out every othei
■one, and place them in another box about four inches apart
By June the plants will be nice and strong, and fit foi
wintering. A good place is a dry turf pit or a shelf of a
greenhouse ; all they will want of water will be enough tc
keep the plants from flagging; all decayed leaves should
be removed, and if green fly settles on the plants, fumigate
them. There is no better method of wintering calceolarias
than in boxes, as here recommended. About the middle oi
•June prepare a compost for potting off the plants, by taking
one-half loam, one-fourth thoroughly rotten manure, and one-
fourth leaf mould, adding a little sand and finely-powdered
charcoal to keep it Open. This mixture should be turned
several times previous to using it. Early in August pot the
plants into their blooming pots, using some from seven tc
nine inches in diameter. Remove from the boxes with good
halls, and, when potted, give a thorough watering through a


fine rose pot, and place on an airy shelf in the greenhouse—
or a cold pit will answer just as well—where they can enjoy
plenty of light and air, and no more fire heat than is necessary
to exclude frost in cold districts. For the next few weeks
they will require attention as to airing and watering, never
allowing them to be too much crowded or affected with green
fly. By the beginning of October most of the plants will be
showing their flower stems, and they will soon produce an
abundance of gay flowers to repay the grower for the care
and attention bestowed upon them.
The beautiful shrubby calceolarias, that were once the
wonder of the London exhibitions, appear to have died out
from some cause, yet they are sometimes to be met with at
local shows exceedingly well done. Conjoined to an almost
unrivalled freedom of flowering, and a long continuance in
bloom, they possess a habit tractable to the wants of every
•cultivator, and rejoice in the possession of colours of many
hues, from pure white to deep yellow, orange, crimson, and
■chocolate brown; in addition to all which, a tendency to
develop the rich markings and parti-colours of the herbaceous
varieties is no longer a question to be doubted, but is actually
■determined. The shrubby calceolarias can be raised from
seed similarly to the herbaceous kinds ; but, as they so seldom
yield seed, it is rarely it can be obtained. The only alterna-
tive is to propagate by cuttings from the old plants; when
they are thoroughly out of bloom the plants are cut down,
taken from the pots, and a good portion of the earth shaken
from the roots ; they are then planted in a shady border,
having a south-west aspect, some good soil being used about
the roots. In this position, and under this treatment, the
plants make young wood, and this furnishes cuttings, out of
which are formed the specimen plants of another season.
These are taken off about March, and put into 48-sized pots,
a few in each, or in single pots, and placed in an exhausted
cucumber-frame, and kept close till struck, when some air is
given, according to the state of the weather. Immediately
■after July the first shift is made, and the plants are then
placed on a shelf and kept close to the glass. A second shift
takes place at the end of September, another at the end of
■October, and a final shift into the ten-inch blooming pots at the
■end of November. The great condition of success is to keep
the plants growing, at the same time giving them the benefit
■of air to keep them robust and bushy. On no account
should the plants be suffered to become pot-bound—the fullest
.root action should be encouraged.


MIGNONETTE TEEES.
We have never seen in the Australian colonies a well-
grown plant of this popular, sweeted-seented flower. No
summer show in England would be considered complete if
such plants were absent; and, as they illustrate great cultural
skill and patience, there is usually offered a substantial prize
for them. As the mignonette is usually grown in the colonies,
it is interesting merely as a sweet-smelling border plant, the
seeds of which may be sown in autumn or spring, and indeed
at nearly any time, except during the intense heat of the
summer months. But to grow the plant as a “tree,” which
will yield bloom for a long series of years, requires some
special care and treatment.
The seed should be sown in a box or pan of sandy fibrous
loam, and as soon as the young plants are large enough to be
handled they should be placed singly in thumb pots—the
smallest size made —the soil being enriched by the addition of
dried cow-dung. As soon as the pots are filled with roots,
which may be known by inverting the pot and removing the
ball, the plants should be transferred to pots just one size
larger, and encouraged to grow freely by frequent waterings
with dilute manure. As soon as these pots are filled with
roots the young plants will require to be again moved to
slightly larger pots. Should bloom appear on the points of
the young shoots it must be pinched out, the object being to
produce the vigorous growth of branchlets rather than blossom.
The most suitable form for the plant to take is that of a cone
or pyramid; a leading shoot should be encouraged as the
central stem around which the laterals should be carefully
trained to neat little rods. At no stage of the plant’s growth
should it be allowed to mature seed, this care indeed being the
secret of successful culture. As soon as the desired size and
shape is attained, the plants may be allowed to develop bloom.
Plants more than two feet in height, and covered with
thousands of spikes of bloom, are frequently exhibited at
the London exhibitions; and there are many instances of
mignonette trees having attained the age of ten or twelve
years. In this colony no special care in the way of housing
in severe weather is necessary, and we commend the matter
as one worth the attention of anyone who loves the fragrance
of this popular flower. The essentials to the successful treat-
ment of the plant are frequent changes to slightly larger pots
as the roots have reached the margin of the pot; frequent


watering with weak manure-water formed by dissolving sheep-
dung; care in pinching out, in the early stages of the plant’s
growth, the bloom points of the branches; and neatly tying
out the lateral growths so as to keep the centre from being
crowded. The plants, too, should not be exposed to intense
sunlight, but, at the same time, plenty of air and light must at
all times be given.
THE PELARGONIUM.
Popularly the term geranium is used as frequently as pelar-
gonium to the various sections of these flowering plants, but
we shall adopt the more general term as used by our leading
nurserymen in their catalogues. There are several classes
quite distinct in character, such as the show, regal, fancy, tri-
colour, Cape, ivy-leaved, gold and silver variegated, zonal,
&c. ; and of most there are single and double blooming
varieties. Show pelargoniums are among the most beautiful, as
welh as the most accommodating of flowering plants; they may
be grown successfully in pots, or in the open ground ; they are
unequalled for the show tables, the greenhouse, or the
drawing-room. For out-door work, varieties of clear and
distinct colours are required ; the finest show sorts with
shaded and mixed colours mostly become clouded and dirty-
looking in the open air ; and, therefore, to have the superb
varieties of the large flowered section in the greatest per-
fection they must be grown under glass. Notwithstanding
their admitted beauty, and although admired by everyone,
they are not cultivated to anything like the extent one would
be led to expect. At our exhibitions it is rare to see a col-
lection except from nurserymen, yet, when they do appear,
they are admired by everyone, and invariably receive a large
share of attention. Their cultivation is sufficiently simple,
and no one need be deterred from undertaking it. The follow-
ing remarks are offered in the hope that some who, from want
of experience, or through fear of failure, have been deterred
from attempting their cultivation, may be induced to try their
skill upon them. The cuttings should be taken from strong,
healthy, well-ripened shoots; each cutting should be of the
length of two joints, or three eyes, cut close under the lowest
eye, with one or two leaves left on the top; a bed for their
reception, composed of very sandy soil, should be prepared
either under a south wall or in a frame; if in the former situation,
the cuttings should be covered with a hand-glass, or a small
frame, but they will succeed by merely shading them with a


piece of canvas, and in all cases they should be uncovered at
night unless drying winds prevail. They should be inserted
half their length in the soil, and receive sufficient water to
settle the soil around them ; but afterwards great caution must
be used in watering, merely keeping the soil sufficiently moist
to prevent them from withering, sprinkling them in the even-
ings, and mornings likewise, should the weather be dry. As
soon as they show signs of commencing to root, by the buds
bursting and the young leaves starting, the shading and cover-
ing must be gradually lessened as the young plants progress,
until they are able to bear full exposure; then, when they
have pushed out shoots and made a sufficient length of root,
they must be carefully taken up and potted in three-inch or
four-inch pots, in light and tolerably rich soil, and placed in a
close frame until they have recovered from the shift, and are
re-established, when they may be again fully exposed. To
obtain plants of handsome shape only one shoot should be
allowed to each, which, when it has attained a height of three
to four inches, should be stopped, and, when buds have broken,
the plants must be re-potted into pots an inch larger ; and as
by this time winter will be drawing near, the pots should be
very carefully drained, and before heavy rains come on they
must be placed in a greenhouse or frame where they can be
protected, for nothing is more injurious to pelargoniums than to
suffer the soil in which they grow to get saturated with water.
If the young plants are strong, each one will have thrown out
three or four shoots, which may again be stopped when they
have formed three leaves each, and in this condition they may
remain throughout the winter either in a greenhouse or
frame. Care must be taken that they do not receive too much
water, nor yet be allowed to become too dry, neither should
the foliage be wetted. Insects must, at whatever cost, be kept
down, the green fly being their chief enemy at this season ;
the preventive of it is frequent fumigation with tobacco. The
plants must be allowed plenty of room, each standing clear of
the others, kept near the glass, and thoroughly ventilated, so
that they may grow up stocky, and not become drawn. As
they will continue to grow a little throughout the winter, they
will require to be again re-potted on the approach of spring,
this time using soil somewhat stronger than before; it may
now be composed of equal portions of turfy loam and year-old
cow-dung, with sand to make it sufficiently porous. This may
be the last shift given to the plants at this stage, unless very
large specimens are desired, when they may be again stopped
and shifted as soon as the roots have begun to travel around


the sides of the pots. In the meantime the young shoots must
be carefully spread out and tied down either to stakes or to a
string fixed around the pot just below the rim. As soon as
the flower buds appear, a little weak, clear, manure-water may
be given two or three times a week. And as this is the time
when they are most likely to get drawn, as much ventilation
as possible must be given, and, at the same time, a constant
watch for insects maintained, for one or two other sorts begin
now to attack them, and frequent and strong fumigation must
be resorted to in order to keep them under. From the time
the plants commence to grow in spring they may be syringed
overhead every evening when the weather is fine, but water
must not be allowed to remain on their leaves during wet or
dull weather. Of course syringing must be discontinued as
soon as the flowers open, for the least spot of water will spoil
them. As soon as the flowering is past the plants must be
placed out of doors, and exposed to the morning sun in order
that the wood may become ripened. In the course of two or
three weeks the shoots must be cut back, keeping the soil
rather dry for a few days before and after. It is well to pro-
tect the pots from the rays of the sun when out of doors,
otherwise the roots might be injured : to effect this they may
be wholly or partially plunged in the soil. A little experience
is necessary in the operation of cutting down the plants, so
that they may not be cut too far back nor yet left so long as to
become straggling. In the course of two or three weeks the
plants will commence to send out fresh shoots, and as soon as
two or three leaves appear on each shoot they must be taken
out of the pots, the whole of the soil shaken off the roots, and
re-potted into the smallest size they will conveniently go into.
Old’plants generally require to have their roots reduced, but
that is rarely necessary in young plants. After potting they
must be placed in a close, well-shaded frame, until they are
re-established, when they may again be set outside until the
autumn rains approach, when they must again be housed, and
treated in the same manner as in the previous year. It is well
to regulate the young shoots after they have broken, by thin-
ning out the weakest, as well as any that are of extra strength.
The silver-edged varieties, like Manglesii, and the zonal
tricolours of the Mrs. Pollock class, and other prettily marked
foliage kinds, when well grown as pot plants, are splendid
additions to the conservatory and bush-house or for table
decoration, but as window or house plants they are impatient
of dust and gaslight, which soon injure the beauty of their
foliage.


The ivy-leaved varieties admit of training well as pot plants,
and are especially suited for vases and other positions where
they do not get much moisture. They also are easily propa-
gated by cuttings. For covering rockwork they are very
effective, and, as round-topped clumps in the borders, their
glossy foliage and gaily contrasting blossoms are truly beau-
tiful.
These directions will also apply to the fancy, regal, and
Cape sections; but the treatment of all the zonal and ivy-
leaved or succulent garden kinds will be somewhat different.
Cuttings of these strike so freely at almost all seasons of the
year that it is nearly superfluous to give instructions for their
treatment. The greatest success will always be had if well
ripened and not too sappy cuttings be taken, cut at a joint,
and planted firmly in pots after drying a little ; or, where a
large number are required for massing, as in bedding effects,
the short jointed cuttings of about six inches in length may
be planted thickly in sandy soil in a shady spot, or where they
have the advantage of a calico cover during great sun heat.
Water very sparingly, and never during sunshine ; the plants
merely require to be kept from getting absolutely dry, and they
soon scald or rot if deluged with water, or kept too wet.
THE HOLLYHOCK.
This fine old favourite flower has of late years, frofn some
cause or other, fallen out of culture. It is exceedingly
popular in England, and is admirably suited for our climate
while, for effect, no flowering plant can fill its place in the
shrubbery, or well back on a broad border in the flower
garden. It may be grown from seed, but where plants of
good varieties are available cuttings may be readily struck,
and give bloom the following season. When grown from seed
the plants will not bloom till the second year, but they will
continue to throw up flower stems for several years, and the
clump may be divided for furnishing other places in the
garden. In common with many other flowers, it, too, should
have care taken of it if the grower would be repaid by
vigorous foliage and fine spikes of blossoms. The soil most
suited to its growth is a rich and somewhat retentive moist
loam, but it thrives well in any good garden soil. The seed
should be sown thinly on a bit of well-manured land in the
month of April or August, and when the seedlings are suffi-
ciently grown they should be pricked out at a distance of a


foot apart, and left to form good robust plants. Previous to
transferring to the spot selected the ground should be well
dug to a depth of eighteen inches, and receive a good dressing
of rich dung. Take the young plants up with a good ball of
earth and place them in groups of three, forming a triangle,
the points of which should be about three feet apart; close
planting will only result in poor, weakly growth and attenuated
flower stems. Mulch and water until established, and tie the
long growth neatly to light stakes.
As before mentioned, the hollyhock, when well established,
will give bloom for several years, but, when old, the plants are
apt to damp off or grow feebly. We strongly advise young
plants being planted every year, either from cuttings or seed.
They may be propagated by single eyes taken in December or
January, also by cuttings in August. Plants so raised are best
preserved by re-potting them in March into large pots in light,
rich, sandy earth, and placed in a frame or greenhouse, giving
plenty of air, and avoiding all “ coddling.” They will then
soon gather strength, and maybe transferred to their blooming
position in June or July, and be well established and vigorous
by spring. In October and November, when the shoots have
grown a foot or so, thin them out to about three. Stake
before they get too high and become bent by the wind or rain,
erectness being an essential feature of the plant. Stakes of
about four feet will be quite high enough, and will be well
hidden by the foliage.
THE AURICULA.
The auricula is a flower but rarely grown in Australia, the
common notion being that it is unsuitable for the climate.
The pansy, the primula, and even the strawberry were at one
time tabooed for the same reason, and all of those are now
grown extensively, and gardeners have come to give them such
treatment as our ardent climate necessitates for their success-
ful culture. It may be, and often is, argued that such and such
plants being of Alpine origin, or natives of cold climates, it is
therefore useless to try and grow them under high tempera-
tures. The argument would appear reasonable, and would
have much force, if our daily experience were not continually
showing its fallacy. The whole art of gardening may be said
to consist in adapting plants to new conditions; but in many
cases no very great trouble is experienced during the process,
The strawberry, which is a native of the shady forests of cold


latitudes, and of high altitudes, grows perfectly under the
strangely novel conditions we have assigned it in these colonies.
Many other plants, whose native habitats would suggest to the
gardener the hopelessness of attempting their culture here, are
found to thrive admirably, and even to develop higher
qualities than when grown under the cold of their natural
homes. The Chinese primrose is no less popular here as a
pot plant than it is in England, and this flower is closely
allied to the auricula, which, we contend, has not had a
fair and patient trial at the hands of florists here.
To grow the auricula the first essential is suitable soil, and
this should be formed of old turf composts with which has
been mixed a large quantity of dry cow-dung, taken from the
pastures during summer, and thoroughly broken up with the
turfy fibrous compost. If to this be added some well-rotted
leaf mould, and a few shovelfuls of clear sand, and the whole
be left to lie in a heap sheltered from the rain, all worms
will be destroyed; and the air passing freely through the
heap for a few months will render it sweet and fit for the
auricula. The trouble taken will not be needed specially
on account of the auricula, for the same soil will suit for a
hundred other plants, and a supply of it ought always to be
kept on hand by the floriculturist.
The plants may be propagated from seed, by suckers, and by
division of each old plant’s side-shoots. There are as yet but
few good varieties in the colony, though some excellent
flowers are known to have got into the hands of the New
Zealand and Tasmanian gardeners ; and, as the good qualities
of these become better known, plants will find their way to other
colonies, and our nurserymen will speedily offer them to the
public. Seed may, however, be purchased, and as the
seedlings come into flower a good selection may be made
wherefrom to propagate and to improve, if not to classify, in
the way English growers do. The seed should be sprinkled on
a light rich soil contained in pots or shallow boxes, and these
should be placed in a cool frame or under a hand-glass until
the seedlings are well above the surface. If sown in March
the young plants will be ready for transferring to the bed by
June, and this bed should be in a cool, shady position, and be
under the protection of a light calico awning or glass frame
during cold, inclement weather. One of the best appliances for
the summer protection of auriculas, and indeed all the plants
requiring cold, such as primulas and pansies, is the turf pit
described in another part of this work. With it a perfectly


equable and low temperature may be preserved, and plants
placed within it, yet fully exposed to the light, cannot fail to
succeed. It should always be borne in mind that plants
require light and exposure, and therefore, when protection is
mentioned, it is merely against extraordinary inclemency of
the weather, and extremes of heat and cold.
Plants from suckers are formed by removing the side-shoots,
and potting these off in small pots and shading until rooted,
and this plan is to be commended when it is desired to
perpetuate any good or striking flower. It is better to select
small shoots than large ones, and these, when rooted, may be
transferred to the bed or pit as suggested for seedlings. In
growing the auricula as a pot plant, robust seedlings or plants
from suckers should be taken and firmly planted in well-
drained pots of the soil described. The plants should never
be allowed to get too dry, and care must also be taken that
they be not watered to saturation. Liquid manure formed
from sheep-dung, and not too strong, should be given once a
week. Where a tendency is observed in the plant to throw a
number of weak suckers or offshoots, these must be rubbed
off, a little charcoal dust being applied to the wounds. As
the bloom stems grow the plants should be very fully exposed
and kept freely watered, shading, when necessary, from
intense sun-glare. The water should be applied to the roots
only, and it is a good plan when the plants have been long in
the pots to prick up the surface soil, and to shake it out
without injury to the roots, and to substitute fresh compost.
After the blooming season the plants should be kept tolerably
dry, and it will be well to transfer those in pots to the pit, in
which a cool but not wet soil has been placed for their recep-
tion. In this way the plants will be kept dormant, and not
waste their energies in useless growths productive of poor
flowers; but if allowed to get wet they will speedily mildew
and decay. As soon as any decayed leaf is seen it should be
removed, and the air of the pit or frame should be kept dry,
a good coat of coal dust or ashes being placed so as to inter-
cept damp through the floor. About June or July the old
plants will be ready for re-potting and shifting to fresh
quarters, and, as the young foliage manifests itself, everything
should be done to encourage healthy growth. There are
several sections of the auricula; the green-edged, silver-
edged, and other hybrids are the last recent strains. A good
flower should possess a sturdy footstalk, and the florets
should form a rounded truss, well balanced, and not crowding


each other; the markings should be distinct, and the margins,
whether green or silver, should be well defined. English
authorities, in giving the character of a good flower, say that
the pip should consist of four circles formed at equal dis-
tances round a given point; the truss should be composed of
not less than seven florets; the ground colour should be
perfectly circular, dense, and distinct, and slightly feathered
as it approaches the edge. The edge or margin should be
distinct in colour, whole and circular, not notched or jagged
in outline. The floret or pip should be round and fiat, and
one ought not to overlap the other in the least. The stem
should not be too long, but erect, and the foliage should be
healthy and well powdered, this latter being the distinguishing
feature of this section of the primulas. The auricula is
always shown as a pot plant, and it is one of the sights of the
day at the English exhibitions of spring flowers.
THE BOHVARDIAS.
Perhaps no plant of modern days has proved more interest-
ing than the bouvardia. In the hands of English horticul-
turists varieties have been raised of the most diverse character
as to colour, shape, and general features. In England, where
the recent varieties are chiefly grown as pot plants and under
stove culture, the bouvardia is very popular, and here, where
the varieties may be grown with almost as little care as the
fuchsia, we predict the plants will become very special
favourites. For bouquets or for “button holes” nothing
could be more suitable. As before remarked, the varieties of
these plants now in cultivation are chiefly of garden origin,
having been raised from different original Mexican species.
When first introduced to English gardens, and had become
sufficiently plentiful for distribution, they were more or less
grown by only those who possessed greenhouses or stoves, but
the progress they made under the treatment usually given was
generally such as not to impress one very much in their
favour, being mostly weak, spindly things, resembling in
appearance a badly grown and much drawn-up straggling
carnation.
The best varieties now grown are vast improvements upon
the originals, and very much has been effected by improved
methods of culture. Being naturally very free bloomers,
most of the kinds produce flowers from every bit of growth
they may make at any season of the year, and this habit has


suggested their extensive adoption as bedding plants. But in
England the frequent low night temperature is a great obstacle,
a degree or two below 40 deg. being fatal to most of the
varieties. Hence it is that, cultivated as pot plants, and
managed so as to bloom in autumn and winter when flowers
are scarce, their great value consists.
Bouvardias may be propagated by cuttings made from the
young shoots in heat or from small pieces of the roots. They
will strike at any time, but if the cuttings are put in heat as
early in the spring as they can be got, the plants may be got
up to a useful size for conservatory or house decoration, or for
planting out on the borders for summer and autumn blooming.
Young points of the shoots, about two or three inches long,
such as are produced after autumn rains or when treated in
frames with a little heat, will root quickly when inserted round
the edge of a five or six inch pot filled with sand, and kept in
a moderately warm temperature, say 70 degrees or a little
higher. Cuttings of rootlets also grow freely under the same
treatment, and if taken from the strongest roots, and of about
an inch in length, they speedily make good plants. They
can be grown up to a useful flowering size from either
root or shoot cuttings when struck even as late as Sep-
tember, but the later struck cuttings will require to be
urged on by gentle heat and will not form so robust
plants as the earlier struck cuttings. As soon as the
cuttings are rooted, move them singly into small pots,
using a rich soil composed of good loam with which has been
m i xe d leaf mould, peat, fine sand, and rotted cow-dung.
Keep the newly potted plants in a temperature similar to that
in which they were as cuttings until they have got fairly into
growth. Then pinch out the points of the leading shoots so
as to induce a bushy rather than a “leggy” habit, and
continue to treat them in this way until they are required for
blooming in pots or for transference to the open border.
When the pots get filled with roots it is necessary to
determine how they are to be grown on. If as specimen
plants, or for conservatory or house decoration, they should be
shifted to pots a size larger; if for border decoration they
should be planted out and well mulched with well-decayed
manure, and never be allowed to get dry at the roots.
By this method of mulching much less attention is required
in the way of watering, and the plants grow with greater
vigour and compactness, and give an abundance of blos-
soms. The following varieties may now be had of the


leading nurserymen : Humboltii (large white); elegans
(scarlet); Hogarth (scarlet); Yreelandii (white) ;• maiden’s
blush (pink); bridal wreath, candidissima, Brilliant, Ori-
flamme, jasminoides (white); and the old hardy triphylla
(scarlet), and carnea are other beautiful varieties. But the
latest triumph of horticultural skill has been the production
of the double white and the double pink varieties, named
respectively Alfred Nernmr and General Garfield—these are
free blooming double flowers like a head of miniature double
tuberose. Nearly all these are perfectly hardy in the coast
districts of these colonies; but if exposed to saturation of
the roots during winter they are apt to die off. Perfect drainage
and a sandy soil are essential to the successful culture of the
bouvardias. In the cooler or elevated districts the bouvardias
require the protection of a frame during winter, and similar
treatment to that the fuchsia receives.
CLIMBING- PLANTS.
No class of plants is so beautiful and graceful as that very
large one composing the hardy climbers suitable for these
climates. The bare and unsightly walls of outhouses may be
rapidly covered with the creeping figs, Ficus stipulacea or
Ficus barbata, or with the Japanese Ampelopsis. Fences
may be hidden and arbours covered with numerous brilliant-
flowered climbers of every hue; and the verandah pillars may
be rendered light and elegant by the use of the more graceful
foliaged varieties. Plants which in England require stove or
greenhouse treatment grow here with a luxuriance quite
astonishing. Some varieties, such as the dolichos, Cape ivy,
and even the beautiful Ipomasa Learii, grow so freely, indeed,
as to become almost weeds in the garden if not kept within
proper bounds. In the following list the names have been
arranged according to the colour of blossom, so that there
will be no difficulty in picking out a selection to give a variety
of bloom. Those marked * are tender in the neighbourhood
of Melbourne, and require protection from frosts, however
slight; and those marked ** are too tender for out-door
culture, being suitable for the conservatory or stove; all
others are quite hardy. Around Sydney, Brisbane, and other
northern towns none can be regarded as too tender for out-
door culture, as even the most delicate will only require pro-
tection from spring frosts or prolonged cold, wet weather while
young.


WHITE
TINTED.
Jasminum Sambac
„ grandiflora
„ pubescens
„ gracilis
Mandevillea suaveolens
*Beaumontia grandiflora
Bignonia excelsa
*Hoya carnea variegata
** „ imperialis
Ipomsea grandiflora
„ Hardyii
Lonicera aurea (gold-veined
honeysuckle)
Lonicera flexuosa
*Clerodendron nutans
Lonicera Tartarica
Maurandya alba
Oxera pulcbella
Passiflora edulis
Rhyncospermum jasminoides
*Clerodendron volubile
*Echites grandiflora
** „ picta
Hardenbergia ovata
**Hoya Bella
* „ carnosa (wax plant)
Rhyncospermum variegata
Solanum jasminoides
*Stephanotus floribunda
Bignonia jasminoides
Clematis Fortunii
„ Miss Bateman
„ several new varieties
Clerodendron fragrans
Wistaria alba
Dipladenia alba
Corynostylus albiflora
RED AND
TENDING
TO SCARLET.
Quisqualis glabra
„ Indica
Tacsonia manicata
**Eschynffethus zebrina
Bignonia chirere
„ capreolata
Buginvillea splendens
„ speciosa
Passiflora racemosa
„ ignea
Tecoma grandiflora
Yitis Chontalensis
Tecoma hybrida
Mitraria coccinia
Disemma coccinea
**Columnea scandens
Lonicera rubrum
YELLOW,
*Allamandas
Bignonia argyrea
„ Tweediana
Jasminum nudiflorum
Jasminum revolutum
Stygmaphyllum ciliatum
Thunbergia lutea
PINK, TENDING TO CRIMSON.
**Eschynanthus grandiflora Maurandya semperflorens
Antigonum leptopus Tacsonia Van Volxemii
Buginvillea speciosa „ pinnatistipula
Clerodendron Balfourii „ Mortii
„ Thompsoniana Bauhinia scandens
„ speciosa *Dipladenia amabilis
Dolichos lignosus Manettia glabra
Lophospermum grandiflora


ORANGE
Bignonia venusta
**Columnea Schiediana
Gelsemium sempervirens
Hibbertia
Calystegia pubescens
Bignonia grandiflora
„ radicans
Eccremocarpus scabra
Lonicera Japonica
BLUE
Clematis (new hybrids)
Eustrephus latifolius
Ipomsea digitata
Sollya heterophylla
Ipomaea Learii
Petrea volubiHs
**Thunbergia chrysopa
„ laurifolia
Yinca major
Wistaria magnifica
Plumbago capensis
Lardizabala triternata
LAVENDER
OR PURPLE.
Cobsea scandens
Combretum
Kennedyas
Maurandya Barclayana
Passiflora Buonapartia
„ Empress Eugenie
„ kermesina
Phaseolus (snail flower)
Tacsonia mollissima
Aristolochia gigas
*Allamanda violacea
Bignonia Lindleyana
Buginvillea glabra
„ spectabilis
Canavalia Bonariensis
Clematis, Gem
„ Jackmanii
„ Lady Boville
„ Queen Victoria
and other varieties, from
deep purple to pale lavender
Wistaria sinensis
,', megasperma
FLOWERLESS, OR
INCONSPICUOUS.
(Plants adapted for Covering Walls and Rocks.)
Ivies, green and variegated
Ampelopsis (Virginian
creeper)
Ampelopsis Veitchii
ove named may be trained in the
in this way display their graceful
will be necessary, of course, to
t being firmly fixed, and, if wood
m, or some other wood not liable
Ficus stipulacea
„ barbata
*Cissus discolour (for training
for foliage display)
Many of the climbers above
border as pillar plants, and in
habit very effectively. It wil
secure the pillar or support b(
be used, it should be red gum,
to decay in the ground, as it is very provoking to find, when a
plant has arrived at perfection, its supports have broken
away, and cannot be replaced without damage to the appear-
ance and danger of destruction of the plant. The various
climbing roses should not be forgotten.


THE HOSE.
It was a happy inspiration that made of the rose the
emblem of England, and it is a curious fact that, in the
turmoils of feudatory times, the rival combatants each chose
the rose as their standard, and the flower gives a distinctive
chapter in English history under the heading of the Wars of the
Roses. In those days there were not many kinds in cultivation,
and the public only knew the red and the white rose. It is
within the present century that the flower has made such
advances, and almost within the present age that it has
attained the symmetry and perfection which now characterise
the rose.
To grow the rose well the soil should be rich, yet porous,
poor and sandy soils giving thinness of petal in the flower and
weakly growth of wood. Sturdy, short jointed plants should
be the aim of the grower, and to attain this the following
directions may be followed :
Soil and Manures.—This should be composed of a
good, fair, garden soil mixed with thoroughly decayed dung
from the pit. If the natural soil be light and sandy, there
must be added to it some of a heavier and closer nature, such
as the clayey basaltic soils prevailing in many districts
especially round Melbourne; or the red friable clays
characterising the formation of the large district between
Sydney and Parramatta. Should the garden be of a clayey
nature it will need the addition of just so much drift sand as
will promote the passage of water through the mass and
permit the free ramification of the roots. In either case they
must be modified by the thorough incorporation of rich stable
dung which has, by age and management in the heap, nearly
returned to the condition of heavy soil itself. Canon Hole,
who is one of the best and oldest rose growers in England,
says in reference to manures:—“l have tried various plans for
five-and-thirty years and have come back to that with which I
began : a thick dressing of farmyard manure in the autumn,
followed by a second in spring of liquid or solid from the
tank in the cow-yard, or of guano, bone dust, pigeon, or almost
any other manure; and I have always found a change in these
to be beneficial.” Having regard to the soil as already described,
we have found a dressing of the St. Francis’ Island guano most
[excellent, and, being rich in phosphates, preferable to Peruvian


Propagation.—The rose may be raised from autumn
cuttings of the season’s ripened wood in the open ground,
which, for this purpose, should be sandy; by cuttings of the
young, tender shoots during spring and summer, in a frame
and under shade ; by layers pegged down during their summer
and autumn growth; by budding; and by grafting on stocks
of the Manetti and other free-growing kinds. Where it is
intended to propagate roses by budding in the season, it will
be necessary to be provided with suitable stocks, and, with
this in view, the grower should always put in plenty oi
cuttings in autumn of the Manetti, Boursalt, and other hardy,
free-growing kinds. Grafting is rarely resorted to except bj
nurserymen for very special results. It will be unnecessarj
here to describe the process of budding or preparing cuttings,
as that has been fully done in the chapter on propagation, bul
it may be well to say that some varieties of the rose do nol
succeed readily from cuttings as usually put in, and therefore
should be layered or pegged down until well rooted, or until
callused, and then treated as cuttings. The Cloth of Gold,
Marechal Niel, Solfaterre, and indeed all the Tea-scented and
Noisette roses may be treated as layers.
Stocks. —There is much difference of opinion as to the
relative merits of stocks by even English rose growers, but the
amateur, as a rule, in buying his roses may fairly trust to the
experience of the nurseryman who has made his business his
study, and who will use the stock he has found best suited
for general purposes. The English hedge rose (rosa canina)
is the best general stock, and especially for standards, but it
can rarely be got in the colonies, and the sweetbriar is fre-
quently made to do but poor duty for it. The free-growing
China Blush is a useful stock, whether for dwarfs or stan-
dards ; and the Manetti is popular as a good, general stock,
especially for the Hybrid Perpetual varieties of the rose!
Tall standard trees, which were so long popular in England
have now nearly gone out of fashion, as wanting in grace and
more perishable than dwarf plants; and experience in these
colonies on this latter point is certainly confirmatory of thal
of English growers. Some rosarians bud their plants so lov
on the stock as to induce them to ultimately throw out then
own roots, thus securing to them the full root action of the
stock below in addition to the more superficial support of theii
own roots. Whatever method is adopted, it will be necessary
to keep a vigilant eye in clearing away any growths springing


up from the stock, as, if allowed to grow, they will speedily ruin
the plant. Budding may be done from November to February
in most seasons.
Planting Season. —Preparations should always be made
so as to enable the planter to get the trees in position during
May or the end of June at the latest. Nothing is so fatal to
a satisfactory spring bloom as late planting, for the trees
have not the opportunity of getting full root action before
being called on to support the growth of foliage and flower.
If available, a little bone dust added to the soil in the
neighbourhood of the roots will be useful; but, assuming that
the place has previously been well manured, this will not be
necessary at the planting time.
Diseases.—Aphides and autumn mildew are the chief
enemies of the rose in the colonies. For the former, an
occasional syringing with quassia water, or a weak solution
of Gishurst’s Compound perseveringly applied, will be
effectual; for mildew, the whole foliage of the plant must be
liberally dusted with flowers of sulphur from a muslin bag.
Grubs and caterpillars affect the rose, and for these pests
only hand-picking can be effectual.
Varieties.—ln the space here available it is almost
impracticable to give anything like an exhaustive list of the
many valuable varieties of the rose, and those desirous of
getting a large collection will do well to consult the
descriptive catalogues of our leading nurserymen. Fifty
excellent and distinctive roses are the following, and these
may be added to as opportunities offer:— Tea-scented —Gloire
di Dijon, Niphetos, Cloth of Gold, Marechal Niel, Rubens,
Souvenir d’un Ami, Madame Berard, Devoniensis, Belle
Lyonnaise, Cheshunt Hybrid, Catherine Mermet, Madame
Levet, Saffrano. Moss Roses Little Gem, Baron de
Wassenaer, Crested, Comtesse Murinais, Gloire des
Mosseuses, and Madame Rochalembert. Hybrid Perpetuals —
Jules Margottin, La France, Baroness Rothschild, John
Hopper, Duke of Edinburgh, William Taylor, Victor Verdier,
Etienne Levet, Louis Van Houtte, Alfred Colomb, A. K.
Williams, Senateur Vaisse, Star of Waltham, Prince Camille
de Rohan, Rev. J. B. Camm, Madame Lacharme, Charles
Lefebvre, Captain Christy, Marie Baumaun, Madame Victor
Verdier, Bessie Johnstone, Boule de Neige, Comte de Morte-
xnarte, Charles Lawson, Comtesse Chabrillant, Countess of


Eoseberry, Christine Neillson, Dr. Hogg, Glory of Cheshunt,
Madame Duchet, Comtesse d’Oxford. Bourbon Roses —
Acidalie, Souvenir de Malmaison, Sir Joseph Paxton,
Louise Odier, and Rev. H. Dombrain. Many of the fore-
going, especially of the Tea-scented, are of climbing habit, or
they may be trained to supports, as pillars in the shrubbery;
but we must not forget to mention the yellow and white
Banksia roses and the Rosa Microphylla. These are special
favourites for training as climbing plants. Roses, as now
grown, are divided into the following classes, each of which
include some very specially beautiful flowers ; but the Hybrid
Perpetuals bloom so constantly that we have given preference
to that section in the above suggestive list :
Provence (Rosa centifolia) —Of which the old Cabbage Rose
and Unique Panache are illustrations. Hybrid Provence —As
Blanchfleur and Oomptesse de Segur, Miniature Provence —As
De Meaux and Burgundy. Moss (Rosa Muscosa) —As Murinais
and Laneii, etc. French (Rosa Gallica) —As Adble Prevost and
Kean. Hybrid China —As Blairii No. 2 and Madame Plantier.
Hybrid Bourbon —As Charles Lawson and Paul Ricant. Alba
(Rosa Alba)—As La Seduisante andPrincesse de Lamballe,etc.
Damask (Rosa damascena) —Like Madame Zoutman and La
Ville de Bruxelles. Austrian (Rosa lutea) —Like Persian
Yellow and Harrisonii. Ayrshire (Rosa arvensis) —Like Alice
Grey and Elegans. Cluster (Rosa multiflora) —Like Fragrans
and Laure Davoust. Evergreen (Rosa sempervirens)—Like
Fblicite Perpetua and Adelaide d’Orleans. Boursalt (Rosa
alpina)—Like Amadis and De Lisle. Prairie —Like Baltimore
Belle and Linnean Hill Beauty. Perpetual Moss— Like Eugene
Yerdier and Madame Edouard Ory. Damask Perpetual —Like
Rose de Roi and Mogador. Hybrid Perpetual —As the roses
given in the foregoing list. Bourbon (Rosa Indica Bourboniana)
—As Acidalie and Souvenir de Malmaison. China (Rosa Indica)
—As the Common Blush, Mrs. Bosanquet, and Cramoisie
Superieure. Miniature China (Rosa Indica Pumila) —As Fairy
and Pompon Bijou. Tea-scented —As Devoniensis and Mareohal
Niel. Hybrid and Pedigree Tea-scented —As Madame Etienne
Levet and Cheshunt Hybrid. Noisette (Rosa Indica Noisetteana)
—As Cloth of Gold, Lamarque and Narcisse, Solfaterre, etc.
Banksian (Rosa Banksiae) —Like the Yellow, White, and For-
tuneiana. Microphylla —Like Rouge de Luxembourg and
Triomphe de Machetaux. And the Macartney (Rosa bracteata)
—As Marie Leonida. Many of these last named are very
interesting, but are mainly serviceable for covering quickly any


unsightly fence or other object. This is a complete classi-
fication of the typical characters of the roses as cultivated
by modern growers.
THE CAMELLIA.
When planted under favourable conditions no plant gives
greater satisfaction than the camellia under the greatest
range of temperature. A native of China, where excellent
varieties were cultivated, it was brought to England in 1739
as Camellia Japonica, a brilliant crimson semi-double flower,
and it was not until the present century that the double sym-
metrical flowers were introduced to Europe, and afforded
cultivators the opportunity for raising the numerous excellent
hybrids which now crowd our catalogues.
The camellia, in the hands of the ordinary amateur, is a
rather difficult plant to propagate, but with the skilled
operator it is quite easily raised. This is done by layers, by
grafting on seedlings or rooted cuttings, and by inarching or
grafting by approach. The soil suiting the camellia is peaty,
sandy loam, pretty firm of texture, and free from limey
matter. When the plants are received from the nursery
they should be in pots not less than six inches, and they
should present a rich, dark, glossy appearance, with well-
ripened wood and not too thickly set with bloom buds. If it
be intended to grow them in pots for the greenhouse, they
should be allowed to bloom in those they are purchased in,
and never be permitted to get dry at the roots. As no plant
suffers more than the camellia from having the pots placed
in the sun and wind, it is well to plunge them in tan, or refuse
fibre from the rope works. When so treated a thorough
drenching once a week will be sufficient; but if the pots are
left exposed they will require constant watering. After the
plants have bloomed, and young growth is beginning to start,
they may be transferred to a size larger pot if required, and
be kept well watered until growth is declining, when they
must be watered less frequently, to allow the young shoots to
mature or harden. If bloom buds set too freely over the plant
these should be pinched out when of the size of peas. The
leaves should occasionally be wiped with a sponge, and any
scaly insect found on the stem or in the joints should be
pushed off with a bit of wood, and the plant well syringed
with soapy water.


If intended for open ground cultivation the plants should be
procured of the character above described about April, and be at
once transferred to the spot they are to occupy, which, no matter
how good the soil naturally, should have a thorough admixture
of sound sandy peat or bog earth and heath soil. Some
growers use sheep and cow dung, but if the soil is suitable—as
described —nothing is better than a light surface dressing of
soot before rain, and when the plant is in a growing state. For
the first year, if the aspect is an exposed one, a light enclosure
of branches may be made round the plant, or a flour barrel
cut in two, with the head removed, and placed at the spot,
and some successful growers use the bamboo sugar mats for
this purpose. But whatever contrivance is adopted to protect
the plants from the full force of the sun and wind, it must
not be so close as to darken the enclosure, for such a plan
would merely draw up a weakly, unhealthy growth. The
surface soil for two or three feet should have a dressing of
fibrous debris like that found under sheoak, pine, and other
timber trees. This is better than manure, as it checks evapora-
tion, yet allows rain to percolate freely to the roots of the
plant, while a mulching of manure frequently intercepts and
retains the moisture from even a heavy shower. The varieties
of the camellia are so numerous, and nearly all are so good,
that it is difficult to make a selection without leaving out
excellent, well-known kinds. A few of the best are, in whites
—Alba plena, Fimbriata, Matthotiana, Candidissima, Isabella.
Bed and crimson—lmbricata, Madame Lebois, Bealii, Venus
Medici, Princess Mary of Cambridge, Queen of Denmark, Rose
de la Eeine. Rose and blush—lncarnata, Yaltavareda,
Storyii, Wilderii, Sarah Frost, Lavinia Maggi rosea, Prince
Frederick William, Dryade, Jubilee, Napoleon 111., Perfection.
Striped or marbled—Bonomiana, Charles Albert, Cup of
Beauty, Pressii, Princess Bacciocchi, Queen Victoria, Roma
Risorta, Rosa Madiai, Tabbs, Tricolour imbricata plena.
THE LILY FAMILY.
Some of the most superb flowers that grace our gardens are
members of this group. They all require a good, sweet, yet
rich and porous soil, and on no account should fresh dung be
applied. When grown in the borders they should be left
undisturbed for several years, care being taken to perma-
nently mark the spot with a stake, so that the roots are not
injured in digging. On planting they should be set pretty


deep—about four inches—and as growth advances it should
be secured to light rods firmly fixed in the ground. When
grown as pot plants for greenhouse and bush-house decora-
tion, the bulbs should be set deeply in roomy pots of rich
compost, placed in a frame or shady spot until starting into
growth, when they may be transferred to the show tables, the
pots being plunged in a layer of old tan, or cocoanut fibre, to
check evaporation from the sides of the pot. Lilium
auratum, L. speciosum album, L. rubrum, roseum, and
punctatum are usually adopted for pot culture, but they all
grow splendidly in the open borders, and, blooming as they do
at various periods, the garden is continually gay with some
variety, while they afford the widest field for contrasts in
colour and height of bloom stems. In getting a stock of roots
it is well to order early in the autumn and to plant at once in
their blooming positions. It happens, however, that ship-
ments of the roots arrive at almost any period of the year,
Japan being now so freely communicated with. If planted
during summer care must be taken, by mulching with fibre,
that they are not allowed to shrivel in the ground from
excessive heat. Some of the varieties, notably auratum, have
a most exquisite perfume, and all except the pure whites are
beautifully spotted or rayed with markings on the petals.
THE AZALEA AND RHODODENDRON.
These beautiful flowering shrubs, with the kalmia,
andromeda, daphne, ledum, Ac., in the temperate districts,
will all do well in a fair garden soil, provided it be enriched
with peat, as described for the camellia. They require, in
their early stages, very similar treatment to that plant until
they get fairly established in the open ground, and, as pot
plants, they must never be allowed to have too restricted a
space for their roots, or become pot-bound. The cooler
districts of New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland, and
South Australia are well suited for all these plants, but the
rhododendron and kalmia find in Tasmania and New Zealand
quite a congenial home. There are now a vast variety of
these plants in the hands of our nurserymen, who will readily
furnish a nice collection of contrasting kinds. They are
chiefly propagated by layering old-established plants.


THE CHRYSANTHEMUM.
Fob many years this has been an exceedingly popular
flower in England. It is so tractable, is of such varied form
and range of colour, stands so well the dust and smoke of
large cities, and blooms so copiously when there are few other
plants available, that it has received more than ordinary
attention, and is to be found in every garden. And yet, as
usually grown in the colonies, it is very much spoiled by mis-
management, or, rather, from having no management at all.
Old plants are allowed to grow on for years in the same spot,
until the surrounding soil is thoroughly exhausted. Added to
this, no attention is paid to stopping the rampant shoots, and
thus inducing short, sturdy habit, and the weight of the head
of bloom bears down the branch, which, with every breeze,
sweeps a circle within its range, and the flowers are spattered
with mud on every shower of rain, and are expanded early in
autumn before the proper season which gives the flower its
special value. The proper way to grow the chrysanthemum
is to stop the young shoots of established plants in November,
and again in January, giving the clump a globular outline ;
from the shoots thus pinched back new growth soon sets in,
and this is supported by the woody bottom stems and kept
quite erect until the blooming season. When new plants are
desired they should be procured in pots in the month of
January, and be planted in well prepared manured spots and
encouraged to grow by liberal doses of manure-water. The
shoots may be pinched back to give a head of later bloom, or
be tied up to stakes if large individual blossoms are required
for exhibition or other use. After the bloom is over, and the
shoots are drying, they should be cut close down to the ground.
The chrysanthemum may be increased by division of the
roots in early spring, or by cuttings of the young season’s
growth put in pots of sandy soil and set under cover of a
calico shade in a cool place. For general use_ we strike
cuttings in November; but for successional blooming for the
bush-house or conservatory we have plants coming forward
from cuttings put in during December, January, and even
February. Shoots of the season’s growth are cut at a joint,
and of about six inches in length, and stuck round a six-inch,
well-drained pot of sandy soil. These will fill the pots with
roots in a month, and may be then turned out and potted
singly in four or five inch pots of a richer soil, and kept well
watered until bloom appears, when they may be arranged so


as to harmonise the colours well in the house. They brighten
up a bush-house or fernery wonderfully for several months,
and even as dinner-table ornaments are very desirable.
The chrysanthemum is a great glutton in the way of feeding,
and well repays in profusion of flower and richness of colour
any attention given to it in watering it with liquid manure
during the growing season. After blooming, the plants should
be transferred to the open borders, as they will not thrive if
left longer in the pots.
There are four distinct classes of the chrysanthemum: the
Large Flowered (imbricated and expanded); the Pompone, or
button flowered; the Japanese (“ragged Jacks”); and the
Summer Blooming. There are numerous varieties of all these
sections, as will be seen in the lists of any nurseryman.
THE VERBENA.
This is a very pretty and exceedingly useful bedding plant,
and, when finely contrasting varieties are chosen, nothing can
be more brilliant than a border or bed of verbenas well pegged
down and kept compact. It is readily propagated by layering
the young growths around the plant and watering freely, or by
cuttings of the young wood put in sand in spring or autumn under
protection of a frame, and well shaded from sun-glare. The self-
coloured, such as Foxhunter, scarlet; Candidissima, white;
Bertie, plum colour; Emily, rose; Garnet, carmine; Old
Black Joe, mulberry; Lord Raglan, purple, are well adapted
for contrasts in mass; and the striped and shaded varieties,
such as Monetti, Mayor of Geelong, Pioneer, Warrior, with the
Italian and striped varieties, are better as individual plants.
There are fully fifty excellent varieties for the selector to
choose from. It is a good plan, after securing rooted layers or
cuttings, to grub up the old plants, as they rarely give satis-
factory results several years in succession; the centre gets
bare and woody, and the plants too straggling for neatness to
be observed in the border.
THE PENTSTEMONS
Are showy flowering plants, with abundance of bloom of
varied colour, and resembling a miniature foxglove or gloxinia
in shape. They are propagated by divisions of the root, or,
better still, by cuttings inserted in a sandy soil, in a sheltered
border, in the autumn. These will be nicely rooted by


August, and will form good, thrifty blooming plants if put out
in the beds as individual plants, or if grouped in masses-
of colour of finely harmonising contrasts. They will require
tying up to rods, if not pinched back as recommended
for clumps of the chrysanthemum.
PHLOXES.
The annual varieties, and they are of every shade of colour,
may be sown in autumn and spring, in boxes or in prepared
beds; and as the young plants attain sufficient size they
should be pricked out six inches apart until well rooted, when
they may be transferred to their blooming positions in the
borders, either singly or in masses.
The perennial varieties are a fine section of plants, growing
to a height of from two to three feet, and bearing large
rounded trusses of bloom, arranged with such perfect
regularity that every pip or floret is displayed to the eye.
For named varieties, which are constantly being added to, the
catalogues of our leading nurserymen should be consulted.
The plants are readily propagated by division of the roots, and
by cuttings treated as recommended for the pentstemon.
Being of tall growth, they should stand well back from the
edge or margin of the border, and be tied to rods as they
advance.
THE DAHLIA.
This showy flower is much more satisfactory when dis-
tinctly grown as an autumn-blooming plant, for it is in
perfection when it gets the benefit of the heavy dews of that
period; but when started early—unless where facilities for
watering are at hand—it is a good deal debilitated by hot
days, the flowers are poor, and the whole aspect of the plant
is unthrifty. Dry tubers are to be purchased in the winter,
and these may be started in a hot-bed, and an eye with a piece
of the tuber—just like a cutting of a potato prepared for
planting—may be potted off and kept on the bed until fairly
established. Cuttings may also be made of the young stems ;
these should be cut about six inches in length, just below an
eye, and placed in pots of sandy loam, and kept in a cool
frame until rooted; they should then be transferred to well-
prepared spots in the garden, thoroughly enriched with a
bucketful of good decayed hot-bed dung. As the plants advance
stake carefully, for they are soon injured by the wind, and if


it be desired to have the plant of bushy or spreading habit,
pinch out the leading shoot so as to encourage lateral growth.
The dahlia is a very tractable plant, and it may be trained for
large bedding effects by being pegged down as roses are. To
effect this, the leading shoot, when young, should be pinched
off near the soil; this will induce two or more lateral shoots,
and these may again be stopped at the points; then, as the
shoots extend, gradually strain them to the ground and peg
them down with layering pegs. Plants treated in this way,
and especially when selected of the same habit of growth,
present a grand appearance in the autumn. The soil for the
dahlia must always be rich, and no plant derives greater
benefit from surface mulching. As the stems die off, raise the
tubers with a fork, and when the soil dries so as to readily
shake off, hang them in a cool outhouse, carefully marking
each variety with its name or colour. If the tubers show
signs of shrivelling, place them in boxes of cold but perfectly
dry sand, but if allowed to mature before lifting they will
rarely shrivel.
THE COLEUS.
This plant is so showy and varied in its colour and
markings, and is, withal, so easily propagated and managed,
that it takes a very important position in the bush-house and
conservatory, and even in the open garden, where it serves a
very useful purpose for bedding, though it rarely gives the
brilliant colours it develops under glass. It is propagated
from seed, which, in sowing, requires the most delicate care,
but mainly from cuttings of the young heads. These, if cut
off just below an eye and pricked firmly in small pots singly,
or four in a six-inch pot, around the edge, in a light, sandy
soil, and placed in a little gentle heat in winter time, or a
cool frame during summer, will root in ten days. They
should then be potted off into a somewhat richer soil, in which
cow-dung, peat, and sand are constituents, and kept well
watered, with plenty of air and light. If in a confined position
the plants become drawn, the foliage is small and of poor
colours. When a little growth has been made, the central
point should be pinched out, so as to induce side branches,
and these, in turn, may also have their points out.
The plants will thus present four or more well-furnished
branches, and these, as they grow, will develop minor ones,
until the whole appearance is that of a globe of leaves, each
disposed so as to show off its brilliant markings to advantage.


The subsequent treatment of the plant will be a gradual shift
to a size larger pot of the same good soil. As soon as a plant
gets leggy or unpleasing to the eye, it should be cut back and
put away in a cool store frame to throw young shoots for
cuttings. Mealy aphis is the enemy of the coleus, and it
must at all hazards be got rid of by looking once a week or so
at the under sides of the leaves and in the axils of the leaves.
Caterpillars must be looked for whenever a leaf is seen cut or
torn. On dull, cloudy days water sparingly, and avoid
wetting the foliage in such weather, as it soon damps off.
THE ABUTILON.
This flower is so graceful in shape, so hardy and so varied
in habit and appearance, that all the varieties should be repre-
sented in the shrubbery; while the free blooming dwarf
varieties are especially valuable in the greenhouse. It is
easily raised from cuttings, and the rarer varieties should be
purchased from the nurserymen. Fire King, Purity, and
Violet Queen are the latest additions to the list of abutilons ;
the variegated varieties, Megapotamicum, Vexillarum, Thomp-
sonii, Van Houttei, and Darwinii, are very effective; and the
old Due de Malakoff, Striata, Lady of the Lake, and others
deserve a place.
CYCLAMENS.
This old favourite of English spring gardens has of late
years had attention given to it, and with a result that varieties
have been raised with flowers of very large size, and beauti-
fully marked, and with the foliage marbled and variegated. It
is easily raised from seed, which should be sown in autumn,
and the young plants pricked off as soon as the true leaf is
developed into four-inch pots. The tubers will not bloom well'
till two years old; it is better, therefore, to get some for
immediate effect from the nurserymen, who usually keep
established tubers on hand.
ERICA, EPACRIS, AND THE HEATH FAMILY.
It is very remarkable that nearly every country has its
special type of heath plant. Thus the Cape of Good Hope
has no fewer than 760 named varieties of the erica, its typical
class. Australia has over forty of the epacris. Lord Howe’s
Island has the giant “ heath ” Fitzgeraldii, a tree forty feet


or more, as its representative; Menziesia polifolia is the
Irish heath. Calluna vulgaris is the heather of Scotland
and the north of England. India, the Himalayas, and part
of Europe have the rhododendrons as members of the Erica
family, and North America and China have the azaleas, the
andromedas, and kalmia. All the plants named preserve
their boundary lines rather rigidly. Australia has not an
erica, and the Cape has not an epacris. The Irish heath is
not indigenous to any other country, and the Scotch heather
is not found wild out of Britain. Most of the members are
very showy flowering plants, and some of the hybrids are
extremely beautiful.
The ericas and epacrises are easily propagated by taking
the young and tender shoots, cutting at a joint, and placing
thickly in pots or pans of Reigate or other sharp, clean sand ;
then placing over a little bottom heat, watering carefully—not
allowing the surface to get dust dry, or so saturating the pots
as to cause them to be waterlogged. When rooted, the young
plants should be pricked off singly into small pots of
heath soil, with which a little sound old peat has been incor-
porated, and then placing the pots in a cool frame protected
from the sun, when they may gradually be hardened off by
exposure on all fine dull days. We advise amateurs desirous
of getting a collection of heaths to get them direct from a good
nurseryman—young thrifty stock which has not been so long
in the pot as to get the roots coiled in a mass; and to transfer
on a cool day to the borders prepared with patches of the soil
described. If to grow as pot plants—for which they are very
suitable —care must be taken not to let them get dry during
the growing season, and not to water profusely when at rest.
Good hardy varieties for the border are Cavendishii,Bowieana,
arborea, baccans, persoluta, Wilmoreana, Hyemalis, Lin-
nffioides, hybrida, Cerinthoides, coronata, and the showy, grace-
ful ventricosa section. With this selection the garden need
never be without bloom. They should be mulched during
summer, and some fibrous matter like spent tan or coir refuse
is better for this purpose than manure, for which nearly all
this class have an aversion. If we examine for a moment the
conditions under which the ericas and heath plants thrive
naturally we shall find that they rarely can get fertilising
material of any kind —dry sandy rises, with but very little
organic matter in the soil, is the home of this race of plants ;
and we must imitate closely the natural features of the habitat
we find them in if we would succeed.


GENERAL REMARKS AS TO TENDER OR
TROPICAL PLANTS.
The amateur is often tempted to purchase plants when in
bloom which require special treatment, and which he is rarely
able to give. For example, unless he have facilities, artificial
heat, equable temperature, and a humid condition to the
atmosphere, it is waste of time, and great discouragement,
to attempt to grow crotons, gloxinias, the Indian and other
tropical orchids, and the ferns of warm, moist regions. The
plants named, and hundreds of others tempting to purchase
on account of their beautiful foliage or flowers, would only be
a source of concern, and would, under the adverse conditions
they find themselves, simply linger for a time and die. The
tyro in plant management should, as far as possible, confine
his attention to those of hardy or simple habit, and these are
abundant enough. He will then have the infinite pleasure
of seeing his stock from day to day progressing and developing
new beauties, and he will not be saddened by reflections
of money and energies wasted. If the amateur desires to
grow plants of tropical habitat he must be prepared to give
them the treatment they require; and this leads us to the
consideration of the greenhouse or conservatory, and stove or
hothouse. It is true these may be of the humblest character,
and of such a shape as to cost but little in their maintenance;
but, at the best, such appliances must be looked on as make-
shifts, and for temporary purposes, until a permanent structure
be erected.
ECONOMIC PLANTS.
A very interesting feature may be made in an ordinary
greenhouse or conservatory by having the spice and other
plants of commerce represented; and nothing can be more
attractive to the occasional visitor, or to the younger members
of the household. Not one in a thousand has ever seen, for
example, plants of the black pepper, the allspice, the cinna-
mon, nutmeg, tea, coffee, cocoa, ginger, vanilla, rondeletia,
and patchouli, things which enter into daily commerce and
consumption, and all of which are ornamental and may be
grown with the greatest ease in a warm, humid house suiting
tropical plants.


BEGONIAS.
This is a plant which has been forced into notice during
the last few years by reason of the vast extent of its varieties
and the wealth of colour afforded by it. The modern tuberous
varieties are exceedingly handsome, and having thick, fleshy
leaves, with brilliant blossom, are much used in England and
on the Continent for late summer and autumn decoration.
They are all suited to this climate, and should succeed better
here than in countries where occasional frosts are so destruc-
tive. It is easily propagated by division of the root or offsets,
and a few purchased plants, allowed to grow with plenty of
room for a season, will afford hundreds of young offsets for
increasing stock, or of leaves which strike readily when pegged
down on sandy soil, and kept tolerably dry in a little bottom
heat during the winter months, or simply under shade during
summer. Those old, showy varieties—Metallica, Sanguinea,
Manicata, and others of the large, marbled-leaved kind—make
very showy plants for the greenhouse or stove, their foliage
contrasting finely with other plants. The fuchsia-like —popu-
larly called “ wax fuchsias”—grow very rapidly, and bloom for
many months of the year when given plenty of pot room and
frequent surface dressings of guano or sheep-dung. All the
kinds require care after blooming in slacking off the moisture
and gradually drying or hardening the growth of the season.
Great care is required in raising varieties from seed. It should
be sown on the surface of pans of clean, sharp sand, kept just
moist —not wet —and water should be given over sheets of
blotting paper laid on over the soil, for the finest syringe will
disturb the seed or destroy the young seedlings as they
germinate.
FLOWERING PLANTS INDIGENOUS TO
AUSTRALIA.
It has often been urged that we colonists do not appreciate
the great beauty and variety of our indigenous flora, or it
would be more conspicuously represented in our greenhouses
and gardens; and there is great truth in the charge. For
though it may be answered that there is little need to culti-
vate things that grow wild “in the bush,” it must be
borne in mind that a plant under judicious culture and
training is a very different object than when grown under the
chances and vicissitudes of the bush. Nearly the whole glory


of the English conservatory in spring is due to the presence of
Australian plants, and they usually form the chief features
as specimen plants at the leading horticultural exhibitions.
Boronia Megastigma is perhaps the best known here as
yielding such a volume of perfume, but there are others which
are little grown which ought to be in every garden. Boronia
serrulata is the brilliant pink flower which keeps for several
weeks in bloom. Boronia pinnata is also pink, but with
divided fern-like foliage. Boronia ledifolia is like all the race,
very free flowering. Boronia Tetandra, Boronia heterophylla
and elatior are equally beautiful, and, as their period of
blooming varies, all should be represented in the garden.
The croweas of the bush near Sydney do very well, resembling
the boronias in colour, but taller growing. The hoveas
illicifolia and ovata give brilliant blue flowers. The choro-
zemas are quite hardy, and give a great wealth of orange and
crimson flowers for many months of the year. Plants of a
larger growth are the acacias, many of which are well suited
for the shrubbery; Acacia Drummondii, A. cultriformis, A.
riceana may be specially noted as affording very brilliant
golden flowers early in spring.
The Kennedyas—once termed Hardenbergias—are other
beautiful plants, some of climbing habit, others bushy and
erect. K. Comptoniana (purple), K. ovata stricta (purple),
and K. monophylla alba (white), are three good varieties ; but
there are others. Other indigenous plants suitable for garden
decoration are the dwarf varieties of Grevillea, Pimelea,
Gompholobium, Oxylobium, Epacris, Bossifea, Swainsonia,
Leschenaultias, Genetyllis tulipifera, Eriostemons, Correas,
Dilwynias, etc. Seeds of these may be obtained from most of the
leading colonial seedsmen, or plants from the nurserymen.
All the plants named require a peaty soil, in which fine, sharp
sand abounds; and where the natural soil of the garden is
clayey and stiff, suitable compost must be used at the spot the
plant is intended to occupy. All the plants mentioned are
impatient of moisture, and grow naturally in poor, well-
drained, sandy soil. The idea prevails generally that bush
plants cannot be successfully transferred to the garden, but
this is a mistake. If the small seedlings are taken from the
soil as soon as they are large enough to handle, and trans-
planted to soil of somewhat similar character to that they
have been growing in, they will thrive just as cultivated plants
do. But the fashion of taking up from the bush large plants
whose roots have probably crept over a surface of several


yards is certain to result in failure. In the process of taking
up, thousands of fine rootlets are destroyed, and so the very
life of the plant is endangered, no matter what future care
may be taken.
BEDDING—CARPETS AND RIBBONS.
A striking feature of English and Continental gardening is
that of massing plants of various hues of foliage and flowers,
so as to give the general impression of a well-designed carpet,’
or a prettily patterned ribbon. The parks of London and
Pans are rendered extremely beautiful during the summer and
autumn months by the tasteful selection of plants suiting the
designs to be illustrated; and there are few private gardens of
merit wherein there are not good examples of bedding and
ribbon bordering. As the Australian climate is still more
favourable—admitting, as it does, of a greater range of plants
we ought to see the system brought even to greater perfection.
Plants for this purpose should be propagated in large num-
bers, and this may be done here with the greatest ease. For
winter and early spring effects, scillas, hyacinths, ranuncu-
luses, anemones, tulips, crocuses, ixias, watsonias, and other
early blooming, bulbous plants should occupy special beds.
Daisies, violas, pansies, iberis, gentians, nemophilas, with
other spring flowering dwarf plants, will make up other interest-
ing beds. Later on, lobelias will give the various shades
of blue, their dwarf and flowering habit being especially valu-
able for marginal lines and curves. Gazania picta is another
plant giving rich orange flowers in profusion ; and the various
mesembryanthemums (“pig’s faces”) produce a most brilliant
picture on sunny days. Cineraria maritima is a plant of
silver-hued foliage; and Pyrethrum aurea is especially valu-
able for its pale golden foliage, and its dwarf, compact habit.
The Golden Thyme and variegated Sedum and Mesembryan-
themums are useful for bordering. Iresines, Herbstii, and
Lindenii afford a mass of deep purple and carmine, and these
colours are most useful, for, though the plants grow rather
tall, they may be cut back and kept of the required size.
From November till March the varieties of coleus and plectran -
thus are also available. Verbenas of great variety give a
large range of colour, but they require to be pegged down, and
the rampant shoots pinched back to keep them of the required
shape and size. The blood-red foliaged beet, and the gold and
silver veined varieties are very effective, and the alternantheras


are especially to be valued for edgings, and for working out
designs in ribbon bordering. For summer and autumn effects
in the colonies the great variety of coleus will be available;
these may be planted in special beds or intermixed with other
plants, and we have in this interesting section of plants a
most valuable help in producing fine effects. The new race of
tuberous, hardy begonias may readily be propagated and will
thrive much better here than in Paris, where the public squares
and gardens are largely planted with them. Of plants of later
habit, valuable for bedding purposes, we may enumerate the
various amaranths, tricolour, bicolour, salicifolia, melancholi-
cus and others; these give a most gorgeous effect to large
sized beds. Coxcombs, petunias, pentstemons, pelargoniums,
geraniums, all form fine masses for central effects in beds.
The zonal, bicolour, tricolour, silver and gold variegations,
and the double flowered kinds of the geraniums are especially
effective; while the recently introduced variegated ivy-leaved
varieties are very graceful when used for marginal purposes,
their compact trailing habit admitting of their being pegged
down and trained to completely furnish the space to be covered.
The plants here enumerated form but a small proportion
■of those available. We have here no frosts which can
seriously affect many plants which might be made to do duty
in the beds during the winter, but which in England can only
safely be planted for spring effect. The violas, primulas,
anbrietias, snowflakes, and pansies, and the plants mentioned,
would all give grand winter effect and then make way for
the summer and autumn blooming plants.
There is really no reason why our private gardens and
public pleasure-grounds should not be kept gay and con-
stantly cheerful with flowers and foliage. Objection may be
taken to the system of bedding as being expensive and
tedious, but really, if care is taken in preserving and propri-
gating from the plants in the open garden, the expense will
not be much; as to the trouble, nothing beautiful can be
obtained without it.


THE SHRUBBERY, &c.
No garden, however small its dimensions, can be considered
complete without at least a few, in proportion to its size of
ornamental trees or shrubs. Flowers, although beautiful’ in
themselves, are more or less evanescent, while the trees or
shrubs remain a continual source of pleasure. They may be
divided simply into evergreen and deciduous, and these again
into foliage and flowering, although many of them combine
both qualities in themselves.
In the evergreen section the Conifers (so called from bearing
their fruit or seed in cones) command our greatest attention,
not only from the majestic grandeur of their appearance, the
ease with which they can be cultivated, their adaptability to
almost any description of soil, and their general hardiness,
treating alike with contempt the heat of summer or the severe
cold of winter, and flourishing in the poorest soil, but also
because from amongst them we can select trees of every size
and habit, from the dwarf and trailing Juniper Prostrata and
Biotas or Thujas of two or three feet in height, to the giant
Wellingtonias, towering upwards of 300 feet, and spreading
their enormous limbs around—fair-sized trees in themselves ;
and in contrast there is the slender, erect Cupressus Sem-
pervirens, with its close and compact habit, occupying only a
few feet in diameter, although attaining a height of between
50 and 60 feet.
Some of these, although making splendid specimens for
lawns, parks, awenues, &c., are scarcely suitable for garden
culture except in those of large extent, and good judgment
must be exercised, not only in choosing the varieties according
to the extent of ground, the climate, and situation, but in
planting and placing them so that the taller kinds, such as
Pines, Cupressus, Cedars, and Araucarias, &c., are in the
background, and have sufficient room left for future growth, as
many trees are spoiled by being crowded too much together.
Some of the fastest growing and most handsome of the pine
family are Insignis, Canariensis, New Caledonia Araucaria


(Cookii), Moreton Bay (A. Cunninghamii), and Norfolk Island
( excelsa ), the latter particularly being a universal favourite.
Among the Cupressus or Cypress we have Majestica,
Lawsoniana, Lambertiana, Sempervirens, Torulosa, and many
others, Torulosa standing the heat and drought better than
any other. Then there are the Cedars (red, white, or silver),
and Libani, or Cedar of Lebanon, very handsome and fast-
growing trees, requiring but little attention; with many
others far too numerous to mention here.
Next in order among the evergreens come those noted, not
only for the beauty of their foliage, but also for their flowering
qualities, and foremost stand the Magnolias. Grandiflora, so
well known for its magnificent, large, and deliciously-scented
white flowers and fine glossy foliage, is perfectly hardy, and if
properly established with roots when planted out will defy
either heat or frost. Fuscata, which is a dwarf variety, is a
nice-growing shrub, with purple flowers, and a peculiar and
strong perfume like port wine ; hence it sometimes gets the
name of Port Wine Magnolia. The Oleanders, which are
very ornamental, some of them having beautiful, variegated
foliage, have both single and double flowers, generally crimson,
pink, and white in colour. The Lasiandras have beautiful
foliage and purple flowers. Pittosporums of various kinds,
some being variegated in foliage, and suitable either for speci-
mens or hedge culture. Engenioides and Nigrescens are very
handsome, free-growing shrubs, and Undulatum, bearing large
trusses of white flowers, very strongly scented, is also a quick
grower, attaining a fair size. The Abutilons, which deserve
to be placed in the front rank for grace and beauty both in
flowers and foliage, are a numerous section in themselves,
almost all shades of colour being now represented in their
blooms—for instance, white, yellow, crimson, pink, orange, red,
mauve, striped and spotted, while the foliage of some are beau-
tifully variegated. Fabiana Imbricata is a very hardy, hand-
some, white flowering shrub, with foliage like the heath.
Veronicas, especially Gracilis and Diosmoefolia, which are
nice, small foliaged, white flowering varieties, are very hand-
some. Hydrangeas, with their large trusses of bloom;
Spireas, or Australian May, continually in flower; Garde-
nias, or Cape Jasmines, with fragrant white flowers; Euony-
mus, or Japanese Laurel, with its variegated leaves and
shining red berries; Diosmas, Ericas, &c, with hundreds of
others, give a large field for selection. In the foliage class
we have the Moreton Bay Figs, the Ilex, or Hollies, English


and Chinese, with their variegated varieties, the Cerasua or
Laurel, including the Portugal and Sweet Bay. Grevillea
Robusta, or Silky Oak of Queensland, a magnificent specimen
tree, with its beautiful fern-like foliage. The Tasmanian Blue
Gum for exposed situations. The well-known Schinus Molle,
or Indian Pepper Tree, is one of the fastest and freest growing
trees we possess, with handsome, pendulous foliage, and
numerous clusters of red berries, giving it a very ornamental
appearance, while its hardy nature, resisting alike heat or
cold, makes it very useful as a shade or shelter tree.
Other effective evergreen shrubs are the Abelias, Acacias,
Acmenas, Adenandra, Adhatoda, Agnostus, Agonis, Alla-
mandas, Andromeda, Anopteris, Anthocercis, Aphelexis,
Aphelandras, Azaleas, Arbutus, Ardisia, Arduina, Aucubas,
Backhousia, Bamboos, Banksias, Basckia, Barklya, Bauera,
Benthamia, Berberis, Bignonias, Botryodendron, Browallia,
Brachysema, Brugmansia, Buddleas, Buxus, Callistemon,
Calycanthus, Camphora, Cantua, Ceonothua, Colletia,
Ceratonia, Cercis, Chironia, Christia, Coprosma, Coryno-
carpus, Cotoneaster, Crataegus, Croton, Cycads, Cytisus,
Daphne, Dasylirion, Daubentonia, Deeringia, Dieffenbachia,
Diosma, Dombeya, Dracaenas, Duranta, Duvaua, Edwardsia,
Elaaagnus, Escallonia, Eucalyptus, Eugenia, Euonymus,
Euphorbias, Fabiana, Felecia, Francisea, Fugosia, Gardenias,
Garrya, Genista, Geraniums, Goldfussia, Grewia, Guavas,
Habrothamnus, Hakeas, Hovea, Hymenosporum, Illicium,
Indigofera, Ixora, Jacaranda, Jasmines, Kentias, Lantana,
Laurels, Lemons, Oranges, Liriodendron, Loquat, Macademia,
Macrozamias, Macoya, Magnolia, Mahonia, Menziesia,
Meyenia, Mertrosideros, Mitraria, Muraltia, Myoporum, Myrtle
Neriums (or Oleanders), Omphaloides, Osmanthus, Palms,
Pandanus, Phormiums, Pittosporums, Pleroma, Plumbago,
Podalyria, Polygala, Poinciana, Proteas, Prostanthera, Eaphio-
lepis, Eogiera, Eoellia, Eondeletia, Eussellia, Sanseveria,
Bchinus, Sophora, Swainsonia, Zamias, Wigandia, Yitex,
Yirgilia, Sterculia, Verticordia, Viburnum, Tasmannia, Thea
Tecomas, Templetonia, Tetratheca. No mere description
could convey any adequate idea of the character of these;
but the list is given that note may be made of any plant
striking the eye of the visitor to our public or private gardens,
so that it may be obtained at the planting season.


DECIDUOUS SHRUBS.
Some of these, from their powerful contrast of colour with
evergreens and constantly varying character, should always
be present in the shrubbery. A few of the leading varieties
are given here—Ailantus, Aloysia, Berberis, Catalpa, Cerasus,
Cydonias, Deutzias, Diervilla, Diospyros, Double-blossomed
Peach, Almond, Cherry, Thorn and Rubus —Erythrina, Filbert,
Flowering Currant and Gooseberry, Forsythia, Fraxinus,
Fuchsia, Halesia, Hibiscus, Hydrangea, Kerria, Laburnum,
Lagerstrcemia, Ligustrums, Lilacs, Magnolia, Maples, Melias,
Mulberries, Paulownia, Philadelphus, Poinsettia, Poplars,
Punica, Pyrus Japonica, Quercus, Quince, Rhus, Rhamnus,
Robinia, Salix, Sambucus, Sorbus, Spartium, Spirea, Syringas,
Wistarias, Weigela, Vines, Tilea, Ulmus, Tamarisk, Ceratonia,
Cercis, Oestrum, Chironia, Christia.
HERBACEOUS PLANTS.
These differ from shrubs in their usually non-ligneous
character, and are of shorter life, coming more speedily into
blossom for the decoration of the foreground of shrubberies,
for the conservatory, or for bedding effects. The following
are a few of the most effective and useful:—Ageratums,
Alonsoa, Alocasia, Anchusa, Anemone Japonica, Angelonia,
Anthurium, Aspidistra, Borage, Capsicums, Clianthus, Coro-
nilla, Delphinium, Dianthus, Diplacus, Echium, Eranthe-
mum, Eulalias, Farfugium, Fittonia, Funkia, Gentiana,
Heliotrope, Iberis, Justicia, Lathyrus, Lavatera, Lavenders,
Libonia, Linums, Lobelias, Luculia, Maranta, Medinilla,
Mimulus, Myosotis, Nierembergia, Orchids, Peony, Pent-
stemon, Phlox, Salvias, Saxifrages, Statice, Vincas, Torenia
Thyme, Verbenas, Veronicas, &c., tfec.
ANNUALS.
These, with plants of biennial or perennial habit, should be
well represented in the flower division of the garden. The
list is a far too long one to give here fully, but the following
will be found to give great pleasure, as they are easily
managed and bloom profusely:—Amaranthus (all kinds).
Antirrhinums, Asters, Campanulas, Cockscomb, Convolvulus,
Helichrysums (or Everlastings), Godetia, Lychnis, French and
African Marigolds, Annual Phloxes, Stocks, Wallflowers, Zin-
nias, Acroclinium, Aquilegia, Balsams, Clarkia, Collinsia,


Cyclamen, Dianthus, Sweet William, Gaillardia, Sunflower,
Ipomopsis, Larkspur, Lobelias, Linums, Lupins, Sweet Peas,
Mignonette, Nasturtium, Nemophila, Petunias, Poppies,
Portulacca, Rhodanthe, Salpiglossis, Salvias, Scabios, Sapo-
naria, Silene, Schizanthus, Viscaria, Whitlavia, &c.
AQUATIC PLANTS.
Thebe are interesting when grown in ponds or in tanks,
many varieties being quite hardy, while others require
the higher temperature of the stove or conservatory. The
Nymphfes (Water Lilies), Nelumbium, Valisneria, Villarsia,
Aponogeton, Ranunculus Aquaticus, Utricularia, Hottonia,
Lemnas, Nupheas, &c. The Lattice plant is particularly
interesting, but it needs the heat of a warm greenhouse or
stove.
ORNAMENTAL GRASSES.
Many of these are very pretty in their dwarf habit, while
others grow to a very large size. The Arundos, Pampas Grasses
and Bamboos should be planted where they can have plenty of
room; the Eulalias, Stipas, ribbon grass, and dwarfer kinds
may occupy positions nearer the margin of the beds ; Isolepis
Gracilis is suitable for the greenhouse and stove near water.
AVENUE AND SHADE TREES.
A wide field is afforded by the great range of climate in the
Australian colonies for the selection of trees suitable for
avenue and street planting. The Conifers are very popular,
the pinus insignis in particular being preferred for its rapid
growth and pleasant dense green aspect ; but nearly all the
species of pinus—abies, picea, araucaria, cedrus, with the
taller, compact members of the cypress family—are worthy of
a trial. Of another character, the popular deciduous trees of
Europe and America thrive well in many districts: the oak,
elm, willow, birch, beach, ash, poplar, plane, maple,
robinia, chestnut, tuliptree, alder, with their varieties are
but a few of these. In evergreen trees other than Conifers
the number is legion, but none are more effective than the
Echinus Molle, Magnolias, Moreton Bay Fig, Tristania,
Botryodendron, Grevillea Robusta, Pittosporums, Camellias,
Laurels, evergreen oak, Olive, Pistacia, Acmenas, Lopho-
stemon. As, however, the subject of avenue and street plant-
ing is rather outside this book, we must curtail further notice.


SUCCULENTS.
These form an interesting group of plants of diverse habit,
and highiy suitable for rockwork and dry positions. It
embraces the Aloe, Cactus, Echeveria, Mesembryanthemum,
Epiphyllum, Cereus, Kalosanthes, Yuccas, Cotyledons,
Sempervivums, and many other plants having thick, fleshy
leaves, and existing with little or no chance of moisture.
Their culture is of the simplest: cuttings or offsets left to dry
in the air for a day root freely on being planted, and soon form
good-sized plants.
BULBS, TUBEROUS, AND OTHER ROOTS OF
FLOWERING PLANTS.
These, which embrace some of the most gorgeous features of
the garden, all require almost similar treatment. The spring
blooming varieties should be all got into the beds not later
than April, and the soil should have been previously prepared
by having mixed with it well pulverised dry cow or sheep
dung, with drift sand. The leading varieties of bulbs to be so
treated are:—Amaryllis, Anemone, Anomatheea, Antholiza,
Anthericum, Alstroemeria, Allium, Albuca, Apios, Babiana,
Belladonna, Bellevalia, Bletia, Bohardtia, Bravoa, Brodisea,
Bulbicodium, Crocus, Fritillaria (Crown Imperial), Cyclamen,
Dog’s Tooth Violet, Galanthus (Snowdrop), Gladiolus,
Hypoxis, Hyacinth, Hepatica, Hippeastrum, Iris, Ixia,
Jonquil, Lachenalia, Narcissus, Ranunculus, Scilla, Sparaxis,
Tigridia, Tulip, Tuberose. Choice plants whose roots may be
purchased during their periods of rest are;—Aehimines,
Gesneras, Tydeas, Gloxinias, Begonias, Dielytra, Eucharis,
Freesia, Imatophyllum, Lathyrus, Lilies, Spirasas or Hoteias,
Tropeoleum, Commelina, Dahlia, Eucomis, Nerine (Guernsey
Lily), Geesortysa, Gastronema, Gloriosa, Hedychium, Hemero-
callis, Leucocoryne, Leucogum (Snowflake), Muscari, Schizos-
tylos, Solomon’s Seal, Sternbergia, Tritonia, Trillium,
Tritelia, Uvularia, Yallota, Watsonia, Aconite, Zephyranthus,
Caladiums, &c.
Other bulbous plants of great use in the garden are
Agapanthus, Arums, Callas, Crinums, Tritonias, Boussingaultia
iclimber), Calochortos, Camasia, Chlidanthus, Christmas
Rose (Hellebore), Chroniums, Claytonia, Clivia, Colchicum,
Gummingia, Cyrtanthus, Cyclobothra, Doryanthes, Erythro-
nium, Freesia, Morea, Ornithogalum, Oxalis, Pancratium,
Peony, Richardia, Sarana, Sanguinaria.


CALENDAR OF OPERATIONS.
[Note. — In the following hints as to seasonable operations,
it has not been deemed necessary to refer in detail to many
of the plants for which pretty full cultural directions have
already been given, and which may be referred to when
necessary.]
JANUARY.
If mulching has been observed the dry weather which
usually prevails at this season will not have shorn the borders
of their beauty, even if abundance of water has not been
available. Watering should, however, be carefully attended
to where necessary. The too luxuriant growth of climbing
plants should also be cut back or tied neatly in to the trellis or
arbour over which they are trailing. Recently budded roses
should have their young shoots secured to a light rod. Dahlias
and hollyhocks will need looking to, giving abundance of
water and tying neatly in to the stakes. A few dahlias, if
available in pots, may be planted for late autumn blooming.
Chrysanthemums should be cut back so as to form nice
rounded self-supporting clumps in the border (see “ Chrysan-
themum”). This is the blooming period of balsams,
stocks, phloxes, ipomeas, thunbergias, zinnias, delphiniums,
and for many weeks the beds should be gay with these and
other flowers. Continue to propagate by cuttings the various
plants mentioned under the heading of “Bedding.” Coleus,
iresine, alternantheras, cineraria maritima, plectranthus, etc.,
may be pricked out closely in shallow boxes of sandy soil, and
be placed under cover of canvas until rooted. Echeverias
may be increased by offsets which spring up abundantly around
the old plants. Amateurs should visit the Botanic Gardens
occasionally and note the fine bedding effects produced by
merely a few varieties of plants, and especially should he
notice the plants standing heat well and affording plenty of
bloom during the dry months. Thus, in roses, he will find
Cloth of Gold, Climbing Devoniensis, Cheshunt Hybrid,
Lady Emily Peel, La Prance, Souvenir de la Malmaison in
gorgeous bloom wherever they have received good treatment,
and care should be taken to secure these varieties in his
collection, either by budding now or by purchasing in the


season. Continue to bud roses, as also the' double blooming
thorn, peach and cherry. Only in cool, moist seasons
may seeds be sown in January and February in the open
ground, and then only when facilities exist for shading from
sun-heat. On the whole it is better to bring the young
seedlings forward in frames (see “ Seed Sowing”). It will
be necessary to secure all tall growing plants to stakes,
as a high wind at this period may be fatal to them when
left unsupported. Azaleas, camellias, daphnes, heaths, and
all evergreen flowering plants showing signs of drooping
should be promptly watered and mulched as the only
means of saving them, and a little close brushwood may
with advantage be stuck around such plants. As rain falls,
transplant in the borders any available seedlings, which,
if our previous instructions have been acted on, should now
be plentiful. Zinnias, balsams, amaranthus of varieties,
antirrhinums, French and African marigolds make a fine
autumn display if planted now, and they succeed the earlier
sown ones. Continue to propagate by cuttings, in sand
under shade, petunias, chrysanthemums, carnations,
picotees, and verbenas. Cut back old flowering stems of
dahlias and hollyhocks. Plant out from pots chrysanthemums,
or give them a shift to a larger pot, with occasional liquid
manure, if required later on for the conservatory or bush-
house. Plant again of gladiolus corms for successional
bloom.
The Conservatory. —Attention should be paid to water-
ing, syringing for thrip or scale, etc., fumigating occasionally
with tobacco, and shading on all days of sun-glare. Hanging
baskets of plants should once a week, in dry weather, receive
a thorough soaking by being plunged in a vessel of water, as
the centre of the ball of soil is apt to get dry and hard when
it receives only a mere syringing. Coleuses should receive a
shift to larger pots, and be liberally treated with manure-water.
They must not be too much shaded, but exposed as much as
possible to the light and air. Climbers should be tied neatly
in—not allowed to darken the house. Ferns should not be
fully exposed to the sun, and the natural conditions under
which they grow should be observed in their house treatment.
FEBRUARY.
Towakds the end of the month is the best time to sow seeds
of all the primulas, calceolarias, pansies, and cinerarias, our
experience going to prove that seedlings of earlier sowings are


very difficult to manage, and are liable to be drawn up when
under protection, to their detriment in point of vigour and
robustness. Continue the operations assigned to last month,
except as to planting out dahlias and chrysanthemums, it
being rather late for this. Prepare ground for planting the
spring flowering bulbs by deep digging and enriching with
cow-dung and drift sand; it will then absorb all the rainfall,
and ought to be in good condition to receive the bulbs and
tubers next month or the following. Purchase at once such
stock as is required of hyacinth, anemones, ixias, ranunculus,
scilla, tulip, Narcissus, and others mentioned in the list, as
if later on the best may have been selected. Propagate as
directed last month, and get in a stock of all the popular
zonale pelargoniums for bedding, &c., as also cuttings of
show, regal, and fancy varieties (see “Pelargonium”). Save
seeds of flowers specially marked for their excellence, and
others for general use. This will require greater care than is
generally supposed, for, though it is a simple thing to secure
the seeds of lupins, convolvulus, and other large-seeded
plants, it is a very critical matter with phloxes, verbenas,
lobelias, <fec., which shed their seed soon if not watched,
and yet continue blooming for a time. These should be gone
over at intervals of a few days, and the seed vessels plucked
and put in paper or linen bags, until a wet day affords the
opportunity of cleaning the seed. On dry, hot days give the
weeds a hoeing, and especially keep the lawn free from rank
growing weeds by cutting out and by constant mowing and
rolling.
The Conservatory and Bush-House.—Diminish
the supply of water to fading plants of gloxinias and cala-
diums, so that the plants may get their annual rest. Water
sparingly on dull days such things as tydeas, achimenes, &c.
Plants of coleus that are growing too tall or leggy should
have their tops taken for cuttings, and be put in a little fresh
soil, to afford a succession of young wood for cuttings.
Palms, cycads, dracaenas, and pandanus should be examined
for scale, and be shifted into pots a size larger, giving their
foliage a careful wiping with a soft sponge. Carefully shade
the lights on hot days.
MARCH.
Note well the various climbing plants, many of which will
now be blooming, and procure good hardy plants of any
required from the nursery. If planted out now in a nice soil,


and shaded, they will speedily get established and make good
growth before the cold weather sets in; but if left till that period
before planting they are very liable to damp off or make no
progress until the spring has far advanced. As the young
seedlings advance of cineraria, calceolaria, pansy, viola,
primula (and this last embraces the auricula, polyanthus, &c.),
prick out singly into the smallest-sized pots and plunge them
in the soil or tan under shade, and water sparingly, never-
allowing the pots to get dry or to become soddened with
moisture. Prepare a piece of good soil for the reception of a
batch of cuttings of approved roses; this is to be done by
deep digging and mixing with sharp sand, if not naturally of a
sandy nature (see “ The Rose”). Toward the end of the month
plant out all the spring-blooming bulbs, labelling the exact
spot to prevent damage by hoeing, weeding, &c. Top dress
the beds with sifted cow-dung.
The Fernery and House.—This is a good time for
getting collections of hardy ferns from the mountains and
gullies. In taking up it is well to select such as have well-
matured fronds, as the young tender growths usually droop
and rarely recover on transplanting. Todeas, Polypodiums,
Blechnums, Gleichenias, Davallias, Pteris, Aspleniums,
Adiantums, Alsophila, Aspidiums, Dicksonias, and Lomarias
are but a few of those available within easy distances of most
centres of settlement. The Blue Mountains of New South
Wales, and the Macedon and Dandenong Ranges of Victoria,
are peculiarly rich in ferns, and visitors may easily make a
nice selection on their holiday rambles for utilisation around
their homes. As the sun’s influence declines give the fullest
exposure to plants hitherto shaded in the conservatory.
Periodically—say once a month—it is a capital plan to turn
out the contents of the house, clean up the shelving and
tables, and rearrange the stock. By doing this it enables the
operator to personally inspect every plant, to wash the pots of
any slimy or mossy matter, and gives a fresh aspect to the
whole collection.
APRIL,
Do not defer longer the planting of spring bulbs. In addition
to those already mentioned, the Christmas Rose of England
(Heleborus nigra), the Hepatica, Winter Aconite, Lily of the
Valley, and Solomon’s Seal claim a place by reason of their
blooming in midwinter. Dielytra, Spireas Japonica and
Palmata and Crown Imperial are also noteworthy, but the list
is a long one, as will be seen. Also, during the month, sow on


nicely prepared patches most of the hardy annuals for early
spring blooming, or prick out seedlings from previous sowings.
Collinsias, larkspur, phloxes, stocks, wallflowers, campanulas,
nemophilas, hollyhock are but a few of the many decorative
hardy plants admitting of sowing now. Early in the month
layer the lower branches of most shrubs, pegging down firmly
in the soil to a depth of four inches, and cutting half through
or twisting the branch at the joint in contact with the soil.
This is a good time for rooting cuttings of the young growth of
fuchsias, abutilons, heliotropes, bouvardias, &c., in pots or
pans of sand over a little bottom heat in a frame. It is also
the best time to put out cuttings of the year’s shoots of nearly
all shrubs, laurels, deutzias, laurustinas, laburnum, the
varieties of hibiscus, roses, tamarisk, all require the same
treatment, and will speedily root, forming useful young stock
for spring planting. Where additions are desired to the
shrsbbery procure plants and set out late in the month, as they
do better than when left till the winter months, when root
growth is usually feeble, or till spring, when dry weather may
threaten their existence. Pelargoniums, pentstemons, and all
herbaceous plants should be largely propagated by cuttings in
the. open beds for spring use. Verbenas, carnations, &c.,
may be pegged down for rooting, and when ready they may be
transplanted and the old plants destroyed. Sow again, for later
spring bloom, cineraria, calceolaria, primula, mimulus, and
pansy seed, and young cyclamen plants may be potted off.
Give a dressing of soot to the roots of camellias and thin out
the bloom buds where too thickly set. Plant out in their
blooming positions seedlings of stocks and wallflowers; and
young seedlings of the various showy salvias should be put
out. It will often be found that after the late autumn rains
numerous seedlings of the various flowering plants spring up
in the neighbourhood of their parents; these should be fully
utilised and not treated as weeds, for they form excellent hardy
plants for the borders, and require no coddling. Look well to
slugs, which at this time are very active in the garden, and
especially destructive to the hyacinth and other bulbs as they
spring from the'soil. Soot and lime dusted over the beds in the
evening is fatal to them.
Plant Houses.—Coleuses must be removed from the bush-
house to the conservatory, or to frames, and if the amateur has
no convenience for protecting his stock, it will be well for him
to secure one or two plants of desired varieties, and get them
under a canvas covered frame, with a view to get cuttings from


them further on; and the same remark will apply to the
more tender bedding plants, such as a alternantheras, plec-
tranthus, Ac., Ac.
MAY.
This month should be gay with the late blooming chrysan-
themums and the late dahlias, and both should be kept securely
tied to stakes, and neatly trimmed as the blooms fade. Eoses
and other deciduous flowering shrubs should be pruned, refer-
ence being made to our special articles on such plants.
Cuttings, as directed for April, may still be put in, but the
sooner the better. Let the shrubbery have a thorough over-
haul, straggling growths be cut closely in, and the whole
plot be enriched with a good dressing of short dung, which
may be dug in now or left till opportunity occurs, always
using a fork in preference to a spade. All digging or trenching
should be hurried on, and changes in the general plan of the
garden got out of hand. Where winter or spring bedding
effects are desired a selection should be made of hardy plants,
such as pinks, cinerarias, pansy, pyrethrum, gazania, and the
like, as it is of little use depending on the alternantheras,
iresines, and other tender things which a single night’s frost
may ruin. In sheltered, warm situations that glory of
tropical climates, the poinsettia, will be full of promise, its
brilliant carmine bracts being the oriflamme of the temper-
ate garden, or the glory of the greenhouse of lower tempera-
tures. Keep a sharp look-out for aphis on young advancing
plants of cinerarias and calceolarias, and re-pot as growth
requires.
Plant Houses. —Still induce a hardy habit by fullest
exposure on fine days; avoid watering too freely, and only on
fine warm days, or when necessary. Artificial heat will be
necessary for all plants of tropical habitat. Crotons, marantas,
anthuriums, and all that class of plants, with the ferns and
dracaenas of warm countries, should never be subjected to a
less temperature than 60deg., and the amateur would do well
to avoid their culture if he cannot give to them these essential
conditions. Calocasias, caladiums, and such plants should
now be put aside to dry off in the pots preparatory to starting
again in August or September.


JUNE.
This is an excellent month to renovate lawns and to
prepare for forming fresh ones (see “Lawns,” &c.). Plant
edgings of rosemary, golden thyme, box, and violets. Divide
and plant out daisies, primroses, and polyanthus. Having in
view previous suggestions, get all shrubs in position, especially
roses, which will then give abundance of spring bloom.
Cuttings of the various plants named before may still be
struck. Prune closely all the hybrid perpetual roses, and tie
in (without pruning) to the trellis or stake the Cloth of Gold
and Tea-scented climbing varieties. Divide the roots of
desirable kinds of chrysanthemums, perennial phloxes,
marguerites, and other hardy flowering clumps. Look to
advancing seedlings, and thin out the patches where growing
too thickly. Cuttings of nasturtiums will root freely if put in
now.
Plant Houses.—. Be-pot cinerarias and calceolarias as
the young rootlets reach the sides of the pots ; and plant out
in the open beds seedlings of pansies, violas, and struck
cuttings of show and fancy pelargoniums. Keep up a
moderate night temperature in the warm house where
crotons, tropical orchids, allamandas, dipladenia, and such
things are grown, and on cold days, with westerly winds,
keep the lights close. The large foliage varieties of begonias
of tropical habitat will now be starting for their new growth,
and must be treated carefully, watered lightly, and with a
little guano dissolved in the water. Syringe the more
delicate ferns—such as Adiantum Farleyensis—with tepid
water, and keeping in the warmest spot in the house.
JULY.
In the absence of the means of procuring artificial heat by
glass structures, it is essential that beds of manure should be
formed. These will be found very useful adjuncts to the
garden for striking cuttings of tender plants, for starting
dahlia tubers, and for raising seedlings of melons, cucumbers,
egg-plant, and other tender garden plants. But another
purpose they will serve is that of giving early crops of
cucumbers and melons, and for bringing forward delicate
seedlings of flowering plants. Fresh horse-dung and litter
from the stable is built up in a nice, square heap of the
required size to suit the frame, and of about three feet in
height. When it has settled down, another good layer is


added, and over this is laid a thickness of about five or six
inches of a good garden soil. A good sized frame for general
use is one about four feet wide and six feet long, and it may
have a sliding sash of glass or one covered with thin, white
oiled calico. This frame is laid over the soil, which should
extend outside the edges of the frame a few inches, so as to
secure the warmth from escape at the edges. In a day or
two, when the heap begins to ferment, a steady warmth is
imparted to the soil, and it is ready to receive the seed or
lnter V le , d ‘ As the subsides fresh litter may be
added round the heap, and by repeating this operation from
time to time a regular heat is kept up as long as it is required,
or until the plants are ready for transferring to the open
ground. During fine, mild weather the sash should be raised
so as to admit air and greater light, and to give to the plants
more robust and hardy growth. Every garden should have its
several hot-beds in various stages of decomposition, as
nothing is so useful a fertiliser—suiting nearly all classes of
plants—as the thoroughly decayed remains of an old hot-bed
And, besides this feature, there is that of tidyness, which is
secured by having straw manure placed in a compactly built
neap. In the absence of stable-dung, the thinly-placed turf
ot a pasture, built up in a square heap, forms in time a fine
sweet mouid for every purpose of the flower garden. It may’
alter lying a month or two in the heap, be turned over and be
rebuilt, adding a little soot and lime to destroy wood-lice and
other insect life. Shrubs may still be planted out, but if wet
and cold weather prevail delay the work until the end of
August or beginning of September. This is a good time for
propagating plants in large numbers for bedding purposes.
Though this is the coldest and most trying month of the
year cuttings of all the summer bedding plants may be put in
on a sunny border, and though growth will be slow they will
root and be ready for planting out in spring. It is of great
importance to get out a large breadth of the lobelias. If the
old roots are torn to pieces, and the rooted slips put in a few
inches apart, a good stock of nicely-rooted plants will be
ready for August planting.
Plant Houses.—All the large leaved begonias may be
struck by inserting the leaves in pots of sand, shading, and
watering lightly as directed. Keep the house as dry as
possible without allowing the plants to suffer. Give light and
air on genial days, and keep pansies, primulas, cinerarias, and
calceolarias freely moving forward by shifting to slightly


larger pots as the roots fill the pots. Water all tropical
“foliage” plants with tepid (not warm) water, and encourage
a hardy condition by not overheating the house and giving
air on genial days. Struck cuttings of fuchsias and show
pelargoniums should be moved into larger pots and be
encouraged to form a sturdy, robust habit by being allowed
plenty of air. Mignonette, in pots, should have plenty of
root room, and the young shoots pinched back or tied neatly
out to light rods.
AUGUST.
Propagate for spring planting all the varieties of bedding
plants which of late years have added so much to the beauty
and attractiveness of the garden. Lobelias, myosotis, anchusas,
ageratums, centaurea, nemophila, salvias, cinerarias, echeveriasi
gold and silver edged and zoned pelargoniums, thyme, gazanias’
begonias, daisies, violas, pansies, iresines, geraniums, coleus’
heliotropes, and alternanthera should be propagated in pots
or pans by thousands, as if such have to be bought in quantity
the expense is apt to be a little alarming. Sow lightly of the
chief hardy annuals in patches prepared by having a spade of
good stout loam dropped at the spot designed for the flowers, or
under shade, as previously recommended. Additions to the
stock of roses, and all the shrubs of which specimens may be
desired, should be made, and the plants put at once into
position. Plant for a succession of bloom another lot of
gladiolus, as, with care, these give a wealth of bloom
during ten months of the year. Towards the end of the month
sow the more hardy annuals, and transplant the seedlings from
autumn sown varieties, such as wallflowers, stocks, antirr-
hinums, collinsias, petunias, foxgloves, campanulas, and
others. Give advancing flowering shrubs, such as camellias,
azaleas, and rhododendrons, a light mulching, or water with
a little liquid manure. Look out for slugs among the bulbs,
and especially with hyacinths and liliums, which should now
be .showing young growth.
Plant Houses.—Attend to re-potting, and water more
freely as the temperature of the days increase, but be
jealous of the cold nights, keeping the houses close and free
from draughts, especially from cold westerly winds. Pot off a
few gloxinias and caladiums, keeping pretty dry until growth
sets in. Lilium lancifolium of varieties and auratum should
be deeply potted in a good, rich, sandy compost for house
decoration further on, and advancing hyacinths should receive


a little liquid manure. All the members of the heath family
should be watered lightly and fully exposed to the light and
air. The early plants of cinerarias should be showing for
bloom, and must have copious waterings at the root, avoiding
wetting the foliage, and especially in dull weather.
SEPTEMBER.
The advent of this month should remind the gardener that
he must prepare for finishing off the work of sowing seeds of
flowering plants, the more delicate varieties being reserved for
the end of the month. Keep down green fly on the roses by
syringing, when necessary, with soapy lye, formed of four
ounces of soft soap to a gallon of water. Plant out, from pots
or from layers, young plants of verbenas, pinks, picotees,
and carnations. A reference to the chapters on Australian
plants and bedding out will be very suggestive as to valuable
varieties of plants to select, and this is a good season to
procure them. Start a few dahlia tubers in the frame for
early planting, leaving till November the main lot for planting
out in December or January for late autumn bloom. Sow a
good breadth of mignonette at the backs of the borders. Tie
in all climbing plants to the trellis or structure they are
designed to cover, stake with neat pegs the flower stems of
tulips, ixias, hyacinths, &c., and prick out from the too
crowded patches of annuals such plants as will admit of it.
Especially must weeds be kept down, and lawns mown
and rolled. Walks should be kept free from weeds, and, if
necessary, receive a coat of gravel, being afterwards well
rolled. Towards the end of the month sow seeds of balsams,
amaranthus, cockscombs, and portulaca for subsequently
pricking out.
Plant Houses.—These should now present an aspect of
young, luxuriant growth with abundance of blossom, the
primulas, pansies, cyclamens, hyacinths, heaths, cinerarias,
Ac., being the chief features of the display, while the foliage
plants, coleus, &c., will be lending their aid.
OCTOBER.
The garden should at this time be very gay with bloom, and,
if the varieties of Australian plants enter into the com-
position of the shrubbery, this cannot fail to be the case.
This is the best month to form ribbon and carpet borders and
beds, and if the plants necessary have been raised, as


suggested in August, they will be in nice condition for trans-
ferring. Fuchsias, geraniums, and the numerous show and
fancy pelargoniums may be transferred to the beds, and fresh
sowings be made of the seeds of tender annuals. An occasional
visit to our best nurseries and public gardens will suggest
many desirable plants, the beauty of which a mere catalogue
here would altogether fail to convey to the reader. Prepara-
tions should be made to mulch early all the borders before hot
weather sets in. Trim edgings, and mow lawns as frequently
as growth requires it, on no account neglecting the grass, as a
week’s too much growth will seriously injure the appearance
of the lawn. Keep down all weeds by hoeing on fine, dry,
sunny days.
In the shrubbery great care will be necessary to keep things
growing, and in the absence of rain copious waterings will be
necessary. The vigorous growth of roses and climbing plants
should be pruned back or tied into the trellis or stake. In
the absence of a bush-house, a pit composed of sods of turf is
a valuable protection to this class of plants during the heat of
summer. Plant out in groups of three or four such seedling
annuals as may be too crowded in the patch.
Plant Houses.—Shade during bright days, as the young
foliage at this stage is very susceptible of injury from sun-
glare ; but never retain the shading on the house or frame
longer than is necessary, so as to induce a tender, drawn
condition. Save seeds of choice primulas and cinerarias,
make further cuttings of coleus, and pinch out the leader of
such plants as are desired to form a good rounded head of
foliage. Except on cold nights little artificial heat will be
required, such plants as allamandas, cissus, crotons, gloxinias,
Arc., being the only subjects requiring care in the way of high
temperature and humid atmosphere.
NOVEMBER.
This month should find the garden in perfect order, with
.all work, such as sowing and transplanting, finished, except
as regards dahlias, which, for autumn effect, should be
planted out this and next month, or even as late as January.
The tubers, when started, should be planted in well enriched
soil, and be well protected around by a good dressing of
manure to serve as mulching. Chrysanthemums, from pot-
raised cuttings, may also be put out, treating similarly. The
crowded patches of seedling annuals may be divided and
planted about the borders. Those plants from the early


sowings in the frame, and which were pricked out in
September, will, however, give much better results than those
from the patches in the open borders. Train in all climbers
and tie into neat stakes the rampant growths of shrubs and
flowering plants. Eoses of all kinds may be budded, a very
pretty effect being given to the climbing banksias by budding
thereon any of the popular hybrid perpetual varieties. Sow
again of the pretty variegated maize, and plant out from pots
fuchsias, geraniums, and verbenas, double and single
petunias, and generally the numerous handsome bedding
plants, which will produce splendid effects during the
summer and autumn. Take up all bulbs which have their
foliage withered, and, after carefully drying, shake away the
soil and store in a cool outhouse. Plant out seedlings of
portulaca, cockscombs, and amaranthus of the many showy
kinds, and sow again for subsequently transferring to the
borders. Shade beds of pansies on hot days, and, as the
primulas cease to bloom, plant out in boxes of sandy soil and
remove to a cool, shady spot.
Plant Houses.—Carefully shade by a calico awning, or
whiten the outside of the glass with lime-wash in which a
little paste has been dissolved; this will materially reduce
the day temperature and modify the glare of the sun. This
care will be essential where ferns and palms occupy the
house. The tropical plants, as alocasias, caladiums,
marantas, dracaenas, gloxinias, crotons, etc., must be kept
growing with plenty of moisture. Begonias of all sections
should form a prominent feature of the house. Turn out
occasionally the whole contents of the house and give a
thorough soaking with rain-water, selecting a dull day for
this purpose.
DECEMBER,
There will now remain but little to do in the way of
planting or sowing in the open garden, but shrubs and
herbaceous plants must be thoroughly mulched (see
“ Mulching”).
Eaise and dry off such bulbs as have their foliage withered
and dead; or remove the stems and mark by a tally the spot
occupied by the bulbs. Secure advancing stems of the many
beautiful liliums, phloxes, and dahlias by neatly staking.
Bud roses and the double flowering cherries, plums, peaches,
*c. Water carefully where necessary, but do it thoroughly,
as occasional sprinklings do more injury than good. Strike
* ♦


desirable kinds of pansies and violas under shade, as also
pipings of carnations and picotees. Clip over the too
vigorous growth of lobelias, iresines, and other bedding
plants where such growths are interfering with the definite
outline of the design. Give supplies of liquid manure to
chrysanthemums, dahlias, and hollyhocks, tying neatly in
to stakes.
Plant Houses.—Shading, watering, cleaning the pots,
and destroying insect and fungoid pests on the plants will be
the chief work for the house, taking advantage of cool or
cloudy days to throw open the lights. Fuchsias and show
pelargoniums that have done blooming may be*plunged in
the soil in a shady spot, and receive little or no water until
the wood has matured. Cuttings of the latter may be put in
pots and kept just moist —not wet —under shade until started.
Azaleas, rhododendrons, and camellias must not be allowed
to suffer by getting too dry.
CONCLUDING REMARKS.
There is one point in connection with the Flower Garden
that, perhaps, we have not dwelt upon sufficiently, and that is
the importance of effective contrasts in the character of plants
and the colours of flowers. In planting the shrubbery, and in
the grouping of flowers, the first point to be considered is the
general character or outline of the tree and the tints of the
flowers. It is essential with such plants as the Chrysan-
themum and Dahlia that the colours be well dispersed, so as
to harmonise with themselves and their surroundings. Few
persons, unless they be afflicted with colour-blindness, are
insensible to that beautiful harmony of colour generated by
the contrast of red with Nature’s prevailing green. Red of all
shades, with green in contrast, are to painting and gardening
what the common chord is to music—the most marked and
noticeable of all harmonies. And it is remarkable how beau-
tifully, how artistically the colours of vegetation are arranged.
By far the greater number of flowers are red or ruddy. By
far the greater number of leaves are green; so,'also, are the
grasses, and that colour predominates all Naturp. Blue, as
a floral tint, is comparatively rare, and, as certainly as you


perceive a blue flower, it naturally grows in contrast with tints
which harmonise with it. Blue cornflowers spring side by
side with the crop sere and golden, but red field poppies come
at an earlier season, when the crops are green, so that in
either case the colour arrangements are perfect. Care should,
then, be exercised in the arrangements of shrubs and herba-
ceous plants in the flower garden to have brightly contrasting
colours over the surface of the beds. The modern system of
carpet bedding, described on page 93, owes its effectiveness
purely to the taste exercised in the disposal of the tints of the
plants used. In the same way rbuch may be done to give
interest and variety to the mixed flower border by judicious
arrangement.
Qibbs, Shallard, and Co,, Printers, Pitt Street, Sydney.


THE FRUIT GARDEN:
3V practical (Bmfc*
TO THE PLANTING AND MANAGEMENT OF THE CHIEF
FRUIT-YIELDING PLANTS OF TEMPERATE
AND TROPICAL ZONES.
By WILLIAM CLABSON, F.L.S.
PART I. CONTAINS-
PROPAGATION OF PLANTS
By Cuttings.
By Layeking.
~ Eyes. „ Grafting.
Budding.
HINTS ON PRUNING.
PLANTING.
THE GROUND AND ITS TREATMENT.
HARDY FRUITS:
The Peak. The Cherry. The Currant.
Nectarine. Raspberry. Fig.
Peach. Gooseberry. Almi
Gooseberry. Almond.
Apricot. Strawberry. Olive.
Plum. Mulberry.
LIST OF VARIETIES OF THESE FRUITS SUITABLE
. FOR ORDINARY PLANTING.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
GIBBS, SHALLARD AND. CO.,
70 PITT STREET, SYDNEY.


THE FRUIT GARDEN
PART 11. CONTAINS-
Akee. Durion.
Alligator Pear. Elderberry.
Anchovy Pear. Edgenias.
Native Cherry.
Native Currant
Orange.
Apple. Filbert and Cobnut. Pacane Nut.
Arbutus. “ Five-Corner.” Papaw Apple.
Bananas. Granadilla. Passion Fruit.
Berberry. Ground or Peanut. Persimmon.
Bilberry. Guavas. Pine-Apple.
Blackberry. Herbert Yale Pistachia N
Herbert Yale Pistachia Nut.
Brazilian Cherry. Cherry.
Plaintain.
Brazil Nut. Honeyberry. Pomegranate.
Bread-Fruit. Hovenia.
Butter and Hickory Jack Fruit
Prickly Pear,
Quince.
Nut. Jujube.
Quandong.
Rambutan.
Cape Gooseberry. Leeches.
Carob Bean. Lemon.
Rose Apple.
Sapucaia Nut
Cashew Nut. Lime.
Chestnut. Longa
Longan.
Shaddock and Pome
Citron. Loquat.
Cocoa Nut. Malay Apple. Tamarind.
Crabs, Siberian and Mammee Apple. “ Ten-Corner,
other. Mango. Tomato.
Cranberry. Mangosteen. Vine.
Crat.egus. Martingola Plum. Walnut.
Cucumber. Medlar. Wampee.
Custard Apple. Melon. Wine Palm.
Date Palm. Mocker Nut.
WINE-MAKING. CIDER-MAKING.
HYBRIDISING OR ARTIFICIAL FERTILISATION.
MULCHING AND MANURES.
DRYING AND PRESERVING OF FRUITS.
TABLE OF DISTANCES.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
GIBBS, SEALLARD & CO., 70 Pitt Street, Sydney.


' fctner’s iflloniKti) & iiurnP Jlustcafian’
(under new management),
AN ILLUSTRATED JOURNAL,
DEVOTED TO THE INTERESTS OF THE
Fißfll, §lllll, OlClill, POUTIT,
AND KINDRED SUBJECTS.
PUBLISHED THE FIRST OF EVERY MONTH.
Terms of Subscription—6s. a year, in advance.
DAVID HAZLEWOOD, Proprietor,
16 BOND STREET, SYDNEY.
Specimen Copy Free , on application.
Gr_ MACARTHUE,
MANUFACTURER OF
GARDEN POTS. STANDS, SEED PANS,
And other Horticultural requirements,
CL yde pottery, QAMPERDO WN,
NEAR SYDNEY.
Leichhardt Trams pass the Works.
SILAS SHEATHES,
CAMELLIA GROVE,
PARRAMATTA.
SPECIALTYPIants of all varieties of the Camellia and
Orange sent out in excellent condition. .*


JOHN G. TRESEDER,
NURSERYMAN, SEEDSMAN, & LANDSCAPE GARDENER,
UNDERWOOD NURSERIES, ASH FI ELD.
SEED WAREHOUSE— 19 ROYAL ARCADE, SYDNEY.
Fruit Trees, a large stock, clean, healthy, and well grown. Shelter
Trees in great variety, especially hardy and fast growing. Trees and
Shrubs suitable for all Climates. Roses, all the newest and best, a fine
healthy stock and in great variety. Camellias, finevigorous Plants of the
best kinds. Flowering Bulbs, in Anemones, Crocus, Hyacinths, Ixias,
Tulips, Ranunculus, &c., &c. Seeds of all kinds ; the best procurable only
kept in stock.
The Laying-out and Furnishing of Gardens undertaken by Contract.
Gardeners sent out. Your Orders will oblige.
H u straficiii Journal/'
A FAMILY PERIODICAL OF LITERATURE,
SCIENCE, AND ART.
% ,
THIS long established and popular Journal has done more to
encourage Australian literature and develop native genius
than any other literary enterprise in the country.
It numbers amongst its contributors the most accomplished
and SUCCESSFUL WRITERS OF THE DAY, who for the most
part achieved their reputation in its columns.
The serial tales are always vigorous in thought, full of inci-
dent and creation, and complete portraitures of life in various
grades and classes of society.
It abounds in short and graphic sketches, amusing literature
generally, fashion notes, hints for the household, recipes for
cooking, health, &c., and a vast collection of varied and useful
information concerning many things.
Issued in Monthly Parts. Price 6d., or 6s. 6d. per Annum.
Published by GIBBS, SHALLARD & CO.,
Pitt Street, Sydney.
May be ordered through News Agents anywhere, or ditect
from the Publishers.


Advertisements,
GOODLET & SMITH,
TIMBER, GALVANIZED IRON, PLATE AND
SHEET GLASS MERCHANTS,
493 61911 STREET, SIDIEY.
CO
tu
CO
rs
O
x
uj d
_l ««
< d
2 «>"
“■ LLI
Ll_ CO
O =>
coO
Si
cc W
rj m
h- °=
O C 3
c
u_
X
z
<
PLATE GLASS, BRITISH SILVERED PLATE,
in Large Sizes.
ROLLED & ROUGH CAST PLATE,
LARGE VARIETY OF ORNAMENTAL GLASS
GLASS STAINED & EMBOSSED ~
TO ANY DESIGN,


