

GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY OF AUSTRALASIA.
NEW SOUTH WALES BRANCH.
THE IMPORTANCE OF GEOGRAPHY:
BY
SIR EDWARD STRICKLAND, K.C.8., F.R.G.S.,
PRESIDENT OF ROYAL GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY, AUSTRALASIA.
h* 3—87




The Importance of Geography.
By Sir Edward Strickland, K.C.8., F.R.G.S. President of Royal
Geographical Society, A”"tralas'
If we were asked to state what, next to Euclid, was the driest,
and consequently the hardest task we were called upon to learn
at school, the majority of us would probably answer, geography
Most of us have a vivid remembrance of the weary half-hour,
generally preceding the conclusion of the day’s toil, in which the
dullest of the teachers tortured us with the dullest of his tasks,
and endeavoured to imprint on our memories the names of all the
capitals of the world, and all the rivers to boot.
Names of cities, heights of mountains, lengths of rivers, and all
the thousand-and-one statistics connected therewith, which crowded
the pages of the wearisome text-book which the master .constantly
used, were doled out to us without stint, till our heads literally
ached with the undigested and undigestible ware they were made
to contain, and we wished geography at Jericho, and would gladly
have sent the teacher on a voyage of excursion to a similarly
remote spot. The dullness of the former methods of teaching
geography has been admirably described by the late Mr. J. R.
Green, in his introduction to the “ Short Geography of the British
Islands:—
“ No drearier task can be set for the worst of criminals than that
of studying a set of geographical text-books such as the children
in our schools are doomed to use. Pages of ‘ tables,’ ‘ tables’
of heights, and ‘ tables’ of areas, ‘ tables’ of mountains, and
‘ tables’ of tablelands, ‘ tables’ of numerals which look like
arithmetical problems, but are really statements of population ;
these, arranged in an alphabetical order or disorder, form the only
breaks in a chaotic mass of what are amusingly styled ‘ geo-
graphical ’ facts, which turn out simply to be names—names of
rivers and names of hills, names of counties and names of
towns —a mass rarely brought into grammatical shape by the needful
verbs and substantives, and dotted over with isolated phrases
about mining here and cotton-spinning there, which pass for
Industrial Geography. Books such as these, if books they must
be called, are simply appeals to memory ; they are handbooks of
mnemonics, but they are in no sense handbooks of geography.”
In fact geography was at one time almost universally, and still
is to a very large extent in our English schools, taught in such a
way that it is looked upon by every school-boy as a bete noir. And
yet it can undoubtedly be made the most interesting study of all,
and second to none as a means of educating the faculties and
developing the mind. For insignificant as is the position occupied
sh* 3—87


in most of our schools by geography, it is after all the most
comprehensive of the sciences, since it embraces and includes
almost all the others. It is the central sun round which the other
sciences circulate like so many contributory planets. It would be
difficult indeed to say what geography does not include since a
description of the earth would be incomplete without a knowledge
of the elements of which it is composed, and necessarily comprises
an understanding of its natural features, of the different races of
beings by which it is inhabited, and of the part which they have
played in the past history of the globe.
I do not mean to say that an accurate acquaintance with all the
multitudinous details of each particular science is necessary to a
right understanding of geography, but it is, I think, self-evident
that any system of geography worthy of the name will embrace a
general view of the other sciences with which it is so intimately
allied. It is only within very recent years that this comprehen-
sive view of geography has been taken even in Germany and
Austria, where the importance of geography is very well understood,
and where it takes a very much higher rank in the educational
systems than it does at home.
Formerly geography was studied principally in its relation to
history ; now it is going the other way about, and is frequently
taught in connection with geology, although geography really begins
where geology leaves off, the objects of the two sciences being
entirely distinct. Rightly understood, geography should be made
a special study by itself, and professors of geography should be as
well known and I may say, as well paid, in our Universities as
professors of any other science.
Dr. A. Geikie, F.R.S., Director-General of Geological Survey,
and author of the well-known text-book on physical geography,
says “ that the forms of the land and their origin, the climates of
the globe, the distribution of plants and animals, and the causes
that have regulated it; the influences of the variations of climate,
soil, and topography upon the history of man; the reaction of man
upon nature; these, and a thousand other connective problems
form the subject of the highest kind of geography.” You will see
therefore that I am not alone in my view of the importance and
comprehensive nature of this, to me, extremely interesting science.
One of the reasons why geography is regarded with such little
favour in our schools is that it is supposed to be almost valueless
for purposes of intellectual discipline, compared, for example, with
the studies of language and literature; but if teachers were
properly trained and scholars were properly taught, this impression,
■which I need hardly say, is entirely erroneous, would soon dis-
appear, and it would be found to be as valuable a subject as any
included in the ordinary school curricula. As the Re v. Dr. Jex-blake,
■the successor of Dr. Arnold, at Rugby, somewhere observes, “ No


one could understand the political history of a country without
being acquainted with the geographical facts that had made the
towns, and when he was a boy, he never dreamed of being able to
get through even a Greek play lesson, much less a page of
Thucidides or Livy without knowing the lay of the land.” That
geography sheds a much needed and brilliant light on history, has
long been a well recognised fact, but physical geography, or that
important branch of the science which deals with the natural
characteristics of the earth, has rarely met with that attention
which it deserves at the hands of our Universities or higher-class
schools. Professor Freeman, the eminent historian, a master in
one of our most famous schools at home, says, “ that more than
half of his history teaching is geography; ” and in his well-
known historical atlas he demonstrated the intimate connection
between the two. The late Mr. J. R. Green, too, the famous
author of the “ Short History of the English People,” also ably
illustrated the same intimate connection, in the admirable little
work from which I quoted a few minutes ago.
According to this writer, geography is the natural starting-
ground of education. “ Studied,” he says, “in such a fashion
as this, geography would furnish a ground-work for all after
instruction. It is, in fact, the natural starting-point for all
the subjects of later training. History strikes its roots in
geography; for without a clear and vivid realization of the
physical structure of a country the incidents of the life which
men have lived in it can have no interest or meaning. Through
history, again, politics strike their roots in geography, and many
a rash generalization would have been avoided had political
thinkers been trained in a knowledge of the earth they live in,
and of the influence which its varying structure must needs exert
on the varying political tendencies and institutions of the people
who part its empire between them : nor are history or politics the
only studies which start naturally from such a ground-work.
Physical science will claim every day a larger share in our
teaching; and science finds its natural starting-point in that
acquaintance with primary physics which enables a child to know
how earth and the forms of earth came to be what they are. Even
language, hindrance as its premature and unintelligent study has
been till now to the progress of education, will form the natural
consummation of instruction when it falls into its proper place as
the pursuit of riper years, and is studied in its historical and geo-
graphical relations. ‘ Such a dream of education will, doubtless,
long remain a dream; but, even as a dream, it may help us to
realize the worth of geograghy, and to look on the study of it in a
grander as well as a more rational light than has commonly been
done. It is, at any rate, such a dream as this that has encouraged
its writers to attempt the present book.’ ”


-Here in the Colonies the study of geography is of especial
importance, and it comes home to each one of us in a way that
could hardly he the case in an old country where almost all the
problems connected with the commercial, industrial, and physical
aspect of the science have been long mastered and understood.
But here geography is a living science, we have still vast areas that
are either wholly unexplored, or else so imperfectly known by our
travellers, that stories of interesting and valuable information
await the explorer who brings to his task not only the energy and
endurance, which so many of his predecessors have displayed
before him, but that practical knowledge and grasp of the relative
importance of things to be observed, which only a scientifically
trained mind can ever hope to acquire.
Commercial or industrial geography is another very important
branch of the question, which should not be overlooked when we
emember that however interesting to the geographical enthusiast
an extension of. our geographical knowledge may be, yet this
alone will not help the merchant or small trader much ■ and after
all the backbone of the country is made up of merchants and
small traders, and not of geographical enthusiasts like myself.
A knowledge of the products of the earth and their uses, which
is a part of commercial geography, is taught in our Public Schools,
where by means of special apparatus and object lessons, such as
Pestalozzi, the great Swiss educationalist, introduced, this is made
one of the most interesting portions of the curriculum. But
after all this is only one aspect of the subject, and I need hardly
say a considerable improvement might be made even in our Public
Schools in the way in which geography is treated, as a whole.
In England the position of geography, as of other subjects in
primary schools, has greatly improved since the State undertook
the charge of elementary education.
Geography has been made compulsory, and must be taught
according to a generally prescribed method, which, if carried out
everywhere with intelligence and enthusiasm, would be nearly all
that could be desired. In the London, Birmingham, Edinburgh,
and Glasgow Board Schools, for example, great progress has been
made, based to a considerable extent on what is known in
Germany as the “ Heimatskunde ” —a pretty little phrase, which
sounds very scientific, and which really means “ Information
concerning the locality in which one resides.” The term is, in
fact, thoroughly German, and I may add thoroughly philosophical.
Instead of going to Greek and Latin sources for their scientific
terms, as we do, with the result that none but the initiated under-
stand the words we use, the Germans manufacture their scientific
terms for themselves by simply, as in the case before us, combining
words from their own language, which hit off their meaning to
perfection. “ Heimatskunde ”is a perfect instance of this happy


peculiarity on the part of our German friends. The teacher’s
whole philosophy is comprised in this single word. There are
few spots on the globe so favourably situated as Sydney for the
teaching of geography and the allied sciences, especially geology
by this method.
The essence of the German system is that the near is a sample
of the remote, and that if you once understand the meaning o:
that which lies around you, you will be in a fair way of mastering
that which lies beyond. If this be the case, as I think I
undoubtedly is, I think I am right in saying that in having
Sydney, as a sample-ground from which to understand the
mechanism of the world, we are singularly fortunate, and tha
here, ir anywhere, such a system should meet with more than
ordinary success.
Every .Field-naturalist’s excursion is, though the members may
not know it, an instance of the “ Heimatskunde ” method on a
small scale, and decidedly one of the greatest English professors of
the system, though the term by which it is known was not invented
in his days, was the Rev. Chas. Kingsley, priest, scientist, novelist,
and poetist combined. The Board Schools at home are much
better off in this respect than the higher schools. In each of the
London Board Schools, for example, may be seen a map of the
neighbourhood, a map of the school, a map of the division in which
the school is situated, and a map of London and its environs. In
some of the Board Schools may be large-scale maps of the surround-
ing district, relief-maps of various kind, not always of a satisfactory
character, large wall-pictures of a geographical nature, specimens
of products, mineral and vegetable, raw and manufactured, and a
fair stock of wall-maps which, in number at least, says an inspector
who recently inspected the schools, are in marked contrast to the
empty walls of most of our great public schools. The inspector
however, thought that too much importance still attached to books
and too little to good large-scale wall-maps, geographical pictures,
good reliefs, accurate and carefully executed sheet-maps or atlasses,
and the living voice of the teacher himself. The Education
Department at home have indeed done much towards spreading
correct notions on geographical subjects among the masses of the
English people.
The attention of the lower forms in the Board Schools is, of
course, mainly given to elementary facts, couched in general terms,
but in the higher forms special reference is made to the colonies. 5
“It is especially desirable ” says the department in its revised
instructions to Her Majesty’slnspectors issued in 1885 ; instructions
which reflect the highest credit in the intelligence of the depart-
ment, “It is especially desirable that attention should be called to
the English Colonies, their productions, government, and resources,
and to those climatic and other conditions which render our
distant possessions suitable fields for emigration and for honorable
enterprise.”


Above tlie primary schools, however, the teaching of geography
is very imperfect, very few of the higher schools at home, with
the exception, perhaps, of Dulwich College, Liverpool College,
Gordons Hospital, Aberdeen, and one or two others, paying
anything like _ the attention to geography which its importance
deserves. It is a very significant fact that there is not a single
professorship of geography in any of the Universities or Colleges
throughout England, while almost every important educational
centre on the Continent is provided with a special representative
of this truly fascinating science. In neither of our Universities
at Oxford or Cambridge is geography properly recognized, while
in the London University it is almost ignored. Cambridge is,
perhaps, in this respect, a little better off than Oxford. Lectures
being occasionally delivered there on the subject by one of the
staff. I am glad to say, however, that the subject has a well-
defined place in the Oxford and Cambridge School Examinations,
which have done so much to influence and improve the state of
education throughout England for many years past.
Much has been done, too, by the Royal Geographical Society to
improve the status of geography of late years. In 1869 the
Society commenced issuing medals for proficiency in Geography in
Public Schools, and although these were discontinued in 1884
owing to the unsatisfactory nature of the results, yet the study of
geography undoubtedly received a stimulus which it otherwise
would not have had. The Society also promoted the delivery of
lectures by eminent specialists in various departments of science
relating to geography, and did its very utmost to induce the governing-
bodies of the Universities to establish Geographical chairs. The
last effort made by the Society to further the good work was the
appointment of an inspector, who was instructed to visit the
leading schools in England and abroad, and to report to the Society
on the position occupied by geography generally throughout
Europe. Mr. J. Scott Keltie was the gentleman selected to carry
out this important work, and one of the results of his labours was
the holding of an exhibition in London, which was opened by the
Marquis of Lome, as President of the Society, and at which
specimens of the appliances used in geographical education in
England and on the Continent were displayed. The object of the
exhibition, which was held last year, was to enable teachers and
others interested in the improvement of geographical education to
obtain information as to the various appliances in use, and to com-
pare the maps and other objects produced in England with those in
use in the leading countries on the Continent; the exhibition, in fact,
was purely educational, and with one or two exceptions, only such
objects were shown as were in actual use in the schools. The
information obtained by Mr. Keltie during his tour of inspection
of the Continent was exceedingly intern ting and valuable, and I


will endeavour to give as brief a summary of it as possible. He
says that, so far as Great Britain is concerned, Professor Moseley’s
statement still holds good that geography is almost entirely
neglected as a subject of education, the only places where it is
anything like properly taught being elementary schools, the high
schools for girls, and isolated middle-class schools. In his report of
the examination for the Society’s medals in 1884, he says it is
almost hopeless to expect that schools will do it justice until it is
recognized at the Universities and scholarships and other induce-
ments are open to those proficient in it. In a previous report
Professor Moseley had already stated that the neglect of geography
at the Universities naturally led to its neglect in most of the
principal schools ; there were no scholarships or fellowships to be
won by it, and thus instead of ousting from the time worn
curricula subjects far less fitting both as means of mental training
and as useful acquisitions, geography had allotted to it in the
weekly routine in these schools probably only a meagre couple of
hours.
Germany.
One of the principal countries visited by Mr. Scott Keltie was
Germany, which may be taken, he says, as the model which all the
other Continental countries are following as far as their especial
circumstances will permit. The idea aimed at, and indeed being
rapidly carried out, is to have one continuous course of geographi-
cal instruction from the youngest school year up to the University.
The elementary stage or “ Heimatskunde ” is met with in,
practically, all primary schools in Germany and in the preparatory
classes of the higher schools, and this stage is rapidly finding
its way into the corresponding schools of most other Continental
countries. There are at least t welve Professors of Geography in
Germany, that is, in more than half the total number of Univer-
sities, nearly all of which, curious to relate, have been founded dur-
ing the last twelve years. The methods and appliances used in the
Universities, colleges, and schools, are far superior to those in use in
similar institutions at home. In a lecture on appliances used in
teaching geography, delivered by Mr. Keltie at the exhibition
already referred to, the lecturer gave a very instructive list of the
maps and other apparatus in use; first, in the geographical class of
a German University; secondly, in a German high school; and
lastly, in a German elementary school. “In order to give you an
idea of the apparatus used at a German University,” says Mr.
Keltie, “ I should have to select hundreds of the best staff maps
of the various countries of the world ; a hundred or two of the best
wall maps issued both in Germany and abroad; a formidable
stock of smaller maps constructed by the professor and his
students for special purposes—meteorological, botanical, zoological,


o fwl ogr i ap l lCa ’ &C - ; . a sefc of tlie best atlases obtainable:
ail the best geographical pictures issued; hundreds of photo-
graphs and engravings illustrating the features of all the regions
ot the globe ; some of the best reliefs and models exhibited
ere,, seveial sets of apparatus for castographical work; a
o ding blackboard extending all the length of this room, with
ample supply of coloured chalks; a library of some hundreds of
selected geographical works; ethnological busts, pictures, imple-
ments, weapons, &c., mineralogical specimens, globes, projection
apparatus, and. a variety of other objects, only to be found in
museums in this country, if found at ail.
For a Idealschule or gymnasium you will find lists in the
appendix to my report.
“ Select from the walls sixty or eighty of the best maps, add
twenty to forty maps, including separate wall maps of every
country of Europe, half-a-dozen or so of the best English maps
ot the British Isles, American maps of the United States, other
specia maps. Take in tlie fifty or so geographical pictures you
see on that screen, and add the so-called historical pictures in
b ° rt 5 opo ( 60 111 ab ), used also in geographical teaching; this
relief of Central Europe; that glacier and volcanic island, not
to mention smaller reliefs ; ethnological pictures and busts; large
pictures of representative specimens of animals and plants; series
of photos., with probably hundreds of mounted cuttings from The
Graphic and Illustrated London News, and the German and
f rench illustrated papers ; implements and weapons ; specimens of
savage texti e manufactures and clothing; models of savage
n ' e in S s ) globes (relief and plain) ; tellurimus ; and various odds
and ends helping to lend interest to geographical lessons. My
mission referred specially to middle-class and higher schools, but
I visited a few elementary schools.
“In a } ar ge Leipzig school of this class I found a store of
apparatus m a large room used for the purpose scarcely inferior in
quality and variety to that just catalogued.
“Need I give you the scanty and unattractive picture with
which we are all too familiar on this side of the North Sea, in
our higher schools—a seedy map or two, or it may be half-a-dozen
gaily coloured sheets.
“.Happily in some middle-class and elementary schools things
are improving, but we are far from the German or Swiss, or even
French or Italian, standard, either in quantity or quality.”
An essential part of the “ Heimatskunde,” to which I have
already referred as the basis of geographical teaching in German
schools, is the taking of the pupils on excursions to the surround-
ing districts, and occasionally on somewhat protracted tours.


With their maps in their hands they identify the leading
features become personally acquainted with the cities, rivers!
districts, and manufactories about which they have read.
This plan is carried out in Germany, France, and even Spain.
Austria.
Austria, says Mr. Keltie, is following fast on the heels of Ger-
many m the extent to which geography is taking its place in all
grades of education, and as to the methods adopted in teaching it
It Germany has twelve professors, Austria has eight; the educa-
tional system pursued in the two countries being essentially the
same. The ground covered in the Universities does not, however
appear to be quite so extensive, it seems to be mostly confined to
Europe, and largely to Austria, the physical aspect of the question
being more dwelt upon than the political or historical one Geo-
graphy is taught m all the schools, but here, Mr. Keltie thinks it
is associated to too large an extent with history. However, some
of the best text-books, school war-maps, atlasses, and geographical
apparatus come from Austria. I may add that Vienna possesses,
wJiat is probably the leading commercial academy of the world
attended by about 900 students, many of them from abroad. The
geographical course extends over three years. Professor Zehden
who is the author of a large text-book of commercial geography is
m charge of the academy. As in all the best schools in Germany
and Austria there rs a speciai room for geographical apparatus,
where Mr Keltie found about 150 maps, all of the best class, includ-
ing special maps from various foreign countries.
. France.
-In f° country, says Mr. Keltie, has the progress in geographical
education been greater than in France during the last fourteen
years In 1 871 an official report, which had been called for the
Minister of Education, was made to the Government, the result of
personal inspection of the position of geography in French schools
and U niversities.
The report stated that geography was scarcely taught in France
at all. At the time of the first Republic it had occupied an im-
portant place on education, but after that it had gradually dropped
This state of things has been completely altered since then and
now geography finds a substantial place in the programme of every
school. While the official programmes for the various classes of
schools are comprehensive enough, the economic and military
aspects of the subject dominate for reasons obvious enough to
those acquainted with the history and social conditions of France.


Both in the earlier and the more advanced stages, however,
there seems to be a lack of the variety arid thoroughness which
mark the teaching of geography in German schools. The former
are not, as a rule, so plentifully supplied with maps as their Ger-
man rivals. Text-books have been considerably improved of late
years, though there remains much to be done before France comes
up to Germany and Austria. Paris has also its commercial college,
not far behind that of Vienna, in which geography holds an all
important place. Mr. Keltie thinks that while there is still room
for improvement in the method of teaching, geography is never-
theless everywhere regarded throughout France as a serious study,
and that in time, France will be, in this respect, on a par with
the most progressive countries in Europe. I may add that there
are nine professors engaged in the Universities and Colleges of
France.
Italy.
What has been said of France, writes the inspector, applies
equally to Italy, where the progress of education in recent years has
been of the most radical and hopeful character.
The progress has, however, been greater in elementary than in
the higher schools, though in the latter the subject is gradually
finding a place similar to that which it has in France. All the
best features and best methods have been imported from Germany,
and maps of German origin with Italian nomenclature have been
largely introduced, There are no less than twelve professors of
geography in Italy, the course being somewhat similar to that
which prevails in the leading German Universities.
Military and Naval Academies.
It has frequently been said that the Franco-German War was
fought as much by maps as by weapons, which the Germans won
in a great measure owing to their thorough knowledge of all the
geographical features of the country over which they moved. One
of the lessons to be learned from that war was the importance of
a study of geography in our military academies, for as Chief
Justice Daly pointed out in his address to the American Geo-
graphical Society, if the fate of a nation may depend upon a battle,
a battle may depend on a knowledge of geography. It would be
interesting, therefore, to see what position geography holds in
the Military Academies of Europe. In the French superior
school of war, corresponding to our Staff College, as well as in the
special military school at St. Cyr, geography is the most important
subject taught, and the examinations for entrance to the French
Academies named, as also to the French Naval School, are far
more severe than is the case at any stage in England, although


not more severe than is the examination for entrance to the
Military Academy in Berlin, where the importance of a sound
knowledge of political and physical geography, far beyond that
with which a youth leaves his school to enter the English Academy
is insisted on. In the English Staff College frontier geography
and military surveying are most effectively taught, but there is no
guaiantee that our military and naval officers enter on their career
with more than the most elementary knowledge of general
geography.
I find, says Mr. Keltie, that in none of the schools for the
education of our naval and military officers does geography find
a place of any importance, exhibiting a marked contrast in this
respect to most of the corresponding institutes on the Continent.
In the Austrian Cadet School in Vienna the methods are very
good. In the Naval and Technical School at Genoa, geography is
particularly well cared for, but in the Military School of Turin,
though there are plenty of reliefs and other apparatus, a general
geography does not occupy the important place which it does in
the French Military Schools.
Switzerland.
The educational system of Switzerland differ in each canton,
but geography occupies an important position in several, especially
m that of Zurich, where a professor is attached to the University.
It is best taught, however, in the lower schools, where an improved
German method is used. The text-book of elementary geography
or Heimatskunde in use at Zurich, is one of the best and most
comprehensive issued on the Continent, while one of the schools
visited by Mr. Keltie, possessed what is probably one of the finest
combined museums and laboratories to be found in any similar
institution in Europe. Randegger’s maps, which are in general
use, are unsurpassed, while Randegger’s carto-graphic establish-
ment at Winterthur is one of the very best of its kind
Other Countries.
In Holland and Belgium geography is tolerably well taught in
the elementary schools, but there are no special professors attached
to the State Universities, although there is a Professor of Indus-
trial Geography at Liege, and it is believed that professorships of
geography will shortly be established in the Belgium Universities.
In Sweden geography occupies a still less important position.
There is no geographical chair attached to either of the Univer-
sities, geography being generally taught in connection with history.
In Spain methods of teaching geography are improving, French
maps and Geiman text-books are in great repute, and the teaching


of geography is widely different. In American schools geography
appears to be taught in a very unsatisfactory manner, and there
appears to be abundant room for improvement in this regard
throughout the State.
Conclusion.
I have now placed before you all the information bearing on
the position occupied by geography throughout Europe in as brief
a manner as is possible to me. The conclusion is overwhelming that
Germany, Austria, France, Italy, many of the Swiss cantons,
and even Spain, are far ahead of the mother country in this
respect, and that whether regarded from a physical, political, or
commercial point of view geography is far more intelligently
studied in the countries I have named than it is among ourselves
It is more than probable that the efforts of the Royal
Geographical Society at home will result before long in a
very great change for the better being made. The mere
publication of the report from which a great deal of the
information contained in the present paper has been called,
and the holding of the exhibition of geographical appliances
to which I have referred, must have the effect of showing the
English people how backward they are in this respect, and it can
hardly be doubted tint the head society will ultimately succeed in
procuring the establishment of chairs of geography in the
Universities of Oxford and Cambridge. The appointment of
professors of geography in the Universities will at once result in
increased interest being felt in the higher branches of the subject,
and in increased attention being paid to its tuition in those great
middle-class schools whence the Universities draw their annual
supplies. In the present depressed state of the colony we can
hardly expect that any large funds will be diverted towards
establishing such a chair in the University here, but there is no
reason why the public should not extend its sympathy and
practical support on behalf of a society such as this which has the
cause of geography so much at heart, and which is peculiarly fitted
tp promote that cause in a manner which shall redound to the
advantage of the Colony, not only from a scientific, but also from
a commercial and industrial point of view. In equipping and
sending out an expedition to New Guinea, the Society has already
done at any rate something towards solving a few of the
important problems which surround us on every side. We have
the testimony of leading scientific men as to the value of the
collections brought back by the party which the Society sent out,
and of the importance and value of the geographical discoveries
made by them. Baron von Mueller, Professor Wilkinson, the
Government Geologist, and Mr. Ramsay respectively inspected the


botanical, geological, and ethnological specimens, and pronounced
them to be of great and undoubted scientific value. But
after all that was only a single effort, and much more, very
much more, remains to be done. There is an unusually
vast field for the labours of a Geographical Society in a new
country like this. I have already pointed out in the first part of
this paper what an immense amount of information of the most
valuable kind awaits the scientific explorer on Australian soil.
Here there is so much that is strange and new. Our fauna and
flora—our birds, our beasts, and our plants—differ in so many
important respects from those in any other part of the world that
it must be long before we can hope to exhaust all there is to be
known concerning the dwellers on the surface, and with all that
dwells on the surface of the globe the science of geography neces-
sarily deals. Then there is the immense store of minerals—gold
and silver, diamonds and precious stones —which nature has
scattered so profusely all around, which are probably destined to
form a chief source of wealth, and which already stand in pro-
minent rivalry with the leading mineral fields in the world. Fresh
discoveries are being made every day, and doubtless rich fields yet
await the explorer who, with a proper knowledge of the conditions
under which minerals are formed—for each mineral has more or
less its allotted place in the geological strata of the globe—shall go
about his quest in an intelligent manner, and with scientifically
trained eyes. Coal, too, which is the primary source of the com-
merce and manufactures, and consequently of the commercial
greatness of Great Britain, we have in abundance, but there is no
reason why further important discoveries may not be made in this
direction as well. Of the importance of geographical research to
commerce in a new country like this one could dilate at con-
siderable length. To explorers we owe our first knowledge of the
existence of the land, and to explorers we look for an answer to
the question how it may be best turned to profitable account. Our
explorers, in fact, are like the spies sent by Joshua into Palestine to
spy out the land, and according to their report we estimate the capa-
bilities of the soil. They lead, we follow. We owe to them our
knowledge of the mountain masses, of the river courses, and of
the great trackless plains. They discover our gold, our silver, and
our coal, and instantly commerce rears her altar—travel-stained
pioneers flock in and worship, towns spring up as by enchant-
ment, and industry and wealth, accompanied as ever by poverty
and pain, may now be seen instead of the former desert waste.
The vista opened up by regarding geography from this compre-
hensive standpoint is nearly boundless, inasmuch as almost every-
thing that is at all worth knowing about the land in which we
live is included within the meaning of the term. Till we have
made ourselves acquainted with all the varied life that breathes


and plants that bloom on this fertile land of ours we can hardly
be said to have thoroughly mastered the geography of Australia.
As it is, we are ignorant of the very surface configuration and
form of the land in many parts ; while the strange forms of
animal, insect, and vegetable life which go through their appointed
rounds—start into being, flourish for a brief while, decay and die—
throughout the vast interior of Australia are, many of them,
equally unknown. Not, however, till we have thoroughly probed
the secrets which lie around us in every direction, and which
nature has scattered about for our investigation with so lavish a
hand, will the need for a Society such as this cease. What do we
know of the laws which govern the distribution of life over our
vast inland territory ; what of the causes which have led to the
diversion which has taken place in the forms that now people this
portion of the globe 1 All this lies within the scope of geography,
and may be properly included within the field of geographical
research side by side with inquiries into the area of water-sheds
and the trend of mountain chains. There are other and more
interesting and more important problems to be learned respecting
a country than the length of its longest river and the height of its
loftiest mass of rock. As there are other and more important facts
to be learned in history than the names of the kings, so are there
other and more important facts to be learned in geography than the
names of the towns. The sciences, indeed, act and interact upon each
other. History, which treats of the deeds of a people, is as fre-
quently moulded by geography, which treats of the form of the
land in which the people reside, as in geography itself, by that
latest born of the sciences, which traces the origin of the earth’s
crust to conditions existent in an almost boundless past. With-
out going any further I think I have shown what an important
work lies before a Geographical Society in a new country like
this. An ideal society, such as I have occasionally pictured to
myself, would soon make itself indispensible in our midst. It
would be a recognized centre for the gathering and dissemination
of information bearing on geographical points; it would be
the common meeting ground of explorers and those who assist
them in carrying on this important work, and it could not but
conduce very materially to the progress of geographical research.
In the rooms of the Society would be found the best appliances
for teaching every aspect of the science—the best text-books, the
best reliefs, and the best maps—and any scheme tending to the
advancement of physical, commercial, or industrial geography in
Australia would find in the Society its due meed of encourage-
ment and support. But, in order to carry out this ideal, the public
must assist the Society in a very different manner to what they
have hitherto done. We do not ask for grants of money or land.
We do not ask for handsome donations and substantial gifts,


although we would not pledge ourselves to refuse them if put in
our way. We are much more modest in our demands. All we
ask is that the public shall become members of the Society, and
shall contribute their guinea a-piece, in return for which they will
have access to our library, to our meetings, and to our rooms; they
will he heartily welcome at our social and scientific re-unions;
they will be entitled to copies of our printed papers and publica-
tions on geographical subjects, and they will have the satisfaction
of furthering what, I think you will agree with me, it is, when
properly carried out, a very great and important work.
E. STRICKLAND.






