

;„yS- /.fy •; .. t £ ,
'
T H E
MINES OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
INCLUDING ALSO AN
ACCOUNT OF THU
Jtoflthig hi tot O|olaiii|;
TOGETHER WITH
A BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE COUNTRY,
INCIDENTS OF TRAYEL IN THE BUSH.
ILLUSTRATED BY A MAP.
By J. B. AUSTIN.
C. PLATTS, 15. S. WIGG, G. DEHANE, J. HOWELL, W. C. RTGBY,
G. MULLETT, AND ALL BOOKSELLERS.
Melbourne, Paris, akd New York : F. F. BAILLIERE, Publisher xn Ordinary
to the Victorian Government.
SYDNEY: A. CUBITT, and G. SANDS. Tasmania: WALCII & SONS.
London : LONGMAN & CO., Paternoster- Row.
AND ALL BOOKSELLERS.
MDCCCLXIII,
First 'Edition of Three Thousand .]


E. S. WIG <}.
DaoKseller, Stxiiamx, $ §.ccountfaooK gtinmfadurer.
12, BUNDLE-STREET, ADELAIDE.
BOOKS, MAGAZINES, and NEWSPAPERS, ordered by
every Overland Mail to England, and executed by Return Mail.
Subscriptions, payable in advance, received on the most Liberal
Terms,
The STANDARD LITERATURE of the Day, and SCHOOL
BOOKS, coming by the less expensive Sea Route, are, for the
most part, sold at English Published Prices. A Stock of from
8,000 to 10,000 volumes of the Publications of the Religious Tract
Society and the Sunday School Union is always kept on hand,
and are uniformly sold at English Rates, with a discount to
Stores.
A Eurther Stock is kept of Several Thousand Volumes,
selected with great care, for Rewards in Eamilies and Day and
Sunday Schools. Close attention to this department, during 21
years, has enabled E. S. WIGG to make this selection as useful
as possible, and merits particular attention from Parents and
Guardians of Youth.
RELIGIOUS TRACTS sold at 400 pages for Is.
English and Colonial-made Accountbooks, Memorandumbooks,
&c., in Great Variety.
Eoolscaps, Letter, and Note Papers; Account-book Papers ;
a Stock of 300,000 Envelopes from 4s. per Thousand.
1131“ The Largest Assortment of Drawing Papers, Drawing
Materials, and Mathematical Instruments in the Colony.
The time having come, when the demand for HOMCEOPATHIC
MEDICINES has called for a Dispensary for their sale and
preparation, E. S. WIGG has added a department to the other
branches of his business where, in addition to the sale of
Globules, Pilules, and Tinctures, prepared by Messrs. H. Turner
& Co., the celebrated Chemists of Manchester and London, he
makes Dilutions from the original (or Mother Tinctures) pre-
pared by Messrs. Turner & Co., of London, and Messrs. Jaler &
Gruner, of Leipsic, from which he medicates Pilules and
Globules, to the various potencies desired. E. S. WIGG is glad to
find the Medicines thus prepared act more certainly and promptly
than those which, being prepared in England, have had to
experience the detriorating effects by lapse of time and a sea
voyage.


MINES OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
INCLUDING ALSO AN ACCOUNT OF THE
Snu'ltiug tilorjw in that 0[olong;
TOGETHER WITH
A BRIEF" DESCRIPTION OE THE COUNTRY,
INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL IN THE BUSK.
ILLUSTRATED BY A MAP.
By J. B. AUSTIN.
ADELAIDE:
€. PLATTS, E. S. WIGG, G. DEHANE, J. HOWELL, W. C. RIGBY,
G. MULLETT, AND ALL BOOKSELLERS.
Melbourne, Paris, and New York : r. F. BAILLIERE, Publisher in Ordinary
to the Victorian Government.
Sydney: A. OUBITT, and G. SANDS. Tasmania: WALCH & SONS.
London : LONGMAN & CO., Paternoster- How.
AND ALL BOOKSELLERS.
MBCCCIim.
First Edition of Three TUonsond.]
1




DEDICATION
(bt permission)
TO HIS EXCELLENCY SIE DOMINICK DALY,
Knight, Governor-in-Chief of the Province of South Australia, and
Vice-Admiral of the same.
The high position which you occupy in this Province
naturally suggests the desirability of dedicating to your Excellency
a work on the Mines of the Colony ; hut independently of your
official position, another reason is found in the warm interest
shown by your Excellency in everything pertaining to the welfare
of South Australia.
It is a happy circumstance for the Colony to be blest with a
Governor who can appreciate the importance of the objects of the
present little work; and it affords me, therefore, the sincerest
pleasure to inscribe it to your Excellency, for this reason, as well
as from motives of the highest personal esteem.
I have the honor to be
Your Excellency’s
Obliged and obedient servant,
J. B. AUSTIN.
A7-i




LIST OF SUBSCRIBERS.
His Excellency Sir D. Daly, Governor-
in-Chief
His Honor the Chief Justice
The Hon. the Chief Secretary (G. M.
Waterhouse)
The Hon. the Attorney-General (B. I.
Stow)
The Hon. the Treasurer (A. Blyth)
The Hon. the Commissioner of Crown
Lands (H. B. T. Strangways)
The Hon. the Commissioner of Public
Works (W. Milne)
The Hon. the President of the Legisla-
tive Council (Sir J. H. Fisher)
The Hon. the Speaker of the House of
Assembly (G. C. Hawker)
The lion. G. F. Angus
The Hon. G. Hail
The Hon. G. Tinline
The Hon. S. Davenport
The South Australian Company
Thomas Elder, Esq.
The Moonta Mining Company
The Wallaroo Mining Company
Henry Martin, Esq. (Superintendent,
Yudanamutana Mining Company)
Karkarilla Mining Company
Talisker Mining Company
Yelta Mining Company
Eirwan Mining Company
South Australian Mining Association
(Burra)
Kanyaka Mining Company
Charles Bonney, Esq. (Manager, Great
Northern Mining Company)
Napoleon Mining Company
New Cornwall Mining Company
North Bhine Mining Company
Wirrawilka Mining Company
The Patent Copper Company
Captain P. Morrison (Great Northern
Mines)
Captain H. E. Hancock
Captain J. B. Pascoe
South Australian Banking Company
National Bank of Australasia
Bank of Australasia
Messrs. A. L. Elder (London)
“ Alexander Scrutton (Stock Ex-
change, London)
“ T. A. Austin (Ditto.)
“ A. H. Gouge
Messrs. J. Stilling & Co.
“ E. H. Paulding & Co.
“ H. C. Glceson
“ Alfred Frost
“ A. P. Burtt
“ H. Alford
“ Wright Brothers
“ John Baker
“ Levi & Co.
“ Samuel Court, Money Order
Office, London
“ Wm. Sheffield, Solicitor, London
“ J. T. Bagot, M.P,
“ Neville Blyth, M.P.
“ T. Magarey, M.P.
“ John Colton, M.P.
“ W. Bakevvell, M.P.
“ H. Mildred, M.P,
“ John Hart, M.P.
“ J. B. Neales, M.P.
“ B- B.Torrens (Begistrar-General)
“ E. M. Bagot
“ J. Hodgkiss
“ H. Noltenius
“ G. Wyatt
“ Edmund Bowman
“ S. Stocks
“ Henry T. Morris
“ W. Fowler
“ E. M. Martin
“ W. Bartley
“ C. Smedley
“ John Western
“ G. Boothby
Dr. Mayo
Dr. Gosse
Dr. Bayer
Dr. Whittell
Dr. Wheeler
Dr. Todman
Dr. Taylor
Bev. Julian Edmund Woods, F.G.S.,
and F. 8.5., Victoria
Bev. F. W. Cox
Bev. A. B. Bussell
The Very Bev. Dean Farrell
Bev. C. Manthorpe
Bev. J. Watsford
Bev. C. Farr, M.A., St. Peter’s College
Bev. James Lyall
Bev. John Gardner
Bev. George Stonehouse


Rev, Robt. Haining
Rev. C. W. Evan
Rev. W. Marcus
Rev. John Smythe, (R. C. C.)
Messrs. R. Stuckey
“ D. Gulley
“ E. J. Beck &Co
“ W. B. Dawes
“ David Randall
“ G. Muller
“ T. Schumacher
“ S. Pearce
“ R. S. Crabb
“ N. Y. Squarey
“ Goode & Cussen
“ J. &A. Hallett
“ E. J. Peake, S. M.
“ W. Gawen
“ G. &H. Bartleet
“ R. Hall
“ C. G. Everard
“ S. Duryea
“ Green, Parr, & Luxmore
“ Joseph Gilbert
“ Johnston, Furniss, & Blakeway
“ W. J. Brown
“ J. T. Fitch
“ W. Einke
“ J. L. Young
“ W. Younghusband, Jun,, & Co.
“ G. &R. Wills & Co.
“ Skelton & Co.
“ Acraman, Main, Lindsay, & Co,
“ H. C. Palmer
“ Causby
“ J. B. Hughes
“ W. Main
“ C. D’Oyley Cooper
“ E. McEllister
“ W. W. Tuxford
“ Lyshon Jones (Superintendent
Smelting Works, Wallaroo)
“ J. D. Woods
[Total number of
Messrs. C. S. Hare
“ Green & Wad ham
“ Townsend Duryea
“ Bull & Whitington
“ J. Darwent
“ J. Perryman
“ Townsend, Dotting, & Kay
“ Arthur Hardv
“ W. Goddard
“ W. Hitchcox
“ John Chambers
“ Giles & Smith
“ Richard Hicks
“ Andrews A Bonin
“ S. J. Way
“ E. K. Horn
“ Joel Lyons
“ St. George & Smythe
“ Stephen King
“ W. Butterworth, Yankalilla
“ Thomas Wilson
“ G. W. Hawkes, S.M.
“ Fredk. G. Waterhouse
“ Adolph Gaedechens
“ Charles Fenn
The Consul for France
“ Denmark
“ Hamburg
“ Bremen
“ Portugal
“ America
“ Belgium
“ Chili
The Hon. G. Rolfe, Melbourne
G. M. Larnacb, Esq., Melbourne
M. W. Taylor, Esq., Melbourne
William Noall, Esq., Melbourne
James Edward Keild, Esq., Melbourne
Henry Sheffield, Esq., Public Library,
Melbourne
Dr. Embling, Melbourne
F. Mueller, M.D., F. 8.5., Melbourne
Copies subscribed for, 1,200]
6


P R E F A 0 E.
The growing importance of the Mining Interest in this Colony,
and the evident want of general and correct information respecting
our Mineral resources, suggested to me the idea of making a tour
of all the Mines, and publishing the result of my observations. The
book, although not professing to be a scientific work, may prove,
in an humble degree, a not inappropriate sequel to a very valuable
work on the Geology of the Colony, by the Eev. Julian Edmund
Woods, E.G.S., and E.R.S. (Victoria).
To guard against the possibility of loss, I drew up a Prospectus
soliciting subscriptions to the work; and I feel great satisfaction
in referring to the List of Subscribers, as a proof of the confidence
placed in me, and also of the great importance attached to the
Mining Interest of the Colony.
About four months were occupied in visiting the Mines and
collecting information, and during this time I travelled about 1,800
miles, chiefly on horseback.
I hope this work will be found especially interesting and
important to readers in England, and elsewhere, who may desire
information respecting our Mines, and which is not at present to
be found in any other book. It is, I believe, 17 years since any
detailed account of the Mines of this Colony was published in a
collective form, and this was in a valuable work by E. S. Dutton,
Esq., and entitled “ South Australia and its Mines.” At that
time the Copper Mines enumerated were eight, and the Lead
Mines three in number! I trust so long an interval will not elapse
before an enlarged edition of the present work will be required.
I have to express my obligations to those numerous friends who
have assisted me in various ways; to the settlers in the North
who aided me with horses, and whose genuine hospitality cheered
and refreshed me on my toilsome journey; to the members of
the Government, who rendered me all the information I required ;
and though last, not least, to those who have subscribed so liberally
to the work. I trust it will not disappoint their expectations.
J. B. AUSTIN.
Adelaide, March, 1863.




INTRODUCTORY
Haying for some years taken a great interest in Mineralogy, and
having paid especial attention to mining matters during my recent
connection with the Adelaide press, the idea suggested itself to
me that a work on the Mines of South Australia would, at the
present time, prove not merely interesting but useful. It is well
known in this country and elsewhere that a mining mania has, for
above two years past, held possession of the community, and from
the commencement of mineral discovery in the colony, no fewer
than 1,720 mining “ claims” have been applied for to the 31st
Dec., 1862; 1,576 of them during the last three years. The
large majority of these represent 80 acres of land to each claim,
and where the claim is “ taken up” a rent of 10s. per acre is paid
to the Government under the present regulations. The leases
are for 14 years, renewable at the end of the term on payment of
a fine. It will be seen that a very large amount of capital,
considering the smallness of our community, is invested every
year in mining. But although so many claims have been applied
for, the number of Mines actually being worked is very small in
proportion. It must be explained that every claim does not
represent a separate lode or discovery of mineral, nor does it
necessarily indicate the existence of mineral at all; for, with that
spirit of speculation apparently so inseparable from mining, as
soon as a good discovery is made by one party there is frequently
a rush to the Land Office, and others take out claims all round,
merely with the hope of finding something, and often without
any knowledge of the locality on the part of the speculators.
I have thought these few words of explanation necessary for
the benefit of readers not acquainted with the colony ; and before
proceeding with the subject under consideration, I would add a
few remarks respecting the mode in which I determined to deal
with it. Before starting on my journey I was strongly urged to
visit every mineral claim , and if I had had time and means at my


command I should have been glad to have done so; but it was
no part of my original design to visit claims on which no work
had been done, but to describe only the Mines of the colony, —
no matter how small, so long as they were entitled to the name.
However, I have visited as many claims as I was able to see,
and I may state that with reference to many of them I have
come to the conclusion that it would be unfair to the proprietors
and also to the public, for me to express an opinion respecting
them in a work like the present. I refer more particularly to
claims which are strictly private property, not being offered for
sale, nor being worked by a public company.
In writing the following pages I have kept in view the fact
that the book is likely to fall into the hands of English readers,
and of many others unacquainted with the interior of this colony ;
and I have considered that the introduction of a description of
our mode of travelling and of bush life would relieve the dullness
almost inseparable from a mere dry detail of shafts and drives,
lodes and cross-courses, I have aimed rather at giving an
intelligible and popular description of the Mines, than at writing
in too technical language.
Perhaps this chapter would be the most fitting place for
expressing my views as to the usual plan of disposing of mineral
properties. Whenever a discovery of Copper Ore—l might
almost say of Copper stains —is made, it is held, by interested
persons, as entitled to be called “ a mine.” It is not difficult
to find a man bearing the title of “ Captain” —perhaps assumed,
perhaps entirely honorary—to write a glowing report of this
“ wonderful discovery ; which must pay its working expenses at
least, from the very first day that a pick is struck into the ground,
and will, in all probability, pay handsome dividends to the fortu-
nate proprietors in an incredibly short time.”
The experience of mining, during the last seventeen years, in
this colony, does not warrant the confident assurance, that even
rich surface indications will result in the development of a
valuable mine ; and my opinion is, that the fairest plan to pursue
in dealing with a mineral property intended to be sold, would be
to sink one or two shafts, or cross-cuts, according to the nature
of the country, to a sufficient depth to prove at least that there
was a Copper-bearing lode going down a few fathoms, before
asking a high price for it. I have seen many “ mineral claims”
which the owners tried to persuade me were some of “ the finest
mines in the country,” but on which not a day’s work had been
done, and where, in my opinion, there was nothing to indicate
that any Ore-bearing lode would be found below the surface. It


is very true there might he a few pretty specimens of green and
blue carbonates, or even grey and red oxides, on the surface, but
as I have before said, it does not follow that these Ores will
continue to be found in depth ; as some of these surface deposits
appear to have been made by the action of water. At the same
time, there are many mineral sections, the value of which may be
judged of with a great degree of certainty from the surface.
Where, for instance, as is sometimes the case, a regular and well
defined Copper-bearing lode, in favorable country, can be traced
for a long distance, and, as often happens, the back of the lode
is sufficiently exposed to show the walls and the underlay ; then
we are warranted in supposing that we may meet with favorable
results. On the other hand, it cannot be denied that some mines
which presented every appearance of permanence, and yielded a
fair quantity of good ore for some fathoms in depth, have appa-
rently run out, and have in consequence been abandoned. In
many, perhaps in most such cases, the abandonment has resulted
from want of sufficient capital to prosecute the search ; as I am
well aware there are many of our abandoned Mines which would
be considered very promising properties in Cornwall.
To revert to the question of the disposal of mineral properties.
Owing to the want of liberality in the mineral regulations of the
colony it frequently happens that a poor man (comparatively
speaking) who may have a good claim, has not the
means of proving it; in such cases there can be no doubt
that the fairest mode of procedure, instead of selling an unproved
mine for a large sum, would be to raise a capital sufficient to
develop it, and there is little difficulty in the way of such a course
if the property promise to be a really good one. I consider the
prices often put upon the mineral claims —mineral leases as they
are in fact—are often fictitious ; for who can say until a Mine is
developed, at least to some small extent, whether it is worth
£20,000, or £IO,OOO, or even £5,000. On this ground I conceive
that it would be best for all parties that some amount of work
should be done to prove a Mine before it is sold ; for a Mine
worth £20,000 might be sold for £s,ooo'for want of a knowledge
of its real value, or the reverse might happen with equal
probability. I feel the importance of these remarks, because
several instances have occurred in which “ Mines” have been sold
for a high price and turned out nearly valueless, whereas if proper
precautions were taken, or some judicious system adopted with
reference to the examination of mines by a competent party,
before the purchase was completed, such unsatisfactory results
would not be likely to occur. There is no doubt that in some


cases it would have answered the purpose of English capitalists
to have sent out a qualified person from England expressly to
report on the property offered for sale ; not hut that there are
men in the colony of sufficient probity and understanding in
such matters to qualify them to protect the interests of absentees ;
but I mean to say that money would have been saved in the end
by the expenditure at first of £2OO or £3OO in the way I have
indicated.
We have lately had brought very prominently before the public
in this colony, “The New Burra Burra Milling Company,” a
scheme which has been denounced by the leading journals of
Adelaide as “ a rank swindle.” I confess when I read the
prospectus and the accompanying “ reports” I thought the
exaggerations so palpable, that it was a matter of surprise how
any one could have been deceived by them. The idea of courses
of Ore 70 yards wide is something so very extraordinary, not to
say unlikely, that it is astonishing that persons of any sense were
so easily duped into believing the statement; and especially when
nothing was known of the Mine in the colony, except by a
favored few—Messrs. Cave Sf Co., and who Messrs. Cave & Co.
are does not very clearly appear. Mr. Cave is said to be a young
man who was shepherding or stock-keeping for the Messrs.
Chambers, and the Co. is supposed to be Mr. Gf. Erancis, of
Crawler, a man of rather higher attainments in geological know-
ledge than his partner. Mr. Erancis has lately written to the
public papers here, since the bubble has been exposed, repudiating
the course pursued in reference to this Mine in England. I
must confess that prior to my departure on my tour through the
Northern Mines, I had heard nothing of the “ New Burra
Burra ;” it is true I had provided myself with a list of mineral
claims from the Land Office, and in that list there were three
applications in the name of Cave, the claims being held “ under
right of search .” When I arrived in the far North, I was asked
on two or three occasions if I had seen the Mine, and on my
replying in the negative, and stating at the same time my
intention to visit it, I was invariably met with a laugh, and was
told that I might spare myself the trouble, for there was nothing
to be seen. Subsequent enquiries resulted in the receipt of
similar replies. Nevertheless, I made up my mind to go and
judge for myself, but when I was actually on the road to the
place, unavoidable circumstances prevented me from accomplish-
ing my design, and I found I must either give up seeing the
“ New Burra Burra,” or neglect other Mines which appeared to
be of more importance. When I returned to Adelaide and saw


the prospectus of the Mine in the English Mining Journal, I
regretted that 1 had not remained a week or so longer in the
North, and retraced my steps in order to visit it.
Some correspondence lias taken place in the Adelaide papers
respecting this Mine, and, as I said before, Mr. Gi. Francis wrote
a letter repudiating the course pursued in England. In one of
this gentleman’s letters he expressed his willingness to accompany
any person to the Mine who was qualified to judge on mining
matters, aliedging that although the Mine had been unwarrantably
“ puffed” in England there was a quantity of good Ore en the
claims. I then wrote to Mr. Francis, agreeing to accept his
offer, and was at the time prepared to start at once, but I received
no reply to my letter, and I must now postpone my visit for
some few months.
In a work like the present there is some slight difficulty in
determining the order in which to notice the various mines. The
proprietors of mines in one locality are jealous of those in
another. The Wallaroo people affect an amount of disbelief in
the Northern Mines, and those interested in the North, on the
other hand, believe their Mines to be superior to those at
Wallaroo. I had thought of noticing the Mines in the order of
their discovery, but this plan would have been attended with
some inconvenience, and I therefore decided on describing them
as nearly as possible in reference to their geographical position.
This will obviate certain little difficulties, and will enable me the
more readily to introduce a description of the country traversed
in visiting the Mines.
Starting from Adelaide in a northerly direction, we ride for 26
miles over plains between ranges of hills on the East, and the sea
on the West, and varying in width from Bto 12 miles.. These
plains, which at the time of the discovery of the Kapunda Mine
were almost entirely uncultivated and occupied only as sheep
runs, are now covered with farms, every available portion of them
being either brought into cultivation or enclosed as grazing
paddocks. After passing Gawler on the road to Kapunda the
country becomes more hilly, and lightly timbered. There is
nothing remarkable in the geological formation of the country
until we reach the Kapunda Mine, after a ride of 24 miles from
Gawler. This Mine is the oldest Copper Mine in the colony,


having been discovered in 1843 by Mr. Francis S. Dutton and
Mr. Charles Samuel Bagot (now of London), the youngest son
of Capt. Charles Harvey Bagot, then a sheepfarmer and also a
member of the Legislative Council. The Mine workings are on
hilly ground of moderate elevation, and which was originally
lightly timbered with peppermint gum, but the settlement of the
adjoining township, the working of the mine, and above all the
carrying on of smelting operations, have denuded the country of
almost every stick of timber for miles round. Abundance, however,
remains for the requirements of the Mine for some years to come,
and within a moderate distance for cartage.
The first Ore was raised at the Kapunda Mine on the Bth
January, 1844, and on the 23rd of the same month, five dray
loads were dispatched to Adelaide. I had then just arrived in
the colony, and well remember the excitement caused by this
commencement of the development of one of the most important
sources of the wealth of the colony. The Ore was good, the
Mine promised well, and search soon began to be made for Copper
Ore in other directions, and it was not long before farther
discoveries were announced.
With reference to the statistics of the Kapunda Mine I cannot
do better than copy the following account from that concise and
valuable little work, by my friend, Mr. Frederick Sinnett, “ An
Account of the Colony of South Australia, prepared for distribu-
tion at the International Exhibition of 1862
“ On 4th March, 1845, the first horse-whim commenced work
drawing water, and kept the Aline dry to the fifteen-fathom level
for some time; but as the works were extended, it was soon
found that it would be indispensable to procure engine-power,
and during 1847 a 30-inch cylinder, double action engine, with a
supply of pumps, was obtained from England, and erected on
the Aline, commencing work on Ist July, 1848. Shortly after-
wards machinery was added tor crushing ore, and for drawing or
hauling; and tliis engine, with a brief interruption, caused by
the breaking of the main shaft in J une, 1850, has been at work
ever since.
“As the extent of working increased so did the water, and, in
1850, a larger engine was purchased and erected —commencing
work in January, 1851. Both engines were employed in pumping
for some years; but, latterly, all the water has been brought to
one shaft —now sunk a depth of sixty fathoms, to which level the
Mine is kept in fork by the last-mentioned engine, which is of
36-inch cylinder, single direct action. The other engine is used
in hauliing and crushing.
“In December, 1849, the first smelting furnace commenced
work and was shortly followed by a second ; and, for some time,
a large portion of the Ores were reduced to regulus before
shipment.
“ The great attractions presented by the gold-fields of Victoria
during the year 1852, induced most of the men to leave. The


smelting works ceased altogether on 17th March, and were not
resumed till March, 1855.
“ Nearly all the miners, also, left; and it was with considerable
difficulty the engine was kept going, and the Mine kept dry—at
one time there were but four miners. During 1854, however,
and especially in the early part of 1855, large numbers returned
or came to work, and since then there has not been any material
interruption.
“ The Ores comprise almost every variety, as yellow ore, or
pyrites, blue and green carbonates, muriates, grey and black
sulphurets, oxides, bell-metal and peacock ores, and native
copper, or malleable. The percentage also varies much, from 66
downwards.
“As to the present state of the Mine, the deepest level is
sixty fathoms below the surface, at which depth it is kept drained.
The deepest level in which tributers are working is fifty fathoms
from surface.
“ The underground workings are nearly all confined to the
original section of eighty acres, No. 1271, extending nearly from
North to South. Two other sections, Nos. 1284 and 1405, South
of the original section, also belong to the Company, as well as a
considerable portion of No. 1429, and some allotments north-
ward —part of No. 1400.
“ The engines on the Mine are as follows: —One 30-inch
cylinder, 6-fect stroke, double action condensing, now used only
for hauling and crushing Ores. One 36-inch c}dinder, 8-feet
stroke, single action, direct expansive and condensing, used only
for pumping; those at present attached being a 12-inch plunger
column, and drawing lift at the bottom ; between five and six
strokes per minute keep the Mine in fork.
“ Each of these engines has two large tubular boilers of about
thirty feet by six feet, all of which were built on the Mine, as
well as another spare boiler. One ten-horse power portable
high pressure engine employed in turning, boring,, chaff-cutting,
&c., &c.
“ There is also on the works, but not yet erected, one 50-inch
cylinder condensing engine and a tubular boiler, in plates.
“ One set of stamps and a plunger-jigging machine, for Ore
dressing, to be erected immediately; one water wheel, and
perpendicular and circular saws.
“ The buildings now erected are —the two engine-houses and
boiler-houses above named, with crusher and lathe-house attached,
and draining case.
“A large and very substantial erection of stone, with slate
roofing, just completed —and comprising engine-house, boiler-
house, crusher, and mine stores.
“This is intended for the reception of the present drawing
engine, as the ground around it is sinking. There is one metal
foundry or cupola, one brass foundry, smith’s shops, and iron
store, carpenter’s shop and timber yard, and saw pits, weighbridge
and office, and a counting-house, with manager’s residence attached,


Officers, agents, clerks, overseers
Men.
Boys.
Engineers, enginemen, stokers ... .
Pitman, timbermen, tutworks, &o.
.. 43
Tributers (raising ore) .,
23
Tradesmen, carters, laborers, kibble-fillers
. 82
13
Smelters and furnacemen . . .
, 36
Masons (2), laborers, smiths, &c....
—
Total men
36
a commodious and handsome building. There are also resi-
dences for the accountant, clerk, agents, and engineer—and about
thirty other cottages occupied by the workmen and miners ; also
houses for the pitman, timbermen, sumphmen, and a range of
barracks, or changing rooms, for the miners; also a magazine for
powder, store for candles, stores for Mine materials, stables, &c.
“At the smelting works there are five Ore-reducing furnaces,
one Copper roaster, one refinery, Copper store, and Ore shed, all
substantially roofed ; also superintendent’s residence and office,
smith’s forge ; brick kiln, and brick shed for fire bricks which are
made on the Mine, of very superior quality, from clay and sand
obtained in the immediate neighborhood.
“ Besides the drawing done by the engine, there are eight horse
whims, two double whipseys, and several single ditto ; and on the
Ore floors are twelve jigging sieves, picking tables, &c., &e.
“ The last return shows the number of hands employed, as
follows ;
Besides a large number of woodcutters, carters, and others who
are completely dependent upon the Mine for their means of
subsistence.
“ -Adi the Ores raised are now reduced to fine copper before ship-
ment ; 595 tons were shipped in 1861. The expenditure during
the year being £48,300; the greater portion of which is
circulated on the spot for wages, fuel, &c. £8,713 was paid
for fuel for the smelting works alone ; timber being alone used.”
The entire quantity of Ore raised from the commencment to
the close of the year 1862, was 38,220 tons of 21 cwt., and of
an average produce of nearly 20 per cent. The quantity raised
during the past year was 2,940 tons, of an average of 16£
per cent. The quantity of fine Copper made during; the year
1862, was 486 tons 12 cwt.
The total value of the Ore raised from this Mine has been
above half a million sterling. The Kapunda Mine has been
worked, on the whole, carefully and economically, and but little
of the produce has been lost, which it would have been possible
to save with the appliances at command. However, as the depth
of the workings increases, and the average percentage of the Ore
becomes less, it will be necessary to employ new and improved
machinery for dressing the Ores of lower percentage than it has
hitherto been thought worth while to deal with ; and this course,
I am informed, is about to be adopted, the Manager of the
Mine having recently paid a visit to the Bremer Mine to inspect


the machinery in nse there, that mine being decidedly the most
economically and thoroughly worked of any in the colony.
A large township (Kapunda) has sprung up near the Mine, and
contains several substantial buildings, amongst others, four com-
modious places of worship, a Bank, a Mechanics’ Institute,
Post Office and Telegraph Station, Court House and Police
Station; several Hotels, a line Railway Station, —for Kapunda is
now united with Adelaide by the iron road, trains running daily
twice each way. There are a number of good shops and houses,
and the population probably numbers altogether about 2,000.
Adjoining the Kapunda Mine, on the South, is another valuable
mineral section, which was worked for a short time, but aban-
doned in consequence of the water coming in too strongly to be
kept down by the appliances at the command of the South
Kapunda Mining Company ; the Mine, however, is believed to be
quite equal to the Kapunda, and I understand it is intended to
resume the workings.
There is said to be another valuable property to-the North-
East of Kapunda, and known as Stephens’s Mine, but no amount
of work has been done here.
Of JkiMta filinr.
Leaving Kapunda, we proceed in a northerly direction through
undulating country, and amidst numerous farms, on our road
towards the far-famed Burra Burra. After a ride of 10 miles we
come to the small but prettily situated township of Hamilton, on
the Light, and when we pass this the scenery becomes more
monotonous. There is plenty of cultivation, but little timber,
and the road lying between fences and presenting no remarkable
or pleasing features to the eye, and being moreover nearly flat,
travelling, especially with no other companion than a led horse,
becomes tedious. Thirty miles from Kapunda we reach Apoinga,
a village consisting of one public house, a Post Office, and two
farm houses ; the scenery here is an improvement upon what we
have passed through, and is also superior to what lies before us.
Four or five miles further we come to the Karkulto Mine in the
midst of hilly ground of moderate elevation. This is a rather
remarkable mineral property, for the indications of Copper were
considered to be so good that the South Australian Mining
Association (the Burra Company) and the Royal Mining Com-
pany, each purchased a large block of land here. Both parties
to work on their property; large and regular lodes
were found; the walls were well defined, the underlay was
satisfactory, and all the indications appeared favorable, but very


little Copper was obtained. The ironstone and gossan did not,
as was hoped, give place to Copper; still a little Copper Ore was
occasionally met with, and the proprietors felt encouraged to
proceed, especially as the iron ore could be sold as a flux to the
smelting works, at a price which helped to pay the expense of
raising. The Eoyal Mining Company, however, soon abandoned
the workings, and eventually sold the property at a loss. The
Burra Company are still continuing operations and a few tons of
Copper Ore have been dressed up, to yield an average of from 16
to 20 per cent, of Copper. It is still the opinion of some
practical men that the Karkulto Mine will ultimately prove rich
in Copper, though as the depth at present reached is upwards of
40 fathoms, it will probably be necessary to sink considerably
deeper before the desired result can be attained. The South
Australian Mining Association, who cannot be accused of a
wasteful expenditure in the development of their property seem
to have had great confidence in the Karkulto, for they have laid
out upwards of £30,000 in opening the Mine.
Clj£ s«tta sma ||lrat.
The road from the Karkulto to the Burra exhibits no features
worthy of notice. The “ Monster Mine” is about 100 miles
distant from Adelaide, a little to the east of north. It is situated
on bald hills of the transition series, and about 150 feet in
height from the surrounding country. The prevailing feature of
the geological formation is limestone. The ground being soft
and easily worked a tremendous amount of timbering has to be
employed to secure the drives, and in going underground one
walks through miles of these galleries, without seeing anything
but timber, and in some places the passages have been so narrowed
with these supports that a stout person would find some difficulty
in squeezing himself through. There is less to interest the
casual visitor underground at the Burra than there is in many
other Mines far inferior in mineral wealth. A large quantity of
the Ore consists of what is called “ smalls” and this, as well as
much of the other Ores, is so coated with the “country,”—or soil in
which it is found, —that it would escape observation from the
uninitiated. In proof of this I may mention that as I was going
underground we came upon a pair of men, who had by them what
appeared to be a large heap of rich loam, I remarked to my guide
—“ Capt. Dick that looks as if it would make good garden soil
I thought at the same time there might be some Ore amongst it,
but was surprised to learn that the pile had yielded, on assay, an
average of per cent, of Copper. Here and there in the


workings you may come upon a splendid bunch of red oxide and
malachite, and the specimens of blue and green carbonates to be
found in this Mine are extremely beautiful. It is a singular
circumstance, but the miners agree in saying that there is not a
regular lode in the Burra Mine, however, if there is no lode,
there is plenty of Copper without it, the whole country being
impregnated with it. The Burra appears to be one vast “ pocket”
full of Copper. Its original appearance in a huge boil on the
surface was so remarkable that numbers of persons undertook
the journey from Adelaide —quite an adventure to many in those
days—for the mere purpose of seeing this wonderful deposit of
Ore, A vast hollow is now shewn at one part of the Mine,
about 100 yards in diameter and 30 or 40 feet deep, whence
thousands of tons of the richest Ores were taken. This great
hollow, however, is owing, perhaps, as much to the sinking of the
ground because of the large amount of excavation which has
been performed in following the Copper below. The Ores
obtained from this Mine have been chiefly red oxides, very rich
blue and green carbonates, and malachite. Native Copper has
also been found. Many very beautiful specimens of all the
varieties named have been procurable from the Burra Burra, and
are to be seen ornamenting the mantlepieces or cabinets of an
immense number of houses in the colony.
To proceed with a brief history of the Mine ; it was discovered
by a shepherd named Pickitt in 1845, and in order to secure the
fee simple of mineral land it became necessary to purchase a
special survey of 20,000 acres ; paying the Government for the
same in specie. The survey was taken on August IGth, by Messrs.
C. H. Bagot and G. F. Aston on behalf of themselves and others,
afterwards called the Princess Royal Mining Company, and by
Messrs. William Allen and Samuel Stocks, Jun., for themselves
and others, who afterwards became incorporated with the South
Australian Minning Association, which name is still borne by the
Burra Company. These two parties were called respectively the
“ nobs” and the “snobs,” the former representing the “aristocracy”
of the colony, and the latter the merchants and tradespeople.
The nobs were unwilling to combine with the snobs in a joint
stock company for carrying on the Mine, and therefore although
they united to purchase the ground,—as neither party could,
unaided, raise the hard cash—as soon as the survey was completed,
the laud was divided by drawing a line through the centre from
east to west. Lots were then drawn for the land, and the “snobs”
became the fortunate proprietors of the northern portion of the
survey, and on which the Burra Mine existed. The Princess
Royal property was ultimately sold for pastoral purposes at 18s.
an acre.
The first Directors of the S. A. Mining Association, and who
were appointed to manage the affairs of the Burra Mine, were
Messrs. Charles Beck, James Bunce, John Benjamin Graham,
John Benthara Neales, William Paxton, William Peacock,
Christopher Septimus Penny, Emanuel Solomon, and Samuel


Stocks, .Tun. Mr. Henry Ayers was appointed Secretary.
Operations were commenced immediately, the number of miners
employed being ten, under the superintendence of a Captain,
and with a smith to sharpen and repair the tools. The first shot
was fired on the 29th September, 1845, blasting a large mass of
rich Ore, and in a short time several drays were loaded for the
Port. The workings were carried on with vigor, and the produce
of the Mine surpassed the most sanguine expectations entertained
on its discovery. The original working capital of the Company
was only £1,500; but with a Mine so rich and so easily worked
that amount proved sufficient, until the sale of Ore increased the
funds available for working expenses. During the first six years
of the history of the Burra, nearly 80,000 tons of exceedingly
rich Ore were raised and shipped to England, yielding a profit to
the Company of £438,552; a pretty good result from an
original outlay of £IO,OOO for the land. At the close of the first
six years since the opening of the Mine, the number of hands
employed was upwards of 1,000; but at this time the newly
discovered gold-fields in Victoria attracted a large proportion of our
population, and especially the miners, who left in such numbers
that only 100 were left at the Burra—the Kapunda Mine
suffering in like manner; indeed, I believe at one time only five
or six men remained at Kapunda, including the Captain and
Purser. This state of things produced a serious check on the
working of the Alines ; at the Burra, where pumping engines had
been erected, the machinery was of necessity stopped, and the
water let in ; the comparatively few men who remained being
employed in working above the water level. Por the greater
part of three years the Mine continued thus, the Government
then took the matter into their serious consideration, and rightly
deeming the prosperity of the colony to be dependent, to a great
extent, on that of its Mining interest, they adopted measures for
the introduction of a number of Cornish miners. AVhen these
immigrants arrived, the water was pumped from the Mine, and
full operations were resumed, and have been carried on with
comparatively trifling interruptions, until the present time. The
greatest number of hands employed, was in 1859, when it
amounted to 1,170 persons. The discoveries at Wallaroo, two
years ago, caused some of the miners to remove to that locality,
and several were attracted by the reports of the great richness of
some of the Alines in the far North. In November, last year,
also, a still larger departure of miners took place, in consequence
of inducements held out to them by a certain Coal Alining
Company in New South Wales. Prior to this time, however, the
working of the Alines at Wallaroo and in the far North had
tended to raise the rate of wages, and it was deemed advisable
by the Directors of the Burra to confine their operations to those
workings above the 55-fathom level; the water was therefore let
into the lower part of the Aline—from the 70-fathom level to the
55—and it is found that at the present rate of wages, larger
proportionate profits can be realized, without incurring the


expense of pumping and working the lower levels. I may here
allude to a rumor which is frequently circulated, and occasionally
with increased vigor, that “ the Burra is nearly worked out.” I
have heard this rumor repeated almost annually, for the past
fourteen or fifteen years, and I think the best answer to it, is a
reference to the continued prosperity of the Mine. With a
disposition on the part of some to spread or to countenance such
a report, it will readily be believed that the occasion of letting
the water into the lower workings gave a fresh opportunity to
the croakers ; but, after careful enquiry, I see no reason to doubt
that the Burra will continue to yield large quantities of rich Ore,
and consequently to pay good dividends for many years to come.
The yield of Ore has ranged, for many years, from 10,000 to
18,000 tons a year, the produce of the Ore giving an average of
from 22 to 23 per cent, of Copper; or about 2,500 tons of pure
Copper, when smelted, and yielding to the colony an average
annual amount of at least £225,000. The total amount expended
in the colony by the Burra Company, up to the present time, is
about £1,700,000, of which upwards of £1,000,000 has been paid
in wages. The gross profits amount to £850,080, of which
£714,560 have been divided among the shareholders, and
£135,520 added to the capital stock, while £10,560 remained
undivided.
It may not be altogether out of place to mention the rate of
wages paid at the Mine. It is subject to fluctuation according to
the state of the labor market, and the Burra Mine perhaps pays a
trifle below the average paid at some other Mines, as it is
reasonable to suppose a concern so well established and so
substantial might do, because the men can reckon with certainty
on permanent and regular employment. It is true they can now
do so at several other Mines, but I merely throw this out as a
suggestion explanatory of the alleged fact. Laborers’ wages have
varied from £1 ss. to £2 per week. Miners’ from £1 15s. to £3.
Mechanics from £2 2s. to £5 12s. per week. Boys from 9s. to
15s. per week.
The surface workings present a very animated appearance.
The great engine for pumping the Mine is of 80-inch cylinder ;
the water raised is made available for working other machinery,
turning large water wheels, or being conveyed over the mine by
means of landers. The jigging shed is a long erection and
contains a large number of jiggers for washing the Ore. Cornish
stampers are worked near at hand by means of a waterwheel,
and reduce the Ore preparatory to its being washed. Until a
comparatively recent date a large quantity of Ore in fine particles
ran to waste, being washed into the creek ; it is now found worth
while to wash this refuse, and a number of men are employed at
it, —I believe on a kind of tribute wages, i. e. being paid so much
in the pound for the value of the Ore they clean ; and I am
informed they do very well at this work. It is calculated that
the quantity of refuse, the accumulation of many years, in the
Burra Creek is worth many thousands of pounds sterling.


The Mine is under the able superintendence of Capt. Henry
Roach, who has managed it very much to the satisfaction of his
employers for about 15 years. He has under him a whole staff
of grass captains and underground captains, and other officers.
There are several townships in the neighbourhood of the Mine,
the two principal being Kooringa and Redruth; next in impor-
tance is Aberdeen, but this is connected with the adjoining (Bon
Accord) Mine. There are also the suburban townships of
Hampton, Little Hampton, and Copperhouse. Kooringa and
Redruth contain six places of worship, belonging to the Wesleyans,
Independents’, Church of England, Bible Christians, and Primi-
tive Methodists. There are also two Banks, several public houses,
one first-class hotel, and many shops and other buildings,
but altogether the townships present a miserable and dirty
appearance. I must not omit, however, to mention an Hospital
connected with the Mine, and a Telegraph Station and Post Office
united, the latter being one of the best buildings in the place.
In concluding my notice of the Burra Mine I may, perhaps, be
allowed to introduce some clever lines, written soon after its
discovery by J, W. MacDonald Esq., then Acting Colonial
Treasurer.
These lines describe pretty accurately what actually occurred
on the discovery of the Burra Mine, and with little or nothing
of a “ poet’s licence”:—
Have you not heard of the Monster Mine ?
There’s never a man to be got to dine,
There’s never a clerk who will pen a line.
At my behest or thine.
They are all gone forth to the houseless North
To gaze on the Monster Mine.
Have you not seen the solemn Nobs?
Have you not marked the eager Snobs ?
Have you not heard of the wiles and jobs,
Of the men who can’t combine ?
With a snobbery, nobbery, jobbery, bobbery,
All for the Monster Mine.
See how hurriedly they come and go,
Backwards and forwards—to and fro—
Making a sad and solemn show
Of the human face divine ;
They wear not a shirt but has lain in the dirt
Three nights at the Monster Mine.
E’en Teddy,”* who is the grinding man,
Has mustered his paper all he can,
He’s mustered his baggage—pot and pan.
Ah! where shall the great man dine ?
He’s cut his stick in a coach and six,
To tread on the Monster Mine.
He’s closed his desk, he’s locked his till.
He’s taken his great fat brother “Bill,”t
And a member of Council greater still. J
* Edward Stephens, Esq., then Manager of the Bank of South Australia,
t W. Giles, Esq., then Manager of the S. A. Company.
J Captain Bagot.


Ah ! where shall the great men sleep ?
They shall shiver all night in waistcoats white,
And long for the morning’s peep.
They shake they shiver, they shiver they shake,
They have no Dolly their beds to make ;
It behoves the great men to be wide awake,
When the Snobs and fleas combine.
Ah ! Snobs and fleas would ye dare to teaze
The King* of the Monster Mine ?
Up spake the King with solemn frown,
“ The very best strata are beds of down,
’Tis meet a King should wear a crown,
’Tis meet a King should dine;
Then, ‘ Billy,’ poor fellow, may bluster and bellow,
But where is the Monster Mine?”
The Snobs they are hurrying up and down,
Some lend them a sovereign, some a crown,f
They leave not a shilling in all the town
To pay for a pint of wine;
Then steady, boys, steady, the Company’s ready,
Hurrah ! for the Monster Mine.
Quoth Nob, “Are you ready?” quoth Snob, “I am
But the Company shut to the door with a slam pf
Yet the Company’s paper was nothing but sham,
When the moon began to shine,
For it shone through the paper like a shadowy vapor,
But not on the Monster Mine.
Then away with all rancour, and jabber, and jobs,
The Snobs and the Nobs, the Nobs and the Snobs,
The “ lords of the soil,” with Dicks and Bobs ,
Their brotherly arras entwine;
And long may the Snob and his brother Nob
Grow fat on the Monster Mine.
|hmass |vtrpl Hint
This Mine strange to say was in reality discovered before the
Burra, and it was owing to its discovery that the Burra was found
shortly afterwards. It is also a singular fact that the Princess
Boyal Mine is situated near the South-eastern corner of the
special survey, and the Burra just within the North-western boun-
dary. Pour hundred shares were issued by the Princess Boyal
* A title bestowed upon Edward Stephens, Esq., from his position aa
Manager of the Bank he ruled the movements of the other parties.
f It is an actual fact, that in order to raise the required amount (£20,000) in hard
cash, for the purchase of the special survey, money was scraped together in every
possible way, and so small a sum as one sovereign was borrowed to help to
make up the amount.
t The Manager of the S. A. Company, endeavored to secure for the Company a
share in the Mine; but he could not provide hard cash , and the Bank Manager refused
to discount his drafts on the Company in London, hence the Manager was reported to
have left in a huff.


Company, and the amount paid up on each share was £B4. The
working of this Mine was commenced nearly at the same time as
that of the Burra, and with considerable success. A great
quantity of rich Ore was raised and shipped to England, the
average percentage of Copper being above 27. A large parcel
made over 29 per cent. The workings were carried on until the
year 1851, when the water was cut at about the 30-fathom level,
and the capital of the company being all expended, as well as the
proceeds of the Ore, —in machinery, buildings, wages, &c., &c.,
the shareholders lost heart and determined on abandoning the
Mine. The land was subsequently sold, and enclosed for a sheep
run, the price paid being £9,000 for 10,000 acres. The total
proceeds of the Ore raised were above £7,000, and the Mine
ultimately paid a dividend of about 13s. in the pound on the original
cost and outlay. The shares, however, at one time rose to above
£2OO each. It is not at all unlikely that if a company were to
recommence working this Mine in a legitimate way, and with the
determination to sink £20,000 or £30,000 at the outset and look
for no return beyond what would pay for the labor employed for
twelve months, the Mine might yet prove to be one of great
value. Its comparative proximity to a shipping port is greatly
in its favor, for cartage can be had for about £2 10s. per ton.
Cjw s(m |tlme
Is situated so close to the Burra, that from a short distance the
buildings and workings of the two mines appear to belong to one
establishment. The land on which the Bon Accord Mine is
found was purchased by a Scottish Company, now known as the
Scottish Investment Company. Its close proximity to the Burra
first led to the ground being taken up ; and I believe there were
some slight indications of the existence of Copper. A con-
siderable amount of work has been done and a large sum expended
on the Mine. Favorable indications have appeared to warrant
the outlay, and some of the piles of stuff which have been raised
look as if they would almost pay for dressing, they are so impreg-
nated with particles of Ore, amongst which may be detected red
oxide and black Ore. The engine-shaft is sunk to a depth of 50
fathoms and there is a large cross course which, it is thought,
will probably intersect a lode of Ore. Other shafts have also
been sunk on the property, and a considerable length of drives
has been opened underground, but without any very satisfactory
result. This company really deserve to be more fortunate, for
the steady perseverance with which they have worked on in spite
of discouragement.


Some mineral sections have been taken out about 20 miles
North of the Burra, but I am not aware of any Mine that
has been worked to any extent in that direction.
However, a little to the West of North, and from 22 to 28
miles from the Burra, we come upon a batch of Mines on the
Broughton liiver, and hence called
®jic |lrot(jj)tim Utraes.
The indications here were very promising, and some fine rich Ora
was obtained, but the country was so hard that it was found it
would not pay for working, and after a few months the Mines
were abandoned. An attempt has been made lately, on the
representations of one of the miners, who is willing to embark
his all in the enterprise, to recommence working one of these
Mines ; this man declares that the country, in the particular
Mine which he wishes to work, is not too hard to be worked with
profit, considering the rich lode of Ore which exists in the Mine ;
and it is not unlikely that another trial may be made here. These
Mines are situated on a very fine sheep run belonging to the
Messrs. Fisher.
There is but little timber in this neighbourhood, and the
country presents no features of special interest either to the
geologist or to the artist; the ground is for the most part undula-
ting. Some of the hills are rather rugged and rise to a height of
200 or 300 feet, and are occasionally covered with the abominable
spinifex, or porcupine grass, a vegetable production which no
animal will eat, and which is considered utterly useless. It does
not, however, grow here in such rank luxuriance as it attains in
the far North, wdiere, in some places, it is quite an impediment
in the way of horses travelling, the plants growing to a large
size, and the spines being both sharp and strong. However, on
these fine runs this porcupine grass is the exception and not the
rule, and we travelled over many miles of splendid sheep country,
until we came to Boowooley (pronounced Bowley), one of Mr.
H. B. Hughes’ stations, also in the midst of beautiful pastoral
land. From Boowooley to Charlton the appearance of the
country improves, and some parts are very beautiful. I should
suppose no finer sheep runs are to be found in the colony
than those I have named, though there may be others equal
in value. As we approach the Jtlocky liiver we see belts of
finely timbered land, gums, pines, and other trees growing
luxuriantly. Here we observed that singular variety of the
wild duck called the wood-duck, which possesses the power of
perching on the boughs of trees like birds of flight; the teet
of these wood-ducks are only half-webbed ; they are elegantly
shaped birds (for ducks) and their plumage is beautiful.


In the neighbourhood of the Kooky Kiver the country is very
fine, and many large and handsome gum trees add to the beauty
of the scene. After a ride of above forty miles we reached
White Park, a station belonging to the Hon. Gieorge Tinline
and William Fisher, Esq,, and where I was most hospitably
entertained. This station deserves to be called a park from the
beauty of its scenery, and the fine clumps of noble gum trees
studded over the gracefully sloping hills. A creek of excellent
water runs through the property, and its course is marked as
is usually the case, by a continuous line of gum trees.
The road from Charlton to Mount Eemarkable is, in many
parts, exceedingly pretty. Now you ride along the banks nf
the creek, commanding an extensive view over fine undulating
country, and presently a turn in the road leads you up a narrow
gully where you can see nothing but the steep hills on either
side. Within a few miles of Mount Kernarkable, the trees for
some distance present almost the appearance of an avenue, but
nearer the Mount the land becomes more thickly timbered, and
scarcely so interesting to the eye. Here and there an agreeable
variety appears, as for instance at the residence of Gr. B. Smith,
Esq., S.M., where the land becomes more open, and the pre-
sence of a fine creek of water has its effect upon the size and
appearance of the trees. After a most agreeable ride of about
15 miles, I arrived at Mr. Smith’s, who received me very kindly,
and at whose house I remained for a couple of days.
Mount Remarkable presents a fine appearance from this place,
being distant about two miles. It rises boldly to the height
of 1,857 feet above the surrounding land, and is rather more
than 3,000 feet above the level of the sea.
%\t Utoirat |Ecm;irluiWt glint
About the year 1846-7 Copper Ore was discovered in the
neighbourhood of the Mount, and a special survey of 20,000
acres was taken out by a few adventurers, money having become
more plentiful than when the Burra was purchased. Prospecting
parties were employed, and £3,000 was spent in preliminary
operations ■; some tolerable Ore was found and a small quantity
sent home as a sample, together with a mineral supposed to be
Emery, but the Copper lode was small and “ pinched,” and the
ground very hard, so that the workings were abandoned nothing
worth the name of mining having been done. When the discovery
was first made, like many others, it was very much puffed, and
Mount Remarkable was spoken of in Adelaide as a “ Mountain
of Copper,” just as some hills farther North are now represented


to be. Strange to say, however, the survey did not include the
hill, but stopped at its southern base. The company was ulti-
mately wound up and the laud sold at a low figure, it being in
those days thought a remote settlement, 175 miles from Adelaide.
The survey is now probably Avorth over all more than double its
original cost, £1 per acre.
Cljc Spring Cretli Pine.
Tttis Mine is situated on the Northern end of Mount Remark-
able, one of the high peaks of the Flinders Range, and is about
11 miles from the township of Melrose, which is at the South
side of the range. The Mine is about 35 miles from Port
Augusta, and is, as its name imports, on the banks of a fine
perennial creek of excellent water. The hills on either side are
from 300 to 400 feet in height, and very steep, so much so, that
in an ordinary dray —which, by the bye, is a heavy vehicle eight
bullocks can only draw 15 cwt. of Ore to the top. Notwith-
standing this difficulty at the outset, parties offered to contract
to cart all the Ore from the Mine to Port Augusta, at thirty
shillings per ton; but with a trifling outlay a better road could
easily be cut. The Mine itself is on the East side of the creek.
A bold reef of rocks running up the face of the hill contains
numerous stains of Copper, and on breaking off portions of the
rock where these stains occur, Ore is almost invariably found;
in some cases blue and green carbonates, but more frequently the
richest red oxide and ruby ore, and sometimes a little
native Copper. A small drive of about 2 fathoms has
been made about 120 feet above the level of the creek into the
hill, and shews several veins of red oxide from one to six inches
in thickness and running down, as if to a main lode. I was
informed that from this place five tons of Ore were sent to
England as a sample. The appearance of the “ country,” where
the ground has been opened, is favorable for Copper; there is a
good deal of ironstone on the back of the reef of rocks, and also
fine gossan, and several tons of rich Ore might be quarried from
the face of the hill. Opinions differ as to the probable perma-
nence of this Mine, some asserting very positively, that no
continuous lode will be found, and that when what is now visible
on the surface is removed, there will be an end to the Mine.
Others, on the contrary, are as confident in their belief that the
Mine will prove both rich and lasting. Without venturing to
give too positive an opinion myself, I may state one or two.
circumstances which, I think, favor the probability of a good
Mine being developed here. It is situated in a decidedly mineral


country ; the other end of the range, or Mount Remarkable
proper, containing deposits of Copper Ore, at a direct distance,
it is true, of eight or nine miles from the Spring Creek Mine; but
beyond Spring Creek, about three quarters of a mile to the
West, and over the next range, another discovery has been
made, and a claim taken out by Messrs. Nott and others.
This claim consists chiefly of grey oxide in thin veins, but
little has been done as yet to prove the ground. The reef of
rocks, in which the Ore at the Spring Creek Mine is found, runs,
as I have before said, down the face of a steep hill, and points
ISorth and South, Messrs. Nott & Co.’s claim being nearly due
West of if. This would indicate the continuance of a course of
Ore in that direction, though I cannot go so far as to say that at
present the lode has been distinctly traced between the outcrop-
pings of Ore. The proprietors, however, believe that it does
exist. Some parties who speak depreciatingly of the Spring
Creek Mine, do so, I believe, because of the extreme richness of
the surface Ores and for no other reason, but this is not, in my
opinion, a sufficient reason. The geological features of this colony
present occasional anomalies, and many of the ordinarily received
rules are found sometimes to be disregarded by Dame Nature.
It does not always follow that where there is a rich surface deposit
there is nothing beneath. I confess I incline to the opinion of a
very intelligent gentleman, who has had considerable experience
in mining in this colony, and who remarked to me respecting
another Mine—“ These surface deposits must have boiled up as
it were from below, and even if we cannot find a continuous
course of Ore as we go down, we shall no doubt find it again
in depth, but people here either have not capital, or have not
patience to go deep enough.” The deepest Miue in the colony
the Burra Burra, is only about one-fifth of the depth of some of the
Copper Mines of Cornwall, and there are only about two dozen
other Mines where anything more has been done than what
would be called “ surfacing” in Cornwall. Persons of experience
in English mining will therefore at once see that the development
of the mineral wealth of this colony is but in its infancy.
To conclude my notice of the Spring Creek Mine, I think it
highly probable that if an adit were driven South into the hill,
it would lead to a discovery of importance. I shall look forward
with great interest to the development of this Mine, as likely to
set at rest some disputed questions in relation to Mines and
mining in the North.
drat dlaktone ||tine.
Proceeding northwards from the Spring Creek Mine through
about 20 miles of fine country, well grassed and lightly timbered,
we come to the Great Gladstone Mine—named after the
Chancellor of the Exchequer. This Mine is situated on a bank


rising to the westwards towards Mount Brown—another high
peak of the Flinders Range —the country to the East being
flat. The distance from Port Augusta is 32 miles. The surface
indications of the existence of Copper here are favorable. The
country consists of clay slate, and quartz, and several out-
croppings of Ore and Copper stains are found in many places.
The back of the lodes consists chiefly of ironstone, and a
considerable proportion of iron is found in most of the Ore
raised. There are, however, some fine specimens of rich Copper
ore, grey oxide, and brown ore, besides green carbonates and a
little malachite. Other metals also exist in this Mine, small
particles of Galena being met with, and another metal which I
believe to be Silver. Probably careful research might lead to
other discoveries. Three shafts have been sunk, from 8 to
nearly 17 fathoms, and a considerable extent of ground driven,
from which a large quantity of mineral has been raised. I say
mineral, as it would not be strictly correct to call it Ore, though
there is a good deal of metal amongst it; but without machinery
much of it would not pay for dressing. However, as producing
mere curiosities for the cabinet this Mine is one of the richest
in pretty specimens ; the crystals of quartz stained with Copper
and other metals being very beautiful. The ground is soft,
scarcely any necessity existing for the use of powder, and a
large amount of work has been done at a very moderate outlay.
There is a considerable extent of ground on the Great Gladstone
Company’s property yet untried, and where the surface indica-
tions are encouraging; it is, therefore, not improbable that
future researches may result more successfully than those hitherto
made. Should a payable Mine be found here, its situation will
give it many advantages; its nearness to a shipping port, and
also to Melrose, the inland township of Mount Remarkable, and
its immediate proximity to sheep and cattle runs.
After leaving the Great Gladstone Mine we had the assistance
of a guide, who undertook to take us a short cut to Kanyaka, and
by which, he said, we should save a distance of 20 miles. We
accordingly started, our guide shewing the most utter contempt
for roads ; but I often wished, despite the supposed saving in
distance, that we were on the beaten track, for we crossed the
Willochra Plains, which consist of loose sandy soil covered with
stones as if road metal had been sown there broadcast; moreover
the ground is full of holes made by little animals, which abound
here, and the holes being about four inches in diameter, and
perhaps a foot in perpendicular depth, the travelling was very
unpleasant for the horses as well as for the riders. Here
we “ camped” in the middle of the day, to refresh man and beast,
at the junction of the Willochra and Pitchiriichie Creeks,
amongst beautiful native flowers, including sweet peas. There
was good water and feed for the horses. We saw a number of


native fowl which, at a short distance, appeared very like domestic
poultry, and were supposed by the “ new chums” of the party to
be so. After discussing some bread and meat which we brought
with us, and resting our horses for an hour, we again proceeded
on our journey, remarking how very much such an exhibition as
we then made would “ take” in London—live men, rigged out
in bush costume, and with pannicans, hobbles, saddle-bags, &c.,
three of us leading pack horses, —but, mirahile dictu , not one
smoker in the party ! Really it w'ould not be a bad idea for
some Albert Smith to give an exhibition, by means of tableaux
vivants, of life in the bush of Australia. The ground by
no means improved as we proceeded, and as we had lunched,
or camped rather early, the afternoon was long and tedious.
During the journey we saw innumerable kangaroo rats,
“ wideawakes,” (a variety of the wallaby), a few kangaroo, and
some fine turkeys. Towards evening we approached K any aka,
and saw a very remarkable rock, which, at a little distance,
appears to rise abruptly from the plain. This rock, which is on
the bank of a creek, measures about 22 feet in height from the
plain, but where the earth has been washed aw r ay on the creek
side, it is fully ten feet higher, and is about 30 feet long and 18
or 20 feet through. There is a waterhole in the creek so nearly
corresponding in dimensions to this rock that many persons fancy
it was by some extraordinary convulsion thrown out of the bed
of the creek. It is a hard kind of granitic rock. The natives in
the neighbourhood appear to attach some superstitious notion to
the rock, for they manifest an anxiety, when at the point of
death, to be brought and laid down to die under its shadow. I
was informed that their wishes in this respect are not merely
attended to by their companions, but that the course pursued by
them is by no means unlikely to hasten the desired end. The
unfortunate native is laid down under the big rock, with his
blanket or opossum rug, and a very small supply of provisions,
his comrades then retire to the distance of a mile or more, where
they encamp, and come to the rock about once every twenty-four
hours to ascertain if the sick man is still living; if he is, a little
water and food is given him, but scarcely sufficient to support
existence, so that before many days he attains his wish, his
death no doubt having been expedited by exposure and insuffi-
cient food.
Kanyaka, the station of J. B. Phillips, Esq., is rather prettily
situated ; a gum creek runs past the station, and contains good
and permanent water in pools. After a thunder storm I have
seen it present the appearance of a small river. The hills,
especially on the east side of the gully, are bold and lofty, and
there is sufficient timber to relieve the country from the appear-
ance of barrenness. The grass also, at the time of my visit, was
very luxuriant and looked inviting to the scythe. The station
comprises several substantial stone buildings, and a fine stone
woolshed is built about 800 yards from the houses. One of the
offices is used as a Post Office, and the number of letters and


newspapers passing through it is surprising, considering the
scattered population of the North, and the nature of their occu-
pations. About a mile from the station, rather to the south of
west, a Mine has been discovered amongst low hills, and is called
Cjj t Jbnpk Pine.
The country consists chiefly of pipeclay, decomposed slate, and
soft sandstone, and is very easily worked, from 255. to 85s. per
fathom being the price paid for sinking or driving. The softness
of the country, however, will necessitate the employment of a
quantity of timber for the purpose of securing the shafts and
drives. There is a very well defined lode, having near the surface
the appearance of indurated clay, strongly stained with Copper,
and containing occasional stones of ore of from 20 to 30 per cent.
I should judge that for some distance the whole produce of the
lode as raised would be worth from 7 to 10 per cent., but of
course it can be dressed to a higher yield. As the lode goes down
there is an improvement in the quality of the Ore, and I saw two
piles containing seven or eight tons, which had been dressed to
an average percentage of 30. Several stones of the ore (grey
oxide) would probably yield 50 per cent, of Copper. Since my
visit, and up to the present time (January 28), the quantity at
grass is about 20 tons of 30 per cent. Ore. The lode is from two
feet to thirty inches in width, but is rather too flat, dipping from
the horizon only about two feet in the fathom. A great deal of
gypsum is found at the sides of the lode. A very fair amount of
work has been done here, several shafts having been sunk, the
deepest of which is 15 fathoms, and these are connected by drives
extending for about 40 fathoms, and proving the lode to be of the
character I have described over a large extent of ground; it has
been traced altogether for 11 chains in length on the surface. I
have no doubt this Mine will prove a paying concern, from the
small expense at which it can be worked, and the moderate cost
of cartage—which can be obtained to Port Augusta (distant 57
miles) at 355. per ton —and there is a good quantity of Ore in
sight, the lode continuing very regular. The lode in this Mine
is most easily distinguishable even by the untutored eye, the
country being nearly white and the Ore of a dark blue and grey
color. A company is engaged in working the Mine (on Section
1533), the superintendence being given to Captain Tonkin. The
shares are at a premium.
(Tlk llloitnt (f ram Uliiit.
Prom Kanyaka and the neighbouring Mine we proceeded to the
Mount Craig Mine, a property that promised very well, and from
which some very fine Ore was raised; but, owing, probably, to


mismanagement somewhere, the Mine was abandoned, and the
Company wound up. The Mine is situated favorably enough,
and in mineral country. There is a creek with precipitous banks
running through the section, and from these banks drives have
been made with the view of cutting the lode ; but they appear
to have been made parallel with the lode, instead of at an angle
with it, and as two parallel lines can never meet, it is no wonder
the lode was not cut. One of the best educated and experienced
mining captains we have has given me his opinion that there is
still a good Mine on the property if it were properly worked,
and I have no doubt the same remark would apply to many
abandoned claims, A great deal of work was done here, but no
results of importance were realized, and for want of capital to
carry on further operations the Mine was abandoned.
®jjt Mirniluilb glint
Is embedded amongst hills, about two miles North of Mount
Craig, and where the Company have seven sections. The
indications of Copper are plentiful and extensive; but the ground
is hard in some places. Eleven shafts have been sunk, the
deepest being nearly 30 fathoms, and a number of drives have
been made, of which the longest is 50 fathoms; but no result has
yet been attained to compensate for the outlay. The hills on
the property are very steep, and shafts have been sunk, in some
cases, close to the sides, and from a considerable elevation. Ore
has, in many cases, been found all the way down. The quantity
raised, in proportion to the amount of work done, is small, and
past results are not very encouraging for further operations.
Nevertheless, some pretty samples of Ore have been raised, and
some specimens of red oxide were obtained from the lowest
level. In some parts of the property regular lodes have been
met with and followed to some depth, consisting of quartz,
gossan, and felspar, and containing some good stones of Ore.
The country, for several fathoms, consists of a porphyritic rocky
stratum, and beneath this clay slate is met with. This is a
favorable indication, and it is possible that at a greater depth the
country may become more settled, and better results be obtained.
At the time of my visit, about 30 men were employed on the
Mine, but since then the number has been considerably reduced.
I examined some claims in the neighborhood of the Wirra-
wilka, and which w T ere represented to me as very rich ; but my
eight cannot have been so good as that of the person who took


out the claims, for I could see nothing to warrant even the
expense of the first application for the land. There were some
stones dug out from near the top of a high hill, and which were
stained green, but I could not call them Copper Ore. There was
no lode, nor anything favorable in the way of indications, except
the green-stained stones. Ido not wish to identify these claims
by any more minute description, but I allude to them to show
how sanguine some persons are if they find anything the color of
Copper Ore.
I heard of two men (shepherds I think) in the North, who
rather unaccountably gave up their situations, and were missed
for some time; about a month afterwards, a person who knew
them discovered them in a secluded spot, working most indus-
triously, digging up ironstone. They had saved money enough
to purchase a stock of tools and provisions, and' thought by
working quietly and alone to raise Ore enough from their Mine
to enable them to retain their supposed wealth to themselves.
The person asked them what they had got there ? They replied,
“ a Copper Mine, and a rich one too, see it is just the color of
penny pieces but they looked rather crest-fallen when they
were told that their Mine was worthless, and their Ore would not
make penny pieces at all. It appeared they had never seen
Copper Ore, but haying heard of its existence, they took out a
claim of ironstone, in mistake, and worked it for a month!
Cl n liirtoan Uline
Is situated about four miles South of Mount Craig and 72 North-
east of Port Augusta, at the foot of a range of hills of moderate
elevation sloping towards a plain to the westward. The country
consists of a soft light killas and a kind of pipeclay. There are
several lodes and branches of Ore on the property, running
generally to the East of North, and underlying from is inches to
two feet in the fathom. Three shafts have been sunk, the deepest
of which is 21 fathoms, and at the bottom of this shaft there is a
lode between three and four feet wide and composed of quartz
and copper pyrites. A level has been driven on the course of
one of the lodes about ten fathoms into the hill, and a cross-cut
about five fathoms, cutting several branches of Ore running into
the lode. Another cross-cut has been driven to the South-east,
cutting a lode of fine blue and green carbonates about a foot
wide; several tons of good Ore have been raised here, A short
distance to the West two shafts were sunk on the course ot the
lode, which is composed of carbonates of Copper, intermixed
with ironstone, and is traceable for 300 yards. A quantity of


Ore was also raised at this part of the workings. On another
section, about a mile and a-half South-east of the first-named
place, a small shaft has been sunk on an east and west lode which
produced some fine grey and red oxide.
The country on the Kirwan Mine differs somewhat from that
on either side, and would seem to be a band of more favorable
strata for copper. It is a very promising looking Mine.
The same proprietary have another Mine in the neighbourhood
of Arkaba, which, as it belongs to the same company, and is
known by the same name—the Kirwan Mine—may be described
here. It is on the Messrs. Marchant’s Arkaba run, and about
80 miles north of Port Augusta. The country consists of killas.
There is a good East and West lode of fine black and yellow Ore,
about two feet wide, and underlying about 15 inches in the
fathom. A shaft has been sunk six fathoms, and a level driven
about five fathoms from the surface on the course of the lode.
This level is driven eastwards about ten fathoms. Another lode,
or propably a branch of the same, lies about ten feet to the
North, and contains good stones of Ore on the surface. Some
tons of Ore, averaging about 40 per cent., have been raised here,
although comparatively little work has been done. Water and
timber are plentiful on the section and in the neighbourhood.
Cjtt Ijfapolwm Mint.
Prom the Kirwan, we rode along the foot of the hills for about
seven miles further, through mallee scrub and loose sandy soil,
until we came to the claims of the Napoleon Mining Company,
and here, I regret to say, I was disappointed; I had heard so
much of the richness of these claims that I was surprised to find
nothing but the poorest indications. A hole had been sunk
about 10 or 12 feet, through country consisting of carbonate
of lime and felspar, and containing a few specks of
Ore, but the appearances were most unpromising. I enquired
of the person in charge where the fifteen tons of Ore were to be
seen which I was informed had been raised, and was told that
there never was so much, and all that had been obtained had been
carried away as specimens ! I was further told, that that was
the best of the Napoleon Mining Company’s claims, but that
there w r as another seven miles off, to which my informant
offered to accompany me if I wished to go; but as he
assured me there w r as not a particle of Ore to be
seen, I declined to ride 14 miles for nothing, on a
hot day, through a miserable country. On my return to
Adelaide, I was annoyed to find that this person having had a


quarrel with his employers, purposely misled me; and I ascertained
from them that the section seven miles further was that from
which the Ore had been raised, and that which I saw was one
which they thought of abandoning. I can, therefore, give no
account of the Napoleon Mine. I may, perhaps, be allowed to
say that the reports of the Mine written by the person alluded
to are strangely at variance with his statements to me, and in
them he speaks of lodes of rich Ore, and expresses the highest
opinion of the property.
From the Napoleon Mine we proceeded to Warcowie, a station
of P. Butler’s, Esq., and rather prettily situated. There appeared
to be some very good country on this run, although, as we rode
over a large portion of it by moonlight, it was not easy to form a
judgment; still we could, in many places, distinguish a fine crop
of grass growing. After partaking of the customary hospitality
of the station, we laid in a stock of flour, meat, tea and sugar,
for the next three days, and started to visit a mineral claim
(No. 1665) S.W. of Bawnsley’s Bluff. We rode about nine
miles through undulating and nearly flat country, with occasional
patches of light scrubby timber, but for the most part monoto-
nous and uninteresting. The claim is situated on low, undulating,
settled ground ; a strong reef of ironstone shows on the surface
for 250 or 300 yards, and contains some good stones of green
carbonate of Copper. I consider the indications favorable, but
as the discovery was quite recent, no ground had been opened.
From the appearance of the surface and nature of the country
I should not be surprised to hear of the development of a good
Mine in this place.
Being directed where to find water for ourselves and horses,
we proceeded about three miles in an easterly direction, and came
to a fine spring, where a well had been dug in the bank of a
creek, and about six or eight feet from its bed, the water over-
flowing into the creek. Here we camped for an hour and a half,
kindled a fire, boiled our quart pots, and having made tea, “ did
ample justice” to the provisions we carried with us. There was a
little good feed for the horses, but they appeared rather daint y
and did not make the most of it, as no doubt they would have
done could they have foreseen what was before them, for they
were without food for the next 33 hours, and then got but a
scanty supply. Our guide now designed to take us another of
his “ short cuts,” which he accomplished pretty much in the same
way as if he had travelled along three sides of a square instead
of one; starting nearly at right angles to the direction which we
had to go. We soon came on to rough, desolate-looking, country,
dry and parched, as if—as is possibly the case —no rain had fallen
there for years. The land was stony, and as dusty as a road over
which heavy traffic passed ; not a blade of grass was to be seen,
yet there was some kind of vegetation, miserable stunted scrub,
which only rendered the appearance of desolation more complete ;


even this scrub, though retaining the semblance of vitality,
seemed dried up and sapless, and the branches broke almost like
rotten wood. A double portion of the curse seemed to rest on
this miserable place, and as we came to an opening, revealing
miles of similar country to our gaze, we could not help thinking
of the “blasted heath” in Macbeth ; and it would have required
the art of a witch to have found water there to boil, or sticks fit
to make a fire. The country I have thus feebly attempted to
describe is on the edge of the Eastern Plain, and on the boun-
dary of a run, at the other side of which is one of the finest
portions of country in the North. Still we travelled on, for
there was no use in stopping, and our guide seemed to entertain
a vague and uncertain notion that there was the bare possibility
of our finding a suitable camping place before night, and feed for
the horses. About half-past 6, we reached Yudnapunda Springs,
where there was a good supply of excellent water, but not a
bite of any kind for the horses, we therefore tied up the poor
brutes to let them rest, after giving them drink ; we then lit our
evening fire, made “johnny cakes” of flour and water, which we
baked in the ashes, where also we grilled some chops, and having
made tea we endeavored to enjoy the sumptuous repast. For
my part, and I believe others shared my feelings, I felt distressed
on account of the poor horses, and could enjoy nothing. The
ground about the Yudnapunda Springs was quite a “ Golgotha,”
covered with mimerous skeletons of unfortunate cattle starved to
death, and Avhich had come to the water to drink and die. Many
other springs in the North are surrounded by similar relics; for
some three or four years ago there was a very dry season, and
sheep and cattle perished by thousands in this part of the
country. After resting two hours, we rode on through similar
dry, dusty, barren country, for two hours more, when, as there
seemed no prospect of improvement, we came to a halt for the
night in some horrible mallee scrub ; hobbled the horses, to give
them a chance if there should happen to be any feed near, but
they were tired, and immediately lay down, and we soon followed
their example. I selected a soft place in the sand, and spreading
my wallaby rug on the ground, rolled myself up, and was quickly
asleep. We rose early the next morning, and made a cup of
tea, with water carried in canteens ; and having breakfasted off
johnny cakes, started at about half-past 6. The horses had
wandered about a mile in search of feed, but found none, and
they looked very miserable. After riding some miles along the
edge of the plain, through similar country, we began to turn a
little in towards the hills, in order to reach a “ gap,” the only
spot our guide was acquainted with, where we could get through
the tremendous range that frowned down upon us. However,
since he last travelled in the North—some two years previously—
another gap had been discovered, and if we had known of that
we should have had a better road and 20 miles shorter, I don’t
know then that our guide would have preferred it, for he seemed
to delight in great circle sailing, and also in selecting the


roughest route for travelling. This cannot have resulted from
anything of the poetic in his composition, or from any love of
the sublime and beautiful, for he appeared to revel in the rugged
and the desolate. Poor fellow ! I could not help feeling sorry
for him; for the uncertain seasons, and vicissitudes of sheep-
farming, in the North, had helped to ruin him, and perhaps he
brooded over his misfortunes, and a morbid feeling took
possession of his mind, making him like to wander over barren
and desert country.
I have dwelt rather long over this part of our journey, in
order to give some idea to those who “ sit at home at ease,” of
what bush life often is. The reader may imagine, to some extent,
from what I have described, what our brave explorers have to
encounter, when for weeks together they have, day after day, a
repetition nearly as bad as what we endured, and without the
saving clause of plenty of food and water for themselves. Our
horses alone suffered, and that for only two days.
But to finish this part of the narrative: my horse was taken
ill and knocked up, and for some four miles I had to drive him
before me. Towards noon we reached a creek containing good
water, where the horses drank and rested for about twenty
minutes. 1 managed to get my horse along for three miles
further, when we camped for two hours, and the poor animal
seemed in a dying state. However, we drove him on four or
five miles, after he had rested, and then were obliged to leave
him. After a tedious ride of three hours more, we reached
Angorigena, the station of H. C. Swan, Esq., where I was very
kindly received, and my companions proceeded about four miles
further, to the Blinman Mine.
The next day I went to look for my horse but could not find
him. Our guide, who was an experienced bushman, then kindly
undertook the search, and tracked him for six or eight miles,
through some of the wildest country imaginable —over rocks,
and along the sides of almost precipitous hills, where no one
would suspect any but wild animals of venturing. However, the
horse could not be brought back, and was left at Wirryalpa, on
the Eastern Plain.
Proceeding from Angorigena through moderately hilly country,
lightly timbered at intervals with pine, I came to the
®jjeal |llsiratmr,
A Mike belonging to the Yudanamutana Mining Company.
There is a large reef of indurated clay slate, intermixed with iron-
stone and gossan, and forming the back of a lode running nearly
North and South, and distinctly traceable for about 200 yards on
the surface. In the clay slate small pieces of green carbonate
and grey ore are found. The lode runs to the top of a hill, about
90 feet in height from the creek, and here it forms a large “ boil,”


in which the ore was discovered. On the rocks being broken
away a fine lode of exceedingly rich Ore was seen, 8 feet wide,
and underlying westwards into the hill about 18 inches in the
fathom. When I visited the Mine the top of the hill was being
stoped away, and a splendid course of Ore was exposed to view.
It was nearly solid metal for a width of 8 feet, and had a peculiarly
brilliant appearance, like a mixture of grey and red oxides. Some
rich green and blue carbonates w r ere occasionally met with, and
specks of the finest yellow ore, known as “ semi-metal.” At the
time of my visit No. 1 Shaft w y as sunk nine fathoms on the course
of the lode from the top of the hill, and carried ore the whole way
down. No. 2 Shaft is about 8 fathoms south of No. 1, being
further into the range, the first shaft commencing very near the
face of the hill; the same lode has been cut in this shaft, where
it is from 8 to 10 feet wide, and the shaft sunk about 5 fathoms
on the lode; the ore raised is of similar quality to that in the
other shaft, and the quantity raised is about 100 tons of first and
second quality, and 150 tons to be smelted. About 18 fathoms
farther south No. 3 workings are going on, and which, at about
two fathoms below the surface, have produced five tons of the
finest Ore, and about 10 tons for smelting. About 10 fathoms
still farther south, on the same lode, a shaft has been sunk four
fathoms, from which about five tons of second quality Ore have
been raised, and a few tons have also to be reduced to regulus.
About 20 fathoms north of No. 1 shaft another shaft (No. 5) has
been sunk four fathoms through a good gossan lode containing
Ore of first and second quality. Fifty tons of Ore of all qualities
have been raised from this shaft, and 20 fathoms farther north
No. 4 shaft is sunk to a depth of 10 fathoms through a good ore-
bearing lode from three to four feet wide. At the depth of eight
fathoms the lode inclines farther w r est, and a drive is being carried
to intersect it, and when it is cut again drives will be carried both
North and South, on the course of the lode, under the various
workings above-mentioned.
Up to the close of 1862 above 600 tons of Ore of all qualities
were raised here, 400 of which were estimated to yield an average
produce of 40 per cent. A fine block of this value, and weighing
about 2J tons had been sent to Port Augusta for shipment. The
country was very dry, a well having been sunk 20 fathoms in the
bed of the creek without cutting w T ater. There are, nevertheless,
some fine springs in the immediate neighbourhood. A number
of substantial pine huts for the miners have been erected on the
Mine, besides a good store of galvanized iron with a cellar
beneath, also offices and Captains’ apartments. The distance of
this Mine from Port Augusta, by the present road, is about 140
miles, but a new road has been cut through the Brachina Creek,
and by which a saving of about 20 miles would be effected, and a
better road secured for feed and water for cattle. The rate of
cartage paid has been from £4 10s. to £5 per ton, but should
the season continue favorable, and feed be plentiful, it will
probably be much lower shortly.


|flr. giifetm’s Claims.
Erom the Elinman we went to look at some neighbouring
claims, the first was No. 1683, taken out by Eobt. H. Davison,
about 2or miles from the Mine. This contained good indica-
tions, reaching from the gully for some distance up a steep hill,
and a small pit had been sunk near the foot, disclosing a lode of
Ore of fair quality. Ore was also found in two or three other
places which were opened, and the section was altogether a
promising one. At the next claim we visited, a small shaft was
sunk 15 fathoms through whitish clay slate, following stains of
Copper down from the surface. This work was performed with
commendable diligence, by only two men, in a very short space ot
time, but my own impression of the indications was that they
were not sufficiently encouraging to warrant the expenditure of
labor bestowed on the work. However, it was singular to find
continuous stains for so great a depth, and some persons of
experience in mining recommended the industrious workmen to
I have been since informed that they found some
small pieces of grey ore in the bottom. The ground was certainly
such as “ Copper would live in,” as the miners say, and it is not
impossible that a course of Ore might be met with at a greater
depth.
We next proceeded to Messrs. Chambers & Einke’s Station of
Moolooloo, where we passed the night. There was in the hut an
armchair of peculiar construction, quite unique in fact, being cut
and hollowed out of the solid trunk of a gum tree, even the seat
of the chair having been left in its original position as part of the
solid tree, and showing the perfect round of the trunk. The
wood was cut away underneath to reduce the weight, but it was
nevertheless rather heavy. The design was ingenious, though the
workmanship was not quite such as a cabinetmaker would turn
out, and the chair did not exactly come under the denomination
“ easy.”
The next morning we rode to Patawarta, formerly called
Mount Bugged, to see a mineral claim. The country we rode
over was the most beautiful I had seen since leaving Mount
Remarkable, indeed I think it surpassed anything I saw in that
neighbourhood. The land was at that time well grassed, and our
road lay sometimes over undulating ground and sometimes
through wild and rocky gorges, the hills rising like high walls on
either side. At last, passing through a fence in a narrow gap
betAveen two such hills, we entered a kind of “ pound” —that is
a tract of land so surrounded by high and rugged or precipitous
hills that a few yards of fencing across the gap sufficed to confine
the cattle in an area of several square miles. There are many
such “pounds” in the North, but the grandest of all is the
Wilpena Pound, and this will be described in its proper place.
Having entered this pound a beautiful view presented itself; on
the right was a fine bold range rising to a height of about 500


feet, and so steep that though not impracticable, few cattle
would ever attempt to cross it. There was a little vegetation on
it, just sufficient to relieve the prevailing reddish-yellow of the
rocks and soil covering its side, while a creek containing many
fine gum trees skirted its base. On the left, and rising gently
from the bank of the creek, were fine grassy slopes studded with
clumps of elegant pines, giving the place the appearance of an
English park ; while to complete tne picture, in the background
the bold dark rocky summit of Patawarta (distant about two
miles), towered majestically above the surrounding hills. Pro-
ceeding in the direction of Patawarta we gradually ascended
until we came amongst high hills, and rather “ disturbed” looking
country, scantily covered with scrub. On two of these hills we
found claim No. 1654.
This claim contains several lodes, having backs of ironstone
protruding above the surface, and showing a good deal of grey
carbonate of Copper and yellow Ore. Copper is found scattered
in many places over the section, and the lodes are traceable over
two hills and a gully, for a distance of nearly a mile. Some very
good specimens of Ore have been found here, and Bismuth of a
high percentage has also been discovered; it is, therefore, very
probable that the claim may prove to be a valuable one. Adjoin-
ing sections have been claimed by Mr. E. Williams, Mr. W. Eose,
and others ; and the indications afforded are such as to warrant,
at least, the expenditure of some labor in testing the place.
I afterwards visited several claims in the neighbourhood of
Wheal Blinman; but, as I said in the introductory chapter, Ido
not intend to describe every separate claim which I saw, and I
shall, therefore, pass them over with a brief notice. Some of
these sections exhibit very promising indications, and I may
mention, especially, two taken out by Mr. Swan, and others by
Mr. Martin and Mr. Gaedechens. Mr. Campbell, also, has two
claims about four miles from the Blinman, and which contain
Copper Ore. Another claim about two miles North-East of the
Blinman, and called
®l;e ®ljtal |totltr,
Demands a rather more particular notice, from the peculiarity of
the Ore which it yields: a reddish brown or liver-colored Ore,
which, on assay, produced 37 per cent of Copper, although most
persons supposed it to be merely a variety of ironstone, which,
indeed, I believe it is ; but so largely impregnated with Copper
as to make it worth working. Two sections have been taken out
here (Nos. 1391 and 1392) ; they are on low undulating ground,
and in settled country. A good lode passes through both
sections, and has been opened, at intervals, for nearly a quarter
40


of a mile. The hack of the lode consists of ironstone, micaceous
iron, gossan, and quartz; and, below these, stones of green and
blue carbonate, and a quantity of liver-colored Copper Ore are
found. The underlay is about 2| to 3 feet in the fathom, and
pits have been sunk to various depths —4,8, and 12 feet—proving
the regularity of the lode, which varies from 18 inches to 8 feet
in width.
Leaving the Blinmau in the afternoon we made a short stage
and camped at Owanegan, formerly the head station of McKinlay,
the explorer, and at that time (1850) the most distant station
from Adelaide—about 300 miles in a direct line. At Owanegan
there is another pound similar to that which I described near
Patawarta; the approach to it is very fine. The traveller proceeds
up a gully between bold rock-capped hills, the space gradually
narrowing, and the hills becoming more precipitous, until he enters
a gorge or gap only a few rods across, and here, as usual, there is
a fence with a sliprail. Shortly after passing the fence, there is
a mass of rocks on the left hand, which, viewed from the other
side, bears a striking resemblance to an old man’s face, and it has
been named accordingly. Some stunted gums and pines appear
“ in the place where the wool ought to grow,” and pines and
scrub adorn the shoulders and bust of this natural sphinx. I
should have said that pines and occasional gum trees grow in
great abundance at the entrance to and also within the pound.
We made this station in the full expectation of finding abundant
feed and water for the horses, and in the former we were not
disappointed, but there was no water, and every sign of the old
well was obliterated, floods having come down the creek had
evidently filled it up. A trough was there, washed down from
its original position, but it was not until some time had elapsed
that a well was discovered in another place, about 15 feet deep
and with a puddle of water in the bottom. There were, however,
no means of drawing the water ; at last a pine pole was put
down, and our indefatigable guide, who, to do him justice, was
equal to any emergency of this kind, descended the pole with a
canteen and pannican slung round his neck. It was now nearly
dark, and as the water was only two or three inches deep it was
difficult to scoop it up, those on the top therefore threw down
lighted bits of paper to illuminate the well, and at last the canteen
was filled and brought safely up. Meanwhile two of the party,
not knowing where the others were, had kindled a fire in the hut,
so that the quart pots were soon boiling. When I took mine off
T observed a peculiar frothy scum on the top, and on examination
found it to be the larvae of the mosquito, with which the water
was quite thick; fortunately most of them had floated, but the
tea retained rather a soupy flavor —it may have been more
nourishing, but it was certainly not more agreeable for this
addition. However, hunger and thirst demolish fastidiousness of
palate, and we made a good meal and turned in, watching the


stars through the gaps in the roof. During the night a thunder
storm came on, accompanied by tremendous wind, which threa-
tened to blow the remains of the roof off, and rain which gave us
the benefit of a shower bath. The next morning we were astir
early, and made a start in order to reach water where we might
breakfast. At a short distance from the hut we came upon a
“bushman’s grave,” that of Mr. Walter Grill, a gentleman with
whom, some years before, I had the pleasure of a slight acquaint-
ance. The sight of a grave is calculated, under any circumstances,
to call forth serious reflections, but in the solitude of the bush it
awakens those feelings with tenfold force, and there is something
peculiarly affecting to stand over a lonely sepulchre in the wilder-
ness, far removed from the haunts of men. I saw a few others
during my travels, but none so neatly enclosed, or with such
pretty surrounding scenery as this. I made a sketch of the
place, and proceeded on my way after the rest of the party. The
scenery for some distance was equal to any I had met with in the
North, the land being well timbered and with a greater variety
of trees than usual. Passing under Patawarta, the view was
such as would have delighted an artist, the grand old mountain,
with its summit of overhanging rocks, rose high on our right,
while ranges of hills stretched away in the distance. There were
what appeared to be one or two small caves in the face of the hill,
which was covered with rocks and scrub. On our left the hills
were of less elevation and more gentle slope, and covered with
pines, sheaok (casuarina), and gums. A belt of pines also grew
at the foot, and partly up the slope of the mount, while the fore-
ground appeared like a wide smooth and well gravelled carriage
drive. Between the mount and the hills, on our left, was a
“ gap” leading away into the distance, and through which we
saw other hills beyond, forming a pleasing background to this
beautiful picture. Patawarta is visible from Mount B liemarkable,
a distance of about 170 miles.
After a ride of above three hours, we came, at 9 o’clock, to a
good spring of water in a creek, where we gave the horses drink,
and filling our canteens proceeded further, before breakfasting,
in order to find better feed for the animals ; the land, in imme-
diate proximity to water, in the North, being generally bare of
grass. As we rode on we came to some rather open country with
rocks —a kind of ferruginous clay slate—here and there on the
surface, and amongst some of these we found a curious fissure
about 20 feet in perpendicular depth, at which point it took a
slight turn and went still deeper. Some hills at a little distance
presented a peculiar red appearance, and were composed of
stratified rocks, probably, stained with iron. We saw Mount
Tilley to. the left, in a heavy black looking range, Mount
MacParlane on the right, Mount Hack, straight before us, and
Mount MacKinlay and Mount Uro (or Huro), a little to the
right, in the distance. We were now passing through Mr.
Field's run. Presently we came to Mr. John Baker’s run
(Pernunna), and passed through a gap in the range; on our


right there was a mass of rocks full of small caves of peculiar
appearance, and one of which had a regular porch, with one
pillar at the outside corner —two sides of the porch being open,
besides the entrance to the cave. On our left, were the Cock’s-
comb and the Mount Hack ranges, enclosing a “ pound” about
half a mile wide by ten miles in length, extending in a westerly
direction to Sliding Kock Creek.
I must not omit to mention the remarkable form assumed by
many of the hills in the North, and hence called “ reap-hook
rangesone side rises abruptly, and culminates, generally, in a
knob of rocks, while the other side slopes away gradually in a
graceful concave form, very much the shape of a sickle.
We were delayed three days at Mr. Baker’s station, by the
rain—a most unusual circumstance in the North, where it rains
seldom, and when it does, a thunder shower, lasting for half an
hour, often floods the country for miles. So uncertain and
limited is the quantity of rain in this part of the country that it
has been facetiously remarked, the northern squatter’s rain
guages are constructed so as to indicate a fall of fifteen drops to
the square mile ! The effects of brief and sudden thunder storms
soon pass away, so that a steady rain of several days was hailed
with delight; and at this time the effects proved most beneficial
and lasting, for the rain continued, with occasional intermission,
for eight consecutive days, and extended over a tract of country
comprising, probably, 80,000 square miles. The creeks were set
running, and large waterholes were filled with a supply, which,
without further replenishing, would last for years. In any future
remarks that I may make about the luxuriance of the herbage, it
must, therefore, be borne in mind that the season, when I was
privileged to travel in the North, was an exceptional one. The
grass sprang up rapidly after the rain, and in less than three
weeks country which before had presented the most barren and
desolate appearance was covered with a rich carpet of emerald
green.
Ifltnrat Siuio Iflinf
During our stay at Pernunna we paid a visit to the Mount Huro
Mine, distant about two and a half miles. This Mine is situated
in rather disturbed country, and amidst high and rugged hills.
A heavy reef of quartz and ironstone, on low hills gradually
rising from a creek, is found on examination to contain strong
stains (green and blue) of Copper, with occasional small pieces of
Ore, and in one place we found some good specimens of grey
oxide. ' Nothing has been done to develop this Mine, and it is


just one of those places about which it is difficult to express an
opinion; it may prove a valuable property, if the surface indica-
tions lead to a good Copper-bearing lode, but this has yet to be
proved. From its position and distance from a shipping port it
would require to be very productive to be a paying concern. The
same remark will apply to many other Mines in the North.
When we left Pcrnunna we found that the rain had made a great
alteration in the ground over which we had to travel. We had
frequently to dismount and lead our horses, to enable them to get
the more easily through the loose boggy soil. Our road through
the Malkio Gap was very rough. We were obliged to ride for
some distance along the bed of the creek, which was now
running strongly, in some places nearly up to the saddle girths,
and was very rocky, so that the horses had difficulty in keeping
their footing. We came presently on to more open country,
surrounded by hills in the distance; here we saw some red
kangaroo —as red as a fox. I noticed that the prevailing color
of these animals, in the North, was a reddish fawn of various
shades, whereas that of the kangaroo in the Southern and
Eastern districts of the colony is generally a mouse color. The
uro, or huro, is a variety of the kangaroo distinguished chiefly,
for its skin being covered with hair, while the common kangaroo
has a wooly kind of fur ; I fancy it is also more graceful in form,
and it attains a larger size than the kangaroo, uro being frequently
seen six feet high, and sometimes taller. Another peculiarity is
that it lacks the strong claw on the middle of the hind feet; pro-
bably to adapt it better for the rocky country in which it lives, and
where the long claw might get broken. Hence a uro does not rip
open the dogs like a kangaroo, though he often hugs them severely.
I have heard of a uro carrying off a kangaroo dog in his arms,
while two others were hanging on to his flanks with their teeth ;
I was also told of a gentleman being seized and carried for a
short distance by one of these powerful animals.
As we rode across the open country I observed, several miles
distant, in an easterly direction, something which presented very
much the appearance of a large factory chimney. On looking at
it through the glass it proved to be an immense mass of flat-faced
rock in a range of hills, and just the shape of a tall chimney
stack. This morning we saw some remarkable deposits of iron-
stone —containing, probably, above 80 per cent, of metal —in
immense masses, outcropping on the surface to a greater extent
even than any of the Copper Mines I have seen. There was one
hill which had a huge iron cap overhanging its brows like one of
the new-fashioned “ helmet hats.” Of course these vast deposits
of iron, 200 miles from a shipping port, must remain unavailable
until the discovery of coal enables the metal to be smelted on the
spot; and even then greater facilities for cartage must be provided
before any profit could arise; but I shall have more to say on
both these subjects bye and by.


As we proceeded we passed Constitution Hill, and saw the
Mine (?) named after it. The section is on gently rising ground
at the foot of the range, and a reef of limestone runs through it
containing some slight stains of Copper and a few small particles
of grey oxide.
A short distance further brought us to Mount Serle, a fine
massive mountain between 3,000 and 4,000 feet above the sea
level, and rising almost abruptly from the surrounding country.
This part of our journey was through better land than a great
deal that we had seen, and the scenery was very passable, though
not remarkably interesting. There was a fair sprinkling of light
timber and scrub, and a short distance from thr mount we
observed, nailed to a tree, a board containing the following impor-
tant announcement —“ Water up the creek, to the left, both
salt and fresh.” Some benevolent individual had taken the
trouble to cut out the letters so that they should not he easily
obliterated. Obeying the directions, we found plenty of good
fresh water where we camped, and not standing in need of salt
we made no further search. A few miles more and we arrived at
Messrs. Scott & Kingsmill’s station of Owieandana, where we
stopped the night, as the weather was threatening and we could
make no other station on our road for a distance of 30 miles. In
the early morning some heavy rain fell, but the day was pleasant
for our journey.
About five or six miles from the station, we came to
% liomtt iiO'jf mint
The working of this Mine having been temporarily stopped, I
had no means of descending the shafts. Before I left Adelaide
I was given to understand that there was a person in charge;
otherwise I might have made arrangements for going under-
ground ; but no one was there, and all the ropes, &c., were
removed. I also ascertained that the water was in the lower
part of the Mine. However, I did the best I could, and examined
the ground and the piles of Ore at grass, and looked down the
shafts, in which the lodes were plainly to be seen. Judging from
the Ore and the nature of the country, as well as from the
appearance of the lodes, so far as they were visible, I formed a
very favorable opinion of this Mine. The killas and gossan were
of the right kind, and the country appeared to be easy to work.
Although the best of the Ore raised had been carted away to the
amount of nearly 100 tons, several tons remaining at grass would
quite pay for dressing.
As I consider this Mine as likely to become one of consider-
able importance, when the working of it shall be resumed, I
have procured the following brief particulars relating to it from
a gentleman who visited the place shortly before the cessation of


operations. I may first state that the Mine is 215 or 220 miles
from Port Augusta, and a good road exists between the two
places ;
No 2 shaft is above 13 fathoms in depth. The lode has been
stoped away North from this shaft for two fathoms and a half,
and is more than three feet wide, of solid black and grey Ore of
high percentage, and which is standing seven feet high in the
North end of the stopes. No. 3 shaft is sunk 10 fathoms, on the
underlay of a large counter lode, five feet of which have been cut
through, and only one wall found at present. A few feet were
driven on the course of the lode, and a branch or leader of fine
Ore, 18 inches wide, was cut in the bottom of the level. No. 4
shaft is sunk to the depth of 10 fathoms, and contains a quantity
of Mundic, also a lode two feet wide and composed of green
carbonate of Copper, mixed with ironstone and gossan. This
lode is parallel with that in No. 2 shaft. The Ore shipped to
Swansea was assayed by Messrs. Bath & Co., there, and yielded a
produce of 28f per cent.
About three miles further we came to the
|ljp |)HI Pine,
Situated in rather rough country and amongst steep hills.
There is a lode traceable for about 150 yards on the surface, and
running about North-east and South-west. The back of the lode
consists of ironstone with quartz and copper ore. The country
is quartz and killas, or clayslate. Several stains of copper are
found in other places away from the lode; there are very strong
green stains on the face of“ a precipitous rocky hill at one side of
the creek, while the hill on the opposite side is covered with blue
stains. The Ore in the lode is not very rich, but looks promising,
consisting of green and blue carbonate with a little grey Ore. It
is impossible to say what it may prove in depth, the ground not
having been opened at all.
At the time of my visit a beautiful creek of excellent water,
and shaded by fine gum trees, ran purling amongst the hills,
and on my return, three weeks afterwards, the water was still
abundant. We found plenty of native peaches here, but
they are so soon attacked by a kind of caterpillar, or maggot,
that it is difficult to meet with a ripe specimen that has not been
commenced on by one of these tiresome insects. The peach is
about as good a fruit as any of the wild fruits of the colony, and
makes a very nice preserve, though it is rather insipid in its
natural state ; nevertheless it is very refreshing to the traveller in
the bush, and has been made the means, occasionally, of sustaining
life for days together when no other fruit was to be found. The


stones are hard, round, and full of small holes, and when cleaned
are of a yellow color; they are extensively used for making
bracelets and breast pins, mounted either with silver or gold.
Having gathered a quantity of these peaches we made some
jam in one of our quart pots, and ate it with Johnny cakes at our
midday meal. On this occasion our horses fared as well as our-
selves, for they had an hour and a-half’s rest on as good feed as
they could wish for, and they needed it, for they had 50 miles to
travel to day. However, the road was good and water plentiful,
and we kept the beaten track after leaving Apex Hill, and this
enabled the horses to travel better, for they seem always to prefer
the road to the bush. We met 250 or 300 fat cattle, looking
very clean and sleek, and presently afterwards saw a snake 5 feet
in length, the first that we had met with. The country through
which our road lay was more interesting than the average of
what we had passed through, and as we felt we were on the last
day of our upward journey, we were in good spirits, and rattled
over the last 30 miles between half-past two and half-past seven,
at which time we reached
®{)t gukramtami Himes
We met, during the afternoon, about 20 drays loaded with Ore
from these Mines, and carrying, altogether, about 50 tons. This
sight tended very much to enliven the road, and the magnificent
quality of the Ore showed us that we were approaching a Mine
of no ordinary character. On one dray we saw a splendid block
of Ore estimated to weigh at least four tons, and containing,
throughout, about 40 per cent, of Copper. The prevailing Ore
was grey oxide, accompanied by some green carbonate, and a few
beautiful crystals of arseniate of Copper. Another dray, in
company with the former, contained two large blocks, which,
together, must have weighed above three tons. These, we were
informed, were originally part of the same block as the first
mentioned.
The last 40 miles of the road was, with a trifling exception,
excellent, and it would be no difficult matter to drive tandem at
a good pace nearly all the way. The exceptional part of the road
(Compass Pass), however, can be avoided by taking a new cut
leading more to the eastward, near Illinawurtina, Mr. John
Scott’s station, and this track is considerably shorter. I was
amused, when riding alone past Oomberatina, a station of Mr,
Elder’s, 15 miles from Yudanamutana, by some natives who
called out to know if I was “ going to look for Copper F” The
blacks now quite understand the object of many of the whites
who visit the Horth, and several of them have pointed out
Copper Ore. A blackfellow was the first to discover the Yuda-
namutana Mine, which he called “ Big one old man Copper”—
“old man” being an expression in use among the blacks to denote


anything of full size, or maturity, and when “big one” is
prefixed the superlative degree of comparison is understood.
When nearing the Yudanamuntana Mine we came to a fine
gum creek, the windings of which we followed for some little
distance until, passing through a gorge, we entered a romantic
looking spot surrounded by high peaked hills, for the most
part crowned with rocks, in some of which the stains of
Copper were visible from a considerable distance. The situa-
tion of the Mine reminds the traveller of Swiss or Welsh
mountain scenery, and several fine sketches might be taken of
the neighboring hills ; indeed, a panoramic view of the locality
would be very pretty. The creek is shaded by gum trees and
shrubs, the latter being seven or eight feet in height; and
the hill sides are covered with low scrub and small flowering
shrubs, with here and there a clump of pines. The first
grand discovery which was made here consisted of a large boil
of Ore in ironstone and gossan, on the top of a low hill in the
midst of the surrounding amphitheatre of mountains, and I have
frequently observed a similar formation in connection with
Mines in the North. The hill referred to in the present case is
on section “ 135 a,” and is about 80 or 90 feet above the creek,
which flows on two sides of its base.
The boil of Ore at the top contained altogether about 70
tons above the surface, a portion of it, on one side, is still
left standing as a sample or memento of its original appear-
ance. When an inspection of the Mines of the colony was
made by order of the Government, although no report was
published, it was generally understood that such report would
be rather damaging to most of the Northern Mines, and it was
stated that the Yudauamutana Mine, especially, was condemned,
the boil or bunch of Ore on the surface being said to be all
that ever would be found there, as it went down suddenly in
the shape of a wedge, and ran out, and that no more than 60
tons could be raised from the hill. This assertion—which,
whether it formed a part of the report handed in to the
Government or not, was much talked of out of doors—has
been most triumphantly refuted by the subsequent development
of the Mine. It was to a certain extent true that the great mass
of Ore, which was 10 or 12 feet wide, did go down in the shape
of a wedge for a few feet, but the end of the wedge has not yet
been reached, though shafts have been sunk on the lode to a total
depth, from the top, of 28 fathoms. The aptness of the com-
parison ceased after the first two fathoms, for a finer and more
regular lode below I never saw. The Ore in the lode varies from
two to four feet in width, the walls are of killas, and the lode of
fine gossan and steatite, with splendid grey Ore, accompanied
by green carbonate and liver-colored Ore. The lode underlies
about One foot in the fathom, and has been traced altogether for
above two miles in length, occasionally cropping out on the
surface. On the property of the Yudauamutana Mining Company
the lode runs for a mile, and has been proved at intervals for a


length of above 1,300 yards. The principal workings are in the
neighborhood of the boil of Ore on the hill, where a shaft (No. 2)
was sunk at the side of the lode for 11 fathoms, proving the lode
to that depth, the country as well as the lode in the bottom
looking very favorable. Several fathoms to the north of this
shaft w r ere stoped away from the surface, so that the nature of
the lode could be plainly seen. Some stoping had also been done
on the south side of the hill with a similar result; and a very
promising counter lode to the east of the main load was opened
for a length of between 20 or 30 feet, and a few feet in depth.
At the bottom of the hill on the South, an adit level (No. 1.)
was being driven on the course of the lode ; from the mouth of
this level the large blocks of Ore, before referred to, were taken ;
a winze was sunk three fathoms at the entrance to the level, and
the appearances presented in it were highly satisfactory, the
finest possible country with beautiful Ore in the bottom. A
little further south, and across a small flat, 70 fathoms from
No, 2 shaft, we find No. 1 shaft sunk 12 fathoms on the same
lode, and in every respect looking as well as the other, several
fine stones of grey Ore of about half a ton weight, and from
40 to 50 per cent, produce, were raised from the bottom in my
presence. On section “ 135 n,” to the South of that which I
have described, workings were commenced about 600 yards from
No. 2 shaft, and several tons of red oxide and steel grey Ores
raised. At this spot there is a curious volcanic looking boil of
ironstone, and what appears very much like lava and scoriae.
This boil was hollow internally, so that while one of the miners
was working here with his pick, a mass suddenly fell inwards into
the cavity, nearly causing him him to fall with it. A short
distance to the eastwards a branch lode has been cut, apparently
converging with the other at an acute angle towards a point in
the gully to the north, and about this point a cross course, from
the west, seems to be intersecting the main lode. If this should
prove to be the case, a large deposit of Ore may be looked for at
the point of junction. I have now described the extent of the
workings at the time of my visit, but I also inspected the adjoin-
ing mineral sections belonging to the Company, and on all of
which Copper is found. Two of these (Nos. 285 and 1398)
appear to be better than the others, and I am glad to learn that
operations have been commenced on 285, called the Martichudina,
and very encouraging results met with. On one part of this
section there are large masses of rock containing Copper Ore in
abundance, and in another place, stones of the size of road metal
are scattered thickly up the slope of the hill for a width of 18 or
20 feet, and nearly half of them contain Copper Ore, many of
them to the value of 40 per cent. A similar surface deposit
occurs on section 1398, though perhaps not quite so rich as
on 285.
I have been favored with the following additional particulars
respecting these Mines by Henry Martin, Esq., the indefatigable
Superintendent of the Company in Adelaide, and who has just


returned from his third visit to Yudanamutana, he having visited
both the working Mines of the Company three times in seven
months. The total quantity of Ore raised at the Blinman and
Yudanamutana togther, is estimated at 2,400 tons, and this has
been accomplished by less than 80 men and boys in little more than
seven months, in addition to a great deal of preliminary work, such
as building huts, sinking wells, &c. Six hundred and thirty-eight
tons of Ore, averaging at least 40 per cent, produce, had been
carted from both Mines up to 22nd January, and 514 tons
shipped at Port Augusta. Niue hundred tons are at grass at the
Yudanamutana Mine, of which 300 tons are estimated to produce
50 per cent, of Copper, and the remainder above 25 per cent.
Nearly the same quantity is at the Wheal Blinman, and is thus
classed : —above 00 tons about 50 per cent.; 500 tons. 25 per
cent., and 300 tons 15 per cent.
Several sections adjoining those of the Yudanamutana Com-
pany, and containing Copper Ore, have been taken out by other
parties ; some of these claims are supposed to contain a continua-
tion of the Yudanamutana lodes, and others may prove well
worth working, but at present little or nothing hss been done to
develop them, and therefore a detailed account of them is not
strictly within the scope of the present work. However, I may
state generally, that this part of the country is, for miles in
extent, the richest in mineral of any I have yet seen, and when
greater facilities are enjoyed for working the Mines and carting
away the Ore, there will no doubt be many good claims opened
in this neighbourhood. As the natives express it—“ Big one
Copper sit down all about.”
On one of these sections (1685) taken out by Mr. Robert H.
Davison, there is a rather singular waterfall —a very rare thing in
the North. This fall—Petalinkina (“moonshine water”) as it is
called by the natives—comes over the side of a range about 200
feet in height from the gully, and, for 150 feet, quite precipitous;
indeed, half way up, a mass of rock overhangs a few feet, causing
the water which trickles down from above to dash over in spray.
A nice pool, about 35 feet in diameter and 4 feet deep, receives
the water, which falls about 150 feet from the top of the hill, and
then trickles down, amongst large rocks, into a second pool,
12 or 15 feet below. In another section (No. 1410), South of
the Yudanamutana workings, and belonging to Messrs. Neales,
Whitington, and James, there is another waterfall, very inferior
in height, being not more than 20 feet, but far superior as to the
surrounding scenery. The water flows along a narrow gully,
between steep rocky hills, from 250 to 300 feet in height, and
having their sides covered with porcupine grass, and pine and
gum trees. There are several large and deep waterholes in this
gully, and of considerable depth, so that the supply of water
(of excellent quality) is unfailing, or, to quote our friends the


natives, “never tumble! down”—this expression signifying death
or dissolution. They also apply their favorite phrase to this place,
“ big one old man water —never tumble down.” Near the end of
the aforesaid gully there is a peculiar formation ; masses of rock
rising, perpendicularly, to a height of 60 or 70 feet, and with a
face almost as smooth as the sides of an immense jar, encircle
nearly two-thirds of an eliptical basin, whose longest diameter is
100 feet, and its shortest 60 ; but in the upper side a huge cleft
exists in this mass of rock, nearly corresponding in slope with
the sidess of the hill behind. Through this cleft, and under a rude
kind of natural bridge, composed of large blocks of stone, and
having a little tree growing at one end, the water rushes, and
dashing against a jutting piece of rock rebounds a few feet, when
again meeting with a (slighter) resistance, it falls into the pool.
When I saw this romantic little cascade, the rate of the fall was,
I should think, about 100 gallons per minute, and the greatest
depth of water in the pool was said to be 14 feet. The water
continued to run from it, down a rocky gully, until it reached
the main creek flowing past the Yudanamutana Mine. Before
leaving this neighborhood, I may perhaps be allowed to describe
a claim belonging to the “ Welcome Copper Lodes Company,”
No. 1632, and which the proprietors, in commemoration of my
visit, did me the honor to name
%\t tu'llmtl Justin.
Tins section is half a mile South-South-West of the Yudana-
mutana Mine, and the country presents similar features, both
geologically and physically. An immense reef of ironstone rocks
runs up a rise from the gully in a North and South direction,
and is evidently a continuation of the great Yudanamutana
lode. This reef of ironstone and gossan contains strong stains
of Copper, and numerous stones of green carbonate and grey
oxide ; it is from 18 to 20 feet in width, and its course very
regular ;it is without doubt a champion lode. At the South
corner of the same section a good course of Ore exists, and the
country contains a large quantity of Copper.
tt In' ITelba Mint
o Go
The Northern Mineral Association have a very good section to
the South-West of the above, and on the opposite side of the
creek 5 this they call, after the native name, “ Yelda.”
It is on a rather steep hill, nearly 300 feet in height; a fine
regular lode is visible on the surface for above 300 yards, running


S.E. by E. down tbe face of the hill, which is covered with scrub
and porcupine grass. There are also two other secondary lodes
running parallel with the main lode.
I also examined several other claims belonging to the same
proprietary as the Wheal Austin, and all of which exhibited
something more than mere good indications ; there were regular
well defined lodes on all the undermentioned sections, and it is
highly probable that the whole would prove payable when worked,
but unless some special features in the different localities demand
notice, I shall pass over with a few brief remarks those on which
no work has been done. Sections 1619, 1635, and 1674, are
about a mile and a quarter E.N.E. from the Yudanamutana Mine,
and show good lodes, and stones of Ore of a high produce,
scattered over the surface. Erom these claims I proceeded, in
company with Mr. Alfred Frost, to some others, distant less than
12 miles in a direct line, but to roach which, we had to perform
an extremely rough journey of more than double that distance.
I may mention by the way that Mr. Frost claims, and I believe
justly, to have discovered more mines than any other individual
in the colony. He is an excellent bushman, is capable of endu-
ring great fatigue and considerable physical exertion, and is,
moreover, a perfect enthusiast in mining matters; lest, however,
this expression should be misunderstood, I must do Mr. Frost
the justice to say that during several days which I spent in
examining mineral sections, in many of which he was personally
interested, I did not find that he liad exaggerated in any state-
ments which he had previously made to me respecting them.
While speaking of Mr. Frost, I may also mention Mr. Burtt,
who has for some time been associated with him in mineral
discoveries, and who has also been so fortunate as to find several
valuable mines; all that I have said respecting Mr. Frost will
apply equally to Mr. Burtt, and having travelled for some days
with this gentleman, I may say that I found him a most agreeable
and intelligent companion. JRevenon a nos moutons , as the
French say. Accompanied by Mr. Frost I rode what he called
15 miles to Paralana, but over such rough country that it tried
the horses more than three times the distance would have done on
a good road. About half the journey w T as along the rocky bed
of a creek, which, without such a guide as I had, I should have
deemed in many places impassable for any but animals of the
feline tribe. If I were to give a correct description of the route, I
fear I should scarcely be believed; indeed, I feel almost incredulous
myself now, when I read over the notes which I made just after
that terrible ride. The first four or five miles were shnply rough
and uncomfortable for the hurses, without being actually perilous ;
the “ road” consisting of boulders and angular masses of stone
in the creek, with an occasional variation of an ascent and descent
over a spur of the range, perhaps 100 feet in height, and having


a gradient of not less than 2 in 2, or, in other words, an angle of
about 45 degrees. By way of further variety, these gentle
ascents were sometimes covered with large stones, lying on a
deep bed of loose sand, so that the horses’ feet sunk between the
stones, or sent them rolling down the hill behind. After little
more than an hour’s pleasant riding of this kind, we stopped at
the foot of a tremendous hill, I should think 350 feet in height,
at* an angle of about 60 degrees from the horizon, and covered
with loose stones in the way I have described. Mr. Frost told
me there was a Mine on the other side, and when he discovered
it he brought his horse over the hill, and down to the place where
we stood 1 and to confirm what he said, as we ascended, he showed
me the animal’s tracks ; however, we tied our horses to a tree in
the gully to let them rest, and commenced the ascent on foot,
but soon
“ The foot was fain
Assistance from the hand to gain,”
and sometimes the stones rolling away from our tread, compelled
us to go on all fours, or caused us, like the Irish boy going to
school, to slide two yards back for one step forward. At last we
reached the top, and were rewarded tor our toil by the sight of
similar ranges, almost as far as we could see, and a distant glimpse
of the eastern plain through a gap in the mountains. Beneath
our feet
Iphtbifpitit glint,
On section 1538, lies about 150 feet from the top of this
range, on the other side, and on a secondary hill parallel
with the main range, and connected with it by a kind of solid
bridge or causeway. I did not much relish the idea of descending
and having to ascend again; but it must be done, so down we went,
and found the usual ironstone rocks impregnated with Copper,
both green carbonate and grey ore; the lode running nearly
East and West for 70 or 88 yards, and varying in width, on the
surface, from two to six feet. The geological appearance of the
ground is singular, the following substances being all found
within a few rods : ironstone, granite rock, greenstone, disinteg-
rated quartz rock, felspar, limestone, micaceous schist, and some
beautiful small crystals of quartz.
I should state that, notwithstanding the rough road we had
travelled to reach this place, it is easily accessible in another
direction, so that if the Mine were worked a tolerable road could
be made to it.
Returning to our horses we found the descent, after having
climbed to the top of the range from the Mine, even more diffi-
cult than the ascent, as we tried a new path, and not being able
to see far before us were stopped twice by jutting and pre-


cipitous rocks; however, we reached the bottom in safety,
and proceeded through what proved a far worse road than
that we had left behind us. The recent rains had filled the
creek; and its bed consisting in many places of large masses of
smooth rock lying at an angle under the water, the horses found
some difficulty in keeping, their footing. Sometimes the water
was up to the saddle girths, and in one place, where the only
possibility of getting along was by going for about 50 yards in
the bed of the creek, the water gradually deepened, and I con-
tinued to raise my feet until they were straight along the
horse’s back ; I then experienced a peculiar sensation, which
having felt before, I knew again; my horse was swimming;
it was impossible to keep my feet dry, so I held on until
we reached the shallow beyond. This part of the creek
was entered through a narrow gap, between two huge rocks
between 20 and 30 feet high, and over which we could scarcely
have climbed ourselves, much less could we have taken our
horses. In other parts of the creek our horses had to climb
like cats over masses of rock, stepping up at once nearly
four feet from the ground, and after going over a few yards of
uncertain footing they sometimes had to jump down three or four
feet into the creek. Occasionally, we dismounted and led them,
and in one or two places the rocks were so extremely rough that
we drove the horses before us, and clambered after them our-
selves. Towards evening we reached Paralana, the station of
John Jacob, Esq. Mr, Jacob had gone to Adelaide, and Mr.
Comyn, the Overseer, was out at the time with Mr. Howitt, who
was conveying the bones of Burke and Wills, the lost explorers, to
Melbourne, via Adelaide. Mrs. Comyn received us kindly, and
set before us a sumptuous repast; comprising, amongst other
delicacies, milk, fresh butter, and cake, and having been living
for several days on rough bush fare, without any such dainties,
we fully appreciated them. After drying our boots and stock-
ings, resting our horses, and fastening on their shoes, wnich had
become loose through their rough journey, we proceeded about
five miles further in order to find better grass for the horses, and
to shorten our march on the following day. Mrs. Comyn kindly
gave us a bottle of milk (which lasted us for supper, and break-
fast, and dinner the next day) ; besides supplying us with bread,
butter, meat, tea, and sugar, so that we were unusually well off.
I may mention, that about a mile and a half from Mr. Jacob’s
station there is a hot spring; but I did not visit it, being
informed that the recent floods would have so overpowered it as
to render it difficult to find. We camped about 9 p.m., on the
edge of the Eastern Plain, having had a good road from the station,
and a fine moonlight evening for our ride. We enjoyed a pot of
tea, “au lait ,” and having made up luxurious couches of twigs of
the tea tree, resigned ourselves to rural repose, lulled by the occa-
sional notes of the birds, the distant tinkling of our horses’ bells,
and the musical hum of the mosquitoes. The next morning we
were up at peep of day, and rose with that feeling of refreshment


known only to those who can enjoy sleeping in the pure open air
of a fine dry climate like ours. After breakfast we walked about
half a mile to examine a claim (No, 1467) belonging to the
Northern Mineral Association, and called by them “ Wheal
Susanthis section is on low hills very little elevated above the
plain, but divided by a gully below the level of the plain. There
is a strong lode of ironstone running above the surface for 50 or
60 yards, and containing grey Copper Ore and green carbonate;
there is also a good crosscourse running into the lode. There is
a quantity of what I believe to be the old red sandstone on this
section and in the neighbourhood, and as it is accompanied by
mountain limestone, it may be considered as a very favorable
indication of the proximity of coal.. I therefore advised the pro-
prietors of this claim to take measures for testing the ground by
boring. I believe if two or three boring machines were intro-
duced into the colony, capable of penetrating to a considerable
depth, and worked by persons of enterprise and capital, such
persons would be well repaid, and the ultimate results to the
colony would be very beneficial. Gold is knovm to exist in many
places, and coal has been found, at least a lignite, that would
answer the purpose of house fuel very well; several other
minerals of great value have been met with occasionally, and
might be found in large quantities if a thorough and systematic
search were made for them. But if no further good resulted
from the introduction of boring machines, I believe that the
benefit to be derived from a good supply of pure water would
repay both the borers and those who employed them. The exis-
tence of coal is strongly suspected in several localities, and speci-
mens of lignite, bituminous shale, &c., are sometimes met with.
It is found in the neighbouring colonies, and I firmly believe that
before long it will be in South Australia. lam of opinion, in
common with many others, that half of our mineral wealth is not
yet known, and the argument so often adduced is a very shallow
and illogical one—that because a certain discovery has not been
made for the six-and-twenty years of the colony’s existence,
therefore it never will be. I shall have occasion to touch upon
this subject again by and bye, in referring to some important
discoveries which have been recently made.
After examining the Wheal Susan, we saddled our horses and
proceeded through another portion of the same creek we traversed
yesterday, or rather through the Arcaroola (or Ahanola) Creek
of which the Paralana is a tributary. Some of the scenery here
is very grand, the sides of the creek, in many places, being com-
posed entirely of rocks rising to a height of 300 to 400 feet,
sometimes smooth and regular, and at others rugged and wild in
their transposition. Occasionally we came upon a piece of less
sterile country, some of the flats being covered with grass, and
the sides of the hills with pines and scrub, amongst which were
many beautiful flowering shrubs, the most conspicuous being a
tall handsome shrub, bearing an elegant little blue flower with
fringed edges ; and it is a curious fact that a dwarf plant only a


few inches high, and with totally different leaves, bears a flower
precisely similar to the other.
In the course of a couple of hours or so we arrived at
(The duUlcomc Mints
Section 1512 contains two or three lodes. A fine strong lode
runs nearly North and South, shewing for 50 or 60 yards on the
surface, four or five feet in width, and underlying to the West
about 18 inches in the fathom. The lode consists of steel grey
oxide, mixed with a greenish grey Ore; as the lode goes down it
appears very regular, and above two feet in width of solid ore,
yielding between 40 and 50 per cent, of Copper. The lode here
had been stoped away and about 25 tons were raised, dressed,
and bagged by two men in about six weeks. Another lode
was opened lower down the hill, and on the south end of the
section there are several veins of rich grey ore, ranging in width
from one to six inches, regular in their course and underlay, and
leading in the direction of the main lode. The country on this
Mine and about the neighbourhood consists of soft whitish killas
and a peculiar shaly kind of sandstone beautifully watermarked.
A good road has been cut from these Mines on to the Eastern
Plains, whence the route to Port Augusta is easy. The country
here is thickly timbered with mallee and mulga scrub, and gum
trees in the creeks. I also saw the native orange tree, very
similar in its general appearance to the true orange, but without
fruit, this not being the season.
Another Mine adjacent to the Welcome, and belonging to the
same Association, is called the Wheal Hancock after one of the
shareholders. This Mine is on section 1511 and 1537. The former
contains a good and distinct lode, traceable for about 250 yards, the
ore is about 18 inches wide and consists of fine grey oxide. There are
also some veins of good Ore in other places, and stains of Ore with
small pieces of malachite scattered on the surface near the lode,
which runs North-east and South-west, underlying westwards
into the hill. On the east of the lode there is a good cross-course
nearly at right angles with it, and containing beautiful “ silver
grey Ore,” as the miners here call it. On 1537 the Ore runs
almost the whole length of the claim, the lode outcropping for a
short distance and shewing solid grey Ore nearly two feet wide.
A little more than a mile from these sections we came to some
belonging to the proprietors of
(Tlif ©jroolkim 3'Hiiif,
And on one of which this Mine is situated. I thought as I rode
over one of these sections, that the country looked very favorable
for Copper, although there was no lode to be seen nor any special


indication. The Mine itself, if such it can be called, is on another
section, and consists of an immense mass of rocks about 100 feet
wide, and from 12 to 15 feet high, and which, I suppose, is called
the lode. These are very hard quartzose rocks, and contain
numerous green stains of Copper, but no Ore is found beneath the
stains; a little further up the rise on which this reef is found
some work has been done ; the rocks have been broken, and some
very fine thin veins of rich grey Ore exposed to view ; but the
depth of the workings does not exceed five feet. I was informed
that 15 cwt. of Ore was raised here; if this be the case lam
surprised that so much was obtained, and it must be taken as
a proof of the richness of the Mine; but my opinion is that if
it had been silver instead of Copper it would not have more
than repaid the cost of raising it.
Daniktamt |pnt
Is situated about 25 miles nearly north of Mr. Jacob’s station,
Paralana. I did not see the Mine, but have been favored
with the following account of it, compiled from the Captain’s
report to the proprietors. I have reason to believe that the
account may be depended on, and I have seen some fine specimens
of Ore from the Mine. The country consists of clay-slate, and
light soft sandstone. There are three distinct lodes on the
section, two running North and South, and the other East and
West; the latter is visible on the surface for about 250 yards,
going over a small hill about 50 feet in height, it then crosses a
gully on to the next hill. The small hill contains a large quantity
of Ore and Copper stains ; the lode is very wide, and a cross-cut
has been driven under the hill and across the lode, for a length of
15 fathoms from the gully level; the lode has an underlay to the
South of about 18 inches in the fathom. Two pits have also
been sunk on the lode—one in the creek, and the other at a short
distance from it—and in each of these places the lode improves as
it goes down, the stains of Ore giving place to green and blue
carbonate. The other lode, to the East of that just described, is
traceable about 150 yards on the surface ; in some parts it crops
out of the ground, and in one place it is estimated that 100 tons
of the lode are visible above the surface. It has been opened on
in two places, and its width has been ascertained to be four feet,
consisting of red and grey oxide, intermixed with spar and a
little iron. The third lode is three and a half feet in width, and
underlies about three feet in the fathom. A shaft has been sunk
five fathoms in this lode through malachite and green carbonate
of 35 or 40 per cent, produce, intermixed with priau and gossan.
Several smaller lodes are also found on the section, containing


good Ore. There is a good supply of wood within five miles of
the section, and plenty of water close to the Mine. This is the
most distant Mine (North) with which lam acquainted. The
road which would he used for carting away the Ore lies, for some
distance, along the Eastern Plains, and, I suppose, the distance
from Port Augusta is above 270 miles.
£ljc s‘vT gmuiimfi anb |laljr Hthtes,
I now proceed to describe this very rich batch of mineral sections,
the property of the Northern Mineral Association, and commen-
cing about four miles North of the Yudanamutana sections.
Nearly the whole of the ground between these two points is
metalliferous, in a greater or less degree.
The Daly Mine (claim 1464) is situated on a steep hill nearly
200 feet in height, and consisting of soft whitish country,
apparently a kind of pipeclay or fireclay. There is a reef of
quartzoze rocks running East and West, near the top of the hill,
and forming, apparently, the back of a lode, which, however, has
not been opened up in such a way as to shew its regular course.
Sloping has been done to some extent at the side of the hill, and
about 100 feet from the gully, and has laid bare a large quantity
of fine Ore, chiefly grey oxide, in strong veins running down into
the hill; some of these veins open out to a considerable size, so
much so that large blocks of Ore are obtained. I saw one very
fine mass of solid grey oxide, and which would weigh, I should
think, fully three tons, and average, throughout, 50 per cent, of
Copper. Some fine specimens of red oxide and green and blue
carbonates are also found here. Several other blocks weighing
some hundredweights each were also at grass. To give an idea
of the easy nature of the ground, I may state that a drive was
carried 15 fathoms into the bill, at 355. per fathom, and although
its position and direction were not selected so judiciously as
might have been the case, veins of Ore were continually met with
in cutting it. The workings being on the side of a steep hill, the
Ore as turned out is for the most part sent rolling down to the
bottom, where it is dressed and bagged. Nearly 90 tons of Ore,
averaging 40 per cent produce, were raised at this Mine by four
men, in little more than three months, or perhaps it would be
correct to say in three months, as some time was occupied in
cutting, blasting, and clearing a road through a rocky gully to
some of the sections. Higher up the hill, and towards the
South-Eastern part of the section, there is a quantity of stones
of Ore scattered over the surface, and indications of other lodes.
I picked up some fine large crystals of quartz in this place.
“ Old Noll’s Mine,” on section 1482, adjoins the former at the
South-West corner. It is on a hill of considerable elevation, and


contains a fine deposit of green carbonate and red and grey oxide
of Copper in a large reef of rocks running for some distance on
the top of the range. In many places, were there is no appearance
of Ore, the breaking of what seems to be nothing but common
quartzose rock discloses rich specimens of Copper, and there
appears to be a large quantity on this section, Indeed, many
tons could be quarried out with the pick and crowbar.
The “ Sir Dominick” Mine is very similar in appearance to the
preceding, and lies to the east of that section. The lode, which is
from eight to ten feet in width, contains red and grey oxide, and
green carbonate of Copper in considerable quantities; it is
visible on the surface for nearly half a mile in length. The reef
of rocks, forming the back of the lode on the summit of the hill,
is very bold, and in some places the path, if such it can be
called, is so narrow as to be perilous to an unsteady foot; a
strong puff of wind from either side might send a weak or
nervous man rolling 300 feet down into the gully. I was remin-
ded here of Sir Walter Scott’s descriptions of Highland
scenery :
“ The loose crags whose threatening mass
Lay tottering o’er the hollow pass,
As if an infant’s touch could urge
Their headlong passage down the verge.”
Many of the surrounding hills are similar in their appearance,
and the view from the Sir Dominick is extensive and beautiful.
No work has been done on either this or “ Old Noll’s Mine.”
The Stanley Mine, on section 1465, is in a kind of basin, and
in lower and more settled country than the three Mines I have
just described. A short distance to the North rises the bold
range called Ereeling Heights, the Yudanamutana ranges bound
it on the East, while hills of more moderate elevation rise on
the South and West. There is a magnificent main lode running
East and West through this section for about half a mile, and
proved to contain fine Ore for nearly 400 yards, and probably for
a much greater distance. The prevailing Ore is grey oxide, there
are also blue and green carbonates and some malachite. The
back of the lode consists chiefly of fine gossan and ironstone.
A branch lode from the South-east runs into the main lode, and
contains a large percentage of Bismuth in combination with the
Copper. When I examined this Mine it had not been opened,
but, after a careful inspection, I expressed an opinion that it
would, when worked, prove to be an exceedingly valuable pro-
perty. Since I saw it the lode has been opened in two or three
places, and with most satisfactory results.
Another section (No. 1553) which I visited, and belonging to
the same company, is near to the Yudanamutana Mines ; the
discoverers named it the Daisy Mine. It contains two lodes, one
of which is about four feet wide, and traceable for 80 yards along
the surface, carrying grey and red oxide and green carbonate in
fine gossan. There are also limestone and quartz on the section.
The same proprietary have several other claims which promise to


be quite worth working, but which it is needless to notice sepa-
rately. There is, however, another claim belonging to a portion
of the same owners, and named after the discoverer,
%\)t oollifal Jfrosi
This contains so extraordinary a deposit of Copper Ore, as to
demand a special notice. It is on a range about 350 feet high
from a creek on one side, and between 400 and 500 feet from a
creek on the other side. It is about two miles from the Daly
and four from the Yudanamntana Mines. The top of the range,
for 80 or 90 feet in height, consists of a mass of granitic rock,
from which the upper soil has either slipped or been washed
away, leaving the rock exposed. It is almost perpendicular and
contains numerous green stains of Copper, visible for a distance
of a quarter of a mile or more. I and my guide climbed up the
face of this rock for a height of 60 or 70 feet, by means of small
holes and inequalities in its surface, and almost everywhere, even
where there were no stains to be seen, we found rich Copper
Ore —grey oxide and green carbonate ; especially in small caves
or holes in the rock. Below these bare rocks, and down to the
gully, we found a quantity of stones of Ore scattered over the
surface ; amongst them were bits of malachite and various oxides
and carbonates. Ironstone, gossan, killas, limestone, sandstone,
and greenstone, are found here. If the surface indications form
a criterion of what may be found in depth, a very large deposit of
Copper should be met with on this claim.
The same proprietors have another claim (No. 1668), called
“ Wheal Maria,” between the Daly and Yudanamutana Mines.
It is a very fair section, and has a good lode of Ore traceable for
130 yards North and South, in a favorable country for Copper.
The natives in the North, although brought more recently into
contact with Europeans than those in the older settled districts
of the colony, fully understand the mysterious power possessed
by the whites of making paper speak, and a blackfellow, if sent
on a message, likes to carry a written paper with him, as a kind of
warrant or authority for his errand. They soon observed me
“ taking notes” and making sketches, and at once dubbed me
“ Paper Masser.” Glentlemen connected with the Mines, by the
same rule, they call “ Copper Massers.” The Captains of the
Mines are thus designated, but if anyone appears to possess
authority over the Captains, like Mr. Martin, the Superintendent
of the Yudanamutana Mines, for instance, they call him “ Big
One Copper Masser,” and this without inference to the relative
stature of the individuals in question, I have in my note book


a number of interesting memoranda about the natives ; but having
been unavoidably delayed in the preparation of this work, I fear
I must postpone the writing up of that information for some
future opportunity, and proceed with my description of the
Mines. 1 will, however, allude to the existence of a tradition
pretty general amongst the blacks, throughout the colony,
respecting a huge animal called by some a Bunyip, and which they
say “ plenty eat up blackfellow.” I have myself conversed with
blacks wdio professed to have seen this dreadful creature, and to
have ineffectually given it battle, as they said it would break
their spears with its teeth. This tradition is very well known in the
colonies, and I mention it here simply to state that it exists also
amongst the natives of the Far North ; and to offer the sugges-
tion, whether the fossil bones discovered at Herr Got Springs,
near Mount Attraction, belong to the animal referred to.
Before starting on my return trip, I may refer to a few of the
physical features of a portion of the country, beyond the most
northerly point which I visited, and which have been described
to me by Mr. A. P. Burtt, who has travelled through that
country. The ranges beyond the Freeling heights gradually
diminish in elevation, and are more disconnected than those
farther south; and in what is called Stuart’s country, most of
his “ Mounts” are low hills, many of them not more than 50 feet
in height. Several of these mounts have fine springs on their
summits; the “ Blanche Cup,” named after Lady MacHonnell,
our late Governor’s Lady, is a beautiful example ; here there is
a spring of delicious water on the top of a hillock, and in a kind
of crater, or cup about 30 feet in diameter, and of a considerable
depth. The country beyond 400 miles North of Adelaide is
more level and “ broken” than it is further south. There are
belts of scrub and patches of good country, here and there long
tracts without water, and then fine springs and creeks containing
fish ; salt water lakes and fresh water lakes ; springs impregna-
ted with soda, some having a peculiar smell, as that at Petamora,
and the Welcome Spring; this odour, which resembles that of gun-
powder, goes off after the water has been exposed for some time
to the air, and does not appear to rise from any deleterious
quality in the water, which is said to be soft and also perfectly
sweet when used for making tea and bread. The Petamora
Spring bubbles up with some force to a height of several inches
above the surface. Timber, generally, is very scarce in the North,
large trees being seldom found except in watercourses.
While in the neighbourhood of the Daly Mines, I heard a
curious noise made by a bird, and closely resembling the sound
caused by pouring liquor out of a bottle* Another bird which I
have also heard elsewhere produced a sound like the tinkling of
a large cattle bell. The lyre bird and, lam told, a variety of the
bird of Paradise are also met with in some parts of this country ;
but as I have only seen or heard of two places in the North at
all Paradisaical in their character, I should conclude, if the latter
bird is found elsewhere, it must either have lost itself or been
expelled from its native bowers.


In riding from the Welcome Mines towards Illinawurtina we
passed through a fine valley bearing the rather ostentatious name
of the Yale of Avoca. The scenery is certainly very fine ; the
ranges on either side rise to a height of from 400 to GOO feet,
that to the North being higher and bolder than the other. At
the top of the range, immense bare rocks, like those previously
described at Wheal Frost, rise here and there in fantastic shapes,
and then smooth and flatlike flagstones, while below, where there
is some soil and the slope is more gentle, grass, scrub, pines, and
pretty flowering shrubs, grow from the foot of these rocks down
into the gully. On the other side the hill is less bold and
remarkable. I suppose in the case of the first range the soil has
been washed away from the top, as seems to have been frequently
the case in the North, leaving the rocks exposed. Below the
large masses of rock, and at the distance of a few yards, an
irregular wall of rocks, ranging from ten to more than twenty
feet in height, runs for a considerable length. There are several
apertures in this wall, one of which is remarkable from the
regularity of its shape, and from the fact of its being spanned by
a natural bridge, composed of a single stone 15 or 20 feet long,
and as regularly formed as if dressed and erected by masons. It
happens, singularly enough, that a pine has fallen over the bridge,
and its dead trunk looks like a hand-rail placed there for the
convenience of passengers. After coming through the Yale of
Avoca we entered the Arcaroola or Illinawurtina Creek, one of
the finest I saw in the North, and containing a large quantity of
fine gum timber and good water. The Illinawurtina run con-
tains a considerable extent of excellent country, where genuine
grass grows luxuriantly after rain. Here I saw the Nardoo plant,
to which such a sad interest is attached from the fact of its having
supplied the unfortunate explorers, Burke and Wills, with a
scanty subsistence for some time after their return to Cooper’s
Creek. The taste of the seed is far from pleasant, and it pro-
duces a slight burning sensation in the throat; I must be very
hard pressed indeed before I should resort to it as an article of
food.
On leaving Illinawurtina, where I spent two days very
pleasantly with Mr. H, Hughes, Mr. Scott’s overseer, I started,
in company with Mr. Burtt, and made for the Western Plain.
The country through which we travelled was undulating and
pretty well grassed. About four miles South from Illinawurtina,
we saw Benbonyata (pronounced Benbone-yata), “ survey point
Z,” the highest land in South Australia. I cannot ascertain the
exact height, as the calculations have never been worked out, but
it is considered to be mqre than 4,000 feet above the level of the
sea. This is a bold massive-looking range, several miles in length,
running nearly North-east and South-west, between Gammon
Hill and Mount McKinlay.
After riding 12 or 14 miles we came into country exhibiting
peculiar geological formation; clay-slate rocks rise out of the
ground in every direction like gravestones in an old churchyard.


There are numerous low hills, some of them rising rather abruptly,
one in particular, called Fortress Hill, is a mount about 200 feet
in height, and having a rocky summit on which the stones are
deposited with almost the regularity of mason’s work, giving it
the appearance of a fortification. Its diameter at the top is,
perhaps, 120 or 130 feet, and at the base about 300 or 350 feet.
Beneath this cap of rock the sides of the hill are covered with
scrub and small loose stones, but no other large rocks are to be
seen.
A little beyond Fortress Hill we reached Mr. Thomas Gill’s
station, in the midst of the “ grave stone country.” Proceeding
westward, we came upon the Frome river, which, when I saw it,
really appeared to deserve the name, though it is frequently dry
for the greater part of its course. 1 came upon the Frome at a
point near to a magnificent pool, called by the natives “ Murry -
wyannait was then a fine sheet of water from 30 to 40 yards
wide, above 150 yards long, and about 20 feet deep at its greatest
depth. Bocks rise perpendicularly on the side of the creek, next
the deepest part, and I believe that the water here has never
been known to fail in the dryest season. Having supped at
Mr, Gill’s station, we rode about seven miles beyond to camp, in
order to find good feed for our horses, and in this we were very
fortunate. The next morning we were up by daybreak, and
“ making tracks” for
®|n JfHouut fp%rst Pint,
On the edge ot the Western Plain. This Mine has received its
name from Mount Lyndhurst, although that hill is nearly ten
miles distant; but I believe it is the nearest trigonometrical
station of any importance. The Mine is on low hilly ground, no
part of which 1 should consider more than 100 feet high.
Nevertheless, the view across the plain is very extensive, and
many far-distant hills, both amongst the ranges and on the edge
of the plain, are distinctly to be seen.
The geological formation of the ground consists of clayslate,
micaceous schist, limestone, and quartz. The poorest indications
are found on the highest part of the ground, where the quartz
predominates, but there is a lode traceable on the surface for
about 130 yards, and from two to three feet wide, carrying strong
stains of Copper and some good stones of Ore. The back of the
lode, as usual, is composed of ironstone and gossan. This lode
has been opened in two or three places, and some green carbonate
and grey oxide raised. About 200 yards further East, another
lode is met with, and a shaft has been sunk four fathoms on the
lode, which underlies about 18 inches in the fathom, and looks
very well indeed ; it is nearly four feet wide, containing grey
and red oxides; some native or malleable Copper was also found


here. A good cross-course runs into this lode from the North-
East. There is another lode running nearly East and West, and
traceable about 70 yards on the surface. The back of this lode
consists of ironstone and gossan, strongly impregnated with
Copper. The lode underlies from two to two and a half feet in
the fathom, towards the North, and contains malachite, greenish
grey Ore, and liver-colored Ore ; it is from 18 inches to two feet
wide.
A fourth lode is found about 50 yards from the preceding, and
running parallel with it; the solid Ore in this lode is 15 inches
wide ; it contains similar Ore to that last mentioned, and fine
yellow Ore in addition. At another part of the section there is
a considerable surface deposit of Ore scattered over several rods
of ground, and containing green carbonate, malachite, and grey
Ores, varying in value from 20 to above 40 per cent, of Copper.
This Mine, being on the edge of the Western Plain, is very
favorably situated with respect to the line which will most likely
be taken for the formation of a tramway.
It was my intention after visiting the Mount Lyndhurst Mine,
to proceed to Mount Coffin to inspect the “ New Burra Burra,”
but to my great regret circumstances arose which prevented my
doing so, and I was obliged to strike through the hills to Mount
Bose, and thence to Owieandana, where we passed the night. We
here met with Mr. H. C. Gleeson who was returning from the
I)aly and Welcome Mines, in which he is interested. The next
morning our horses were missing, and after three hours of
wearv wandering over the hills, they were found about five miles
away on the road back. We thus made a rather late start, but
were determined on reaching Angipena before dark, and this we
accomplished, without pushing our horses beyond the ordinary
pace for bush travelling—five miles an hour. Although only a
fortnight had elapsed since the rain commenced, its effects were
very manifest in the growth of the grass, and the freshened
appearance of vegetation generally. Many parts of our route,
to-day, were really beautiful; grassy slopes, with thinly scattered
gums and pines, occasionally diversified with thick belts of mallee
scrub, or bold rocky hills, and every now and again a fine “ gum
creek,” with abundance of water in pools. The Erome, especially,
is one of the finest creeks in the North, and contains some good
timber. The Mudlipena Gap, through which this creek runs, is
a fine piece of rocky scenery, and would be extremely grand and
imposing if the walls were a hundred feet higher ; they are only
about 100 feet in height but extend for a considerable length,
at least on one side, while the other side, except in the narrowest
part of the gap, is less wild and rocky in appearance. A
pretty little gravelly flat of four or five acres, is enclosed
between the hills close to the gap and the road then takes a


sudden bend to the left, revealing some fine pools of water. As
we rode along, when within about eight miles of Angipena, a
turn in the road displayed to my astonished gaze what appeared
like a line of telegraph posts ; but on ascending a rising ground,
I saw that these posts encircled a large space of undulating
country, having on one side a rough erection of wood, called the
Grand Stand, behind which was an immense number of broken
bottles, the debris of former “ meetings at intervals round the
circle were short pieces of fencing, designated by the name of
hurdles : in fact we had come upon the Angipena race-course, the
only one, I believe, North of Mount Eemarkable, and to it, I am
told, visitors have been known to come a distance ot about 200
miles! The number present last year was about 50 ; a good
muster, considering the very scattered nature of the population.
I understand a large amount of cash changed hands on the
occasion, for bushmen are fond of sport, and generally very free
with their money. The company all camped at night on the
ground, many of them being too far overcome to travel, and, had
it been otherwise, they would have been unable to find accommo-
dation. The country, as we neared Angipena, was very pretty,
indeed I could have fancied myself in the neighbourhood of
Mount Barker; the land was well grassed, and trees were much
more plentiful than in most parts of the North.
Angipena is the most distant police-station in the North, and
four troopers reside there. They have, occasionally, long and
important journeys to perform; for instance, Corporal AVauchop
was ordered to convey despatches from the Committee of the
Expedition to Mr. Ilowitt, at Cooper’s Creek. This he
accomplished in 21 days from Adelaide, the distance travelled
being nearly 800 miles, a considerable part of the way through
very rough, inhospitable country.
Angipena station is in a pretty dell, thickly wooded with pines,
and a few gums, and surrounded by steep, but not very high
hills. About half a mile East from the trig a mineral discovery
has been made, and a claim taken out, which has been named,
after one of the proprietors,
®jjt (u'llhfal |ksleir.
The indications and nature of the country here are very favor-
able ; there are two lodes on the section, bearing very good
gossan impregnated with green and blue carbonates and contain-
ing occasional good stones of Ore. The lodes run North and
South, and are traceable across the section for a distance of about
300 yards. Besides the green and blue carbonates, there is liver-
colored and yellow Ore, scattered in places on the surface.
About two miles eastwards from Angipena is the once celebrated


lllofjratooim Utitw.
This was at one time believed to be such a wonderful discovery
that many miners left the Burra, hoping to find more remune-
rative employment here, though the Moehatoona is 300 miles
beyond the Burra. Bor a short time a number were employed ;
but there appears to have been, by all accounts, some little
mismanagement, for although several tons of Ore were raised,
the ground does not appear to have been judiciously worked, and
the funds of the proprietors were exhausted before the Mine was
fairly tested. The ground looks very favorable for mining, and
it may be that some future adventurers, having more money,
more enterprise, or more skill than the first, will yet develop a
valuable property here.
Before leaving Angipena, I saw a native’s grave. A semicircle
of stones, about five feet in diameter, and only a few inches high,
was placed at the head and covered with branches like a native’s
“ wurley” or hut; two or three large stones were placed over the
head of the body, and a fire was kept burning for several days on
the ground at the feet. The ground was bare of grass, and was
swept regularly for some time after the burial. The mourners at
the funeral walked in procession round the grave, and each threw
a large stone, with considerable force, against an adjacent tree, so
as to make a permanent mark in it. I have described this grave,
and the ceremonies connected with it, because they differ mate-
rially from those practised in other parts of the country. It is
pretty well known that some of the natives place their dead on a
stage, raised like a high bed on four sticks, and the body dries in
the sun. Others deposit the corpse in some hollow tree, and
others bury their dead, but without the care and ceremonies
described above.
From Angipena we proceeded to Nuccaleena, and on our way
visited
®|t ck'hrnioota fffinc
It is situated amongst low hills, or rather undulating ground, to
the westward of a main range, running nearly North and South,
about five miles from Mount Stuart, and near the Wirryoota creek.
There is a well-defined lode running lengthwise through the
section, and having, as usual, a back of ironstone; the surround-
ing country being killas and quartz. A few stains of Copper are
found here" and there on the surface, and two or three holes, five
or six feet in depth, have been sunk on the lode. At these


places the lode has good walls, and seems going down almost
perpendicularly, and from one to two feet wide, carrying good
stones of grey ore and green carbonate.
We had previously taken a look at the Mount Stuart Mine ;
but I refer to that below, in order to bring consecutively under
notice, all the Mines of the Great Northern Mining Company.
®jjt ittoimt Stuart ittiuc.
Is at present not being worked. A large mass of rocks appears
to have crossed a gully and been cut through by the force
of water, or by some other effort of nature. They contained
stains of Copper and a good vein of Ore. Two shafts were
sunk near the rocks, one on each side the gully, and there
was some Ore on the floors, blue and green carbonates,
but the general appearances were not favorable. One of
these shafts was sunk 10 fathoms, and a drive was then
carried 10 fathoms, but without cutting the lode.
Proceeding onwards we came to a station of Messrs. Chambers
and Pinke’s, called Bobmoonie West, and here we found a fine
spring of water and good country; from near this place we had
a fine view of Mount Deception, and a large extent of hilly
country on this side of it.
gutralenra.
Ox leaving the Wirryoota we had a pleasant ride of ten or twelve
miles to Nuccaleena, where we arrived about 8 p.m. This Mine
had an immense surface deposit of rich Ore, on the side of a hill,
from which above 600 tons were taken. The lode was then lost,
and the water stopped further progress, until the engine was
erected. After the water was in fork (all pumped out) the lode
was recovered at the 10-fathom level, and when I visited the
Mine it presented a most encouraging appearance. The lode
was proved for 18 fathoms in length, with well-defined walls, and
underlying 18 inches in the fathom ; the width of the Ore (black
oxide and sulphurets) being from five to seven feet. A winze
was sunk three fathoms five feet on the lode, and from it seven
tons of good Ore were raised, the quality improving with the
depth.
The engine-shaft is 18 fathoms in depth, having been com-
menced about 12 fathoms above the level of the creek, in the side


of the hill. The slopes are 33 fathoms North of East, from the
engine-shaft, and five levels have been driven on the course of
the lode, all the “ backs” and “ bottoms” being sloped away.
An adit was driven into the hill, and cut the lode in nine fathoms,
and which was then driven on for 40, fathoms, a large amount of
sloping being done. At the 10-fathom level a winze is sunk,
about 15 fathoms East of the whim shaft, leaving that extent of
ground which carries the lode recently recovered. The main
cross-cut was driven 22 fathoms South into the hill to cut the
lode, but was temporarily stopped. If it prove successful, it will
give the stope of all the hill, and enable a tramway to be laid to
convey the Ore to the floors. The Mine is under the superin-
tendence of Captain Pearson Morrison, a gentleman of con-
siderable experience both in Cornwall and America.
This Mine presents a more pleasing appearance, as to its
buildings, and all the arrangements at “ grass,” than any Mine in
the North ; there is an air of comfort as well as of business
about the place, which its more recent competitors have not yet
attained to. Moreover, the 16-inch cylinder steam-engine adds
very much to the appearance of the Mine. This, which is a low-
pressure condensing engine, was made by Mr. Q-. Wyatt, of
Adelaide, for the Reedy Creek Mine; it was then used, for a
time, at the Charlton Mine, and at last found its way here, being
the first engine erected in the Ear North. The Captain’s apart-
ments, office, and three other buildings of stone, are erected on a
terrace opposite the engine, and present a frontage of nearly 100
feet. There are, also, substantial stone stables, a good store,
smith’s shop, workshop, &c., besides a general store, established
for the purpose of supplying the wants of the miners ; also a
doctor’s house, and about 20 good pine huts for the men.
A Mechanic’s Institute has been formed here, and the men
seem to devote themselves after work to useful study, or to
innocent recreation. They have established a judge and jury
club, for the trial of petty offences amongst themselves, and it
has been found to work well. There is, also, a good musical band,
including some good singei-s among its members, the instrumental
part consisting of a drum, triangle, “bones,” violins, and a
concertina. On the evening of my arrival the band was “ dis-
coursing sweet music,” the sound of which, reverberating
through the hills, was very enlivening, especially to weary
travellers, who had been long absent from anything of the kind.
Another of the Company’s properties, is
n |sratj)m.
It is situated about two miles nearly North of Nuecaleena, on a
hill ot some altitude. At first this Mine looked exceedingly
promising, a lode of rich red oxide, two feet in width, being


traceable the whole length of the section, but when they com-
menced sinking and driving the lode was lost. I can hardly con-
ceive that a regular lode of this nature would be succeeded by
nothing in depth, and I should hope that when a favorable
opportunity presents itself, researches will be resumed in this
quarter.
The next of the Great Northern Company’s Mines which I
have to notice is
t Dratunp |flinf
It is situated about seven miles South-east of Nucaleena amidst
low hilly country. There is a good lode averaging about 12
feet in width and containing very fair Ore. Shafts have been
sunk on the lode, varying in depth from 6 to 15 fathoms, and
Ore was obtained in each, nearly 100 tons being raised. At a
depth of about 12 or 13 fathoms a peculiar slide seemed to have
taken place in the lode and a floor came in having a slope of
about 25 ° , This was followed down until the miners were
stopped by water. In another place, about 20 tons of 30 per
cent. Ore* were raised from a counter of the lode, and a shaft
sunk with the view of cutting the lode at 18 or 20 fathoms in
depth but here the water stopped proceedings. It is intended to
erect a donkey engine which is expected to be sufficient for
keeping the water in fork for the present; and operations will
then be resumed. The Mine is considered a very promising one.
Another of these Mines is called
<TI)f JtUcroo itliiif.
Ok the edge of the Eastern Plain. The first indications were
found here on a hill about 130 feet in height, and which was
stained with Copper from top to bottom. Two shafts were sunk
to the depths of six and eight fathoms respectively, and abo*.t 20
tons of Ore was raised, but the water coming in rather s' L, s iy,
and no regular and promising lode having been met with, the
work was put a stop to.
Nevertheless there are strong indications of mineral existing
in the neighbourhood, and several sections, on which Ore was
found scattered over the surface, were explored, but without any
particular results.
This Mine is a few miles to the West of Prism Hill, one of the
trigonometrical stations, and about twenty-five miles North of
Mount Chambers, which is about °ix miles to the North of


Hktmt Cjjantfors Hike,
Which is in low country, a little to the South of the hill so-
called, near the Eastern Plain, and is situated between hills of
moderate elevation. The surface of the ground is covered with
boulders of primitive limestone. Several large blocks of
malachite were found in a clear space, about 20 feet wide,
running North and South between the boulders. There is
no regularly defined lode, although in one place the arrangement
of the Ore bore very much the appearance of one. Blocks of
Ore were obtained in three different parts of the section, at
intervals of 120 or 180 yards. The country being moderately
hard pipeclay, is easily worked, and requires no timbering.
Several shafts were sunk without finding a lode, although a good
deal of malachite and green carbonate is scattered on the surface.
The Ore is rich, some samples having assayed between 50 and 60
per cent. Operations on this Mine are suspended for the
present.
Disci's Claim.
No. 1630, about 10 or 12 miles North-East of Nuccaleena, and
on the Warrewena run, is a valuable property. There is a well-
defined lode running nearly through the section, and containing
very rich Ore : green carbonate and grey oxide, some of the
latter containing about 70 per cent, of Copper. The country
consists of clayslate and pipeclay. Some little work has been
done, but the recent rains prevented my examining the pit that
had been sunk.
After leaving Nuccaleena, as we approached Moolooloo, the
hills beyond presented a most curious appearance, the jutting
rocks (indurated clay-slate, I believe) on the top and down the
sides, pursuing a tortuous course, and looking in the distance
like gigantic serpents crawling over the country.
That part of the country between Moolooloo and Angorigena
having been noticed in a former page, need not be again described.
From Angorigena I proceeded to
Cl n |)ttt Claim,'
No. 1621, belonging to Messrs. Finke & Kerfert. This claim is
about six miles S. by. W. of Mount Emily, and though at present
nothing very extensive has been discovered, the indications are


decidedly good. A lode has been opened in a creek near the road
side, and shows good walls and favorable country, killas and
flucan with line gossan in the lode, and a fair amount of green
carbonate of Copper and chocolate and yellow Ore. The lode is
nearly perpendicular, and about 18 inches wide ; an adit was
driven into the hill on the course of the lode, and a small shaft
commenced at the mouth of the adit and in the creek, but after
being sunk about six feet the water came in and filled the hole.
Since the water has subsided, I am informed that two tons of
good Ore have been raised here. A short distance, only five or
six yards to the North, and about 20 or 25 yards to the West,
another lode has been opened close to the surface, unless it be a
heave of the same lode, but from the appearance of the country
Ido not think it is. There was but little Ore visible here at the
time I saw the plaoe, but the indications were good, and the lode
carried remarkably well-defined walls.
From this claim I crossed tne hills to
The “ Garden of the North,” a station belonging to Mr. Thomas
Phillips, and formerly to Mr. Hayward. Although I have no
Mine to describe here, I devote a special notice to this beautiful
locality, as I saw no other place in the North at all to be com-
pared with it. Coming upon it after a weary day’s ride, and just
as the rays of the setting sun were casting their golden beams
over the landscape, I thought it one of the loveliest spots I ever
beheld; and even after making every allowance for the enthu-
siasm of a first impression under the circumstances, a critical
study of the place must result in a judgment highly favorable to
its appearance. There is a combination of the wild and grand,
with what is softer and more gentle; and without any violent
contrast, which would mar the general effect. The scene is
perfectly harmonious ; and if any improvement could be desired,
it is that hinted at by an enthusiastic Hibernian, when he first
saw the place, and exclaimed, “ Sure its like Killarney, intirely,
burrin' the lake."
A fine, bold, massive range, terminating at the South in Hay-
ward’s Bluff*, and 600 or 700 feet high from the valley, rises
majestically in the background. A space of about 100 feet
downwards from its summit consists of bare rock, of a reddish-
brown color, and, I presume, either granitic or indurated sand-
stone. Below the rock, innumerable steep spurs proceed from
the range ; and these are covered with vegetation of various kinds.
Near the top there is little grass, but scrub and pines ; lower
down the pines become thicker, and gum trees are interspersed
amongst them ; until when the valley is reached, the trees become


more luxuriant in their growth, and numerous handsome shrubs,
wild-ftowers, and grasses, abound. Although our Hibernian
friend missed the lake, Aroona is one of the most remarkable
places for water in the colony. A low hill rises with a gentle
slope in the centre of the valley, and is completely surrounded
by a creek, in which, I believe, water is to be found throughout
the year. About 60 feet above the creek there are numerous
surface springs from which the water flows, and some of them are
complete bogs, so as to require fencing to keep out the cattle;
the water being conveyed, in shoots, to troughs fixed on hard
ground. A good garden is made below these springs, and can be
irrigated ad libitum; it contains tine weeping willows, splendid
vines and fig-trees, loaded with fruit —besides other fruit and orna-
mental trees —and vegetables that would grace any horticultural
show. I measured cauliflowers, less than three months old, two
feet six inches high, above the stalk, and the flowers nine inches
in diameter! The house is built of large pines, placed upright,
trimmed and fitted close together, and the supply of water is
derived from one of the surface springs above mentioned and
close to the door.
The creek, a branch of which forms a horseshoe turn in front
of the house, runs through a beautiful grassy flat about a quarter
of a mile wide, and joins the Brachina a mile lower down.
The best view of Aroona is obtained from the side of the hill
to the East of the valley where some masses of rock and hand-
some trees add to the effect of the foreground. Looking South-
wards from the same stand point, there is a fine view of a succes-
sion of curious hills, the most Northern side of each being steep
and generally capped with rocks, while the South side is gently
sloping. This is called the ABC range from an idea that the
number of the separate hills is the same as the letters of the
alphabet. There is a beautiful valley, well grassed, and containing
some good timber on either side of the range. St. Mary’s Peak,
one of the highest points of the Wilpena Pound range, towers
away in the distance. I think the 20 miles of country, including
Aroona and Wilpena, contain more subjects for the artist’s pencil
than any other part in the North. Before concluding ray notice
of this favored spot, I may be permitted to add that the residents
are well worthy of the place. I spent nearly two days most
agreeably with Mr. Phillips and his family, from whom I met
with great kindness. Even the animals here seemed more cheer-
ful and lively than in most other places, the native pigeons were
heard cooing around, and numerous little songsters twittered
amongst the bushes. One pretty bird—the shepherd’s companion
.—occupied a willow tree near the room where I slept, and kept
up a pleasing kind of chirrup all through the night until day-
break. I honored him with the title of the South Australian
Nightingale—just by way of encouraging his laudible attempts.
Before leaving Aroona, Mr. and Mrs. Phillips kindly accom-
panied me to see the Brachina, a creek somewhat like the Area-


roola or Ahanola farther North. Tremendous rocky ranges rise
on either side to a height of 600 or 800 feet, forming, in some
places, almost perpendicular walls for a considerable elevation;
yet amongst these rocks, wherever a little soil was to be found,
a tree or bush of some kind might be seen. The creek itself
contained many fine trees and handsome shrubs, and large pools
of water. This watercourse receives several tributaries, and at
times, after a heavy thunderstorm, though miles distant, a torrent
seven or eight feet deep will come rushing down with irresistible
force and with the shortest possible notice.
From Aroona I rode to
SSSiljjetra |)auiA
The country through which I passed was pleasant and the road
good. The magnificent hills encircling the pound presented an
object of which the eye did not soon weary. For the whole
distance I scarcely lost sight of some portion of them. The
most Northerly peak, and I believe the highest, is St. Mary’s ; the
next, about four miles to the South-East, is Point Bonney ; and
the most Southerly, six miles further, is Eawnsley’s Bluff. St.
Mary’s Peak is said to be 1,500 feet from the base to the summit.
It presents a peculiar appearance, having a kind of frill or
collar of rocks surrounding it, about 50 feet from the top. Many
of the peaks in the North are similarly encircled, including others
in the Pound ranges.
The approach to Mr. H. S. Price’s station is up a broad flat,
through which the Wilpena creek, or Pasmore river runs; this
stream rises in the pound, and contains a never failing supply of
excellent water. The appearance of this place rivals that of
Aroona, probably some persons would prefer it, but each has
beauties of its own. The scenery of Aroona is more wild and
Highland-like, while that of Wilpena, near the station, is of a
softer, more homely English beauty. The land is well timbered
■with fine pines and gums, and the clear flowing creek, with rushes
growing on its banks, supplies an interesting and practically
important feature in the scene. Mr. Price was in Adelaide at
the time of my visit, but he had kindly given orders for my
reception. It being shearing time every hand on the station was
busily employed, and I was obliged to find my way into the
Pound without a guide. This was not a very easy matter for a
stranger, for the entrance is up a narrow gorge, the bottom of
which, except a narrow path, consists of a complete bog or
morass, covered with most luxuriant grass, for no cattle can
venture on the treacherous soil to eat the tempting herbage.
In some parts this path has been made more secure by placing
stones at the edge of the bog. After riding above a mile, I came
to a fence across the gorge at a place where it would be impossible


for cattle to climb the hills on either side. There were slip-rails
on the path, so passing through I rode a little further until I was
stopped by smooth sloping rocks, at such an angle that the horse
could not pass over them; I therefore tied him to a tree, and
with some little difficulty proceeded on foot. The upper rocks
underlapped those below, and where they did so, in some instances,
there were considerable pools of water. After a while I got
fairly into the Pound, and the magnificent sight that met my
gaze, would have repaid many a weary day’s journey. A gently
undulating, but nearly level surface, extending for 10 or 12 miles
in length by nearly three in breadth, covered with luxuriant
grass, and having noble pines and gum trees dotted about
in clumps, as in an English park, and interspersed with
shrubs and flowers. The giant hills which surround this
wonderful natural pound frown darkly down on the enclosed
plain, bidding defiance to the cattle to escape over their
lofty and rugged summits. The sides of the hills are covered
to a considerable height with shrubs and small trees, and higher
up apparently with low scrub. Mr. Selwyn, the Government
Geologist of Victoria, says of the Pound—“ It’s singularly grand
and picturesque appearance far surpassed anything I had pre-
viously seen in Australia. * * * It is not a volcanic crater,
nor in any way due to volcanic action, of which there is no trace
in the neighbourhood, but simply to a sinclinal undulation of the
upper sandstones, * * * the highest beds of the great
anticlinal, and forming the summits of all the higher peaks from
Mount Ee mark able northwards.”
Erom Wilpena, I rode the same evening to Arkaba, on the East
side of Elder’s Eange, passing to the West of the Druid’s and
Chase’s Eanges. On the road I encountered a thunder storm, and
had a specimen of the way in which the country is suddenly
flooded. The flats were almost entirely covered with water, and
the creeks soon rose several feet, rushing along like torrents.
From Arkaba I rode to Kanyaka, intending to visit some
mineral claims which I had missed seeing on my way up ; but
being seized with an attack of illness, I was unable to ride over
to these sections, which were several miles off the road, and
having an engagement in Adelaide on a certain day I was obliged
to push on ; 1 therefore procured the following description of
licCmibillf’s Uliiif,
Which comprises sections 1424 and 1455, about six miles South
from Kanyaka, amongst low bald hills. , There is a lode on the
surface in both sections, running about 300 yards North and
South, and about 18 inches thick ; the Ore, which is mixed with
goSsan and felspar, is not continuous, but occurs in patches, it


is a rich sulphuret, peculiar in appearance, and of a dark greenish
grey color. A shaft was sunk on the lode to the depth of about
three and a-half fathoms, and a drive was then carried for five
fathoms, Copper Ore being obtained throughout. Some holes
were sunk in other places and Copper found in all. Nine tons of
Ore have been raised, a sample of which assayed per cent.
Another claim which I omitted seeing is called
(WVV i t CVW’
States suite,
And is about eight miles from Watts’s Sugarloaf. A lode
containing stains of Copper was found on the surface, and on
sinking some good Ore was met with. The country is favorable,
and the lode contains good gossan with the Ore. Some very
good samples of the Ore have been sent to Adelaide, and the
claim is considered a promising one. But little work, however,
has been done here yet.
I have now described all the principal Mines in the Northern
part of the colony, and am not aware that I have omitted one of
any importance, and which could fairly be called a Mine.
However, I believe there are several valuable mineral claims, on
which, at present, no work has been done • and which, from
various causes, I did not visit. I do not consider that the
omission of a notice of these claims is a matter of much impor-
tance, as connected with the object of the present work, and which,
as I stated in the Introductory Chapter, was to give a description ot
the Mines of the colony. 1 have no intention of casting a slur
upon those claims which I have not described, for I have no
doubt there are some which I did not see as rich, or richer, than
many which I have noticed. Had I attempted to describe every
mineral claim in the colony, the bulk of the book would have
been increased five-fold, and the price must have been in propor-
tion, while the importance of the information would not have
been adequate, and the work would, necessarily, have appeared
extremely tedious. While, in many instances, the descriptions I
have given will serve as a guide to persons desirous of investing
in the Mines, the book has not been written with that view, and
those who think of investing should satisfy themselves by other
means of the eligibility of anything that may be offered to their
notice.
On my return to Adelaide, after a few day’s rest, I visited the
Mines in the East and South, and these I now beg to introduce
to the notice of the reader. The first I shall describe is


n srmtr Uliue.
This Mine is the freehold property of the Worthing Mining
Company, and is sometimes called the Callington Mine—
Callington being the name of the surrounding township, which
has sprung up since the discovery of the Mine. It was first dis-
covered in 1850, and is 36 miles from Adelaide, on the bank of the
Bremer, a considerable creek, running into the Murray ; though
only a chain of brackish waterholes in summer. The surround-
ing country is flat, consisting of clayslate, shaly rock, micaceous
schist, and occasionally a little quartz. The present state of the
workings may be thus described: —The engine-shaft is sunk to a
depth of 53 fathoms, and levels have been driven at the following
depths —12, 23, 33, and 43 fathoms, on the course of the lode,
North 23 ° West. The total length of the drives is above 400
fathoms. Some fine courses of Ore have been met with five and
six feet wide, but occasionally rather dradgey ; however, at the
lower levels there has been a decided improvement in this respect,
fine yellow Ore, of a quality superior to most of what has hitherto
been raised, as well as more solid in the lode, being now in course
of working at the 53-fathom cross-cut. The Ores in this Mine
are sulphurets of a good average quality; the prevailing Ore is
yellow, there is also black, and a little peacock met with. 4,500
tons of Ore have been raised here in five years, the large propor-
tion of which has been obtained during the last two years. The
large engine is a very fine one of GO-inch cylinder; a smaller
engine (40 horse-power) works the machinery, and will be used
for hauling. The smelting works, under the management of the
Messrs. Thomas, are about 250 or 300 yards from the Mine, and
comprise one calcining and two smelting furnaces. The Copper
made is of the quality of 96 per cent, of pure Copper, the
refining process being omitted.
Notwithstanding the small average produce of the Ores —only
13 per cent.—lower, I believe, than any other Mine in the colony,
this Mine is made to pay owing to the very careful management
adopted by Alfred Hallett, Esq., who devotes a considerable
portion of his time to the personal supervision of the Mine.
Everything is done with strict economy, and the important prin-
ciple, “let nothing be wasted or lost,” is fully carried out.
Machinery is made largely available for reducing the Ores, and
thus a Mine, which must at once show a loss if worked as other
Mines in the colony are worked, is rendered profitable to the
proprietors, besides providing direct employment for 120 hands,
including smelters ; and indirectly providing the means of living
for three or four times that number. That useful and recently
invented machine, known as “ Appleton’s Stonebreaker,” is em-
ployed for crushing the inferior Ores preparatory to their being
sorted, the best of the Ore having been previously broken and
picked by hand, when it is sent to the crushing rollers to prepare
it for the furnace. The “ smalls” are dealt with as usual, being


jigged and washed. The most important machinery for washing the
smalls and the slime Ores is in use at this Mine, consisting of a con-
continuation of Yyan’s Rake Buddie, self-acting plunge jiggers, and
the revolving table, hitherto only used for washing lead Ores, has
been adapted by Mr. Hallett for separating the slime, and is found
to answer admirably. It is, perhaps, scarcely necessary to give a
description of this machinery in a work like the present, but
from what I saw of its performances I am convinced that its use
in other Mines would add a considerable percentage to the profits,
and would enable some Mines to be profitably worked, which at
present yield nothing to the proprietors. Many of our Mine
adventurers would derive a useful lesson, and more than one,
perhaps, from a visit to the Bremer Mine. There has been no
extravagant outlay in handsome buildings, and “ no more cats are
kept than catch mice,” yet everything absolutely necessary
appears to be provided. I look upon this as the model Mine of
South Australia, and its enterprising Manager, Mr. Hallett,
deserves the highest praise for the judicious and persevering
manner in which he has developed the property, in spite of diffi-
culties that would have disheartened many.
From the Bremer Mine I proceeded through pretty country,
to another property belonging to the same Company, and called
%\t Jbeittuimma Sliiw
This Mine is about six miles North-East of Callington, and on a
rather high hill, in generally hilly country, near the Murray
Scrub, 38 miles from Adelaide. Some fine surface indications
were found here, and the Mine was opened in 1854, some good
Ore being raised, chiefly carbonates ; after a time the lode was
lost, and the Mine abandoned. The present proprietary com-
menced reworking this Aline about two years since. They
carted away 100 tons of stuff, from the surface, to their smelting
works, to use as flux, and this yielded five tons of Copper.
Several tons of “ roughs” are still scattered about, and, if
gathered up, would probably produce 10 per cent, of Copper.
The engine-shaft is sunk to a depth of above 47 fathoms, and
some fine black Ore was cut, about 30 fathoms from the
surface, but not in paying quantities. It was, however, believed,
from certain indications, that a good lode would be met with at
about 45 or 50 fathoms, and the appearance of the ground at the
present depth, strengthens that opinion. Some rich grey and
black Ore is now being raised from the engine-shaft; and
quantities of Mundic have been met with almost throughout the
entire course of the sinking. Some muriate of Copper has also
been found in this Aline.
This is one of the old mining districts of the colony, and from
the quantities of Ore that are now being raised here, and the


still larger quantities that are evidently likely to be produced, I
think my readers will agree with me, that it is to he regretted
that operations once commenced, in so favorable a country, were
ever abandoned. Several promising Mines opened in this district
during the years 1845-6, and 7, and from which large quantities
of rich Ores were raised were closed, chiefly, I believe, for want
of judicious management. Some of these have been taken up
again during the last two or three years, and appear to be working
advantageously, and with excellent prospects. The first of these
Mines, which I propose to notice, is the original South Australian
Company’s Mine,
Hjje |iaitiu:mtom Pine.
It is is about three miles nearer Adelaide than the Bremer
Mine, being a little to the South of East from the City, and
amongst hilly country. The present Company was formed in
November, 1861, with a capital of £12,000, in £5 shares ; £2 of
which only has yet been called up. Since the commencement of
this Company, 1,920 tons of Ore have been raised, and smelted
at the Company’s smelting works, in the neighborhood of Scott’s
Creek. These works consist of a calcining, a reverberatory, and
a refining furnace, and other necessary buildings. The principal
lodes are the Kangaroo, Emily’s, and the Boundary lode. The
two former run North and South, and the latter is a counter
lode. The first is a large lode yielding yellow Ore of a
moderate percentage. Emily’s lode has produced large quantities of
yellow Ore, which, at the 10-fathom level, gave place to red oxide
and native Copper ; one large block sent to Adelaide for exhi-
bition weighed 11 cwt. Two levels have been driven on the lode,
at 16 and 26 fathoms, respectively, showing a considerable
quantity of Ore to have been left in the Mine. The Copper
produced at the smelting works from the Ore now being raised
amounts to about 12 tons per month, and the rate of cartage to
Adelaide is 20s. per ton. A large amount of work has been
done at this Mine since its first commencement. The South
Australian Company raised about 4,000 tons of Ore, and opened
a large extent of ground. Mr. W. B. Dawes, who subsequently
rented the Mine, raised above 1,900 tons. Some of the old stopes
and drives in the Mine testify, on examination, to the immense
deposits of Ore which formerly existed there. This Mine is paying
the proprietors. Sixty-four hands are at present employed on it,
and 16 at the smelting works. There is a small but flourishing
township about half a mile from the Mine, and called after the
native name of the place —whence also the Mine derived its
designation—Kanmantoo.
A short distance from this, on an adjoining section, is another
Mine, called


®j)t oc'ltsl |l;uuu;nitoo Uline
The workings are on the side of a hill about 100 feet above the
valley. A very large opening—part of former workings—exists
in the ground, and from this a large quantity of Ore was taken.
At the time of my visit only two men were at work at the bottom
of this opening at a depth of 10 fathoms, and they had just cut
a seam of fine black Ore, which looked both rich and promising
for quantity. Since then the quantity raised by the two men in
two months was 30 tons. Some good carbonates have been found
in another part of the Mine, and the prospects are considered
highly satisfactory. A royalty is paid by the present company
on the Ore raised.
In the neighborhood of the Bremer and Kanmantoo Mines
are several others, that have been worked to a certain extent, but
as they are at present shut up and contain no features, as far as
I am aware, requiring special notice, I do not deem it necessary
to allude to them all, even by name. Of these the most impor-
tant was the Paringa Mine, from which nearly 900 tons of
Copper Ore were raised, and which, probably, may at some
future time again be worked to advantage. Indeed, this is so
evidently a mineral district, and one, the position of which,
offers so many advantages that, under circumstances of capital
and labor different from those at present obtaining in the
colony, I should not be surprised to see many of these old
Mines tried again. There are also other Mines between the
Bremer and Adelaide —at Lobethal, Hahndorf, &c.—in fact it
is impossible to travel far in the hills without coming into the
neighbourhood of metallic Ores of some kind, even if only iron.
About ten miles from this Mine, and 32 from Adelaide, is
flic wllical flint ftliuc.
Situated amongst hilly country about three miles from Stra-
thalbyn. The property, which comprises 700 acres, is freehold.
It was originally worked solely as a Silver-lead Mine, and some
fine lodes of galena and carbonates were opened, yielding from
eight to ten tons of the former and five of the latter per fathom.
About 2,000 tons of Lead Ore were raised containing, besides
90,000 ounces of Silver, and from one to two ounces of Gold in
each ton of pig-lead. A very large quantity of auriferous gossan
is found in this Mine, which has yielded, on assay in England,
from four to si«. ounces of Gold to the ton. Four thousand tons
of Ore are estimated to be in reserve in the present .levels.
The lode is opened on for a length of 120 fathoms. Six shafts
have been sunk to various depths, and levels driven every ten
fathoms. Bassett’s shaft is 62 fathoms in depth, and at the 50


the lode is larger than at any other part of the Mine, Scott’s
shaft is sunk 45 fathoms, the bottom going down in galena and
blended with yellow Ore. The engine-shaft is down 30 fathoms
and fully prepared for the engine and pit work now on the ground
and ready to be erected. Spence’s shaft has also been sunk 30
fathoms through a large lode of iron gossan, bearing Gold for
about 22 fathoms, when rich red oxide of Copper made its appear-
ance, and in the lowest depth the gossan has given place to
mundic, containing about 4 per cent, of Copper. The North pit
shaft is sunk 22 fathoms, and communicates with Spence’s for the
sake of ventilation. From the nature of the ground, and the fine
lode of Ore already discovered, large returns of Copper are
expected from this part of the Mine ; it is now being worked on
tribute at a good profit. At the present time the water is in the
Mine up to just above the 40 fathom level, below which there are
large reserves of Ore which cannot be raised until the engine is
erected.
Operations at this Mine are just now very slack, pending
certain negociations, in England, respecting the property.
A fine large chimney-stack, connected with the smelting
furnaces, rises to a height of about 70 feet; and the furnaces
consist of a calcining and reverberatory furnace, also a complete
blast furnace, with a steam-engine, and every requisite. The
supply of timber for smelting purposes is likely to be inexhaus-
tible for very many years to come; it is now being delivered at
4s. 6d. per ton on the Mine !
Not far from the Wheal Ellen is the batch of Mines known as
the Monster Lode Mineral property, and the old Stralhalbyn
Mines,
(Tlk Ifionstfr fok qlrcipnfn
Consists of several mineral sections, upon which a number of
places have been opened, yielding Copper Ore. A small party of
miners have been working on tribute, on some of these sections,
during the past six months, and have raised sufficient Ore to
justify the expectation that if capital were employed in developing
the property it might be added to the list of our lend fide
Mines.
<Tljf s'liatli:ilhimlfiiius
Compeise a property consisting of 635 acres of low hilly land,
which, unlike most of that on which the Mines are situated, is
fit for agricultural purposes. These mines were originally opened
by private enterprise about the year 1848, and some quantity of


good Copper Ore was raised and smelted on the property. It
was subsequently sold to an English Company, who made prepa-
rations apparently with the intention of carrying on operations
on an extensive scale, but this they never did, and the Copper
lodes, for the working of which they originally purchased the
property, have remained almost, if not entirely, untouched, the
water not even having been pumped out. On another section
a lode of Silver-lead has been opened and several hundred tons of
the Ore were sent to England. In one place, about 18 fathoms
below the surface, a splendid lode, 18 feet wide, of solid galena
is exposed, and this lode having been traced for about 30 fathoms
it is estimated that fully 2,000 tons of Ore can be taken out.
The Ore contains about per cent, of lead, and ounces of
Silver to the ton. The shaft here is sunk about 30 fathoms, and
in the bottom the galena is improving, and is also impregnated
with yellow Copper Ore. There is a portable steam engine on
the Mine, and the pump work is there ready for immediate use
—it is really a pity to see such a property lying idle.
Coming nearer to Adelaide we find the old
Utoirfatatt Ulrae,
On the Mount Lofty Range, and about 10 miles nearly North-
east from Adelaide. This Mine was discovered in 1813-4, and
the section on which it was found was purchased at auction by
Messrs. Baker, Frederick Dutton, Hagen, and Hart, for the sum
of £1,550 ; a few hours afterwards they parted with three-tenths
of their interest for what the whole had cost them, and the com-
pany formed was called the Montacute Mining Company. The
Mine is situated on a steep spur of the range, and extensive out-
croppings of Ore were visible on the surface. The Ores are chiefly
yellow and peacock Ores, averaging about 18 per cent.; some
native Copper was also found. The Mine was worked for some
time and several hundreds of tons of Ore raised, but it has now
been for many years abandoned. Other sections in the neighbor-
hood also contain Copper. About three miles North-east of the
Montacute, another Copper Mine was discovered and purchased
by G-. A. Anstey, Esq., of Highercombe, but little work was done,
and the Mine having been long since abandoned, it scarcely
demands a lengthened notice. Some Mines of more importance,
and which for some years, while worked, yielded a good return of
Silver-lead Ore, are
%\t dmn ©smonit Ulints,
A little more than four miles from Adelaide. They are the
property of Osmond Gilles, Esq., who leased them on a royalty
to an English company. There are several good lodes in the


ground, and many hundred tons of Ore were raised, yielding
about 70 per cent, of lead and from 15 to 18 ounces of silver to
the ton; but I believe the royalty was found to be too high to
leave the lessees sufficient profit, and other causes combined to
cause the abandonment of the works. The country consists of a
very hard clayslate.
The Wheal Watkins Lead Mines, adjoining the above, were
for a short time worked successfully ; and the Mines of the
Wheal G-awler Mining Company were also, at one time, amongst
our working Mines. The late" Mr. Duncan McFarlane also had
a lead Mine a short distance up Glen Osmond.
In other directions, I have heard of recent discoveries of
Copper : on the Para, about 12 or 14 miles from Adelaide, on
the tlley Hills, to the East of Gawler, and elsewhere in the
neighborhood of Gawler; also on Skilligolee Creek, a few miles
from Auburn; but it will be impossible for me to visit and write
about these places in the present work. lam informed that one
man in the IJley Hills makes a very fair living by carting to the
Smelting Works, at Port Adelaide, the Copper Ore which he
scrapes up on the surface of his own land ; and I believe the
same has been done by others, without any mining at all.
The next locality I shall describe is the
Staffs Craft glint,
About 18 miles from Adelaide, near Cherry Gardens. It is on
the side of a steep but not very high hill, on the surface of which
in ironstone rock some strong "stains of Copper were found. A
shaft was sunk, and some good stones of rich Ore were raised,
chiefly grey oxide, mixed with a little green aud blue carbonate.
The lode was small but regular aud well defined ; at the depth of
five fathoms there was but little Ore, the lode being composed
chiefly of gossan. The same lode has been found on the opposite
side of the section, but a sufficient depth has not yet been reached
to enable a judgment to be formed as to the future of this Mine.
The ground looks favorable, and the lode is nearly a downright
one, having but little underlay; a creek of good water runs
through the section and timber is plentiful.
It is not my intention in describing the Southern Mines to
enter into such particulars respecting the appearance of the
country, or the mode of travelling, as I did when writing on the
Northern Mines, for these more settled districts are better
known to residents in the colony; and for the information of
readers in England aud elsewhere, I may state generally that the
South comprises a large extent of agricultural land, in most


instances presenting pleasing features to the eye, farms, home-
steads, and rural townships being thickly scattered through the
country ; the scene is diversified occasionally by scrub or a belt
of stringy bark forest, which, in its turn, gives place to scenery
of great natural beauty, this being often increased by the pre-
sence of a pretty farmhouse with its beautiful garden, &c., or by
a neat township, with its church, mill, and scattered dwellings.
Twenty-one miles from Adelaide, we arrive at the township of
Noarlunga, through which flows the Onkaparinga, the second
river, as to importance, in the colony. Mineral has been found
in sevei’al places in this neighborhood, but no Mine of any note
has been worked here since the Worthing Mine, about five miles
nearer Adelaide, in Morphett Yale. That Mine was at one time
believed to promise well; but the country was extremely hard,
and Ore not being found in paying quantities, it was abandoned.
After passing sundry smaller townships, and numerous farms,
and some scrub and forest land, we reach Yankalilla, 50 miles
from Adelaide, and one of the prettiest, and most substantial, of
all our country towns. It is beautifully situated in a fine valley,
about two miles from the sea. Leaving Yankalilla, and travelling
seawards, we come to Normanville, a smaller township, boasting,
however, the possession of the district Court House. About a
mile and a half nearly North from Normanville, a Silver-lead
Mine called
Hike,
Is being worked by private enterprise; Mr. Lutterworth, 1
believe, being associated with Mr. Barritt in the venture. This
Mine is on a hill, in sight of the sea. It was first discovered
in July, 1862, and in about five months three men had sunk a
shaft 10 fathoms, and driven 11 on a rather irregular course of
Ore. They had raised 15 tons of Ore, 10 of which were shipped.
I was informed that it was rich in silver, and yielded 2| ozs. of
Hold to the ton. They had been driving North-East and South-
West ; but the indications of a North and South lode appeared
to me to be stronger, and the men informed me that a similar
opinion had been expressed by some one else, and that they were
going to try in that direction. The country consists of clay slate
and limestone.
Two miles South of Normanville there is a Copper-bearing
lode on Mr. David Cowan’s property, and he calls it
(Skrge Stint.
It is on the face of a steep hill, rising almost abruptly from a
flat half a mile from the sea. The lode runs about N.N.E., and
is traceable for above 250 yards on the surface. It is composed


of a quartzose rock strongly stained and impregnated with blue
and green carbonate of Copper, and containing thin veins of
Ore. As the lode runs in the direction of the range, it would
be easy to cut it by means of an adit driven in at the foot of the
hill. The outcropping of the Ore is about 100 feet above the
level of the sea, and the indications and nature of the country
appear favorable; and should a valuable Mine be developed
here it will derive many advantages from its proximity to a place
of shipment, from its situation in the midst of a large agricultural
district, and from the abundance of fuel and water in the neigh-
bourhood ; —there are two creeks of fresh water on the land.
There are other mineral discoveries in the vicinity, but none of
them have yet been developed.
gattapfinp Hint
A few miles farther South, at Eapid Bay, a Lead and Copper
Mine was discovered and purchased by Mr. H. W. Phillips, in
February, 1844. The lodes of lead are close to the surface, and
are easily worked. The produce was 75 per cent, of Lead and
from 22 to 25 oz. of Silver per ton. The Copper lodes were
found cropping out on the surface, and showing also in the face
of the cliffs fronting the sea, at a depth of 400 or 500 feet from
the top. The Ores consisted of grey, yellow, and peacock Ores.
About 50 tons of Silver-lead Ore were raised. The workings
were stopped partly from want of proper superintendence, and
partly because the Messrs. Phillips gave up a station which they
had held in the neighbourhood. lam informed that they have
recently been applied to by practical miners for permission to
work the ground on tribute. The ground is rather hard, but the
situation cannot be surpassed for the facilities which it affords
for dressing and shipping away the Ore —a stream of water
constantly running through the valley at the foot of the Mine.
Some fine white marble is found on this and the adjoining land.
There are also other mineral deposits in the neighborhood, but no
great amount of work has been done here. The country is very
pretty; but between this place and Cape Jervis, a distance of
nearly 10 miles, a belt of stringy-bark forest intervenes, relieved
towards the coast by beautiful and fertile valleys. On the high
ranges, about two miles East from the Cape, we come to the
CratpM's Cuff Jiilto-lestit Ipms,
Comprising seven sections of land. Lead has been found in
various places on the property, but no payable lode has yet been
cut. Drives have been made in four different places, and some-


thing like a lode was found, but not very well defined; and
although the Ore was good it was not in sufficient quantities ;
yet the Talisker Mine was working a payable lode, apparently
running in the direction of this section, and at a distance of only
40 fathoms. On section 1610 a drive was carried eight fathoms
and stopped for want of bands, some good stones of Ore,
however, were raised, and a pile of several hundredweight was
at grass. Another drive was made on 1558, and carried eight
and a half fathoms, with the view of cutting the Talisker lode
North, and which, it was hoped, would be accomplished when
about 22 fathoms more had been driven.
Although, hitherto, the operations on these claims have not
been very successful, it is not improbable that the lodes turning
out so well in the Talisker Mine may make in depth in the
ground worked by the Campbell’s Creek Company.
As I have already intimated, closely adjoining these claims are
those of the
Caliskr SHte-teth Him
These claims comprise about the same extent of ground as the
Campbell’s Creek Mine, but the proprietors have been much
more fortunate in their operations. The principal workings are
on section 1554. An adit level, the lower cross-cut, was driven
four fathoms into the hill; the upper cross-cut being at the same
time driven 18 fathoms, and intersecting a fine lode, running
North-east and South-west, containing above 75 per cent, of Lead,
and from 35 to 40 ozs. of Silver to the ton of Ore. This cross-
cut intersected the lode, and was then driven on its course for
four fathoms each way. A winze was sunk on the course of the
lode, in the lower or South level, and an air-shaft sunk from
above nearly six fathoms. This part of the ground presented a
very favorable appearance, the lode was looking settled, and
shewed good quantities of fine Ore. Since my visit I understand,
from disinterested parties who have seen the Mine, that a
material improvement has taken place here ; and I can readily
believe it, as it is no more than might have been expected from
the general appearance of the ground. What is called Mufford’s
level has been driven about 12 fathoms on the course of the
lode, and a winze been sunk four fathoms to open up ground for
sloping ; the lode here being nearly five feet wide of almost solid
Ore. When I visited the Mine nearly 100 tons of Ore were at
grass. The first shipment of about 20 tons had just been made,
and the remainder was being sorted and dressed. Since then
two further shipments have been made, and a large quantity of
Ore raised. Machinery is now (March) in course of erection for
dressing the Ore, and the prospects ot the Mine are very
encouraging. The works are under the superintendence of
Messrs. Alfred Jenkin & Son.


Three or four miles from the Talisker, Silver-lead Ore has been
discovered on the property of Mr. P. B. Coglin, M.P., but no
work has yet been done to develop the extent of the discovery.
Both Lead and Copper are also said to exist in other places in
the neighborhood, and it is not improbable that ere long this
part of the country may become an important mineral district.
The facilities for shipment are very great, and Mines could be
made to pay here that would be worthless far in the interior.
Leaving this part of the country, I now proceed to notice
briefly another mineral district which should, perhaps, according
to geographical arrangement, have been alluded to before—l
refer to Angaston, Truro, and the North Ehine.
Prior to the year 1846, a German Geologist, Mr. Menge, well
known at that time in this colony, discovered a lode on a section
belonging to George Fife Angas, Esq., near Angaston, and in the
valley of the river Gawler. There were indeed tjvo lodes, one of
which was traced for above 200 yards, and some fine samples
were raised yielding, on assay, 33 per cent, of Copper; but no
systematic mining was prosecuted here. Subsequently another
very promising Mine, the Wheal Barton, was found on another
part of Mr. Angas’s estate, or in the immediate neighbourhood,
and for a time it created quite a stir in the colony, but from some
cause or other, either mismanagement or want of unanimity
amongst the shareholders —for a company was formed for working
it—it was closed ; although it is believed by many that it would
have proved a very valuable and remunerative Mine. I am
informed there is a probability of its being again worked before
very long.
More recently, a new discovery was made close to the town-
ship of Angaston, and called the Crinnis Mine. The late Captain
Eodda entertained a very favorable opinion of the place; but
after an ephemeral existence the Company formed for working
the property was broken up.
About 10 miles from Angaston, on fine, thinly timbered, and
moderately hilly country, we find
%\t |Urtjr l&jjint Hint.
This Mine is situated on sections 563 and 570, the Company
having, also, the adjoining sections numbered 550 and 562—a1l
freehold. Copper is found on the whole of the land, and one of
the lodes is traced through two sections. There are two lodes
running nearly parallel, in a North and South direction, with an
underlay towards the West of about 18 inches in the fathom.
The Ores found near the surface were green and blue carbonates


of promising appearance. The Eastern lode was first opened ;
and about 20 tons of Ore, averaging a little over 20 per cent, of
Copper, were sent to England, but as the water soon became too
strong to be kept in fork by animal power, an engine-shaft was
sunk near the main (or Nicholls’) lode, and a 70 horse power
engine and pump work fixed; this has been working very
efficiently since March, 1860. Another shaft, near the engine-
shaft, had been commenced prior to the present Company taking
the Mine, and this was continued by Captain Barker, until the
lode was cut at 20 fathoms, where it was four feet wide, being
composed of black Ore, Mundic, and spar. The sinking was
continued to 30 fathoms, and it was after this that the engine-
shaft was sunk. The lode was, unfortunately, not found to
yield Ore in paying quantities when cut again at the 80-fathom
level; but the indications were deemed such as to warrant
further sinking. When the 43-fathom level was reached a drive
was made and carried on for 70 fathoms on the course of the
lode ; but although the lode varied from three to six feet in
width, it contained too large a proportion of Mundic to allow of
its being worked to advantage. The engine-shaft has been sunk
to a depth of 60-fathoms, and another drive made for 50 fathoms,
but the lode unfortunately remains unremunerative, although
containing black sulphuret throughout. The drive is being
continued, in order to communicate with a winze which is in
course of sinking from the 43-fathom level.
Before proceeding to a description of the extraordinary Mines
on Yorke’s Peninsula, and most generally known as the Wallaroo
and Moonta Mines, I may make a passing allusion to the fact of
Copper Mines having been for some time worked on the opposite
peninsula, to the Westward, and in the neighborhood of Port
Lincoln. One of these Mines was called the Mount Liverpool,
and another the Port Lincoln Mine ; a fair amount of good Ore
has at different times been raised from these Mines, but, I am
informed, the hardness of the ground is one obstacle in the way
of their being profitably worked. Some persons still assert that,
under good management, and with labor at a reasonable rate,
they might yet be worked to advantage.
I believe Plumbago has been found in considerable quantities
in this neighborhood; it is also traceable for three miles along a
range near Gumeracha.
In a work on the Mines of the Colony, I should hardly be
justified in omitting to notice our little Gold-field at Echunga,
20 miles from Adelaide, although a Victorian or New South
Wales digger would perhaps not exchange one good claim in
the richer colonies for the whole of our diggings. These
diggings were discovered about 10 or 11 years ago, and ever
since that time a few plodding persevering men have continued to


work here, and although no great “ finds” have been made, very-
good average wages have been earned, and, in the aggregate, some
thousands of pounds worth of gold raised annually. It is next to
impossible to arrive at an accurate estimate of the total quantity,
for those who have evidently been most successful have been
very quiet—keeping their own counsel.
Gold has been found in many other parts of the Colony, and a
recent discovery has been announced at the Meadows, a few miles
from Echunga, but the extent of the auriferous ground is not yet
ascertained. I have seen a sample of the Gold, which is more
shotty than that found at Echunga, the latter being remarkably
fine and flaky. Gold has also been met with in quartz reefs
here, but none of the attempts to work them have hitherto been
.successful.
It is singular that, up to the present time, this Colony should
have proved the poorest in the precious metal, as I believe the
first Gold discovered in Australasia was found in one of our
oldest Copper Mines, in the Mount Lofty ranges, about 17 years
ago. If I remember rightly, a brooch was made from the Gold,
and sent as a present to Her Majesty the Queen, the Mine being
called the Victoria Mine.
Malknm Hikes.
Little more than three years since, some excitement was caused
in Adelaide by the announcement that a valuable discovery of
Copper had been made on Captain W. W. Hughes’s sheep run
at Wallaroo. Copper had been found on the Peninsula years
before; but the small attempts made at the time to trace the
lode were not so successful as to lead to any extended operations.
The excitement I have alluded to did not at once become
general, but before many months had elapsed there was a perfect
furore for securing “ claims” at Wallaroo. To such an extent
did this proceed, that, to my knowledge, persons who had never
seen the place went to the Land Office and asking to see the
plans, indicated two or three spots where they desired to take
out claims; and some of these “ dips in the lucky bag” resulted
satisfactorily ! I think I should scarcely exaggerate if I were to
say that hundreds of claims were taken out for no other reason
than they were North, South, East, or West, of some other
claim said to contain Copper! Some really good discoveries
were made, and many persons who undertook a systematic search
for mineral on the Peninsula were well rewarded for their
trouble. But, notwithstanding all the “ splendid prospects,” I
think I shall not be wrong in saying that not more than half a
dozen out of the hundreds of “promising Mines” on Yorke’s
Peninsula shew at the present time any prospect of proving


remunerative; and not even half that number are as yet actually
paying. Still this is a wonderful mineral district, and when the
bad effects ot the mania shall have passed away, and mining is
pursued in a legitimate and less speculative way, it may be that
still greater riches may be brought to light. Of course the
Treasury benefitted largely by the unexpected influx of wealth,
derived from the rents of so many sections; besides two large
townships were laid out and the land sold at a high price ; but,
as usual, the proceeds of the whole were absorbed in the general
revenue, and the locality which had added so much to the public
funds received the usual amount of official neglect in return.
The inhabitants complain, and very justly, that nothing has been
done by the Government to improve their roads ; and notwith-
standing the scheme for drainage—so essential to the successful
prosecution of mining at Wallaroo—which was laid before
Parliament, no action has been taken, and the working of one
really valuable Mine has been stopped in consequence of the
“ mad-water.” Acres are covered, for a depth of two or three
feet, with water pumped out of the Mines, and which must soon
porcolate back through the light porous soil. Besides this evil,
the health of the inhabitants is likely to suffer from the
amount of stagnant water which can find no natural outlet. The
Survey or- General, in his report, estimated that at least a fair
interest on the cost ot constructing a drain would be readily paid
by the Mining Companies— yet nothing is done. Perhaps the
present Parliament will move in the matter.
Private enterprise is generally in advance of G-overnments, and
so it has proved at Wallaroo, for a railway has been constructed
from the Mines to the Port, a distance of about five miles, by
Mr, A. H. Gouge, the Peto of South Australia. Since Mr.
Gouge got the railway into working order, a Company has
purchased it, Mr. Gouge, however, retaining a considerable share.
It is in contemplation to extend a branch from Port Wallaroo to
the Moonta Mines (9 miles) as the present line is paying hand-
somely. I should also state that a fine jetty has been constructed
at the Port, so that although close in shore the water is shoal,
vessels of 1,000 tons can load and discharge in safety at the
jetty, which is connected with the railway.
Before commencing a description of the Mines, I may state
that the two townships contain many very substantial buildings,
the hotels being equal to any in Adelaide. The population of
the Peninsula, which three years ago consisted of a few shepherds,
besides Captain Hughes and his family, in a few months after the
opening of the Mines began to be reckoned by thousands; the
number of the inhabitants at the present time is somewhere
about 6,000.
The land is low and undulating, and, in the latitude of the
Mines, it stretches for about 30 miles between the two gulfs.
The soil is loose and sandy, and abundance of limestone is found
in nodules and blocks on the surface. This part of the Peninsula
is well-grassed, in large patches of pasture land, surrounded by
mallee scrub. s.


The first Mine which attracts the attention of the traveller
proceeding from Clinton, or Port Arthur, to Wallaroo, is “ The
Cumberland,” which is prettily situated to the left (South) of
the road, on open rising ground, surrounded by scrub. The
buildings of the Mine are plainly seen from the road, although
about a mile and a half distant. Soon after the working of this
Mine was commenced, what appeared to be a fine lode was
discovered on the surface, but it proved to be only a boil, and
ran out in about three fathoms. Some fine Galena was also met
with in a similar way. A considerable amount of work was
done with the view of finding the lost lode, but without success.
Three shafts were sunk, one of which was, at the time, the
deepest on the Peninsula, viz., 27 fathoms ; and many fathoms of
drives were made, besides costeening. Above eight tons of good
Ore, altogether, was raised here; but eventually the Mine was
abandoned. I shall not pretend to enumerate, much less to give
a notice of, all the “ Mines” started in this district. I may,
however, briefly allude to some of the unsuccessful ones, and
amongst these are “ The Pinniss Claims,” which really deserved
to have resulted in a good Mine, from the patient, untiring
perseverance displayed by the unfortunate proprietors. If some
others had pursued as legitimate and systematic a course of
genuine mining, in search of Ore, as did the Pinniss Claims’
Company, the state of affairs in connection with their pockets
and their claims might have been very different from what it is.
One of the first Mines which commenced working at Wallaroo
after the original Wallaroo Mines was
®l n fto Cornhrall,
Which was introduced to the public with very good prospects.
The Mine is about a mile E.S.E. from Kadina. It is now about
two years since this Mine was opened by the present Company,
and during the former part of the time operations were pursued
with great vigor; several shafts were sunk, drives cut, and stoping
done. There are two main lodes—Lucas’s and Sismey’s; the
former is the principal. They are almost parallel lodes, running
nearly North-West and South-East, but converging both as to
their direction and their underlay. All the veins and strings of
Ore met with also converge towards the main lode ; it is there-
fore expected, that where the lodes meet there will be a very
large deposit of Ore. Lucas’s lode has varied in width from one
to 14 feet. Squarey’s (Engine) shaft is now sunk to a depth of
29 fathoms on Sismey’s lode, and No. 2 shaft, on the same side,
is down 20 fathoms ; a cross-cut is being driven from this level to
intersect Lucas’s lode. This is considered one of the leading
points of the Mine, as, eight fathoms below the surface, the lode
was opened on for a length of 15 fathoms, presenting a strong
and promising appearance, and containing quartz, green carbonate,


and muriate of Copper. The cross-cut now being made will cut
the lode at 12-fathoms lower. The lodes at present are not first-
rate courses of Ore, but disturbed and dradgey. There was a
considerable influx of water in this cross-cut, but arrangements
are being made to put the machinery in order to keep it in fork.
Unfortunately, an accident, similar to what occurred some time
since, has recently happened to the engine; and to prevent a
recurrence of it the engine will have to be reset, which will cause
the works to be suspended for about a month. The country in
Squarey’s engine-shaft is as favorable in appearance as could be
desired, and contains some good stones of Ore and pieces of
native Copper. The ground throughout the Mine is generally
favorable.
I must not omit to mention that a large block of Ore, said to
weigh nearly five tons, was sent to the International Exhibition
of 1862, having been raised from Lucas’s lode, out of White’s
Shaft. Between 3,000 and 4,000 tons of stuff are now at grass,,
and will be dressed up so as to yield, probably, from 800 to 1,000
tons of Ore, worth 15 per cent, of Copper. The buildings on
the Mine are substantial —being, chiefly, of stone and brick—and
comprise Captain’s house, store, office, smith’s and carpenter’s
workshops, besides engine-house and chimney-stack (72 feet high),
also crushing-house, with a separate engine to work up to 12-
horse power, driving two feet rollers. There is, also, a still for
distilling water, and a tank to hold 15,000 gallons, stone stables,
and several miners’ cottages. Close at hand is Mr. Ttodda’s
smelting establishment, which will be described in another place.
Though the prospects, or rather, I should say, the present
position of the Mine is anything but satisfactory Captain East,
who is evidently a very intelligent, practical man, entertains the
best hopes for the future, and I think not without good reason.
I trust, for the sake of the shareholders, these anticipations may
be realized. I should recommend them not to sell out; but to
hold their shares for another six months at least.
®|t Patta Utiitta Pint.
This is one of the richest of the batch of Mines near Kadina,
and known as the Wallaroo Mines. Two shafts have been sunk
to the depth of 20 fathoms. A fine lode of Ore was cut at the
10-fathom level, running about E.S.E. and W.N.W., consisting
of rich green carbonate and grey sulphuret, with red oxide and a
quantity of malleable Copper. Ore to the value of nearly £20,000
was raised; but, as the sinking proceeded, a large influx of water
interfered with the work, the little engine of 25-horse power
being unable to keep it in fork ; but, perhaps, it would be more


correct to say that, for want of sufficient drainage, the water
found its way back into the Mine, and at present operations are
suspended. It is singular that this Mine is so much wetter than
the neighboring Mines, but so it is. There is scarcely any
difference in the level of the ground, but the sub-strata must be
looser, or some extraordinary spring of water must exist in the
Mine. It is much to be regretted that operations were stopped
here, for, as I said before, a fine productive lode was being
worked, the Ore from which is far richer than that from any
other Mines on the Peninsula, except the Moonta. The Matta
Matta is prettily situated, in sight of Kadina, and Mr. E. K.
Horn, the proprietor of half the property, has erected a neat and
commodious cottage, which is occupied by his son, Mr. E. Horn,
who has the management of the Mine. The necessary buildings
in connection with the Mine are substantial. At one time about
40 hands were employed here,
A short distance to the North of West from the Matta are
the original
flc'l:tH:uoo glints,
Better known by the names of the shafts, the “ Home” and
“Wombat.” There are also Taylor’s Engine Shaft, Young’s
Shaft, and Hughes’s Engine Shaft; the last is the deepest, being
down 40 fathoms. The Home Shaft is the next in point of depth,
being down 24 fathoms ; and the rest are all about 20 fathoms
deep. There is also Smith’s Shaft, which will not be used at
present for want of sufficient drainage to carry off the water.
The inconvenience suffered from want of drainage is manifest at
all the Mines on the Peninsula, and unless some prompt action
is taken in the matter it will become very serious. At these
Mines Captain Warmington informs me that he has just been
obliged to discharge twelve boys in order to allow of a pair of
tributers washing their Ore; and this need not have been the
case had the drainage been such as to admit of arrangements
being made to enable the boys and tributers to work at the same
time. Thus the poor lads are thrown out of employment, and
the Mine is deprived of the benefit of their services.
The shafts I have named above are all sunk, at considerable
intervals apart, on the same lode, running East and West, and a
very considerable length of drives has been made on the course
of the lode, besides a large amount of sloping having been done.
In Hughes’ shaft, at the 40-fatbom level, a drive has been carried
East on a splendid course of solid Ore, 8 feet in width. At the
30-fathom level and 20-fathom level, East of Hughes’ shaft, there
was an extraordinary course of Ore, the lode having opened out
to a width of 30 feet of good yellow Ore, a little intermixed with
spar, and having a very small “ horse” in it, but worth nearly 60
tons to the fathom of Ore which would produce, as raised, pro-
bably 12 per cent, of Copper. This course of Ore had increased
92


regularly from 10 feet wide at the 10-fathom level, to 20 feet at
the 20, and so on. Ten fathoms turther East the lode is 8 feet
wide of solid Ore. The prevailing nature of the Ore in this
Mine is yellow sulphuret, but a variety of Ore has been met
with in the course of the workings—red and grey oxides, carbo-
nates and muriates, and a little malleable Copper. The average
produce of the Ores from this Mine I suppose does not exceed
15 per cent, but the quantity is enormous, and the close proxi-
mity to a shipping port (5 miles) and the convenience of a rail-
way passing within a few fathoms of the shafts, would enable the
Mine to pay with a much lower produce. The extensive Smelting
Works, erected at Port Wallaroo by the proprietors of this
Mine, should also assist in increasing the profits of the under-
taking, These will be noticed by-and-bye. There are two engines
at present at work, both high-pressure, one of 21 and the other
of 18 inch cylinder; the latter is used for crushing as well as
pumping. An engine-house is just completed for the reception
of a fine new Cornish pumping engine, recently imported, of 60
inch cylinder. This will work at Taylor’s shaft.
Not to tire the reader with a more detailed description of the
works at these wonderful Mines, the best account I can give of
them is the following statement of the quantity of Ore raised:
The total quantity of Ore sent away from the Mines, from the
commencement to 31st January, this year, was 15,910 tons
12 cwt.; and, probably, from 1,500 to 2,000 tons more are now at
grass. About 300 men are employed, at wages varying from
4s. 6d. to 7s. 6d. per day.
About half a mile southward from the Wallaroo Mines we see
the now abandoned “ New Devon Mine,” which was, for a time,
worked with very good prospects of success ; some fine Ore was
raised from a very promising branch lode, but it did not hold out,
A little to the West of this, is
®jrt IMIa Uliitt,
W here some very good Ore was found near the surface, and a
few tons raised; a lode was cut, underlying North about 15
inches in the fathom; and a shaft sunk 25 fathoms. But little
driving has been done; at the 10-fathom level a drive of 15 feet
cut the lode, containing branches of good Ore with micaceous
slate and spar. Another drive was extended six fathoms West
on the lode. The lode runs East and West, parallel with the
Wallaroo lodes, and at the 25-fathom level it is nearly seven feet
wide. A drive was carried 16 feet at the 15-fathom level, and
cut the lode; it was then extended eight feet West, and four feet
East on the lode, which contained branches of Ore. Eight tons of
Ore, averaging over 25 per cent., were raised from the 10-fatbom
level, and altogether about 50 tons have been raised. At


the 25-fathom level the lode contains some good branches of
very fine yellow sulphuret Ore, and the prospects of the Mine
are considered good. A small engine pumps the Mine, and there
are good offices, and Captain’s house, substantially built of stone.
About half a mile from the Kurilla, southwards, we come to
®l n nrjea Uline,
On section 471. The Company to which this Mine belongs
hold several other sections, as indeed do most of the Mining
Companies ; but no operations of importance are being carried
on elsewhere, at present, though some of the other claims were
considered to show good indications.
The Mine has now been worked above 18 months, and altogether
several hundred tons of orey stuff have been raised, but the great
bulk of it requires treating by some cheap and effectual process
for separating the Ore, before it can be considered marketable.
Twenty-five tons of 15 per cent. Ore were sold, and 25 more of
probably a higher quality are ready for market, besides nearly
five tons of 30 per cent., and about 50 or 60 which require dres-
sing. The engine shaft is down above 37 fathoms, and is to be
continued until 42 fathoms are reached. Cross-cuts and levels
were driven at 12, 22, and 32 fathoms, and two regular lodes
found, running nearly East and West, and underlying about 18
inches in the fathom. A very large amount of mundic has been
met with in the lodes, and this is often an indication of a large
amount of Copper below. The country is favorable, and some
very good Ore has been found at various levels, and which may
pay to stope away when the workings are in a more advanced
state. A material improvement is perceptible in the cross-cut at
the 32-fathom level where there is a good course of rich yellow
and black Ore in the lodes, and where the two lodes appear to
have run together. The appearance of the present end is very
satisfactory ; the country is evidently becoming more settled and
with a little less mundic, and Ore in its place, the lode would soon
prove payable. This it is confidently expected to do at the
42-fathom level.
The lode having steadily improved as it has gone down, and
containing at the present level a promising course of fine yellow
Ore in more settled country, it is only reasonable to conjecture
that at the next level (42 fathoms) a still further improvement
will be met with. There is a good deal of black Ore in veins and
“ squats” through the Mine, and some small branches of Ore, but
in several places the Ore has been thrown out by “ horses,” or
patches of unproductive ground. A great deal of Ore may be
seen in small pieces intermixed with the stuff that has been
hauled up from various parts of the lode, and if apparatus such
as is employed at the Bremer Mine were brought to bear upon it,
I think several tons of good marketable Ore might be recovered.


Proceeding from the Duryea Mine in the direction of Tipara,
we see, about six miles on the road, a new claim called the
Kangaroo, which is being worked by Mr. W. B. Dawes and
others. When I saw it, on the 12th of March, no Ore had been
cut, but the country looked remarkably “ keenly,” and there
were indications which led to the supposition that they were not
far from the back of the lode. Copper, in small quantities, has
been found in the ground by the use of tests ; but not in particles
perceptible to the unaided eye, although small nodules have been
smelted out of some of the stones, by Mr. Bodda’s process.
About a mile from the Kangaroo we come to the
pita Pint,
On claims adjoining the Moonta, and where, for upwards of
twelve months, operations have been vigorously carried on, in the
hope of cutting the Moonta lodes. Small stones of Ore have
occasionally been met with, and at one time it was thought that
the same lode as was found in Buchan’s shaft on the Moonta
was cut in the Yelta. The country in some parts looks decidedly
favorable for Copper, though it is hard in places. They are now
driving at 11 fathoms, and an improvement in the ground is
perceptible, and a good deal of steatite is making its appearance,
and a “ vug,” or small cavity, containing fine Mundic, was found
in the side of the drive. The proprietors feel very sanguine of
ultimate success, and they deserve it for their patient persever-
ance, It would be surprising if the lodes stopped short on the
Moonta claims, where they are strong and productive, and left
the Yelta copperless. They surely must be found, perhaps at a
greater depth, and the fact of a new and promising part of the
lode, consisting of black and yellow Ore, having been cut in
Buchan’s shaft, is encouraging to the Yelta proprietors, as they
also may meet with the same thing. The next Mines we come
to are the celebrated
Ulmmta flints.
The great rivals of the world-renowed Burra Burra, which is
described near the commencement of this work.
There are four distinct lodes on these Mines, all nearly parallel,
within a space of half a mile, and running about North and
South. The first discovery of Ore here was made about two
years since, when a quantity of small stones of green carbonate
was found on the surface. Some holes were sunk, and a lode of
fine Ore cut at a small depth. This lode was named after one of
the proprietors, Taylor’s lode. Four shafts have since been sunk


on it and named after proprietors ; Elder’s, the deepest, is now
30 fathoms, and Smith’s, Waterhouse’s, and Taylor’s, 20 fathoms
each. A house for an engine of 60-inch cylinder is now in
course of erection here for the purpose of pumping the Mine.
In the drives from Smith’s shaft a fine lode of yellow Ore, from
18 inches to 2 feet wide, is being worked at the 20-fathom level.
The lode is 4| feet wide in Elder’s shaft, in which shaft, at the
10-fathom level, a splendid lode of rich black Ore, largely mixed
with malleable Copper, has yielded great quantities of Ore ; at
one time it was being hauled up at the rate of 20 tons a day.
From the drives from Taylor’s shaft a quantity of rich Ore has
been raised, consisting of black and grey sulphurets, red oxide,
and malleable Copper.
The drives on the lode extend altogether for a length of about
350 fathoms at the 10 fathom levels, and for 250 fathoms at a
depth of 20.
Two other lodes, Young’s and MacDonnell’s —the latter named
after our late Oovernor—have produced Ore of a higher percen-
tage than that from the other parts of these Mines; it is grey
sulphuret, some of which has given, on assay, 66 per cent, of fine
Copper, and the average of the lodes is estimated at nearly 60 per
cent. Both lodes have been driven on for a considerable distance at
the 10-fathom levels, Young’s being 6 feet wide, and Mac Donnell’s
varying from 6 inches to 12 feet, but averaging a less width than
Young’s. At Buchan’s shaft, a large deposit of malleable Copper
and rich black Ore was met with, and some beautiful specimens
of native dendritic and foliated Copper were found both here
and on Taylor’s lode. Buchan’s shaft has been lately sunk to 20
fathoms, and a fine lode of black and yellow Ore cut.
The buildings on this Mine are large and substantial, and
besides offices, stables, &c., comprise a complete and well-furnished
assay office, under the management of Captain R. H. Hancock,
a scientific gentleman who came to this colony a few years since
to superintend the Wheal Ellen Mine.
The wonderful richness of these Mines will be seen from the
following approximate return of Ore raised during twenty months,
since the commencement of the workings, viz., 8,000 tons of Ore
averaging nearly 25 per cent of pure Copper; and which has
been raised at such a comparatively small cost as to enable two
dividends of £lO per share each (together £64,000) to be
declared on Ist October last, and 25th February this year.
The Miners say the Moonta will be a Mine when the Burra is
forgotten —because she has lodes and the Burra has none; but
this remains to be proved. As long as one has plenty of gold it
matters little whether it be in the shape of long bars or heaps of
sovereigns.
About August or September last year, when a large quantity of
Ore was required at Port Wallaroo for shipment, a distance of
about 10 miles from the Moonta, 1,700 tons of Ore were delivered
in nine days!—by means of drays. The number of hands
employed on these Mines is nearly 300; but, until the last few


months, not nearly so many were engaged. Ample provision is
made for a supply of water, by means of large tanks holding
many thousand gallons, collected from galvanized iron roofs.
On an adjoining section, South of the Moonta, is the
Ilarlutrillit Pine,
In the direct line of Taylor’s lode, which has been cut here, and
is now yielding fine yellow Ore, with some black; but at present
scarcely in paying quantities. However, the lode is pretty
regular, and improving as it goes down, so that when a few
fathoms more are sunk it is probable there will be a good and
profitable course of Ore. No. 1, Cudlip’s shaft, is 26j fathoms
in depth, and the country looks very favorable; similar to that in
the Moonta, and containing a great deal of steatite, which is
regarded as a good indication. Drives have been carried, on the
course of the lode, 21 fathoms South, and 12 fathoms North.
Two or three small shafts were sunk at the commencement of
operations here; but the main shaft, now, is No. 1, from which
the workings are extended. In the present end of the drive the
lode is about 15 inches wide, and is looking very well. About
15 tons of Ore, averaging 111 per cent, of Copper, have been
sold, and about 12 more, of a higher percentage, are now at
grass. I can state, from my own examination of the Ore that
was sold, that the low percentage must have arisen from its being
imperfectly dressed, for what I saw bagged for market was very
much mixed with spar and stone. This Mine is considered one
of the substantial ones. Being in the hands of a few, and not
very wealthy proprietors, it has been worked economically, and
so much has not been done as might otherwise have been the
case; but the proprietors are full of sanguine anticipations for
the future.
About three and a half miles S.S.E. from the Karkarilla, a
new claim has recently been opened under the name of the
Stfljmtl Stuart,
About which there has been some little excitement in Adelaide,
as it was represented to be a “ second Moonta.” I must confess
I did not find the same amount of excitement in the immediate
neighborhood. The claim is about three and a half miles S.S.E. of
the Moonta, and a quantity of small pieces of green carbonate Ore
was found on the surface. A shaft has been sunk for eight and a
half fathoms, through gossan, steatite, ironstone, and quartz —all
very favorable indications—and it is confidently hoped that the
lode will soon be cut.


About four miles S.W. of the Moonta another discovery was
made by Captain Lean, and although it has received no name
intended to be permanent, it is pretty well-known as the
m\pi puiubj,
Being named after a storekeeper at Kadina, who has an interest
in it. Similar surface indications to those at the Wheal Stuart
and at the Moonta were found here, and on sinking four fathoms,
the back of a lode was cut, consisting of ironstone, mixed with
green carbonate of Copper. The country is good, being chiefly
killas, It is difficult to say anything with reference to the
probable future of either this or the preceding Mine. Present
indications are undoubtedly good, and of course those interested
are sanguine; but too little has at present been done to hazard
the conjecture that they will be “ second Moontas.” I have
noticed these claims as being the latest discoveries of any impor-
tance that I have heard of in the district; and, having now
concluded my description of the Mines of South Australia, I
proceed to notice
Cljc Smelting cu'lorlis
The Smelting Works immediately connected with some of the
Mines, have been already briefly noticed, viz., those at the
Kapunda, Bremer, Kanmautoo, Wheal Ellen, and Strathalbyn
Mines. Ido not conceive it necessary to observe any particular
order, chronological or geographical, in describing the others. I
may just mention two which are now matters of history only,
having long.since passed away —those near Port Adelaide, called
the Yatala Smelting Works, and those at Apoinga, 22 miles from
the Burra ; but having just described the Wallaroo Mines, it
may be as well, before taking leave of the Peninsula, to notice
the Smelting Works here, and which are the most extensive in
the colony, and the largest, I believe, out of Swansea. There are
at present 22 furnaces, under a galvanized iron roof, measuring
695 feet in length, by 55 in breadth ; 10 feet high to the wall-
plate, and 18 feet to the ridge; besides a Refinery containing
three furnaces, and measuring 80 feet by 50 feet in the clear, and
27 feet high. The sides of the shed over the furnaces being
necessarily open, the roof is supported on massive stone arches,
when rain falls an immense quantity of water is collected on so
large a surface. Tanks are constructed to hold 50,000 gallons
of water, and during a heavy shower the water from the roof
completely fills the main pipe, of eight inches diameter, leading
to the tanks. Eighteen furnaces are at present in operation,


besides the three refining furnaces. Wood is burned in the
latter, and in some of the others ; the remainder burn coal. Over
the furnaces is a tramway, leading from the place where the Ore
is prepared for smelting, and the crushed Ore is put into a truck
having a simple contrivance for tilting, so as to shoot the contents
into the hoppers over the furnaces.
The building runs parallel with the beach, and close to the sea
is a culvert six feet high, and six wide, built of stone and slabs of
slag from the furnaces, moulded into the shape of bricks but
much larger. This culvert, running parallel to the furnaces,
receives the smoke from them, through flues passing downwards
into it, and communicates with the chimney-stack by means of
another culvert at right angles to it; a tremendous draft is thus
obtained, and the heat generated is intense. We walked into
a part of the culvert, and, through an aperture in a temporary
party wall, could see, feel, and hear the effects of the tremendous
blast of hot air rushing through.
The chimney-stack is a fine pile of bricks and mortar, being
120 feet in height, 24 feet square at the base, and 12 feet at the
summit. The walls at the lower part are 5 feet in thickness,
having a lining of firebrick, and a space or chamber for the
admission of cold air between the exterior and interior of the
stack. The air is admitted through holes in the ground, which
lead to apertures in the foundation of the stack ; these holes are
covered with gratings. Nearly 300,000 bricks have been
employed in this erection. This huge chimney is on a bank
about 25 or 30 feet above the ground where the furnaces are
built, and a flue or culvert slopes upwards from the culvert behind
the furnaces to the base of the chimney, which is 150 feet from
the culvert connected with the furnaces.
The Assay Office in connection with this establishment is very
complete, and fitted up with every convenience; the draughts
necessary for blowing the fires are introduced from the large
culvert near the great chimney. There are two or three furnaces
of different descriptions, and a sand bath for boiling chemical
tests in porcelain vessels; to prevent any danger from the fumes,
there is a glass cover over the sand bath, so that the operator can
watch the process, while the fumes are carried through a flue to
the outside of the building. Mr. Ludwig Seeger, of the Uni-
versity of Munich, has the appointment of Assayer and
Analytical Chemist, and rejoices in the completeness of the
establishment over which he presides.
There are also four large furnaces for burning the yellow
sulphuret Ores, to drive off the sulphur, before putting them into
the smelting furnaces. A few bushels of wood are sufficient to
start them, and the Ore will continue to burn fiercely until the
sulphur is consumed ; a great saving of fuel is thus effected.
There is a crushing engine of 16-horse power, for reducing the
Ore to powder before smelting. The offices, &c., in connection
with the establishment, make it as complete as could be desired.
The erection of these immense works was planned and designed


by Messrs. GK & E. Hamilton, Architects and Civil Engineers,
Adelaide, and I believe they received several suggestions, as to the
practical part, from Mr. Lysson Jones, the Superintendent of the
smelting, and formerly of the Patent Copper Company’s Works
at the Burra, and more recently of Kapunda.
About 150 hands are employed here, besides wood-carters, and
the rate at which pure Copper is made is, at present, from 36 to
40 tons per week ; but much more could be accomplished if the
works were in full operation.
|krat auk gad Smelting SaXorhs.
Were commenced in the year 1849, at the Burra, by the Patent
Copper Company, under the management of Gr. S. Walters, Esq.,
and Mr. Williams, the former at the Adelaide office, and the
latter at the works. The present Manager of the Company is
James Hamilton, Esq. The process of smelting is that known
as Napier’s Patent, The works at Port Adelaide have been
erected by the present Company (“The English and Australian
Copper Company”) for the double purpose of extending the sphere
of their operations, and of managing the smelting of the Burra
Ores more economically, by balancing the cartage of Ore to the
Port Works, with that of coal to the Burra, so that the waggons
never travel empty.
Fourteen years since the Patent Copper Company entered into
a contract for seven years with the Burra Company to purchase
all the Ores from the Mine on certain conditions ; paying accor-
ding to the produce of pure Copper obtained from the Ore ; and
at the termination of that contract it was renewed, or a fresh
contract made, for another term of seven years, which period has
nearly expired. This Company has done much in the way of re-
pairing the roads used by their teams, and has built bridges over
several creeks. Some years ago they imported a large number of
mules direct from Chili, with drivers to manage them; and hundreds
of these animals, besides horses, are constantly employed in carting.
In the former almost impassable state of the roads, the mules
were sometimes made to carry the Ore in packs to Port Wakefield,
whence it was shipped in barges to Port Adelaide. The arrange-
ments of the Company appear to be very complete, and, did time
permit, a history of their operations in the colony would be
interesting ; but I must content myself with little more than a
brief description of their smelting establishments at the Burra
and Port Adelaide.
At the time of my visit hands were scarce, both at the Mine and
the Smelting Works; and of the 14, furnaces only 5 were at
work, turning out about 120 tons of pure Copper per month, or


£IO,BOO worth. On some occasions more than this has has been
done in a week. In one year the Company made the immense
quantity of 3,087 tons of pure Copper from Burra Ores, and at
the Works near the Mine the value of the Copper being about
£290,000; 135 tons have been made in one week. There are
11 ordinary furnaces and three refineries, and fine Copper is made
from carbonate Ores in only two operations, the fluxes used being
iron and limestone. Each charge is from two tons to two and a
quarter tons in weight. Fire bricks of excellent quality are
made on the spot from fire clay procured about 12 miles distant;
a cupola kiln being employed for burning the bricks, and which
holds 27,000 at once. These bricks stand better than the best
Dinas, Stourbridge, or other imported bricks. Splendid fire clay
is now obtained in many parts of the colony, and fire bricks
made near some of the principal Mines. The stables contain
stalls for 30 horses, besides loose boxes for half a dozen more ;
there are also commodious yards and paddocks for the mules,
and every appliance and convenience necessary for repairing the
waggons, and shoeing the animals. The offices are convenient,
and, besides clerks’, accountants’, and Captain Killicoat’s
(Manager) offices, comprise an assay office well-fitted up.
Laborers’ wages are from 355. to 40s. per week ; smelters’ from
58s. 6d. to 775.; helpers from 455. to 695. The higher amounts
may, in some cases, include overtime.
It is unnecessary to add any description of the Smelting Works
at Port Adelaide; suffice it to say that they comprise seven
furnaces and one refinery, and the foundations of eight more are
nearly completed. The number of handse mployed at the two
establishments, independent of carters, varies from about 120 to
250, according to the amount of work in hand.
From the above account it will be seen that the works of the
English and Australian Copper Company have been productive
of great benefit to the colony from the large amount of capital
expended here, and the hundreds of hands employed in various
ways. During last year they expended £7,000, for feed for horses
and mules. I believe the Company are anxious to extend their
operations by making arrangements with Mine proprietors for
the purchase of Ore on terms as good, or better, than they could
realize by shipping it to England.
Sir. Ilona’s ’jfyxottss
I proceed now to describe a new process of reducing Ores,
invented and patented in this colony by the late Captain E-. V.
Eodda, of Angaston. The peculiarity of this process consists
in the fusion of the metallic particles alone, while the


stony portions of the Ore retain their original form, though
deprived of much of their weight, and of certain other qualities
and this enables them to be more easily crushed, while the
metallized part is more readily separated. A great saving in fuel
is thus effected, the heat required for this process being only
about 2,000°, Far.; while to smelt Ores, by the old method,
nearly double that heat is necessary. No flux is required, and
the expense is ascertained to be only £1 per ton on Ores con-
taining no sulphur. Thus poor Ores can be dealt with which are
now rejected as worthless. A great saving in time is also
effected ; three charges, equal to three tons, have been treated in
15 hours, less than two tons of wood and only one cwt. of coal
being consumed. Other Ores can also be dealt with—lron Ores
being easily formed into wrought Iron without the usual process
of first casting the metal.
This process has only been fairly put to the test at the New
Cornwall Mines, and I will give Mr. Itodda’s (Captain E’s. son)
own description of the furnaces there:—
“The present furnace at the New Cornwall Mines is constructed
with three soles or floors ; on the top floor, which is in fact the
roof of the furnace below it, the Ores are first placed to be dried
and heated by the surplus heat of the fire underneath. The hot
Ore broken to about half inch guage, and mixed with about an equal
quantity of charcoal, is then let down on to the middle floor, when
it is raised to a dull red heat. Communication with the outer
air is then shut off, and the combustion of the charcoal is only
sustained by the oxygen contained in the Ores themselves. In
parting with its oxygen the metallic portion of the Ore is con-
verted from its friable and compound state into a simple and
metallic condition, and at this stage of the process the charge
is let down into the lowest furnace, when the heat is increased
till the metal is thoroughly fused, the particles of the metal being
found to run together into granules under the influence of
molecular attraction. The furnace process is then completed ;
the charge is drawn, the unconsumed charcoal is separated from
the Ore by flotation in w r ater, and the granules and metal from
the stone by crushing and washing. The crushing and washing
are estimated to cost about ss. per ton with proper machinery,
and even with the rude appliances hitherto available for this pur-
pose the Copper left in the tailings, after washing, is found to
amount to less than one quarter per cent.”
This discovery is likely to prove of great benefit to the colony,
and a Company has been formed to carry out the working of the
plan.


mineral Regulations.
I alluded briefly to our Mineral Regulations, as they are called,
in the introductory chapter, but I propose now to consider the
subject more in detail. The Act of Parliament passed last
session—No. 24 of 1862—and assented to by the Governor-in-
Chief in the name and on behalf of the Queen, on the 21st
October, 1862, may be thus briefly summarized : —Leases of the
AVaste Lands of the Crown may be granted by the Governor,
for the purpose of mining for any mineral except Gold, the
quantity of land leased in any one block to be not more than 820
acres, and the term of the lease not to exceed 14 years. The
rent payable to the Government is fixed at 10s per acre; and
the right of renewing the lease at the end of the term is secured
to the lessee for two further periods of 14 years on payment of
what is called a fine on each renewal; the fine to be not less
than £1 nor more than £2O per acre. After paying the first
year’s rent the lessee has right of search for one year, before
taking out his lease, thus gaining actually a term of 15 years
before having to pay the fine for renewal. No Ore, however
(except one ton for samples, I believe), must be removed before
the lease is agreed. The rent is payable yearly in advance, and
the lessee is required to spend in labor, on the ground, £6 per
acre, during every two years, or to employ three men for at least
nine months in each year. The lessee may determine the lease
by giving three months’ notice of his intention; but should
he desire to renew the lease he must give notice twelve months
before the expiry of the first lease ; and the Government will fix
the amount of the fine three months before the lease expires.
These are the principal regulations respecting the leasing and
working of mineral lands in South Australia, and they are
regarded as far from satisfactory by those persons engaged in
mining pursuits.
There is some little improvement on the old regulations, but
still anyone conversant with mining will see that very little
encouragement is afforded to persons desirous of developing
the mineral wealth of the country. The clause compelling the
lessee to expend £6 per acre on the ground every two years,
was no doubt introduced to prevent anything like a dog-in-the-
manger action on the part of holders of mineral lands, and so far
it may be all very well; but it may also operate very prejudicially
in another direction There are also certain practical difficulties
thrown in the way, so that if some slight error be made in
describing the position of a claim, or in surveying it, the original
discoverer may be deprived of his just right, by some interloper
who is more fortunate in the surveyor he employs, or in his own
powers of description, or organ of “ locality.”
These things are managed better in Cornwall, and though we
are apt sometimes to laugh at “ Cousin Jack” we might occa-
sionally gain some useful lessons from him. In the Duchy of


Cornwall persons can search for metal anywhere, on land not
previously claimed, without being called upon to pay 10s. an acre
on a described claim, for the right of search; they may peg out a
claim without fear of being molested, unless another comes to
search alongside of them, when they may be called on to define
their boundaries; and as the payment is made in the shape of a
Royalty on the Ore raised, they don’t have to pay for nothing ,
as is too often the case with us. In Cornwall, if a man wishes
to shift the pegs marking his boundary he can do so provided he
interferes with no one else, without having to incur the expense
of a survey ; here, if he discover that his claim is a little too
much one way or the other, he must go to the expense of a new
survey, which will cost £l5 or £2O, and after all he may get no
Ore in paying quantities. Moreover, the surveys may be disputed,
as the bearings of the Government trigs are sometimes said, by
the surveyors, to be incorrect. It is palpable that there should
be some difference made between the rent paid on claims produ-
cing nothing and on those which yield 500 tons of Ore, or more,
per month. There are two plans open to the Government, either
of which, I believe, would be more popular and generally satis-
factory than those now in operation. The first is a Royalty, but
that has its objections, and was strongly opposed when hinted at
some years since ; the better plan wouM perhaps be an export
duty on all Ores or Metals, this would be more easily collected
than a Royalty, and in many respects preferable —witness how
well the export duty on Gold has worked in Victoria.
I have not time to enlarge on this subject, but have thrown
out a few rough hints, which, if duly considered and acted upon
by our legislators, may tend to bring about an improved state of
things in respect to our Mineral Regulations, and, instead of our
energies being crippled, there will be every incentive to vigorous
exertion.
I now proceed to refer to the proposed
IkiliMf to ijrc llorfjjcnt Slims
This is usually but incorrectly spoken of as a tramway. A tram-
way, strictly speaking, is a line of wooden rails plated with iron
whereas I belive it has never been contemplated to lay down,
from Port Augusta northwards anything but regular iron rails,
though of a lighter weight than those used where great speed and
heavy carriage are required. The weight of rail suggested by Mr.
Hamilton, and adopted by Parliament, is 35 lbs. to the yard, and
the speed required eight miles per hour, including stoppages. Mr.
George Ernest Hamilton, C.E., made an inspection of the pro-
posed route, at the request of Mr. Bonney, the Manager in Ade-
laide of the Great Northern Mining Company, and his report,
which is a very favorable one, was laid before Parliament and
printed by order of the House. The report, though interesting,


is too lengthy for insertion here; but I shall condense the sub-
stance of it: —The country is unusually favorable for the con-
struction of a railway for at least 100 miles from Port Augusta,
along the Western Plain. [The route is marked on the map
accompanying this book.] It might, if expedient, be then ex-
tended through the Parachilna (Tap to the neighbourhood of
Patawarta. This would bring it very near to the Nuccaleena
and Elinman Mines, and into a rich, but at present to a great
extent undeveloped, mineral country. It might also, if advisable,
be extended northwards along the Plain past Mount Deception,
Mount Coffin, and Mount Lyndhurst, where we know there is a
valuable Mine ; and then a very large tract of pastoral country
would be benefitted by the facilities offered for the carriage of
wool. The idea of the extension to Mount Lyndhurst is my own,
and I believe I am correct in saying that there are scarcely any
engineering difficulties in the way. lam not, however, prepared
to say whether that route would be warranted by the immediate
prospects of traffic', but, as I believe the Western Plains a few
miles north of Mount Lyndhurst are only about 15 miles from
the Yudanamutana, and the Sir Dominick, Daly, Stanley, and other
Mines, and also not far from the Mount Rose (a very rich Mine)
further South, it would be worth consideration whether, with the
prospect of a large supply of Ore from this district, and the pro-
bability of a quantity of wool from the North and North-west, a
continuation of the line would not be advisable. Since writing
the above I have been favored with the sight of a supplementary
report by Mr. (1. E. Hamilton, written at the close of last year,
and in which be alludes to the route I have suggested as being
less expensive of construction, though of greater length to the
Mines, than that through the hills by Patawarta ; and he says if
the general opening up of the country is considered, without
special reference to the Mines, the route along the Western
Plains might be the most desirable, as it is the most practicable.
Still it must be considered that the bulk of the traffic would come
from the Mines ; and it is just a question of expense, taking all
things into account, whether a railway along the Plains, within
15 miles of several Mines, or direct to the Mines through the
hills, would be the best. Mr, Hamilton estimates the distance
from Port Augusta to the Yudanamutana Mines, by way of
Burr’s Creek (through the hills) at 230 miles; by the present
road it is at least 20 miles more. Mr. Hamilton in bis first
report, dated August 1860, estimates that the stores, wool, and
other produce for and from 10,000 square miles of country would
be forwarded by this railway ; and would yield a return, indepen-
dent of the Mines, to the amount of £15,000 a year. I. consider
this a fair and moderate estimate, and would add that a great
deal more country has been taken up since then, that the
squatters are sending more sheep up in place of cattle, and that
some really valuable mineral discoveries have been made in the
North since 1860. The Yudanamutana Company, alone, could
better afford to pay £30,000 a year cartage to the railway (for


10,000 tons of Ore at £8 a ton), than they can now afford to pay
drays for 3.000 tons at an average of £7 per ton; and their Mines
must be very inferior to what I believe them to be, if they
cannot from all raise 10,000 tons of Ore per annum. If this be
the case the railway could, without doubt, as Mr. Hamilton
believes, pay the promoters six per cent, on the outlay ; and, I
believe, they would have at least three or four per cent, for a
reserve or sinking fund. Then it must be remembered that there
are other Mines, as yet undeveloped, but likely to prove exceed-
ingly rich, and which would add largely to the traffic, if the
formation of a railway induced the working of them.
Without a railway I am convinced that nine-tenths of the
Northern Mines must be practically worthless ; but with this
important auxiliary to their successful working, wealth almost
unimagined may be developed, and employment found for
thousands of persons. Even the Yudanamutana Mines cannot
be expected long to be able to pay the high rate of cartage at
present ruling; for Ores of less than 35 or 40 per cent, from
that distant locality do not leave a reasonable profit.
By an Act (No. 28, of 1862), passed at the close of last
session, our Parliament have agreed to make a grant of the land
required for the construction of the railway, for a breadth of
two chains along the line, and a grant of blocks of land in con-
tiguity with the line, equal to two square miles for every mile of
length, and which may be selected by the promoters, on either
side of the line; but not more than 20 square miles in one block,
and the shape to be a parallelogram, half as wide as it is long.
These liberal terras, with the prospects of success, surely ought
to be sufficient to induce capitalists to undertake the work.
I think I have already stated the population of the country
North of Port Augusta to be above 6,000, and the following
return of letters received at Kanyaka, and despatched therefrom,
during the year 1862, may not be out of place as an evidence of
the importance of the Northern districts. Letters received
23,305, despatched 21,598. lam indebted for this information
to the Postmaster-General. There is now a weekly mail to and
from Yudanamutana, embracing all the intermediate stations.
Conclusion.
I have now completed my labors, and I can conscientiously say
that I have given a true and faithful account of our Mines, to
the best ot my judgment, and from a personal inspection of
nearly all of them. some there may be a difference of
opinion; but this there often is between professional men who


have for many years been practically engaged in Mining; indeed)
I have been astonished to hear the diametrically opposite opinions
sometimes expressed by men of equal knowledge and experience.
I have had no inducement to speak favorably ot any Mine, or
unfavorably ; my object, in writing this book, has been to give
correct information for the benefit of the public, and especially
for the good of the colony ; for I believe, when the immensity
of our mineral resources is known, benefit must result to the
country.
Nearly every known mineral has at some time or other been
found here, although at present those which are known to exist,
in any considerable quantities, are only Iron, Topper, Lead,
Silver (in Galena), Bismuth, Manganese, Zinc, Plumbago, and
Gold (the last in not very large quantities comparatively speaking).
Of these Manganese and Zinc exist in combination with other
Ores, and are not made any use of.
The discovery of Bismuth, on the Stanley Mine, the property
of the Northern Mineral Association, is likely to prove of some
importance ; and I am informed that a promising Mine of Plum*-
bago is being worked, or about to be so, in the neighbourhood of
Port Lincoln.
In reading over the proof sheets it occurs to me that I might
have spoken rather more favorably than I have of the Apex Hill
Mine ; and also of the AVheal Austin.
I have been requested by several persons interested in mining
to make some allusion to the high rate of wages current at the
present time. I have given quotations in various parts of the
book, and may state generally that the lowest rate of laborers’
wages is 4s. fid. per day, while some earn as much as 7s. 6d.
Miners’ wages vary from ss. fid. to 9s. fid. per day, the latter
rate being paid on the more remote Mines, and to the best men ;
boys from 2s. to 3s. fid. Tributers of course have the chance of
making more or less according to their “ luck.” Refiners on
some of the smelting works earn 12s. per day, and masons the
same; carters and stablemen, ss. lOd. to 6s. Bd. per day. In
speaking of the rate of wages I should also name the price of
flour and meat. The price of the former is one penny farthing
to three half pence per lb., and of the latter from 2d. to fid. per lb.
Par be it from me to wish to grind down the laborer, who is
worthy of his hire, if he does a fair day’s work ; but I think when
compared with the rates paid in England it will be seen that
miners are better off in this country. The complaints of
employers are unanimous as to the difficulty of working Mines
here on account of the rate of wages. I have sometimes been
witness to the independent spirit of some men, who seem the
more discontented the higher their wages, and who have not
the slightest compunction in causing their employers great
inconvenience by suddenly leaving them, even at a critical time ;
and I have often known of men earning enough to keep them well,
by working three days a week, and idling the rest of their time.
I believe the conscientious, industrious, and provident miner or


laborer will find that in this country he will he secure of a fair
day’s wages for a fair fair day’s work, and will have far better
opportunity of settling his family well here than in the old
country.
The last mail from, the North, (19th March), brings highly
favourable accounts from the Yudanamutana Mine, and mentions
fine lodes being cut in two parts of the property recently
opened.
The West Kanraantoo Mine is also shewing very satisfactory
results, and the shares in the New Company are, I believe, nearly
all taken up. Nearly 50 tons of splended black sulphuret Ore
are now raised from the lode which I saw opened, at 8 fathoms,
not 10 as stated —besides nearly an equal quantity of Ore of less
produce.
The Talisker Silver Lead Mine continues to improve, and its
stability and richness may now be considered as fully estab-
lished. Since writing my notice of this Mine, returns have
been received from England of an assay made by the Messrs.
Johnson of one ton of the Ore, which yielded 60 per cent, of
fine Lead, and 621 ozs. of Silver to the ton of Ore. The estimate
I gave of 30 to 40 ozs. of Silver was, doubtless, within the mark
as an average of the whole produce of the Mine.
The lode in the Kurilla Mine has improved considerably during
the past week, and some rich yellow Ore has been raised; the lode
is said now to be yielding from 3 to 4 tons per fathom.
A fine discovery of Silver-lead Ore is just reported as having
been made on the property of Mr. P. B. Coglin, M.P., between
Sapid Bay and Cape Jervis. I have seen samples of the Ore,
which is really splendid, a piece from just below the surface
having yielded, on assay, 80 per cent, of Lead and 12 ounces of
Silver to the ton of Ore. The lode is traceable through two
sections, or for a length of about a mile.
The Bremer and other standard Mines are also progressing
very satisfactorily. The Karkarilla Mine also is said, by a
telegram received on 20th March, to be “ looking better than
ever, the lode, 18 inches wide, and very good.” The Captain’s
report of same date, since received, says they are raising some
good Ore.
Other discoveries are reported almost daily, but I have heard
of nothing of special importance; and if I were to continue to
write about all the mineral discoveries as they are announced I
should never have done.
1 have mentioned these in order to give the latest information
possible.
In conclusion, I have to apologise for some typographical errors,
the principal of which will be found corrected below, and also
for the roughness of the map, which was copied from one hastily
drawn by myself. It is, however, tolerably correct, quite suffi-
ciently so for the purpose for which it was intended ; although I
regret to say there are one or two slight inaccuracies in the
relative positions of some of the Mines on Yorke’s Peninsula.


It was almost impossible in a lithographed map, drawn on so
small a scale, to mark down every mineral claim, but all the
principal Mines are named, and the mark inserted in other
places to shew the existence of mineral. The lithographers have
committed a slight error in saying “ Townships, &c., marked H”
Many of the places so marked being merely sheep or cattle
stations ; most of the townships and few stations are south of the
Burra, while all to the north of Kooringa, except Melrose and
Kanyaka, are stations.
I am sensible of the defects of this little work, which has been
written under circumstances of some difficulty, but I trust they
will be viewed leniently, and that the object of the book will be
answered.
EERATA.
Page 40, line 16, for “grey," read “green.” Page 41, line 11, for “300,”
read “ 260.” Page 53, Pindildena Mine, line 8, for “ 88,” read “ 80.” There
may be other trifling errors, but the above are all which I have observed worth
correcting.


MR. J. B. AUSTIN,
IMIXIsriH] _A.G-EISrT & BROKER,
WATERHOUSE’S BUILDINGS,
ADELAIDE.
Mr. AUSTIN having visited all the Mines of the Colony,
is prepared to furnish Detailed Eeports upon them, giving full
and reliable information to persons desirous of investing.
He has also made arrangements which will enable him to
undertake the Sale of Mines or Shares in the English or
Colonial Markets.
He will also Inspect and Report on any Mineral Properties.
Eor terms, &c., apply as above, or to Messrs. ALEXANDER
BCRUTTON & SON, 81, Old Broad-street, London, E.C.
REFERENCE
London.—A. L. ELDER, Esq., Eenchurch Buildings,
Eenchurch-street.
Melbourne. —Hon. GEORGE ROLFE, Bourke-street
West.
Sydney. —ANDREW GARRAN, Esq., 8. M. Herald
Office.
26, and 28 RUNDLE STREET,
JOHN HODGKISS & CO.,
IMPORTERS OF AND DEALERS IN
Linen and Woollen Drapery, Silks, Shawls,
Mantles, Gloves, Hosiery, &c.
SiiiML mWMM d OTWlffili,
CARPETS & GENERAL EURNISHINGS.
TERMS—Cash on Delivery, or Interest on Approved Accounts
at Fifteen per cent, per a-mnnn.
ADVERTISEMENTS.


T OXFORD'S
(By Her Majesty's Royal Letters Latent)
Which have now Maintained their Position for Seven Years
against all competing Engines.
These Patent Engines consume less fuel than those of any other maker,
doing fully Six-horse Power in the Farm-yard, with Four Hundredweight
of West Hartley Coal per Day. They have Boilers on an Improved
Principle, effectually obviating the troublesome leakage so common with
the ordinary tubular boiler. The whole of the Working Parts are enclosed
in an Iron House, protecting them from wear or tear, from grit and dirt,
and from corrosion by exposure, yet leaving them perfectly and readily
accessible for examination or correction. They have Vertical Cylinders,
ensuring the more lasting power of the Engine, and preventing the hollow
wear of the Cylinder, which is the necessary consequence of the horizontal
construction.
DVCE SSRS. TTJIKIFOIR/D,
Sole Agents for Adelaide for all the Leading English and Scotch Manufacturers ,
North Terrace, and Grote and Gouger Streets, Adelaide.
ADVERTISEMENTS.


WEST KMMMTOO MIXING COMPANY,
LIMITED.
CAPITAL—£I6,OOO, in 16,000 Shares of £1 each, payable as follows:
ss. on application, 5s on Allotment, and the remainder, if required,
in Calls of 2s. 6d. per Share, at intervals of not less than three months.
IProbisbrtal Commits:
W. W. Tuxford I B. J. Price
T. L. Goode H. Applecamp.
H. Com?.
Bankers—Bank of Australasia. Solicitor— Hon. R. I. Stow.
Secretary, pro tern. J. Hamlin.
This Valuable Mineral Property consists of One Hundred Acres, and is
situate about one and a half miles from the Township of Kanmantoo, and
about 35 miles from Adelaide, held on a lease from the South Australian
Company for 14 years, at a rental of £l5 per annum, and a Royalty of
one-eigtheenth on minerals raised. It is bounded on the East by the
Mines of the present Kanmantoo Company, and on the South by the
Paringa Mine.
The Promoters wish it to be understood that they have perfect con-
fidence in the great value of the Property, and have no desire to place it
before the public; but the terms of agreement entered into with the
South Australian Company necessitate the formation of a Company under
the Limited Liability Act, with a guaranteed capital of not less than
£lO,OOO.
During the past five months, which period the Property has been in the
hands of the present Proprietors, a considerable portion of that time has
been devoted to cleaning out some of the old workings. About 12 men
on the average have been employed on the Sett—six on Owners’ account,
and the remainder on Tribute. Four Tribute Pitches have been let (all
of which are producing Ore of a good percentage), one being sunk to the
depth of about 12 fathoms, and is at present worked by two men, who
have raised about 40 tons of rich black Ore, yielding a produce of from
30 to 35 per cent. Several assays of Ore from this place have been made,
and have given 72, 75, and 77i per cent.
The Promoters believe that in working this Property with the present pro-
posed capital, a rich Mine will be laid open, and that no property more favor-
able than this, as a Mining investment, has for many year’s been offered to
the South Australian public. Two Smelting Establishments being within a
few miles of the Mine, will afford facilities for the disposal of the Ores
on the most advantageous terms if considered desirable.
The short distance of this Property from Adelaide affords great facili-
ties for a personal inspection, and it is hoped that intending Shareholders
will avail themselve of it.
The Pro per tv is offered to the Public by the Promoters for Six Thou-
sand Pounds, Three Thousand of which is to be paid in cash, and the
remainder in Shares of the Company of 10s. paid.
Applications for Shares to be made to
J. F. ROSS, Broker, Green’s Exchange, Adelaide.
Adelaide, March 19, 1863.
ADVERTISEMENTS.


MACARTB, kLOOMGII. & CO,
MERCHAITTS,
46, MOORGATE STREET, LONDON,
PIRIE STREET, ADELAIDE,
IMPOSTERS OF
ENGLISH, SCOTCH, FRENCH, AND GERMAN
MANUFACTURES,
ENGLISH
Boots and Shoes
Flannels
Haberdashery
Calicos
Blankets
Muslins
Beavers
Millinery
Carpets
Broadcloths
Shawls
Doeskins
Mantles
Lawns
Linens
Hearth Bugs
SCOTCH
Shawls
Plaiding
Derrys
Tweeds
Winceys
Hosiery
Druggets
Sewed Muslins
PHENCH
Ribbons
Flowers
Kid Gloves
Millinery
Glace Silks
Perfumery
o-ißißiiyn^-isr
Toys
Fancy Boxes
Blankets
Fancy Reticules
Fancy Articles
ADVERTISEMENTS.


TOWNSEND, HOTTING, & KAY,
L-A-ISriD, HOUSE,
(henna I Commission Agents,
AUCTION MART, KING- WILLIAM STREET, ADELAIDE.
Sales attended to in all parts of tlie Colony.
ZMZZBLZBOXJIR-lsrE.
F. F. BALLIERE,
|luWisj)tr in #rjJtnarjr to tl u Dirtorian Cotemnent,
AND
Importer of Medical and Scientific Works.
LONDON. NEW YORK. PARIS. MADRID.
COLONIAL AGENTS:
SYDNEY, A. CITBITT AND G. SANDS ; ADELAIDE, W. C. RIGBY ;
TASMANIA, WALSH AND SONS.
J. M. WENDT,
oolaltl) iiuit Cloth ’Hahn. |eklke, tfe.
84, BUNDLE STREET, ADELAIDE.
Wedding Rings, every description of Watches, Clocks, Musical Boxes,
Sold and Repaired.
BY SPECIAL APPOINTMENT,
PROFESSOR HALL,
paGTGGBAPMEB,
NEXT THE VICTORIA HOTEL, HINDLEY-STREET.
Colored Photographs on the new principle. Cartes de Visite.
Photographic Views of Colonial Scenery, &c., &c., &c.
ADVERTISEMENTS.


A. G: BURT,
STOCK AGENT,
O-AIWILIE-R. rPZLJXCIB,
GREEN’S EXCHANGE.
j. mm &s,
EXCHANGE HOTEL, KADINA.
Visitors will find at the above first-class Hotel every accom-
modation combined with moderate charges. Ale, Wine, and
Spirits of the best quality. Shower-Bath on the premises ; also
a first-class Billiard Table.
Good Stabling and plenty of Water.
Saddle Horses and Vehicles to let on hire.
Booking-office for Port Adelaide per Young Australian.
J. MOYLE, Proprietor.
MUIRHEAD,
d(Eatc|imikr nub
CORNER OF HINDLEY AND KING WILLIAM STREETS,
ADELAIDE.
HENRY MUIRHEAD having just arrived with his New Stock
of the best English GOLD and SILVER WATCHES, SILVER
PLATE, &c., and having very much enlarged his stockof these
articles, ’ has much pleasure in inviting the Public of South
Australia to inspect his varied and valuable assortment, which,
for quality and value, will compete with that ol any other
establishment in the Colonies.
H. M. begs to call attention to the following Price List
Gentlemen’s warranted Gold Hunting Watch, £22; Gentle-
men’s Split Seconds, Independent Seconds, Chronometers ,&c., all
with Compensated Balances, £3O, £45, and £63.
Ladies’ best Hunters from £l4 to £22; Silver Hunters,
warranted, from £2 15s. to £lO.
New Luncheon and Breakfast Cruets, 255. to 30s.
New Silver Cups, Claret Jugs, Salvers, Baskets, Cruets, Salt
Cellars and Mustards, in great variety.
Best Ivory-handled Table and Dessert Knives 80s. and 355. per
dozen ; Carvers, 12s. 6d., Bread Knives, 4s.
Plated Spoons, best Table, 555. per dozen ; Dessert, 455.
ADVERTISEMENTS.


PADMAN & CO.,
SUHI ABB IMBWMI HIMHiiTS,
COIvY LLISSIOLT AGENTS.
Importers of Agricultural Implements.
GAWLER PLACE, ALELAIDE.
GEORGE PETER HARRIS,
WHOLESALE AND RETAIL
ll«SBoi|«g|t
xnvcrpoiß/Tißiß/,
A®ILA [ ® i e
HAS ALWAYS ON SALE THE FOLLOWING
MINING MATERIALS:
Blasting Powder, Safety Fuse, Borers, Mallets, Kibbles.
Sieves, Picks, Gads, Shovels, Steel of all kinds.
Hat Caps, Rope, Engine Packing, Saws, Axes.
Forges, Bellows, Anvils, Chain, all sizes, Wire.
Bar, Bundle, Plate and Sheet Iron, of all sizes.
And a large assortment of Ironmongery in general.
W. MOSELEY begs to draw the attention of his Friends and
the Public to the fact that the above Hotel is most agreeably
and conveniently situated close to the Jetty at Glenelg ; that it
is replete with every convenience and comfort for Ladies and
Gentlemen visiting the Bay, and being so near to the Beach, the
luxury of sea bathing can be enjoyed without fatigue.
The House being lofty, commands an extensive view of the
Gulf, and also of the Mount Lofty Range and the intervening
country.
Omnibuses run to and from Adelaide four times daily.
A good table is kept, and first-class Liquors supplied.
For Invalids, Pleasure Parties, or occasional Visitors, the
accommodation is unrivalled.
ADTERTISEMENTS.


ADELAIDE FOUNDRY,
ITOH/TH TEBBAOE.
€S'@a€i wfAff,
(gnttiiu'er, Jr on and grass ,Jfo mulct;
Pumps and all kinds ot Castings for Mining and other purposes,
Kibbles, &c., made to order and with dispatch. Boring and
Turning done of any size. A large Stock of Patterns for Mining
purposes to select trom.
WOMBAT HOUSE, KADINA,
VICTORIA STORES, WALLAROO.
itin,
Wholesale and Retail Drapery and Clothing Establishment , and
General Importer of every description of Merchandise.
No. 4.
U 1
n
2 M
W o
l> w
P
m
PH
H
QQ
A
P
A
P
PH
d
d
d
d
d
w
d
d
d
d
H
H
OH
LJ
ADVERTISEMENTS.


|lcdueitt aitit axffbrinr anil Jfiit Assurance
COMPANY.
CAPITAL, £lOO,OOO
Established 1838. Head Office, Hobart Town.
ADELAIDE BRANCH :
W. SAMSON, Agent, Office, 5, Currie-street.
EASTON’S PATENT BOILER FLUID,
Adopted and used by the Governments of Great Britain, Spain,
Denmark, Sweden, Brazil, and East Indies, for Preventing and
[Removing Incrustation in Steam Boilers (Land or Marine) thus
Saving Euel, and without any injurious effect on Iron.
Sole Agent for South Australia,
WILLIAM ISBISTEB,
5, CUEEIE-STEEET, ADELAIDE.
HUMPS PRIZE HEMP. MffliES.
JOSEPH MELLOR
Eespectfully solicits Orders for his Prize Eeaping Machines
with new Patent Lever or Ordinary Comb, on his usual Liberal
Terms.
OUST SALE,
Colonial-made Winnowers ; Bullock, Horse, and Spring Drays ;
Box-Carts, Steam-made Wheels, Harrows, Gates, Wheel-Hurdles,
&c, Eepairs promptly executed.
MANUFACTORY, FEANKLIN-STREET,
ADEL JLXZDIB.
ADVERTISEMENTS.


G-. & R. WILLS & COMP Y
Imprtci's anb Mlfjolcsalc tlrapn-s.
BUNDLE STREET,
© i \L A a © iu
<Sc BESIDENTCE.
Mai. iuiifi,
MtAffiffi.7ATOmi.ffi,
Conveyances pass every quarter of an hour within ten minutes’ walk.
N.B. —Stabling if required.
SEWING MACHINES. SEWING MACHINES.
Sole Agent in Adelaide of the two most celebrated Makers, viz.—
SINGER AND WHEELER & WILSON.
The Family Machine of both makers will sew the finest
cambric or heaviest broadcloth, and all intermediate textures,
with the same ease, rapidity, durability of stitch, and beauty of
finish. They will hem, stitch, fell, and gather, and do a greater
variety of work than the machines of any other manufacturer.
They make the tight lock-stitch alike on both sides, and one
that positively will not ravel —are strong, durable, and simple in
construction, and cannot he put out of order except by gross
carelessness or violent misusage.
Singer’s No. 2, or Manufacturing Machine, is worthy the
attention of every draper, tailor, shoe and hat hinder in the
country. It will stitch a shirt bosom, make a silk dress, do any
kind of tailoring, shoe, and gaiter work, corset making, and hat
binding. The Machine is of great strength and durability
Singer’s No. 3 Machines are sepecially adapted to all kinds of
light and heavy leather work in carriage trimming, hoot and
shoe making, harness making, &c., &c.,
The public are respectfully invited to call at 15, Hindley-
street, where they can see the machines in operation.
Purchasers have full instructions imparted to them in the use
of the machine.
ERED. HASLUCK.
ADVERTISEMENTS.


H. L. YOBZ,
82, E.TJ3SrXDX_,E-STR.EET, 82
IMPORTER OF
Oils, Paints, Window Glass, Paperhangings,
Sheet Lead, Zinc, &c.,
WHOLESALE AND DETAIL.
Baths, Pumps, &c., Made and Fixed to order.
WILLIAM CLARK,
IlilSMWil iii WIiMKIE,
VIISTE COTTAGE,
OSMOND TERRACE, NORWOOD.
Choice WINES on Sale in any Quantity. VINE CUTTINGS
in the Season.
COMPANY’S MILLS, HACKNEY-ROAD ADELAIDE,
ESTABLISHED IlsT 1843,
JOHN STEVENS,
MILLER,
Superfine Silk-dressed FLOUR always on hand at current rates.
The quality of this Flour for keeping sound is unsurpassed, as it has
been known to stand the test of a voyage to England and back to
Australia.
Wheat Bought throught the year at market prices.
FREDERICK HELLMAN,
pittrkfssn, fhrfumer. tfo.,
34, HITTDLET-STREBT, 34=
OPPOSITE THE EAGLE TAVERN.
All kinds of Eaucy Grooda Sold at Moderate Prices.
THE ADELAIDE LOAN SOCIETY,
OFFICE, 198, HINDLEY-STREET,
Hours from 10 till 4.
Money Advanced in Sums of £5, £lO, £l5, and £2O, on personal
Security or Deposit of Title Deeds.
SAMUEL PEARCE, Manager.
ADVERTISEMENTS.


PORT IRXDJYID TIMBER ITAJEUD.
IF ® CFi IT a
FRANCIS REYNOLDS,
|kitto, Citato:, anir |«« Ulmjjant,
&c., &c., &c.
TURNERY OF EVERY DESCRIPTION.
Doors, Sashes, &c., on hand at lowest Market price.
The Cheapest Photographic Establishment in Adelaide,
tcu* aUNBLEI STRRSTi, VAST*
E. H. CORNOCK,
»a«r6«isf & f ato/fA€aAt®ia,
PHOTOGRAPHS ON GLASS, PAPER, OR TALC, FROM 2s.
Every description of Photographic Chemic als ahvays on hand,
warranted chemically pure •
®ktona Jamilg anh Commtrdal ||o id.
BINDLEY STREET, ADELAIDE,
(Within two minutes’ w T alk of the Railway Station),
HENRY EOOTE,
PKOPRIETOH.
GOOD STABLING. HORSES AND GIGS TO LET ON HIRE.
HO, HIITDLEY STREET. HO.
W. NITCHKE,
€«*vs&sibiva &sts siraiitisa.
All kinds of Copper Work done. Brewers’ and other Boilers,
Pumps and Stills of every description, Gas Fittings, Artificial
Waterworks, Steam Heating and Hot-water Apparatus, Baths of
all sorts, Roofs and Verandahs covered, &c.
All kinds of repairs executed quickly and cheaply.
ADVERTISEMENTS,


PARR & LUXMOORE,
anft Commission; Agents,
EXOMBKBUE MfCTON ILMT,
KING WILLIAM STREET,
ASSSAIBS.
Sami 3li]cute and Sand AulioniTni.
LANDED PROPERTIES VALUED-LANDED PROPERTIES SURVEYED.
PLANS Furnished and TOWNSHIPS LAID OUT. Plans of
Townships, Hundreds, &c., &c., throughout the Colony, always open
for inspection.
HOUSES, STORES, LANDS, SECTIONS, &c., LET OR LEASED.
Exchange Land Mart and Land Offices,
KINO WILLIAM STREET.
ADELAIDE: ) LAMB, LOAN, AND C Melbourne.-
GREEN & WADHAM, £ GENERAL j WILLIAM GREEN,
King William-street. ) OFFICES. (. Great Collins-etreet.
GOVERNMENT ) Purchased in accordance with the instructions
SECTIONS J °f Parties absent from Adelaide.
GOVERNMENT | Purchased and Let on Lease with Eight of Pur-
SECTIONS j chase.
SHEEP and CATTLE RUNS, MINERAL SECTIONS, &c., SURVEYED.
ACCURACY IN ALL CASES GUARANTEED.
SPECIAL NOTICE.
GEEEN & WADHAM’S ADVERTISEMENTS appear in the
“ REGISTER” Newspaper on MONDAYS and THURSDAYS,
and in the “ OBSERVER ” of Saturday.
GREEN & WADHAM, Land Agents.
ADVERTISEMENTS.


W. ROUNSEYELL,
COACH PROPRIETOR & MAIL CONTRACTOR,
GRENFELL AND PIEIE STREETS, ADELAIDE.
Booking Office, King William-street, for Passengers and
Parcels to all parts of the Colony.
Weekly Mail to the principal Mining Districts of the Far
North. Carriages of all descriptions always on Hire. First-
class Saddle Horses. Hearses and Mourning Coaches for Hire.
DALE’S MEDICAL HALL,
85, HINDLEY-STREET, ADELAIDE.
WHOLESALE AND RETAIL DRUGGIST,
Agent for Holloway’s Pills, Murray’s Magnesia, Cockle’s Pills,
and Patent Medicines of all kinds.
Hair, Tooth,, Nail, and Clothes B ushes, Sponges, Comls, Sfc., in great
variety ; Sponge Bags and Bathing Caps.
HORSE, SHEEP, AND CATTLE MEDICINES.
Sole Manufacturer of Fletcher’s celebrated Preparation for
Cattle, &c., and Agent for Underwood’s Snake Antidote.
Storekeepers supplied on Liberal Terms.
R. S. CRABB,
VETERINARY SURGEON,
No. 224, HINDLEY-STREET WEST,
ADELAIDE.
WILLIAM BLACKLER,
Mine anbf %ivit
UsTOIELTIEL ZPAALW/AUDZE],
PORT ADELAIDE.
Hotels and Shipping supplied in and out of Bond.
ADVERTISEMENT'S.


M B - C, M e CARTHY,
Jbnseb Smriitjrw,
42, KING WILLIAM-STREET, ADELAIDE.
ANDREW JONES,
(LATE IPADPIPIIN - & JOUBS)
ENGINEER, MINE SMITH,
IRON FOUNDER.
Mining work in Wrought or Cast Iron made to order.
Brass Castings, Engine, or other Brasses of best metal at
Is. Bd. per lb.
Windmill Pumps and other apparatus for Drawing Water for
Sheep or Cattle Stations supplied at the shortest notice, and on
moderate terms.
ANDREW JONES,
BLYTH-STREET FOUNDRY,
ABEX.AIDB.
JOSEPH HILLARD,
WINEGROWER,
Mr. GILLARD’S AVines have taken the following Prizes :
Horticultural and Floricultural Society’s Show, January 16th,
1862, Second Prize for Red Wine, Vintage, 1861, and Special
Prize for Erontignac, “ a wine of very superior quality and
manufacture.”
Agricultural and Horticultural Society’s Show, February
13, 1862, Second Prize for Red Wine, Vintage, 1861. Judges’
report Wine of great promise, will doubtless arrive at a very
high standard of quality.”
Vinegrowers’ Association Show, November, 1862, First Prize
for Red AViue, Vintage, 1861. (This Wine sells at 30s. per doz.)
Third Prize for White Wine, AHntage, 1861.
VINE CUTTINGS IN THE SEASON.
ADVERTISEMENTS.


SAMUEL PEARCE,
House, faiA attif 6cncral §.gcnt.
198, BINDLEY STREET
Rents and Debts Collected, Bills Discounted, and
Doans negociated.
South Australian Wines can be obtained at these Vineyards, also at
the Cellars, No. 34, King William-street, Adelaide.
PITT & SONS invite Consumers and Dealers to call and try these
Wines, as they believe them to be unsurpassed by any made in the
colony ; and they are determined to sell at prices as low, if not lower,
than than any grower in the Colony.
N.B.—Families supplied in small or large quantities, in bottle or
bulk. Orders from any part of the world punctually attended to.
(Orders from unknown correspondents must be accompanied with
remittances).
Yelta Vineyards, near Payneham ; Cellars, 34, King William-street,
Adelaide.
GLOBE INN,
WAILMMXDo
W. SQUARE (late of Gawler Town) bogs to inform the public
that since building the above house he has made such additional
alterations as must render it one of the most convenient and comfort-
able establishments in the colony.
The Billiard and Dining Rooms are lofty and spacious, and will
enable the Proprietor to provide for parties on a more liberal scale
than heretofore.
The Kitchen arrangements are complete, and every culinary im-
provement adopted.
A new, handsome, and extensive Bar is about to be erected, capable
of giving every facility for business on gala days.
New and lofty Bedrooms have been built, and are furnished with a
view to the comfort of lodgers.
Large Tanks, with a bountiful supply of rain water, have been pro-
vided, and the luxury of Baths will be added to the establishment.
W. Square pledges himself to the public that every article supplied
by him shall be of first-class quality, and confidently looks to them
for their liberal support.
ADVERTISEMENTS.


HENRY NOLTENIUS,
GILBERT PLACE, ADELAIDE,
(The Store lately occupied by Messrs. Lightfoot, Blundell, and
Co., and P. Auld & Co.)
Australian: Mint Bcpot.
H. N. is always a Purchaser of good Colonial AVinea, and will
receive the same for Storage or for Sale on Commission, or will
undertake the Management of AVmes for Home Consumption, or
for Exportation.
HENRY NOLTENIUS
Begs to intimate that he has always on hand a
YYELL-SELECEED STOCK
Foreign Wines, Spirits, Ale, and Porter.
HENRY NOLTENIUS,
GILBERT PLAGE,
ADELAIDE,
IMPORT E R O F TH E
Real German Bremer Lager Ale.
HENRY NOLTENIUS,
(BHUBEOT
ADELAIDE
GFIML COMMON MERCHANT.
ADVERTISEMENTS,


DEBNEY’S
CaMmt $ Satarerooms $ |siuvufacfonr.
103 and 105, RUNDLE-STEEET.
G. R. DEBNEY begs to call the attention of the Public to his
Establishment—the Oldest and Most Extensive of the kind in the
Colony—where he has always on Sale a Large Asssortment of
Walnut and Rosewood Drawing-room, Dining-room, and other
Furniture, of the Best Materials and Workmanship, and Newest
Designs, including Gilt and Window Cornices and Poles ; all being
manufactured on the Premises by First-class Workmen, under his own
immediate superintendence.
G. R. DEBNEY is making considerable additions to his Show
Rooms, and is constantly importing, direct from the Manufactories,
Floorcloths and Passage Cloths; Brussels, Tapestry, and other
Carpets and Hearthrugs, of the Newest Designs ; Reps, Damasks,
and Trimmings to match; Yenetian Blinds, Brass Poles, &c, &c.;
Chimney, Pier, Cheval, Dressing, and other Glasses; Bedding and
Upholstery of every description.
Estimates given , and Gentlemen*s Souses Completely Furnished.
MB JOHN ALBERT BRUCE,
(Assayer and Chemist to the Kapunda Mining Company, and late of
Leigh-street, Adelaide)
mrlr Cimlt&g djjmnH
ieh -A_ jp tj Ist id .a..
JAMES JAMES,
ASSA YIBIR,,
ADELAIDE.
Samples forwarded to the care of Messrs. Everett & Chambers;
King William-street, will be immediately attended to.


PLATTS’S
|ool, Ulttsk, anb Stationers Marebnsts,
IsTUmßmiL 03STB,
HINDLEY AND KING WILLIAM-STREETS
WHOLESALE STORES, If ORTH TERRACE, OPPOSITE THE
RAILWAY STATION.
THE LARGEST ESTABLISHMENT OF THE KIND
IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
BOOKS.
A regular importation, per Overland Mail, of the newest pub-
lications of every kind.
A varied Stock of Novels, Travels and A dventures, Romances;
Religious, Theological, Geological, Scientific, and Medical
Works. Periodicals and Newspapers supplied with the greatest
punctuality upon arrival of the Mail.
SCHOOL BOOKS.
Chambers’s, Oliver & Boyd’s, and those published by the Irish
National Board of Education.
PLATTS’S mUSIC BOOMS.
Contain a large assortment of PIANOFORTES by the most
celebrated makers of London, &c., and form a collection quite
unequalled by that of any other establishment.
HAHMOKITjMS.
The superiority of tone of Alexandre’s Instruments is too well
established to need any comment. An assortment may be seen
suitable to the School-room, Church, or Drawing-room.
Tnere are upwards of 10,000 pieces cf Music to select from.
Instruction Books of every description.
COMMERCIAL STATIONERY, FANCY GOODS.
CRICKETEY AND ARCHERY.
Agent for Loath & Ross’s Homoeopathic Medicines and Moffat’s
Life Fills and Phoenix Bitters.
Established 1839.


