





The...
Griffith-Moroney
DEBATE
LABOR PARTY v. SOCIALIST LABOR PARTY
Second Edition
Price - - - THREEPENCE
SYDNEY:
The People Printery, 16 George-st. West
1909




REPORT OF DEBATE
BETWEEN
MR. ARTHUR GRIFFITH, M.P. and JAS. O. MORONEY
(Report taken for the Socialist Labor Party.)
There was a large gathering in the Agricultural Hall, Walls-
end, on Saturday night, May 1, to listen to the debate be-
tween Mr. A. H. Griffith, M.P., representing the Political
Labor Party, and Mr. J. O. Moroney, representing the Social-
ist Labor Party, on the subject of whether the Socialist organi-
sations m this State were justified in withdrawing from the
Political Labor League. The debate had been much talked
of in the Newcastle district for months before it took place,
and great interest was taken therein by the large audience.
The speakers were accorded good hearings, the interjections
being few, and no more than might be expected in the course
of a discussion which lasted for nearly three hours.
Mr. D. Howell, schoolmaster, of West Wallsend, presided.
In opening the meeting he said : Ladies and Gentlemen, —I
will read from the newspaper the notice containing the sub-
ject of the debate—“ That the members of Socialistic organi-
sations in this State were not justified m withdrawing from
the Political Labor League.” The conditions are : Mr.
Griffith to take the affirmative, and open with three-quarters
of an hour. Mr. Moroney to take the negative, proving the
Socialists were justified in withdrawing from the P.L.L., and
reply with three-quarters of an hour. Each speaker to have
twenty-five minutes for a further reply. At the close of the
debate a vote will be taken.
To the two gentlemen taking part I wish to say : As soon
as the bell rings they must stop. You who are in the body of
the hall, I ask to be quiet, and the doorkeepers to see that
there is no interruption at the door while the debate is pro-
ceeding. Now, we will commence, and I will introduce to you
Mr. Griffith.
Mr. GRIFFITH (who was received with applause) said :
Mr. Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen, —I would like to make
one or two preliminary remarks before I enter upon the subject
of this debate. First of all, I want to say how pleased lam
to have an opportunity of once again meeting a Wallsend, or,
rather, a district audience. You treated me extremely well
when in this district, and I have kindly and friendly memories
of the time when I represented you in the Assembly of New


South Wales. Since I have left you, however, some of you
have dealt fairly harshly with me—that was a few years ago
T over the pro-Boer business. Some men said in public meet-
ings that I should be expelled from the Parliament because
I dared to resist an attempt, the purpose of which was to
expel the white man and get the Chinaman into the mines
of South Africa. Hard things were said then in Wallsend
and elsewhere about me, and also in my own district. But
I say to-night that I would take the same course, in the same
circumstances ; and I would take the same course, even if it
brought the jingo fury upon me, in opposing this Dreadnought
business which is sought to be imposed upon the country.
(Hear, hear.) lam saying that I appreciate very much
this large gathering, because we come here to consider a
matter of very vital moment to the Labor movement. It
seems to me that nothing more disastrous could happen to
our Labor movement than that at this juncture, just in the
middle of a desperate fight against the moneyed power of
the country, that the political Labor party should be split
into ty/o hostile sections. My purpose in coming here to-
night is to endeavour, as far as lies in my power, to show
to those different sections of the Labor party Ihe suicidal
unwisdom of that course. (Hear, hear.) lam not going
to make any attack at all upon the gentlemen who differ from
me in this respect, I am going to assume their bona fides
throughout ; and that Mr. Moroney, and those who think
with him, believe they are doing the right thing. I will
make no personal remarks at all ; but I may make remarks
which may hurt their political feelings. But I wish them
to remember that I have nothing against them personally.
What I say will be in condemnation of the political course of
action which I believe is deadly hurtful to the Lsbor move-
ment in the hour of its necessity. I desire to take this
opportunity —and I am saying this in the time allotted to
me, Mr. Chairman—of saying a word to those of the men
in this district for the splendid support you have given to our
chaps up in Broken Hill, in helping them to fight the wealthy
Proprietary Company. You have stood to them as com-
rades, and I thank you for it. The fight is not over yet,
and the generosity and public spirit you have shown in this
matter I hope will be continued. On behalf of my consti-
tuents of the Barrier, I wish to extend to you the apprecia-
tion they feel, and to thank you on their behalf for the mag-
nificent contribution you have sent to help them m a struggle
which, after all, is your battle, too.
When any great proposition is placed before the people,
when any programme, political or industrial, is laid down,
and when great questions are to be considered, different


types of men will view them from different standpoints. The
coward asks himself one question : Is it safe? The oppor-
tunist will ask himself merely this question : Is it popular ?
The sophist will ask himself : Is it wise ? But I want you,
in considering this great Labor movement of ours, to mea-
sure it by a higher standard than that. I want you to ask
yourselves : Is this political labor movement just and fair
and equitable ? If it is not then you are justified in split-
ting it up, and destroying it ; but if you think it is just and
fair and equitable ; if you think that its purpose and its
machinery is to try to make life a little cleaner, and better
and purer and more wholesome for ourselves and our children,
then I want you to view it from that standpoint, and not from
a lower one ; and upon that question to give your verdict.
Now, first of all, I want to affirm deliberately and dispassion-
ately that the labor movement is a socialistic movement ; that
the Political Labor Party is a socialistic organisation ; that
its objective is socialistic, and that the concrete planks of its
platform will carry into effect the consummation of Social-
ism. As for myself, lam a Socialist, and always have been.
The reason I joined the Labor party was because it was a
socialistic party. When I was a teacher in the Grammar
School in Sydney I was a Socialist, and I favored the Labor
party simply because it was a socialistic party. It was a
socialistic party'then, and so it is to-day, and that I intend
to prove to you to-night. I would like, when I make an
allegation like that, to call a witness, not myself only, but
one of our opponents, to justify what I say. If you take
up any of the great metropolitan papers, which condemn
the Labor party in season and out of season, and which
attack the party, its machinery, and its personnel, you will
find in the “ Sydney Morning Herald,” in the “ Daily Tele-
graph,” in the “Evening News,” in the Melbourne “Age”
and “Argus,” you find in ail of them the Labor party con-
demned because it is a socialistic party, and
yet we are condemned by another section be-
cause we are not a socialistic party. The party we
are fighting, which is represented by Mr. Wade and Mr. Cook
and the moneyed interests of this country, they accuse the
Labor party of being socialists, and ask the people of this
country to vote against us because of that fact. In support
of what I state, let me read you an excerpt from the Mel-
bourne “Argus.” Prior to the last Federal election they
asked the people of Victoria to vote against Chris. Watson
and his party, because, they said, “ The sole aim of the
Labor party from the outset, whether avowed or not, has been
the accomplishment of the principles of Socialism.” I prove
out of the mouths of our opponents the contention that we


the Socialists, and that the Labor party is a socialistic organi-
sation. Here is another excerpt from the manifesto of the
Employers’ Federation, published two and a half years ago :
The public have a just dread of Socialism
when they know it to be Socialism, but they are not
apt to accept socialistic principles when put forward under
another guise ; and for this reason we have had socialistic
principles put into legislative form in this colony, which, if
they had been boldly admitted as being socialistic would never
have been accepted. This fact is recognised by the Labor
party.” I give you these facts from our most bitter and
powerful opponents, to justify my contention that the Labor
party is a socialistic party. But there are sections and
creeds .in the Socialist party, and that is the source of its
weakness.
It is as impossible to define Socialism as it is to define Chris-
tianity. You get Cardinal Moran and Dr. Dill Macky to
define it, and you find their definitions as wide apart as the
poles. And so with Socialism ; there are different varieties
of it. We are sane and commonsense Socialists, who believe
m going step by step and who realise that you can never get
to the top of a ladder unless you climb rung by rung. (Hear,
hear.) And if I might judge of the views of the other party
—and this will be ably and effectively met by my opponent,
who was one of the most capable and honest and trustworthy
men of that organisation—and for that very reason, from
my point of view, one of the most hurtful ; because a man
who is honest and energetic in following up a wrong course
can do a cause more harm than the man who lacks energy
and ability. And my quarrel with Mr. Moroney—though I
have never had a cross word with him—is that his very good
qualities and those of some of the others with him, make* for
danger for the Labor party, because of those good qualities.
If he were a waster, or lacked ability, he would be harmless
for evil ; but, on the wrong course, the more valuable his
personal qualities, the more evil he can work to the Labor
movement. My judgment of these scattered groups of
Socialists—because I think there are two or three groups
which are more or less hostile amongst themselves—is that
it seems to me, they maintain that our policy is not suffi-
ciently aggressive, and does not reach our objective rapidly
enough. They seem to think that we have to do nothing
for a long time, and then suddenly someone rings a bell, and
then the whole industrial life of the community, which has
taken centuries to build up, will be changed, and a new era
would be ushered in—just like the falling of a drop-scene in
a theatre. Now, civilisation does not work like that. Every-
thing has been worked up gradually, first from savagery


and barbarism to feudalism, and then to greater freedom of
frn^ St fl y ’ w? t 0 the ca P. 1 i ; a } lstlc system ; and the change
trom the latter system will be to the higher and nobler one
ot a co-operative commonwealth, which will mean the fruition
of Socialism (App ause.) But you cannot do these things
by any sudden dislocation of the existing order. Every
movement in the world has been slow of accomplishment :
men have had to move step by step. Tennyson puts
it very nicely : J
Men the workers ; men the fightprs ; ever gaining some-
thing new,
That which they have done the earnest of the things
that they shall do. s
The Labor party of New South Wales stands for that com-
monsense Socialism which goes step by step, taking one plank
of reform and nailing it down securely, and then going on
and taking another and doing the same with it Let me
once more describe it from the pen of one of our opponents,
Henry Carey Dangar. You know he is no friend of the Labor
party Any excerpts I shall quote I shall take from the
mouths of our enemies. This one is from the London “ Morn-
mg Post, in which Henry Carey Dangar, describing the state
of political affairs in Australia, says: “The wage-earners
constitute a majority m most constituencies. In the city the
merchants is hopelessly outnumbered by his clerks and dray-
men ; m the suburb in which he resides, he is outvoted by his
coachman, groom, and gardener ; while in the interior the
owner or manager of a station counts for no more than any
one of his boundary riders, rouseabouts, or bullock drivers
Ihe squattmg districts of the Far West are all carried by
the Labor vote. If the working classes are not divided
amongst themselves they would be all-powerful.” That is
what I say (Hear, hear.) And that is why lam here to-
night to deprecate this division of the Labor party—and to
say those gentlemen who call themselves Socialists—al-
though I do not know that they are quite entitled to that
name, for Socialism is an evolutionary process, and those who
do not like it must be called by some other name—l am here
to say to those gentlemen that they are doing what Henry
Larey Dangar was exulting in, namely, causing division in
the ranks of the Labor party. If they were not divided
amongst themselves, then they would be all-powerful : and
that is why I want those extreme Socialists to come back into
the Labor party—to keep it solid, and lift it to a higher plane.
(Hear hear.) Dangar says further that they would be all-
powerful, for “their platform is selfish, and their discipline
is admirable. They constitute a caste in politics, and refuse


to support representatives who have not been selected from
among their own numbers. The consequence is .that their
members are rarely men of sufficient ability to acquire a Par-
liamentary status.” (Laughter.) That is nice. I like
their cool front. Why, there are many men in the Labor
party, and men from this district, too, who have more brains
than ever had Henry Carey Dangar. The same writer, con-
tinuing his remarks, says : “ These are the voters who, under
our beautiful electoral system, pay no taxes, and yet are
potent factors at every election —who, whenever they get a
chance, pat that very.good fellow, Jimmy McGowen, on the
back, and tell him to go in for more. They are insatiable—
as Democrats usually are—and as soon as one plank of their
platform is nailed down and secured, they usually proceed to
rip up a plank out of some other platform, and when it is
fashioned to their liking, they try—not always too success-
fully—to nail it down, too. The list is somewhat as fol-
lows ; —One-sided taxation, old age pensions, mining on pri-
vate property, early closing, and day labor. Those are the
aims of the Labor party, and a statement of what it has
done, and which Dangar condemns them for doing ; and
which they will continue to do if they get the assistance of
those extremists who, every time they vote against the Labor
party, vote for Henry Carey Dangar. (Hear, hear.)
'I wish to follow up that same line. I want our friends—
and I am assuming that they are perfectly honest—and I
am pleading with them to come and help us build up that
great movement of ourselves. And I wish to show them
what a great movement it is ; that it is world-wide ; that even
the leaders of the Socialist parties abroad adopt exactly the
same ideals and the same methods as does the Labor party
in this State and throughout Australia. I want to show you
the length and breadth and strength of this movement. It
is not local ; it is not confined to the great Wallsend or the
great Newcastle district, or to the splendid State of New
South Wales. This Labor party stretches right throughout
the great Commonwealth of Australia ; m every State there
is party, and at every election for the past fourteen
years the party has gained strength. The Federation was
formed by Mr. Bruce Smith, Mr. Edmund Barton, and others,
because they thought that there would then be no Labor
party. They thought they would get an electorate so large
that'a Labor party could not be formed within it; and the
words used were: “At last a legislature has been, formed
where the strident voice of Labor will not be heard. \et
to-day there is a Federal Labor Government in power. (Hear,
hear, and laughter.) Across the sea, in the House of Com-
mons, the walls of which have rung to the voices of Pitt and


F»;»S -i \ss6Jss s MsAag
Xbe Earned !*?"• ° n &
genuine reformed ff ? arty - mcl " dm K in its ranks the
Tc formers of all classes, and on the other will dp
the defenders and upholders of the existing order of things ”
Lv IS On le thn attle W^ ICh 13 ragm ® throughout the worid 8 to-
day. On the one side are men who want to keen things i =
or Victoria, or New Zealand L Great
or the men and women who do the work of the world a little
more of the refinement and luxury and comfort wWd a
rom the wealth they produce. fhat is the ideal VZt
for b tlie P e a 4rem£i 1 t6 n ?o that ?°? d enough and suffi cient
1 .-j 1 w 1 f COme ln and hel P u s ? If thev believe
thinWh ?V°°* Why not Stay m th e Labor party l If they
think the Labor party is not swift enough, why not out thef
energy into it, and make it swifter? (Aoolausef Tf id
t ink that McGowen and Holman and Edden and Charlton
and the rest of us are not sufficiently aggressive let them
HnTi 1 ? fid mfuse T re aggressiveness. into the party bft
. not let them stand outside and throw mud at it That is
not the way to improve matters. I have heard the Social
ist pmty called the advance guard of the Labor movement •
but I have never heard of an advance guard turning found
and firing upon the mam body of the army. That isfot the
way to achieve success. (Hear, hear ) There are twf
ways of destroying an army. One is to af tariff iff f
and the other is t\ attack ft in the rear The Übo r phTt'
taf ght T B a S amat the concentrated power of wealth and cam’-
tal and moneyed interests, against the power of a mi eh tv
press, and against sectarian organisations. And these men
bafk r °U d> a f? tf S f ead of r hel P m g us they knife us in the
ack It would be better for men to vote openly for Wade
than to vote against Labor, while professing it
n some other guise. For so long as a man votes afamst
l6 ? V Sr tmg f ° r Wade and Reid and Joe
dev,.; or &n h g hebke? Te “’TT
age as tf he voted stra.ght out for Georgf Reid or Wtnoughbf


Wade. There are only two parties right throughout the
Empire, as defined by Keir Hardie, and you must be on one
side or the other. These men are Wage’s friends. The
Owners’ and Employers’ Federation would pay down one
hundred thousand golden sovereigns to-morrow if they could
split the Labor movement in Newcastle, Broken Hill, and
other centres, because they know this country is coming
round fast to the Labor party ; and they fear that at next
election Mr. Fisher will get a sufficient majority to carry out
his policy. If the Socialists can but tear down a few of these
Labor members, they will be the dearest friends of the
Employers’ Federation. (Applause.) Ido not suggest cor-
ruption, and I have no knowledge of any fact that would sug-
gest that they are subsidised by the Employers’ Federation,
but it is all the same to us whether they are or not, if these
men are fighting the battle of Wade or Cook. If they fight
it honestly or dishonestly, the result is the same.
New South Wales is the only State that has not a Labor
member in the Senate. We are going to run three good men
next time —capable, honest, and fearless men, of proved abil-
ity and integrity. These men are going to be opposed by
three of the old Conservative party, who represent the
moneyed part of the State, and the Socialist party are going
to vote against the men who carry the flag of Labor. It would
be better for them to come out and give their votes to Joe
Cook right away. (Hear, hear, and cries of “Nonsense ! )
This movement is not narrow, and local, and parochial; it is
not a matter between Arthur Griffith and another man, or be-
tween Jack Estell and another man. Men are insignificant ;
the movement goes on. I appeal to you, for God s sake, dont
split the movement. Our enemies have long kept us divided
in two hostile camps, over the shibboleths of free-trade and
protection. They have had the workingmen fighting each
other over free-trade and protection —as to whether protec-
tion meant prosperity or free-trade meant prosperity. \ou
have had free-trade Governments and protectionist Govern-
ments, and you have not benefited much. You still have to
bustle hard for a crust, and you have the same privileges as
the working bullock —to work when you are young, to star\e
when you are old, and go to the devil when you die, if the
parsons are right. (Laughter.) Then when the fiscal ques-
tion disappeared from the politics of the State, they dragged
in this miserable sectarian matter, and men fought about the
respective prerogatives of King Billy and the Pope. But
after years of battling we have lived that down. Now comes
another attempt to disorganise Labor, and this time from a
different quarter. From our ranks springs a party which
proposes to split the movement on the economic question.


And these men, who are acting honestly and conscientiously,
and. in good faith, the more success they meet with upon the
lm es T are f°^ ow^n g> the more harm will they bring upon
the Labor movement. The result last time was the loss of
one Labor seat—Darling Harbour. Next time, if they are
stronger, we will lose half a dozen, and that will mean the
success of Wade for another term. The “ Daily Telegraph,”
the most malignant enemy we have booms the Socialist party
as often as possible. At Broken Hill, when Nulty and I and
others spoke to the men, and advised them to be reasonable,
and to act calmly, and they accepted that advice, our re’
marks were hardly reported. But when others got up, and
advocated the use of dynamite, and other methods of vio-
lence, the Telegraph boomed them in letters that siz'-'
(He indicated the size of the “ Telegraph ” headlines.) Whyl
Because they know if they boom that party the Labor seats
may be lost, and Wade may remain in power for another term.
(Applause.) I wish on the strength, and almost the invul-
nerability, of the Labor party, to say something, and for that
purpose will read from one of their bitterest enemies, to show
* : ] ie y regard it. George Reid, speaking recently at
Waterloo, said this : “ The Labor party is the greatest power
in Australia to-day, not because of its numerical strength— not
at all. The situation just reminds me of the difference be-
tween a regular army of framed soldiers and a lot of people
who are hurriedly got together to oppose them. The Labor
Leagues of Australia drill just as you drill a regiment of sol-
diers. They are loyal to one another, they march to the
word, of command, and while they remain compact, loyal, en-
thusiastic, and ready to sacrifice a little of their leisure to
record their votes, we find those who are opposing them quar-
relling among themselves.” I regret that the position has
changed ; we are inclined to quarrel amongst ourselves now.
He added : “ I say the Labor party, united, opposing all the
others disunited., is the strongest power in Australia to-day.”
I echo that statement. The Labor party united is invulner-
able. If we are united, Mr. Fisher will win at next Federal
election, and will have his policy endorsed; and at the fol-
lowing State election, Mr. McGowen will win, and we will have
a Labor Government in New South Wales. (Hear, hear.)
But you must realise that the other side are never divided.
They may appear to you to have several political organisa-
tions, each appearing to differ, but when the time for voting
comes they turn up to a man—and to a woman—and vote
against the Labor man. Last time, when we were divided
over the miserable sectarian business, the two men who work-
ed most strenuously on the committee which financed the
Reid-Cook party, were old Nick Fitzgerald, a prominent


Roman Catholic, and Senator Fraser, who is the Pope of the
“ yellow ” fellows. (Laughter.) They sat “ cheek by jowl/
night after night, on the committee, fighting the Labor party.
One was green and one was yellow, but their money was uie
same colour, and their interests were the same ; and they
put their money and. cheir interests together, and they worked
together to down the Labor men, while the Labor men were
fighting as to whether they should down King Billy or the
Pope. And now that we, by propaganda, and by general
work, have trampled that miserable sectarian serpent under
foot, are we to see another split, and to have our party divided
into two sections of Socialists ?
But I have to prove my contentions that the Labor party
is a Socialist party.- I want to give my friend something to
disprove. Let me do it from documentary evidence. Our objec-
tive is a general statement of the aims of our party, and here is
what it is : The first is a national question, and has nothing to
do with this matter : “ The cultivation of an Australian senti-
ment, based upon the maintenance of racial purity, and the
development m Australia of an enlightened and self-reliant
community.” That is a racial question, but we maintain
that the purity of our blood is the first consideration. I
know you believe in that ; at least, all of you except the inter-
national Socialists, who think that the Chinese or the Japs are
in all respects equal to us. Ido not say that they are in-
ferior ; but the Chow and the Jap, the Indians and. the
Pathans, are distinct races. They have many virtues which
we have not, but they also have many vices which we are
thankful we have not. They are different peoples, and we
cannot have them mingling their blood with ours, and breed-
ing a race of mongrels. We want Australia to be white,
not black and tan. (Laughter and applause.) At the same
time I do not say that the Chinese and Japanese are inferior
to us. They have virtues which we might emulate ; but
they have vices, too, which we thank God we have not got.
But I say they are of a different stock, and they cannot be-
come homogeneous with the white race. Ihe Chinese are
an alien race, though not inferior. The second part of the
objective is ■ “ The securing of the full value of their indus-
try to all producers, by the collective ownership of monopo-
lies, and the extension of the industrial and economic func-
tions of the State and municipality.” Is not that Socialism,
as advocated by Marx and Engels, and all the leaders of the
Socialists ? Don’t they say that every man should get the
full results of his labor. “ Suum cuique,” were two words
found cut into an old marble'column in the Roman Forum.
“Suum cuique”—“to every man his own.” That is the
policy of the Socialist in Germany, and m England and in


frX Ce; That i- iS T ‘C °S Jectl , ve °{ ‘he Labor party in Aus-
-
c^ai?tv US Tho eC0n0I ? lc Unctions of the State and munl
tF”’ ‘"c-te Sections
our Co-operattve W Commonwe r aUh! ng ’B a u n t d the e thing T^notT
™lS a E *
mg of your wives and little chfldren No ’ but Ccln be'
he a " d ' S< *
Lon T you ftke, but
ievolution you get the back swing of the pendulum which ear
£ i
the" EmpSor NapoTe°on arCh TT aS succeeded *?y the despotism of
the oendihim We 1 , The y.experienced the back swing of
e pendulum. We believe in nailing a plank down find
making it secure, then another, and another, until you’ have
a solid and permanent structure, and where there is no WP
swrng of the pendulum. (Hear hear.'Thaffs the ob.ee
leh T, L; l b °, r f; art - v - 1 ought to know what it means'
because I had the honour to be one of the five which Ton’
ference instructed, to draw it un T sav n c h V
"pure and undefiled,” to obtam'for every man the result n
S ‘? P bei " S ‘P ofmonS-
pones, and tne nexc the increase of the industrial and
land policy- Immediate cessation of Crown land sales ’’
iat means that two-thirds of the land in this State not in
Va ue, but in area—shall be retained by the people and that
no more land shall be sold. It means, too, that we still keen
if 0t “ a Ama? firSt . Step towards nationalisation,
in n o cff T) I ~A malB 'a ma tion of existing Savings Banks
s for Tha? ank ' a o d th6n ft S° es oa to explam whafk
is tor. That means the creation of a great National Ranh
fen the people, owned by them, and worked for their benefit
Not banks as they exist now, which bleed people white in
to P m Vld Ti dlVlde ? ds f ? r those who live at the other end
of the world. That is Socialism. Then there is : “ Increased


Probate Duties on estates of over £20,000 in value.” That
is Socialism —although it does not sound like it. If you take
20 per cent, of a man’s fortune when he dies, and another
20 per cent, when his son dies, in five generations you have
got it all. (Laughter.) That is practical Socialism —build-
ing up the State by acquiring the property of men when they
die. Free education on the bursary system is also a plank
in our fighting platform, by means of which we would make
it possible for the children of poor people to secure not only
primary education, but secondary, and of passing a qualify-
ing test to get into the high school with a bursary of £BO a
year to keep each student ; and then the securing of a bur-
sury m the high school would enable him to enter the Sydney
University, and agricultural college, or a technical college, at
the expense of the State. Is not that Socialism ? It would
give to the children equal opportunities in the world. We
do not say that all men are equal, but what I have striven for,
and what the Labor party are striving for, is equal opportun-
ity for every child in the community. That is Socialism. It
is the State doing what private individuals are doing now.
To-day there are two boys of equal ability. One, because
his father is wealthy, goes to the university and becomes a
barrister or a doctor. The other, because his father is pool,
has to leave school and go to work, and he gets no chance
in the world a,t all. Wc say, both should sit side by side
in the schools, and whichever does the best work should get
the opportunity to rise to the higher position. And so the
man getting the seven or eight “ bob a day may see his son
become Chief Justice of the State. That is Socialism. (Hear,
hear.) . „ „ A „
Further, we desire to provide for : All Government work
to be executed in the State, without the intervention of con-
tractors.” That is to say, that when the Government of this
country proposes to build railways or to do other public works
or to construct its own locomotives, in place of farming out
the work to contractors, who make hundreds of thousands ol
pounds by sweating their men or taking the Government
down, the State would do the work. The contractor must
make money either one way or the other, and I know a man
who made one small duplication—from Petersham to Home-
bush—who made £200,000 clear profit out of the work. Why
should he have that money ? (A Voice : “ It’s sweating.”)
[The Chairman rang his bell, to intimate that the speaker
had exhausted his time ; but it was agreed between Mr. Grif-
fith and Mr. Moroney that the former should speak for hve
minutes longer, and that Mr. Moroney should speak for fifty
minutes in his opening address.]
Another plank of the platform provides for appointment


of a “ Crown Defender, to be appointed and paid for by the
Government, in all casess where a Crown Prosecutor is em-
ployed.” His office would be to defend accused persons, just
as that of the Crown Prosecutor is to attack them. That
means that instead of lawyers taking the money of an ac-
cused person the Crown will undertake the defence. The
eighteenth plank is “State subsidy to maternity.” Well,
that means that when women have to go through the difficul-
ties and dangers of childbirth, all the expenses inseparable
therefrom shall not fall upon the man who is, perhaps, strug-
gling to maintain a large family. The State will bear the
cost, and will relieve the father of undue expense in providing
citizens for this young country. (Hear, hear.) Plank
twenty-one is—“ Workers’ dwellings to be constructed by the
Government in suitable localities, and co be let to these requir-
ing them at reasonable rentals.” So that landlord. ,/ill not
rack-rent you. The State will give you as good r ouse as
it can for the money, and you will get better habitat, ns and
more comfort than you do now, and you will pay only per
cent, upon the cost of the building. That is Socialism. One
of the means by which the Labor party proposes to absorb the
unemployed is by “The establishing of State ironworks.”
This country sends away hundreds of thousands of pounds
every year, money that could easily be saved, by establishing
its own ironworks. We say that the iron industry in private
hands must become a great monopoly, and we can trust no
monopolist but che people ; and so we say we will establish
that industry. That is Socialism. “ The establishment of
State farms and labor colonies,” and “The establishment of
State woollen mills and clothing factories,” come under the
same category. We also propose the nationalisation of all
land, and the nationalisation of the coalmines, and that all
iron required for State use be produced from State mines.
That is Socialism. Matters that equally affect the welfare
of the people are the establishment of infants’ milk depots,
control of ferries, municipal, gas, and electric lighting, and
many other things which we say come within the function of
the State. All of these, I say, are Socialism. But the Social-
ists find fault with us because along with our socialistic plat-
form we have what they call palliatives. We say that we
are fighting for the great co-operative commonwealth, and
that we want to do something for the people ob to-day, as
well as for the people of to-morrow and the day after. (Hear,
hear.) We say that all these things are for the good of the
people, and will be for the good of our children and our grand-
children. They say that the old age pension is a palliative.
Well, it is one lam proud to have been associated with. (Ap-
plause.) And they say that the Miners’ Accident Relief Fund


is a palliative. Would it be any palliative to the miner to
rot and starve when injured because we had neglected him in
order to do something tor his grandchildren? (Voices: “No,”
and hear hear.) All these are socialistic planks ; and they
will benefit posterity ; but while we are doing that we are
at the same time trying to do something for those who are
fighting the battle of life to-day. (Loud applause.)
file Chairman : Ladies and Gentlemen, —I now introduce
to you Mr. J. O. Moroney.
Mr. MORONEY, who was well received, said : Mr. Chair-
man, friends, and feilow-workers, I am just as pleased as Mr.
Oilffith at the size of this working-class audience to-night;
pleased also to have an opportunity of meeting a representa-
tive member of the Labor party or New South Wales, m order
to speak to the working-class face to face, and to present
to you for your criticism and your judgment as to which of
the two parties and the two sections which claim to speak for
the working-class are right or wrong. Personally, I have no
feelings whatever against Mr. Griffith or the members of his
party, and the Socialist Labor Party has no quarrel against
individuals, but a quarrel against methods and against tactics
which we believe to be unsound. (Hear, hear.) And, there-
fore, while appreciating Mr. Griffith’s complimentary remarks
to myself, I wish to say to him and the members of his party
that when they come out to oppose the attitude we take up
well, we ask them to come out with the gloves off and to
regard us, if they so think, as bitter and implacable foes.
We ask no quarter, and we of the Socialist Labor Party will
give none. (Hear, hear.) We believe we are right, and we
• are going to fight to the last ditch for the principles we believe
m, because we know they are true, because we know they are
correct, and because we know that the forces and the powers
of the community and. of humanity are behind it, and are irre-
sistible, and must triumph in the end. Mr. Griffith in his
statement did not place before you the position of the work-
ing man and the working woman in the twentieth century
(A Woman’s Voice : “ Hear, hear.”) Mr. Griffith spoke about
the force of evolution. He said rightly that the development
of human society has been one continual process. We emerg-
ed, and I believe scientists are correct in saying so, from the
lowest form up to the state which man has reached now. We
went through all the stages of savagery and barbarism, and
into feudalism and chattel slavery, until we have reached the
pinnacle ol civilisation co-day—wage slavery. Society has
been a continual evolution ; we admit that. We Socialists
say that evervthing we have got in this world to-day, every-
thing substantial, everything material, everything necessary,
our language, our thoughts, all that environs us to-day, is the


total of all the labor, of all the effort, of all the genius, of
all the coil and sacrifice of the myriads of human beings who
have preceded us upon this planet. Every invention, every-
thing science has done, has been the direct result of the social
and. collective labor of human working societies from ages
down, until we see on every hand, in every country, in every
language, that production has reached, a titanic stage and
the genius of man has been able to harness all the forces of
nature, not only on the earth, but in the spaces in the air.
Shakespeare s words m the mouth of Puck were quite true
when he said he would “place a girdle round the earth.”
Man has done that. We find continents can communicate
with each other over intervening waves. The very atmo-
sphere has been harnessed to man’s power, and by mere auto-
matic touch communication can take place between nations,
invention follows invention on all hands, science creates new
and more valuable ones everywhere; and man’s collective
labor provides sufficient food and clothing to meet the needs
of over three times the number of human beings in the world
to-day with the present machinery. Yet we find everywhere
machinery becoming more perfect and more automatic in its
working, and production more and more vast, until to-day
national lines are obliterated and we have a world-market and
capitalist ownership. In every country to-day—from reeking
blood-stained Russia across Europe to'the greatest industrial
and capitalist country of the world, the United States, and
acioss the Pacific co Australia—we find the world, one market,
producing the same things and producing then bountifully.
Yet with it we find an increasing army of unemployed, an
increasing hunger line, and. increasing dependence. Crises
follow crises with shorter and shorter periods ;
and the working class as an army are de-
pending nationally and internationally ' upon eaeh
other. All the world over to-day, notwithstanding its
splendid machinery, and all the means of production we have
to-day, we find thai a handful of the human race owns all
this wonderful plant of production, and all the marvellous
machinery. But the great human family, millions upon mil-
lions of the human race—that is, ourselves—find themselves
more helpless economically and less wealthy than at any other
period in history. (Hear, hear.) There is a class war.
. can hide that with as much verbal confectionery as you
like, but the community is divided into the working-class
nation and the capitalist class nation. (Mr. Griffith and
otners : Hear, hear. ) Is there anything in common be-
tween them? (Voices: “No.”) Yes, one thing is, the
earth, which no one made.
Ever since man became an inhabitant of this planet, he


required the common earth, which he has come from for sus-
tenance. We are passing travellers, living our little span
and passing away—yet all require Mother Earth. At the
same time a few men own it, and the majority have to pay
toll to have access to it. The earth is useless without some-
thing else—labor and machines. Labor produces the ma-
chines and operates them, but labor to-day has got to work
as an army—socially and collectively—-in making machines,
which the coal-miner at Newcastle, in Pennsylvania, in Scot-
land, in England, or Germany uses, and the coal-miner is just
as much a part of the mechanic in making the machines as
the engineer, or the fitter, or the inventor. Every part of
labor is engaged to-day in every invention and every mecha-
nical process. And seeing that all is being socially operated,
we could expect to find it socially owned, but, instead of the
social operators owning it, the capitalist class own it, but
without having done one fraction towards its invention, its
production, or its building up. The working, class to-day are
wage slaves. They cannot get access to the mine, to the
factory, to the shop, or to the ship, or to the counter or the
dock without they get the permission of those who own it,
and they can only get permission by selling their labor power
at so much per day, or week, or fortnight, or month, when
the owners think they can get a profit out of their labor. If
there is no profit, then they are not employed ; and so, in
spite of mountains of literature which capitalist apologists
have built up to refute it, we see that from the beginning up
to the year 1909 labor has produced, and alone produces, and
must produce, the wealth of the world. (Mr. Griffith and
others : Hear, hear.) You have to go no further than New-
castle to see that the capitalist class own everything. Who
own the coal-mines of Newcastle and Maitland? The miners?
No; the capitalists. Who gets The capitalist
or the miner? The miner gets it. When, last November
twelve months, the miners of Newcastle struck, they missed
one of the greatest opportunities they had for winning, for
they had the capitalists of Australia at their mercy. All
factories and shops were depleted of their coal supplies, and
you found right throughout Australia every capitalist paper
and concern in a state of terror lest the strike should con-
tinue, because their establishments would have to close. If
labor does not get the coal, why not the owners? Because
they could not. (Laughter.) In the first place, they do not
possess the physique or sufficient courage ; and, further, they
are insufficient numerically ; and, still further, they do not
live in Newcastle, but at the other end of the world—at least
many of them do. ' Take Broken Hill. We are told there
is no class war, and that the Labor party stands for all sec


tions of the community. Mr. McGowen has said frequently
that it is a lie to say that the Labor party is a class party,
and he has thrown out a challenge to anyone to prove that
it is such. It stands for all classes, he says, therefore it
stands for different classes in the community. It stands for
the mine-owners of Newcastle and Maitland, and the Proprie-
tary Company, as well as for the locked-out starving men and
women of the Barrier at the present juncture. (Applause.)
No ; our chief charge against the Labor party is this : That
they are only a Labor party in name. (Hear, hear.) That
in all other essentials, by their acts, by their votes, by their
methods, by their advocacy, by their exposition, as exempli-
fied by Mr. Griffith to-night, it is proven that they are merely
a middle-class representative party. (Applause.) There-
fore, we broke away from the Labor party twelve years ago,
just at the time when the people’s vote knocked out the Labor
party for representation in the Convention to frame the Fede-
ral Constitution, and when the Labor Conference carried a
plank that the Labor party should proclaim that they stood
for the nationalisation of the land and all the means of pro-
duction, distribution, and exchange.*
I was a member of the Political Labor League Executive
at that time, and had been for a considerable time. Ever
since I have had a vote in this country which gave me birth,
I cast my vote up to that time for Labor men, and belonged
to Labor Unions and Political Labor Leagues. At that time
the Labor party came down with a new constitution, saying
they would not go to the country on a Socialist platform, and
the majority of that Executive decided they would not retain
that plank of the platform. They said they wanted votes—
(A Voice : “ They were ‘ smoodging ’ ”) —and we decided, as
the Australian Socialist League, and the oldest organisation
in Australia, which has been organised all the way through,
in spite of its vicissitudes and all the discouragement and the
apathy and indifference. And, in spite of all the efforts to
crush it, it was kept together by one of the best men who ever
stood on Australian soil, Andy Thomson. He was one of the
men who ever spoke on behalf of his class, and he it was who
kept it together. (Applause.) A. man who could not be
bought, and whose proud epitaph was spoken by the President
of the Stonemasons’ Union, who said at his graveside in
Waverley Cemetery : “ There was not money enough in Aus-
tralia to buy Andy Thomson.” (Hear, hear.) It was
through him and others that the Socialist movement was kept
Footnote.—ln 1896 the Socialist Plank was carried by the P.L L Conference,
in January of that year, but was strongly opposed by the Labor Party and the
Executive. Easter 1897 the A.S.L. launched its new programme and decided to
build up the S.L P.


clear. They say the Labor party does not want Socialism,
it only wants votes ; then our place is outside the Political
Labor League, to build up in New South Wales a clear, defi-
nite, and uncompromising Socialist movement and party.
(Applause.) Now, that is honest, I believe. The party was
born then. Mr. Griffith says : “ With your wonderful powers
of organisation, and with your transcendental gifts of oratory,
why not come into our organisation and place it on proper
lines.” (Mr. Griffith : Hear, hear.) We did remain in the
Party, but we could do nothing there. We found, instead of
our transcendental abilities having an effect, that the Labor
politicians were too strong, and they voted us down every
time. Take the last Political Labor League Conference, when
the Barrier League sent down the following proposal to be
placed on the Political Labor League platform. It is taken
from the official organ of the Political Labor League, and
also the political organ of the Labor party, so it cannot be
said I am taking it from a capitalist source : —lt was moved
by Mr. Jabez Wright,—“That the objective (Clause 2) be
amended to read : ‘ That securing of the full results of their
industry to all producers by the collective ownership of the
means of production, distribution, and exchange.’ ” That
was opposed, and the principal opponent of it was the ex-
member of the Australian Socialist League, Mr. W. A. Hol-
man, who said that there seemed to be an impression that
this little idiotic idea from Broken Hill was true Socialism.
He said : “ Who put up this body at Broken Hill to say what
was true Socialism? It no more expressed true Socialism
than do speeches often heard in the Sydney Domain. They
had an objective that had been deliberately adopted, yet those
idiots—(the Chairman said the remark was offensive, and
would have to be withdrawn. Mr. Holman said he gladly
withdrew it, and apologised.) What he desired to make clear
was that the idea in the main was an old movement of fifty
years ago, that was being abandoned by all up-to-date Social-
ists of the world.”
Mr. Griffith asks us and others to join an organisation
of that character. An organisation that is controlled by poli-
ticians who are already.in Parliament, and by politicians who
want to get there, and a Political Labor League which takes
in everybody. It is only a loose organisation. At election
times or just preceding elections it becomes active, and can-
didates who want to get selection pack it, and when they have
attained their seat in Parliament they have no further use
for the workers until next election comes round. (Applause.)
Mr. Griffith spoke about what the party had done, but I ask
you, as members of the working class, “ Are you any better
off now than you were fifteen years ago?” (Voices : “ Yes ”


and “No.” One Voice: “A thousands times more, the
Coal Mines Regulation Act proves that.” “And they are
asking for relief works.”) If our friends who are so excited
and jubilant over the progress they have made feel quite satis-
fied, it is a matter for themselves ; but I want to ask you this :
“ Has the Coal Mines Regulation Act given you anything more
than a better supply of fresh air?” (A Voice :“ Is not that a
boon?”) Granting it is an improvement on what you had
before, but so far as wages are concerned, is the position of
the worker any better than it was fifteen years ago? (Voices :
“No,” “Yes.”) Have you got higher wages now than fif-
teen years ago? (Voices: “Yes.” One Man: “We don’t
get any at all.”) Are you more secure in the possession of
your jobs now than then? (Voices : “ No.”) I want to say
to those calling out : If you are in such an affluent position
you should be perfectly contented and happy. We will take
another official utterance. We will take the President of the
Sydney Labor Council, who opened the recent Trades Union
Congress in Sydney : “ The Trade Union movement to-day
was not satisfied with its position either politically or eco-
nomically. As they had obtained increased wages, so had
the prices of commodities gone up. We are practically in
the same position as we were ten years ago, in so far as any
ordinary laborer with only his hands to rely upon is con-
cerned. To all intents and purposes he is always on the
verge of starvation. He only needed to fall ill or be out of
work a little -time, and he felt that he was an outcast. It
was only his fellow-unionists who prevented him from sinking
lower and lower in the social scale.” That was said only
three weeks ago by the President of the Labor Council, when
he opened the Trades Union Congress. Take another wit-
ness from the Labor ranks—W. M. Hughes, the literary ex-
pounder of the Labor party and its defender in the Sydney
“Daily Telegraph.” He says in to-day’s issue:—“From a
fairly wide knowledge of the facts, I am of the opinion that
a very large number of working men in this country have
barely the means to support themselves and dependents for
one week ahead. Many, of course, have more. On the
other hand, some live literally from hand to mouth. Dam
their little rivulet but for twenty-four hours, and they are
reduced to direst extremities. In a struggle which resolves
into a question of endurance, that side which is half-starved
must inevitably be defeated.” These statements are from
men of the Labor party, not mine ; and Mr. Griffith to-night
did not show you in what manner these evils, which the
spokesmen of the Labor party speak of, can be altered. (A
Voice : “They have never been in power yet.”) Take their
objective. Mr. Griffith says the objective is socialistic. That


it stands for the collective ownership of monopolies and for
the gaining of the full results of their toil for the worker.
Now, if the worker is going to get the full product of his
labor, I want to ask how that is to be obtained by the objec-
tive? Does the objective extend to the whole working class
or only to a section? It only extends to a section. For
they propose to nationalise one monopoly, and how do it?
By buying it out. Now, take the favorite monopoly they have
in view, the Tobacco monopoly, which will take some two mil-
lions to buy out, provided they get the authority
to do it. If they buy out the Tobacco monopoly, and pay
some millions of pounds for it, they will have to go to the
capitalist in London or Australia to borrow the money ; if
they don’t, they will issue debentures on the public market,
which will be negotiable on the Stock Exchange. One or
other of these means they will have to adopt. Then they
will have to conduct the industry like a Trust ; they will have
to make a profit out of it. The workers will get wages, and
the purchase-money and interest will have to be paid back to
those from whom it was borrowed. So far as the working
class is concerned they will be no better off than before. (A
Woman’s Voice: “Hear, hear.”) And that money can be
used by the Trust, to which it was paid,, in some other form
of industry for the exploitation of the worker. That goes on
over and over again, and the worker who buys the tobacco
wall have to pay the same as if it were made by a private firm,
and all you will have done will be to put a fence round a few
workers while the others are fighting for a crust against the
whole forces of capitalism. (Voices : “ Nationalise it by co-
operation.”) We say that is side-tracking the workers of
Australia. They are to use their manhood and womanhood’s
might, and every worker of Australia asked to march up to
the ballot-box, and take over the Tobacco Trust or Sugar
Trust ; use all their political and industrial might to benefit
no more than a mere section of their class, leaving the capi-
talist class still in power. If they are capable of doing that,
we say the working class can be disciplined to throw their
heart and soul into the matter, and have their massed might
behind the world demand, and that demand shall be the owner-
ship of all the means of production in Australia, to be con-
trolled by the whole people of this country. (Applause.)
One of the greatest figures in the Socialist movement to-
day, a man who is standing in the storm-centre of the Socialist
world in New York, Daniel De Leon, says in one of his famous
addresses and booklets, that a lion will fight you just as
ferociously if you try to pull a hair out of his nose a.s if you
go for his whole carcase. It is just the same with the capi-
talist class. Touch one part, and the whole capitalist animal


will attack you. (Hear, hear.) What we advocate is that
the working class must be taught their position ; that between
the working class and the capitalist class there is a bitter and
implacable war going on which no force in this world can
bridge over ; that the working class is economically a wage-
slave class, dependent upon the capitalist class ; and when
you have that concept in their hearts, and when every particle
of their heart’s blood throbs in unison with that thought, and
you lift up the standard of manhood’s and womanhood’s
might, then they will express that power intelligently and ably
on the political field by their mass ballots. (Loud applause.)
But unless you have behind the mass ballots the economic
power to enforce them, they will be so much waste paper. We
say the working class must enforce their political might by
their organised industrial might in the plants of production.
We do not advocate the general strike. We are not anarch-
ists, and we are not, as some of Mr. Griffith’s colleagues so
kindly attribute to us, in the pay of the capitalist class. I
would be glad if he would name them, and if they will come
out in the open and endeavor to substantiate their allega-
tions, we are prepared to meet them. (Hear, hear.) We
say the workers are divided by the Labor party. The Labor
party and the craft union movement divides them into little
sectional movements, and ties them up with separate agree-
ments, and so keeps them divided. And, further, the Labor
party, by their advocacy of compulsory arbitration, com-
pletely denies that it stands for the working class or for
Socialism. (Hear, hear.) But that they admit that the
capitalist class has a right to what Labor and Labor only
produces. By entering the Arbitration Court they do so with
two capitalists against one Labor representative. (Applause,
and hear, hear.) You can have any Judge you like—you can
have Judge Higgins, with all his humanity and sensibility, yet
he stands for the capitalist class all the same. He is really a
representative of the capitalist class, and not of Labor, and
that was shown in the dispute at Broken Hill, for Judge Hig-
gins was dominated by the economic system of capitalism
which environed him. He had to consider the profits of the
capitalist in making the award. And, while he gave Labor
what they asked for—and in the High Court the Chief Justice
said they got all they asked for—yet, having granted that,
those who held the key of the position still kept the store
locked, that is, the mineral wealth of Broken Hill is still in
the hands of the Proprietary Company, and they have the sole
use of it. The Labor party, by their acts and their advocacy
and support of compulsory arbitration, upholds the v/ages sys-
tem, and they deny that they are Socialists by that very act.
We opposed it when it was first originated, seven or eight


years ago, and we still oppose it, and say that all the experi-
ence ol the Act is that instead of solidifying the working class
it has separated them more than ever before—(hear, hear)—
because in the industrial dispute or lock-out, or strike, with
all the forces of capitalism against Labor, the capitalist class
have the working class tied up with agreements. They say
it would be suicidal to come out in support of their fellows in
othei industries. We ask the workers to organise their forces
as one Industrial Uniop on the industrial field. (Hear, hear.)
then we would not have this spectacle of the workers in New-
castle and Maitland, members of the union, fighting capital-
lsm, wmlst the South Coast and Western District men were
providing supplies while they were out. The Labor party
divides the working class by separating them into sections.
We say that men, whether miners, seamen, or wharf laborers
or wharf lumpers, or whether employed in factories or shops
no matter where they stand, their interests are identical with
their fellows m every part of the Commonwealth. The inter-
ests of every miner, whether of coal or silver or copper or
any other metal, from end to end of Australia, from Western
Australia up to Northern Queensland, and on every section of
Lie Commonwealth soil, are the same, and we say they should
be one industrial union, and that union should contain Ml tfm
mme-workers m every part of Australia. (Hear, hear.) (Mr.
urilfith : So do wed’) We say the same with the wharf
workers or the workers in the factory or the shop. They
should form link after link in the labor chain, until no force
of capitalism could snap it. (Mr. Griffith : Hear, hear.) An
injury to one member of our class will be an injury to all.
(Hear, hear.) Is that the case to-day? No. You have
organised scabbery. It is not the poor unemployed, forced
by hunger co take your places, who are the greatest opponents
to industrial unionism, it is the organised scab in othe'r indus-
tries, keeping at work while you are out, who beats you.
(Hear, hear.) The system which we advocate means that if
the workers are industrially organised on such lines, if the
workers are attacked in any part, and other workers might
assist or help indirectly or directly, those workers will have a
common cause, and will act together. (Applause.) Now
a. W °^ r Vt tied U P b y agreements under the Arbitration
Act and the Wages Board which have given rise to a gang of
harpies. I hey have bred a new type of Labor advocate, who
is appearing in the Courts, tieing "the laborers up with agree-
ments, and. keeping them in little coteries. We do not believe
in anarchy or a general strike, but in following the lines of
industrial evolution, and for the workers to use their political
power on the political field. When they reach that stage in
their march to the goal of collective ownership, they will have


industrial might behind them to back up their desires. (Hear,
heai.) If that is not logic, Ido not know what is. If you
don t accept it, we will not force you.
Our difference with the Labor party is a fundamental
one. It is not so much a question of tactics as a question of
basic principles. We say that the Labor party, by its oojec-
tive and platform, repudiates its claim to be regarded as a
working-class or socialist party. Mr. Griffith has to-night
mentioned the land. Ihe Labor party is in line with Mr.
Wade who, Mr. Griffith insinuated, is a gentleman who has
gamed considerable support from our very extreme attitude.
Now, Mr. Wade and all the capitalist politicians of Australia
are m favor of closer settlement. So is Mr. Griffith and his
party. Joseph Carruthers said very incautiously some time
ago, that one of the strongest buttresses against Socialism
was a landed peasantry, or a country which was built up on
small landed proprietors. Now, in France and Europe, where
there is a peasant proprietary, we find, the most reactionary
and bitter toes of the socialist movement and of the working
class, and you know that every cocky-farmer and small
settler is against the working class ; and yet Mr. Griffith and
his party want to increase the number of landlords instead of
decreasing the number, and to build up landlords as a bulwark
against the working class. (Hear, hear.) Mr. Griffith told
you they are going to have a National Bank, and give people
cheaper money. Who will they give it to? To the workers
in the mine, or on the wharf, or the sweated women in fac-
tories and shops? (Laughter.) What will they have cheaper
money for? For the little landed proprietor, who will get
cheaper money from the State Bank than from the private
capitalist? It will be lent for thirty or forty years, so you
sem the number of years Mr. Griffith wants in order to bring
in Socialism. All this money will be handed out to the small
cocky-farmer that he may make himself richer, while the
working man will be poorer—(A Voice: “They will be the
capitalists”)—while the huge army of small landed proprie-
tors is being built up as defenders of capitalism 'against the
working class. (Applause.) Let me quote some figures.
In Australia, according to the latest statistics of the Savings
Banks, one in three of the working class are depositors. In
the State of New South Wales the number of depositors, ac-
cording to the institution which Mr. Griffith has more know-
ledge than I, according to their latest balance-sheet, the ave-
rage amount at credit of each depositor on 31st December
last, was 18s. being an increase of llfd. on the pre-
vious year. The total number of depositors was 121,745.
4 hat is the average. Take another table. The number of
depositors of and under was 07,616. Ihe number of


depositors of between £2O and £SO, 15,537. The number of
depositors between £SO and £IOO, 11,605. The number of
depositors between £IOO and £2OO, 12,673. The number of
depositors between £2OO and £SOO, 13,392. The number of
depositors of upwards of £3OO, 800—brings the total number
of depositors up to 121,745. Now, that is for New South
Wales. The average, you see, comes to £54 18s. 5Jd., and
yet we have 67,000 who have deposits of under £2O each.
You know how averages work out? You have often heard
that if three men are in a room together, and you say these
men have an aggregate of £6O, it does not work out indi-
vidually. One of the men has got £4O in his pocket, another
has £ls, and another £5. But if the whole amount were
averaged out they would have £2O apiece. These are facts,
and figures cannot lie. As the Americans say : “ Figures
cannot lie, but any liar can figure.” Mr. Griffith proposes to
take the earnings of the working class and to foim a bank,
and Mr. Griffith and his party will put their hands into it
and give the money to the cocky-farmers and others to build
them up. (A Voice : “Bunkum.”) (Mr. Griffith laughed.)
It is not bunkum ; it is true, because if the State Bank is to
be built up, where are they going to get the money, except
from those who deposit it there? And they are going to let
it out on interest to the small cocky-proprietor, and, therefore,
finance him and strengthen him in his holding. By doing that
they are building up an entrenchment against the working
class. Their objective is what we call “their objection”
to Socialism. It is no more Socialism than are the proposals
of Mr. Wade or any other capitalist politician ; and to see
that the Labor party in Australia stands to-day in the same
relation to the people as any other capitalist party, you have
only to take the position of Mr. Fisher and his party at the
present time. Mr. Fisher, in his Gympie speech, and in New-
castle, devoted two-thirds of his time, not to the matter of
the slavery of the working class and their economic position,
and how they were to get out of it, not as to the Labor party
standing for the full results of their toil, and in advocating
Socialism, but advocating, in two-thirds of his speech, the
best method, of defending Australia. (Hear, hear.) Yet we
are told the working classes have got nothing. Mr. Hughes
shows it, and every other Labor man proclaims it. That they
have no land ; that they are dependent and unwealthy all the
time, and yet here is the Federal Labor Government expend-
ing its energies in showing how it is going to defend Aus-
tralia —a country which the capitalist class owns. There is
Broken Hill. Who owns it? And who will they ask to defend
it? They are going to ask the workers of Broken Hill, who
have no quarrel with their fellows elsewhere, to take up arms


and defend their country, while the people who own that coun-
try ar£ living in London. (Applause.) (A Voice : Don t
you want your country defended?”) According to a state-
ment by a firm of brokers, published in the “ Sydney Morn-
ing
(The Chairman’s bell rang, and Mr. Moroney sat down,
amid loud applause.)
Mr. GRIFFITH : Having listened to Mr. Moroney, I have
come to the conclusion that I have been laboring some
mistake. I have never heard before a more effective denun-
ciation of the impossibility of nationalising Trusts than I have
heard to-night from Mr. Moroney, even when I listened to
members of the Employers’ Federation. (Hear, hear.) Mr.
Moroney ought to belong to that Federation. (Laughter.)
He has used the same facts, the same words, and the same
figures as the President of the august Federation, to say we
cannot nationalise the great monopolies. He says it will
cost too much. He said we would have to buy them out.
(Hear, hear.) But we will not have to do so. When they started
Government factories and shops in Japan, they did not buy the
private firms out j and when we started Government factories
here, they would simply shrivel up like a worm in a blast
furnace. (Applause.) We have a Government which is in
favor of monopolies, but they had to start a State clothing
factory, and if the Labor party comes into power that factory
will be extended until the others will have to shift. We don t
confiscate them, we start a State monopoly, and they have
to go. If we started a State brewery and. public-houses, who
said we would have to buy out all the large breweries? It
is absurd to say we will pay tens of millions to buy out exist-,
ing monopolies. If ironworks are started, are we going to
buy up the privately-owned ironworks? Certainly not. We
start, and take no notice of the others. Just as Mr. Seddon
did in New Zealand, when he started the State Insurance Com-
pany. Did he buy out the others? No. And he also
started a State coal-mine, but he did not buy out the others.
(A Voice : “ And how are they managed?”) lam not con-
cerned with that, because you will return the men who will
run them. The last report of the State coal-mines m New
Zealand show that Seddonville lost £6IOO, but the other mine
at Port Elizabeth made a profit of £17,350. The latter mine
was capable of producing 3000 tons of coal per week. Ihe
prospects as to the quality of the coal at Seddonville aie that
it is much improved, and if it gets up to the standard the
Colony’s mam supply in the future will be derived from State
coal-mines, and there will be no hesitation in providing for
their development as rapidly as circumstances will permit
The Government has a large tract of country with a good


se am of coal to work upon, and the State carriage of coal has
brought about a reduction in the cost of wmrkmg ofTsoO a
"f ' The management reports favorably upon the estab
hshment of depots tor the sale of State coal. If here had
been State coal-mines when the Maitland field was opened
years ago, there would have been no millions of monet to
P ay ’ and ?° but State coal-mines run by menkou
put there to run them. (Applause.) What I say to Mr
Moroney and those who believe with him is this If they are
"L favor 01 ®, tate mmes, and object to people living abroad and
d awing millions upon millions in the shape of dividends from
the working class, let them vote for the Labor party wlurh
has on its platform the nationalisation of all mines ' And if
they object to sweating in factories, let them vote for the
dothing a fact’on« Ch TV natlonaHse the ironworks and create
i ■ actones. .1 his is m concrete form on our nlaifnrm
(Hear 1 hear 1 an 4* hlte ’ and 11 13 futlle for him to deny it.’
Lw ' h , e f ard rh f re . were one or two statements inad»
v Mr. Moroney which are absolutely untrue. I don’t want
to hurt his feelings, but they were not true He said the
platform was framed by the Labor party, and that L was
*f?s‘frkS k
thoiXcan Ere d ryU a bo e r S Le^ue ClP has ‘thf „gh” to
platform and. not the Labor members. (Applause ) Mr
(Laughter'fb’ £ y °“ L
representatives there every year yoa send Xour
200 delegates the othekdaf itThi Labor CongTesAon y"
were members of the Labor nartv IWc !L . &even
that those seven men dominated the other 200? & (A Voice 37
They would not let them.”) I S av thev did' nnbkL t '
be° Llse A lo LV e .f elegate f all °- d ‘hemL d d solheLwould
Mnff 1 f Unions they represented. (Hear hear 1
pride'o? the T b a e b m ° re dem< ? cratic than that, and that is the
P. * de ot T the Labor party, that its platform is not framed hv
i members, but that their policy is fnmcrl tw iKo t i “
Unions throughout the country. ~ He told you Mr M,J' ahor
ie r brains We say the man who works with his brains
ns hamL UC VL Creat h 0 r r °[ W ; ea K h aS the man who works with
as ,2VI V architect who designed this building was just
as much the creator or it as the carpenters who built it


(Hear, hear.) And we have said, again and again, that we
are in fierce and deadly antagonism to that small section —
numerically small, but intensely powerful—who live upon labor
without working for themselves. (Hear, hear.) We are
fighting those rich men who put up £50,000 or £60,000 every
year to fight us at the general elections ; and those are the
men whom Mr. Moroney and his friends are voting for when
they vote to down us. (Applause.) He asks if you are
better off now than you were fifteen years ago. I ask you
if you have had a Labor Government in New South Wales to
make you better off? (Voices: “No.”) If they want
better conditions let.them vote for a Labor Government.
What is the sense of a man using all his powers and influence
to prevent Labor men getting into Parliament?
Partly as a result of that action we are in a minority in
Parliament to-day, and thirty Labor members are trying to
fight fifty representatives of capital, and so we are outvoted,
on every point. And yet he asks : “ What good have you
done?” Why don’t he come in and help us? Then, if we
fail, he can blame us ; but not until then. (Applause.) He
referred to Broken Hill. If a Labor Government had been in
power every mine that had paid to its shareholders in the
form of dividends, say, 20 per cent, of its capital, would be
compelled by law to pay fair wages, no matter what the price
of coal might be, and "to work continuously. Then, instead
of paying away millions in dividends, and making the workers
suffer when the slump came, they would put a reserve by, and
would work continuously through good and bad times. If
they did not, they would forfeit their lease to the. Government.
(Applause.) Give us a Labor Government, and that will
come ; but every man who votes against us and then turns
round, and blames us, is most unfair and. unreasonable in the
proposition which he places before an intelligent audience.
(Hear, hear.) Then there is another statement which is abso-
lutely untrue. It i.s that we are in league with Mr. Wade
and his Government to establish a lot of peasant proprietors
and landholders throughout the State. (Hear, hear.) Mr.
Moroney knows, and you ought to know, that when the Closer
Settlement Bill was before the House the Labor party moved
an amendment that the land be not sold to these men, but
leased out to the peasant proprietary. We fought Mr. Wade,
but because of "Mr. Moroney and his friends, we were not
strong enough to carry our proposition, and that is why the
land is being sold and the landlords increased m this State.
(Hear, hear.) It is most unfair, and most misleading, to
make such a statement, but most of you are too well informed


politically to be misled by such statements. (Laughter.)
Really, the attitude of Mr. Moroney and some of his Socialist
friends—there are two or three sections of them, and'l don’t
know which is which, and they are fighting each other like
Kilkenny cats—their attitude is something like the old Quaker
and his wife. They had been sitting quietly thinking for some
time, when the old man said : “ Matilda, I have been thinking
of the future, and I have come to the conclusion that on the
Day of Judgment everyone will be damned except me and
thee, and sometimes I have my doubts about thee.” (Laugh-
ter.) They, according to Mr. Moroney, agree that the Labor
party will be damned, and they don’t know whether some of
their own number won’t be damned, too. (Laughter.) It
is ludicrous, but it is also serious, because every split in the
ranks is against Labor’s chance of success. I will read an
excerpt from one or two of the European leaders of Socialistic
thought, who think with us. After all, our objective is the
nationalisation of monopolies, and that will take place next
year, if you give us a majority wherewith to do it. (Hear,
hear.) The next is the extension of the industrial and econo-
mic functions of the State. That covers it all, and the reason
why we would not take the resolution from Broken Hill refer-
ring to the nationalisation of the means of production, dis-
tribution, and exchange, is because we cover it now, and the
Conference said it was no use changing every year, and that
it is no use altering every few minutes to please every crank
'who comes along. (Applause.) If you have the economic
and industrial functions of the State, you have everything.
We have declared for that in the Federal Conference, and in
the States, and the platform framed by the Convention, and
which is Socialistic, is the platform upon which the Labor
party stands, and they are battling for that against all its
enemies, including Mr. Moroney and his little crowd.
Now, another thing that Mr. Moroney said was that the
gieat weakness of your industrial organisation was in having
small separate craft unions, working out of sympathy with
each other—(hear, hear)—and that was the fault of the Labor
party. Well, he knows that it was the unions who created
the Labor party, and not the Labor party who created the
unions, and he knows that the Australian Labor Party believes
m forming all unions mto one organisation. I. have said so
and other Labor members have said the same, and last week
the Congress said they should be so organised. At one time
all the waterside workers used to be split into little bodies,
but now they are federated into one body, owing to the action
of Mr. Hughes. The shearers were brought together in like
manner by Mr. Spence and Mr. Macdonnell, or, at any rate
chiefly owing to their efforts ; and so the statement that we


wish to see the Unions split up is absolutely untrue. We be-
lieve that the Unions should be federated, and should speak
with one voice from shore to shore of this great continent, so
that when their demands were made they would be irresistible.
(Applause.) (A Voice: “What about defence?”) What
about defence? Well, Australia is defended somehow. We
have four millions of people, but up in China there are four
hundred millions ; in India three hundred millions : and there
are forty million Japs looking enviously at Australia. (A
Voice : “ Nonsense.”) There are also forty millions of people
in Java. The matter is not whether Australia is to be de-
fended, but how it is to be defended. One section of the
community wants us to build battleships, and present them to
Great Britain to fight the Germans or someone else ; but we
say, let us defend Australia. (Applause.) Mr. Fis.her has
resisted this Jingo fury, which is appealing to you to come to
the help of England on the other side of the world. He says :
“ Build your own flotilla,” and if he is thrown out of office it
will be because he supports national defence, and refuses to
send money to the wealthiest country in the world, to build
warships. (Applause.)
I want to say in connection with this matter that what
the Labor party is fighting for here is exactly what the lead-
ers of Socialism abroad are fighting for. Now, you have
heard of Samuel Gompers, President of the American Federa-
tion of Labor. He says : “ The workers want more wages ;
more of the comforts of life ; more leisure ; more chance for
self-improvement as men, as trade unionists, as citizens.
These were the wants of yesterday ; they are the wants of
to-day ; they will be the wants of to-morrow, and of to-mor-
row’s morrow. The struggle may assume new forms, but
the issue is the immemorial one—an effort of the producers
to obtain an increasing measure of the wealth that flows from
their production.” That is the ideal of the American Social-
ist Party. Now, let me quote Tom Mann, who stands de-
servedly high in the estimation of the workers of Australia
to-day. He said at Albury the other day that he was—“ A
man with a settled campaign as a student of life’s conditions,
to checkmate the encroachments on the part of the employing
classes, and to obtain for the employed class a reduction of
working hours and increased rates of pay.” That is the
whole object of the efforts of the Labor party. This great
class-struggle, as I have said, existed in times gone by as well
as to-day, and at one time the foreign Socialists adopted the
extreme measures which are to-day advocated by only the
smaller sections of Socialists to which I have referred. The
great body of them has seen the wisdom of coming down to-
day and adopting the ideas of the French United Socialist


s f Y an i fest P : Reforms, however limited, if won from
the hostile class, increase not only the freedom of action but
|J SO f he and spirit of the working class.” (Hear
. We are fighting for those reforms. But Mr. Moroney
and his party say they are only palliatives. We say so top 7
but a S the French Socialists say, they are reforms won from
a^ h t°he Smirnov the \ mcrease the freedom and action and
fir?™ f P In f the workm g class - Here is a further quo-
nf the’Tt r v n n i n6W |, paper Justice,” concerning the aims
■ thJ H L i ab t r P ? rt ? : “v They (the So «alists) say that
strike and lock-out, for the purpose of testing physical
strength, is unscientific, and a waste of energy ; thaHmstead
their e stTenffth e h S fh kln^ for h i gfter w ? geS > unite
tn<sir strength at the po Is, and vote themselves into power.”
(Applause.) That is what the British Labor Party says and
narfv s S avs he But this little
you want”' ChUCk d ° Wn your tools > and y° u will get what
in Pm M VUi° N f Y : When the Chairman rang the bell, I was
sat th rfnwn ldd e T° f & sentence ; and > as I believe in discipline, I
kers irTa" Sa Y ng tha t a Sydney firm of leading bro-
kers m a Safely-issued monthly sheet, state that the number
qm S nm eS h ? ( \ at Broke ? Hill by the Proprietary -Company is
and that out of that number 700,000 were owned in
artrml v \ tain is! d ?.? 0,000 m Aagtr alia. (Mr. Griffith : 960,000
actually) M,u Moroney: Yes; those are found figures,
n Great Britain, according to the “Westminster Review,” of
February, IJOB, the people were financially divided as follows •
dhe rich numbered 680,000 persons, and their wealth amounted
b l nfYu Hmn pounds ; the middle class, 5,100,000 persons
wealth three billion pounds ; the working class, 38,220 000
wenlthjone billion pounds. Thirty-eight millions of
the British working class own wealth to the amount of one
pillion pounds while 680,000 rich own twelve billions. Now
we asL this : Who produces that wealth? The thiriv-eicrht
million or the six hundred thousand who 'own twelve billion
more pounds than the thirty-eight million? The six hundred
thousand, who appropriated that amount from the workmg
class of Great Britain? No; the working class. I just
mention these figures because Mrf Griffith spoke of Keif Har-
die, and the work they propose to do in Great Britain. Now
hove are the working class going to retain that which they
produce, and how are they going to prevent that exploitation ?
Are they going to do it step by-step, or are they going to fully
+ n! an n e Y a f mi g kt on the Political field, as well as on
ue mdiistilal field, so that when they are consciously edu-
cated up to their real position, they will use their'ballots and
change the present system, The:latter-the only thing we


propose. • Mr. Griffith and his party do not propose to do
that. They do not even go as far as the middle class m
Great Britain. Keir Hardie, speaking m the House ot Com-
mons last December, when the Bill for legalising the Eight-
hour Day in coal-mines was before the House, and all the
capitalist class, including Balfour, Was against it, Keir Hardie
is quoted in the “ Daily Telegraph ’as follows He quoted
from the last available report of the Inspector of Mines for
the Eastern District of Scotland to show that there had been
a greatly-increased output from the Scottish mines since the
reduction of the hours of work. With a working day of ten
hours in 1895, the output was 30,000,000 tons. With a work-
ing day of eight hours in 1906, it was 47,000,000 ; and in spite
of the fact that there had been a decrease m the number of
men employed.” What do you make out of that? Less men
”e employed and yet they turn out 17,000,000 tons of coal
more in 1906 than in 1895. Keir Hardie could not have known
what that meant, for, as the statement shows, such a re-
form ” could hardly be said to benefit the working class man.
Tust look at the economic results of the working of the Labor
party’s platform. They say it will absorb the unemployed.
But Mr Hardie quotes, in justification of the passing of the
Eight-hour Bill, the fact that since the reduction m the hours
of labor less men were employed and more coal turned out.
Then so far as the economic position is concerned there is
no change. The capitalist class, by retaining the means of
production, have the working class caged up. The slow m
P turned adrift, and they get machines m to further reduce
the number of men employed. And so, if you put a wedge i
at one end it makes a hole in the other. And. so we say that
the working class, as a class, are not benefited by any re-
form ” which you bring up. One section might be, but tl
class as a whole remain in the same state of economic slavery
as they were before those “ reforms were brought about
Hlear hear ) Mr. Griffith referred to Sam. Gompers as one
of the*leading lights of the Labor movement m America. But
he has been one of the greatest Labor frauds and fakirs that
the world has ever known, and at every election he has fought
on the RepubHcan or the Democratic platform and agains
the Socialist movement of America. (Applause.) At last
election he tried to get the workers in the Labor
to support Bryan. Yet there was Eugene Debs standing tor
the Socialist party, and a proxy for Preston for the S.L.P.
a member of ?he "working class, who is doing twenty yearsnn
eaol for doing picket duty during a strike And yet Gompers
was telling them to vote for Bryan and capitalism! (Ap-
plause ) "And Mr. Griffith says that man stands for Socialism
and Labor. I was glad he put on the fighting spirit m the


second r ° un d and took the gloves off, and that he repeated
unconsciously, voting for them \ r PY ’ but ’ P erha P s >
and I do not mmd f^i
dividing th'l' T ' (j ffith s Peaks of the Socialist Labor party
“li tie crowH - b movement > and of Mr. Moroney and his
nurd! wn as c a miscroscopic section of the Socialist
Pt tJ- ' , Well, , we f ee l proud of being even a “ little crowd ”
Fisher ' Mr °G*riffith ° and •>"*. "Cindy
r S i 'J r - (jn mth, and his friends in it. (Applause ) Mr
Ss of he d r, ellberate >y *w„ to the wo“kl
o that he and his party stand for capitalism
and no hmg else. At the first election after the birth of the
1 what did^the^abor
MacLnnell. Bu?sixmen haTTbe vote?
count, and what did they do? Mr Griffith anrl hie m t u
Sodahsi: ticket with Mr. Andy Thomson. Tte
said to the workers : ‘ Throw your votes away on Thomson
an r pu } m Sam - Smith and Donald Mac-
donnell. But the Socialist Labor Party put up the full ticket
for or’indnli hOU fTh t got ° nly a mi «°-opal ™te, they stood
scoff as you like but I have a right to my opinion and 73
Salef Tnd f s°aid Pr TTh e - h <Applause > We’pu” up six
six men for whlmt'recordThem totes-‘The" SodahsLah" 6
fr 2h d,d ‘T' and “ ,at Was the brrthof it. (Appdte )
o !i h ” SPe u S contemptuously of “Mr. Moroney and his little
owd. The Saviour of Mankind—as you call Him was
orn in a manger, and had but a small following. Why does
he not say : Christ and his little crowd?” (A Voice: “ That
is what he would say ”) “Moroney and his little crowd »”
That is his contemptible way of putting it. (Mr. Griffith rose
“ S,> IS In eet V^ nd u aS a j° U !i r° s P eak when there were cries of
Sit down ! He said :“ I only wish it to be put right Mr
Moroney is not doing that. 7 ’ He then sat down.) The fol'
lowing election the Labor party put up one man, and we


( S.L.P.) put up three. We did so that every class conscious
man and woman might vote. The Labor party helped the
Deakin Government to put on the deposit of £ 25, so that if
you did not get one-fifth of the votes polled by the lowest sue-
cessful candidate, you lost your money. Mr. Griffith and his
party supported that. Mr. Griffith also carried the brand of
the Protectionist party, and he had two colleagues accom-
panying him who were not from his party, though his party
largely supported them. (Mr. Griffith : I had no colleagues.
I ran on my own, with no colleagues, and without assistance.)
Well, if not in the Labor party, thev were included to make
up the bunch. (A Voice : “Do you call them the Labor
party?”) No, for you had to give your vote to two capitalist
politicians in order to get the vote for Mr. Griffith counted.
Now, the Socialist Labor Party put up three men, and said :
“ If you believe in the principles of the Socialist Labor Party
we ask you to vote our ticket.” But our men were rejected,
and we lost £l5 in addition. (A Voice : “Good enough for
you.”) (Laughter.) Yes, that is a Labor man for you.
Last time we had not the unions behind us. (A Voice : “ Take
the verdict.”)* The verdict will be recorded, old man, when
you are dead and* forgotten. (Applause.) The; Socialist
Labor Party is going to put up three candidates again, and
•we have asked the Federal Government to remove that de-
posit. And if Fisher remains in power, we will ask him also
to do so. (Flear, hear.) And then you will see whether they
will remove it or whether they will retain it, in order to pre-
vent opposition. Mr. Griffith spoke about the coal-mines in
New Zealand. You heard recently that they were on strike
even in the State mine ; ancTtnat the coal-mmers there, owing
to the beneficent working of the Workmen’s Compensation
Act, were told to undergo ? A medical examination. But they
could not do so because they were suffering from diseases
caused by getting out coal for the State. And yet they say
the State does not sweat. And they say the Labor party does
not divide the workers. But they do bv tieing them up with
separate agreements or boards.
Now,, the Government of to-day is the representative of
the capitalist State, and the latter is run for profit the same
as any other private concern. The worker who enters the
railway service or the tramway service, has to give up his
rights as a citizen. He is prevented from recording his vote
at times, and denied the right to express his political opinions.
And are not the workers there sweated, too? Mr. Johnson,
only last week, told a deputation that he would not "do what
they asked him to do with contractors who were doing work
for the State railways, namely, compel them to pay the union
rates. He said he was there to run the railways' as a com


mercial concern, and he would not do so. In the tramway
strike, were not the workers divided? When the tramway
men came off the cars, it was the most splendid display of
solidarity that Australia has seen. But they were beaten by
the engineers who remained, at work in the power-house sup-
plying the power for the trams. And the Labor party did all
they could to kill the tramway strike. (Mr. Griffith stood up
and said : “That is not true.” Several persons in the audi-
ence at once called out: “Sit down,” and he resumed his
seat.) I say, too, that the Labor party was responsible for
the gaoling of the rockchoppers ; because they supported, in
the first instance, the Arbitration Act, which said that a man
may be fined £lOOO, or in default two months’ imprisonment,
for going on strike, and when Mr. McGowen was asked a
question by Mr. Wade, he said he was always in favor of
carrying out the law. Now, “Hansard” can prove that.
The Labor party is responsible, because they supported that
Act, and for a man to strike now is a criminal offence. (Mr.
Griffith : “It is not fair, in your reply, to break new ground
that I cannot touch.”) Mr. Griffith has accused us, m his reply,
of being the enemies of the working class by dividing them.
I say that that is untrue. If my arguments are not conclu-
sive, I cannot convince you, and you will vote them down ; (
but I can prove what I assert. Ido not stand here to-night
as the advocate of the General Strike. The general strike
would, mean starvation for the working class, and the Socialist
Labor Party does not advocate it. But we do advocate that
the working class should, be organised industrially on the lines
laid down in the Preamble of the Industrial Workers of the
World ; organised for the purpose of casting their ballots in-
telligently for the collective ownership of the means of pro-
duction, distribution, and exchange, and then they will have
the industrial discipline to stay in possession and supervise
those means. The State to-day is a capitalist State, and it
will disappear when we get Socialism. Where we differ fun-
damentally with Mr. Griffith and his friends, is that we say
the State stands for capitalism, and that the working class
are divided by geographical lines. Take Newcastle, for in-
stance. It is one of the greatest industrial centres in Aus-
tralia, and is practically one electorate for the Federal elec-
tions. Every manufacturer;, every professional man, and
ever)/ working class man votes here within the limits of a cer-
tain geographical area. Ihe same thing applies to other
parts of the country, and so you have not an industrial vote —a
definite industrial organisation at the ballot. The system we
believe in is that the woxkers shall vote in the industries in
which they are engaged ; so that, instead of authority com-
ing from above it will come from below. Mr. Griffith and his


party advocate State capitalism, in that the heads of State
services come direct from the capitalist school, and the work-
ers have no vote or say in the appointments. The Socialist
Labor Party say they will elect their directors and officers
from amongst the workers in the industry in which they are
engaged.
In conclusion, I do not particularly desire to hurt the
feelings of anyone here, but I did not set out with the purpose
of trying to please anyone by hiding what I believe to be true ;
and so I have stated what are the tactics and the efforts of the
party to which I belong ; apart from that the great question
of Socialism is racking the world to-day. No other question ;
so affects the human race to-day. And I, as a member of
that army—an insignificant section here, but still a portion of
that army, which is engaged in a world-wide movement—re-
joice in the fact that in every country in the world to-day, the
first of May, in Russia and in other countries of Europe, in
Japan, in the United States, and in Australia, is being observ-
ed as the International Labor Day. (Applause.) If you be-
lieve that one Force and Power made us, and that the world’s
Humanity should be One Brotherhood, then you should be
linked with the Socialist workers of the world, sending your
class greetings and demonstrating your class solidarity to the
workers of the world. (Loud applause.) You are to-day
dependent upon outside forces, and are suffering semi-starva-
tion, because the world’s markets are controlled by capital-
ism. We have in the world to-day the capitalist class nation
and the working.class..nationj but no power in the world can
stop the march of t_hfe Socialist army. It is-for the workers
of the twentieth century to.Tealijie ffpdyalfer their economic
position by organisationjoq (he inclustpa! field as well as on
the political field..-, / Workers pffthe vv'OrlC unite ! You have
a world to gain, and only your chairfs to lose.” (Loud ap-
plause.)
The Chairman appointed Councillor Stenhouse and Mr.
Hoare to act as scrutineers in taking the vote. The Chair-
man then announced: The majority have shown by their right
hand that the members of the Socialist organisation in this
State were not justified in withdrawing from the Labor party.
(Applause.)
The numbers were not given ; but though the majority
supported Mr. Griffith, a large vote was also given in support
of Mr. Moroney.
Mr. T. Britt, of West Wallscnd, proposed a vote of thanks
to Mr. Griffith and Mr. Moroney for their addresses. The
vote was carried with acclamation.
Mr. Griffith, in responding, said : It has been a very in-
teresting debate. I want to say to you men and women—


Take an interest in the burning questions of the day, and I
think that when you have the chance in a few months to record
your votes, you'will remember that the fight is between the
Labor party and the enemies of Labor ; and then you will give
your votes to Andy Fisher and the men who carry his
flag Mr Moroney said : Ido not require any thanks. lam
not used to it. But I want to say this about the vote : You
are entitled to vote how you like ; but we are of just the same
opinion ; and we are going to keep fighting until we get you
round to our view. I have pleasure in moving a vote of thanks
to Mr. Howell for presiding.
The vote was seconded by Mr. Griffith, and earned with
acclamation.




TO REMOVE
COBWEBS
Read “THE PEOPLE”
And the following PAMPHLETS which are Printed and
Published by the Socialist Labor Party, tuul obtainable at
the Headquarters of the Party
Marx Hall, 251 Castlereagh Street, Sydney
or at the Printing and Publishing House
The People Printery, 16 George Street West, Sydney
Socialism, by Scholl McClure Id
Socialism and Churchianity Id
Griffith-Moroney Debate Labor Party v. S.L.P. 3d
What Means this Strike by Daniel DeLeon 2d
Socialism versus Anarchism „ 2d




