

PRESBYTERIANISM
FORM OF CHURCH GOVERNMENT.
Rey. JOHN B. MEHARRY, A.B.
PRICE TWOPENCE.
Ifcforastle-Mgfln-^p*:
FEINTED BY M. S. DODDS, 34, QUAYSIDE.
1880.




THE ADVANTAGES OF PRESBYTERIANISM AS A
FORM OF CHURCH GOVERNMENT.
I Tim., v. 17. —“ Let the elders that rule well be counted worthy of double
honour, especially they who labour in the word and doctrine.”
Acts, xx. 17-28. —“ And from Miletus he sent to Ephesus, and called
the elders of the Church. And when they were come to him, he said unto
them Take heed therefore unto yourselves, and to all the
This Lecture, delivered at a late Ordination of Elders ,
is published at ihe request of the Session of Trinity
Church who thought that in its present shape it would
be a seasonable contribution to the public on a subject but s
little understood.
J.B.M.
government may be sty lea Presbyterian or .Episcopal, but not
Prelatical. Discarding minor and non-essential details, we find
that three great and scriptural principles characterise our
government:— (a) the Supremacy of the Presbytery; (b) the
Representation of the People in the Government of the Church;
and (c) the Unity of the Church as a Visible Organization.
(a) —By the supremacy of the Presbytery we mean that it
is the highest order in the Christian Church, and superior to the
Diaconate to which belong only the financial or secular affairs.




THE ADVANTAGES OF PRESBYTERIANISM AS A
FORM OF CHURCH GOVERNMENT.
I Tim., v. 17. —“ Let the elders that rule well be counted worthy of double
honour, especially they who labour in the word and doctrine.”
Acts, xx. 17-28. —“ And from Miletus he sent to Ephesus, and called
the elders of the Church. And when they were come to him, he said unto
them Take heed therefore unto yourselves, and to all the
flock over the which the Holy Ghost hath made you bishops, to feed the-
Church of God which he hath purchased with his own blood.”
Acts, xvi. 4. “ And as they went through the cities, they delivered
them the decrees for to keep, that were ordained of the apostles and elders
which were at Jerusalem.”
BFOEE proceeding to discuss the advantages of the
Presbyterian form of Church government, it is
SriryHl necessary for me to explain its main features and
principles. Our Church derives her name Presbyterian from
the fact that the administration of her spiritual affairs is
committed solely to the care of presbyters or elders, who in
regard of their office are also called bishops. Hence her
government may be styled Presbyterian or Episcopal, but not
Prelatical. Discarding minor and non-essential details, we find
that three great and scriptural principles characterise our
government:— (a) the Supremacy of the Presbytery; (b) the
Eepresentation of the People in the Government of the Church;
and (c) the Unity of the Church as a Visible Organization.
(a) —By the supremacy of the Presbytery we mean that it
is the highest order in the Christian Church, and superior to the
Diaconate to which belong only the financial or secular affairs.


I am aware that the parity of the elders is often exhibited as
a leading feature of our system; this, however, seems to me but
a. corollary of a more important principle, for if the presbyters
be supreme, and be alone responsible for the administration of
spiritual matters, then it follows they are officially equal.
Now a Presbytery may have charge of a congregation only,
in whioh case it is called a Session, and is composed of the
officiating minister and elders chosen by the people; or of a
number of congregations, each of which is represented by its
minister and one of its ruling elders, and is then called a
Presbytery in the stricter sense; or, lastly, under the name of
a Synod or Assembly, and composed of their ministers and
representative ruling elders, it may have the oversight of all
the congregations in a country. Thus it is evident that
the Synod and Presbytery differ from the Session only in
extent of jurisdiction—that they are concentric circles though
of different radii and circumferences. But whether the Presby-
tery have charge of one or many congregations its jurisdiction
is supreme; there is no other order in the Church superior
to it. And here it may bo expedient to say, once for all,
that we regulate our ecclesiastical polity as well as our creed,
not by principles of expediency, but by the Word of God.
Our contention is that the two orders of office-bearers, deacons
and presbyters, alone are of divine origin, and as such can
neither be disfranchised nor over-ruled by any third order
which owes its existence to human invention, or the force of
circumstances. We can give proof of the establishment in
the Apostolic Church of the Diaconate and the Presbyterate
for the administration of financial and spiritual affairs respect-
ively ; but we cannot discover similar testimony to the estab-
lishment of a third order exercising jurisdiction over both,
and in possession of spiritual privileges that rightly belong to
neither. Nay more; we are prepared to show that the same
persons are indiscriminately styled elders or bishops, and that
their functions are the highest that are discharged in the


Christian Church. Take the second extract I have read as
the text for this evening’s lecture. Can there he any reasonable
doubt that the persons cited to meet the apostle were elders ?
That these, he said, the Holy Ghost had made bishops
( tVj akokovs ) oyer the flock ? And that the duty to which
he urged them was that of feeding the Church of God P
Words could not make it plainer that their rank is that of
bishops, and their duty that of pastors. Happily, however,
this is no longer a matter requiring stubborn argument;
this redoubt is ours by the frank admission of the more learned
and less bigoted of our opponents. Here is Dean Alford’s
view of the protectionist policy adopted in this (I am glad to
say) unique instance by King James’ translators:
English version has hardly dealt fairly in this case with the
sacred text in rendering cttutkottovs ‘ overseers ’; whereas it
ought as in all other places to have been bishops, that the
fact of elders and bishops having been originally and apostolically
synonymous might be apparent to the ordinary English reader,
which now it is not.” He is even more explicit in his com-
ments on I Tim., iii. 1.; “We may perhaps retain the word
bishops if it be clearly understood that the office here men-
tioned was really nothing in common with our bishopricks.
These bishops were simply presbyters.” [How to Study the
New Testament.] Conybeare and Howson declare:—“These
terms are used in the New Testament as equivalent.” I
might multiply quotations from Bishop Lightfoot to the same
purpose; but I shall content myself for the present with the
following:—“ It is a fact now generally recognised by theo-
logians of all shades of opinion, that in the language of the
New Testament the same officer in the Church is called
indifferently ‘bishop’ and ‘elder’ or ‘ presbyter.’ [Epist. to
Philipp., p. 95.] In fact the note from which I have quoted,
and his subsequent dissertation on “ The Christian Ministry”
appended to the same commentary may be regarded as an
unanswerable vindication of Presbyterianism as the Apostolic


mode of Church, government, and an appeal for the extension
of toleration to the Episcopate which (to use the significant
words of the bishop) ‘ ‘ was formed not out of the Apostolic
order by localisation, but out of the Presbyterial by elevation.”
I think after this admission we may naturally expect that a
fair application of the fifth commandment will secure for our
system an amount of filial respect to which it has been for
some time a stranger in England. If it were needful or to my
purpose to-night further to prove the scripturalness of the
principle I have enunciated, I might mention the frequent
interchange of the terms elder and bishop, together with the
fact that the moral and mental qualifications for office are the
same in both. Thus in Titus, i, 5,6, 7, we find Paul declaring:
“ For this cause left I thee in Crete that thou shouldest
ordain elders in every city as I had appointed thee; if any be
blameless for a bishop must he blameless .” Only the
most reckless and fanatic obstinacy can resist this Apostolic
syllogism. Could anything be more absurd than this appeal,
supposed to be addressed to Titus on the prelatical principle P
Let the elders be blameless for bishops must be blameless,
although elders and bishops are not the same. What obligation
could rest upon the lower office to possess as a condition of ordi-
nation thereunto a qualification belonging to the higher ? Does
it follow that because a head master in a board school must
possess certain literary qualifications his subordinates must
possess the same ? If the head of a mercantile firm declare;—
“Every buyer must be sober for every servant in my house
must be sober,” would we not all understand him thus to imply
that every buyer was a servant P The missing premiss of this
Apostolic enthymeme is one no prelatist can consistently supply,
for it is—every elder is a bishop. The practical benefit of this
principle we shall soon consider, as well as the sad effects of its
non-assertion by any Church; but in the meantime we present
this dilemma to our opponents:—The Presbytery is either the
supreme executive, or it is not. If it is, by what authority are


its rights escheated to another, and that a human order. If it
is not, then its superior must be an indescribable residuum ot
the apostolate, contrary to the declaration of your most erudite
bishop. But even were the latter “ horn ” seriously accepted we
should make bold to enquire, where is authority to be found for
this process of official sublimation, or in what respects the apos-
tolate stripped of its supernatural character and qualifications is
superior to that office which we hold to be supreme ?
( B .) —The second principle characteristic of our government
is the share accorded to the people in our Church courts. Our
eldership is a mixed order, wherein the laity, as such, is fairly
represented in the person of the ruling elder. Our first text
furnishes us with a specimen of the distinction, not perhaps so
decisive in itself as when confirmed by a comparative view of
the government of the Church of God at all times. Presby-
terianism is not the neophyte some would have you believe;
its history is in substance that of the Church in all dispensa-
tions. Moses adopted it by the advice of his father-in-law
in the desert; elders joined with the priests and Levites in
the government of the Jewish Church; Paul making mention
in Romans xii, 4—B, of the “many members which have
not the same office,” enumerates not only “ministers” and
“teachers,” but “rulers,” and in I Corin. xii, 28, expressly
includes “ governments" among “the diversities of ministries.”
For some time after the Apostolic age, the elders joined with
the teachers in the government; and even in the fourth century
we find Hilary of Rome saying:—“ The Synagogue, and after-
wards the Church had elders, without whose council nothing
was done in the Church. By what neglect this has become
obsolete I know not, unless perhaps by the sloth, or rather
pride of the teachers, whilst they alone wish to appear some-
thing.” That Hilary was right in his conjecture is proved by
ecclesiastical history, for the keen eye of a despotic hierarchy
saw clearly that the people could not be enslaved, and they


unduly exalted, while ruling elders were continued in the
government of the Church. Hence prelacy and geminal popery
joined hands to efface this lingering landmark of the people’s
rights. On the other hand, our forefathers have left us this
entail of liberty which they bought with blood, and which
(we are sorry to say) a few of their descendants would sell, and
have sold for what has bought the priests “ the potter’s field.”
In all the actions of our Church the people’s hand may he seen;
in all her utterances their voices heard. In the administration
of their affairs, in the carrying out of their Master’s laws, they
have as clear rights and privileges as under the freest and safest
political constitution; their civic rights are not a whit more
secure than their ecclesiastical. The government of the Church
is committed neither to a tyrannical hierarchy on the one hand,
nor to an irresponsible and purse-proud democracy on the
other; but to a body, the two factors of which are (without
being independent) mutually helpful and respectful.
(c.) —The last principle, that of Unity, even in an outward
organization, we avow as scriptural, and tending to good order.
This unity is secured by representation, for each congregation
is represented in the Session, each Session in the Presbytery,
and each Presbytery in the Synod. This grouping together of
the various congregations scattered over a country is not by
way of a voluntary compliance with Church etiquette, but in
obedience to a divine obligation, and under the conviction that
greater force, dignity, and importance are given to our “ actings
and proceedings ” in our unified capacity.
The Church at Jerusalem can hardly have been a single
congregation, considering the “myriads” of converts it in-
cluded, while in later times the legislative authority of a repre-
sentative assembly over subordinate congregations seems to find
its precedent in the proceedings recorded in the fifteenth chapter
of Acts.
These, then, in brief are the leading principles of our


polity which once enjoyed the honor of a formal recognition
by the English people as national and established. Surely that
cannot he regarded as an exotic which was unanimously
adopted by both Houses of Parliament [Sept., 1642] in a
resolution which at the same time declared “ that government
by bishops was inconvenient and ought to be taken away.”*
The standard of our principles, the Westminster Confession
of Faith, as its name declares is a native of the soil, and is
in substantial harmony with the Articles of the Established
Church, yea, of the reformed Churches generally; while Canon
Ryle, speaking for the evangelicals of his Church, says:—“We
steadfastly refuse to believe that Presbyterian orders are not
valid orders.”
We have no wish to flatter ourselves, but we commend to
the attention of our fellow-countrymen (whose spiritual and
moral interests alone we desire to help) the following pregnant
statements of Dean Stanley, in reference to a branch of our
Presbyterian family: “The Scottish Church is not only
Christian, Catholic, National, and Protestant—it is also Presby-
terian. There was a time when it used to be the prevailing belief
of English divines that Episcopacy, in the sense of the necessity
of one presiding officer over every Christian community, reached
back to the first origin of the Christian society. This belief, in
the enlarged atmosphere of more exact scholarship and more enlight-
ened candour, has now been abandoned. The most learned of all
the living bishops of England, whose accession to the great see of
Durham has been recently welcomed by the whole Church of
England with a rare unanimity and enthusiasm, has, with his
characteristic moderation and erudition, proved beyond dispute,
in a celebrated essay attached to his edition of “St. Paul’s
Epistle to the Philippians,” that the early constitution of the
Apostolic Churches of the first century was not that of a single
bishop, but of a body of pastors indifferently styled bishops or
• Hallam’s Const. Hist., Yol. 11, 162, note.


presbyters, and that it was not till the very end of the Apostolic
age that the office which we now call Episcopacy gradually and
slowly made its way in the Churches of Asia Minor; that
Presbytery was not a later growth out of Episcopacy, but that
Episcopacy was a later growth out of Presbytery; that the
office which the Apostles instituted was a kind of rule, not of
bishops, but of presbyters; and that even down to the third cen-
tury presbyters as well as bishops possessed the poiver of nominating
and consecrating bishops. .
When, therefore, at the time of the Eeformation the reformers
adopted in this country the exclusive jurisdiction of presbyters,
they were reverting both to the earliest form of ecclesiastical
government which the New Testament affords, and also to those
large exemptions to Episcopal rule which the Middle Ages never
relinquished. [Speech before the Glasgow Society of the Sons
of the Clergy, 3rd. April, 1879.]
We are speaking, therefore, within the line of our right,
even as allowed by our opponents, when we declare our polity
to be Scriptural and Apostolic. A priori, it should possess
advantages above those of any human system, however carefully
elaborated, “ because the foolishness of God is wiser than men.”
What, then, are the advantages secured by this ecclesiastical
system ?
I.—lt secures liberty: the liberty, that is to say, of both
ruler and ruled, for with superior and unprejudiced courts of
appeal no violence can be done to the liberty of either. We all
know how the temptation to despotism besets the ruler; while
the ruled, on the other hand, may demand not liberty which is
always consistent with law, but license which is the subversion
of law. Again, if all power be vested in the minister the people
become enslaved; while if this power be vested in the people
the minister degenerates into a tool. On either side of us lies
an extreme —a people having too much power, or none at all.
Let us preserve the mean. Eecent disclosures of ministerial life


show that the people can be as despotic as any individual; what
is wanted is a check to both by such an adjustment of the lay
and clerical elements in Church life that there shall be a liberty
consistent with rightful restraint, and an authority consistent
with reasonable freedom. Now this liberty may be asserted in
action or thought; but it is evident that the very nature of the
Church, as a Christian society, requires some bond of union in
the shape of a standard of opinion and laws of action. In har-
mony with, and by means of these the deeds and decisions of
our Church are regulated ; and it is competent for any member
to move in a constitutional way for the setting aside of what is
considered obsolete or offensive, or for the adoption of whatever
is useful and edifying. Greater liberty than this no man
has a right to ask, for in no well-regulated society can individual
opinion or action be allowed to rule the general. We think our
Church will in this respect compare favorably with any other.
No congregation is forced to accept a minister, but has the
liberty of choosing him and its elders, and of making its voice
heard on any topic affecting itself or the whole Church. Out-
siders may object that our creed is narrow ; but it is the creed
of the people. It is, too, capable of being reduced to a few
simple principles which find a place in the various confessions of
Christendom, and are powerful enough to abide the test of a
division with any other, while our polity is in the main adopted
by more than a half of the Christian population of the globe.
Our motto may fairly be described as “A free ministry and a
free people.” No minister is responsible to his congregation or
Session; while in the event of being offended they are not
without redress from the Presbytery to whom he owes submis-
sion. The practical benefit of this arrangement is patent to
all—it prevents caprice on the part of the people, and despotism
on the part of the minister.
2. —It preserves the maintenance of discipline. Unfortu-
nately every Church has members upon whom the exercise of a


kind and firm discipline is necessary for the sake of its own
character and purity. Not long ago a clerygman declaredto
me that discipline in his Church had become effete; and it is a
notorious fact, brimful of shame, that the excommunicated and
those that are the objects of a just discipline in one Church
have at all times a refugium peccatorum open to them in the
welcome embrace of another. All who have at heart the purity
of Christ’s Kingdom and the personal benefit of the disciplined
will deplore this fact; will themselves guard against it; and
allow no sectarian differences to prompt them to take a mean
and sinful advantage of the dutiful action of a sister Church.
A deplorable instance of the degeneracy if not the cessation
of ecclesiastical discipline is to be found in the Established
Church of this country. We know how unwelcome such a
charge is to those affected thereby; so lest we should be supposed
to have “ set aught down in malice,” we shall quote from an
address delivered last year by the Bishop of Oxford, at a meeting
of the Church Congress: —“ It was only within this last century
that the courts of the English Church had ceased in practice to
deal with lay offenders against her law. Unfortunately, they had
long ceased to deal impartially with rich and poor, and it was
found impossible at last to maintain a jurisdiction over wrong doers
from which the wealthy offender was by general consent exempt.
There were, unhappily, some clergymen, though few in
number, notoriously chargeable with such sins as drunkenness,
incontinence, or total neglect of duty— men totally unfit for the
Christian ministry and a scandal to the Church: yet against
these offenders commonly no prosecutors, no witnesses appeared,
or, if they did appear, the tradition of the courts seemed to assure
the accused a favorable construction of their worst vices, and
lenient sentence even when the worst charges had been proved.”
The cause of this is not far to seek. Where justice has to
wait upon the tardy movements of a cumbrous and complicated
legal machinery we may expect to find such a scandalous ano-


maly, and especially if tlie Church, do not carry her own keys.
We invite a comparison, and fearlessly await a verdict. We
have within ourselves a healthy system of discipline, and power
to execute it righteously. Quick as the measure or the time
demands we can give our verdict without precipitancy; and be
our judgments however hastily delivered they yield to the touch
no feeling of the heat of velocity. The right of appeal from
one court to another and a higher gives every member a guar-
antee that neither undue haste nor fatal delay shall injure his
cause.
But if the rulers are empowered to deal with offenders,
these in turn enjoy the protection that belongs to them. Here
we think a decided advantage lies on our side. The accused
enjoys pre-eminently (thanks to the unity of the Church) an
immunity from local or personal prejudice which is too often
found in trials before mere congregational tribunals, from which
through a variety of causes a fair verdict may not be got.
He may appeal to higher courts so constituted as to preclude a
fore-gone conclusion on his case, and give him a dispassionate
judgment framed in honour and in truth. Even at that point
where it might be supposed discipline would become relaxed
through members leaving one congregation for another, they
Note.—lt is a matter of regret that some members on leaving a town or
district betray great carelessness in not asking for their certificates for a
considerable time after they have left, or it may be in not presenting them
to their new Session at the earliest opportunity. For this there is no
excuse, except in places where there is no Presbyterian Church; and we
earnestly ask members to beware of this neglect as it often leads to serious
declension from the faith. We fear we must plead guilty as office-bearers
to having contributed unconsciously to the defection to be found more par-
ticularly among adherents, by not giving these latter certificates of attend-
ance entitling them to be received as in some way connected with us. This
defect must, and will be remedied. Meantime we exhort both classes on
arriving in a strange place to seek out immediately their own Church, and
be at once enrolled as in the congregation they left.


do not escape control, for they take with them certificates entit-
ling them to be received into membership. On presenting these,
they enter under the supervision of another Session, having in the
interim been still retained under the jurisdiction of the Church.
3. —It is eminently adapted to conserve the faith in all its
force and purity. Think for a moment of the moral effect of
having the same gospel truths preached by twenty thousand
clergymen every sabbath. [See statistics in Eeport of Pan
Presbyterian Council for 1877.] What a comfort to our people
to think that let their lot be cast where it may no false gospel
shall grate upon their ears; that an educated ministry have
spontaneously agreed with a harmony testifying to the presence
of the Holy Spirit in their hearts to preach the gospel, which is
one the wide world over ! We know how this very union of
thought and heart is a stone of stumbling and rock of offence
to some. But to whom ? Largely to those whose opinions are
so individualistic as to forbid the prospect of their ever becoming
general, and who cannot obtain for their crudities an accept-
ance beyond their coterie. But, on the other hand, what hope
is there of the triumph of error among a community whose
parts are all trained in the same faith and government P For
rolling back the tide of the error of the Church of Eome what
system is better suited ? Every one of her distinctive positions
is under our range and open to our attack. She is united, so
are we; her creed is one, so is ours; while on ground which
others have yielded to their hurt we stand immovable. We cut
at the very root of her hierarchy, for we assert the supremacy
of the Presbytery, and abjure her priesthood as an outrage upon
the Mediatorship of Christ. Wo count her Apostolical succession
a figment, and assert that the Apostles, as such, had no succes-
sors. Thus at every point where she has left the Word of God
we stand ready to resist.
But, farther, it is surely something for a Church to wear a
name that is an index of what she is and what she believes.


Our faith, is no quicksand. Our ministers profess at their ordi-
nation their free belief in a definite creed, and that creed they
preach all over the land. Our Church is neither a Noah’s Ark
nor a Babel. And yet you will not find a nobler recognition of
the brotherhood of faith anywhere than in our definition of the
visible Church. “ The visible Church, which is also catholic or
universal under the Gospel (not confined to one nation, as before
under the law) consists of all those throughout the world that
profess the true religion, together with their children.” “ The
purest Churches under heaven are subject both to mixture and
error.” Thus are we enabled while holding a definite, because a
strictly logical, creed to exhibit a charitable sentiment not sur-
passed by the followers of the broadest school of theology. Our
confessional framework is the measure and criterion of our
opinion, not of our fellowship or love; it encloses a spirit
which it can no more restrain than the body of a man can his
soul.
4. —Presbyterianism appears in the light of recent and re-
mote history as the point of ecclesiastical equilibrium towards
which various Churches are showing a manifest tendency in
the hope of rest and security. This is no optimist’s delusion;
it is but a plain induction from well-observed facts.
Quite recently a most influential branch of the Methodist
Church has admitted the laity to a share in her government,
and we believe she will find the alliance will work well.
Making all allowance for the disclaimed authority and juris-
diction, is not the Congregational Union a confession that visible
and representative unity is the desideratum of modern Church
life?
But, perhaps, the most remarkable instance afforded in
modern history is that of the late Established Church of
Ireland. A thorough reformer might desire the removal of
certain hampering conditions put upon concessions to liberty in
that body, but everyone who rejoices in the progress of truth


and freedom must hail with delight the efforts successfully made,
and these, too, largely through the directive force of a perse-
vering laity, for the assertion of the popular right to speech
and action in her councils. They have curtailed the power of
the Episcopate; they have resolved that the General Synod
shall consist of 208 clerical representatives and 416 lay repre-
sentatives —that is two laymen for every one clergyman; they
have virtually granted the principle of popular election, for the
select vestry is to he chosen by members of the Church, and the
people are to have a voice in the choice of the parish minister.
But the manner in which they effectually clipped the wings of
Sacerdotalism is beyond all praise. That obnoxious word
“priest ” has at last been rolled out by an authoritative expo-
sition into presbyter, and by a majority of 261 this Church
declares that the word is not indicative of a sacrificial order.
Even an intermediate court called a Diocesan Synod, and cor-
responding to our Presbytery, has been formed. Thus in the
Church as in the world we find old fashions that have sunk
from view upon a tooth of the wheel of time turn up again—
for “ that which hath been is that which shall be.” How much
of this improvement is due to Presbyterian influence and
propagandism it would be difficult to say; but it will not
savor of vain-glory if I assert that our uncompromising declar-
ation of Scripture on this subject is beginning to bear fruit.
God grant our ministers faithfulness to preach, and our people
steadfastly to receive the truth, despite the Demas-spirit of
modern society, and inquisitorial efforts to introduce among us
godless caste patronised by Mammon !
5. —The last advantage I shall mention is one that more
immediately concerns the subjects of this realm, and it is that
our Church polity is parallel to our national. A system which
weds together the Church and State, not by the mechanical
contrivance of establishment (the ring of a false sacrament)
but by the natural one of congruity, is worthy of a nation’s


study and kind treatment. So far we kayo been waiting at the
harbour’s mouth for the favour of the tide which must flow as
for two hundred years it has ebbed. We are no foreigners.
Our polity, as we have seen, has been already adopted and
established by law as national; our faith is indigenous to the
soil. We fly a British colour though we have crossed the
Receive us! “If there be any virtue, if there be any praise ”in
the model of your constitution, wo think you owe us, by the
appraise of history, something for it. The minimum of your
obligations is a pledge to “ think on these things;” and if you
find with us as strong safeguards for your religious as you else-
where have for your civil liberty and order, we claim for our
system not toleration (for before that door no freeman should
be found begging) but adoption, and confidence, and support.
You are content to be governed in this country only by
your representatives in parliament—men of your free choice 5
you think it no hardship to accept as obligatory a decree or law
emanating from the majority though against your individual
taste and opinion; you do not confound the rulers with the
ruled, although you insist that the former, including even
Royalty itself, shall be answerable to the latter from whom
they received their position. The principle that is good in
Westminster Senate cannot be bad in the Abbey. From
Westminster came the creed and polity we offer you; and we
challenge you to examine the parallel. Put before your minds
John’s Magna Charta, and William’s Bill of Rights; you have
but to translate these into ecclesiastical vernacular to discover
our meaning.
I know that in thus laying emphasis on the importance
of government I am colliding with the opinions of some who
believe that Church polity is the natural self-assertion of
Church life, and is rather to be evolved out of circumstances
than adopted from revelation. But these seem to forget that
the Founder of the Church surely knew her potentialities and


her needs, and therefore must have knoivn at least the best
method of expressing and protecting them. He that made her
soul did also make her face; and between these two there is
a pre-established harmony.
But the truth is more serious issues are attached to this
subject than appear at first sight. History lifts up her voice
to declare that victims have been demanded and offered upon
this altar. What, therefore, has cost us sacrifice is not to be
veiled from sight to gratify the listless apathy of those who
have never been priests in the temple of duty. It is not because
of its having many advantages alone that I plead to-night for
a prayerful and conscientious study of our system; but because
I believe it is the only natural and scriptural habiliment of a
supernatural life, which commends itself by giving, like the
bark of a tree, protection with freedom for expansion; and
because it asserts a suggestive harmony between the laws of
nature and of grace, in a subordination of the parts to an
organic unity of health, beauty, power, and profit.


. %


