

The Netherby Gazette,
A JOURNAL PUBLISHED ON BOARD THE SHIP
NEIHERBY,
CAPTAIN OWENS,
BOUND FROM LONDON TO BRISBANE;
Edited by Messrs. H. D. vincent and Townsend, Saloon Passengers.
WITH AN
ACCOUNT OF THE SHIPWRECK ON THE
WESTERN SIDE OF KING’S ISLAND,
(In LAT. 39° 53' SOUTH, ON THE 14TH JULY, 1866, AND THE MIRACULOUS
ESAPE OF All ON BOARD, CONSISTING OF 452 SOULS AND NARRATIVE
OF OCCURRENCE ON THAT ISLAND, UNTIL NOBLY AND RUMANELY
RELIEVED BY THE VICTORIAN GOVERNMENT, AND EVENTUALLY DROUGHT
ON TO MELBBOURNE BY H.M C STEAMERS “VICTORIA" AN D "PHAROS.”
W. B. STEPHENS,
BOOKSELLER AND STATIONER ,
15 COLLINS STREET WEST,
MEL BOURNE.


The Netherby Gazette,
A JOURNAL PUBLISHED ON BOARD THE SHIP
NETHERBY,
CAPTAIN OWENS,
BOUND FROM LONDON TO BRISBANE;
CONTAINING AN
ACCOUNT OF THE SHIPWRECK ON THE
WESTERN SIDE OF KING’S ISLAND,
In Lat. 39° 53' South,
On the 14tii July, 1866, and the Miraculous Escape of all on
Board consisting of 452 Sour.s, and a Narrative of Occurrences
on that Island, until nobly and humanely relieved by the
Victorian Government, and eventually brought on to Mel-
bourne by H.M.C. Steamers “Victoria” and -
EDITED BY
MESSRS. H. D. VINCENT AND TOWNSEND,
Saloon Passengers.
w. 13. STEPHENS,
BOOKSELLER AND STATIONER ,
15 COLLINS STREET WEST,
MELBOURNE.




THE NETHERBY GAZETTE.
“ Reason contents me” —“ Ex nihilo nihil fit.”
THURSDAY, 3rd MAY, 1866.
INTRODUCTORY.
We now bring before you all the first Number of a Paper which
we intend to publish weekly. It is entitled “ The Nefherby
Gazette , in honour of the ship in which we are crossing the
deep. We have chosen two mottos—the first, “ Reason contents
me,” because it is that of the ship Netherly , and also as it is very
suitable to our position, for we hope our friends will be reason-
able, and not expect too much from us, as this is our first attempt
to edit a paper. And further, it may be useful to us all if we
bear the same in mind, and exercise a reasonable and contented
spirit with whatever may befall us when we arrive in the country
of our adoption. The second motto is—“ Tlx nihilo nihil Jit.”
This we consider also very appropriate ; for if we make an effort
to start a paper for the benefit of all on board, with nothing
bearing any interest, amusement, or instruction, it would, as a
matter of course, die a natural death; but, if we are sup-
ported by the community at large, by their endeavouring
to the best of their abilities to supply us with the
daily gossip, mishaps, and other events, which would afford
amusement and instruction to all, we hope to be able to con-
tinue the same until our arrival at Brisbane. We must, how-
ever, impress upon the minds of those who will lend us their aid,
to condense as much as possible the matter they intend to favor
us with; for, as all must be written, copied, and re-copied, it will
necessarily entail much labor and consume much time. We
must further mention that all correspondence containing personal
remarks and unreasonable complaints will be strictly rejected;
for we do not wish our paper to become the medium of discord,
discontent, or the engendering of unpleasant feelings between par-
ties. With these preliminary remarks, we make our bow, and
commence our


WEEKLY SUMMARY.
The ship Netherby, one of the Black Ball line of clipper packets,
hound for Moreton Bay, Queensland, Australia, left the East
India Docks, London, on the 31st March, 1866, commanded by
Cantain 0. Owens, and having on board 303 passengers under
the Surgeon-Superintendent, M. H. Webster, Esq. In tie
evening;' of the same day she anchored oft Gravesend to
undergo a final Government inspection. On the 3rd April
we left Gravesend at 6 p.m., in tow of the steamer City of London,
making the best of our way to Plymouth, at which port we were
to call, to make up the full complement of our passengers. On
the 4th April, at 4 p.m., being off Dungeness, the steamer left
ns and, after a pleasant run down channel, we dropped anchor in
Plymouth Sound, at 9 a.m. on the 6th April We remained at
Plymouth until the 13th April, when we sailed for our destination,
with 413 passengers and 38 sailors as ship’s crew, having on board,
all told, 451 souls. At the commencement of our passage we
encountered adverse winds and heavy cross seas. Passed the
Lizard on the 15th April, and the Scilly Islands the same evening,
passing to the north of them. During that night experienced
strong gales from the W.S.W. and a heavy sea, which made the
ship labour considerably, and many of the passengers to wish they
had wings to fly back to Old England again.
16th April.—Wind and weather as above.
17th April The wind being more moderate, and less sea on,
our passengers attempted to make use of their understandings;
and behm able to move about without much inconvenience, be-
sieged thecook in his citadel, the galley and no respite was given
him until their craving appetites were fully satisfied, after their
temporary fast. 7
18th April—Light winds from the S.W.; working to wind-
ward. Lat. 49.18 N.; long. 7.2 W.
19th April—Wind still W.S.W., as if nailed to that point;
weather squally. Split foretopgallant sail. Lat. 49.17 ; long.
9.27 W.
20th April —Brisk breezes from W.S.W. Carried away mar-
tingale. Lat. 46.16 ; long. 7.44 W.
21st April—Light winds, S.W. and W.S.W., with frequent
calms. Lat. 46.37 ; long. 8.25 W.
22nd April—Eirst part, light and variable. At 10 p.m., breeze
sprung up from S.E. Lat. 44.24 N.; long. 10.30 W. _
23rd April. —Eirst part, strong breezes from S.E.; during the
nio-ht the wind shifted, in a heavy squall, to the westward. Split
some of our sails. Lat. 41.53 N.; long. 13.47 W.
24th April—Winds W.S.W., S.W., and N.W.; strong breezes,
with a heavy cross sea. Working to windward to the best ad-
•
25th April. —Strong squalls, with rain; taking in and making
sail, according to circumstances; ship labouring heavily. Lat. 40.21
N,; long. 14.43 W.


26th April.—Moderate breezes; wind AY.S.AY. to S.S.AY. Lat.
39.24 N.; long. 14.07 AY.
27th April. —Moderate breezes from SAY.; during the night
vivid lightning and squally.
28th April.—Strong squalls and rain. Lat. 36.58 N ; long.
12.31 AY.
29th April.—Strong winds, and heavy squalls ; vivid lightning ;
SAY. and AY.S.AY. Divine service was performed in the morning
on the poop, and in the evening in the second cabin, the weather
being showery. A part of the service was chanted, and hymns
were sung, accompanied by the harmonium, which tended much
to give it a good effect. A Sunday school was opened this day at
3 p.m.
30th April. —Strong AY.S.AY. winds, with frequent and dan-
gerous squalls; ship labouring heavily; Porpoises were seen in
numbers, some of the sailors endeavoured to harpoon them, but
did not succeed; a large whale was also seen. Lat. 35,10 N.;
long. 13.19 AY.
1st May.—-First part, strong winds, AY.N.AY.; violent squalls
with passing showers ; at 8 a.m., set all sails ; smooth water.
Lat. 32.12. N.; long. 15.9 AY.
2nd May. —Moderate breezes from AY.N.AY.; smooth water.
Lat. 29.50. N.; long. 14.50. AY.
3rd May. —Set all studding sails ; passed one of the Canary
Islands at a distance of about 8 miles. It was a beautiful bright
morning ; the houses in the different towns and hamlets, situated
on eminences, were distinguished with the naked eye; the
majestic Teneriffe could also be seen towering in its splendour,
with its snow-capped head above the clouds, over the island of
Canaria. The passengers amused themselves, some by playing at
quoits, others by pinning pieces of paper on each others backs,
with the words ; —“For sale, cheap, only 6d.,” which latter caused a
good deal of laughter. The brass baud enlivened ns with many
sweet airs in the evening, after having been silent for many days.
Two flocks of birds were seen flying in Indian file, which gave
the appearance of kites with long streaming tails.
DOMESTIC OCCUREENCES.
DEATH.
On the 22nd April, Lucy, daughter of Mr. William and Mrs. Caroline
Skerman, aged 4 years.
CORRESPONDENCE.
To the Editor of the Netherhy Gazette.
Dear Sir, — Through the medium of your valuable paper I
wish to call the attention of all to a nuisance of no slight im-
portance, and, if possible, to seek redress. To-day, by order,
somebody’s pigs have been placed on deck ; the stench arising
from these animals is most pestiferous, and needs no description.
In London, and, I believe, in other cities and towns in England,


these animals are not allowed to be kept within 30 feet of any
dwelling. It is necessary to maintain cleanliness and prevent
unnecessary smells ; and in our ship of 450 souls we have no
chance if disease overtakes us. I feel convinced that steps will
be taken to remove this, if you will insert my letter in your
paper. I regret that the first number should contain a com-
plaint.
I remain, Sir, Tours,
AN INTERMEDIATE PASSENGER.
April 28.
To the Editor of the Netherby Gazette.
Dear Sir, —It has come under my notice that it would be a
great boon to the safety of the passengers, if the persons who
sit on the ladders leading to the poop would confine themselves
to one side, and leave the other side free for those who wish to
go up and down, without running the risk of hurting themselves
or those who are seated.
I remain, Tours truly,
A SECOND-CLASS PASSENGER.
To the Editor of the Netherby Gazette.
Dear Mr, Editor—I am delighted to hear that you have
started a newspaper on board our good ship, and intend to con-
duct it during our passage to Queensland. I shall be happy to
assist you in every way in my power, and will send you a weekly
report of the sanitary condition of the ship, in which we are all
interested. Many on board, and most of our dear friends at
home, have most erroneous ideas regarding the life on board;
they generally believe it is nothing but a scene of privation,
misery, and monotony; in fact, little better than a prison life. It
has always been my endeavour to prove that even a voyage across
the dreadful ocean can be made pleasant and agreeable. The
first and most essential principle to make a shipboard life agree-
able and comfortable, is strict discipline ; however hard and dis-
agreeable the execution of the many rules and regulations may
be to a good many, I hope that every one will bear in mind that
we cannot do without discipline, but more especially in our small
republic on board, which is confined within* so narrow limits, and
that all laws are made for the general good. Secondly, our
attention must be particularly directed to cleanliness. I cannot
impress too much upon you all how very much depends upon the
strict submission to all regulations regarding the promotion of
health ; sickness once located is not easily got rid of, especially
in hot weather. Thirdly, the great secret of being happy, is to
try to make ourselves contented, cheerful, kind, and obliging to
each other ; to take an active part in all amusements which may
be established ; and I can assure every one that at the end of our
passage, when we part, possibly to meet no more, all will look
back with pleasure on the days spent on board the good ship
Netherby.


I am very sorry at so early a date, to have to report the death
of a little girl in the steerage, from convulsions.
Those of the passengers who have been suffering from sea
sickness are recovering, and I hope will continue to improve.
The mean temperature for last week was 56 deg.
Wishing your paper every success,
I remain, dear Sir,
Tours faithfully,
MARSHALL H. WEBSTER,
April 30. Surgeon Superintendent.
To the Editor of the Netherhy Gazette.
Dear Sir. — I hereby congratulate you on the first issue of the
Netherhy Gazette , and trust that your health and strength will be
spared to continue from week to week, the publication of your
valuable paper, and that the gentlemen of the Second Cabin, as
well as the other passengers, will strengthen your hands by their
timely contributions. lam animated with zeal for its success
and prosperity, as it cannot fail of being a source of instruction
and amusement to the passengers generally; besides cementing
them together in mutual friendship, kindness, and good will, as
one happy family, whilst sojourning together towards that distant
land of their adoption. A summary of the ship’s log being in-
serted in another column, I will not trespass on your valuable
space, but merely state, for the information of the passengers,
that our good ship is this day in lat. 27.25. N. ; long. 15.10. W.
Experiencing so much adverse winds in the commencement of
the passage is rather discouraging, but I trust that prosperous
gales are at our heels, after a salutary exercise of our patience.—
Adopting the old adage—“ Never despair,”
I remain, Dear Sir,
Tours faithfully,
O. OWENS,
Commander.
To the Editor of the Netherhy Gazette.
Dear Sir. —We regret to hear that a young gentleman, sup-
posed to be closely allied to the noble families of Howard and
Brooke, is seriously indisposed. Professional men say it is
disease of the tongue, and generally incurable; at all events, the
last bulletin announced that it was still wagging.
I am, Dear Sir, yours sincerely,
A GENTLEMAN OF THE SECOND CABIN.
To the Editor of the Netherhy Gazette.
Dear Sir,— Lately the second-class passengers have not been
permitted to walk on the windward side of the poop ; well, if
they could have the leeward side to themselves it would be all
right; but instead of that it is blocked up by the school and
steerage passengers, so that they cannot move about comfortably.


They dare not go on the forecastle, for if they did, they would be
tied up and have to pay four or five shillings to be let off. They
cannot go on the main-deck, as that is occupied by the steerage,
so I now appeal to the public, to say where they are to go. I do
not wish the steerage invalids to be kept from coming up —far
from it —but I do object to a parcel of noisy children and men,
who are able to keep down on the main-deck. What is the good
of our having paid second-class fare if we are to be as bad, if not
worse, than the steerage ? —for they seem to go to windward or
leeward at pleasure. Even the second cabin itself is not free
from them, for I saw one of them having his dinner just inside,
and using our plates, mugs, and cutlery, which, I think, is not at
all proper. I would not have troubled you with such a long
letter, only our liberties are being broken into.. At dinner time
we have a lot of dirty faces peeping down the skylight, and when
they are told to withdraw, they laugh and grin. Hoping that
these evils will be cured by giving publicity to them,
I remain, Sir,
Yours obediently,
A SECOND-CLASS PASSENGER
TO OUE COEEESPONDENTS.
We received a letter from a passenger eulogising the conduct
of the crew in the discharge of their duties, and recommending
grog to he served out to them. It is our opinion that good con-
duct and grog seldom go hand in hand. We are authorised by
the Captain to say that he will have great pleasure in giving them
an extra Y.Gr. when discharged at the end of the voyage, if they
continue throughout to merit it.
ED. N. G.
ACEOSTICS.
Now my boys come along and join in this song,
Every voice must swell the chorus
To the ship and her freight of faces so bright;
Her name is the Netherby, “ hwylus.”*
Each passenger bold, come both young and old,
Repeat we are bound for Australia,
Britannia we left, of our friends are bereft,
Yea, adieu to old Albion and Scotia.
Leaving our sweet home in that country to roam,
Is to me a solemn story,
Vivid to my mind my relations so kind,
Each heart at parting sorry.
Rough sea and strong wind on the passage we find,
Peculiar each day our feeling ;
On, onward we go, blow high or blow low ;
Oh ! for hearts to rely on the ruler on high,
Leaving all to His faithful keeping.
O. O.
* A good sailing ship.


I.
Onward the Netherby goes,
With her captain kind and free,
Ever ready to lend a hand to those
Needing help and sympathy.
n.
Oft as we go thoughts fill our mind
With hopes of our future shore,
England we’re leaving far behind,
None can tell, and none can know
Shall we ever see her more.
E. J. S.
POETRY.
Oh ! sweeter than the sweetest flower
At evening’s daily close,
They will unite with the power
To succour human woes ;
And softer than the softest strain
Of music to the ear,
The placid joy we give and gain
By charity sincere.
S. FORD.
CONUNDRUMS.
1. Why is an umbrella like a pancake ?
2. Why is sea-sickness like an auction ?
3. How did Ruth ilitreat Boaz ?
4. If a gentleman wanted to kiss a lady, what newspapers
would she mention in her answer to him P
5. If a hear went into a milliner’s shop, what would he want ?
6. A Fenian fire how best put out F
7. Why is punctuality unnecessary ?
8. What is the difference between a bad shot and one who
heats his wife ?
9. If a man fell from the third-story of a house, what would he
fall against ?
ADVERTISEMENTS.
A SCHOOL for Children was commenced last week. Hours
of attendance for Boys, from 10 to 12 a.m.; for Grirls, from 3 to
5 p.m. There are also classes, from 7 to 8 p.m., every evening, for
Adults, to he held between decks. Those wishing to attend will
please give in their names to Mr. Hope Martin, schoolmaster.
By order of the Surgeon-Superintendent.
STOLEN, on the night of 23rd April, from the ship’s galley, a
piece of CORNED BEEF, and a new LINEN TOWEL. Also,
on the 24th instant, the Bakehouse was broken into, and TWO
LOAVES of BREAD taken. A reward of Is. 6d. will be given
to any one who will give information that may lead to the
apprehension of the offenders. Apply to the Saloon Steward.


LOST, between Sunday the 22nd and Monday 23rd April, a
GILT PIN, with a fox’s head. Whoever will return the same to
the Editor of the Netherby Gazette will he rewarded.
IT has been found that several EGGS have been taken from the
hencoops on the Poop. The person or persons guilty of the
same, are requested to return the shells to the Saloon Steward as
soon as the contents are consumed, in order that the fowls, may
be supplied with them for the purpose of forming other shells
for other eggs. The materials for forming eggshells having
become scarce, the winged tribe have been complaining lately.
ONE POUND EEWAED.
On Tuesday night, the 1st May, an IEON BOX, belonging to
John Allen, Constable, was taken out of the single men’s com-
partments, and is supposed to he thrown overboard. The above
reward will be given to any one who will give such information
as will lead to the detection of the offenders. The Surgeon-
Superintendent.
TEN SHILLINGS EEWAED.
The Captain begs to invite the party or parties who have taken
a certain quantity of canvas from the store-room, to pay him a
visit in his own cabin, where the remainder of the canvas is now
deposited. He promises to give the adventurers a warm recep-
tion, and ten shillings reward in the bargain.


THURSDAY 10th MAY, 1866.
We have much pleasure in bringing before the public the second
number of our paper. We notice that our efforts to contribute
towards the amusement and instruction of our fellow-sojourners
by chronicling the events which have transpired, have met with
the appreciation anticipated ; under such auspices we resume our
work with renewed zeal, and trust that if, under Clod’s blessing,
we are permitted to reach our destination, and when we re-
peruse the Netherhy Gazette, we shall look back with pleasure on
the days we passed on board of that ship, and think of all our
Iriends and companions to whom we were so closely united by a
life on shipboard!
In one ot our columns appears a letter announcing that a com-
pany of minstrels, in imitation of the Christy’s Minstrels, is
being formed for the amusement of all on board, and that their
first concert will be held when the Equator is crossed.
SUMMAEY OF THE WEEK.
Friday, 4th May.—Moderate breezes, varying from JS.E. to
8.E. ; all sails set; a large vessel was seen going the same way
as ourselves. This is now the sixth vessel we have overtaken and
passed, and none have outstripped us. If it goes on so we shall
have to add another adjective when we allude to our ship, and call
her, instead ot only “ the good ship,” “ the good clipper-ship
Netherhy .” Eat. 25.56 N. ; long., 17.52 W.
5th May. Moderate breezes from Korthto E.N.E.; trimming
sails as required ; the saloon passengers amused themselves under
the shade of an awning by playing at quoits ; a gilt pin, ad-
vertised in our last number as lost, was this day returned to the
owner by a little girl who found it; a reward of one shilling
was given her. Eat. 23.58 N. ; long. 20.15 W.
6th May.—-Brisk breezes throughout from N.E., it was a beau-
tiful day ; Divine Service was held at 11 am. on the poop. We
had full service and a very efficient choir; we were happy to see
that the attendance was better than the preceding Sunday, though
still not so well attended as it should have been. The evening
service was held on the poop at 5 p.m. with singing.
7th May. Iresh breezes and cloudy; some of our steerage
passengers amused themselves on the main deck with boxing, and
theseconds rubbed their principals down audfanned them with their
hats ; a little sparring went on also on the poop. The second-
class passengers amused themselves in the evening by imita-
ting the crowing ol cocks, the braying of asses, and the mewing
of cats. 8ome jolly songs were sung by the steerage passengers
on the main deck, a number joining chorus. Eat. 18.58 N.;
long. 24.8 W.
8th May.—Fresh breezes from N.B. to E.N.E.; at 6 a.m., saw


St. Antonio, one of the Cape DeYerd Islands, bearingS. E., distant
about 25 miles ; a flying fish fell on the deck ; a great many of
them were seen flying from one spot to another; the band en-
livened us with a few airs during the evening. Lat. 16.18 N ;
long. 25.54 W.
9th May.—Moderate breezes from E.N.E. ; the sun shone very
powerfully ; two windsails were rigged in the fore and after part
of the main deck. Lat 13.20 IN’: long. 25.53.
CORRESPONDENCE.
To the Editor of the Netherhy Gazette.
Deae Sie,—I am happy in being able to report better progress
this week, having experienced tolerable brisk trades. Our noble
clipper has made good strides towards her destination—we are
this May in lat. 10.43 N., and long. 25.26 W. The distance
run per log since my last letter is 1250 miles. Hoping to
get a quick passage through the variable winds which we are
now daily expecting.—I am, Dear Sir, Tours faithully,
O. OWENS,
Commander.
To the Editor of the Netherhy Gazette.
Deae Sie,— Having observed in one of the columns of your
last number, a letter from an “Intermediate Passenger” with
regard to the mansion of Messrs. Piggy & Co., I beg to make
the following remarks : —1st. The pig-stye was taken down in order
to caulk the top of the house on which it was placed for the
benefit of the complainant. 2nd. The pig-stye is washed out every
morning quite clean ; so that the unpleasant smell complained of
may after all proceed not from the pigs-stye, but from the inter-
mediate passenger’s own room ; let him look well to the corners,
behind the chests, &c. 3rd. The pigs are to be removed to their
former quarters as soon as the carpenter finishes his work.
I am, Dear Sir,
Tours faithfully,
AN OBSERVER
To the Editor of the Netherhy Gazette.
Deab Sie, —Allow me to suggest through the medium of your
paper that a committee, consisting of one of the passengers from
the saloon, two from the second-class, and three from the inter-
mediate and steerage, be appointed to get up amusements for the
benefit of all classes on board. I am sure that from specimens
of songs and singers which I have heard on board, we should be
able to get up first-rate concerts, and theatrical performances.
There are also many other amusements which would take up too
much of your space were I to enumerate them. I will at any
time feel most happy to lend any assistance in furthering this
object. I am, Dear Sir,
Tours truly,
BLUEBEAED.


To the Editor of the Netherhy Gazette.
Dear Sir,— Will you kindly allow me a corner for the inser-
tion of the following remarks. A person subscribing himself" A
Second-Class Passenger,” has brought our dear wives and children
before the world through the columns of your paper, accusing
them of occupying the poop stejis, which renders our com-
plainant’s limbs liable to be dislocated in his endeavours to push
his way to the poop. If the said gentleman was to reflect on the
hard condition of married women, themselves enfeebled by sea-
sickness, loss of appetite, and sleep, with two or three children
hanging about them, cross and crying, he would probably sympa-
thise with the poor creatures. Where can our wives go to, to
take a little rest, but on the poop steps, the decks being wet
with sea-water, rain, or what not ? besides, we always see our
wives move out of the way when a gentleman has a wish to pass
up or down, and we trust that our little friend is worthy of this
distinctive appellation —gentleman. We husbands in the steerage
cannot see any grounds for complaint. Live and let live. Again,
we find our little friend carrying his spirit of discontent to the
poop, when he finds fault with our beloved little children, who,
with the permission of the captain and doctor are allowed to
collect on the poop to receive instruction gratis. Our hearts
overflow with joy and gratitude when we see such care taken of
our little children, when we are too poor to pay for their educa-
tion. All we are able to give is a scanty crust to eat, and some-
thing to cover their nakedness. Next, we find our little friend
finding fault with the space allotted to him for the exercise of his
limbs after the temporal cessation from duty during sleep. But
we cannot for the life of us see the reasonableness of this com-
plaint, unless he wishes to monopolise the entire length and
breadth of one side of the poop to himself. But, Mr. Editor,
what brought our warm blood to our ears was the remark about
our children. Should our little friend again observe their dirty
faces gazing on a savoury dish, we would advise him to try the
experiment of giving them a mouthful each, instead of saucy
looks and words. We shall be greatly disappointed if his heart
is not made glad by beholding the instantaneous transformation
oi their dirty faces into that of young angels, and their grins to
charming smiles of joy and gratitude.
I am, Dear Sir,
Yours truly,
A VOICE FROM THE STEERAGE.
To the Editor of the Netherhy Gazette.
Dear Sir, — I am very happy to be able to send you a good
account of the health of all on board ; where there are so many
congregated there are always some little ailments; there is
nothing of any importance, however, and in order that it may
continue so, I would still urge upon you all the necessity there
is for cleanliness ; and I hope by the time we reach Moreton


Bay I shall be able to report the Netherhy as a model ship. The
mean temperature taken in the different compartments of the
ship was last week 72 deg. I have to add that I expect we shall
fall in with some homeward bound ships in a day or two, I would
advise all, especially those who have left their sweethearts behind
to compose their letters at once, and have them ready for the
home mail.
I am, Dear Sir,
Yours faithfully,
MARSHALL H. WEBSTER,
Surgeon-Superintendent.
A WORD TO THE SAILORS.
To the Editor of the Netherhy Gazette.
Dear Sir, —I was very much disappointed and grieved last
Sunday, when I saw that none of you were present during Divine
Service. We always find you at your post of duty, setting and
taking in sails with your cheerful Ho-hi-ho, and we always find
you civil and kind; but my soul mourneth for you when I think
how' negligent you are of your own salvation. Your Captain
sent an officer to invite you on the poop, and the Captain of your
Salvation invites you to enlist under his Banner. He is crying
after you, offering a full and free salvation, without money and
without price. Why will you be so cruel to your own souls.
Remember dear friends that the voyage of life is short; there is
not a moment to be lost; the work to be done is so great and
important, and eternity is near; never neglect the mercies of
grace, for their is neither work nor device, nor wisdom, nor
knowledge in the grave, on the brink of which you and I are
t ottering. Thus saith the Lord, “ He that findeth me findeth
life, but he that sinneth against me, wrongeth his own soul.”
I am, Dear Sir,
A FRIEND TO THE SAILORS.
To the Editor of the Netherhy Gazette.
Dear Sir, — IV ill you kindly insert in your next number that
we have started a company of minstrels,* naming ourselves the
“ Netherhy Minstrels,” with permission of the Surgeon-Super-
intendent and Captain Owens. We intend giving an entertain-
ment on the evening we cross the line. A programme will be
issued.
Your obedient servant,
GEORGE J. A. EVANS.
A MYSTERY UNRAVELLED.
Ok the 3rd -'lay, the ship Netherhy , commanded by the good
Captain Owens, was spanking along, with studding sails set, before
an eight-knot breeze, one ot the Canary Islands on the starboard
hand, distant about eight miles, and over that island the Peak of


Teneriffe showing its loftiness ; the passengers were amusing
themselves on the poop in different ways, when a strange sight
struck one and all —a something white at the foot of the mizenmast.
On approaching it, it was discovered to he a large white umbrella,
held by a person apparently seated, but invisible. The one asked
the other who that could be ? One carelessly answered, “ Oh!
it must be some old lady-passenger, who must have come from the
island during the night.” “ Nonsense !” said another, “ we have
had no communication with the shore.” “ Let us approach and
see,” said a third. When one, more inquisitive than the rest,
advanced, bent down, and, after having reconnoitered for a time,
came laughing back to a group collected on the after part of the
poop, and said, “ Ouess, now, who it is.” No one could unravel
who the mysterious person was ; upon which our inquisitive friend
said, “ I will tell you by a riddle. A quadruped which supplies
us with milk, and a measure about 27 inches long.” If you cannot
guess that, take this acrostic: —
C stands for an animal most useful to man,
O stands for a bird very ugly to scan,
W stands for a being who all men do prize,
E stands for a thing from which chickens arise,
L stands for a language now called the dead,
L is a letter that follows K, it is said.
If the first letters of the above six lines are taken, the holder
of the white umbrella cannot be mistaken.
POETEY.
A EUNEEAL AT SEA.
How sad the scene, how mournful to the sight!
Gloom fills each heart as darkness fills the night.
A few short days ago the child had breath,
Now captive in the icy grasp of death ;
Her coffin lies upon the deck, and meets the gaze of all,
The Union Jack is o’er her spread, and forms her only pall.
Amid the solemn silence, in fervent earnest prayer,
A sad and tearful voice is heard by all assembled there,
And then committed to the deep in words so stern and grave
The little dear one’s corpse is plung’d beneath the tossing wave.
How sad to think the mother’s darling one
Can ne’er be seen again : no little stone
Or grassy mound to mark her resting place,
But down in ocean’s depths, where not a trace
Is ever seen again by those who loved her well,
Nor evidence the least her whereabouts to tell
Amidst the tangled seaweed and shells of lovely hue.
Deep in the dark blue sea she rests hidden from every view.
A sadness all the ship pervades—no laugh is heard ;
All know death’s call can never bedeferr’d,
We must again return into our native dust ;
The young may die, the old ’tis certain must.
May God protect that one who gave the dear child birth,
And in her breast so sad, with love supply the dearth ;
And let us all remember on the ocean or in port,
The fact that death is certain, also that life is short.
M. H. W.


ACROSTICS.
Do Thou, O Lord, descend and dwell
On board our noble ship,
Command the helm, and guide her course
Throughout her tedious trip.
Oh ! grant this blessing on us all,
Renew our hearts with grace,
We then shall praise thee, great and small,
Each day throughout our race ;
Bestow thy spirit from on high,
Send down the heavenly dove,
To-day, oh hear our humble cry,
Each soul on board on Thee rely ;
Refresh us with Thy love.
Now Lord may this our vessel be
Ever a temple raised to Thee,
There is none but Thou canst hear its bell.
Help therefore all who in her dwell ;
Ever may yonder mighty dome
Ring with the hymns we learnt at home ;
Be with us lest the foaming wave
Yet wildly toss above our grave.
O. O.
M. H. W.
CONUNDRUMS.
Answers to the Conundrums in our last Number.
1. Because it is seldom seen after Lent.
2. One is the effect of a sail, the other the sale of effects.
3. She trod on his corns and pulled his ears.
4. lAo Spectators —no Observers —hut as many Times you please.
5. Muslin.
6. A cold-stream.
7. Because the soul of business, therefore immaterial.
8. One misses his mark, and the other marks his misses.
9. Against his will.
1. What disease brings most sympathy ?
2. Suppose a man hates his wife and beats her, why is she not
likely to have the small-pox P
3. What is most like a hen stealing ?
4. Why is the Neiherby like the letter T p
5. Why is a sow called a sow ?
6. What would an old woman be like in the middle of the sea ?
7. Why is a good wife like a pine apple ?
ADVERTISEMENTS.
WANTED—The Cap belonging to the Peak of Teneriffe.
WANTED —The name of the Tailor who dressed out the Heavy
Swell that has been following the ship for several days.
WANTED—A good many people who know when they are well off.
WANTED—The Chair that the Sun sets on.
EIYE SHILLINGS REWARD will be given by James Wel-
bourne to any person who will bring a PURSE containing money
which was LOST on Tuesday, the 7th inst., to No. 51 Steerage.


THURSDAY, 17th MAY, 1866.
We appear before our friends under some disadvantage this time,
as we have not been so well supported with contributions. From
the interest generally accorded to onr paper, we are convinced
that the reason assistance has not been rendered us so fully this
week is to be attributed to a dearth of matter rather than to a
want of sympathy. We trust our friends will exert themselves,
and supply us for our next issue with something that will interest
and amuse the community on board.
WEEKLY SUMMAEY.
10th May.—Sultry weather; wind unsteady, from the east-
ward. The ship being very steady, the ladies of the saloon were
persuaded to take some exercise in the way of dancing, and there
being an equal number of gentlemen to form a full set of quad-
rilles, the services of our small band, consisting of a bombardon,
cornet, and drum —the first performed upon by Frederic Sher-
man, the second by William Skerman, and the third by John
Evans, all from Enfield, and while in England attached to the
band of the 41st Middlesex Eifle Corps—were called into requisi-
tion. Dancing was continued until 9.30 p.m. Lat. 10.44 Js T .;
long. 25.26 W.
11th May. —Sultry weather. Wind E. to E.1STE. ; smooth
water. Boxing carried on in different parts of the ship. Lat.
8.27 N.; long. 24.39 W.
12th May.—Light winds from the eastward. Smooth water.
Lat. G.30 N.; long. 23.40 W.
13th May.—Squally from the eastward, with frequent showers
of rain. Divine service was held on the poop morning and evening.
Yery poorly attended. Lat. 5.5 K ; long. 24.52 AY.
14th May. —Variable light airs and calms. Sighted several
ships, one bound to the northward, distant about five miles.
The port life-boat was lowered to exercise the crew ; when the
boat returned, some of the passengers went in her to have a
row and swim. During her absence the Captain and Doctor
decided upon sending the starboard life-boat with letters to the
ship bound to the northward; this decision caused great con-
sternation on board, and set all busy bringing their letters to a
close. The boat had just started on her mission, when the port
life-boat returned, and as the letters of those in that boat were
left behind, they determined upon endeavouring to overtake the
mail-boat, little thinking the laborious work they were under-
taking, for the sun shone powerfully, and they had forgotten to
take water with them. On the return of both boats we learnt that
the mail-bag was placed on board the Dutch barque Cornelia Adol-
phine, from Batavia, bound to Amsterdam. One of the passengers
B


nurchased a monkey from a sailor on board the Dutch barque, who,
on his arrival was formally introduced to all the youngsters on
board. The first-class passengers had another dance this evening.
Lat. 4.39 N. ; long. 22.25 W. , a
15th May.—Light variable winds, and frequent calms, with
occasional showers. Signalised the barque West Wind, from
Liverpool to Madagascar, out 35 days. A shark was caught.
Lat. 4.0 N. ; long. 22.5 W. , ,
16th May.—Variable winds, and frequent _ calms ot short
duration, and passing showers. Latter part, light breezes from
the eastward. Dancing was resumed this evening. Lat. 4.0 IN ;
20.1 W.
CORRESPONDED CE.
To the Editor of the Netherby Gazette.
Dear Sir, —I have to report another week’s progress, which
is on the whole fully up to my expectation. The ship continued
to make good her course, with steady winds from E. and E.N.E.,
as far as lat. 4.45 V., which is very unusual at this season of the
year. During the last three days we have had variable winds and
frequent calms, temporary squalls, with slight showers of rain.
By all appearances, we are on the northern border of the S.E.
trade winds. Let those who complain of the suffocating heat
exercise their patience and powers of endurance a little longer,
and ere another week will have elapsed I expect to be 1,000 miles
southward of the equator, where we shall find a climate to suit
every constitution. The good ship is this day in lat. 2.28 N;
long. 20.30 W, having run per log since my last letter a distance
of 732 miles.
I am, Dear Sir,
Yours faithfully,
O. OWENS,
Commander.
To the Editor of the Netherby Gazette.
Dear Sir, —The general health on hoard is, I am happy to
say, very good, although the weather has been rather warm during
the present week. The people have kept up wonderfully well.
A ■ cheerful disposition, with a determination to make the best of
everything during our long sea voyage, is of great help to the
doctor. I have much pleasure in informing you that we have
had an addition to our population, and that the mother and son
are both doing remarkably well. The mean temperature for the
last week was 84 deg.
I am, Dear Sir,
Yours faithfully,
MARSHALL H. WEBSTER,
Surgeon-Superintendent.


To the Editor of the Ketherby Gazette.
Dear, Sir, —As the time is drawing nigh for the visit from
Old King Neptune, for the purpose of shaving such of the pas-
sengers and crew who have not crossed his railing before, I take
this opportunity of advising the male portion of our little com-
munity to come to me and get that operation performed in a
more agreeable manner, as they will find that No. 3 is anything
but easy shaving.
I remain, Dear Sir,
W. HUSSEY.
N.B. —Hair cutting on the best principles of phraseology.
POETEY.
THE SEABOY’S FAREWELL.
ye winds while I repeat
A parting signal to the fleet,
Whose station is at home.
Then waft the seaboy’s simple prayer,
And let it oft be whisper’d there,
Whilst other climes I roam.
Farewell to father, reverend hulk,
Who, spite of metal, spite of bulk,
Can soon his cable slip.
Oh ! may our God, whose name is love,
Ever his mainstay constant prove,
And safe in convoy keep.
Farewell to mother, first-rate she,
Who launch’d me on life’s stormy sea,
And rigg’d me fore and aft.
Oh ! long may He her timbers spare,
And keep her hull in good repair
To tow the smaller craft.
Farewell to sister, lovely yacht,
Whether she will be manned or net
I cannot yet foresee.
May some good ship a tender prove,
Well stored-udih freight of peace and love,
And take her under lee.
Farewell to James, the jolly-boat,
And all the little craft afloat
In home’s delightful bay.
Oh ! may they follow in the wake
Of mother’s track, for her dear sake,
And keep their luff alway.
Farewell to all on life’s wide main,
Perhaps we ne’er may meet again,
Through stress of stormy weather ;
But, summoned to the courts above,
Be harbour’d in the port of love.
And all be moored together.


ACROSTICS.
Merrily on the good ship goes,
Health and happiness in her track;
When sickness is ever inclin’d to come,
Energetic the Doctor to drive it back ;
Bo all to him both kind and true,
Since he will do so much for you ;
The man whose skill can make us well ;
Ever should our regard compel,
Remember this, and ever be
Sincere to our Doctor of the Netherby.
CONUNDRUMS.
Answers to the Conundrums in our last Number.
1. The small-pox, because you are sure to be pitted (pitied).
2. Because be whacks-and-’ates her (vaccinates).
8. A cockrobin (cock robbing).
4. Because she is in the midst of water,
5. As-how-it-is (a sow it is).
6. Like to be drowned.
7. Because it is an agreeable compound of sweet and sour.
Why is a Drench cat like an old fashioned arm chair? —
Because it has four legs.
Why should the letter T be avoided P —Because it is the be-
ginning of trouble.
What is that which has a mouth but never speaks, and has a
bed but never sleeps ? —A river.
Which travels fastest, heat or cold ?—Heat, because you can
catch cold.
Why was there no postage label in Henry YIII.’s time ? —
Because a Queen’s head was not worth a penny.
When is a lady like a parcel ? —When she is in a wrapper. _
Why would it be a bad policy to allow our captain to get into
your debt ? —Because he is always Owen (owing).
What is the difference between a cow and a broken chair ? —
The one gives milk and the other gives way (whey).
ADVERTISEMENTS.
THE NETHEEBY MINSTELS present their respectful com-
pliments to the public, and hereby inform them, that they intend to
give their first Concert on the evening of Monday, the 21st instant,
on the Poop. Doors to open at 7.30. Performance to com-
mence at 8. Carriages to be ordered at 11.30. The public are
particularly requested not to join in the choruses.
FIVE SHILLINGS EEWAED.
LOST, a GOLD EING, with a white stone. Whoever will
return the same to James Crocker, No. 116 Steerage, will receive
the above reward.
DOMESTIC 0CCUEEENCES.
BIRTH.
On the 14th instant, Mary, wife of Mr. Robert Nally, of a son.


THURSDAY, 24th MAY, 1866..
Hayiyu crossed the line since our last issue, we produce our
fourth number by giving a prominent place to the interesting
ceremonies attendant upon the visit of King Neptune to our
ship.
On Thursday evening, the 17th iust., at 8 p.m., King Neptune’s
barge was seen approaching by a sailor on the look-out in the
main-top, which was hailed in due form, and when she was sup-
posed to be alongside, a gun was fired in honor of his Majesty. Shortly
after, his Majesty’s barber, and an attendant, most fantastically
dressed for the occasion, came up to the poop, and announced to
the Captain that his Majesty, being indisposed, from the cir-
cumstance of one of the ribs of a whale having stuck in his
gizzard the day before, could not come himself, but had sent a
deputation to inform the Captain that he would honor the ship
with a visit the following day, to see if there were any on board
who had not crossed his domains before. At 2 o’clock on the 18th,
his Majesty, accompanied by his Queen, arrived, under the usual
salute ; and, having entered their carriage, drawn by six
proceeded from the forecastle to the poop, headed by a band ot
musicians, playing the grand march of “ Bee the Conquering Hero
comes.” The carriage was followed by his Majesty’s barber and
attendant, then came a strong police force, and last of all those
who had not crossed his domains before. As soon as the pro-
cession reached the ladder, his Majesty and Queen descended from
the state carriage, and, accompanied by his retinue, marched
upon the poop, passing the lee side, preceded by his standard-
bearers, having the royal standard, with the words “ Neptune,
King of the Sea,” inscribed thereon, suspended upon two poles.
Next, his Majesty and royal Consort, dressed in the fantastical
robes peculiar to his Oceanic Majesty and Court, the King
wearing a long beard, which quite concealed his face, so that a
particular description of his phiz cannot be given. Next in order
came his barber and attendant —the former carrying a ponderous
razor on his shoulder, of exquisite workmanship ; and the latter,
a latherbrush of equal proportion, which showed that they were
in earnest about having their work effectually performed. Next
in order came his Majesty’s body-guard, who were marshalled on
the weather side of the poop, and presented a formidable ap-
pearance. Without much ceremony the King announced his
intention of shaving and scrubbing those who had not passed
before through his dominions, and to exact the tribute he was
entitled to from time immemorial. The Captain addressed his
Majesty in suitable words, congratulating him on his happy
recovery, after undergoing the operation of having the whalebone
extracted from his gizzard; and offered his Majesty some refresh


ment, which his Majesty politely declined, as he had already
swallowed a shark since the morning. His Majesty, Queen, and
suite, after bowing to the Captain, returned in the same order to
the state carriage, and proceeded towards the forecastle. The
royal vehicle was halted on the fore part of the main deck, where
his Majesty could overlook the proceedings, and satisfy himself
that his barber and assistants performed their duty in accordance
with prescribed rules. The first victim was the ship’s butcher.
He was laid hold of by two of his Majesty’s suite, and brought
to the barber and attendant, who stood on an eminence ; he was
then lathered with a yellow liquid, composed principally of peas.
Questions were put to him during this operation ; and, on opening
his mouth to answer, the yellow liquid was poured in. He was
afterwards shaved, and then handed over to two others, who stood
a little lower. These, before he knew where he was, tumbled
him, heels over head, into a large sail, containing a quantity of
sea-water, and there thoroughly dipped, scrubbed, and washed,
by two others, who were there to receive him. Thus ended the
operation. Twenty more were served in the same way. It is
extraordinary the wonderful effect the process had on the ap-
pearance of some of them. The ship’s butcher, the following
morning, whilst attending to the fowls and ducks, was accosted
by the Captain, and asked why he was acting for the butcher ?
He answered, laughing, “ I am the butcher, sir.” He looked so
dean, he was not recognised. At 8 p.m. King Neptune and suite
took their farewell of all on board, after having granted permission
to the Captain to continue his course to the southward; and,
wishing us a pleasant voyage, descended into his barge, under the
usual salute.
WEEKLY SUMMAEY.
17th May.—Eirst part light breezes from the eastward,
gradually drawing to the E.S.E, Latter part, steady breezes
from the S.S.E. Braced sharp up. We have now entered into the
S.L. trades after experiencing variable winds for three days only,
between the parallels of 5.0 and 3.30. N. Lat. 2.28 N.; long
20.30 W. S
18th May.—Moderate breezes from S. by E. ; all sails set.
One of the passengers who slept on the poop, on awaking in the
morning, and looking into his mirror, discovered he was another
person—for when he went to bed he had a white face, and now*
a black one. Some jokers had blackened his face during the
night. Lat. 0.3 S. ; long. 22.18 W.
19th May.—Eresh breezes from S.E. to E.S.E. A heavy
southern swell. Lat. 3.28 S. ; long. 24.20 W.
20th May. Eresh breezes from S.E. to E.S.E. Heavy swell
from _ the southward. Divine service was held on the poop
morning and evening; the chanting and singing very good, and
the attendance fair. Lat. 7.21 S.; long. 24.43 W.
21st May.—Eresh breezes from the southward; continued


heavy swell. The ship rolling considerably. Many of the pas-
sengers sea-sick. At 8 p.m. the Netherhy Minstrels gave their
first concert on the poop, which went off very satisfactorily.
Lat. 11.24 S.; long. 25.6 W.
22nd May. —Eresh breezes, with a clear sky ; smooth water ;
the evening was most delightful; the moon shining bright, and
the air much cooler than we have had it for some time.. Lat.
15.11 S.; long. 25.46 W.
23rd May.—Light variable breezes and slight showers of rain;
smooth water ; the first-class passengers had a dance this evening.
Lat. 17.49 S; long. 25.12 W.
COEEESPONDENCE.
To the Editor of the Netherhy Gazette.
Dear Sir.—I have again the pleasure of sending you a
favourable report of the health of our fellow passengers, and now,
that we have crossed the Line, we may expect soon to be in cooler
weather, which will brace up all those who may have felt the
heat much during our passage through the tropics.
I was very much pleased with the concert given by the Netherhy
Minstrels last Monday, and I think they deserve great praise, con-
sidering the difficulties against which they have had to contend.
I hope they will favour us with another concert soon ; I was also,
much pleased with the excellent order kept by the audience,
The mean temperature for the last week was 86 deg.
I remain, yours faithfully,
MARSHALL W. WEBSTER,
Surgeon-Superintendent.
To the Editor of the Netherhy Gazette.
Dear Sir, —The approach of Thursday reminds me that
another week of our short pilgrimage is gone ; its days and hours
reckoned with the days and hours before the flood; gone with its
actions, words, and thoughts, beyond recall, done, but not lost—
no ! the very movements of our hearts are, at this moment, in-
delibly engraven upon the rocks of eternity. During this short
interval of seven days our ship has crossed the Equator into the
Southern hemisphere, after having had to pay Neptune his cus-
tomary honours and tribute. We have been very fortunate in our
quick passage through the variables ; indeed, much quicker than
I had anticipated ; and the health of our passengers, it appears,
by our good Doctor’s report, did not materially suffer. The ship
is now in the climate that cannot fail to please everybody, and
suit every constitution, being in lat. 19.39 S.; long., 21.09 W.,
drawing towards the southern limit of the S.E. trades ; having
made, per log, since my last report, 1,424 miles, and 1,180 miles
to the S. of the Equator.
I remain, Dear Sir,
Yours faithfully,
O. OWENS,
Commander.


POETEY.
THOUGHTS AT SEA.
Once more at sea, what thoughts now arise,
As around me I view but the ocean and skies ;
Oh ! let me consider them, each one as they come,
And tell them in verse, so speaking yet dumb.
Once more on the sea, so far from our home,
What induces such numbers this distance to roam?
Many years may now pass e’er they next see again
Those scenes and dear faces they left o’er the main.
Ear out on the sea, yet lately so near
To those we loved best, so prized and so dear ;
We know that they pray we in safety may rest;
With such friendship as this, are we not truly blest ?
While on the blue sea, we’ll think kindly of those,
And never forget them till life’s scene shall close.
Wherever we roam still faithful we’ll prove ;
Our hearts shall still yearn for the dear ones we love.
On the restless ocean, with danger so fraught,
In navigation we all are unlearned and untaught.
So we’ll trust in one Captain, and brave gallant crew—
The many for aye must confide in the few.
Once more on the sea, now safely we ride,
Yet who can foretell what woes may betide.
The waves, now so calm, may rise mountains high,
The elements may war in the now cloudless sky ;
Then on the wild sea, all white with the foam,
How vainly we’d wish for the comforts of home.
Our faint hearts, which once for a sea life did burn,
Eor the much despised land and its safety would yearn.
Yet, out on the ocean, so boundless and wide,
With God for our helmsman, how safely we ride.
With faith so unsullied, in him we’ll repose,
And this thought, best of all, brings our verse to a close.
M. H. W.
ON SEEING A WOMAN HANGING OUT CLOTHES WITH A SHORT
TIRE IN HER MOUTH.
You little dingy, dirty slattern,
Whoever set you such a pattern;
For such a low disgusting habit,
I’d flay you as I would a rabbit.
How can your clothes be clean and sweet ?
Who but yourself would like a sheet
Dried and scented in tobacco?
It would do for Poles in ancient Cracow.
The Turkish ladies in the harem,
Such habits, if they choose to wear ’em,
But never English thrifty wife,
Would waste a moment in her life
Making her mouth a chimney pot.
Inhaling smoke, to puff it out ;
\ou never would have known the want of it.
Lay down your pipe, Jane, I am not joking,
A woman’s mouth’s not made for smoking.


A SWAEM OF BEES WOETH HIYINGt.
B patient, B prayerful, B humble, B mild,
B wise as Solon, B meek as a child,
B studious, B thoughtful, B loving, B kind,
B sure you make matters subservient to mind,
B cautious, B prudent, B trustful, B true,
B courteous to all men, 13 friendly with few,
B temperate in argument, pleasure, and wine,
B careful of conduct, of money, of time,
B cheerful, B grateful, B hopeful, B firm,
B peaceful, benevolent, willing to learn,
B courageous, B gentle, B liberal, B just,
B aspiring, B humble, because thou art dust,
B penitent, circumspect, sound in the faith,
B active, devoted, B faithful till death,
B honest, B holy, transparent, and pure,
B dependent, B Christlike, and you’ll be secure.
Use gentle words, for who can tell
The blessings they impart;
How oft they fall—as manna fell—
On some nigh fainting heart.
In lovely wilds, by light-wing’d birds,
Bare seeds have oft been sown ;
And hope has sprung from gentle words
Where only griefs had grown,
O. O.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
Mr. JACKO HANS presents Ms respectful compliments to tlie
ladies, gentlemen, and children, on board of the ship Netherby,
and begs humbly to communicate to them that he was tran-
shipped, on the llth inst., from the Dutch barque Cornelia Adol-
pbine, to this ship. Not being possessed of ready money, and
having no land order with which he might eventually pay his
passage to Queensland, he was placed in an awkward predica-
ment, but the unprecedented generosity of the Captain and
Doctor, removed that difficulty, by granting him a free passage to
the land of promise. He begs further to tender his thanks most
heart-felt to all on board, for the cordial reception they gave him
on his arrival; he believes he observed admiration and love de-
picted on every countenance that came within his view. Whether
his pretty face, his beautiful figure, or his long tail, was most
admired, he has not yet heard, although he cannot refrain from
adding en passant that in his own country, his pretty long tail
was most admired by his country females. He feels himself
placed under very great obligations for so unanimous a feeling
displayed in his favour, and also for the kindness of his friends,
in having a domicile built for him, treating him with all the nice
tit-bits and delicacies procurable on board; and last, but not least,
with an abundant supply of water.
Desirous of showing his gratitude for the numerous favours
showered on him, he has been keeping his weather eye open, in
order to observe in which way he could make himself most useful


to the community on board. He has at last discovered that he
could bring into utility, one of the peculiarities of nationality,
character, or instinct, which nature has accorded to his species ;
and now comes forward to publish the same. He begs most
humbly to offer his services gratis to Mothers, whose children
may have comfortably lodged on their heads that troublesome
animal called a L e. He will undertake to catch them sys-
tematically, without causing any pain to the parties operated
upon, on this condition only, that he may be permitted to do as he
pleases with the little dears after they are caught, For further
particulars, please apply personally to Mr. Jacko Hans, at his
domicile, situated on the third thwart of the port life-boat, or by
letter, to his Patron, Mr. Gr. E. T., No. 10 Second-class Passenger.
LOST. —A PILLOW (feather), it was left on the grating near
the wheel. Any person returning the same to the Second-class
Herman Steward will receive One Shilling Eeward.
LOST.—A left foot WELLINGrTON BOOT, three or four days
ago. It was lying with its fellow on the grating near the wheel.
Whoever finds the strayed boot, please give it to the Second-
class Gferman Steward.
WANTED.
A NUESE that thoroughly understands waiting on a feeble
person. She must be competent in all her duties ; she must not
be younger than 25 years of age, good looking, and must be very
clean. Wages, £2 a year. Address, No. 9 After Saloon Cabin,
between 7 and 8 a.m.


THURSDAY, 31st MAY, 1866.
The only occurrence of any consequence that we can bring under
the particular notice of our readers which has occurred this last
week, is, we regret to say, one of a very heinous nature, being
an infringement of the Eighth Commandment.
Some person or persons actually stole some coffee, which had
teen handed to the cook to he prepared for the use of our hard-
working sailors. The cook had to leave the galley for a few
minutes to look after something else ; advantage was taken of his
temporary absence, and the coffee purloined.
This is shameful; especially to rob those who are obliged to be
exposed to all weathers, and require something to warm them
from time to time. We trust we shall not be again placed in the
position of having to record similar infamous practices.
WEEKLY SUMMARY.
2-Lh May. Light breezes from E.K.S., with smooth water.
At 8 a.m. the Ensign was hoisted in honour of its being the anni-
versary of our most gracious Queen’s birth-day. Great prepa-
rations were made by the second-class passengers in their dining
apartment to do honour to the auspicious occasion. The Captain
and Doctor very kindly allowed those gentlemen fresh meat and
dessert for this day, accompanied with wines, &c., to drink the
Queen s health. If the Queen’s health depended upon the
number of glasses quaffed by those subjects of her Majesty, she
must have been that day in most robust health. Home of our
neighbours had even mistaken the skylight for the door, in honour
of her most gracious Majesty. Lat. 19.39 S.; long. 24.09 W.
25th May.—Light breezes from E.N.E.; all sails set. Lat.
20.47 S. ; long. 22.27 W.
26th May. First part light breezes from Y.E. ; during the
night the wind shifted to the S.W., with slight showers of rain
and occasional calms. Some Cape pigeons were seen for the first
r? 1 ®: w^a^es were also seen, one very near the ship. Lat.
21.31 S. ; long. 21.41 W.
rf-W Squally from the S.S.W. ; took in the necessary
ieefs ; Divine service was held on the poop both morning and
evening ; attendance small. The music was improved by the
strains of a flute. Lat. 21.16 S. ; long. 20.40 W.
28th May.—Eresh breezes varying from S. by W. to S.S.E.
and S. Lat. 20.13 S.; long. 17.26 W.
29th May.—Moderate breezes from S. to S.S.E. ; a heavy swell
from S.W. Lat. 20.17 S.; long. 15.30 W.
30th May.—Variable winds from S.S.E. to S.S.W. Lat. 21.13
S.; long. 17.7 W.


CORRESPONDENCE.
To the Editor of the Netherhy Gazette.
Dear Sir, —It affords me much pleasure to report that the
general health of all on board our good ship Netherhy still con-
tinues very satisfactory. I think it proper to mention here, that
throughout the ship generally my instructions as to cleanliness
are very well observed, and this is one reason why the ship has
been so healthy during our passage through the tropics. As we
have every reason to expect soon to be in cold weather, I beg
earnestly to impress on all the necessity of having warm clothing
ready, and especially mothers of children. The mean tem-
perature taken in the different compartments of the ship was,
last week, 83 deg.
I am, Dear Sir,
„ • Tours very truly,
MARSHALL H. WEBSTER,
Surgeon-Superintendent.
To the Editor of the Netherhy Gazette.
Dear Sir, —As our week’s work has been exceedingly small,
it is not meet that I should write a long letter. The ship made
her distance, per log, 770 miles during the week, notwithstanding
I can only quote 350 miles in the proper direction since your
last publication. But the wind, to-day, seems inclined to draw
gradually to the S.E. which will enable us to make better south-
ing-
Another week, I trust, will bring us to the region of westerly
■winds, which will waft us along speedily towards our destination.
Our latitude to-day is 22 - 31 S.; long, 19’6’ W.
I remain, yours truly,
O. OWENS,
Commander.
To the Editor of the Netherhy Gazette.
Dear Sir, —I have heard that some evil-disposed person, or
persons, have thrown overboard a chair belonging to Mrs. Grimes,
on Saturday night last; hut I sincerely hope that the report is not
true. Is it possible that we have here, on board of the Netherhy,
a person fallen so low in moral degradation, as to carry his vin-
dictive feeling so far, that he would wantonly and maliciously
deprive a person in delicate health of any source of comfort what-
ever? If such, indeed, he the case, such person, whoever he may
he, deserves to be hooted and hissed from civil society, as being
unworthy the name of man; the devil himself can fall no lower.
Martin Luther was of opinion that there were, in his time, crea-
tures wearing the forms of human beings, but begotten of the
devil, who always delighted in the misery of mankind, and
nothing grieved them so much as to see people happy. If he was


correct in his opinion, I think of a truth one of them at least
has paid us a visit, and seems to delight in doing mischief for its
own sake. The same spirit which animates that miserable being,
has prompted him, or one of kindred feeling, to break the lock
which was attached to the letter-box in the forepart of the poop,
annoyed, I suppose, at the idea that the Gazette was a source of
amusement to. any of the passengers. I trust that the unprin-
cipled, spiteful, worthless being, will be made known ere the
passage is over, that the passengers may behold, if not a demon
in human flesh, certainly a thing that is very nearly allied—a
person without a particle of moral rectitude, devoid of conscience,
and all sense of right and wrong —an object to be shunned and
pitied.
I remain, yours truly,
A CORRESPONDENT.
To the Editor of the Netherby Gazette.
Deae Sie, —In your issue of the 24th inst., I noticed an
advertisement from a feeble person, residing at No. 9, Saloon.
Having been out of employ for some time, and wishing to get
something to do —although the terms did not exactly suit me —I
thought I might as well call to see whether I could obtain any
information from the neighbour’s servants what description of
person this feeble old lady was, whether troublesome and exact-
ing, or patient and kind, and whether if she possessed the latter
qualities I could persuade her to increase the salary. I did so,
and knocked at No. 9, and to my astonishment, instead of seeing
a feeble old lady, I found a bearded young gentleman lived there.
Now, Mr. Editor, only fancy what a painful position a modest
young woman has been placed in through the stupidity or care-
lessness of your compositors. I wish you would just box their
ears tor them, and let me know the true number.
I am, Hear Mr. Editor,
Your obedient servant,
ANNA MARIA.
Note by the Editoe, — ~We beg leave to state that the error
made in the address of the old lady, was a mistake made by the
advertiser herself.
From our Special Correspondent.
_ East Saturday evening was the opening night of a Music Hall
situated in Lower Steerage-street. Tour S. 0. who was provided
with a season ticket, jumped into a Hansom ; after ten minutes
fast driving, pulled up at the door of a magnificent building,
which the cabman informed me was the “ Netherby Music Hall,”
but being dimly lighted outside, I could not distinguish the style
of architecture. However, I made the best of my way through a
long corridor which by the way was thronged with people playing
cards, dominoes, and other games. Upon entering the hall, your
S, C. was much struck (although not hurt) with the splendour of


the decorations and the aristocratic appearance of the audience,
and I do not know whether to praise the quality of the wines, or
the civility of the waiters most.
And now began one of the finest concerts your S. C. ever had
the good fortune to attend. Comic singers were there in abun-
dance, and each vied with the other as to who should gain the
most applause. The sentimental and ballad singing was very
good. The chairman, who seemed to work very hard, made
several attempts to relate a story of a certain old woman who
wore a red night-cap ; hut it appeared as if the audience had
heard it before, and did not care to hear any more of it; he even-
tually gave up in despair. The harmony was kept up until about
ten o’clock, accompanied by a band composed of numerous per-
formers, when the national anthem was sung by the company, the
audience joining in the chorus. Thus ended the first concert in
the New Music Hall.
w. H.
POETRY.
WHAT ABE THE WILD WAYES SATING ?
What are the wild waves saying, as they break into snowy foam ?
They tell me of bright things which gleam hid away in the mermaid’s home.
They tell me of glistening pearls, and rainbow colour’d shells,
And the coral which forms the wall of their treasure-caves and cells.
They speak of the starry gems, and the beautiful burnish’d gold,
All shining so bright in the stillness, and forming a wealth that’s untold.
They tell me how often they’ve roll’d over cities of world’s gone by,
Where strange monsters now chase each other thro’ the halls of revelry;
Where the seaweed hath o’ergrown the palace, and shut out the light of the
day,
And where once the fair maiden wander’d, now they dash in their scornful
play.
And I hear the wild waves whispering of hearts so noble and brave,
Who trusted the treacherous ocean, but found only a watery grave.
They hear not the booming waters—no thunder can now break their sleep,
So calm and so quiet they lie far below ’neath the run of the deep.
And again the wild waves whisper how they sweep o’er proud manhood’s
head;
How they play with the bright locks of youth, and dark tresses of maiden’s
just dead.
And they tell me of dear friends at home, whose hearts for the missing ones
yearn,
Little knowing the wanderer’s fate—that they never again can return.
As the wild waves cease to whisper, I think of the days gone by,
When I’ve sail’d in other ships, and other dear friends were nigh ;
And I wonder what has become of them—if they ever think of me,
Who sail’d with them round the world—through the storms and the calms of
the sea.
And I think of those we buried, with whose memories our bosoms yet glow,
And pray that their spirits before us have fled to that land which no mortal
can know.
M. H. W., S.-S.


CONUNDRUMS.
. Why are old maids like sour oranges ? —Because they are not
worth squeezing.
When do we have an exhibition of cannibalism ?—When a rash
man eats a rasher.
Which is the most wonderful animal in the farm-yard?—
A pig, because you first kill it, and then cure it.
Why is Berlin the gayest city in the world ?—Because it is
always on the Spree.
Why do you never expect to see a tailor at home ?—Because
he is always cutting out.
What does a nigger do when his father dies P—He goes a black
burying.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
WANTED.—An Apprentice to learn the’elegant and scientific
art of hair-cutting and shaving in all its* branches, including
wig and whisker making. A premium required. Salary nothing
for the first year, to be doubled the next, and so on until the
expiration of his time. Address—W. Hussey, ship’s hairdresser.
ANTED.—A Biscuit Crusher, also a biscuit pudding maker.
Good wages given to steady workmen. No others need apply.
Address, No. 3 Hatchway of the Netherby Road.
WANTED.—A Corned Beef Curer, also a Good Bone-Picker.
Both men must be very handy and useful. Address, Single Men’s
Hotel.
DOMESTIC OCCURRENCES.
BIRTH.
On the 29th instant, the wife of Mr. John Hanna, of a daughter


THURSDAY, 7th JUNE, 1866.
SUMMARY OE THE WEEK.
31st May.—Eirst part, moderate breezes from tlie southward;
middle part, squally; and latter part, strong breeze from S.S.E.
Heavy swell from the southward. Lat. 22.31 S.; long. 19.6 W.
1st June. —Strong breezes from S.S.E.; heavy southern swell;
ship pitching heavily; mollyhawks were seen for the first time.
Lat. 24.59 S.; long. 20.1 W.
2nd June. —Eirst part, light breezes from the eastward; mid-
night, light, and smooth water ; noon, moderate breeze from
E.N.B. Cape hens and pigeons made their appearance. Lines,
with hooks at the end, and tempting pieces of pork affixed, were
thrown out, but they appeared to be wide-awake, and preferred
other food. Lat. 26.24 S.; long. 19.3 W.
3rd June. —Moderate breezes from E.N.E.; smooth water, and
pleasant weather. Divine service was held on the poop; the
attendance fair. Lat. 29.8 S.; long. 16.16 W.
4th June.-—Eirst part, strong winds from the northward; wind
hauling to N.N.W.; deluge of rain, thunder, and lightning.
Reduced sail, and took in the necessary reefs. Shipping heavy
seas. Latter part, ship labouring very much in the heavy cross
sea. Albatrosses, whale-birds, Cape pigeons and hens were seen
flying astern of the ship in numbers, looking for something to
appease their hunger. Lat. 31.0 S.; long. 13.0 W.
5th June. —First part, wind gradually subsided, drawing to the
W. and W.N.W. Latter part squally. Very heavy sea from
N.W., and also from S.W., causing the ship to roll violently.
Lat. 33.14 S.; long. 9.15 W.
6th June. —Strong winds from NAY. and W.H.W., drawing
towards west and W.S.W. ; frequent showers attended with
violent squalls. Heavy sea struck the vessel on the starboard-
side, tearing adrift the starboard water-closet on maindeck, filling
the cabin, and a great body of water passed below to the ’tween
decks. Lat. 34.10 S.; long. 5.45 W.
CORRESPONDENCE.
To the Editor of the Netherby Gazette.
Dear Sir,' —I have still the pleasure to report that the health
of all on board our good ship Netherby continues very satisfactory.
I would again impress upon you all, that as we are now approach-
ing the cold latitudes, it will be requisite to have warm
clothing at hand; and I must particularly request the mothers .
of children to see their little ones well attended to in this
respect. The mean temperature for last week 72 deg.
I am, Dear Sir, yours very truly,
MARSHALL H. WEBSTER,
Surgeon-Superintendent.


To the Editor of the Nethcrhy Gazette.
Dear Sir.—-In going round on Saturday last through the
tween decks, in company with Dr. Webster, I was highly pleased
to observe that the passengers had their respective departments
kept remarkably clean and in good order. The single men for-
ward are to be prasied for the efficient manner they discharged
their duty in this respect, but on the whole, I must pronounce
in favor of the married people’s compartments, as being through-
°| l |; unexceptionable. The single men, I confess, have many
difficulties to contend with, owing to the coalhole and the traffic
to the bakehouse and galley; notwithstanding all this, I am of
opinion, that they would manage, by mutual effort and good will,
to improve a little in some places. Could I provoke them to a
little spirit of emulation, no doubt they would show a good
pattern, not only to the married people in the ’tween deck, but
also to the stewards in the saloon and the second cabin. Dr.
Webster deserves all praise for his efficient management below ;
every duty becomes a pleasure, wdien conducted with regularity
and good order. I am happy to state that my log for the week
is, on the whole, highly satisfactory, having shortened the dis-
tance by 1263 miles ; so that the fearful rolling and tossing has hot
been in vain. We are this day in lat. 31.59 S ; long. 9.44 W., or
945 nautical miles to the westward of the Cape of Good Hope.
I am, Sir, yours very truly,
O. OWENS,
Commander.
THE MAEINEE’S compass.
In that little box—-the binnacle— open before the eyes of the
man the wheel, is that mystic finger that for ever and ever
him out his way, and this is called the magnetic needle;
v-hat it isy nobody knows. It is a power: it lies snug and com-
pact, floating, as it were, like water—restless as the air—but
otnerwise steady and stationary, though the ship may be dancing
like a cork in the midst of a howling tempest. By darkness or
hj daylight it is the seaman’s friend and guardian angel, whether
in the far ofr Antarctic seas or in the dread calm of the Torrid
tropics ; whether in the fogs that belt our own sea-girt home, or
in Em dread tornado of tne Indian ocean; everywhere the Com-
pass is tne mariner s guide, philosopher, and friend. The
discovery of the mariner’s compass is lost in antiquity,
but France has the credit of its earliest known uses
at sea, and the mark on the north part, a fleur-de-lis,
the French floral emblem, appears to corroborate this. Marco
Polo, a \ enitian, is said to have brought the compass from the
East, in 1200. The art, however, of imparting the magnetic
power to the needle is entirely European. The compass consists
of a finely balanced needle, moving over a circular board, on the
circumference of which are marked the degrees of the circle, be-
sides the 02 points divided again into half-points, for fine steering
c


—“Keep ber away a point, or half a point,” being words of
common command. A pivot rides from tbe centre of tbe box, on
the point of which the needle is balanced; the card and needle
are covered with a glass to protect them from the action of the
air; a strong circular cup contains the whole apparatus, to coun-
teract the irregular motion of the ship. The compass box is sus-
pended within another by means of two concentric brass circles ;
the outer circle is fixed by horizontal points to the outer box, the
inner circle swinging within this on pivots also, the axis of both
being at right-angles the one to the other. Thus the inner circle
sustaining the compass, card, and needle, always retains the
equilibrium under any circumstances, and the rolling and pitching
of the ship has no effect whatever on it.
M. H. W.
POETRY.
Come here, my kind reprover, come and listen to my story,
Don’t blame my short dhudeen, oh don’t, it makes you look so funny ;
You’ve no experience in the world, and when did you see Cracow ?
Who told you there in ancient times the women smoked tobacco?
If you have been in a harem, why did you not look around ?
There they smoke hookahs, which gives to breath a scent so sweet and sound
That your good mammy, English thrifty wife, to make your’s sweeter,
Would like you to do the same, to make you a scented creature.
I smoke tobacco for my good, it makes my heart so cheerful,
It does my mouth indeed no harm, the smoke makes me so joyful ;
Without tobacco, I’m so sad and cross—my husband says so—
He’d rather go without his meat, than mo without tobacco.
Old “ Irisli Matrons” are, one and all, good subjects of the Queen,
Who’ll pay her Majesty the tax, by smoking the dhudeen.
In ancient times to stay the plague, in streets they burnt tobacco;
I likewise keep my mouth from plague, since I’ve no potato.
My husband likes the sheets so well when air’d with perfect smoking—
I cease not, sweet one, to please you , although you are not joking,
Hut would advise you do the same, and I have some experience ;
Until you stronger reasons give, pray madam keep in silence.
JANE.
CONUNDRUMS.
What is that which never asks a question, hut requires many
answers ? —The street door.
Why is C the noisiest letter?—Because the sea roars, and it
makes all call.
When is an infant like a cup or saucer ? —When its a-teething
(tea-thiug).
What is the usual length of a London garden?—One yard.
What sea would make the best bed-room ?—The Adriatic
(a dry attic).
Why is a man’s nose always in the middle of his face ?—Be-
cause its the scenter (centre).
If Neptune tvas deprived of his dominion over the sea, what
would he say?—I haven’t a notion (an ocean).


THURSDAY, 14th JUNE, 1866.
SUMMARY OF THE WEEK.
7tli June. —Strong winds from W.S.W., latter part moderate
from S.W., heavy N.W. swell; a ship in sight to windward,
hound the same way as ourselves. At 8 p.m. the Netherby Min-
strels gave a concert which was well attended, and afforded much
amusement to all classes of passengers. Lat. 34.59 S.; loim.
0.44 W.
8th June. —First part, moderate breezes from the westward,
latter part, increasing breezes from N.E. ; all sails set; cloudy
weather; smooth water. Lat. 35.34. 8.; long. 1.40 E.
9th June. —Increasing winds from N.E. and squally ; hacking
to 1ST. and N.N.W.; at 2 a.m. carried away foretopsail yard ; un-
bent sail and sent down the broken pieces; latter part strong
gale from N.W.; very hollow sea running. Lat. 37.31 S.;
long. 4.44 E.
10th June. —Moderate breezes throughout; wind shifting from
W.S.W. to N.W. and N.N.W.; sea tolerably smooth ; trimmed
yards and set sails according to wind and circumstances. Divine
Service was read on the poop at 11 a.m., very few attending ;
the weather though fine was very cold. Lat. 37.33 S.; long. 7.38 E.
llth June. —Throughout these %4 hours moderate breezes from
N.W. to S.W.; heavy N.W. swell. Lat. 37.50 S.; long. 11.27 E.
12th June.' —Moderate breezes W. to S.W. ; 2 p.m. got up the
new foretopsail yard ; midnight, squally, wind S.W.; latter part
moderate and fine. Lat. 38.16 S. ; long. 14.48 E.
13th June. —Moderate breezes from S.W.; midnight, light airs,
from N.W. to N. At 4 a.m. fresh breeze sprang up from E.
Latter part, squallv, attended with rain. Lat. 38.46 S.; long.
17.30 E.
CORRESPONDENCE.
To the Editor of the Netherhy Gazette.
Dear Sir, — The sanitary condition of our good ship still con-
tinues very favourable, although the weather is getting cold and
wet. A few coughs and catarrhs arc appearing here and there.
There is no sickness to speak of, and I am happy to say a general
cheerfulness pervades all. Once more I would impress upon
all—Don’t forget your warm clothing. The mean temperature
for last week was 65 deg.
I remain, dear Sir,
Yours very truly,
MARSHALL H. WEBSTER,
►Surgeon-Superintendent,


To the Editor of the Netherhy Gazette.
Dear Sir, — I beg to avail myself of this opportunity to return
my warmest thanks to Mr. Young, C.E., and others of the pas-
sengers, who kindly assisted our engineer to repair the defect in
the condensing apparatus. Much praise is also due to the
engineer for his cleverness in his management of the engine, and
his assiduity in finding out the defective parts. After a tempo-
rary suspension, I am happy to say that it is now in good Avorking
order. I have to report onr weekly progress, which is not as
much as I could wish; still it is a good stride in the right direc-
tion, being 1,099 miles since my last. The ship is this day in lat.
41.34 S., long. 19.33 E. Trusting that a month of Avesterly winds
is in store for us,
I am, Sir, yours very truly,
O. OWENS,
Commander.
To the Editor of the Netherhy Gazette.
Dear Sir, —My learned and esteemed friend Dr. Webster lias
given us in your last number, a brief account of tbe construction of
the mariner’s compass, and its importance to navigation as a sure
guide in pointing out a track on the trackless ocean, which enables
the mariner to guide his ship towards her destination in the darkest
night as well as in the clearest day. But this wonderful invention
is subject to perpetual aberration, either from permanent causes
of nature or from adventitious and local attractions. The
variation of the compass is a term applied to the deviation of the
needle from the corresponding point of the horizon, and is
termed east or west variation, according as the magnetic needle
in the compass inclines to the eastward or westward of the true
north point of the horizon—or in other vrords the variation of the
compass is an angle which a magnetic needle suspended at
liberty makes Avith the meridian line on a horizontal plane —or
an arch of the horizon comprehended betAveen the true and
magnetic meridian. The variation of the compass remained long
a secret, after the invention of the compass itself, and it is
asserted that Columbus first observed it on the 14-th September,
1492. Others attribute the discovery of it to another navigator
named Sebastian Cabat, a Yenitian in the service of Henry VTTT,
of England, about the year 1500; but it is hoav generally
believed that the variation of the needle was knoAvn some
centuries earlier,_ though it does not appear that the use
of the needle itself in na\ r igation AA'as then knoAvn. This
variation again is undergoing perpetual change, which Ave will
call the variation of variation ; this latter discovery Avas made by
an Englishman, Henry Grellibrand, Professor of Astronomy in
Gresham College, about the year 1625. The variation of the
compass is different in diverse places, and at diverse times in the
same place, different both in quantity and denomination, and
without a practical knowledge of this perpetual change, and its


daily application to the courses steered by the compass, it would
be impossible to navigate a ship on a long voyage with safety.
Should you wish me to continue the elucidation of this interesting
and important subject, I shall be happy to resume it in your next
number.
I am, Dear Sir,
Yours very truly,
O. OWENS.
A FEW WORDS TO SMOKERS OE TOBACCO.
Tobacco is one of the most powerful narcotic poisons, and is
not without its value, like many others of the same class, as an
article of medicine. Give it even in a small dose to a child, or to
one of any age unaccustomed to its use, and its taste will be
found unpleasant, while its effects will be nauseous and disgust-
ing. But habit brings a change in these respects. After a time
of longer or shorter probation, and after, perhaps, no little sick-
ness and distress in the course of it, the recipient of the tobacco,
whether it be in fume, powder, or solid mass, comes to find a
strange pleasure and fascination in its use. And many a man,
and woman, too nay, even a stripling—would almost as soon
want their daily meal as their accustomed cigar or pipe. They
will not call it food; it is something after meat, and they call it a
luxury. Sometimes, too, they will tell you that when food cannot
be got it forms no indifferent substitute, tending to keep them
warm and comfortable. Now, what are the consequences of this
habit ? Plainly, three at least may be enumerated. 1. Harm
more or less is done to the individual. In confirmed and excessive
smokers, for instance, the tongue soon shows signs of disorder
in the general lining of the alimentary canal, the drain on the
saliva runs to waste, causes thirst, and the stomach gives plain
tokens of an impaired digestion; the hands shake, there is a
peculiar expression of the eye, the heart palpitates, and the
entire norvous*system is evidently impaired in tone. This is bad
enough, but worse may .follow ; local diseases of the most serious
kinds may attack the mouth, and one or both limbs may become
completely paralyzed. Dr. Marshall Hall, a very high authority
on such a subject, has recorded his opinion and experience as
follows: “ It is plain that tobacco acts on the brain and heart;
its eflects are stupidity, defective breathing, and defective action
of the heart, forms of debility, and impaired energy. No abso-
lutely healthy man daily consumes tobacco in any form, or in any
considerable quantity ; if he seems to bear it with impunity, it is
simply because by previous use of the drug he has induced a
perverted or morbid state of the system, to which further con-
tinuance of the drug’s use brings at least a temporary relief.”
M. H. W.
(To he continued.)


POETRY.
ON BOAED OF THE NETHEEBT.
Kind friends, come listen to what I write and give your sympathy,
While I relate what made me sail on board the Netherby
I was short of cash, and short of work, friends turn’d their hacks on me,
So my passage I got, and pack’d my traps on board the Nelhcrbij.
In a foreign clime to try my luck, and tax my energy ;
Where an honest man gets his reward, and is kept from poverty,
With the sweat of my brow I'll earn my bread, and gain my daily fee,
So with conscience clear, I now am here, on board the Netherby.
And should Dame Fortune change my luck, when I have cross’d the sea,
I’ll bless the day I pack’d my traps on board of the Netherby;
The Captain and crew seem all serene, and fond of jollity,
So let us pass a happy time on board the Netherby.
Should any differences arise, the Doctor soon will see,
And he will do his best to please on board the Netherby,
And may we ne’er forget the day we sailed across the sea,
So let us give a hearty cheer for the good ship Netherby.
M. H. W.
i.
Now I have taken up my pen to write,
I pray you all take heed,
About a certain so-called gentleman
Who tried to justify a wicked deed.
ii.
At first they tell a lie,
And say it’s all a hoax,
But that the chain is hid somewhere,
And that it’s all a joke,
in.
Of course, we all expect that
Young men should take their revels,
But we are surprised to see
Them carrying on like devils.
IV.
They do a dirty action,
And then with all their might
Write to Mr. Editor,
And try to prove they’re right,
v.
Now I am sure you all well know
That it was a nasty spleen ;
Conscience cannot but condemn
Such conduct as very mean.
T. G.
I.
I know, O Lord, that Thou art just;
Perfect are all thy ways —
By Thee alone we must
Eternally be saved.
n.
I know, 0 Lord, that Thou art kind,
Ever ready to forgive;
Alas ! that we should be so blind,
But to Thy glory live.
in.
I know, 0 Lord, that Thou art great—
In Thee all things consist;
Without Thee was nothing made.
And by Thee we all exist.
T. G.


CONUNDRUMS.
Why do chickens have no future ?—Because they have their
necks whirled (next world) in this.
When is money damp?—When it is due (dew) in the morning
and missed (mist) at night.
Which is the best net to catch a pretty girl with ? —A coronet.
What word would you use to express the devil riding on a
mouse’s back?—Synonymous (sin on a mouse).
When was B the first letter of the alphabet ? —In the time of
Noah (no A).
ADVERTISEMENTS.
MONEY" advanced, at one day’s notice, without trouble or
exposure, in small sums from £1 upwards, to suit all parties.
Securities will be taken in the shape of drafts on Banks of
Australia, not endorsed; but not on Land Orders. No interest
charged. Apply to Jacob Moses, Netherby Highway.
THE undersigned takes advantage of the large circulation of the
Netherhj Gazette , to intimate to his fellow-passer gers that he is
hard-up for cash, that without cash he cannot obtain drinkables
from Mr. Cashup, and his constitution requiring an uncertain
quantity of stimulating drinks daily, he begs bis fellow-pas-
sengers will take compassion on him, and lend him some money
for the purpose of supplying himself with that which is abso-
lutely necessary to keep up his health. He has a letter of credit
on one of the banks of Australia, but as it is not transferable, he
would not be mean enough to offer it as a security, but offers
the word and honour of a gentleman that he will repay the sum
immediately on his arrival at Brisbane. He requires only £10.
Any soft or green person satisfied with the guarantee
and charitably and disinterestedly inclined, will please make the
s_ame known by letter, addressed to X, care of the editor of the
Netherhy Gazette. Y


THURSDAY, 21st JUNE, 1866.
SUMMAEY OF THE WEEK.
14th June. —First part, strong winds, shifting from E. to S.E.;
frequent showers, with suddcxx squalls of short duration. Latter
part, line; wind N.E. Took in axxd made sail according to cir-
cumstances. A wdxale was seen. Lat. 41.34 S.; long. 19.33 E.
15th Jixne.-—First part, nxoderate bi’eeze from the eastward,
freshening towards evexxixxg. Lat. 42.39 S.; long. 23.01 E.
16th June.—Fresh breezes from E.N.E. and B.; smooth water.
Lat. 43.47 S.; long. 27.20. E.
17th Jxxne.—Fresh breezes from E.N.E.; thick fog; heavy
swell at times from N.W. Many stormy petrels flying about.
Lat. 43.56 S.; long. 32.11 E.
18th June.—Increasing winds froxn N.E. by E. ; thick fog.
Midnight squally, attended with heavy raixx. Deduced sail, and
took in the necessary reefs. Latter part, wind shifted to N.
Ship rolling violently in the cross sea prevailing. Weather cold.
Lat. 44.83 S.; long. 36.40 E.
19th June.—First paid, stiff breeze from N., gradually backing
to N.N.E. and N.E. At 9 p.m. wind ixxcreasing to a brisk gale.
Midnight, strong gales, thick fog, and small rain. Took in the
necessary reefs. From midnight to 6 a.m. ship’s head reaching
under two topsails and main trysail. Lat. 44.42 S.; long. 40.27 B.
20th June.—Moderate breezes from N.N.E.; thick, unpleasant-
weather. Towards evening, wind gradually drawing to 1ST. and
K.AF.; heavy sea; ship rolling violently, Noon, fresh breezes
from E.N.E.; weather very unsettled; high, agitated sea. Lat.
44.11 S. ; long. 44.52 E.
CORRESPONDENCE.
To the Editor of the Netherhy Gazette.
Dear Sir, — The general health of the passengers still continues
very satisfactory, notwithstanding the cold, stormy weather we
have had for the last few days. I am very sorry to have to report the
death of an infant, which occurred this afternoon in the steerage.
The child was suffering from disease of the stomach, and has be°en
in a very delicate state of health for some time. The mean tem-
perature for last week was 52 deg.
I remaixx, dear Sir,
Yours very truly,
MARSHALL H. WEBSTER,
Surgeon-Superintendent.
To the Editor of the Netherhy Gazette.
Dear Sir, inis day being vexy stoxuny, the ship labourixxg axxd
straining very nxucb, and our new sails split into fragments by


the furious winds, my anxiety of mind and the additional duties
devolved upon me in such times, will, I trust, be sufficient excuse
for the very brief letter I am going to write you this time. The
weather throughout the week has been very unsettled and
threatening, the wind continually shifting, but blowing mostly
from theE.X.E. quarter, which greatly retards progress. The
ship has been “ laying to,” under close-reefed main topsail and
main trysail twice during the week, in furious easterly gales.
Taking our many disadvantages and mishaps into account, our
distance run, per log, during the last week, is not insignificant—
being 1,287 miles. The ship is this day in lat. 11,42 S., and long.
48.22 E.
I remain, dear Sir,
Yours truly,
O. OWENS,
Commander.
To the Editor of the Netherhy Gazette.
Dear Sir, —I would not trespass on your columns, were it not
for an advertisement signed X, which, appeared in the last num-
ber of the Sporting Gazette , reflecting on a mistake which he sup-
poses was made by your printer. Now, I have to assure both
you and him, that my advertisement was inserted verbatim as I
forwarded it to you. Mr. X, oi the Sporting Gazette , was evi-
dently in the same predicament as myself, viz. :—both in want of
money, and it was a strange coincidence that both should have
chosen the same pseudonym. Having been drawn into the sub-
ject, I cannot refrain from remarking that Mr. X, of the Sport-
ing Gazette, seems to think, because a person lends him money,
it must naturally follow that he is a gentleman. As the lending
and borrowing of money is nothing more than a commercial
transaction, X cannot view it in the same light; besides every
gentleman is a person, but it is not every person that is a gentle-
man. As it is through the large circulation of your journal that
I have been so soon enabled to obtain the loan of money, I con-
sider myself bound in some measure to acquaint you with the
manner in which it was accomplished. I could not persuade the
person who answered my advertisement to take my word and
honour; somehow, he did not appear to like my physiognomy,
and although I assured him, over ai d over again, that I was born
and. bred a gentleman, yet he maintained he would prefer
taking my non-transferable letter of credit, provided I made an
endorsement in his favour. This did not suit me so well, still
I submitted ; he then got my letter of credit endorsed, and I the
£10. how, won’t I tuck into the malt liquor allowed me by the
rules, and—and—but I must not let the cat out of the bao-.
Between you and me, Mr. Editor, I thought of finding some soft
and green person, but there is no mistake about it, he is wide-
awake.
I am, Sir, your obedient servant,
X.


A EEW WORDS TO MY EELLOW-YOYAOERS.
It is now more than two months since we left Old England,
and our good ship has carried us 9,000 miles ; the life at sea must
by this time have become familiar to all, and those hardships which
appeared so great at first, we hope have now died out; time
may perhaps have taught all to bear patiently those annoyances
which we believe unsettled some amongst us at first; we assure
all that each successive day will lead us to be more contented
and happy. Surely no one can have left home under the impres-
sion that the voyage was to be obtained without some degree of
trouble, anxiety, or care ; instead of complaining of any hard-
ships, let us rather be thankful that they are no worse. We can
say, from experience, that so far we have been fortunate in every
way as regards weather, good health, and amusements. The first
few nights after our departure from Plymouth are no doubt still
fresh in the minds of many of us; but since then, the most
fastidious of us have nothing really to complain of. We will simply
ask them if sea-sickness could not have kept them prostrate P
could not an epidemic have broken out amongst us ? Such has
not happened ; we are spared such calamities, therefore let us be
thankful. It is not for us to enquire into the different causes
which may have led many on board of the Netherhy to emigrate :
these are innumerable; we put them aside, but we are most
anxious to advise all to rely on their own resources, and to push
themselves forward by their own energies. It is of little use at any
time—especially in a colony where most who have risen to riches
and influence, and been brought up in a rough school, and
grappled with difficulties—to imagine that when misfortune
comes we shall find many to cling to, or rely upon in the hour
of need, everybody being intent on his own business. In con-
clusion, we most sincerely hope that if any of us are beaten or
unfortunate in life hereafter, we may not succumb, but rise above
our trials, and pursue with still greater determination the path
in life we may have chosen.
A CONSTANT READER.
A EEW WORDS TO THE SMOKERS OE TOBACCO.
Hi your last paper I spoke of three consequences, at least,
arising from that habit. I explained the first of them—that harm,
more or less, Avas done to the individual. Second—the man
becomes a slai e. I or a time he has gone on swimmingly with
his weed. But, by-and-by he thinks to leave it off on account of
its expense, perhaps lor its inconvenience, or a sense of mischief
done. 1 here are two at the bargain making in either case, but
at the beginning and the end their respective positions are
reversed. “ What has become of your old servant, Robert ? You
have not, surely, parted with him P” said a friend to an aged
gentleman, at the door of one of the metropolitan clubs. “Yes,


indeed I have.” “ Why, has he not been with you for 15 years? ”
“ Yes, but it was full time we should part, and I will tell you
why. In the first five years he was an admirable servant; for the
next five he was avery pleasant companion; butduring the last five
he has been a most insufferable tyrant.” So it is with tobacco.
At first, it is taken up and put down at will, without grudge or
grumble—no menial could be more submissive. ISText, it comes
to be quite on a par with you, and you cannot well stir without
taking it at least into consultation; but, afterwards, you are
altogether its slave; provided you do not quarrel with its exac-
tions, and are content to hug its chains, all may go smoothly
enough the weight of the burden is very imperfectly felt; but if
a contention should arise, and you should seek to emancipate
yourself at one stroke, then the true extent of the mischief flashes
upon you to your sore confusion. One of the two alternatives
are waiting your decision—either to fall back into helpless
bondage, or to begin a fight for freedom, of greatest pain, and
en of doubtful issue. Third—the evil through your influence
and example is extended to others—not only as harm done to
yourself, but giving a character and commonness to the practice,
you are the means of entrapping the unwary, and thereby extend-
ing the evil. You see little ragged urchins in the streets
clubbing their few pence to purchase tobacco and a pipe, then they
congregate on some convenient door-step, and striking a light,
take whiff and whiff about till either sick or satisfied. They
don t like the smell of the weed, much less its taste, and how
comes it that they givethemselves this trouble, simply because they
see their fathers and big brothers do the same, and they think it
manly. Or see that precocious youth with hat and cane, fresh
from his mother’s apron strings, lounging on the portico, or
strolling on the lawn, or swaggering even on the street, striving
hard to seem at ease behind that enormous cigar, almost as big
as himself, which seems rather to be smoking him than he it.
Do you think he would ever have ventured on such a bold
experiment unless he had seen men, gentlemen, sensible-looking
gentlemen such as you, similarly employed ? You say, all very
true, but it is a luxury, and I like it. In reply, let me simply
ask is it either wise or right to indulge in a luxury (something
not essential) that is hurtful, enslaving, and infectious ?
M. H. W.
To the Editor of the Netherhi] Gazette .
Dear bin, I have a few words to bring before the
notice of our chief, and have chosen your columns for
that purpose, and for which I hope I shall not incur
his displeasure. We are out from Plymouth since the 13th
April 10 weeks, or nearly so —during which period I have never
faltered from the post of duty.
You must be aware that we have had much extra duty to per-
form, which is usually the case in rounding the Cape ; and there


has often been a call “ for all hands.” We have no grog allowed
us, which liquor is a great boon to sailors generally—but I do
not ask for that. But I certainly do think that we ought to have
a fresh mess, as, from the appearance of the stock on board, I
don’t think it would be missed ; and it will be a great satisfaction
and a change for us, after eating so much salt-junk. By insex-t-
-ing this you will confer a favour upon my messmates and myself.
Yours obediently,
TEN YEARS BEFORE THE MAST.
CONUNDRUMS.
Why is a short nigger like a white man ?—Because ho is not
a tall (at all) black.
■What is that which you often see made, but never see it again
after it is made ?—A bow.
When is a lady’s dress not a lady’s dress ? —When it is
dripping.
What is the weight of the moon P —Four quarters.
What did the Netherhy weigh when she was leaving Plymouth,
with all her passengers, &c., on board ? —Her anchor.
What is the worst description of cane ? —A hurricane.
DOMESTIC OCCURRENCES.
Death.
On the 21st instant, Eliza, infant daughter of Mrs. George Snooks, aged
10 months.
POETRY.
A STITCH IN' tImE.
A stitch in time, they say, saves nine ;
It does, and sometimes more ;
For I have found, with grief profound,
’Twouldoft have saved a score.
That little rent, perhaps you meant
To mend another day;
But see a nail, or broken rail,
Has torn the piece away.
And now no more neat as before
That pretty frock will be,
For though you’ve tried the place to hide,
The patch we all can see.
That stocking, too, which now you view
With such a lengthened face,
Last week I saw, without a flaw,
Except a small thin place.
A stitch in time indeed saves nine,
As you will always find,
And if you care your work to spare,
You’ll bear this truth in mind.
ANONYMOUS.


THURSDAY, 28th JUNE, 1866.
SUMMARY OF THE WEEK.
21st June, first part, brisk breezes from E.N.E.; at 3 p m
took m all light sails. 5 p.m., wind east, still increasing; furled
mainsail and crossjack, single-reefed the topsails. Midnight, strong
gales from E N.E. 2.30, took in mizen topsail, wind increasing
to a storm, hauled up foresail. 3 a.m., starboard foretopsail
sheet was carried away, and the sail split; endeavoured to take in
die remains, but for several hours the united efforts of the crew
were unavailing The storm still increasing, split foretopmast
staysail; hove the ship to on the port tack, under close reefed
mam topsail and main trysail. 7.30 a.m., a heavy sea struck the
ship on the port quarter; a great body of water washed over the
poop, smashed the after saloon skylight; a great quantity of water
passed through the skylight, flooded the saloon and fore cabin At
8 a.m. wind shifted suddenly to N.W. to W.N.W.; squared main-
yard and set foresail, scudded before the storm durirm the
remainder of the day, heavy seas making a complete breach over
the ship fore and aft, ship labouring and straining fearfully Baro-
R 8 thermometer 47 deg. Lat. 44.42 S.; long.
. 22 n( i June. Commencing with strong gales from W N W
violent and dangerous squalls attended with showers of hail and
sleet, gradually moderating towards midnight; heavy cross sea
making the ship roll and strain very much. 3 a.m., wind again
backing to N, and N.E. Barometer again down to 28 3-lOths.
8 a.m., hauled up and furled foresail, hove the ship to on the
port tack under close-reefed main topsail and main trysail; atmos-
phere very dense and thick all round. Noon, strong gales wind
drawing to tne northward. Lat. 45.5 S.; long. 51.10 E. ’
23rd June. Beginning with moderate winds *N., with small
ram; 2 p.m., unbent fore topsail and bent another; 4pm
win . fast increasing, set close reefed fore topsail • 6 n m ' in-
creasing to a strong gale from W.N.W.j very heavy cross searunnin*
making the ship roll violently so as to endanger her masts; life-
boats at times dipping in the water; towards morning more
modeiate and barometer rising; set more sail. Lat. 44,31 8/
0 / . O X? J . ~ * >
24th June —First part, moderate gale from N.N.W.; 4 p.m
fl0n ? N 'S? ,E ' Took in to P£ ailari t sails, and close-
reefed the topsads. Barometer again falling; midnight, strong
gale At 3 a.m. took in mizen topsail; 6 a.m., wind increasing
bhd, bvr.T" 6 ’ i rawi ?? to the N -> sea ranning mountains
high, breaking oyer the ship in all directions. At 8 a.m. heavy
sea struck the ship on the port side, washing away bulwarks,


lifting the main rail, stove in the main looby hatch, and a large
quantity of water got down to the ’tween decks as high as the
passenger’s lower beds, wetting all their beds and beddin g. Mam
and after hatches ware battened down. The starboard life-boat
was lifted by a heavy sea, unshipped from the davit, and the boats
how fell about three feet. From 8 a.m. to noon, storm continued
with unabated force, rising the sea into dense fog, so that nothing
could be seen distinctly beyond the limit of our ship; 10 a.m.,
fore topsail split in its close reef; rove spilling lines, and took it
in the best way we could : kept steering right before the sea,
scudding under close reefed main topsail and foresail. There
was no other alternative, as to take in the foresail, in order to
heave to, would be utterly impossible; had and sleet. Tat.
44.47 S. ; long. 59.50 E. .
95th June.—First part, the storm still continued to blow with
unabated force. Two p.rn. shipped a heavy sea over the starboard
gangway; washed away the starboard water-closets, top-gallant
bulwarks ; still scudding right before the sea and wind. 1 ©wards
evening the squalls were not so violent ; heavy lightning all round.
Midnight, strong gale, continuing squally until 4 a.m. Latter
part more moderate, but heavy sea running, the ship rolling
fearfully; saloon and second cabin kept continually flooded beds
and births were wet, and every passenger shifting for himself the
best way he could. The ship fore and aft has tins day the
apppearance of a wreck. Lat. 44.14 S.; long. 00.40 .
96th June.—Moderate breezes throughout first part from S.W.,
set more sail, latter part wind N.N.W., very unsteady; steering
E S.E.; heavy swell from N.W. Lat. 48.57 S.; long. 68.89 E.
97th June —Fine weather throughout, light moderate breezes
from S.W. to N.N.W. Lat. 48.48 S.; long. 71.84 E.
CORRESPONDENCE.
To the Editor of the Netherby Gazette.
Dear Sir— Notwithstanding the stormy weather we had last
week the health of the passengers still continues very good.
There are a few more cases of coughs and colds, but nothing at all
serious During the late gales the passengers between decks had
to put up with a great deal of discomfort and inconvenience, as
the hatches had to be battened down to keep out the heavy seas
which were continually washing over the deck, and wet beds were
the order of the day, and even on some occasions provisions could
not he served out. Still I am glad to say every one behaved
themselves extremely well. I heard of no complaining, and all
helped to get rid of the water which would find its way below, al-
though every precaution was taken to keep it out; and I could not
help°noticing that everybody looked cheerful and made the best
of matters. ° I hope we shall keep the fine weather wc have at
present until we get to Brisbane, when I have no doubt every one
will greet the land of their adoption with all the more gladness


after the rough weather they have experienced. One great matter
foi thankfulness we have is, there was no accident to passengers
or crew.
The mean temperature for last week was 54 deg.
I remain, dear Sir,
Yours very truly,
MARSHALL H. WEBSTER, S.S.
To the Editor of the Netherhy Gazette,
ear Sir, During the last week we have had to contend with
storms of indescribable fury from N.N.W. to W.S.W., and most
high and dangerous seas, which did considerable damage to the
ship and her equipments. Much bulwark was lost, water-closets
°n main (1ecl< smashed up, booby hatches, ventilators, and poop
ladders suffered the same fate, and great quantity of water making
its way to the fore cabin and saloon. Main and after hatches
mostly throughout were kept battened down, in consequence of
the heavy sea incessantly washing over the main deck. Several
of my crew are laid up from fatigue and exposure; however, there
has no accident happened to life or limb, and we have much
cause to be thankful. The ship, notwithstanding the severe
rolling, is still comparatively tight and staunch, and I trust that
lorn gale to gale we will finally arrive safely in our destined
haven, when all our trials and hardships will be past and soon for-
gotten. The ship to-day is in latitude 44.31 S., and long 75 30
E,, having traversed during the week 1246 miles.
Yours very truly,
o. OWENS,
Commander.
Jh the Editor of the Netherby Gazette.
Dear Sir, In my first letter I had promised farther to
continue my remarks on the variation of the compass, should anv
of the passengers feel any interest on the subject. One of the
number desired another letter, and I willingly comply with his
wishes, and beg to state, without furtherexordium, that the primary
power which seems to influence the needle—giving it polarity,
and causing it to undergo perpetual change—is magnetism. This
phenomenon of nature seems to elude the definitions of science •
several hypotheses have been formed, and many attempts made to
discover its elementary principles, yet they appear to be still very
imperfectly known. Electricity, the atmosphere, the masses of
rocks and mountains—containing metallic matter, exert a power-
ul magnetic influence; the aurora-borealis is considered to be
an electrical phenomenon, and is thought also to have an effect
on the magnetic needle j and the heat of the sun likewise has an
influence on the needle, producing a diurnal variation, which has
been observed to increase progressively with the altitude of that
luminary, even to 3 or 4 (legs., and increasing from about eight
or nine o clock until one or two p.m., when it begins to diminish,


and probably many other secondary causes besides the disturbing
elements on board ship, causing a constant aberration of the
needle, generally termed local attraction, but this shall form the
subject of another letter. Space will not allow me to give the
diverse opinions of philosophers relating, at different times, to the
perpetual change in the variation ; but the received theory at the
present is the following, and whichhas been, I believe, con firmed by
the investigationandresearch of modern philosophers, viz.:thatthere
are two magnetic poles, both in the northern and southern hemis-
pheres revolving round the polesof the earth. One of the north mag-
netic polesisplaced for the year 1749 in lat. 71 deg. N.,long. 80 deg.
W., and the south magnetic pole in lat. 65 deg. S., and long. 130
E., and according to Mr. Churchman, the north magnetic pole
revolves round the terrestrial pole in 1096 years, and the south
in 2289 years. Professor Haustein, who discovered a magnetic
pole in Siberia, is of opinion that the periods of these revolutions
are respectively 4,600, 1,740, 1,300, and 860 years. The southern
poles being the slower in motion, and by the intersections of the
magnetic meridians with the terrestrial meridians, the variation
of the needle might be found by inspection, were the magnetic
poles well ascertained and the needle not subject to aberrations
from the various causes mentioned above. Sir Edward Parry, in
his last Arctic expedition, found the compasses in passing up
Davis’s Straits becoming sluggish, and on arriving at Barrow’s
Straits, they became totally useless: thus confirming the con-
clusions of Flinders and others, that, although the magnetic force
of the earth would be greatest at the magnetic poles, yet its
horizontal directive power would then entirely cease; but while
the horizontal needle is thus forsaken as it were by the earth’s
magnetic power, the various magnetic bodies in the ship which
surround it are still acting on it with a directive force which
relatively increases as the directive force of the magnetic pole
diminishes.
O. OWENS.
(To he continued.)
ENIGMA.
The following Enigma is founded on palindromic words— words which
read the same either backwards or forwards:—
Mum 1 First find out a word that doth silence proclaim,
1 j And backwards or forwards is always the same.
Anna * hen next you must find out a feminine name,
) Which backwards and forwards is always the same.
Deed i act ’ a Wl 'i t ' n ?> or parchment whose name,
j Both backwards and forwards is always the same.
A n ana A plant that is rare, whose botanical name,
) Read backwards or forwards is always the same.
Minim J note u ' c d in music, which time doth proclaim,
1 ( And backwards or forwards is always the same.
{The initials or terminals equally frame
A title that is due to the fair married dame,
Which backwards or forwards is always the same.


_ POETRY.
Come passengers dark and fair, young and old
And offer your thanks to the sailors bold,
, nob * or them, each in his rotation,
1 he deep sea were, ere now, our location,
ihe wind blew with furious force from north.
In mountains ran the sea towards the south,
At times in frightful gusts the wind came down,
ho that one foaming sea was us around •
Under close reefs to scud before the storm.
Did our good ship her duty well perform.
Her masts creaking, yards and sails distended,
Made some fear the voyage was now ended.
Ihe seas she shipp’d ’twixt after part and fore
Swept rails away, and two or three things more.
Water-closets on deck shar’d the same fate,
hicli would not have happened, if their state
Had been look d into by those who had might
And were sent on board to see all was right ’
for the work done is contract work, like most;
1 he rule is clieapness-or they loose their post :
u hat matters it what happens out at sea
those on board? but they must have their fee
J hat serious accidents did not take place
1 hat quarter galleries were not wash’d apace,
1 hat the roaring sea sternports have not stay’d
I hat all we have under the poop is sav’d
1 hat limbs are perfect, and all ns pertain,
V> e owe to our good, God-fearing Captain
Who, for hours, in the fiercest of the gale,
hen horizontally poured rain and hail
Stood holding on and watching every sea
9-ith «S°SKI r he helmsman or where would we now be ?
and 25th June. . , toi a* c i
nut i , .TT I - Lat - 44 47 S ; long. 62.50 E.
Oh ! happy child, why take thy flight
Like holy angel to the sky ?
And leave us weeping day and night
(Lut weep not when we look on high)
We shed a tear, but not despair,
Since thou hast join’d the heavenly choir.
•By faith we see the glorious day
Y hen death must yield again his prey.
Hie king of terror in dismay
Shall see his captive upward fly.
From depth of sea our child shall rise,
Again we’ll meet her in the skies.
How grave is land so very low,
rxr? enea^1 *! ie Naming billows deep,
\y ithout a single trace to show
Where doth the happy infant sleep.
His faithful word we have of yore,
ihat she shall rise to die no more!
O. O.
W1 XT i CONUNDRUMS.
JIT ?T° al \ a bad ratca tcher ?—Because lie was 40 days
an “.“ ° l ts without seeing ere a rat (Ararat).
timeVLln W fi IC u° W M °'!? wore a xvi o —Because he was some-
mes seen with Hair on (Aaron) and sometimes without.
V\ hy do pioneers always go before an army ?—To axe the way.


THURSDAY, 5th JULY, 1866.
SUMMARY OF THE WEEK.
28th June.—First part, moderate breezes from north ; increas-
ing towards 8 p.m., with a falling barometer; took in all light
sails. 9.30, took in mainsail and crossjack; increasing winds.
Midnight, strong, with small rain. 9 a.m., double reefed the
topsails, took in jib and spanker. 3 a.m., took in mizen topsail.
4 a m., took in and furled the foresail; strong gale, N.E., with
rain; close reefed the topsails. Latter part, strong gale, with
violent and dangerous squalls; running to the S.E. and S.S.E.
keeping as much as practicable before the high sea running
Battened down main and after hatches. Lat. 44.31 S.; long'
75.30 E.
29th June. —Commencing with strong gale from north ; scudd-
ing under close reefed fore and main topsails. 2 p.m,, wind
shifted from N. to W.N.W. in a violent squall. Still continuing
to blow with undiminished force, the high cross sea running,
causing the ship to labor and roll voilenfly; shipping very heavy
seas. Midnight, wind west; set foresail. Latter part, strong
gales from W.S.W., showers of hail and snow. Lat. 43.28 S.;
long. 80.49 E.
30th June. —First part, brisk gale from W.S.W.; frequent
showers of hail, attended with heavy squalls; set more sail.
Latter part, strong winds from west, drawing gradually to N.W.
High sea running; deck constantly wet. Lat. 42.22 S.; long.
86.14 E.
1st July.—Strong winds W.N.W., increasing at 8 p.m. to a
strong gale; reduced sail according to circumstances. Latter
part, more moderate; made sail. Noon, strong wind and showery.
Lat. 42.1 S. ; long. 91.36 E.
2nd July,-—Frequent showers of rain and hail, attended with
violent squalls. 1.30 a.m., shipped a heavy sea over port gang-
way, which smashed port water-closets to pieces; saved the pieces.
10 a.m., sea more moderate ; unbattened the after hatch. Pre-
pared to send down the fore-topsail, being split. Noon, squally ;
hail and sleet. Lat. 41.36 S.; long, 95.36 E.
3rd July.—Strong winds from S.W. to W., frequent showers of
hail and snow, attended with hard squalls; reduced and made
sail according to circumstances. Noon, more moderate. Lat.
41.4 S,; long. 100.44 E.
4th July.-—Strong winds from W.S.W. Latter part, strong
winds from W. and squally ; ship continuing to roll and labor
very much in the high cross sea prevailing; reduced and made
sail according to circumstances. Lat. 40,55 S.; long. 106.1 E.


CORRESPONDENCE.
To the Editor of the Netherby Gazette.
Dear Sir,— It gives me very great pleasure to continue to
report favorably of the general health of all on board our good
ship Netherby. As we approach the shores of Australia, judging
from former experience, I shall expect the Doctor to be still less
enquired after, every one looking forward with pleasure to catch
the first view of the land of their adoption. The mean tempera-
ture for last week was rather low, being 51 deg.
I remain, Dear Sir,
Yours very truly,
MARSHALL H. WEBSTER, S.S.
To the Editor of the Netherby Gazette.
Dear Sir, —Throughout the first part of this week we have
experienced strong gales from N.W. to W.S.W., frequent showers
of hail and snow, attended with violent squalls : ship continuing
to ship a great quantity of water, keeping the decks continually
flooded. The latter part of the week a little more moderate,
admitting one of the after-hatches to be opened, to the great relief
of the passengers below, who display great moral courage in
patiently enduring the hardship which cannot be redressed, and
without showing any spirit of discontent and unnecessary com-
plaints ; for this Christian conduct they deserve all praise. We
continue to make rapid strides towards our destination, and ere
another week will have elapsed, I fully expect to sight land in the
vicinity of Bass’s Straits, when we shall enjoy smoother seas and
a fine climate. The distance run per log since your last issue is
1,022 miles, the ship being this clay in lat. 41.4 S., and long.
111.17 E.
I remain, yours very truly,
O. OWENS,
Commander.
To the Editor of the Netherby Gazette.
Dear Sir, —Through the columns of your paper, I wish to say
a few words to my fellow-passengers. What I am about to say
might be said by some one more competent than I am, neverthe-
less, I hope it will not be said in vain
It is now three months since we first met in the docks of the
richest city of the world, there to embark on board the ship
Netherby, hoping to be carried in safety to a distant land. We
cannot look back to that memorable day without thoughts rushing
into our minds that almost move us to the quick when we think
of that last sad parting with those so near and dear to our hearts—
our kind relations, but still kinder parents, who almost idolized
every good action—looking forward to some bright future, when
we would bo able to repay them for that care which riches cannot buy.
When I first set foot on our ship all were strangers to me ;
there was no familiar face that I could look to for a kind word or
a greeting smile. As time rolled on, all that strangeness of


character died away; when to my groat astonishment I found the
greater part of my fellow-passengers low and degraded in their
morals, using filthy and abominable language, unfit to be heard
by human ears; swearing seems to have reached its lowest ebb,
and it is constantly being poured forth in perfect volumes from
the vile lips of our youngest passengers, who but a few years back
lay helpless on their mother’s knee. Does it look manlv to
swear and use filthy language ? Quite the reverse: it firing's us
on a level, if not lower, than the beast. How is it then we*have
become so low and degraded in so short a time ? Is it because
■\ve miss the sound of the church bell ? Or is it because we have
lost the sweet sound of that familiar voice, who tried with
impressing sermons to mould deep in our hard hearts the inspired
word of God 1 I certainly must say we have been very unfor-
tunate to have been sent on such a long voyage without an
ambassador of the Lord. Swearing is not our only besetting sin,
Sabbath-breaking is equally as bad. How many are there that
would not shun the idea of card-playing on Sundays, as well as
collecting in groups to hear read the Sporting Gazette, even before
oui earthly parents, and how much more dreadful are such actions
in the sight of God, when we have been moving in the very
jaws of death, being pitched about by the mountainous waves,
threatening us with immediate destruction as they fell with
dreadful force against our ship, then flying back, white with foam,
as if angry at being obstructed on their onward course. I say
wdien such sights as these will not make us lay aside our cards
and Sporting Gazette on Sundays, what will ? Still, lam happy
to say there are a few exceptions ; there are a few who do not bow
their knee to Baal: for I sometimes, in passing up and down
among the berths, see some who have not forgotten their early
training as they stand in deep devotion, others more humbly
bending their knee on the cold and comfortless deck ; but by far
the greater part are crucifying the Saviour afresh. Is it possible
that Ave shall grow better ?
We are now drawing very near our adopted land where such
chances will be very few, therefore, I would say to one and all,
let us change our course of conduct ere Ave set foot on land, not
forgetting that the rise and progress of the country to which Ave
are hastening, requires our humble and united efforts, both in
religious and scientific pursuits. I think lam justified in making
a few more remarks before I conclude my letter. Great differences
haAo aiisen amongst all parties on board our ship, sometimes
through pallry actions, causing angry Avords, which, soon brought
forth heavy blows. Therefore, I would say to all, before we leave
this ship, let us stretch out to each other the right hand of
fiiendsbip, to cement us closer than eA'er we have been before;
then, should we cross each other’s path in that vast distant
country, Ave can greet each other with brotherly kindness.
I remain, yours truly,
July 4.
PHILANTHROPIST,
in the Steerage.


To the Editor of the Netherby Gazette.
Dear Sir, In my last letter a few remarks were made on the
natuial causes of the variation of the compass. I will, at present,
very briefly give a few instances of the variation, of the variation,
or, in other words, the gradual, continual, and universal change
observed to take place in the variation at different times in the
same places. Thus, in Paris, the variation in 1550 was 8 deg.
E -> in 1660 there was no variation, and in 1760 it was 18.20 W.j
which is at the rate ot 9| min. per year. In London, in the
year 1580, the variation was 11.15 E.; in 1657 there was no
variation, and in 1780 it was 22.41 W., continuing to increase
until March, 1819, when it was found to be 24.41 W., the needle
having arrived at its maximum in that year, and since that time,
seems to be retrograding at the rate of 6 min. annually. At
Cape Agulhas, S. Africa, there was no variation in the year 1600,
when the Portugese first rounded it (hence its name)." In 1692,
it was 11 deg. W., and the W. variation there continued to in-
crease at the rate of 8 min. per year until it has attained to 30 deg.
W., which is the variation found there at the present time. The
line of no variation which was at Cape Agulhas in the year 1600,
is now found in 28.40 W. long., on the parallel of Cape Horn.
The south end, inclining to E. in its course to join the south
magnetic polo, and towards the N. it inclines gradually to the
westward, passing through Brazil from Bio Janiero to Maranhan,
nearly thence to windward of the West Indian Islands,
entering the United States a little to the N. of New York, thence
through Canada and Labrador, until it joins the north magnetic
pole, discovered by Sir Edward Parry in Barrow Straits. ° The
other line of “no variation is about 131 deg. E. long., on the
parallel of 40 deg. S. lat., the south end inclining eastward, and
the north end westward; passing through part of Australia to the
west_ of India, and entering Arabia, a little to the west of the
Persian Gulf, and, I suppose, finally terminating in the north
magnetic pole, discovered by Professor Hanstein, in Siberia,
though I have not the means of following its track further than
the Persian Gulf. On our passage round the Cape of Good
Hope we found the variation about 33 deg. W., and is
daily diminishing as we proceed to the eastward, until we
fall in with the lino of no variation, in 131 deg. E,;
and by the time the ship will arrive in Bass’s Straits the variation
will be about 10 deg. E. By what has been stated above it is
evident that a ship off the Cape of Good Hope steering east, and
another at Bass’s Straits steering the same course, will have four
points difference respectively in the points steered by compass,
and unless great care is taken to correct the ship’s courses daily,
according to the quantity and denomination of the variation, the
most disastrous results must inevitably ensue. I had intended-
Mr. Editor, to dwell longer on the universal change of the varia,
tion, and dedicate another letter on local attraction, or the devia


tion of the needle, arising from disturbing agencies on board ship;
but as you will have abundant matter for insertion in your Gazette ,
I will close my subject with this letter. But permit me just to
remark that the needle is subject to great aberation from the
quantity of iron contained on board of every ship, and it appears
to be greater in small ships, but most of all in iron ships, and
the iron, and other disturbing agencies on board, acting as a com-
pound force in producing the error in the variation. This does
not appear to affect the needle when the ship’s head is north or
south, as the attraction of iron seems to act in concert with the
magnetic poles; but when the ship’s head is east or west it will
produce 8 deg. or 9 deg. error, the greater at west, and the inter-
mediate points will be effected proportionate to the number of
points which the ship’s head is from north or south. I almost
regret that neither time nor space will permit me to continue my
subject, as it seems to be full of interest both to mariners and
passengers; hut as we are now drawing towards the end of our
passage, the more engrossing subject relating to their new home
must of necessity occupy much more of their minds than the
compass and its variations. Apologizing for the length of my
letter,
I remain,
Yours very truly,
O. OWEN.
POETEY.
ON THE DEATH OE AN INFANT AT SEA.
’Twas noon, my child was sleeping, while the waves like feathery snow,
Dash’d o’er the ship, and I sat keeping, keeping my sad watch below :
I mark’d the suffering of the babe, that could not speak its woe.
I watch’d the infant’s tears gush forth—what cause could make them flow ?
I met the meek uplifted eye, that fain would ask relief,
Yet could not tell of agony—this was ray greatest grief.
I heard the faint and frequent sigh, the quick and shorten’d breath,
I watch’d the last dread strife draw nigh, and pray’d it might he brief.
The burning tears were in my eyes, I bent me down to kiss
Thy livid lips and pallid brow, my first-born bud of bliss.
I laid thee down in sinless rest, and from thy marbl’d brow
Culled one soft lock of radiant hair, my only solace now.
I gazed upon thy quiet face, half blinded by ray tears,
Till gleams of hope, unfelt before, came brightening on my fears,
I saw thee plung’d beneath the waves, and heard the fearful splash,
I shudder’d as I thought that now they’d madly o’er thee dash.
The voice of prayer came on ray ear, I listen’d as ’twas read,
That solemn service of the church, the service for the dead ;
It told me, for my darling one, not to be sad and weep
Tor she had gone to realms above, tho’ buried in the deep,
So when the first wild throb is past of anguish and despair
I’ll lift the eyes of faith to Heaven, and think my child is there.
M. H. W.


ACROSTIC.
Queensland, thy clime is not like that dull clime of ours;
Under a southern sun, a sweeter influence breathes around your flowers.
Earth’s softest springs can nowhere shed so soft and warm a light,
Earth’s brightest summers can nowhere be so gloriously bright ;
Nowhere can birds of brighter, lovelier plume be found,
Search where thou wilt, the whole wide world around ;
Let every nation with thy flowers their own compare,
And none will be so beautiful, so gloriously fair ;
Nowhere has nature been so liberal with her hand ;
Dwell where thou wilt, no country’s like “ Queensland.”
M. H. W.
CONUNDRUMS.
Where did the cock crow so that all the world could hear
him ?—ln the ark.
Why is a carpenter more ugly than a blacksmith? —Because
he is a deal plainer.
Why does an artist die the most horrible of deaths ?—Because
he makes faces and busts (bursts).
According to the laws of retaliation, why have you a right to
pick an artist’s pocket?—Because he has picked yours (pictures).
Why is good acting like a broken lock, a broken sash-line, and
an express train ?—Because it should be rewarded, recorded,
but never retarded.
What is often brought to the table, always cut, but never
eaten ?—A pack of cards.
If you cut a tree down, why has it no right to complain ?
Because it was axed whether it would or not.


THURSDAY, 14th JULY, 1866.
CORRESPONDENCE.
To the Editor of the Netherhy Gazette.
Dear Sir, —I am happy to say that applications at the dispen-
sary are becoming fewer every day, although the weather con-
tinues rather cold. I hope this pleasant state of affairs will con-
tinue, and that I shall have the pleasure of landing all safe and
sound at Brisbane next week ; and though some maybe weakened
by the voyage, a few days on fresh meat and vegetables in the
delightful climate of Queensland will set them all right again.
I made my weekly tour of inspection last Saturday, in company
with Captain Owens, and was much pleased to find the ’tween
decks looking so clean, in fact, cleaner than I anticipated, after
the late severe weather we have had. I hope that all will do
their utmost to get the ship as clean as possible next week, so
that the Government Inspectors may report us a model for clean-
liness on our arrival at Brisbane.
The mean temperature for last week was 63 deg.
I am, Dear Sir,
Yours very truly,
MARSHALL H. WEBSTER.
July 12. Surgeon-Superintendent.
To the Editor of the Netherli/ Gazette.
Dear Sir, — Owing to the variable winds and frequent calms
experienced during the first part of the week, my letter cannot be
so favorable as the preceding one. During the latter part we
have experienced strong winds from N.N.E. to N.E., and conse-
quently driven to leeward of our course. Our ship, notwith-
standing adverse winds and calms has made during the week
1,099 miles, being this day in lat. 41.40 S.; long. 135-40 E.
Cape Northumberland, the nearest point of land in Australia, is
this day at noon distant 298 miles, and Cape Otway 370 miles.
With ordinary progress we may expect to see land on Saturday
morning. I am anxiously looking for a change of wind, so as to
enable u=> to pass through Bass’s Straits, instead of going to the
south of Tasmania, which will lengthen our distance by about
260 miles. I am, Sir,
Yours very truly,
O. OWENS,
Commander.
SUMMARY.
6th July.—Strong winds from W., heavy cross sea, shipping
seas at times; latter part more moderate; made sail according to
circumstances. Lat. 41.4 S.; long. 111.17 E.


6th July.—Moderate winds from W.; set studding sails; opened
main hatches after being kept battened down for 14 days; gloomy
weather. Lat. 40.59 S.; long. 115.33 E.
7th July.—First part light, breezes from W., gloomy, heavy
swell from the W.; noon cloudy. Lat. 41.5 S.; long. 117-57 E.
Bth July. —Variable winds, frequent calms, smooth water.
Lat. 41.2 S.; long. 18.45 E.
9th July.—First part light airs, N.N.E. to N.E.; latter part
light from N., smooth water. Lat. 41.24 S; long. 120.53 E.
10th July—Moderate winds from N.N.E. At 4 p.m. increas-
ing ; latter part strong N.E. to N.N.E. 3 a.m. reduced sail;
noon cloud}'. Lat. 42.2 S.; long. 121.6 E.
11th July—First part strong winds N.N.E.; towards latter
part wind increasing to a fresh gale ; single-reefed the topsails;
noon wind still increasing ; heavy sea rising. Lat. 41.51; long.
131.30 E.
12th July—Fresh gale from N.N.E.; double-reefed the top-
sails ; latter part more moderate. Noon cloudy; fresh breezes.
No observation. Lat. 41.40 S.; long. 135.40 E.
13th July—Dark gloomy weather; moderate breezes; N. to
N.N.E.; all sails set. Noon cloudy ;no observation. Lat. 40.48
S.; long. 139.24 E.
14th July —Moderate breezes from north to N.N.E. ; overcast
sky. At 7 p.m. wind shifted to west. 9 p.m. south to S.E.,
with rain. Latter part light southerly winds, small rain, smooth
water. No observation. Lat. 40.5 S. ; 142.32 E.
Civil Time, 14th July, 1866, commencing at noon—First part
light wind from south to S.W., thick with small rain; steered
N.E. by E. until 4 p.m.; altered to N.E. h E.; slight passing
showers. At 7.15 p.m., whilst seated at the tea table, the chief
officer, who had the watch, was heard to say u hard up.” The
captain immediately started up, and on his way to ascertain what
was the matter, saw the chief officer on the companion-ladder,
calling out for him to go on deck. On the Captain reaching the
deck, it was discovered that land was close to, a little on the star-
board bow. Orders were then given to square the main and
crossjack yards, the ship paying off from N.E. £ E. to N. by W.
| W., when she took the ground on a rocky bottom, with a reef
stretching out to the west close under the bow. The port life-
boat was then lowered to ascertain if a place could be found to
land passengers, as the ship was bumping severely, and
the surf striking on her stern and port quarter. Three
attempts were made, but no safe landing place could be seen in
the darkness, the surf breaking over the rocks in all directions;
we had, therefore, to wait until daylight approached, in the greatest
fear that the ship would break up during the night, as she heeled
over to port bilging heavily, the sea breaking over the port or
seaward side. By 8.30 the ship began to leak, the passengers
manned the pumps and worked perseveringly, but to no avail,
for before long the lee side of the ’tween decks was under water,


the purser, withassistance, endeavouring to save as much provision
as possible out of the hold. The women and children collected
in the fore-cabin and saloon behaved themselves uncommonly well,
awaiting the fate destined for them with the utmost patience.
During the night the pinnace was attempted to be got off the
skids and put overboard on the lea or sea side over the port
quarter, but she was stove against the ship’s side and torn adrift,
the men that were in her barely escaping with their lives. At
daylight the life-boat was sent to make another attempt to find a
landing-place and carry a line out to the shore, under the com-
mand of Mr. Jones, chief officer, which was with difficulty
performed, as the sea was breaking fearfully over the rocks. A
line was eventually made fast to one of the rocks where the sea
broke with the least violence, and at about 8 a.m. a commence-
ment was made to land the passengers, women and children first.
The debarkation of the passengers was superintended by the
Captain and Doctor, who were in attendance by the gangway from
first to last, to regulate the number of passengers who were to go
in each boat, and to keep back a rush which was from time to
time made to get into the boats. The two life boats were employed
for that purpose, the one commanded by Mr. Jones, chief officer and
the other by Mr. Parry, second officer. Many of the passengers had
to be dragged through the water up to the rocks, after which they
had to make a circuit, wading through some inlets of the sea, and
over rocks again before they could set their feet on terra firma.
The landing of all the passengers was finally accomplished by 3
p.m. The*first male passengers who landed went round to see if
any fresh water was procurable, and to our great delight heard
that at a distance of about a mile from where we landed a spring
was discovered, affording a plentiful supply of delicious water. As
soon as landed, the passengers cut arvay the bushes to make a
resting-place for the night, and fires were kindled all round to
warm themselves, as all were drenched to the skin. The captain,
officers and crew then turned their attention to the landing of pro-
visions; after which, at about 5.30 p.m., as it was considered
running a great risk to remain on board during the night, the
captain, officers and crew came on shore in the gig—the two life-
boats having, the last trip, got broadside on to the landing rock,
and sustained damages which rendered them unseaworthy losing
the last lot of provisions placed in them. Before leaving the ship
it was deemed advisable, to relieve the ship as much as possible
from bilging too heavily, to cut away the masts. This night—
Sunday night—all were looking round to find some place to shelter
themselves from the inclemency of the weather; the chopping
of trees and the crackling of green wood and smaller scrub in the
fires which were kindled resounded on all sides. Occasional
showers of rain added to the misery of all, for none had dry
clothing to change.
These occurrences occupied 36 hours.


THE WESTERN SIDE OF KING'S ISLAND
IN LATITUDE 39.53 SOUTH.
MONDAY, 16th JULY, 1866.
At 8 a.m., a party of six passengers volunteered to walk to the
lighthouse situated on the northern part of King s Island, under
the command of Mr. Parry, second officer and started for that
purpose, having a letter from the Surgeon-Superintendent to the
Colonial Secretary of Melbourne, and two from the Captain-one
for the officer in charge of the lighthouse and the other for the
a .rents of the ship at Melbourne. The Captain, carpenter, an
crew doing their utmost to land as much provision, baggage, Ac.,
as possible. Provisions served out this day-quarter pound flour
to each adult; women and children having a small portion of
biscuit allowed them in addition.
TUESDAY, 17th JULY, 1866.
After having affected some necessary repairs to one of the lite-
boats—the other being abandoned—the Captain, with the crew,
assisted by some passengers, succeeded in saving some more pro-
visions and passenger’s luggage, many of the passengers being
in a state of destitution. Mrs. Cubbms safely delivered ol a
daughter.
WEDNESDAY, 18th JULY, 1866.
The life-boat being much damaged, used the gig for the pur-
nose of saving provisions. The Captain succeeded in making
Snlv two trips ; the remainder of the day having been given to
tho sailors, who were exceedingly fatigued wet recruit
themselves This evening, it was proposed by the Captain tin t,
as the success of Mr. Parry’s party was still du^° u ®’Jjf
have the life-boat put in a seaworthy state, and stare for the hg
house situated on the north point of the rsland, to see what means
could be adopted to communicate with some place where assistance
could be procured. Some provisions and passengers lugga 0 e
was landed this day. TT ,, 1M(!
THURSDAY, 13th JULY, 1866.
The captain continued to do his utmost to save as much pro-
vision and luggage as possible, the gig being used for that pur-
P ° Se * FRIDAY, 20th JULY, 1866.
At 9 45 a.m. the captain left us in the life-boat, manned by the
sailmaker and four sailors, and proceeded on his mission tot
north part of the island, where the lighthouse is situated. •
Jones,Carpenter, and crew doing their utmost to save as much
provision and luggage as possible.


SATURDAY, 21st JULY, 1866.
Mr. Jones, carpenter, and crew employed in saving what they
could from the ship. At 2 p.m. Mr. Hickmott arrived here from
the lighthouse, bringing a letter from Captain Owens, which in-
formed us that he arrived at the lighthouse at 6 p.m. yesterdav
and that the party under Mr. Parry had reached the lighthouse
some hours previous, and that four of that party had already pro-
ceeded, in a life-boat belonging to the lighthouse, to Melbourne.
1 he consternation in our camp when they heard that succour was
at hand is indescribable. Mr. Hickmott performed the trip in
15 hours. At9 p.m., a light was seen in the offing,and shortly after-
wards a blue light, supposed to be Captain Owens returning. The
crew, followed by some passengers hurrahing, went to the landing
rock, and at 9.30 p.m., Captain Owens landed, and walked up
to camp, where he was received by the whole community with
three hearty cheers and one cheer more.
SUNDAY, 22nd JULY, 1866.
The boat the captain went in was so leaky the whole way up
to the lighthouse, that it required two men constantly bailing to
keep her free. On his arrival at the lighthouse, she was hauled
up to make some temporary stoppage to the leak by soaping the
seams, but on her return trip, before she got out of the surf, the
soap was washed off and she was as bad as ever. This day she was
placed again in hands of the carpenter, A preparation was made by
carrying a kedge and line to the offing, in anticipation of a steamer
coming. Prayers were appointed to be read this morning, and a
general thanksgiving rendered to the Lather of Mercies for our
deliverance • but so many destitute women and children comin"
to our hut for articles of clothing, shoes, Ac., the Doctor was fully
occupied in clothing the naked in the forenoon, intending to have
a meeting in the evening, but heavy rain prevented this intention
though, no doubt, many returned thanks privately for our
miraculous preservation, as this coast is strewn in all directions
to a great distance with sunken rocks. Had the ship struck on
one of these rocks, not a soul would have been saved to tell the
tale.
MONDAY 23ud JULY, 1866.
Mr. Hickmottleftthis morningwithllT single men passengers for
the lighthouse, as they were well provisioned there, and we on very
shortallowance here.beinghalf pound flouroroatmeal for each adult.
An hour after the departure of Mr. Hickmott a steamer was seen
to the southward. As soon as she was near enough Captain Owens
went off in our life-boat and acquainted the commander of H.M.C.
steamer Victoria with the localities. At 11 a.m. she anchored
about tinee-quai ters of a mile from the wreck. Two boats were
immediately loweied, and a commencement made to embark the
passengers women and children first $ when the women were


embarked the men followed. During the day another steamer
hove in sight and anchored shortly after, outside the Victoria.
Some of the saloon passengers had sent a part of their things to
the rocks, but there being no person to be found to assist in taking
off the rest, they could not proceed. The embarkation continued
until 4 p.m., and just before , dark the two steamers got under
weigh, leaving behind Captain Owens, six saloon passengers, six
second-class passengers, two officers, sailmaker, carpenter, and
six of the crew, in all, twenty three persons, five of whom were
ladies. Our life-boat acted as a kind of bridge during the em-
barkation of passengers between the rocks and the Victoria’s boats,
and required to be constantly bailed out, the men in her being
completely exhausted in keeping her from sinking. After the
last boat left for tbe Victoria she was hauled up, assisted by every
male on the island, and put bottom up on the rocks, very much
shattered. The Victorian Government very humanely sent provi-
sions to the island, and the Commander of the Victoria informed
the Captain that he had more to place at our disposal if required.
What a change ! Last night we had about 445 souls in our
camp, comprising a circumference of perhaps a mile, distributed
in about forty or fifty huts ; some constructed of brushwood or
scrub, and covered with the same material; some covered with
canvas washed ashore from the ship ; others again with sheets,
&c., &c., all hastily and hurriedly run up as a shelter from rain
and wind ; forty or fifty fires blazing up in all directions during
the whole night to keep the cold out —in one direction children
were heard crying, in another bigger ones discussing passing
events in their own quaint way at the top of their voices ;
in another, men disagreeing, and occasionally the soft
accents of dear, devoted woman endeavouring to pacify the
angry parties; in another jovial songs were being sung, and in
another concertinas playing lively airs. For the purpose of keep-
ing a strict watch over the provisions, a regular watch was kept
by the saloon passengers, and a bell struck every half hour, echoed
by two others in opposite directions : And to-night, the com-
munity reduced to 93 individuals, peace and quietness reigning
around, not a voice to be heard ; no music, no songs, and the half-
hour bell even ceased to tell us the half-hours which were passing
away. The saloon passengers bore up cheerfully with their
altered position ; and the saloon ladies, young, delicate, and nursed
in the lap of luxury, were seen chopping and cutting firewood, and
carrying water for culinary purposes, with happy, bright faces,
and laughing under all their misfortunes, heavy losses, and dis-
comforts.
TUESDAY, 94th JULY, 1866.
Heavy surf breaking over the rocks and landing-place, and
heavy breakers over the reefs in the offing. Shortly after day-
light the ship was observed bilging and twisting with the force


of the heavy breakers, giving evident signs that she could not
hold out much longer. She gradually began to heel over to sea-
ward, and at 1 p.m. a heavy breaker having passed over her, with
a sudden surge she was observed to part m two. Shortly after
the fore part disappeared, and by 5 p.m. nothing appeared of the
after part but a few straggling timbers. Everything in her hold
then broke loose, and boxes, cases, and packages of merchandise,
together with planks, timbers, and beams, were seen scattered far
and wide on the rocks. What a great good fortune to us that the
ship did not break up whilst the mass of passengers and sailors
were amongst us. The Quantity of drinkables scatteied along
the rocks for a distance of about six miles would have acted as a
magnet to some of the single men, and we should have seen
drunken men perambulating the camp, stirring up strife, and fo-
menting quarrels, which might have ended in bloodshed, if not
murder. East Sunday shewed us, on a small scale, what mis-
chief the free use of spirits can cause, for a few of the single
men passengers went on board of the wreck, ostensibly to look
out for their things, but they found cases of ardent spirits and malt
liquors, which they broke open, and made use of to such an ex-
tent as to prepare them for committing deeds which they possibly
would be ashamed of if sober. They landed from the ship in a
shameful state, and, joined by some of the sailors who were also
intoxicated, began to fight and quarrel in the camp, blows weie
exchanged, blood was shed, women running between, andimploring-
them to be quiet, until after a great deal of trouble, the Captain
and Doctor managed to send each to his own hut.
WEDNESDAY, 25th JULY, 1866.
All went on quietly in our camp. Sailors employed under
their officers in picking up what was on the rocks, and placing
them above high-water mark. Unpleasant rainy weather j damp
beds and blankets ; discomfort all around,
THURSDAY, 20th JULY, 1806.
At 11 a.m. H.M.S. Victoria appeared in sight, and had
some difficulty in finding where we were located, as no wreck was
visible, and we were stupid enough not to light fires. Captain
Owens, as soon as she was near enough, went off in our life-boat,
when shortly after she anchored, and sent her boats in to rescue
us from our direful position. There was a high surf on, and by
0 p.m. the last boat with the passengers and luggage, all more or
less drenched through, reached the Victoria , when she got under
weigh. We cannot speak in too high praise of the kindness
shown by Captain Norman to one and all of us —especially to the
ladies —placing his own cabin and everything that could be of
use to them at theirdisposal. Some who were thoroughly drenched,
he lent his own clothing to —for all he had kind words and
sympathy —and his example was followed by all his officers, and
by every man on board of H.M.S. Victoria .


THE STEAMERS VICTORIA AND PHAROS SENT TO
THE ASSISTANCE OF THE PASSENGERS,
Intelligence readied the Government, dbout nine o’clock on
Saturday night, the 21st inst., of the total wreck on King’s
Island of the emigrant ship Netheriy, 944 tons, Captain Owens,
from London, bound to Brisbane, and the existence of the whole
of the passengers and crew, nearly 500 souls, principally women
and children, in a state of semi-starvation on the island. The
information was brought to town by Mr. Parry, second mate of
the ship, who, in a bout, assisted by two passengers, reached the
coast near Mr. Hoadknight’s station, somewhere in the vicinity of
Barwon Heads, from whence he proceeded to QueensclifF, and com-
municated to Captain Ferguson, the harbour-master, the particulars
of the disaster. In passing through Bass’s Straits, the vessel struck
on the south-west point of the island on Saturday week, and
became a total wreck. For some days previous to the catastrophe,
the captain was unable to get an observation, and his precise
position was therefore unknown. About seven p.m., on Saturday
night, the look-out man reported land ahead, and immediately
after the vessel struck heavily. The night being dark, and the
weather tempestuous, the nature of the coast could not be ascer-
tained, but some notion was formed of its rugged character from
the beating of the surf which was painfully audible. A scene of
indescribable confusion followed. The captain, upon ascertaining
that the vessel had received irreparable injury, and finding shoal
water around him, encouraged the passengers to hope that with
the morning some means of landing might be found. With the
mcrning’s light the hopes of the passengers revived, upon ascer-
taining that the coast, though hugged by a heavy surf, was low,
and that with care they might reach it in safety. The ship was
hai’d and fast, with her back broken, in shoal water; and as nothing
could be done to relieve her, or save anything from her, the cap-
lain and crew prepared to land the passengers. This was a work
of time, owing to the inability of the boats to get near the shore,
the women and children requiring to be carried through the surf;
and the whole of Sunday and Monday was occupied in placing
the passengers in safety. It was found impossible to save any-
thing from the ship, and their condition was miserable in the
extreme, but providentially twenty barrels of flour, which were
cast overboard, drifted ashore, and afforded temporary sustenance.
Upon ascertaining his position, the captain found he had been
wrecked on the south-west portion of King’s Island, and some-
where in the vicinity of the spot where, some time ago,
the Flying Arrow and Catarque were wrecked. The lighthouse
belonging to the Tasmanian Government, on the opposite


side of the island, and some thirty miles distant, af-
forded hope of succour; and the second officer, Mr. Parry,
and some passengers volunteered to cross the island and
notify to the lighthouse-keeper their distress. The lighthouse
was reached on Thursday, and a small whaleboat was brought
into requisition, in which the officer and two passengers under-
took to cross the straits and obtain relief. The boat made the
coast, near Mr, Koadknight’s station, about six p.m. on Friday,
and a horse being provided, Mr. Parry reached Queenscliff on
Saturday evening, and put himself in communication, through
the electric telegraph, with the harbour-master at Williamstown,
as the representative of the Government.
Immediately on the intelligence of this wreck coming to the
knowledge of the Government, they very promptly took measures
for the relief of the passengers by sending to their aid the Pharos
and the Government steam-sloop Victoria; the latter under the
charge of Commander Norman, with a quantity of provisions,
consisting of 2,000 lb. of meat, 400 lb. of bread, 1,300 lb. of
potatoes, 100 lb. of vegetables, besides a large quantity of stores
belonging to the vessel. This steamer has been lying idle for
some time, with only men enough on board to keep her clean
and in trim, so that the order for her departure coming so sud-
denly, great difficulty was experienced in getting a proper com-
plement of men ; but, by the energetic measures of Commander
Norman and Lieutenant Woods, of the naval training ship, the
required number was obtained. The latter officer, and the whole
staff of men and boys of the training ship, were on board the
Victoria from four o’clock a.ra. on Sunday, and rendered valuable
assistance in preparing her for sea. Everything being finished,
the boys, &c., were transferred to their own vessel. At eleven
o’clock the anchor was hove up, and the vessel proceeded to
Sandridge, for the purpose of taking in a lot of blankets, which
were ordered to be ready there; but, after waiting a short time,
Commander Norman, seeing no indication of the arrival of these
articles, ordered the vessel to be got under weigh. The weather
was very favourable, and after passing through the Heads, the
breeze freshened, and the vessel’s head was turned in the
direction of King’s Island. About four o’clock on Sun-
day afternoon a nasty drizzling rain came on, which continued
throughout the night, so that when the steamer sighted King’s
Island light at a quarter to ten p.m., the captain thought it wise
to stand away under easy steam, and wait for daylight. When
the morning came, she proceeded along the coast, which had a
very unprepossessing appearance ; the land is low, and the shore
is bounded by rocks, which appeared to be granite; and at half-
past ten, on rounding a point of headland, smoke was seen in
the distance, and shortly afterwards, the hull of the wrecked
vessel. At a quarter past eleven, the steamer came abreast of
the wreck, and dropped anchor about a cable’s length from the
shore, when the captain of the Netlierhy went on board in a


small boat, which its crew had much difficulty in keeping afloat,
one of them being constantly employed in bailing her out. The
Victorias pinnace and cutter were immediately launched and
manned, and sent on shore with provisions for those who were to
remain behind, and to fetch the rest on board.
THE SCENE OE THE WRECK
Is Fitzmaurice Bay, which is almost encircled by reefs of granite
rock rising in sharp and serrated peaks above the water. The
Netherhy lies broadside on to the rocks, about 300 yards from the
shore, her head to the northward, with deck to seaward. The
masts are cut away, and she is evidently broken-backed, and
cannot last long in her present position. She is slightly sheltered
from N.W. winds, but so exposed from W. to S that a gale from
that quarter would break her to pieces in a few minutes.
THE VOYAGE AND STRANDING OF THE NETHERBY.
The Netherhy was a first-class ship, British built, 944 tons
register, belonging to the firm of Messrs. James Baines and Co.,
Liverpool. Left the East India Dock, London, on the 31st
March, 1866, with Government emigrants, for Brisbane, Queens-
land, and a quantity of general cargo, and after calling at Ply-
mouth to make up the complement of passengers, she sailed on
the 13th of April, and proceeded on the voyage without anything
memorable occurring until the 19 th of June, being then in
lat. 40.27 S. long. 44,42 E., when a succession of gales were
encountered,commencing at N.E.,veering round to N., N.W., and
W., generally shifting suddenly and without abating in violence
and strength, rising a dangerous cross-sea, which washed away
everything moveable about the deck, smashing in the saloon
skylight on the poop ; poop ladders, booby hatches, water-closets,
bulwarks rails, and everything moveable was swept away, until
the ship wore the appearance of a wreck. Alain and after hatches
were for several days closely battened down, the whole of the pas-
sengers passing up and down through the fore hatch. From the 5th
July better weather was experienced ; wind generally prevailing
from N.E. to N.N.AV. with squalls. During the voyage there were
two births ; and two children, who were sickly when they came
on board, died; these were the only casualties. At half-past
seven p.m., on Saturday, the 14th inst, the captain was at
supper, when Air. Jones, the chief officer, called him on deck,
and stated that there were breakers a-head. Captain Owens
immediately went on deck, and ordered the helm to be put hard
a-port, which was done, but the vessel immediately afterwards
struck, and within an hour her lower deck was flooded, The


night was pitch dark, and nothing could be seen but the white
breakers around. Shortly afterwards the moon rose and the land
was plainly seen. The chief officer took a boat and went to see
if a landing place could be found, but came back disappointed;
so the shipwrecked people were obliged to wait for day-
light, when the mate landed, taking with him a hawser,
one end of which was fastened to an anchor placed in the crevices
of the rocks, the other end being fastened to the ship. By this
the boats were pulled to and fro, and two-thirds of the passengers
had been landed when two of the boats were dashed against the
rocks and smashed, leaving only one to do the work. By three
o’clock p.m. everbody was ashore but the captain, the surgeon-
superintendent, and some of the crew, who remained on board to
cut away the masts, float the sails ashore, and send provisions
which had been got up during the night. Everybody slept on
the island that night without having any cover to shelter them
from a nasty drizzling rain ; the only thing they could do was to
light several fires, and lie around them, wrapped in blankets, or
whatever they could find. Next day (Monday), all hands set to
work, and erected several tents with the sails and brushwood,
which was very plentiful, sufficiently so, indeed, to allow of a
compartment being constructed for each family During the
same day the second mate was sent away to the lighthouse, with
letters to the Chief Secretary and agents of the vessel. All the
provisions saved only sufficed to allow of a quarter of a pound of
flour a day to be served out to each person, and a little biscuit
and tea for the women and children. One day a box of preserved
meat was washed ashore, but it was so little that only a few were
enabled to partake of it. There were plenty of kangaroo on the
island, but after shooting a few the ammunition became exhausted,
and the shipwrecked people had to depend on the flour. Very
little luggage was saved by any of the passengers ; some of them
not getting their blankets, some even nothing but what they
stood in; and what was saved was damaged by the salt water.
They had heard that a steamer was coming to their assistance,
from Mr. Hickmott, one of the lighthouse staff, who walked
across the island to give them the information, and bid them be
of good cheer. The clay after the landing, one woman gave birth
to a. girl, and both mother and child are doing well.
THE EMBARKATION.
The boats of the Victoria were guided by the hawser leading
from the wreck to the inner barrier of reefs, where they had to
stay. Everywhere around was strewed a quantity of broken
utensils and other things, while on the reefs lay the two staved
boats, which are now only fit for firewood. In one spot a lot of


flat rocks lead from the shore to the reef, forming stepping-stones
tor the poor people to walk upon ; but at the end of this they had
to cross a channel about 20 yards wide, where the water is three
teet deep and through which the surf rolled continuously, making
it very difficult, except in the intervals between each‘roller to
walk. It was melancholy to see the poor women, some of them
old and decrepit dragging themselves through the water, while
perhaps alongside of them was the husband and father, with one
child on his back and another in his arms. Some of the men
took females on their backs, but this was found to be too dan-
gerous in consequence of the surf. After crossing this channel
they came on to a small heap of rocks, by which they were sepa-
rated from the reef, alongside which the boats were stationed, in
a narrow channel about four feet wide, through which the water
rolled with terrible force. Men had to be stationed on each side
ot the passage to help the women and children across. When
safely fixed on the reef, the poor sufferers (women and children
first) were, with some difficulty, placed in the boat. On this reef,
waiting for their turn to be placed in the boat, were men, rvoraen,
and children, ail huddled together; some of the latter, who had
been, perhaps, brought over by strange men before the
mothers crying piteously for their parents; mothers calling for
leir children, all wet through ; while, to make everything more
dreary, the waves, dashing against the rocks, would cast their
spray overall, drenching them to the skin ; all this, I say, formed
a scene truly heartrending. One poor woman, in crossing the
channel, had a narrow escape from drowning; a roller coining
suddenly against her, she lost her footing, but, before
washed away, a man fortunately caught hold of her and carried
her across. Several were in a very weak state, and had to be
assisted m the same manner. It was a fortunate thing that there
was very little wind, for, as it was, the labour to keep the boats
oft the rocks was heavy ; but, had there been any strong breeze
no boat could have lived, and the poor sufferers could not have
received any aid. ihe whole circumstances in connection with
the wreck seem miraculous; for had the vessel struck on another
reef which ran about a mile into the sea, a little to the left of her,
or had there' been any wind, all hands on board must have inevi-
tably perished. Altogether, there were 230 souls placed on board
the Victoria. It would have gladdened the most callous-hearted
to ha\e seen the joyful expression on the countenances of these
unfortunate beings. When safe on board, one female uttered the
words I hank God, and immediately fainted; but, on restora-
ti\es being applied, she soon recovered. Several others were in
a very exhausted state, and for these Captain Norman had ready
wane and spirits. Plenty of good hot soup and bread and beef
had been already prepared, and wss distributed among all as they
were severally put on board ; this was received with loud expres


sions of thanks and gratitude. But still they all looked in a
pitiable condition, and their wet clothes were taken off, and lines
having been put up in the engine-room, they were hung there to
dry. The poor woman who had been confined on the island, and
who was very weak, was, by the kind orders of Captain Norman,
placed in his cabin, and everything that the ship afforded was
given for the comfort of those who so much needed it. When
280 had been put into the Victoria, the Pharos arrived and
stopped a short. distance from us. There were then about 60
remaining to be taken away, as the captain and crew of the
Neiherby intended to start across the island with provisions for
the passengers, numbering 117 single men, who that morning
had gone to the lighthouse. The 60 persons at the wreck were,
therefore, placed on board the Pharos. On inquiring whether
all was ready, it was found that a ferv of the first-class passengers
were still on shore, upon which a message was sent requesting
them to come on board as quickly as possible, to which an answer
was returned by a Mr. Townsend, to the effect that he had not
packed his luggage. Another message was sent by Captain
Norman, informing him that the vessel would sail immediately;
the answer was, u that he would not go with that rabble,” and I
did hear that he had deputed one of the passengers to represent
his case to the Government, and get another vessel sent for him.
Through his obstinacy, a few others also remained behind, but
they were willing to come if he would.
THE RETURN.
At half-past four pan., everything being ready, we started on
our return, the Pharos following. Boon a great black cloud came
hovering o’er us and the rain came pattering down ; an unfortu-
nate thing for those crowding our deck, who would have no
shelter during the dark and dreary night; but our anticipations
were agreably disappointed, for in a few minutes the glorious rays
of the setting sun shone forth, a gentle breeze set in against us,
the black clouds were carried over our stern, and a fine evening
ensued. Shortly after sundown, tea was provided, consisting of
meat, bread, tea, and potatoes, ad libitum, the latter being enjoyed
amazingly after their protracted abstinence from it. Supper being
over, all patiently awaited the drying of their clothes, and during
this period they certainly exhibited a motley group. Men and
women appeared without shoes or stockings ; some of the latter
without much more covering than a shawl. When those who
possessed any extra clothing had got their garments dry, an hour
or allowed for a promenade. It was a beautiful moonlight
night, and it was easy to discern the beneficial effects of kindness
1 srood food, by a certain degree of gaiety which soon became


visible. As soon as the time for promenading had expired, the
women and children were placed on the lower fore-deck, where the
sailors hammocks and several other tilings were given up for
their comfort. The men, and some of the females who preferred
it, slept on deck, tarpaulins and spare sails being made available
in substitution for blankets. Presently, all was quiet; the day’s
exertions and their past troubles operated on the voyagers, and
they all slept in the confidence that they were in safety. We
passed through the Heads again at five o’clock on Tuesday
morning, and steamed up the bay ; but when abreast of the light-
ship at eight o’clock, the Captain thought it necessary to anchor
for a while, until a heavy fog which prevailed should have cleared
away. Accordingly, the anchor was dropped, and we lay still for
abouttwo hours. During this time the decks presented a scene likea
beehive; all were ondeckoccupiedaboutsomething. Hereyou would
see a mother washing her children, there a young girl employed
in fixing the feathers on her hat; in another a man would
suddenly appear evidently revelling in the thought that he was a
gentlemen, by having changed his corduroy suit for a black coat
and beaver hat; while around were the children, well-fed and
caring for nothing, running about as happy as possible, and merry
as crickets. About eleven o’clock the fog cleared off enough to
allow of us moving, and we proceeded alongside the breakwater at
"\\ illiamstown, where all were landed, and taken by special train
to Melbourne, and lodged, some in the Exhibition Building and
others to the Immigration Depot.
ARRIVAL AT MELBOURNE.
Immediately upon their arrival in Melbourne, the hulk of the
immigrants w r as conveyed to the Exhibition Building, William-
street, by the cabmen assembled in the vicinity of the station, for
which service the men unanimously declined to receive any
remuneration. About three o’clock they were provided with a
substantial dinner, the preparation of which was accomplished by
means of a cooking range, improvised for the occasion in the rear
ot the building, and which proved itself quite capable of satisfying
the heavy demands so unexpectedly made upon its resources.
Scarcely had the people been housed in their new temporary
habitation when presents—not perhaps of much intrinsic worth,
but valuable as indicating the general sympathy of the public with
the sufferers by the calamity—began to be received. It is scarcely
possible, within the short period which has yet elapsed since the
succour of the unfortunate people, to specify the gifts thus pre-
sented; but amongst them were a load of apples and other fruits
presented by Mr. Hadley,late memberof the Legislative Assembly,
who rendered valuable assistance throughout the day ; a number
of periodical publications, the donations of Messrs. Robertson and


Stephens; and a couple of cases of porter, contributed by the Hon.
J. G. Francis, for the use of the women, and more especially of
those acting as nurses. One of the most interesting, though not,
perhaps, the most important contributions, to the little stock of
comforts realized by means of these voluntary offerings, consisted
of half-a-dozen of new-laid eggs, presented by an elderly lady who
thought they might prove beneficial to some of the weaker mem-
bers of her own sex. Very soon after the arrival at the
Exhibition Building, the bulk of the involuntary immigrants
was disposed of in a very orderly manner, under the super-
intendance of Mr, Lesley A. Moody. The arrangements
for the reception of the people, taking into consideration the
brevity of the notice of their arrival, were in the highest degree
creditable. Provision had been made for every contingency
capable of being reasonably foreseen, even to the furnishing of a
temporary hospital, for which, it is to be regretted, some few
occupants have already been found. The classification was quite
as good as could have been anticipated, under the circumstances,
and certainly not inferior to that of Government immigration
ships. At seven o’clock, a substantial tea was provided, and soon
afterwards the bulk of the immigrants retired for the night. The
total number of persons received at the Exhibition Building was
287, and the list was made up of 105 men, 86 women, and 96
children ; but in addition to this number, there were 15 single
women sent to the Government Immigrants’ Home. The
accommodation of the building, utilised as it was to the utmost,
was more than sufficient to meet all the claims made upon it;
and the immigrants enjoyed, at the time of retiring to rest, at
least a reasonable prospect of more comfort than is generally
attainable at sea. It is to be regretted that symptoms much
resembling those of English cholera have been exhibited by some
of the passengers, no doubt in consequence of the recent exposure.
The gentleman who recently came out in medical charge of the
ship Star of India, and Dr, M'Crea, voluntarily undertook the
management of the hospital department, and up to a late hour
last evening there seemed to be no grounds for apprehending any
serious illness amongst the shipwrecked people. In addition to
the passengers lodged in the Exhibition Building, several first and
second class passengers occupied quarters at Tankard’s Tem-
perance Hotel. Amongst them were Messrs. Vincent (Ist-class),
Wall, M‘Gill, Lockhart, Mr. and Mrs. Grimes and two children,
and Mr. Duprez., Some 160 men still remain on the island,
As soon as the Victoria and Pharos bad discharged the immi-
grants brought up by them, the commanders of the respective
vessels, in accordance with orders from the Commissioner of
Customs, at once proceeded to coal, take in more provisions, and
prepare for a return to the scene of the wreck to bring off the re-
mainder of the passengers.


PUBLIC SYMPATHY.
The passengers b} T the "wrecked ship JVetherh>/ 7 located in the
Exhibition Building, have been visited by a good many per-
sons, instigated either by benevolence or curiosity, to inquire
into or inspect their condition. It is gratifying to be
able to state that, as far as practical experience affords an
opportunity of judging, the more honourable of the two motives
was in the ascendant. Contributions of many necessaries, of
considerable value in the aggregate, were sent in, for the relief
of the unfortunate people ; and though we have been unable to
obtain a list of all the donors, as many gifts were sent in anony-
mously, it seems but fair to mention those whose names are
recorded by the officers in charge of the establishment. The
Messrs. Hegraves sent in ten bags of flour; Mr. Hosie, confec-
tioner, a number of buns for the children, which were duly
distributed, to the evident gratification of the youngsters; Messrs.
Smith and Son, a bag of biscuits ; and Messrs. Bees, R. Palmer
and Co., Firth, Schoohberg, John Walters, Low, Clements,
Greaves, Aldwincle, Sargood and Co., Mrs. T. Fellows, and
Messrs. Tyson and J. Barlow, clothing ; and Mr. M'Kenzie, a
quantity of boots and shoes. The latter articles, it may be
observed, are those most required by the unfortunate people, as
those they are possessed of have been for the most part more or
less injured by sea water. The majority of the people have
expressed a determination to take up their abode in Victoria, in
preference to proceeding to their original destination in Queens-
land ; and, yesterday afternoon, some of them applied to the
authorities at their temporary home for leave to accept employ-
ment out of doors, a privilege which will doubtless be conceded
to them.
PUBLIC MEETING AT THE CRITERION HOTEL.
A public meeting, convened by His Worship the Mayor of
Melbourne, was held at the Criterion Hotel, for the purpose of
organising a committee, to raise subscriptions to supply the
immigrants per Netherhy with such clothing and other necessaries
as it was known they required.
The attendance, though select, included most of the influential
mercantile firms in the city ; and several clergymen, of various
denominations, were also present.
His Worship the Mayor, on taking the chair, at the request of
the meeting, explained the purpose for which he had convened it.
He said he felt assured they would all agree with him that an
appeal should be made on behalf of the sufferers by the wreck of


the Netherby to elicit the support of the public. A great deal had
been done by the Government in giving prompt dispatch to the
vessels sent to bring the shipwrecked passengers from King’s
Island to Melbourne, and in properly providing for them whilst
here. Too much praise could not be given to the Government,
and to the officials who, acting under their direction, were instru-
mental in affording relief. ( Cheers.) The conduct of the second
officer of the Netherby (Mr. Parry), who risked his life, and the
lives of his fellow-passengers, in a small life-boat, in the passage
from King’s Island to Victoria, bringing intelligence of the loss
of the ship, was most meritorious. Had it not been for his heroic
conduct, it was more than probable all on the island would have
died from starvation before the disaster could have been made
known. (Applause.) It was not necessary that he should dwell
upon such conduct. It spoke for itself, and appealed irresistibly
to the best feelings of human nature, and it was worthy of the
highest commendation. (Applause.)
Captain M'Mahon, M.L.A., moved the first resolution, viz.
“ That in the opinion of this meeting, it is desirable that a fund
should be raised, by public subscriptions, for the purpose of pro-
viding clothing and other necessaries for the sufferers by the wreck
of the ship Netherby ” He said he considered it almost super-
fluous to make any remarks with a view to commend such a reso-
lution to the appr ,val of the meeting. It was not expected, in
responding to such a motion, that large sums of money should be
contributed, so as to trench upon the means or resources of the
charitable. A subscription-list, widely extended, and to which
all could contribute a small sum without being ashamed of its
smallness, would best meet the object in view (hear); and it was
such a list he hoped to see circulated, and to which all classes, he
felt assured, would willingly subscribe. He could not resist the
opportunity of saying that, although he wars opposed politically to
the existing Government, every credit was due to them for the
course they had pursued ; and it was not only creditable to the
Government, but to the community, to think that when such
calamitous wrecks occurred, we had the resources at command,
and were able and willing to act in the prompt and energetic man-
ner which had elicited such general approval. The proceedings
of the Government in this matter reflected the greatest credit upon
them, and would not be without its effect at home. (Cheers.)
With respect to the conduct of the second officer of the Netherby,
he thought that, when a sufficient sum of money had been raised
to provide for the necessities of those urgently requiring aid, the
surplus should be devoted to mark the sense of the community of
his courageous conduct, as well as the conduct of those who
accompanied him. There was no doubt his perilous adventure
through a high sea, in a small boat, was an act worthy of every
consideration and merited reward.


Mr. Butters seconded the resolution. He said the meeting had
its origin in consequence of several gentlemen visiting the Exhi-
bition Building last night; and commiserating the distress to be
seen there, they thought it desirable to set som.e movement on
foot of a practical nature, to administer relief to the sufferers.
The relief to he afforded, it was considered, ought, to he effective,
to be prompt; and a requisition was at once drawn up, requesting
his Worship the Mayor to convene the present meeting. Not
only was that step taken, hut the gentlemen referred to set about
collecting a sum of money for immediate necessities ; and, he was
was glad to say the result was that nearly £250 had already been
placed to the account. (Cheers.) He had seldom gone round
the city asking for money for an object of this nature, and met
with such universal sympathy, and readiness and willingness to
support him. (Applause.)
The resolution was put, and carried unanimously.
The Hon. Alexander Eraser, M.L.C., moved the second reso-
lution, namely: —“ That for the purpose of collecting and ap-
plying such subscriptions, the following gentlemen be appointed
as a committee, with power to add to their number, namely: His
Worship the Mayor, Councillors Butters and A. K. Smith, Mr.
Baillie, M.L.A.; Mr. Everard, Mr. Aarons, Mr. S. Cohen, and
Mr. W. B. Stephens ; and that a number of ladies be respectfully
requested to act as a committee to distribute amongst the women
and children the clothing and necessaries furnished by the bene-
volent, or procured with the funds to be raised by subscription.”
He thought there was no occasion for him to add to the remarks
already made with reference to the object of the meeting. It was
creditable to the Government and to all concerned, the manner
in which the relief had been effected; and he thought it ought
not to be forgotten that they owed a debt of gratitude to those
who so ably and nobly took "the matter up at midnight, and sent
succour where it was so greatly needed. He was glad of the
opportunit yof taking part in such a movement; and he quite
concurred in the view that it was desirable that gentlemen
anxious to help in the good work should not contribute largely,
but, by making the subscription list general, small sums of money,
spread over a large number of persons, would be found better
than large contributions from a few. He said he would like to
know something of the position of the immigrants, and how they
were situated, and what the nature of their requirements. He
had been informed there was not so much want as was supposed.
The females were without clothing, but otherwise they were pro-
vided for; and everything they wanted had, with that exception,
been furnished. At the same time, there was need of clothing;
and to call upon the ladies to lend their assistance was an oppor-
tunity they would be too glad to seize. They were always fore-
most in every good work, and he was sure they would be so on
this occasion.


Mr. Charles Bright seconded the resolution. He observed
that it was scarcely necessary he should say anything. He quite
concurred with the observations of Captain M'Mahon, that the
Government had shown a disposition to afford relief to the
passengers on board the Netherhy , but it was an act of necessity
on their part that they should do so.
Mr. Patrick O'Brien thought the motion should be slightly
altered, as it referred only to making provision for the females
and children.
The Mayor explained that the object of a ladies’ committee
was to distribute the contributions received, as they were con-
sidered best fitted for that purpose, and understood better the
requirements than gentlemen could do.
Mr. Eitzgibbon said the names mentioned in the resolution ’
were those who were at the Exhibition Building the previous
night, and had been instrumental in collecting subscriptions and
in requisitioning the meeting. Any other names could be added
at the close of the meeting.
The resolution was put and carried.
Eev. W. Ornstein moved the third resolution, namely, “ That
it be in the power of this committee to present to Mr. Parry,
and to those who accompanied him on the voyage in an open
boat from King’s Island, a suitable testimonial of the admiration
entertained of his and their heroism in their effort toprocure assist-
ance for their shipwrecked fellow-seamen and passengers ; and that
in the event of any surplus remaining of the funds after providing
for the reasonable requirements of the sufferers by the wreck of the
NetJierhj, it be in the power of the committee to appropriate
such surplus to the relief of sufferers by shipwreck of any vessels
sailing from this port.” He said he" did not think they could
hold out too much encouragement to those who endeavoured to
save the lives of others. Though he knew very little of the
circumstances under which Mr. Parry had acted, he felt confi-
dent that anyone who, in a stormy sea, would venture his life
in an open boat to relieve his fellow-creatures, was deserving of
his warmest thanks and sympathies, and that to such a man
should be given some public mark of approbation of his conduct.
It was necessary, not only as a reward to those who performed
such meritorious actions, but as an incentive to others to act in
a similar manner. He trusted the subscriptions would be such
as to enable the committee to present Mr. Parry with a testi-
monial worthy of his deed ; and he felt satisfied from the good
beginning that had been made, the committee would be able to
show how heroism was appreciated in the city, and how the
noble conduct of Mr. Parry had gained for him the praise and
commendation of every right-minded and good man. (Applause.)
He hoped the subscription list would not only enable the com-
mittee to do that, but that a surplus would remain as a nucleus
of a fund to be applied to any such eases, should they unfor-
tunately occur.


Mr. James Graham (Graham Brothers) seconded the resolution.
He considered too much could not be said in favour of Mr.
Parry s heroic conduct, which was worthy of his profession as a
British sailor. (Cheers.) He hoped that a large sum would be
collected. The object of the motion, he understood to he to
prevent the necessity of any further meeting being convened in
case of a surplus of funds. He understood there was a surplus
from the Admella and Taranaki funds at present in the hanks,
which might be made available.
The Mayor : Hot of the Admella.
Captain M‘Mahon considered the hint thrown out worthy of
consideration, and suggested that the meeting should pass a re-
solution, to be presented to their Honours the Judges, urging that
the Taranaki fund should be appropriated towards the commence-
ment of a permanent fund for accidents of this kind, and that
subscriptions he collected and he added thereto; and from such
fund sufficient sums .he taken to meet the present case. He felt
satisfied the Judges would approve of thestep. The subscription
was made, not to alleviate the sufferings of any particular class,
but of those who experienced shipwreck ; and if a resolution was
submitted to the Supreme Court, the Judges would, no doubt, he
happy to consider it, and, in the urgency of the moment, would
act with expedition. The Attorney-General would, in all proba-
bility, concur in this view. (Applause.)
Mr Fraser considered there was something invidious in the
resolution, for if the sum subscribed was not sufficient for the
relief of the passengers, what could he done with respect to
marking the sense of the meeting of Mr. Parry’s conduct ? He
thought there should he a separate fund, and he was afraid the
resolution, as it stood, would not work well.
The Mayor explained his experience with respect to one or
two charitable objects—the Admella fund in particular. There
was a large amount subscribed to send relief to those passengers,
and the amount was considerably larger than the committee dis-
bursed something like £6OO ; and as the committee had no
power by resolution, they were unable to do anything with the
surplus until another meeting had been called, when it was pro-
posed the money should be given to the Sailor’s Home, and it
was a nucleus of that institution, which did honor to the colony.
The second part of the resolution submitted was for the purpose
of avoiding any delay ; and he felt assured the inhabitants of the
city and suburbs would not leave the committee in the lurch for
a testimonial to Mr. Parry.
Mr. Butters said the resolution did not propose to go into the
question of the Taranaki or Admella relief funds. That was
merely a subject brought forward for the consideration of the
committee. 'The Taranaki fund amounted to £3,000, which was
lying idle in the bank, and it was not possible to appropriate it,
except by moving the Court in Chancery, which had been done by


a former committee. It was neglect in not passing such a reso-
lution as that now submitted which had locked up the Taranaki
fund, and it was advisable to provide against such a mistake in
future. It would be a matter for the committee to see what could
be done with the Taranaki fund, and, if it was possible, to get
their Honors the Judges to bandit over to the new committee for
such a charitable purpose. He did not altogether agree with the
last portion of the resolution, limiting the relief to vessels sail-
ing from the port. He considered they ought to be more cos-
mopolitan in their charitable views ; besides which, the Netherby
did not sail from this port, and the resolution would tie up the
hands of the committee. He would move that the words be
struck out.
The resolution was amended, by substituting the words, “ relief
of sufferers by any such similar calamity.”
The resolution, as amended, was put and carried.
The Mayor announced that he had just received a note from
the manager of the Benevolent Asylum, Mr. M £ Cutcheon,
enclosing a cheque for £6 12s. 6d., being the amount of contri-
butions of the officers of the asylum for the relief of the ship-
wrecked. (Applause.)
Councillor Macpherson moved, and Mr. Arthur Gribson se-
conded, the fourth resolution, viz.:—“ That the ministers of the
various denominations be invited to co-operate with this meeting,
and that collections be made in all churches in the city and
suburbs on Sunday, the 29th inst., on behalf of the shipwrecked
passengers by the Netherby
Eev. Mr. Becher said, so far as he could personally assist, he
would be most happy to do so, and considered it a privilege to
aid in the work. But, with regard to promising collections in the
churches on any particular day, it was not in his power, or in the
power of any minister of the church to which he belonged, as
such matters were left to the churchwardens, who had the control
of the funds.
After some consideration of a proposal to delay making col-
lections in churches for a week, it was ultimately agreed to leave
it optional to make collections in churches; and the resolution was
amended, to invite the co-operation of ministers in the cause.
The resolution, as amended, was then put and carried.
Captain M £ Mahon then moved that it be referred to the com-
mittee to communicate with their Honours the Judges respecting
the distribution of the Taranaki Belief Bund, with a view to its
being made the nucleus of a fund for the relief of shipwrecked
persons.
Mr. H. S. Campbell seconded the motion, which was put and
carried.
The meeting appointed the Mayor and Councillor Butters as
honorary treasurers, and Mr. John Shillinglaw as honorary
secretary.


Mr. Moody, of the Customs Department, explained that there
had been a large number of contributions forwarded to the
Immigration Office and to the Exhibition Building, for distribu-
tion amongst the sufferers, and it was desirable this distribution
should take place at once. A number of ladies had been at the
Exhibition Building, and active in contributing and obtaining
contributions, and they had suggested that he should appoint
a time for the distribution, which he had hesitated doing,
thinking a ladies’ committee would be named by the meeting,
so as to relieve him of the invidious position of distributing
the supplies. He would suggest that an advertisement be put
in the papers, requesting those ladies who took an interest
in the distribution to meet at the Exhibition Building
to-morrow, at 11 o’clock, to distribute the things already
received. That would be sufficient notice to those ladies who
were kind enough to assist the cause. The greatest want amongst
the immigrants was boots and shoes. Those gentlemen who were
desirous of contributing rather in kind than in money, could not
do better than send boots and shoes of all descriptions. He
would also impress upon every one that the quicker the relief
was given the better. It was to be hoped the people would not
remain together for any length of time, as those who go to
Brisbane would be shortly on their voyage, and those who re-
mained might be employed. He trusted the gentlemen of Mel-
bourne and the committee would assist him in procuring employ-
ment for those who preferred to remain. There was a great
number of tradesmen, many of whom wished to remain. They
had left the determination in his hands, and he would inform the
committee of the result to-morrow.
Several subscriptions were handed in, and the meeting closed.


OFFICIAL REPORT OF CAPTAIN OWENS.
The following is an official report by Captain Owens, late
master of the Queensland Government emigrant ship Netherby ,
with the leading particulars of the recent loss of which, on King’s
Island, the public are already so familiar. The narrative, it will
be seen, commences with the day of the casualty.
15th July (nautical time), lat. (noon) 40.5 S. ; long. 14.32 E.
(This is by reckoning, as no observation could be obtained for
some days previously.) At two p.m. in the afternoon of this
day, the wind from S.to S.W., thick, with some small rain. Steered
IKE. by E. till four p.m., when the course was altered to N.E.
E. ; slight passing showers. A little before sunset, the horizon
was comparatively clear. No land appearing in view, it was not
anticipated that it was so near. At a quarter-past seven p.m.,
the captain being at tea in the saloon, the chief officer, who was
in charge of the watch, was heard to say, “hard up.” I imme-
diately got up, and on my way to ascertain what was the matter,
met the chief officer on the companion, calling out for me to get
on deck, Avhen it was soon discovered that the land was close to,
a little on the starboard bow. Orders were immediately given
to square the main and cross-jack yards. (The courses had been
hauled up, and stay-sails stowed at an earlier hour), and the ship
paid off from N. E. i- E. to N. by W. W., when she took the
ground on a bottom of rock, with about five feet more water
under her bows than from the fore channels to the stern, and a
high rocky sheld stretching out to the westward under her bows.
The port life-boat was immediately got out, under the command
of Mr. Jones, the chief officer, and four seamen, to ascertain if
a place could be found to land the passengers. Three attempts
were made to pass a rope and anchor to the shore, but owing to
the darkness of the night and the high surf breaking over the
rocks, this was found impracticable, and all had to be put off
until daylight. I went myself in a boat a second time, with a
rope from the ship, to ease the boat end-on through the surf, and
got very close; but as the breakers were so very high, we could
not effect a landing. Mr. Jones, the chief officer, very gallantly
offered to swim on shore, but was not permitted, as the hazard of
being dashed against the rocks was too great, in the darkness of
the night. The ship bilging heavily, and heeling to port —that
is, to seaward —she continued about three-quarters of an hour
before making any water. During this time the purser and a
gang of men were busily employed in getting up provisions from
the lower hold, and succeeded in saving about ten bags of bread,


and all that could be got at of flour, as well as several other
articles, including medical comforts. In about three-quarters of
an hour after the ship grounded, she began rapidly to make
water; the crew and passengers manning the pumps, which,
however, were of no avail, as in another hour she was full of water
up to the ’tween decks. Me remained in this uncertain position
until morning, the passengers sheltering themselves where they
could. The women and children in the fore cabin and saloon behaved
most patiently and enduringly during this long night of suspense.
The sales were clewed up but not furled, hut the topgallant sails
mostly blew away with the wind, which had by this time increased
to a brisk gale. About ten p.m., the pinnace, in attempting to
lower her over the side, was struck by a heavy sea against the
main-chains, and dashed to pieces, two sailors who were in her
barely escaping with their lives. At daylight, the life-boat was
sent, under command of Mr. Jones, the chief officer, to make
another attempt to carry out a line to the shore. After ex-
periencing great difficulty in landing, they were ultimately suc-
cessful. A rope was fastened to the rocks, and hove taut on
hoard, the sea breaking furiously on the shore, which was lined
with rocks in all directions. About eight a.m. a commencement
was made to land passengers—the women and children first, with
sailors stationed on the ladder to pass them down the side iu
their arms. At nine a.m. the starboard life-boat was lowered
down and manned, under the command of Mr. Parry, the second
officer, the other being under the command of Mr. Jones;
and the two boats kept busily passing and repassing along
the rope, with about a dozen passengers in each boat. The
landing of all the passengers was completed by three p.m.,
without loss of a life or accident of any kind, which
was almost a miracle, as the boats were frequently half
full of water, and several of the passengers had to be dragged
on shore through the surf, almost in a state of insensibility.
Both officers and men behaved gallantly throughout the day in
managing the boats; myself and the surgeou-superintendant
assisting at the gangway, and preventing too many of the pas-
sengers from rushing to the boats. This was not at all times an
easy matter, as all were so anxious to rush into the boats over
the ship’s side ; and the boats were several times nearly swamped
by overcrowding. On the whole, however, the passengers
behaved very orderly, and awaited their turn with great patience,
under the circumstances. The saloon passengers, ladies and
gentlemen, refused to go until all the other passengers were
safely landed. After all the passengers were landed, attempts
were made to save provisions, but out of six bags of bread put
into the boat only one was landed, and that in a damaged state,
and three casks of flour out of six, as the starboard life-boat con-
taining them got swamped and smashed against the rocks, some
of the crew barely escaping with their lives. Mr, Jones, the


chief officer, remained in the ship at this time in order to get
out the long boat; and the port life-boat was placed under
the command of the carpenter, but all the crew in her
jumped on shore through the surf, declaring that they would
risk their lives no longer. Two sailors, however, Demetrius
Gardi, A. 8., a Greek, and George Adams, A. 8., an Englishman,
volunteered to swim to the boat, which was hanging to the surf-
rope, with only the carpenter in her. These men came and took
off some of the men still on board; but the boat got swamped
in an attempt at landing, and was pulled up on the rocks in a
shattered condition. The chief officer, and some of the crew
that remained in the ship, next got into the captain’s gig, the
only boat now remaining; and after cutting down the three
masts to relieve the vessel as much as possible, as she appeared
fast breaking up and heeling over much to port, we all left in
the gig and landed about five p.m., and each had to shift for him-
self as best he could. The passengers already had temporary
huts, made of the brushwood, to shelter them from the incle-
mency of the weather, and fires were kindled here and there to
warm them after they had been drenching wet. No provision
was served out this clay, but, to our great joy, a spring of fresh
water was discovered a mile and a half from the camp, sufficient
to supply all abundantly. When the gig was being launched
up over the rocks to a place of safety, the long-boat was seen
floating from the ship, having tumbled out of the skids, and
driving in shore before the breakers ; but, before reaching the
beach she was dashed into fragments. Throughout this day a
strong wind from S.W.
16th. —After having held a consultation with the surgeon-
superintendent, and several of the leading gentlemen of the
saloon and second cabin, it was considered advisable to dispatch
a party overland to the lighthouse on the north part of the island,
to ascertain if communication could be effected with the main
land by telegraph, which was known to exist a few years pre-
viously. Consequently, Mr. Parry, the second officer, with a
party of volunteers, gentlemen of the second cabin, were sent
off, about seven a.m., with a fistful of small bread each, as the
only scanty supply of provisions which could be spared, bearing
three letters —one from the surgeon-superintendent to the Colo-
nial Office, in Melbourne, and two from myself; one to Bright
Brothers, of Melbourne, requesting immediate assistance ; and
another to the superintendent of the lighthouse, asking what
supply of provisions he could spare in case of urgent need.
When this party went away, we directed our attention to the
landing of provisions, landing as much as possible for the famish-
ing passengers. We succeeded in saving, this day, eighteen
casks of flour, six bags bread and a quantity of passengers’
luggage. Bat ions: half-pound flour, and biscuit given in addition
to the women and children. On landing the provisions, eight


constables were appointed to keep watch throughout the night,
to guard them from pillage; the saloon passengers keeping
watch likewise, and striking a bell every half-hour, which was
answered by another bell at the provision depot; the constables
having orders to toll back in case of any rowdies attempting to
force past during the night. During this day the passengers
were formed into messes, and each mess erected a temporary
hut for itself, consisting of a framework of boughs, covered
with sails, table-cloths, or anything that could be got, so that
they enjoyed comfort as compared with the previous day, and
the greatest order prevailed until night fell,
17th. —As soon as the life-boat was temporarily repaired, as
was required after her having been knocked about amongst the
rocks, the officers and men exerted themselves to save more pro-
visions, and a quantity of passengers’ baggage, the passengers
greatly needing it, as many were in a state of great destitution,
especially the women and children who had come ashore as they
stood, without any change of raiment or a blanket to give them
at night. Those who had anything to spare distributed it freely
to the most destitute. Rations: | lb. flour, a little oatmeal, and
i lb. salt meat, which had been saved, to each adult daily.
[The records of the 18th and 19th are in a great measure
similar to those of the previous day, though not destitute of
features of interest.]
20th.—Being in great suspense as to the arrival of the expe-
dition at the lighthouse, it was decided that I should leave in
the life-boat for the lighthouse. The sailmaker and four sailors
volunteered to accompany me. We started about ten a.m., and
arrived at the lighthouse at six p.m., when we found that Mr.
Parry and his expedition had arrived on the previous day about
noon, and Parry and three of the party had already left for Mel-
bourne in a life-boat belonging to the lighthouse, kindly lent
them by Mr. Spong, the superintendent. A messenger was
accordingly despatched about ten p.m., bearing a letter to the
camp, informing them that succour was soon to be expected.
On the following day, at eight a.m., after stopping the leaks in
the boat, which kept two men baling, she was so shattered by
rough usage, we started and arrived at the ship at ten p.m.,
where we were received by the passengers with three hearty
cheers. I found that Mr. Hickmott had arrived there about
p.m., bearing the good news, and the joy of the camp was not
to be described, tears of gratitude being shed in abundance.
22nd (Sunday).—At nine a.m., the boat was sent to run out a
rope and kedge to seaward, in anticipation of the arrival of the
steamer, to enable the boats to clear the breakers. After this,
prayers were appointed to be read, and a general thanksgiving
rendered to the Bather of all mercies for our very providential
delivery; but so many destitute women and children came into


our little hut for articles of clothing and some small shoes, which
had been washed on shore from the wreck, that the doctor was
fully occupied in clothing the naked in the forenoon. Wo then
intended to have a meeting in the evening, hut heavy rain pre-
vented us from having a public service, though, no doubt, many
returned thanks privately for our miraculous preservation, as the
coast was strewn in all directions with sunken rocks to a great
distance off; and had the ship struck on one of these rocks, not
a soul would have been saved to tell the tale.
23rd. —A party of 117 single men were despatched to-day to
the lighthouse with Mr. Hickmott, as a scarcity of provisions was
anticipated if succour should not be soon forthcoming. At nine
a.m., to the joy of all in the camp, a steamer was seen approaching
from the southward. The life-boat was sent to meet her, and she
proved to be H.M.C.S.S. Victoria , commander Norman, who
brought us beef, mutton, biscuits, and soft bread for our support,
and her kind commander offered to supply us with every thing we
required. About eleven a.m., the women and children were sent
off first, passing over the long-boat as a bridge between the
steamer’s boats and the rocks. It was amusing to see how careful
the sailors were in carrying the ladies through the surf, and
especially one woman with a young baby in her arms. At three
p.m., another steamer appeared in sight, coming from the north-
ward. She proved to be the Pharos, andjtook off a few boats-
full. About five p.m., the saloon passengers were ready to start
off, but there were none to be found who would take down their
luggage. The life-boat was almost full of water, and many of
the men were exhausted. Orders were given to haul the boat
up on the rocks, which was done by all on the island, but the
boat was in a very shattered condition. The steamers then got
under weigh, and started to the northward. At six p.m., mustered
all hands, and found still remaining in the camp 23, viz., 11 ship’s
crew, master, officers and men, and 12 passengers, 7 males and 5
females. Provisions this night in abundance.
24th. —Wind west to north. Very heavy surf breaking heavily
on the rocks, and heavy breakers over the reefs in the offing.
At daybreak the ship was observed bilging and twisting with the
force of the heavy breakers, and giving evident signs that she
could not hold out much longer, as with every surge she appeared
to heel more and more, until nearly on her beam ends. About
one p.m., with the force of a heavy breaker, she was burst apart
amidships, the fore part falling over to seaward, and soon dis-
appearing. By five p.m. nothing of her after part appeared but
a few bare timbers. The contents of the hold, together with the
planks, booms, timbers, &c., were soon floating towards the
shore. The crew were in attendance to save as much property
as possible, but the cases of merchandise and passengers’ luggage
were dashed to pieces against the rocks before they came within


reach to save them. It was observed that all the debris from the
wreck was carried to the south, along the coast, and none at any
time to the north; proving that there is a very strong southerly
current prevailing along the west side of the island, which un-
doubtedly contributed much to carry the ship out of her course.
26th. On this day the Victoria and Pharos returned, and took
away the remainder of the passengers, calling first at Franklin
ji? r ’ Tr* arr^vin S at the lighthouse before noon. They then
sailed tor Hobson s Bay, where the Victoria arrived about mid-
night, and the Pharos a couple of hours later.
(Signed) OWEN OWENS.
Per Favour of the Fditor of the Argus.
To the Gentlemen forming the Committee of the
Setherby Belief Fund, also Mr, Tanhard, of the
Temperance Hotel.
Deae Sies, ye, the undersigned cabin passengers and officers
of the stranded ship JVetherby, humbly beg to offer you this testi-
monial, as being the only means within our power that we have
at present of showing our deep gratitude for all the numerous
kindnesses you and the citizens of Melbourne have bestowed upon
us ever since we set foot in this flourishing and wealthy colony
of Victoria, in supplying us with everything we could desire. It
shows the warm-heartedness of Christian feeling there is among
you all, in helping those who could not help themselves in their
distress.
We also beg to thank Mr. Tankard, of the Temperance Hotel,
for the kind manner in which he received us and treated us during
our sojourn under his roof.
Again thanking you for the hind hospitality bestowed upon us,
wishing you all health and prosperity and every success in your
undertakings, is the prayer of the undersigned.
On behalf of the Cabin Passengers and Officers,
W. Townsend.
H. D. Vincent.
— Crawford.
J. Grimes.
— Lockhabdt.
Tankard’s Temperance Hotel,
Melbourne, July 31.


THE CEEW OE THE EE TREES T.
To the Editor of the Age.
Sir, —Permit me, through the columns of your journal, to bring
before the liberal citizens of Melbourne the gallantry,valour, and
extraordinary exertions of the crew of the ill-fated ship JSfetherig,
in saving the lives of the passengers from their perilous position
on the wreck, and afterwards in the saving of provisions to keep
them alive when starvation stared them in the face, Eor two
days and two nights they had not changed their wet clothing, nor
had they a temporary booth erected for themselves; but laying
down at night to rest their w'eary limbs, wherever they could get
a friendly reception, ready to undergo again, in the morning, the
same fatigue and exertions in saving provisions and luggage, until
we were together obliged to take a temporary rest, almost unable
to move from sheer exhaustion. I think, Mr. Editor, that such
men deserve some notice, especially when they were so disinte-
rested as to forget their own effects in their zeal to succour
others. I think that some of them had not a blanket to cover
them in the night, and remained in their wet clothes until the third
day. Are not Demetrius Grardi and Greorge Adams deserving of
some slight acknowledgment for their exemplary conduct in
swimming to the boat to assist the carpenter to come and rescue
their commander, chief officer, and the remainder of the crew from
the wreck, when the other boat’s crew jumped on shore through the
surf, declaring that they would risk their lives no longer ? Again,
when it was decided that I should go to the lighthouse, and thence
to Melbourne, if necessary, to give intelligence of the wreck (not
knowing at the time that Parry and party had left), I asked for
volunteers —men that were not afraid of being drowned —both
officers and men readily offered their services, with a determina-
tion to persevere or die in the attempt, and the only difficulty
was who to select : and we commenced our voyage in a
ricketty boat, requiring two hands to keep her free. Permit
me to' mention that the carpenter lost nearly all his tools
in cutting the lower deck to get at the provisions, and about the
rocks in constantly repairing the boats, and had to leave the
island (both carpenter, sailmaker and most of the crew) in a state
of destitution, having lost all their property in their endeavours
to save that of others. It grieved me to hear some of those
deserving men complain that they were treated, at the Exhibition
Building, with coldness and indifference when they applied for a
change of garments to cover their nakedness. If there are funds
in the hands of the committee to reward others with gold medals,
surely the carpenter deserves a moiety wherewith to buy some
tools to earn his bread, after sacrificing all to the general good.
I will mention one instance more, to show the good and sterling
quality of many of my men. When we were about leaving the
wreck on that boisterous night when the passengers were landed,
one of them disputed with mo the honour of being last in leaving
the wreck, and it was with the utmost difficulty I came off


wearing the palm. My chief officer, carpenter, sailmaker, and
three others were with me in my last voyage to India. No doubt,
my good and deserving crew were overlooked by the committee
on account of their anxiety to succour those passengers who
were to leave by the steamer. If there are any articles of clothes
remaining, my destitute crew will receive them with heartfelt
gratitude. To the praise of the honourable committee, I must
say that they told my apprentice (an orphan boy) to go about
the building and select for himself whatever he stood in need of.
Apologising for the length of my letter,
I beg to remain, Sir, your obedient servant,
O. OWENS,
Master of late Ship Netherby.
Melbourne, 1st August , 1866.
CAPTAIN OWENS & THE CEEW OE THE NETHERBY.
To the Editor of the Age.
Sir, —The letter of Captain Owens, which appears in your
paper this day, has been laid before the committee of the
Netherby Relief Fund, and I am desired to express, in the name
of the gentlemen who compose that committee, the pain and sur-
prise it has caused them. This is the first time Captain Owens
has thought fit to place himself in communication with the com-
mittee, and it is to be regretted that he should have made use of
such unguarded language. It is an injustice to those gentlemen,
who have been for the past week labouring day and night to
obtain and to distribute assistance to the unfortunate sufferers
by the wreck of the Netherby. The generous response made by
the colony has enabled the committee to expend about £700 in
actual necessities for the passengers. I believe all the officers of
the Netherby who have taken the trouble to come to the Exhibi-
tion Building have received their share of the bounty; and it
has always been the intention of the committee to give the like
consideration to the whole crew. They cheerfully recognised the
claims of the carpenter, sailmaker, and others who have well done
their duty. But these men were all sent to the Sailors’ Home
by the Government, and are, besides, entitled to wages, &c.,
from Captain Owens ; so that they were not destitute in the sense
of the 470 passengers in whose behalf the appeal was first made.
The committee will not relax their endeavours until they are in
a position to do for the seamen what they have done for the pas-
sengers ; and they confidently believe, also, that the warm-hearted
citizens of Melbourne will come forward, and enable them to
supply those poor fellows still remaining in the Exhibition Build-
ing with the tools of their several trades, that they may go about
their work. When all this is done, they certainly intend to do
something for Mr. Parry, and his gallant companions in the
whaleboat. But the “ gold medals,” spoken of by Captain Owens,
at present exist only in his own heated imagination.
I am, Sir, your obedient,
JOHN J. SHILLINGrLAW, Hon. Sec.
2nd August , I860.


CAPTAIN 0. OWENS.
Deae Sie,— We, the undersigned, passengers of ship Netherhy,
beg to tender you our warmest thanks for the uniform kindness
and sympathy shown us, not only on King’s Island, but during
the whole passage. Our utmost respect and admiration are due
to you for always being foremost at the post of danger, and,
even when the indifference of others was clearly exhibited, for
your daring attempt to go to the lighthouse in a leaky and
shattered boat to save us from misery ; and also for your kind-
ness to those destitute of a change of clothing, by not only
giving up to them all which was saved of your clothing, but also
what you had on your own person.
We have very little time to write this, or we would fill up
this sheet in admiration of your qualities both as a seaman and
as a Christian.
We now bid you adieu, and hope that you will meet with that
success in future which you are highly deserving of.
We remain, dear Sir, yours faithfully,
Wm. Townsend
H. Dunsterville Vincent
E. Cowell
E. Thomas
T. R. Townsend
G. R. Townsend
H. Hartenstein.
M. C. Townsend
E. J. Townsend
Wm. M. Young
Thomas Grimes
C. Grimes
Geo. Evans
G. F. Springett
J. Murdoch
George Fisher
Maurice J. Condon
Mary Anne Condon
Robert Condon
Selina Condon
Caroline Condon
George Massingham
Thomas Johnson
Wm. Hussey
Hope Martin
William M'Kinnon
Elizabeth M‘Kinnon
John Watkins
Charles Ferris
Edwin Bellgrave
Henry Copping
Edward Killhiem
Alfred Lee
James Yates
H. Hughes
Bernard Clark
Catherine Clark
George Huggins
Eliza Huggins
Joseph Grindal
James Burden
Annie Burden
Walter Yates
J. Edwards
Lucy Groom
James Burden
Emmeline Evans
John GiU
Mary Gill
Jane Hanna
Marta Tone
Robert Nally
Mary Nally
William Schrader
Mary Schrader
Arthur Lee
Elizabeth Lee
Robert Jones
Charles Denning
Benjamin Groom
Daniel Watkins
George Snook
Samuel Meager
John Skerman
Johann George Johone
Thomas Eord
James Aplin
Mary Ann Aplin
James Yorston
Rebecca Yorston
Louis Cicola
John Rodgers
Maurice Joseph Condon
William Ellis


Jane Ellis
John Coward
Henry Bone
Richard Grindal
Edward Ganty
Janies Goulden
G. J. A. Evans
James Murphy
Ann Murphy
George Whigley
George Hy. Bulpit
Anne Bulpit
Benjamin Groom
Mrs. Groom
James Renden
Eleanor Renden
Arthur Short
George Dark
H. Fink
W. Smith
A. Darlington
S. Broome
H. Manning
John Clark
Elizabeth Clarke
George Exton
Charley Bartling
F. Skerman
W. Cox
George Cole
Alfred James Austin
Benjamin Cayley
M. M‘Kinnon
Alfred Darlington
Thomas Pope
Thomas Bridges
William Packer
William Skerman, jun.
Wm. Skerman
E. Pinnuck
G. Kerney
C. Wells
J. Dippie
J. Rudge
E. Barry
A. Huggins
J. Crocker
A. R. Berry
E. Berry
Thomas Arkle
J. B. Thompson
R. Sydney
Rosina Exton
James Drake
Elizabeth Drake
Richard Drake
Emily Drake
James Reekie
Melbourne, 30th July, 1866.
Andrew Lee
Mary Lee
Jas. Sinclair
Misses Lawrence
A. Evans
Joseph Frost
W. Barnett
Ellen Barnett
T. Turner
James Malone
Margaret Malone
Barney Clark
E. Clark
E. Berry
A. R. Berry
T. Sanger
T. Parsons
Patrick Burns
William Skerman, sen
Mrs. W. Skerman
Alex. Forbes
H. Robinson
W. Clempson
D. Pinnuck
E. Pinnuck
S. Nolan
G. Scanes
James Pearce
John Nash
Edward W. Shelford
Robert Hall
Reginald Evans
Thomas Bradshaw
Wm, Leman
James Welburn
John Morony
John Hayes
Michael Henery
Mary Henery
James Carbery
Jane Carbery
Hugh Carbery
George Carbery
Mrs. Moffatt
Luke Moffatt
Mary Moffatt
William Beckworth
Elizabeth Beckworth
W. Thompson
F. Brown
G. Hackney
R. Riley
J. Thornton
Mrs. Thornton
John Adams
Eliza Adams
Mathew Fagan
Mary Fagan.
W ALKER, MAY, AND CO., PRINTERS, 99 BOURKE-ST. W r EST, MELBOURNE


ESTABLISHED 185 L
W. B. STEPHENS'
w
a'
P>>
hd
.P
LONDON Sc MELBOURNE
BOOK & STATIONERY DEPOT
Oq
bd
oq P s ?*
P.
hd
Q
Ph ®
H* P*
S? H
R P
S. R
Q) <D
1& STATIONKR
P 1
K
OOKSLI.LER
02
p m
H CD
5 *1
<j
rß'-fSTEiPH EWS^IS
r d
s •■3
o o toMi ic I al : 1 &iH lies' pWe t
irwpTr-
ACCOUNt BOOKS
BOOKSELLER
&
STATIONER
;s
s^TIONERy
V*VMN BOOR
pRtNTI fsi c
bd
cr
P-
p.
&
«
K
oq V!
M
fs
BOOK AND STATIONERY DEPOT,
AND
TELEGRAPH AGENCY,
9 0* I c
MEL-BOUENE.
