

TO THE PEOPLE OF VICTORIA.
PETITION
A BARRISTER
POE AID
REFORMING OUR LAWYERS.
MELBOURNE:
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY WALKER, MAY & CO.,
99 BOXJRKE STREET WEST.
18CO.




TO THE PEOPLE OF VICTOEIA.
THE PETITION OF A BARRISTER FOR AID IN REFORMING
OUR LAWYERS.
Will you kindly listen to an old man, and give him a helping
hand ?
In the first lines I penned in reference to our administration of
the law, I stated I had neither taste nor talents for the undertaking
I had assumed, and was only driven into it because nobody else
would stir. In all that has proceeded from me since, I have
repeated that assertion, and I here again reiterate it.
If I had received a little assistance, I should not only have been
spared the penning of this, but the work of improvement would
have been far on its way.
In my former little pamphlet I made suggestions which, if
attended to, would have saved us from a host of errors, and from
grief many a now heavy heart.
I have seen enough of law here to discover that it is a more
difficult science than I had imagined, and to conclude that in less
opulent colonies much of real injustice must necessarily occur; but
need it be so here, in the great and wealthy Victoria ? Those who
cannot pay for it cannot, of course, obtain the best commodity; but
is that the case with this colony ? What service in talent or aught
else is there she cannot pay for ?
The situation of the gentlemen on this bench is more painful
than, I trust, I shall ever see any other man placed in. Prompt,


like every true worshipper of justice, to reprehend injustice or
knavery wherever on the surface, they are wholly incapable of
grouping’ facts, or probing dishonesty, wherever shrouded by the
flimsiest veil. If the facts which so frequently, by being buried in
lumber, embarrass their understandings, were presented in all sim-
plicity to their minds, justice would be instantly obvious to them.
It must be borne in mind, however, that such simple aspect of the
case is that which ever presents itself to the injured, as they are
exempt from all influence of the lumber; and it is impossible to
estimate the frightful consequences of destroying men’s faith in
what, after religion, is their greatest consolation.
A man readily understands that he may have been cheated into
buying of one brother the estate of another brother, or of any other
man the estate of another, or into an advance to one man on
the estate of another; but I trust that he may never be brought to
understand (which is the picture only too frequently presented for
his contemplation here) how the oracles of justice can permit those
who have cheated him, or those who claim, as mere volunteers, or
equally unworthily, through the cheats, to open their mouths at
her shrine.
If ever the world offered the opportunity of instituting a perfect
system of jurisprudence, it seems to be on this spot —a community
possessing great opulence, and wholly untrammelled.
I am well aware that perfection in the administration of justice,
or the nearest approach to it permissible on earth, must ever be
one of the most difficult tasks of man, simply because of the number
of agents necessarily employed in it; but that is no excuse for the
mean and abject remissness in the matter which this state
manifests.
It is impossible to estimate the pernicious influence of the ill
administration of justice on a nation.
There are enough upright people here to prevent much wrong
that now prevails, if they would but stand up for right. The up-
right vastly outnumber the vicious, and could place a check on the
latter, if they would be a little more active.


Preliminary to some suggestions I am going to offer, 1 crave
leave to comment on three or four cases forming a tew of the num-
ber of those of the same description which have come under my
notice since I last wrote on the subject.
1. Judgment in Equity should be no longer deferred in Salter
v. Daward. The case was argued on the 10th, 11th, and 12th of
October last, nearly a year ago, and judgment reserved, {Argus,
13th October). The interest I take in it is to ascertain whether the
Judge in Equity can find the means of correcting the judgment at
law, ( Argus of Bth, and commented on by my letter in the Number
of the 19th December last,) which appeared to me simply to give
A.’s estate to B. Very nice for 8,, but very unpleasant for A. The
facts were, A. had bought and paid for, and was in possession of,
the property, hut had omitted to obtain the legal estate, —an idol
I had been worshipping for thirty-three years before my arrival
here, hut which I now execrate, as a very scourge for the innocent,
in unskilful hands. 8., discovering the omission, paid the assignee
of the seller, who had become insolvent, a mere trifle to convey to
him such legal estate, although the property had been improved
since A.’s purchase to nearly twenty times its original value. By
this, B. acquired, in fact, no title, even at law; but still he was
allowed to succeed in recovering judgment against A. The English
law applying in such circumstances is as simple as in many others
in which it is here made to appear otherwise. If you are about to
buy an estate from a seller not in possession, never do so, if there
be another person in possession, until you have inquired of him
whether he holds as tenant of the proposed seller. If he says he is
such tenant, and the terms of the tenancy are satisfactory, you may
safely purchase; but if he denies the tenancy, proceed no further
in the matter until the question of right is cleared up, because, even
though the seller (which was not, the fact in the case under discus-
sion) may in some such cases have the right to recover the estate
from the person in possession, he can transfer to you no such right
without himself first recovering possession of the property or pro-
curing his title to he admitted by the tenant.


2, I next advert to Palmer v. Service , (Argus, 4th September,)
which, I. see, is to be appealed from ; but surely the plaintiff 1 will
never be driven to that expense. There is no ground of law what-
ever on which to resist the claim. I offer no opinion as to the
pleading's; but as to the plaintiff’s rig'ht to compensation, there is
not the shadow of a doubt. The cases of East and West India
Docks v. Gattke, Northern and Western Railway Company v.
Bradley, and Glover v. North- Western Railway Company, cited
in the judgment, decide the question.
Those cases show that the question had been decided before the
clauses of the Imperial Act were incorporated into our local Act,
and yet we appropriated the language that confers the right. There
is commonly some excuse for every error; but what, having the
slightest foundation, can ingenuity suggest here ?
It was never seriously doubted at the English bar that the 68th
section of the Land Clauses Consolidation Act gave parties inju-
riously affected, within its terms, compensation for injury to their
property, as well where land or other property was taken from
them as where not; and the cases above referred to show that the
English bar had formed a correct view on the matter. Their
Honor’s judgment, in reference to the facts of the case not bringing
it within the provisions of the Acts, seems to have been founded on
some myth, not on the actual circumstances of the case. The Im-
perial Act includes, and was intended to include, every imaginable
undertaking requiring land ; and were our local Act the creature
of the Imperial Legislature, and if it applied to England, and were
the board acting under it, —either the Board of Trade, or Board of
Admiralty, or any other board of Government appointment, —such
board would be subject, in such a case as Sir James Palmer’s, to
make compensation. Of course, there is no necessity in England
(and too much dread of the consequences) to confer such powers on
the Government. Their Honors could never have read the 2nd sec-
tion of the Imperial Act, in which the word “ promoters ” is inter-
preted to include “ commissioners,” or the 2nd section of our local
Act (10 Vic, 40), by which the very thing established is a board of


“ commissioners.” I assume their Honors mean to claim equal
immunity for the District Road Boards acting 1 under the 13th sec-
tion of our local act, hut if they will look at the 2nd section of the
Imperial Act, I imagine they will he of opinion that its words are
large enough to include those gentlemen; and if not, the more the
pity, and the greater the shame of inconsiderately including provi-
sions in a statute without first studying their meaning, or seeing
that they are adequate for the purposes intended. But the context
of the local act and incorporated clauses will doubtless enable the
injured to reach the Government, assuming it to be an honourable
Government, even through the District Board. Is it proper, by the
way, in a constitutional point of view, either to adopt Imperial Acts,
or incorporate their provisions into Acts of our Legislature, without
placing such Acts, or the incorporated portions of such Acts, amongst
our parliamentary records ? It may be open to some question,
where clauses are in such manner incorporated, whether the Court
has a right to look at the whole of the Act of another Legislature,
or is confined to the mere words incorporated : but nothing in the
present case turns on that point. By railroad special Acts, to
which the Land Clauses Consolidation Act is admitted to apply,
tolls are commonly raiseable; and by our local act, into which the
clauses of the Land Clauses Act in question have been incorpor-
ated, tolls are also to be raised; and we have a board of commis-
sioners authorised to do certain acts, and, as such commissioners,
by virtue of their acceptance of office and acting in the execution of
its duties, contracting by Act of Parliament to pay for injuries to
property occasioned by their acts, and qualified to raise money by
tolls. Is it meant to be asserted, in a free country, that such kind
of contracts with Government officers are to be construed differently
from those with other persons or bodies ? The affair is a legislative,
mercantile (mercenary, if you like) or business contract, or transac-
tion between the public, represented by the commissioners and the
individuals constituting such public as to the terms on which such in-
dividuals are to be dealt with whenever affected by the exercise of the
powers conferred. If the court wants an instance of how the English


courts strain to give its full effect to every word of an act of parli a-
m ent, let it refer to the cases (and there are, I think, several others not
there noticed) decided on the word i( legacy” in the 40th section
of 3 and 4 W. 4, c. 27, the statute of limitations (adopted here)
and collected, 3 Chitty’s Statutes, p. 101, in which, notwithstanding
the title of the act, restricts its operation to real estate, the courts
refused to control the natural import of the word legacy by holding
it to mean legacy out of real estate only, and held it to apply to all
legacies as well those out of personal estate as others; and, if their
Honors want an instance of how near the Queen was being fixed
even for the misconduct of her servants, let them refer to Viscount
Canterbury v. the Attorney-General, 1 Phillips, 300, There was,
however, no misconduct whatever, in the present case, on the part
of the defendants if what they did was necessary and proper for the
public, and they should he instantly protected by Government
from all trouble or anxiety in the matter. The 68th section of the
Lands Clauses Consolidation Act was meant to meet, and does
meet, cases of the present description, and its incorporation into
our local act was meant to meet, if what is honest was meant, and
does meet the case of the plaintiff ; and lam wholly at a loss to
conceive what circumstance there is in the case to distract or turn
aside the mind from a right conclusion, or why the Government
should oppose such a claim, or why justice should not, where
invoked, from so august a fountain, at once step forth. Not a pole
of land (so is the agreement) of the most trifling value, can he
taken on one side of the road, without remuneration, whilst the
entire value of a man’s estate, and possibly his whole property on
the other side, if none of it be actually taken, may be destroyed
with impunity and without compensation. That is the very injus-
tice the 68th section of the Imperial Act was devised to prevent.
If we need roads, which we obtained the right to have on the pro-
mise to pay for the injury occasioned in the operation of making
them, we must pay the stipxdated price. We obtained the right to
make our roads and levy tolls on the parliamentary contract for
such payment to the individuals to be affected by such operations.


There is the road and there is the admitted injury, and there is the
bond—of what character is the mind that boggles over any one of
those items ! Fiat justitia mat ccelum. If we must pay £IOO,OOO,
let us pay it rather than lower our people hy attempting- to evade a
just claim. The little boys in the street will very soon refuse to
hand us the newspaper till they g-et the money. For very shame
never let the case g-o home; we shall be laughed to scorn.
Can’t we just make the thing complete by placing- a toll-bar at
each end of the poor gentleman’s estate, so that when he drops
down the 30-feet cutting we have given him, he may, when he
gains his legs, have to subscribe for deepening the fall another ten
feet before he can make his way towards the doctor.
3. I next notice a crop of cases —Me Fall v. Lett , McNall v.
Smithers, {Argus, sth Dec. last,) and there are several others of
the same family. More unfortunate litigation never occurred.
There is no point whatever in the case, nor anything to litigate
about. The case is the most simple possible—John McNall, in
May, 1839, bought 25 acres of land, at Richmond (portion 23), at
a Government auction, and paid for them, but did not obtain the
Crown grant until April, 1842. In September, 1839, and conse-
quently before he obtained the Crown grant, he sold the land
again, and received the purchase money for it, as stated in a
formal conveyance, executed by him to the purchasers, but by
some unaccountable mistake it was misdescribed in such convey-
ance, as portion 18, which McNall never had, or had any
interest in. Possession of the right land, however, (23), was
delivered to the purchasers, and the persons now in possession
claim through such purchasers. M‘Nall having become insolvent,
in 1841, took the Crown grant, (the Crown never making such
grants to sub-purchasers,) in April, 1842, and in May, 1842,
again passed through the insolvent court. Up to his death,
in 1844, the purchasers remained in quiet possession. After
his death, and in December, 1844, his widow and his assignee,
under the first insolvency, having satisfied themselves of the
mistake committed in the deed of September, 1839, executed


another formal conveyance intended to cure it, stating the whole
circumstances, such deed operating as a release of the widow’s title
to dower, but not, though professing to do so, operating as a convey-
ance by the assignee, the very circumstances stated it, preventing
such operation, by showing that the insolvent was a mere trustee
for the purchasers, and that therefore his assignee could not take
from him the legal estate, and, consequently, could not convey it-
But though inoperative as a conveyance by the assignee of the legal
estate (which legal estate had descended to the insolvent’s heir-
at-law, as trustee,) that deed was good as a disclaimer and decla-
ration of trust or right, by the only person (the assignee under
the first insolvency,) capable of making such disclaimer and
declaration. After 1844, the purchasers sold to numerous other
persons, and distributed the estate in many lots amongst other
purchasers, wdio also took possession, and some of whom sold again;
and the above-named defendants derived their title through the
deeds of 1839 and 1844, and about a dozen others, the assignees
under both insolvencies standing by and advancing no claim to the
property for 17 years. The tribulation of the purchasers, who have
improved the estate until it is now worth, I am informed, upwards of
£30,000, was reserved until McNall’s heir attained twenty-one, in
1859, which fact could in nowise affect the right to the estate, as
the heir coidd only take as trustee for the purchasers. However,
the heir and assignees, in 1859, set up a claim to the property, and
brought an action of ejectment to recover it; and the assignee, under
the second insolvency, was permitted by the full court to prevail in
such action, the court holding that the assignee under the second
insolvency was entitled to the legal estate, though a trustee for the
purchasers of the estate so recovered. Now that is simply impossible:
no estate can pass from an insolvent to his assignee, as trustee for any
body but the insolvent’s creditors, except in the solitary instance of the
insolvent having a partial interest, (not the case here,) in which
instance, of course, his assignee takes as he has something then to
be trustee of for the creditors, as well as for the other person par-
tially interested. The court committed the error of overlooking that


in trying- all such cases, even in a court of law, they are trying- the
equitable rig-ht. If the estate helong-ed in equity to the purchasers,
as it undoubtedly did, it was as much the province of a court of law
to decide that question, as of a court of equity, (see Winch v. Keeley
1, T. R., 619; Dangerfield v. Thomas, 9, Adol and Ellis, 292;
Carpenter v. Marnell, 3, Bos and Puller, 40; and Gardner v. Rowe,
2, Sim and Stu, 346, 5, Russ, 258). By this mistake, the par-
ties are involved in complicated and unnecessary litigation. The
point has been settled for a century, hut I have observed every time
the court of law here g-ets a question of the sort before it, confusion
ensues. No case could he clearer than that of the purchasers. The
deed of 1839 states, that they boug-ht and paid for something-. The
something- mentioned in that deed, the seller never had any
interest in, nor did the purchasers take possession of it, hut the
something- they meant to buy, they did take possession of, the
seller acquiescing. The deed of 1844 explained the mistake, and
stated that the thing bought was that which the purchasers
had taken possession of, and the assignee, who has now been
allowed to recover, stood by and saw the purchasers improve
the estate, from £SOO in value, to nearer £50,000, without ever
making any claim —his title, if he ever had any, being complete
in 1842, and not being affected by the heir attaining majority; and
yet the court, forgetting that it was trying an equitable right, and
that every fact, including the question of mistake, and of acquies-
cence on the part of the assignee, was open to its consideration,
in the same manner as if it had been sitting as a court of equity,
and thinking it was trying some legal question, or other mythical
point, have made a decision clearly against the equitable right, and
consequently against the legal one, which may involve the pur-
chasers in an appeal home, and much needless litigation and expense,
locking up for a long time property of great value, and thus throw-
ing into confusion the affairs of a numerous body of owners, unless
resort he had to the Legislature to correct, as it doubtless ought
to do, the mistake at once. It was an error on the part of
the defendants to defend at law ; but the highly respectable firm


who conducted the defence are wholly blameless, as though such
course was resisted by one counsel consulted, it was approved
of and advised by three other counsel, court practitioners.
The case was one for a court of equity, as the result has
shown, with which courts of law have only concurrent jurisdiction
in such cases ; and as a conveyance from the heir-at-law, as trustee,
only was needed, the court of equity was the court to resort to
where only such conveyance, if refused, could be obtained, and
where the heir and assignees would, if they had resisted the demand,
have been made to pay all the costs of resisting a just and equitable
right.
4. Next, Raleigh and others v. White and others (Argus, 2nd and
4th June last), where the full court (I have mislaid the report) very
properly corrected and prevented all further ill consequences of the
unfortunate proceedings on the trial at nisi prius. No counsel
would have opened such a case in an English court. He would
have been stopped instantly had he attempted it. Is there, I won-
der, in any other portion of Her Majesty’s dominions, a court in
which two of four persons, mere volunteers, and trustees, who
were seeking to recover from lenders, without restoring the
amount borrowed, that on which their constituents, in whose
right they were suing, had borrowed it, on the ground that
such constituents had cheated the lenders out of the loan,
would be listened to for a moment ? Did anybody ever
hear of another making a fraudulent advance ? What are its
characteristics ? Most of us are only too familiar with advances
fraudulently obtained ; but who ever heard that it was
possible to make one ? The defendants made an advance,
as to part, as it is alleged, on bad security, and lost, or are threat-
ened with the loss of their money accordingly; but that is a
foolish, not a fraudulent act, and the court, not perceiving the dif-
ference, set us, for several weeks, hunting a fool for a knave.
The dullest English judge I remember, had the questions
submitted to the jury in this case been handed up to him,
would at once have slyly sug-gested the substitution of the


word folly for fraud, where last used in the second question
submitted, and the whole affair would have ended in laughter;
hut, of course, where men are lawyers no such case as that one,
or as one half of those which brave the light here, would be
heard of.
I could add many others to these cases, but prefer not to do so.
For some months I have read as few of the reports as possible,
simply because they, in too many instances, only give pain. I doubt
whether I should have now taken pen in hand, or come to the reso-
lution I have, hut for Sir James Palmer’s case, and the vexatious
predicament in which McNall’s case recently came again be-
fore me.
It is impossible to lay the faxdt of all that is wrong in the ad-
ministration of justice here at the doors of the bench. The bench
does not receive all the aid it ought to receive from the bar, and
something must be done to put matters in a better state.
If it could he so arranged that the present bench, or even two
of its members should retire, still I doubt whether the substitution
for them of any of the members of our bar would give us anything
approaching what we need.
I have been hitherto familiar only with men whose habit it was
not only to take more pains and to afford more aid in the search for
justice, but also to stand up more for it than this bar does, though
the remuneration they received was much less than the bar here
receives for their very inferior services ; and it would vastly elevate
us if we could get a few persons among-st us to generate that
spirit here.
Not only did I witness the whole of the fierce battle between
Lord Chief Justice Best (Lord Wynford) and Sergeant Wilde
(Lord Truro), beginning in 1826 and ending in 1829, which drove
the former (and as I have ever thought, somewhat harshly, because
my sympathy is ever primarily with the judge) from the
bench; but I also witnessed, which was a far more agreeable
picture, the great success of the copious learning, gentleness,
and firmness of a Turner, and a Kindersley, with a judge who,


though high-minded and a sound lawyer, was yet, occasionally,
rather dull, and often too prompt of anger. There is rarely occasion
for harshness towards a judge. If an advocate feels he is right,
let him repeat his proposition shortly, over and over again. I have
seen Lord Langdale come round under such an operation, and,
with a grateful smile on his face, thus save all the expense and
misery of protracted justice.
Now, if we could only get such men as I have named, or
such as approach them in qualifications (and no price could be
too high to pay for them) they would help us amazingly, not only
in the present, hut in the future of this great country, now being
sacrificed.
But whether such new appointment to the bench take place or not,
and as, at present, our full bench have not the opportunity of reviewing
their decisions, why not pass a short act, giving them the opportu-
nity of a rehearing ? A somewhat low scale of fees to the bar, on such
occasions, woidd protect counsel against any imputation that they pro-
moted rehearings, at the same time that it would be a penalty on them
for allowing justice to miscarry when first invoked. Justice being
our aim, why not call to our assistance any aids in our power ? I
am convinced that if the bench had had the opportunity of review-
ing the decisions I have in this paper and elsewhere noticed, as
well as a great many others, they would have reversed the greater
part, if not all of them. The points at which the mind took the
wrong’ turn, or was not sufficiently observant of facts or a thousand
other sources of error, may be seen on a rehearing, though missed
at the first. We cannot banish error, but we may pursue many
courses to prevent it. In one of the terrible scenes I have passed
through, in my battle with counsel here, after hearing the
court otherwise maligned, I was saucily told I should not get any
full court here to reverse a decision of an individual judge below;
but, all honour to the bench, I have seen, in more instances than
one, that libel falsified.
To persevere in error is neither the part of a gentleman or a
man.


Even if my ailments had not precipitated this appeal, it would
have soon come from some of the other wanderers from that home
of honour and freedom which most of us have quitted.
We should have a Leg’al Periodical—a revival of the Victoria
Times , or some such publication, weekly, in which error may be
pointed out. I will pay a subscription of five guineas per annum
for a single copy, if worthily got up and conducted. The reports
of the cases would be the material matter to be attended to. If
the lawyers alone cannot support it, the public should help. What
are all or any of us more interested in than the administration of
the law 1
I have no sympathy with, but a determined aversion to, the
blending of the two professions of barrister and solicitor, lately
sought to be effected here ; but I intend to try some experiments
in improving the practice of the law, especially as the state of the
profession here has detached me so largely from its members, and
made my position an unpleasant one.
I must here offer my best acknowledgments to those solicitors
who, at the end of the first year from my arrival had, (though
I had in the interval disobliged some of them by refusing
court business), kindly brought up my income to upwards
of £1,500 a-year; and especially to those who, on my return,
so liberally offered to give me the same independent support
as I could obtain from the public, and have tried to make
up my income to its former amount. Had I chosen to acquiesce in
the stai,e of matters as I found them, I might have grown rich (I
might, at the time when I first turned my back on those practices,
have had just any amount of business I chose to accept), but I
could not acquiesce. I admit the profession here has a very dif-
ficult task, but I don’t see how bad lawyers improve bad men;
besides that, I believe there are not so many bad people here as
asserted.
To recur : if any young solicitor will give me assistance—
and I may hereafter want others—l will try my hand at
establishing a more simple style of practice—Short forms in
conveyancing* and everything, which may be imitated by


otlior professional men, if we can make any admirers, and
get up a set of statistics to ascertain whether it be not
possible to establish a system of remunerating solicitors, like
other agents, by a per centage, so that matters of large amount
may, at the same time, compensate them for their extra responsi-
bility, and make up the ill pay of little matters. It is, doubt-
less, an advantage to a man to know what a thing will cost before
he buys it.
If that could he effected, the solicitor would resort to _ the best
counsel for aid; and, having nothing to induce him to swerve from
the simple course, but the strongest interest to keep him in it, the
law machine would get into more satisfactory order, and the com-
munity be much benefitted.
There is difficulty in jobbing one’s lawyer or doctor, but I have
known both done with mutual satisfaction. I had the honour,
during the whole of the ten years I practised at the English bar,
of being consulted in all the affairs of a nobleman of exalted rank,
who jobbed his solicitor. He paid him a round sum annually, as a
substitute for fees, and, in addition, defrayed all outlay incurred in
consulting counsel, as well as all other actual disbursements.
I should like the professional gentleman who gives me his assist-
ance to be a native of this hemisphere, and thus to have that
patriotism or natural attachment to the place which birth, and
birth only, seem to give, and that all his apprentices, and any
pupils who may give me assistance, should be of like native birth.
I have lost all faith in Ovid’s 11 omne solum ” &c. Besides, the
most able solicitor I have had to do with here (and I have been
much employed by his firm) is a native. A body of professional
men having more attachment to the law as a science, would be of
great use here. Their greater knowledge will enable them to
derive from it more emolument than the present class of practi-
tioners obtain, and yet to take much less from the public. There
is waste in everything that is done badly, and very much law busi-
ness is so done here.
My department, in my scheme, will be to prevent, if possible, a
case passing into that of the solicitor. I will not be arbitrator,


but if I can get at botli parties, I doubt not, in three cases out of
four that would be litigated, I shall be able to show them that they
can come to a fair and satisfactory arrangement, and thus prevent
litigation.
If the case goes into the solicitor’s department I shall take none
of his emoluments, but only some trifling fee for general superin-
tendence, and seeing that all goes right, and is transacted in the
most simple, expeditious, and economical manner.
I shall take no part in advocacy, except in directing its course,
and endeavouring to repress its present prolixity.
Words are the mere agents of thought, and to employ more of
such agents than necessary is not sensible. I shall ask the assist-
ance generally, where mere law is wanted, of barristers, now doing
little or nothing, to advocate the cases I send into court, in order to
bring them forward, and to shew how little is required to be said,
when a man knows what he goes into court about, and to lighten,
as far as possible, the task of the bench. lam convinced that if
cases here were laid before the court in a more simple form, justice
would not so often miscarry.
During the whole time I was at the English bar, and though I
took little court business, confining myself chiefly to chamber
practice, I must have taken part in the argument of at least a
hundred cases —not one a month—l never had occasion to take up
the time of the court for more than half an hour.
The system of that portion of the English bar who practise
as mere conveyancers, of which there are hundreds, has always
seemed to me the best for the client. They advise only, never
going into court. No possibility of their being able to help
a lame case ever therefore warps their judgment to launch one. I
shall advise only. If the case fails, except where clients choose to
try a chance, I alone shall be to blame.
I shall certainly not countenance the practice prevailing here of
giving advocates daily u refreshers.” The first fee should be in
proportion to the service to be rendered. There are great objections
to fees per diem. They are unknown at the English bar. If a


case stands over, as a remanet from one sittings to another,
“ refresher ” is paid, hut never otherwise there.
I have no doubt I shall find gentlemen at this bar, who, on
receiving an adequate fee at first, will agree with me in the pro.,
priety of this course.
If I can get the opportunity, I will try my hand at the improve-
ment of the law as well as lawyers.
The Real Property Act of South Australia seems to be a great
favourite here; but there are points of grave importance demand-
ing consideration before it is adopted. As a system there seem to
be great difficulties in working it. Notwithstanding the care
Mr. Torrens’s first bill received, the act had to be amended the next
session, and both the original and amendment acts are now sought
to be repealed, and a new one substituted for the pair. This is not
an eligible mode of proceeding with an affair like real property law.
It would be a valuable achievement if retrospective investigation of
title could be got rid of, in regard to real property ; but we may
pay too dearly for even such an advantage. It is for the most part
a mere money question, and land, like every other property, must
bear its own burthens, and if it be the most coveted of per-
manent investments, what matter if the cost of acquiring, dealing,
and parting with it be a little high ? Those are the only items
against the ordinary course of dealing with titles.
It is very questionable, as respects the mere transfer of title,
irrespective of its retrospective investigation, whether the cost of
dealings with land will not be greater under the proposed system
than under the present one ; but the statistics of South Australia
ought to afford us some assistance on that subject. The accounts
that have hitherto appeared in our journals have given only the
fees of office, and not the professional charges; and, as to dispens-
ing with professional assistance, that will be found to be imprac-
ticable in three cases out of four at least.
The next consideration is, whether there is any necessity for such
kind of legislation. It is a serious question what influence a low
order of legislation may have on a people. It is proposed to


afford the opportunity to A. of getting- B.’s estate, without his
sanction, if he is only clever enough to avail himself of it without
the implication of fraud, and to make B. accept compensation for
his loss from an insurance fund, and the operators under whose
care all this is to he brought about are to be of Government nomi-
nation, What is to be the exact character of the registrars ? Their
office seems to be semi-official and semi-judicial, and their jurisdic-
tion, in some respects co-ordinate with those of the ordinary courts.
How will such a system work ?
Are there not, moreover, weighty constitutional objections to this
description of legislation ? There was a body of gentlemen sat in
assemblies, called Wittenagemots, a few centuries ago, who, and
whose successors, have handed down to us a good deal of liberty.
Are we tired of it ? It is not an incumbrance that over much of
the earth is burthened with.
If, because we wanted something done, and could not do it other-
wise, we have handed over our rail and other road making, as well
as water supply, to Government, with all its fruits and conse-
quences, do we therefore desire to club all our affairs, and hand the
management of them over to Government ?
It is easier to abandon than acquire rights’; and if we hand over
the agency of obtaining us titles to our land, why not hand over
the management of the land also to Government ? Only do not be in
a hurry and the Government will take it all —each addition creates
an office or two, and each office wants an officer—and that sort of
thing is very pleasant on one side, and never mind the consequences.
We have just handed over to the Government the management of
as much of the property of the dead as it can succeed in obtaining*
the possession of (the present curator is, I am informed, a highly
proper and approved agent for his appointment; but that may not
be the case as regards all his successors), and the Government has lost
no time in inviting fish into the net; and if we add real property,
and make a few more bold advances in the same direction, we shall
have placed the noose rather handsomely round our necks, and the
halter in pretty safe hands to afford our descendants a tolerably stiff


job to get it off again, if not to keep out of harm’s way. Perhaps
one Sir James Palmer will tell us those Government folks are not
exactly the sort of people he would select to have the power of
taking liberties with his property.
We shall never catch the English people—nation of shopkeepers
and commercial as they are —adopting this kind of legislation.
They are too jealous and careful of their liberties to save their pence
by depositing anything that may affect their liberty in the hands of
Government.
Even if we adopt the South Australian Act (which, by the way,
though both Houses abound in lawyers, nobody would walk up to,
look at, and give us an account of the principle of,) there will still
be many inconveniences of our present law left, the difficulty of
removing which will be enhanced by that very adoption, at the same
time that these inconveniences will be increased by it, inasmuch as
with the certificate of title in his possession, the owner of an estate,
in family dealings with his property, or on any other occasions
than sales and mortgages, will not resort to the registrar; and that
terrible nuisance, the legal estate, will still be left, therefore, to
exercise its baneful sway.
Can we not get rid of that nuisance altogether, or in a great
degree, as regards real property, by marrying the legal estate to the
equitable, if not for all, yet for most purposes ?
If the equitable owner were exempted from all liability to be
molested or obstructed by the legal estate in the recovery and enjoy-
ment of his property, and the duties which have hitherto been deemed
to require the possession of the legal estate converted into a mere office
and power over the ownership, an immense amount of legal lumber
would be got rid of, and conveyancing be much simplified; and,
aided by some such measure as that of Sir Hugh Cairns, for ob-
taining periodical judicial investigation and a parliamentary title,
that might be a preferable substitute for a measure of such ques-
tionable tendencies as the South Australian Real Property law.
Still, if the measure be a really desirable one, it should be well and
fairly considered.


As respects the present law relating- to the leg-al estate in real
property, it seems great folly that such estate, which in reality ought
to he servient, should be practically dominant, and, in unskilful
hands, converted into a mere offensive weapon.
A measure to unite the legal to the equitable estate would re-
quire great care in framing, hut I see no insuperable difficulty in
the task ; and if we are to go so far, I do not see why we should
not have a good hearty bout of law reform. With great deference
to the noble and learned lords who have been sparring last session
with the Common Law Commissioners over the Law and Equity
Bill, it seems questionable whether the Commissioners have not the
best of the arg-ument; and 'if so, there can be no doubt as to the
propriety of such a measure here, where the same heads administer
both law and equity. We may as well, therefore, see how far we can
proceed in marrying law and equity; and if we advance so far, we
may as well go on in the same direction ; and, as much perplexity
still arises from the very artificial state of pleading, try and invent
some more simple form for it, both at law and in equity.
All that pleading seems to require is the statement, in the most
simple and concise way, of the facts on which the right claimed is
based ; and perhaps it may be found that, under one common form,
—variable according- to the circumstances, and which might receive
the general name of 1 ‘ claim,” —all rights may be presented to the
court, the defendant, (at the risk of any extra costs occasioned
thereby, and of its restoration, if necessary,) possessing the power
to attach the case to either the legal or equitable branch of the
com*t, or rather to bring it under the management of the officers
of either branch of the court, so long as (which arrangement may,
perhaps, be conveniently perpetuated) legal and equitable judg-
ments, decrees, and orders continue to be worked out by different
sets of officers. The lists of law cases and equitable cases would,
of course, still be separate, and taken on separate days, or in
separate courts, as now; and a system should be introduced ren-
dering it necessary to demur to every claim where the facts stated


are not sufficient to sustain the rig-ht professedly asserted, to pre-
vent the costs of a trial where there is nothing’ to try.
I cannot say I could manag-e all these matters without material aid,
but I think I could in time, with only just enoug-h to save me from
the severer labour of u looking- up” cases, sketching- the clauses,
&c. Some of the clauses as well of the Fines and Recoveries Act,
as of the Wills Act, were, within my own knowledge, penned a
dozen times over, if not more, before they were presented for consi-
deration, —such is the difficulty sometimes of hitting on apt legal
phraseology.
If I were successful in my proposed experiment in law practice,
I should have about me, in all probability, those who could assist
me ; but if not, it would cost the Government, if it will not
even take the matter into its own hands, but a small sum to employ
somebody to give me the requisite help. I decline State pay myself
—not meaning thereby any reflection on the many honourable men
who do not. It will take time to do all this, but Ido not see why
a bill to unite, as I have suggested, the legal to the equitable estate
in real property may not be passed next session.
At home they have Law Commissioners: why may we not try
something of the sort here ? It would save many of the present
large and useless demands on the Government in the shape of fees.
We have a revenue half as large again as the English Common-
wealth had in its best day, with at least only one-tenth of its
population j and it is our fault if we do not know the value of a
guinea as well as the Roundheads.
Why do we not buy people, if we want to get rich ? We should
be sure to get some of service to us. I imagine those ancestors of
ours, whom we so much look down on, if they had been here, and had
had too much money and too few people, would not have been much
puzzled what to do with the excess, but would have tried to stock
every little nook (and there are many such, I am told,) where butter,
cheese, bacon, &c., could be produced with the creatures (biped and
quadruped) to produce them, and have contrived to want some-
thing else to send home for, and have thus enabled the poor souls


at home, with the price, to buy a little more than they now get of
the aforesaid things, which we steal from them only to bring* here
and present with something very like the aspect of having been
already once used.
If I could escape, by the step I am adopting, the drudgery and
misery of the practice in which I am engaged and absolutely detest,
and which I have hitherto reluctantly conformed to, and get the
opportunity of passing a few of those hours of the day now ordi-
narily spent in chambers out of doors two or three days a-week, I
would ask some metropolitan constituency in want of a member to
take me if they had no better man in view.
I have but little taste or qualification for a senate, and would not
undertake the representation of any but a metropolitan constituency,
knowing nothing of the country or its wants j but I think I could
not fail to support adequately the interests of any metropolitan con-
stituency, if I had the advantage of being put in possession, by
some intelligent member or members of such constituency, of what
was desired, at the same time that I could take my part in legisla-
tion relating to the general laws of the State. I could not, how-
ever, engage to sit out or even attend the interminable sittings now
indulged in, as it has ever appeared to me that all the business dis-
patched in a session might be got through as well in a sitting of a
month’s duration, for two hours on four days of the week, as in the
lengthy affairs now prevailing.
Moreover, I should have to ask the favour of any constituency to
manage the whole affair for me, I paying the agents the usual
charges and other proper expenses. I can make no electioneering
speeches or electioneering promises.
I have to apologize for presenting to you so mean and hasty a
composition, which the ill state of my health, and the mixed
sensations of scorn, regret, and forlornness I struggle with, at
being driven to relinquish all the esprit de corps that has for
so many years animated me, prevent my revising, or altering,
except so far as I may detect any palpable errors in going over the
proof sheets.


I shall be truly glad if a few persons of standing- will help me
to see if anything can be done, and especially by an introduction
to some young solicitor of unblemished reputation and good
principles, of the kind lam in search of. It is possible I may
materially aid him in making a competence, though I have little
prospect of making one myself.
THOMAS PARSONS.
15 Temple Court, September, 1860.
WALKER, MAY & 00., PRINTERS 99 BOURKE STREET WEST.
