

ILLAWARRA LINE.
SCENE IN THE NATIONAL PARK.








THE
NEW SOUTH WALES
RAILWAY TOURISTS' GUIDE
Division I
Southern and Illawarra Lines:
SYDNEY TO ALBURY,
FITZROY FALLS, NATIONAL PARK,
SHOALHAVEN DISTRICT, &c.
PRICE SKPEITCE.
$2 JUtKoritg:
SYDNEY : CHARLES POTTER, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
(Sold by Messrs. Gordon & Gotch, Sydney.)
1889.
4u 1192-69 A




PREFACE.
1-7
The purpose of “ The New South Wales Railway Tourists’ Guide” is
indicated in its title, the principal object being to afford those travelling
over the railways of the Colony some idea of the character of the
country through which they are passing. The limited size of the
work, rendered necessary by the low price at which it is sold, it being
intended for the Many rather than the Few, has prevented much of the
information being so full and comprehensive as would otherwise have
been the case, but sufficient has been given to awaken some amount
of interest in many of the localities described.
The work is divided into two sections, the First being devoted to
the Southern, Illawarra, and Suburban lines ; and the Second to the
Western and Northern lines. The former contains a full description
of the National Park, illustrated with a couple of views and a sketch
map ; and in the latter will be found descriptive notices of the leading
features of the Blue Mountains, with sketch maps, the Jenolan Caves,
with a plan showing recent discoveries, and the Hawkesbury River.
At the end of each division will be found a list of townships, &c.,
accessible by coach, or otherwise, from the various railway stations and
platforms mentioned, together with the distances, &c. This will be
found extremely useful to those having occasion to visit the more
remote portions of the Colony.




TABLE OP CONTENTS.
Index to Eailway Stations and Platforms 7, 8
Railway Progress in New South Wales ... ... ... ••• 9, 10, 11
Excursion Trains, Tickets, &c.... ... ... ••• ••• 12,13,14
Sydney Eailway Terminus 17
The Southern Line ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• 1®
Sydney to Homebush, Granville, and Parramatta 19
Granville to Albury ... ... ... ... ••• 22
Sydney to Melbourne, via Albury 34
Branch Lines on Southern Eailway —
Granville to Parramatta 37
Camphelltown to Camden... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 37
Goulburn to Michelago and Cooma 38
Harden to Young and Cowra 40
Cootamundra to Gundagai ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 41
Junee Junction to Narrandera and Hay 42
Narrandera to Jerilderie 44
The Illawarra Eailway ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 47
The National Park 49
The Shoalhaven District 59
Townships, &c., near Eailway Stations on Southern, Illawarra, and Branch
Lines ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• 53
Hints to Tourists
ILLUSTEATIONS
Fitzroy Falls Facing Page 26
Eiver Scene in the National Park ... ... ... ... » » 48
Forest Scene „ „ ... ... ••• » » 50
View from the Bulli Pass ... ... ... ... ••• » » 54
The Blow Hole, Kiama... ... ... ... ... ... » » 58
MAPS.
Maps of New South Wales Eailways and Principal Coaching
Eoutes in connection with same ... ... ... ... Facing Title.
Map of Intercolonial Eailway Eoute ... ... ... ... ,» Page 16
Plan of National Park >, » 47


■■ «


INDEX TO STATIONS AND PLATFORMS.
SOUTHEEN, SOUTH-WESTEEN, ILLAWAEEA, AND BEANCH
Station.
Albury
Albury Eacecourse Platform
Albion Park, late Oak Flats
Arncliffe
Ashfield
Auburn
Austermere.
Austinmere
Balmoral, late Bargo, Platform
Bangalore Platform
Barber’s Creek
Beabula Platform
Bellambi ...
Bendick Morell
Benerembab Platform
Betbungra ...
Binalong ...
Boggy Creek Platform
Bomen
Bowning
Bowral
Brawiin Platform.
Breadalbane
Bredbo
Bringagee Platform
Brougbton Creek ..
Bulb
Bundanoon.
Bundure Platform.
Bungendore
Bunyan
Burradoo
Burwood
Cable’s Siding Platform
Cabmaratta „
Camden
Campbelltown
Canley Yale Platform
Carlton
Caratbool
Carrick Platform ...
Clifton, late North Clifton
LINES.
Page. Station. Page.
33 Clyde ... ... ... ... 22
33 Collinton Platform ... ... 39
57 Colo Yale „ ... ... 25
47 Colombo „ ... ... 44
20 Coolac „ ... ... 41
21 Coolaman „ ... ... 42
26 Cooma ... ... ... ... 40
54 Coonong Platform... ... ... 44
25 Cootamundra ... ... ... 31
38 Como ... ... ••• ••• 48
28 Corrimal ... ... ... ... 55
43 Cowra ... ... ... ••• 41
55 Crowther ... ... ... ... 41
41 Croydon ... ... ... ... 20
43 Culcairn ... ... ... ... 32
31 Cungegong Platform ... ... 31
30 Cunningar „ ... ... 30
42 Curran’s Hill ... ... ... 37
31 Dapto ... ... ... ... 57
30 Darlington... ... ... ... 43
26 Demondrille Junction 40
41 Douglas Park ... ... ... 24
29 Erskineville ... ... ... 47
39 Ettamogah Platform ... ... 32
43 Eveleigh ... ... ... ... 19
59 Fairfield ... ... ... ... 22
54 Fairy Meadow ... ... ... 38
27 Fish Eiver Platform ... ... 29
44 Flemington ... ... 21
38 Galong ... ... ... ... 30
40 Gerogery ... ... ... ... 32
26 Gerringong... ... ... ... 59
21 Glen field Platform ... ... 23
27 Goulbum ... ... ... ... 28
22 Granville Junction ... ... 22
37 Grong Grong Platform ... ... 42
23 Groongal „ ... ...
22 Guildford „ 22
48 Gundagai ... ... ... ... 42
43 Gunning ... ... ... ... 29
28 Harden ... ... ... 30
53 Harefield Platform 31


Station. Page.
Hams Park ... ... ... 57
Hay ... ... ... ... 44
Heathcote ... ... ... ... 51
Helensburgh ... ... ... 52
Hill Top Platform 25
Homebush ... 21
Hurstville ... ... ... ... 48
Illabo Platform 31
Ingleburn „ 23
Jerrawa „ ... ... ... 29
Jerilderie ... ... 44
Junee Junction ... ... ... 31
Kenny’s Hill ... ... ... 37
Kiama ... ... ... ... 58
King’s Yale Platform 40
Kirkham’s Lane ... ... ... 37
Kogarah ... ... ... ... 47
Koorawatha ... ... ... 41
Lake Bathurst Platform ... ... 38
Leumeah „ ... ... 23
Lewisham ... ... ... ... 20
Liverpool ... ... ... ... 23
Loftus Junction ... ... ... 48
Macquarie Fields ... ... ... 23
Marrar Platform ... ... ... 42
Marrickville ... ... ••• 47
Marulen ... ... 28
Macdonaldtown ... ... ... 19
Menangle ... ... ... ••• 24
Merry lands Platform ... ... 22
Mery la Siding „ 27
Michelago ... ... ... ••• 39
Minto Platform ... ... ... 23
Mittagong ... ... ... ••• 25
Molonglo ... ... ... 39
Monteagle Platform 41
Moss Yale ... ... ... ••• 26
Murray’s Flats 28
Murrumburrah ... ... ... 30
Muttama Platform ... ... 41
Karelian ••• ••• 37
Narrandera ... ... ... 43
National Park ... ... ... 49
Newtown ... ... ••• ... 20
North Clifton, now Clifton ... 52
North Q-oulburn 28
North Kiama ... ... ••• 58
Nubba Platform 31
Oatley’s Platform 48
Old Junee 42
Station. Page.
Otford 52
Parramatta... ... ... ... 37
Para Meadow, late Cramsville ... 55
Pensliurst ... ... ... ... 48
Petersham ... ... ... ... 20
Picton ... ... ... ... 24
Picton Lake Platform ... ... 25
Queanbeyan ... ... ... 39
Robinsville... ... ... ... 54
Rob Roy ... ... ... ... 39
Rock, The ... ... ... ... 32
Rockdale ... ... ... ... 47
Rocky Ponds Platform ... ... 30
Rookwood ... ... ... ... 21
Rudd’s Hate ... ... ... 37
Rush’s Platform ... ... ... 25
St. Peters ... ... ... ... 47
Sandy Creek Platform ... ... 32
Shellharbour ... 57
South Clifton, late Clifton ... 54
Stanmore ... ... ... ... 20
Strathfield ... ... ... ... 21
Summer Hill ... ... ... 20
Sutherland... ... ... ... 48
Tarago ... ... ... ... 38
Tempe ... ... ... ... 47
Thirlmere Platform ... ... 25
Thononga „ ... ... 43
Towrang „ ... ... 28
Tuggeranong ... ... ... 39
Uardry Platform ... ... ... 43
TJmaralla „ ... ... ... 40
Unanderra... ... ... ... 56
Wagga Wagga ... ... ... 32
Wallendbeen Platform ... ... 31
Waradgerey „ ... ... 43
Waterfall ... ... ... ... 52
Whitton ... ... ... ... 43
Widgiewa Platform ... ... 44
Wingello ... ... ... ... 27
Wollongong ' ... ... ... 55
Yambla Platform 32
Yanko „ ... ... ... 43
Y B,X*l*£L 9Q
Yallah, late Albion Park ... ... 57
Yass ... ... ... ... 29
Yathong Platform... ... ... 44
Yerong Creek Platform 32
Young ... ... ... ... 41


RAILWAY PROGRESS IN NEW SOUTH WALES.
The question of railway construction in New South Wales began to seriously occupy
the attention of the Colonists towards the end of 1845, and on January 29, 1846, an
influential meeting, under the presidency of Mr. James Macarthur, was held in
Sydney, when a committee of leading citizens was formed for the purpose of collect-
ing information on the subject. On the 26th of August in the same year, the
committee thus appointed reported that, from the best ascertained data as to the
products, population, and traffic, they believed that a line from Sydney to G-oulhurn
might be constructed at £6,000 per mile, and that a net profit of 8 per cent, might
be anticipated on the capital expended. In the same month a deputation waited
upon Governor Fitzroy, who had just arrived in the Colony, for the purpose of
bringing the question of railway construction under the notice of the New South
Wales Government, but nothing was done for nearly a couple of years, when a
survey of the proposed line from Sydney to Goulburn having been completed in the
beginning of 1848, by Mr. Woore, a petition, based on his report, was presented to
the Legislative Council, and referred to a Select Committee, of which Mr. (after-
wards Sir) Charles Cowper was chairman. Previous to this a meeting had been held
in Sydney, at which it was stated that in addition to the survey of the proposed
route to Goulburn, others had been made for railways between Sydney and the
Hawkesbury and Nepean Rivers. These facts were mentioned in the petition, and
in due course the Select Committee brought up a report, and on the 15th of June
the Legislative Council passed a series of resolutions to the effect that the period
had arrived for the formation of railways in the Colony, and that it was expedient
for the Government to offer some inducements to encourage private enterprise. The
resolutions were transmitted to the British Secretary of State for the Colonies by
the Governor-General, with a recommendation that the encouragement asked for
should be granted. On the 11th of September, 1848, a Provisional Committee was
appointed, and in November the prospectus of the “ Sydney Tramroad and Railway
Company” was issued. The capital was £lOO,OOO, and interest for ten years at 5
per cent, was guaranteed by the Government. The expressed intention of the pro-
jectors was that a main trunk line should be carried from Sydney to the point from
which it might afterwards be determined that the Southern and Western or North-
western branches respectively should diverge. Eventually it was intended to
augment the capital in order to carry the line to Goulburn, and, if found practicable,
to Bathurst also.
On the 13th November, 1849, the first general meeting of the shareholders was
held, and the Sydney Railway Company (incorporated by Act of 13 Victoria) then
entered on its duties, and was managed by a Directory elected by the shareholders.
The survey of the line from Sydney to Parramatta and Liverpool was completed in
December, 1849, and on Bth January, 1850, the first report of the Directors was
read. It congratulated the shareholders on their position and prospects; and not-
withstanding the apathy of some persons and the undisguised hostility of others,
the Directors entertained the fullest confidence as to the ultimate success of the
undertaking. The sum of £IO,OOO, required by the Act to be raised before the
Company could commence operations, having been paid into the Colonial Treasury,
the Directors lost no time in breaking ground. On 3rd July, 1850, the first turf of


the first Railway in the Australian Colonies, that from Sydney to Goulburn, was
turned by the Honorable Mrs. Keith Stewart, in the presence of Sir Charles
Augustus Fitz Eoy, Governor of New South Wales, and several thousand spectators.
The financial prospects of the Company, however, soon became so gloomy that
the Directors found it necessary to make a general reduction in the salaries of their
officers. The Directors complained of the obstacles they met with, and stated that,
hut for the countenance and support of the local Government, they should feel
disposed to abandon a post which was beset at every stage with difficulties and dis-
couragements of no ordinary kind. In this unpromising position of their affairs
the first contract for 4| miles from Haslem’s Creek, now Rook wood, towards Sydney
was accepted. This was the first railway contract in Australia. The progress of
the work continued satisfactory until the discovery of gold in the Bathurst district
upset the calculations of the contractor and the Directors, threatening the former
with ruin, and entailing much anxiety on the latter, from the sudden and unexampled
rise in the price of labour and materials. This led to the stoppage of the contract,
and afterwards an offer by Mr. Randall to complete the line, first to Ashfield, and
then to Parramatta, was accepted, the Government arranging to bring 500 labourers
from England. Several large sums of money were borrowed from the Government,
but the whole was rapidly absorbed, the estimate of £320,000 for the construction
of the line to Parramatta, having to be increased in January, 1855, to £500,000. It
was now generally admitted that the work was beyond the reach of private enterprise,
and would have to be undertaken by the Government. Accordingly arrangements
for the transfer were made, and in due course the Government took possession of
the Sydney railway, also the Hunter River railway, which had been projected for
the purpose of securing railway communication between Newcastle and Maitland.
The transfer was effected under a special Act of Parliament, the shareholders in
both companies having the whole of the capital invested by them returned, a bonus
of 7 per cent, being given to those holding shares in the Sydney line. Since then
the whole of the railways in the Colony, with two exceptions, those of the lines
between Deniliquin and Moama, and between the South Australian border, Silverton,
and Broken Hill, have been in the hands of the Government.
The railways at the present time are separated into three divisions—Southern,
Western, and Northern —Sydney being the starting point of each. The Southern
line, from Sydney to Albury, is 386 miles in length, and forms also portion of the
intercolonial system, uniting the capitals of Queensland, New South Wales, Victoria,
and South Australia in one unbroken line of railway communication. The stations
on the Southern line were opened as follows, —Liverpool, September 26, 1856;
Campbelltown, May 17, 1858; Menangle, September 1,1862 ; Picton, July 1,1863 ;
Sutton Forest (Moss Yale), December 2,1867 ; Marulen, August 6,1868 ; Goulburn,
May 27, 1869; Gunning, November 9, 1875; Yass, July 3, 1876; Cootamundra,
December 7, is 77 ; Junee, July 6, 1878 ; Wagga Wagga, September 3, 1878;
Gerogery, September 1, 1880; and Albury, February, 1881. From Albury the lino
is continued to the Murray, which is crossed by a fine bridge, and thence to Wodonga,
the nearest town on the Victorian side. The time occupied in making the journey
between Sydney and Melbourne, via Albury, by express train is about 18 hours, and
by ordinary train 24| hours. The mails from Europe are now sent direct by rail
from Adelaide, via Melbourne to Sydney. The branch lines on the Southern rail-
way are Goulburn to Cooma, 130 miles ; Harden to Cowra, 67 miles ; Cootamundra
to Gundagai, 34 miles ; and Junee Junction to Jerilderie, 126 miles, and Hay, 168
miles. From Cowra there is a line to Blayney, 46 miles, on the Western railway,
thus forming a junction between the Southern and Western divisions.


The Illawarra line belongs to the Southern division. It runs from Sydney to
North Kiama, a distance of 70 miles, passing and partially traversing the National
Park, and continuing its course through the Illawarra district, one of the loveliest
and most enchanting regions to be found in Australia.
The Western line extends from Sydney to Bourke, the distance being 503 miles,
and the Blue Mountain range being crossed during its course. As the railway
advanced the following stations were opened, representing the progress of the work, —
Parramatta, September 26, 1855; Blacktown, July 4, 1860 ; Booty Hill, December
12, 1861; South Creek, May 1, 1862; Penrith, July 7, 1862 ; Weatherboard (now
Wentworth), July 11, 1867; Mount Victoria, May 1,1868; Bowenfels, October 18,
1869; Wallerawang, March 1, 1870; Eydal, Julyl, 1870; Locke’s Platform, April
22,1872; Macquarie Plains, July 1,1872 ; Baglan, March 4,1873 ; Kelso, February
4, 1875; Bathurst, April 4, 1876; Orange, April 19, 1877 ; Wellington, June 1,
1880; Dubbo, February 1, 1881; Nyngan, June 9,1883; and Bourke, September 3,
1885.’ The Blue Mountains are ascended, a little above Emu Plains, by a system of
zig-zag lines, by which the steep gradient is reduced sufficiently to enable a passenger
or goods train to make the journey with comparative ease. Thence the line traverses
what has been described as one of the wonderlands of the world, a region abound-
ing in stupendous gorges, magnificent valleys, picturesque waterfalls, and other
marvels of nature, the range being descended by a second series of zig-zag lines,
lending into the Lithgow Valley. Near Tarana are the famous Jenolan Caves.
There are also some remarkable eaves near Wellington. The line is of great value
in opening up the immense pastoral districts of the west and north-west. The
branch lines are, Blacktown to Bichmond, 16 miles; Wallerawang to Mudgee, 85
miles; Blayney to Cowra, 46 miles ; and Orange to Molong, 24 miles. From Cowra
there is, as before-mentioned, railway communication with Harden, thus uniting the
Western and Southern lines.
The Northern line extends from Sydney to Wallengarra, a distance of 490 miles,
where it unites with the Queensland line to Brisbane, via \Farwick and Ipswich.
Originally Newcastle formed the Southern terminus, but with the completion of
the line 'between Sydney and Newcastle the starting point became transferred
to Bedfern terminus. The first station opened on the line northwards from
Newcastle was that at East Maitland, April 5, 1857. From here the work
progressed southward, the station at Newcastle being opened March 19, 18t>8.
Then came West Maitland, July 27, 1858; Lochinvar, July 2, I 860; Branxton,
March 24, 1862; Singleton, May 7, 1863; Musclebrook, May 19, 1869; Aberdeen,
October 20,1870; Scone, April* 17, 1871; Murrurundi, April 5, 1872; Quirindi,
August 17, 1877; Tamworth, October 15, 1878; Armidale, February 3, 1883;
(Hen Lines, August 19, 1884; and Tenterfield, September 1, 1886. The line
between Sydney and Newcastle was completed by the construction of the bridge
across the Hawkesbury, which was formerly opened on May 1, 1889. The branch
lines are, Newcastle to Wallscnd, 8 miles ; East Maitland to Morpeth, 4miles; and
Werris Creek to Narrabri, 96 miles. The Liverpool, Peel, Moombi, and other
mountain ranges are crossed by the line at different points of its course.
The suburban system includes the stations between Sydney and Granville and
Penrith, and between Sydney and Hurstville. A branch line from North Shore
to the Northern railway has been constructed, but has not yet been opened. r lhe
total number of miles of railway open on June 30, 1889, was 2,131; and among the
works in progress at that date were the duplication of the line between Granville
Junction and Gampbelltown, and between Adamstown and Teralba.


TOURIST AND OTHER ARRANGEMENTS.
FAMILY TICKETS.
Family Tickets, at a reduced rate of 10 per cent, on the holiday excursion fares,
are procurable at the Central Booking Office, adjoining the Q-eneral Post Office,
Heorge-street, Sydney, and at Eedfern Terminus, from Sydney to all stations between
Picton and Bundanoon, both inclusive, on the Southern line. Three tickets is the
lowest number procurable, and they are issued for family use only. They are avail-
able for the up and down journey at any time within two months of the date of
issue. Applications for these tickets should be made on forms prepared for the pur-
pose, and which are procurable at any of the places where the tickets are issued.
PEIYATE SPECIAL TEAINS.
These can he arranged on application to the Chief Traffic Manager at Eedfern
Station. The rates are ss. per mile, and holiday excursion fares for each passenger
in addition; the total rate being not less than Bs. per mile, and the minimum charge
for a train being 30s.
HUNTING- AND TEOTTING HOESES.
Hunting and trotting horses will be conveyed at ordinary rates to stations in
the vicinity of which meetings of Hunting or Trotting Clubs are to be held, and, if
unsold, will be conveyed back free of charge to the stations from which they started,
if the return journey be made within a fortnight of the date of the termination of
the meeting, or within two months of the date from which the first journey was
made. Attendants accompanying the horses are charged excursion rates either way.
Much trouble will be avoided if applications for tickets are accompanied by certifi-
cates from the Secretary of the Hunt Club or Trotting Club, as the case may be.
BATHING TICKETS.
Cheap tickets to Lady Eobinson’s Beach, including a bath ticket, are issued at
all stations between Sydney and Arncliffe, both inclusive, by all down trains to
Eockdale only. These tickets are available for return only on the day on which
they are issued.
EXCUESIONS TO THE NATIONAL PAEK.
Cheap return tickets, available for National Park station, are issued at all
stations between Sydney and Hurstville, both inclusive, at the following rates: —
first class, 2s. fid.; second class, Is. fid. These tickets can be used for the return
journey only on the day on which they are issued.


EXCURSIONS TO THE SOUTHERN TOURIST DISTRICTS.
Holiday excursion tickets for the Southern Tourist districts between Picton and
Bundanoon, both inclusive, are issued at all stations, except those between Picton
and Bundanoon, both inclusive, by all trains, and are available for return at any
time within two months from the date of issue.
EXCURSIONS TO THE ILLAWARRA DISTRICT.
Cheap excursion tickets, at 2d. per mile first class, and Id. per mile second class,
for the return journey, are issued at all stations between Sydney and Hurstville,
both inclusive, to all stations between Waterfall and Kiama, both inclusive, by the
train leaving Sydney at l - 50 p.m. on Saturdays. These tickets are available for the
return journey by the train leaving Kiama at 6 p.m. on the same day, or on the
Saturday following; and from Wollongong by the train leaving that place at 6‘35
a.m. on the first or second Monday following. Excursionists to places beyond
Wollongong may also return by the train leaving Kiama at 8 a.m. on the first or
second Monday from the date of issue of their tickets.
SPECIAL EXCURSION TICKETS.
These are issued at all stations between Sydney and Campbelltown, both in-
clusive, for the excursion trains leaving Sydney at 7'55 a.m. and 2 p.m. on Saturdays.
They are issued by the former train to all stations beyond Campbelltown, as far as
Goulbum, and by the latter train to all stations beyond Campbelltown as far as Moss
Yale. They are available for return by excursion trains on the same day, or by the
special excursion trains leaving Goulburn at 7'30 a.m. and Moss Yale at 7 a.m. on
the first or second Monday following. Excursionists from stations between Sydney
and Granville should join the special excursion trains at the latter place. Ordinary
tickets are available for these trains.
TOURISTS’ TICKETS.
In addition to the tickets issued in connection with the various special excur-
sions, tourists tickets are procurable at the Central Ticket Office, George-street,
near the General Post Office, Sydney, and at the Ticket Office at Redfern Terminus,
to all stations between Emu Plains and Bowenfels, both included, on the Western
line, and between Picton and Bundanoon, both included, on the Southern line.
Tickets are also procurable from the two above-mentioned offices, and from the
ticket offices at Newcastle and Maitland, to all stations between Walcha Road and
Tenterfield, both included, on the Northern line. These tickets are available for
eight journeys each way within a period of three months, and are issued at a reduc-
tion of 10 per cent, on eight holiday excursion fares. Applications for these tickets
should be made on printed forms procurable at the above-named ticket offices.


PICNIC CARRIAGE.
Picnic parties may, with the consent of the Chief Traffic Manager, whose office
is at Redfern Terminus, engage one ordinary first-class carriage by ordinary train by
taking not less than twelve first-class holiday excursion tickets, or one ordinary second-
class carriage by taking not less than thirty holiday excursion tickets, which will be
available for return on the same or following day, as may be arranged with the Chief
Traffic Manager. On the suburban portions of the lines (between stations to which
holiday excursion tickets are not issued) return fares are charged.
SPECIAL EXCURSION TRAINS.
Special excursion trains can be arranged for as follows : —For a train of not less
than eight ordinary second-class carriages for any distance not beyond Picton (on
the Southern line), Emu Plains (on the Western line), or Richmond, 2s. per mile
per carriage, including return, will be charged. The same rates also apply to special
excursion trains between Newcastle and Singleton. For every mile south of Picton,
west of Emu Plains, and north of Tenterfield, 3s. per mile per carriage, including
return, is charged, the same rate applying to excursions on the Illawarra and
Hawkesbury lines. The number of carriages and the stations to which they are
intended to run are subject to the approval of the Chief Traffic Manager. Large
carriages are counted as two ordinary carriages. The minimum charge for any special
excursion train is £l5. Trains engaged for lona fide school children may be
engaged at a reduction of 20 per cent, on the above charges. Where first-class
carriages are required, an advance of 50 per cent, on the above rates will be made.
The mileage is calculated from Sydney, with the exception of that on the Northern
line, which is calculated from Newcastle; and the distance which the train has to
run empty before commencing the excursion service will be charged for at the rate
of ss. per mile. When making application for a special excursion train, a deposit
will have to be made, the amount being fixed by the Chief Traffic Manager. Applica-
tions for special excursion trains should be made to the Chief Traffic Manager a few
days before the trains are required, but they will not be let on public holidays or
under conditions which may interfere with the general traffic on the respective lines.
LOST PROPERTY.
All applications respecting lost property should be made at the Lost Property
Office, on No. 5 Platform, at the Redfern Terminus, where all articles found should
be deposited.


SOUTHERN AND SUBURBAN LINES.






Lithographed and Printed at the Department of Lands, Sydney, NSW 1889


SYDNEY TO ALBURY.
SYDNEY RAILWAY TERMINUS.
The Metropolitan Railway Terminus is situated in Devonshire-street, Redfern,
about a mile from the General Post Office, Houses of Parliament, and leading
public offices. The site was selected as being the best adapted for the purpose,
and in an old map of the city, published about half a century ago, it is shown as
the most suitable locality for the then proposed railway terminus. The principal
entrance to the station-yard is in George-street, at the point where that thorough--
fare, after its junction with Pitt-street, suddenly expands into a broad open space.
The terminus is accessible by either ’bus or tram, most of the Sydney bus and
tram routes passing either the Devonshire-street or George-street approaches.
There are also special tram services in connection with the more important trains,
the starting-point being in Bridge-street, near the Colonial Secretary s Office, the
cash-fare being threepence for each passenger. If by ticket, the fare is twopence.
The tickets can be obtained at the Tram-ticket Office on the platform.
Originally the amount of railway accommodation at Redfern was limited to
two or three platforms, but the enormously increased amount of railway traffic
has necessitated the employment of several additional long platforms, each of
which is distinguished by a large number conspicuously displayed at the entrance.
With one exception, all these platforms are united by that forming, as it were, the
main entrance to the station, and having at one of its ends the tram-platform,
while on the centre portion are to be found a number of railway porters, to whom
is entrusted the work of aiding ’bus, cab, and other passengers arriving with heavy
luggage. Here also is a large Train Indicator, showing not only the time of
departure of each train, but also the number of the platform from which it starts.
To the left of this useful contrivance is the Ticket Office, the windows of which,
on its three sides, are numbered in large figures. At windows 2 and 3, tickets for
Suburban stations between Sydney and Parramatta are procurable, windows 4 and
5 being for the sale of tickets to stations on the South and South-western lines ;
windows 6 and 7, for tickets to stations on the .Northern and Illawarra lines ; and
windows 9 and 10, for tickets to stations on the Western and Richmond lines.
The Parcels and Passengers’ Luggage Offices are to the left of the Ticket
Office. The Cloak Room is to the right of the Train Indicator, between platforms
6 and 8, and adjoining it is the Tram-ticket Office. Close by is the
showing the time each tram leaves for Sydney, At the entrance to No. 5 platform,
and adjoining the Ticket Office, is the Traffic Manager’s Office, and on the
platform itself is the Station-master’s Office; also the Inquiry Office, where an
attendant is always in readiness to furnish information required by railway-
travellers. Here, likewise, are the Refreshment Rooms, Ladies’ and Gentlemen s
Retiring and Waiting Rooms ; also a couple of Bookstalls.


Platforms 1 and 2 are used for the traffic in connection with the National
Park and Illawarra lines, most of the trains running from the first-named
platform. The Western Mail Express, which crosses the Blue Mountains, and
runs to Bourke, leaves platform No. 3 ; as do trains to Moss Vale, Goulburn, and
Harden ; also to Mount Victoria, Bathurst, Orange, and Dubbo. The Melbourne
Express leaves No. 5 platform ; the Picton Train, No. 6 platform ; the Gosford
and Newcastle Train, No. 7 platform ; the Northern Mail Train to Newcastle,
Tenterfield, and Brisbane ; also the Southern Mail Train to Goulburn, Albury, and
Melbourne ; and likewise the ordinary Newcastle and Maitland Train, No. 8
platform; and the Newcastle and Maitland Express, No. 9 platform. No. 10
platform, situated on the southern side of the station-yard, is employed for the
purpose of relieving the suburban traffic during the busier portions of the day.
These are the ordinary arrangements, but, of course, occasional changes may be
deemed necessary. The suburban traffic between Sydney, Homebush, Granville,
and Parramatta is conducted principally from platforms 3 and 5 ; platforms 8,9,
and 10 being occasionally used for the same purpose.
The principal Arrival Platform is No. 6, from whence the traveller can proceed
by cab, ’bus, or on foot to his intended destination. If he desires to proceed by
tram, he must proceed to the outer platform, at the entrance to the station, and
turn to the left, where he will perceive a tram in readiness. The tram route
through Sydney is by way of Pitt and Elizabeth Streets; Liverpool-street being the
point of junction for trams running to Crown-street, Moore Park, Randwick,
Coogee, Waverley, and Bondi. The ’busses pass down George-street; King-street
forming the junction for’busses to Woolloomooloo v Potts Point, Woollahra, Darling
Point, Rose Bay, &c. ’Busses also pass the station at frequent intervals for Surry
Hills, Waterloo, Newtown, Forest Lodge, Pyrmont, Balmain, Glebe Point,
Marrickville, &c. The cash fares by tram are threepence each passenger ; if by
ticket, the fare is twopence. Tram-tickets can be bought at the Tram-ticket
Office at the station. ’Bus-tickets, threepence each, are obtained from the driver
of each vehicle, but on some routes cash fares alone are recognized.
THE SOUTHERN LINE.
SYDNEY TO GRANVILLE , CAMPLELLTOWN, GOULBURN, COOMA,
YOUNG, GUN DA GAL, HAY, JERILDERIE, ALBURY, AND
MELBOURNE.
Passengers proceeding to Melbourne will save themselves much trouble and
delay at Albury by having their luggage checked right through. This is effected
by delivering it to a railway porter, who will convey it to the luggage-van, where
he will obtain a brass check for each article of luggage, a corresponding check
being affixed to same. These checks will be handed to the passenger, who, on
arriving at Melbourne, will be enabled, on presenting them at the Luggage Office,
which is also used as a Customs Room, to regain possession of his property.
The Junction Stations on the Southern line are—
Campbelltown, for Rudd’s Gate, Kenny Hill, Curran’s Hill, Narellan,
Kirkham’s Lane, and Camden.
Goulburn, for Bangalore, Lake Bathurst, Tarago, Fairy Meadow, Bun-
gendore, Molonglo, Queanbeyan, Tuggeranong, Rob Roy, Michelago, Collinton,
Bredbo, Umaralla, Bunyan, and Cooma.


Harden, for Murrnmburrah, Demondrille Junction, King’s Vale, Young,
Burrangong, Monteagle, Bendick Morell, Crowther, Koorawatha, and Cowra.
From Cowra there is a branch line to Blayney, on the Western line.
Cootamundra, for Brawlin, Muttama, Coolac, and Gundagai.
Junee Junction, for Old Junee, Marrar, Coolaman, Boggy Creek, Grong
Grong, Narrandera, Yanko, Whitton, Darlington, Benerembeh, Bringagee,
Groongal, Carrathool, Uardry, Tnononga, Beabula, Waradgery, and Hay.
Narrandera (on preceding branch), for Colombo, Widgiewa, Coonong,
Bun dure, Yathong, and Jerilderie.
Albury, for Victorian line to Melbourne.
’ SYDNEY TO SOMEBUSII AND GRANVILLE.
The line between Sydney and Granville, Parramatta, and Penrith, forms
portion of the Suburban Eaiiway System, trains being dispatched with great
frequency from each point during the day, nearly 150 trains, exclusive of additional
trains on Saturdays, passing, leaving, or arriving at Homebush every twenty-
four hours, Sundays excepted.
Leaving the Sydney terminus, we have, on the left, a glimpse of the Exhibi-
tion Building in Prince Alfred Park, and afterwards, on the right, of the Mortuary
Station, from whence funeral trains are run twice a day to the Necropolis at
Rookwood. It is a somewhat low but massive structure, built of freestone, in
the Saracenic style of architecture. Close by rises the elegant form of Chippendale
Wesleyan Church, and almost opposite, on the other side of the line, is the
picturesque square tower, partially covered with ivy, of St. Paul’s Anglican
Church. Emerging from the Redfern Tunnel, the majestic proportions of the
Sydney University are seen ornamenting the heights of Camperdown on the right.
As these disappear from our gaze we reach
Eveleigh (1 mile), where are situated the principal works in connection with
the New South Wales Railway System. The land or yard on which they stand
covers an area of about 64 acres, divided into two almost equal portions by the
line. In that portion to the left, supposing the passenger to be sitting facing the.
engine, are the engine and tender-repairing shops, engine-running shed, coal-
stage, &c. On the other side of the line are situated the carriage and waggon-
repairing shops, the rail level of which is level with that of the main line. On this
side of the line is also the Railway Stores Department, including a series of offices,
a building for small stores, another for heavy stores, and ground storage space of
about 300 feet by 300 feet. Here, likewise, are the workshops of the Railway
Signals and Interlocking Department, together with a commodious building for
making tarpaulins. The number of hands employed is very large, and during the
hours of work the various shops are the scene of continuous bustle and activity,
full of interest even to those familiar with the leading features of industrial life.
Soon after passing Eveleigh the Illawarra Line branches off to the left, and at the
same time we obtain an extensive view of broad level country, with the waters of
Botany Bay in the distance ; the pretty church and busy township of St. Peters,
situated to the west, also attracting attention. To the right of
Macdonaldtown (1| miles) is seen a picturesque old-fashioned shrubbery,
suggestive of the lovely surroundings of some of the antiquated country mansions
in England. Then come several pretty villas and gardens, after which we arrive
at


Newtown (2 miles), one of the most densely-populated portions of suburban
Sydney, the estimated population being 16,200. It possesses 21 miles of roads
and streets, with property of the ratable value of £1,729,400. Here are several
handsome churches, that belonging to the Roman Catholic community being most
prominent by reason of its proximity to the station. On leaving Newtown, the
detached and semi-detached villas become more numerous and more attractive in
appearance, many being surrounded by large and tastefully-arranged gardens.
Approaching
Stanmoee (2£ miles), there is a fine view of open country in the direction of
Leichhardt and Balmain on the right. Among the residents in the vicinity is Mr.
W, H. Paling, whose munificent gifts to the cause of practical charity will long be
remembered by the people of the Colony. In the immediate neighbourhood of
Stanmore is the Wesleyan Training College, one of the best institutions of its class
in Australia. It was formerly situated in Newington House, originally the seat
of the Blaxlands, lying between the Parramatta River and the road from Parra-
matta to Sydney. The scenery now begins to assume a semi-rural aspect, and, to
the right, as we emerge from the various cuttings, fine panoramic views are
afforded of the country about Long Cove and Five Dock, bounded by the heights
of Balmain on one side, and of North Willoughby on the other.
Petersham (3 miles) is situated about 100 feet above sea-level, and
abounds with elegant villas, luxuriant gardens, and well-stocked orchards.
Emerging from the station, the line passes through a wide tract of open country,
dotted here and there with numerous pretty cottages, and bounded on the right
by the azure outline of the Blue Mountains rising 'in the distance. Passing the
Roman Catholic Church and cemetery of St, Mary and St. Joseph on the right,
also the old village of Petersham in the hollow on the Parramatta Road, we
reach
Lewisham (3| miles), which, like the former-mentioned place, is surrounded
by fine open country, through which runs Long Cove Creek, one of the tributaries
of the Parramatta River. The stream is crossed here by a viaduct, and directly
afterwards we find ourselves at
Summer Hill (4 miles), with its handsome Roman Catholic Church adorning
the landscape on the left. Here, as on other portions of the line, the innumerable
villas and gardens which meet the eye in every direction have almost obliterated
the old landmarks, and rendered the place somewhat unrecognizable by those
familiar with its appearance a few years ago. Passing through a deep cutting,
we enter the large and commodious station at
Ashfield (5 miles), worthy of a suburb which is to Sydney what the neigh-
bourhood of Sydenham is to London. The population, which largely represents
the mercantile and business classes of the metropolis, is estimated at about 9,200.
There are 34 miles of roads and streets in the township, the ratable value of the
property being £2,400,000. There is also an Infant’s Home, a large building,
standing in the midst of well laid-out grounds, about four acres in extent. Two
miles to the left of the station is Canterbury, on Cook’s River, one of the oldest
settled portions of the district outside Sydney. The country beyond Canterbury
is elevated and well timbered in places, the whole of the district, as far as George’s
River, being of a pretty character. At
Croydon (6 miles) the line passes through a region of superior suburban
residences, several possessing considerable architectural merit, and many having
beautiful gardens, well stocked with choice shrubs and flowers. As we near


Burwood (7 miles) the Anglican Church on the Parramatta Road forms an
attractive picture, the foreground consisting of numerous gardens and tracts of
partially-cleared country, while in the distance are seen the heights of North
Shore. Close to the station we have a peep at the handsome Congregational
Church, and afterwards, on the left, of an Anglican Church and school, on the
summit of some rising ground. Here large quantities of basalt, or blue-stone,
were formerly obtained, the rock cropping up through the lime-stone. A short
distance from the township is Hen and Chicken Bay, one of the arms of the
Parramatta River. Continuing our course through a broad expanse of open
country, in portions of which many stately trees have escaped destruction, w r e
approach
Strathfield Junction (7 \ miles), where the Northern Line to the Hawkes-
bury, Newcastle, Tenterfield, and Brisbane, branches off to the right (see 11i vi-
sion 2of the present work). The place was formerly known as Redmyre,
and possesses numerous handsome villa residences, surrounded by luxuriant
gardens and shrubberies. A short distance from the station, on the right, is a
large vineyard, indicative of the genial climate and fertile soil with which the
district is favoured. Looking in the direction of Parramatta, we perceive the
Pennant Hills more clearly defined, and occasionally we obtain a glimpse of the
rich fruit-growing country about Hyde ; while, towards the west, the summits of
the Blue Mountains loom in the remote distance. At
Homebush (8 miles) is situated the Metropolitan Live Stock Market. The
yards, which are under the control of the Sydney Corporation, are capable of
holding 3,000 cattle and 35,000 sheep. They were constructed at the expense of the
Sydney Corporation, the total cost being about £47,219. They cover about 404
acres, and are a short distance from the station, a platform being constructed foi
the use of those attending the market. The average annual number of cattle
yarded for sale and sold is 83,883 ; and of sheep, 1,298,/29. Homebush was
formerly the great centre of horse-racing in New South Males, and the old race-
course—the Randwick of former days—is still an object of interest to visitors.
To the left of the line is a Wesleyan school-church. Several of the leading
thoroughfares have been planted with shrubs and shade-trees, which, as they
grow up, will impart a picturesque appearance to the place. Passing
Flemington (9 miles), we enter the region of bush, with an
occasional clearing here and there, increasing in density until hidden from sight
by a cutting, emerging from which we have a magnificent view of the Necropolis,
with the open country in the direction of Liberty Plains and upper portion of
George’s River beyond. Then comes another deep cutting, followed by a closer view
of the great metropolitan cemetery; and directly afterwards we find ourselves at
• Rookwood (10 miles), so named from Ainsworth’s famous novel, where the
funeral trains are shunted into a siding, about a quarter of a mile in length, at the
farther end of which is a handsome mortuary station, forming the entrance to the
Necropolis, the Pcre La Chaise of New South Wales. Leaving Rookwood, and
passing through a wide tract of open scrub country, forming portion of Liberty
Plains, so called from its being the district in which the first free settlers were
located, we approach
Auburn (12 miles), which, unlike the village immortalised by Goldsmith, is
a rapidly-progressing township, that bids fair to become the future Birmingham
of New South Wales. Here are the Australian Iron Works, belonging to Mr.
R. F. Ritchie. They form a substantial brick structure, standing upon a large
block of land contiguous to the railway, with which there is connection by means


of a siding. The smith’s shop is 200 feet by 50 feet, while that containing the
labour-saving appliances is 50 feet square. There are three steam-hammers, and
some of the agricultural implements produced are equal to anything of the kind
made in Britain or the United States. There is also a meat-preserving works, and
other industrial establishments. Approaching Duck Creek, a tributary of the
Parramatta, and so called from the large quantity of wild fowl found here during
the earlier days of the Colony, the indications of an industrial district begin to
multiply. On the right we notice some extensive chlorination works, while on
the left we have a large flour-mill, an agricultural-implement manufactury, a
woollen-mill, and other manufacturing establishments, which give
Clyde (12| miles) an industrial importance second to none in the Colony. It
is situated on the banks of Duck Creek, and forms the station for the extensive
works of Hudson Brothers (Limited), the largest private manufacturing concern in
Australasia. The site occupied by the buildings is about 5 acres, and here almost
every kind of railway rolling-stock, agricultural appliance, &c., &c., is manufac-
tured in the best style. The works furnish employment to hundreds of skilled
artizans, who are among the most intelligent of their class, and neglect no oppor-
tunity of promoting their intellectual and social advancement. At
Granville (13 miles), formerly known as Parramatta Junction, the ine
divides—one portion forming the Western Line (see Division 2 of this work),
proceeding via Parramatta ; and the other forming the southern line proceeding
towards Liverpool and Carnpbelltown.
GRANVILLE TO ALBURY.
Two miles from Granville Junction is
Merrylands Platform (15 miles), in the vicinity of which are several
pleasant country residences. Another mile, through rapidly-rising country, and
we are at
Guildford Platform (16 miles), a few miles to the west of which is the
great Prospect Reservoir, which now forms the principal source of the Sydney
water supply. Guildford is in the neighbourhood of the southern end of the Old
Dog Trap Road, connecting Parramatta with the Old Southern Road, and is
surrounded by low ridges, in places well timbered. Crossing Prospect Creek, we
reach
Fairfield (18 miles), which is on the western outskirts of Liberty Plains,
in the heart of a fine agricultural and fruit-growing district. Nearly opposite
the station is Orchardleigh, a favourite resort of excursionists from Sydney. From
here the distance to the Prospect Reservoir is about 3 miles. The view from
Prospect Hill is one of the most beautiful that can be imagined. The reservoir occu-
pies an area of nearly 1,300 acres, forming portion of a Government reserve of 2,500
acres, and is semi-circular in shape. The land not forming portion of the reservoir
has been cleared of undergrowth and planted, where there was no native timber,
with English trees. The country to the eastern side of the reservoir was so treated
many years ago, and in many places the rich pasture land, dotted with clumps of
noble trees, has a lovely park-like appearance.
Oanley Vale Platform (19 miles) is surrounded by a richly fertile country,
admirably adapted for agricultural and fruit-growing purposes. There are several
dairy-farms here ; also in the vicinity of
Cabramatta Platform (20 miles), so called from the creek, a tributary of
George’s River, on which the township is situated. The country about here is


very pretty, and there are numerous orchards and dairy-farms in the district,
which is undulating, well grassed and timbered. Several pretty residences have
been erected in the vicinity.
Liverpool (22 miles) like Parramatta, is one of the earlier settlements out of
Sydney, and was so named from the Earl of Liverpool, who was Premier of Great
Britain in 1812. It is situated on the left bank of George’s Liver, at the head of
navigation, and possesses several large industrial establishments, including a paper-
mill, said to be the most extensive and complete in Australia. It covers an area
of acres, and employs about 100 hands. There are also two large woolwashing
and fellmongering establishments, in one of which over 250 bales of wool are
scoured, packed, and sent away weekly, the number of skins fellmongered weekly
being 4,000. The surrounding country, which is level and well grassed, is used
principally for pastoral and dairy-farming purposes, considerable quantities of
milk and butter being sent hence to Sydney. In the Recreation Reserve is a
monument to Captain Cook. A short distance from the township is Moore
College, in which candidates for holy orders in the Anglican Church are trained.
A favourite excursion is to go from Liverpool by boat to Sans Souci, and thence
by tram and rail to Sydney, the trip down George’s River abounding in views of a
lovely character. At
Glenfield Platform (25 miles) we passthrough one of the original districts
of the Colony, possessing extensive agricultural and pastoral capabilities. It is so
named from the beautiful Glenfield Estate. Much of the scenery in the neigh-
bourhood of George’s River, which here ceases to be navigable, is very pretty.
Macquarie Fields (26 miles) is surrounded by a busy agricultural and
pastoral district, the rural appearance of which is not unlike that of the more
secluded portions of the English Midland counties.
Ingleburn Platform (28 miles) is also in the midst of a rich agricultural and
pastoral district, with well-grassed hills and slopes, and picturesquely dotted with
trees.
Minto Platform (31 miles) is largely used for sending agricultural produce
to kSydney, the surrounding country, which is of a sylvan character, being largely
used for farming purposes.
Leumeah Platform (33 miles) is also in the heart of a rich agricultural dis-
trict, in which there are numerous large farms.
Campbelltown (34 miles) forms the junction for Narellan and Camden (see
page 37), which are reached by tram from the station. It is 210 feet above sea-
level, and enjoys, with Parramatta and two or three other places, the reputa-
tion of being one of the oldest townships in Australia. It is the centre of a rich
agricultural and fruit-growing district, and possesses several extensive orangeries.
Coal is known to exist in the vicinity, but none of the seams have been worked.
A coach runs from here to Appin, a picturesque little village, about 10 miles
distant, in the neighbourhood of which there is some beautiful scenery, notably at
Broughton’s Pass, Jordan’s Pass, Pheasant s Nest, and the Friendly Falls. The
Pheasant’s Nest Pass, at the junction of the Nepean and Cordeaux Rivers, forms
the starting-point of the metropolitan water supply, a tunnel 5 miles in length
connecting the united streams with the Cataract River, the whole feeding a tunnel
2 miles in length, from whence the immense volume of water is conveyed to the
storage reservoir at Prospect, which covers 2 square miles of ground, and posseses
a storage capacity of many million gallons. At


Menangle (40 miles), the line crosses the Nepean River by means of a via-
duct and bridge, the latter being constructed on the box-girder principle, 498
feet in length, and is carried on four piers, 66 feet above the level of the river,
forming three noble spans of 150 feet each. The viaduct is 978 feet in length
on the Sydney side, and 432 feet on the opposite side of the river. There
are numerous grazing-farms in the vicinity, and much of the scenery near
the river is of a pretty rural description. Menangle is known also as “ The Cow-
pasture,” from the circumstance of a herd of cattle, the descendants of several
belonging to the early settlers, being discovered here in 1794. miles from
Menangle is Camden Park, formerly the seat of John Macarthur, “the father of
the Colony,” who introduced the merino sheep into Australia, and also initiated
the Australian culture of the vine. About a couple of miles from Menangle may
be obtained a magnificent panoramic view of the district, with the bold outline of
Razorback in the distance.
Douglas Park (45 miles), 396 feet above sea-level, is surrounded by a rich
agricultural district, and in the neighbourhood is Nepean Towers, at one time the
residence of Dr. Jenkins, who was widely known in connection with the possession
of fine herds of pure-bred cattle. Much of the scenery about here is of a sylvan
character. The line, to which the Stonequarry Creek runs almost parallel a
considerable distance, continues to rise as we approach
Picton (53 miles), where the station, situated on the Stonequarry Creek, after
which it was formerly named, is 549 feet above sea-level. This is a favourite
resort of tourists, there being numerous picturesque spots within easy reach of the
station, especially along the course of Crocodile or Stonequarry Creek to its junc-
tion with the Hawkesbury River. One portion of the glen is known as “Fern
Valley,” from the large numbers of beautiful ferns found growing there. In some
places water-lilies and other aquatic plants are abundant, while the sides of the
valley are hollowed at intervals into rugged caves, one of which is called the “Salt
Cave,” from the circumstance of the rock of which it is composed being largely
impregnated with salt. From the hills surrounding the township numerous fine
views are obtained. One of the highest of the hills near Picton is known as
“Vault Hill,” in consequence of the summit forming the burial-ground of the
Antill family. A trip by coach from Picton to Burrawang, 15 miles distant, will
amply repay the time and expense involved, the route passing through some of
the grandest and wildest scenery in the Colony. Among the mountains in the
neighbourhood are the Barrengarry and the Kangaroo, 2,500 feet above sea-level.
Burragorang, about 19 miles from Picton, is another romantic district, the Wollon-
dilly here flowing through a valley formed by the almost perpendicular sides of
mountains about 2,000 feet in height. The descent into the valley is effected by a
road, two miles in length, overhanging the valley at portions of the route. It is
thus described by a visitor :—“ For the first quarter of a mile little of the valley
below is visible, but a sudden turn in the road reveals a view which it is difficult
to believe can be equalled in Australia, or excelled elsewhere. From this bend in
the zigzag a charming vista of some fifty miles of mountain and valley scenery,
hill and dale, stream and meadow, is opened up. Below flows the Wollondilly
River —a continuation or feeder of the Nepean. Its course can be traced for many
miles meandering through green pastures and wooded gullies, like a sheet of
molten silver shimmering in the rays of the setting sun. Above rise, first in hardly
perceptible progress, and then with sudden abruptness, the rugged mountains
which enclose this lovely picture, while, away down the vista, the course of the
river is lost in the dim perspective, in which huge mountains are softened down
to the proportions of gentle slopes and grassy knolls. The stream appeal's to be


flowing along up hill toward Goulburn (which is visible from a neighbouring peak
with the aid of a glass on fine days), but a deeper descent into the valley destroys
the illusion, and it is* seen that the stream runs almost north to south, instead of
in the contrary direction. At the same point from which a northern view of the
valley is obtained, a splendid panorama of hill and valley stretches away south
for some thirty or thirty-five miles on to Katoomba, the hotel at which place is
plainly seen on a clear day. The sheen of the sea outside Sydney Heads is
discerned on fine days ; and it is no uncommon thing for the belated residents of
this landlocked valley to catch a sight of the electric light at the Heads, as it
flashes its beams of warning and welcome to the toilers of the sea.” The line
crosses Stonequarry Creek by means of a viaduct, 276 feet in length, 78 feet above
the level of the creek, and having five spans of 40 feet each. Wheat and maize are
largely grown in the district, which possesses an extremely fertile soil. Among
the institutions in the township may be mentioned the “Horae for Consumptives,”
maintained at the expense of Lieut.-Col. and Mrs. Goodlet. Emerging from the
Redbank tunnel, 594 feet in length,
Thirlmere Platform (57 miles) is approached. Here the line begins to
ascend more rapidly, until at
Picton Lakes Platform (59 miles) it is 1,074 feet above sea-level. The
“lakes” consist of several extensive lagoons, situated in a precipitous valley,
about half a mile to the right of the line. These lagoons have remained well filled
during the driest seasons, and during flood-time form a large sheet of water, about
5 miles in length, with an average width of half a mile. There are no perceptible
feeders, and even in flood-time the tributary streams are of small importance, so
that the real source of supply remains a mystery. The water is pumped up from
these lagoons to the station for the supply of the railway engines.
Balmoral (formerly Bargo) Platform (65 miles) is surrounded by a fine and
thickly-timbered district, rocky and barren in places, the Bargo River, a tributary
of the Nepean, running through its midst. The greater part of the country
between the railway and the Illawarra Range, from the junction of the Nepean
and the Cordeaux Rivers to the Lodden or Mittagong Range, has been proclaimed
a reserve for the water supply of Sydney.
Hill-top Platform (69 miles) is in the centre of a fertile and well-watered
country, possessing extensive agricultural capabilities. At
Colo Vale Platform (72 miles) the line is 2,083 feet above sea-level, and
passes through a wide tract of picturesque land, in portions of which there are in-
dications of coal. At
Rush’s Platform (74 miles) the line descends to 1,946 feet above sea-level,
but rises again at
Mittagong (77 miles), where it is 2,069 feet above sea-level. The township,
which is largely dependent on the mining industry, is also known as Nattai, that
being the name of the creek on which it is situated. At one time it was called
New Sheffield, but the designation fell into general disfavour. It is the centre of
an almost incredibly rich iron and coal district, the surrounding country, which
possesses many picturesque features, being principally of a pastoral and agricul-
tural character. Many English fruits, such as the cherry, grow in perfection
here, the climate being delightfully cool during the greater portion of the year, a
circumstance which has made the district a favourite resort for invalids from the
warmer portions of the Colony. The celebrated Fitzroy iron mines are situated


within a few minutes walk of the station, and about 4 miles distant a fine seam
of coal is being worked. At Joadja Creek, about 15 miles distant, kerosene is
obtained from a bed of shale estimated to contain over a million and a half tons.
The works are reached by a steam tramway, the route being through a picturesque
valley, surrounded by high mountains, and watered by a stream from which the
mine derives its name. The mountains around Mittagong are much frequented by
tourists, the summits affording numerous beautiful views. One of these eminences
is called the‘•'Gib,” the name being an abbreviation of “Gibraltar,” to which
rock it is said to bear some resemblance. The neighbourhood is rich in choice
varieties of ferns and other native plants, including almost every representative of
the mountain flora. There are several chalybeate springs, one of which, near the
town, flows into a bricked well, whence it is supplied to invalids and The
through train from Sydney to Albury stops at Mittagong twenty-five minutes
for dinner ; and the through train from Albury to Sydney, twenty-five minutes
for breakfast. About 2 miles beyond Mittagong the train passes through the
Gibraltar tunnel, pierced through the rock so called. It is 1,716 feet in length,
and lined throughout with brickwork and cement. The hill forms the terminating
point of the Mittagong Range, one of the spurs of the Blue Mountains. A branch
continues, although gradually diminishing in height, in the direction of the
Illawarra Range.
Boweal (80 miles) is much frequented during the summer months by Sydney
residents, anxious to escape from the heat and dust of the metropolis, the climate
here being delightfully cool and salubrious. The scenery between Mittagong and
Bowral is picturesque and romantic, becoming less wild and broken as it approaches
the latter place, where the broad open meadows, rich grassy slopes, and gentle
undulations are suggestive of the surroundings of an English country village.
The neighbourhood of
Bueradoo Platform (82 miles) constitutes, as it were, the out-lying portion
of Bowral in a southerly direction, and forms another favourite summer resort.
The district of which
Austermere Platform (85 miles) forms the centre, is of a rich agricultural
character, and is watered by the Wingecarribbee River, or Creek, which takes its
rise in the great swamp of that name. In the uncleared forest lands are to be
found trees of gigantic proportions, rising from a dense undergrowth of fern-trees,,
native shrubs, and thick heavy grass.
Moss Vale (86 miles), situated 2,205 feet above sea-level, is rapidly increasing
in importance, not only as a business centre, but also as a sanitorium, for which
purpose it is admirably adapted. The country residence of the Governor of New
South Wales is situated about 2 miles from the township, near Sutton Forest, and
there are numerous handsome villas, embowered amid luxuriant gardens, in the
vicinity. The soil is admirably adapted for agricultural purposes, being princi-
pally a black or chocolate-coloured loam, which produces excellent crops. The
surrounding scenery is of a highly picturesque character, and excited the admira-
tion of Mr. J. A. Froude, who compared it to Mount Macedon, in Victoria, only
that, instead of being in the midst of dense forests, it is surrounded by rolling
grassy uplands, thickly sprinkled with trees, sheep, and cattle farms, &c., and long
ago taken up and appropriated. To those who are fond of riding, says Mr. Froude,
the situation of Moss Vale is perfect, as the green grass stretches out into infinity.
Then the climate is delightful, being in summer-time like passing from the tropics
into the temperate zone. But the great attraction of Moss Vale is


THE FITZROY FALLS.—(See page 27.




The Fxtzroy Falls,
situated about 12 miles from the township, in an easterly direction. The country
through which the road passes is of a gentle undulating nature, so that the view
of the deep sunken valley in which the falls are situated comes with startling
suddenness on the visitor. Down this valley a tributary of the Shoalhaven River
falls a depth of full 400 feet before reaching the rocks below, after which it
descends a further distance of about 200 feet, making the full depth of the cascade
about 600 feet. The surrounding scenery is wildly beautiful, suggestive of the
romantic landscapes of Salvator Rosa, and from the bridge that spans the stream
above the falls one of the grandest views imaginable is obtained. Facing the
spectator is a gorge upwards of half a mile in width, nearly 1,000 feet in depth,
and stretching for miles in the direction of its length. As the glen trends east-
wards it widens considerably, and traversing its centre is a table-shaped mountain,
called Mount Meryla, behind which glimpses of mountain chains are seen out-
lined against the sky. The sides and bottom of the glen are covered with the
richest vegetation, which, with its glistening foliage, adds greatly to the beauty
of the scene. This glen is the botanist’s paradise, the dense undergrowth
including many lovely kinds of ferns, and multitudes of beautiful mosses, lichens,
and rock-lilies, from which rise countless magnificent cedars, messmate trees, and
picturesque cabbage-palms. It is one of the “beauty spots of Australia, if not
of the world. About 7 miles from Moss Vale are the Berrima Coal Mines, the
entrance to which is in a wild ravine, at the bottom of which the river passes over
huge boulders, while the sides are lined with tree-ferns and oak-trees, the whole
forming a singularly picturesque scene. The coal deposits are said to have been
discovered accidentally, in 1845, by Mr. Atkinson, while rambling in search of ferns.
The descent to the mine is interesting. From the edge of the cliff there is a steep
incline through a tunnel, and afterwards through flood-proof iron doors, from
whence is obtained a fine view of the river and its numerous cascades, ferns,
boulders, and trees, bounded by lofty perpendicular cliffs. From here the seam of
coal may be traced for several miles. Eastward it dips and disappears to reappear
at the foot of a waterfall 200 feet high. It has been estimated that nearly
5,000,000 tons of coal will be produced before the seam is exhausted. Passing
Bald Hill on the west, and Mount Broughton on the east, we reach
Meryla Siding Platform (89 miles), a mile beyond which is Jordan’s
Crossing. Two or three miles to the west is a singular eminence called the
Jumping Rock. Traversing a district called “The Barren Ground,” but the
appearance of which belies its name, we approach
Bundanoon (95 miles), situated on the creek from which it derives its name,
and situated in the heart of a rich agricultural and dairy-farming district, an
abundance of good timber furnishing continuous employment for a large saw-mill.
There is some magnificent scenery, rivalling that of the Blue Mountains, in the
neighbourhood ; and the gullies abound with bungalow, cabbage-tree, and tree-
ferns. Passing
Carle’s Siding Platform (102 miles), which is 2,163 feet above sea-level,
and surrounded by delightful scenery, we reach
Wingello (105 miles), one of the highest points of the line, being 2,220 feet
above sea-level. It is a pretty little township, situated near the Uringelly Creek,
the population being engaged principally in pursuits. In the
neighbourhood are several coal seams, one of which is being worked. Other
mineral deposits are known to exist, but no steps have been taken to utilise them.


Barber’s Creek (110 miles) is so called from the stream of that name,
which takes its rise to the east of Marulan, and flows into the Shoalhaven River.
Marulan (114 miles) is famous for its marble and freestone quarries, which
supply much of the better class of stone for building purposes in Sydney, the floor
of the great hall of Sydney University being constructed of marble from this
district. Coal and other minerals have been discovered in the neighbourhood,
which also abounds in game, especially on the Wollondilly, where at times ducks
of various kinds, plover, quail, snipe, &c., are to be found. The cool salubrious
climate, which has a bracing and invigorating influence on the human body, causes
the place to become much frequented during the summer months by those in
search of health. About 13 miles from the township a series of limestone caves
have lately been discovered. They are near a place called the “Look Down,”
which is much frequented by tourists. Passing
Carrick Platform (122 miles), the centre of a thriving agricultural and
pastoral district, we approach.
Towrang Platform (124 miles). The place is also known as Manna Fields.
The country about here has a somewhat rugged aspect, the principal feature being
a mountain which gives its name to the neighbourhood, and is situated between
the line and the Great Southern Road. On the Wollondilly, near here, gold and
silver have recently been discovered. The country about
Murray’s Flats (129 miles) partakes largely of an agricultural character,
retaining a similar appearance until
North Goulburn Platform (133 miles) is reached, when we find ourselves
on the outskirts of the metropolis of the Southern District, one of the largest and
most prosperous industrial centres in Australia. Another mile, and we are in
Goulblim (134 miles), which forms the Junction Station for the branch line
to Queanbeyan, Michelago, and Cooma (see page 38). The city, which has a
population of about 9,000, is situated at the confluence of the Wollondilly River
and the Mulwarree Ponds, a stream fed by the Bangalore and Bongaralaby Creeks,
the surrounding district being eminently adapted for agricultural and pastoral
purposes. Gold, silver, copper, and other minerals are known to exist in the
vicinity. There is also an abundance of slate and marble, lime-burning being an
important industry. The city is well laid out, having broad thoroughfares, with
a large number of very fine public and private buildings. The Anglican cathedral
is a handsome structure, in the Gothic style, designed and finished in excellent
taste. Its internal length is 150 feet; the width of the nave and aisles being
54 feet, the length of the transepts 96 feet, and their width 54 feet. It is of free-
stone from quarries in the district, with pillars of freestone from the Pyrmont
quarries at Sydney. The walls of the chancel, nave, and transepts are adorned
with handsome medallions, carved in Omaru stone, representing scenes in the life
of Christ ; and there are twenty-three memorial and other windows representing
Solomon Building the Temple, the Marriage at Cana, Raising of Lazarus, Peter
and John at the Sepulchre, and other Biblical subjects. The pulpit is a gift
from Warwickshire, in England. It is of stone from Caen, in France, and is
supported by five marble pillars. The central figure, within a sunken panel, is
that of Christ, having the Prophet Elijah on the right, and Moses and Peter on
the left. The font, a present from Staffordshire, is in a similar style of art.
There is also a handsome brass lectern. The communion table and chairs, also the


Bishop’s throne, are of richly-carved oak ; the ornamental tiles covering the floor
being from the works of Minton & Co., Stoke-upon-Trent. The Roman Catholic
cathedral, which is rapidly approaching completion, is an equally noble structure.
Yarra Platform (141 miles), 2,228 feet above sea-level, is surrounded by an
extensive agricultural and pastoral district. The same may be said of
Breadalbane Platform (149 miles), which is the highest point of the line,
crossing the Cullarin Range, a portion of the Great Dividing Range, at an elevation
of 2,280 feet above sea-level. From hence the line gradually descends to Albury,
where the height above sea-level is 531 feet. There are extensive mineral
deposits in various parts of the district; and at Currawang, 15 miles distant,
copper was formerly mined on a large scale. There are several fine lagoons on the
Breadalbane Plains, which are largely resorted to by water-fowl of various kinds.
Fish River Platform (161 miles) is surrounded by a large agricultural and
pastoral district, watered by several creeks, and affording numerous glimpses of
pretty rural scenery.
Gunning (165 miles), situated near the head-waters of the Lachlan River,
has several flour-mills, being the centre of an extensive wheat-growing country.
Gold, copper, and other metals are to be found in places, but very little has been
done in the shape of systematic mining. To the south of Gunning is Mount
Dixon, having an elevation of 3,000 feet above sea-level. Mica and talc are found
in its vicinity. Passing the station the line turns towards the south-west until it
crosses Manton’s Creek, a tributary of the Yass River, after which its course is
directed north-westward towards Yass.
Jerrawa Platform (175 miles) is situated on a creek of the same name, and
which, taking its rise in Mount Mandonen, flows across the Yass Plains, and
forms one of the heads of the Lachlan River. The surrounding country is beauti-
fully undulating, and abounds with forests of heavy timber.
Yass (187 miles), a busy and important township, is situated about a mile and
a half from the railway station, and is divided into two portions by the river
Yass, a tributary of the Murrumbidgee River. The two portions of the township
are connected by a handsome iron lattice bridge of 285 feet span. The municipal
boundaries include also O’Connelltown. The township is sheltered on three of its
sides by heavy ranges, prominent among which is the bold round elevation of
Mount Downing. There are several handsome public and private buildings in the
place, which afford in every direction the indications of steady progress. The town
population is about 2,370, and that of the surrounding district about 8,000. The
residents are engaged principally in occupations connected with the pastoral and
agricultural industries, large quantities of wheat, maize, oats, barley, and potatoes
being annually raised, in addition to other farm produce; but there is every
probability that at no distant period the district will become a great mining region,
there being many valuable deposits of silver, copper, lead, and other minerals.
Gold has also been found in places. Considerable quantities of fine marble exist
on the Yass Plains, and silver has been discovered in the Yass River. Respecting
the name of the district, it is asserted that when the late Hamilton Hume, the
explorer, and his party, about half a century ago, were crossing over the country
to Port Phillip, they camped one night on a small plain, which was bounded by a
line of ranges. At daybreak Hume despatched one of his men to the top of a hill
for the purpose of ascertaining the nature of the country beyond. On the man’s
return, Hume asked him if there was good travelling ahead, and received the reply
“ Ya-as ; plains,” which so amused him that he called the place by that name.


Bowning (194 miles) derives its name both from the creek on which it is
situated and from the bold round elevation which rises in its rear. The latter is
known as Bowning Hill or Mount Bowning, and from its summit, which is about
1,000 feet above the level of the surrounding country, a fine panoramic view of the
district, with the Murrumbidgee and Yass .Rivers, is obtained. The sides of the
eminence are covered with splendid timber, but between twenty and thirty years
ago the whole forest was in flames, presenting one of the grandest spectacles
imaginable. The country in the neighbourhood of the township is somewhat hilly,
the scenery in places being wildly beautiful, but the land generally, especially in
the valleys, is richly fertile and much used for pastoral and agricultural purposes.
Valuable mineral deposits are believed to exist in the vicinity, the indications of
silver, lead, and copper being found in abundance. There are also several lime-
kilns, Bowning is much frequented by visitors during the summer months.
Binalong (208 miles) is very prettily situated on an eminence with picturesque
wooded hills sweeping in graceful undulations around it. The soil in many places
is admirably adapted for wheat-growing, but grazing forms, at present, the leading
industry. Magnetite has been found in the neighbourhood. Burrowa, formerly
known as Boorowa, about 15 miles distant, is the principal place of the district.
In its vicinity are two volcanic hills, known as Great and Little Carramumbola.
It is a busy thriving place, forming the centre of an extensive agricultural area.
Passing
Galong (216 miles), where the surrounding country is beautifully rural and
fertile, we reach
Rocky Ponds Platform (220 miles), a few miles from whence is Cumbamurra,
on the Great Southern Road, where are to be seen a group of immense rocks.
They are situated on the rugged banks of Spring Creek, about 2 miles above its
junction with Jugiong Creek.
Cunningar Platform (225 miles) is situated near the Cunningham Plains
Creek, which flow's through the country from which it derives its name, an
extensive tract of rich undulating agricultural and pastoral land. About 14 miles
from Cunningar, which was formerly known as Curwenyan, is an extensive gold-
bearing reef, the property of the Hew Cunningar Gold-mining Company, who have
erected very large and complete chlorination works for the treatment of the
pyrites. The reef was formerly known as the Marshal McMahon, and the estate
is said to be the most extensive gold-mining holding in New South Wales.
Harden (228 miles) forms the junction station for the branch line to Young
and Cowra, meeting the Western line at Blayney. (See page 41.) It also receives
a considerable portion of the goods traffic intended for Murrumburrah, 2 miles
further on, the steep gradient at the latter place being productive of delay in con-
nection with the stoppage of heavy trains. The township is the centre of an
extensive pastoral district, from which large quantities of wool are annually
forwarded to Sydney. About 14 miles from Harden, Murrumburrah Creek is
crossed by means of a timber bridge 250 feet in length. Half a mile further is
Murrumburrah (230 miles), picturesquely situated on the Currawong Creek,
a tributary of the Jugiong Creek, and is rapidly becoming a place of commer-
cial and industrial importance. There are rich deposits of gold and galena in
the vicinity. In addition to the mines at Cunningar, gold-mining operations are
carried on at Blind Creek, Wombat, and other places. Much of the land around
the township produces excellent wheat and other cereals. Passing


Nubba Platform (237 miles), which is surrounded by large tracts of good
pastoral and agricultural country, we cross Oonnaughtman’s Creek, and arrive at
Wallendbeen Platform (241 miles), where the soil becomes exceedingly
rich, being several feet deep in places. The country about here is admirably
cultivated, and becomes tolerably level as we approach
Cootamundra (253 miles), formerly known as Coramundra, which forms the
junction station for the branch line to Grind agai. (See page 41.) It is situated in
an upland valley at the source of the Muttama Creek, a tributary of the Murrum-
bidgee River, and the surrounding country includes some of the finest agricultural
land in New South Wales, the wheat produce averaging 20 bushels to the acre.
Many of the farmers have each as many as 1,000 acres under cultivation, using the
newest and most improved appliances. Pastoral pursuits are largely carried on,
and it is expected that the township will become the site of a great central live-
stock market. The town possesses a fine park, also a good racecourse, and is
surrounded by picturesque undulations which gradually swell into ranges, the
highest point being known as Mount Coghlan. The district is highly auriferous,
and includes the Temora, Barmedman, Muttama, and other well-known gold-fields.
Passing through broad tracts of good agricultural land, Salt Clay Creek is crossed
twice.
CtJN'GEGONG Platform (262 miles) is situated near the creek of that name,
which is fed by several springs and runs into Muttama Creek. Between here and
Cootamundra, lying to the west of Muttama Creek, is Mount Bethungra, a lofty
eminence of somewhat imposing appearance. The land about here is principally
of a pastoral character. It is the same at
Bethungra (268 miles), the surrounding district being somewhat thinly
settled. At
Illabo Platform (276 miles), formerly called Billabong, the Billabong Creek,
a tributary of the Murrumbidgee, is crossed by a large culvert, and after traversing
several miles of pastoral country,
Junes Junction (286 miles) is reached. Here the South-western line to
Narrandera, Jerilderie, and Hay branches off (see page 42). The old township of
Juneeis situated on the branch line, about Smiles distant from the Junction.
The country is chiefly pastoral, but the area devoted to agricultural purposes is
annually becoming larger. There is a railway locomotive depot here, and the
station buildings are among the largest and most commodious of their kind in
Australia. Passengers from the North and South stop here from 25 to 30 minutes
for meals. The refreshment-rooms here are the largest and most complete of their
kind on any Australian railway. The great dining-hall measures 70 feet by 40 feet,
and is splendidly furnished with large mirrors and modern furniture. The bar,
which is also handsomely furnished, is 30 feet by 24 feet. There is also a large
private dining-room, and seventeen bedrooms. At
Harefielb Platform (294 miles) the district is principally pastoral, but
partakes more of an agricultural character as
Bomen (304 miles) is approached. It is on the outskirts of Wagga Wagga,
being situated on the north bank of the Murrumbidgee, while Wagga Wagga is on
the south bank. There are extensive live-stock yards here, and large quantities
of agricultural produce grown in the district is annually sent from the station.


Wagga Wagga (309 miles) is the centre of a most extensive pastoral and
agricultural district, and has become recognized as one of the leading townships
in the Colony. It commands the bulk of the trade of the rich pastoral country
watered by the Murrumbidgee, and has a thriving and prosperous appearance.
The agricultural produce of the district includes wheat, maize, barley, oats,
potatoes, and tobacco. There are also several vineyards, in which large quantities
of good wine-producing grapes are grown. The surrounding district, which is or
a beautifully undulating description, rising into hills in the distance, is dotted
over with selectors’ homesteads, which impart an appearance of life to the scene.
About half a mile from the township is the racecourse, which fairly rivals that at
Rand wick, and has a grand-stand capable of accommodating about 2,000 people.
Sandy Creek Platfobm (318 miles) is in the centre of an extensive pastoral
district, of a somewhat level nature, and shortly after leaving it the country
begins to assume a more picturesque appearance, the foliage of the numerous trees,
being enriched by that of the peppermint, which here grows in great luxuriance.
The Rock (327 miles) is the nearest station to the celebrated Brookong Run,
which, containing over 300,000 acres, is one of the largest sheep-stations in New
South Wales. The station is so named from an immense mass of overhanging
rock on the mountain range to the western side of the line. The highest point is
said to be about 2,000 feet, and those who have made the ascent, which is one ot
some little difficulty, pronounce the view to be one of imposing magnificence,
including the winding waters of the Murrumbidgee gleaming like a streak of silver
in the purple distance. Wallabies and kangaroos are numerous in the ranges ; and
wild duck and other game are said to be plentiful in the vicinity of the creeks and
waterholes. Proceeding through a region of pine scrub, we reach
Yerong Creek Platform (336 miles), which derives its name from a tribu-
tary of the Bullenbong Creek. The country between here and
Culcairn (356 miles) is mostly of a pastoral character, as is the extensive
district between the station and that at
Gerogery (368 miles), within a short distance of which is Morgan’s “ Look-
out ” and Cave, so called after the notorious bushranger who, some years ago,
kept the whole district in a state of terror, until he was shot by John Quinlan, a
labouring man. To the south-east the peculiarly-shaped mountain, called table
Top, is strikingly conspicuous. It can be seen under different aspects, the greater
part of the distance between Wagga Wagga and Gerogery, but it is here that its
curious formation is most clearly defined. It forms portion of the Yambla Range.
A considerable portion of the district is devoted to wheat cultivation, for which
purpose much of the land is well adapted. A large number of German families
are settled in or about Jindera, Burrumbuttock, W alia TV alia, and other portions
of the district.
Yambla Platform (378 miles) is much used by the residents of Bowna, about
4 miles distant, and situated on the Mullingandra Creek, about 2 miles from the
river Murray. The country about Yambla is largely devoted to agriculture, and
in the direction of Bowna there are numerous vineyards. Much of the land is in
the hands of selectors, who form a busy and prosperous class. Close to the
Ettamogah Platform (381 miles) is the famous vineyard which gives its
name to the place, and where some of the finest wines in Australia are produced
We are now in the valley which, in its suitability for vine cultivation, rivals tnat


of the Rhine, and as we approach the “Federal City ” we see a portion of the
famous Murray Valley vineyard, the first established in the district, where upwards
of 150 acres of vines are in full bearing. Passing
Albury Racecourse Platform (384 ’miles), which is found convenient for
residents and others in the suburbs, we reach
Albury (386 miles), which forms the southernmost limit of the New South
Wales Railway System. The station here is large and well arranged, the principal
platform being 400 feet in length by 20 feet in width. In addition to all the
appurtenances of a first-class station, there are upwards of 4 miles of sidings and
crossings in the yard, with extensive goods, engine, and other sheds. The town
is large and well laid out, most of the thoroughfares being planted with young shade-
trees. The surrounding country is extremely diversified, consisting of flat
undulating plains, and rugged, precipitous, and well-timbered ranges, a prominent
feature among which is the summit of Mount Table Top. Vine cultivation is the
leading industry of the district, the quantity of wine produced in 1888 being no
less than 104,141 gallons. Wheat and other cereals are also grown, together with
a fair quantity of oranges, tobacco, &c. Grazing is extensively followed, and in
the Black Ranges and elsewhere quartz-mining operations are being successfully
carried on. About a mile from the township, near the river Murray, is a tree,
preserved with jealous care as a landmark of the past, on which are seen the
initials of Hovell the explorer, and the date, November 17th, 1824, marked by
himself, of his discovery, with Hume and eight other colonists, of the great
river which forms portion of the boundary line between New South Wales and
Victoria. The Black Range, so called from the dark appearance which it presents
to the south, is believed to be rich in gold-bearing quartz, and in several places
mines are being worked. The hills are situated about 5 miles from the township.
In proceeding from Albury to Melbourne, the train from Sydney remains in the
station until all the luggage, &c., not intended to cross the Victorian border has
been removed, when it is taken a few yards further down the line until that
portion of the platform beyond the Customs barrier has been reached. Here, on
the other side of the platform, is the Victorian train. As the luggage is removed
from the Sydney train it is examined by the Victorian Customs officers, except
where it is “ checked” or booked through to Melbourne. The passengers for
Victorian stations getting out at Albury are met at the barrier by the Victorian
Customs officers, who examine any articles of luggage they may have with them.
In arriving from Melbourne, the process is reversed, passengers for stations in
New South Wales being met at the barrier by the New South Wales Customs
officers, who also examine all luggage passing into the Colony. If there is no
apparent attempt at concealment on the part of passengers, comparatively little
delay or trouble is occasioned.


SYDNEY TO MELBOURNE, VIA ALBURY.
Passengers from Sydney to Melbourne can proceed either by ordinary train or
by express. The former, which leaves Sydney every evening, Sundays excepted,
arrives at Albury at 1-20 p.m. on the following day, stopping at all intermediate
stations, and leaving Albury for Melbourne at 2T5 p.m., arriving at Melbourne at
10T5 p.m. (Victorian time) the same day. Passengers leaving Sydney on Saturday
evening, and arriving in Albury on the following day, cannot proceed beyond
Albury until 6‘50 on Monday morning, and will, therefore, have to remain in
Albury all night. There are, however, several good hotels in the township, at
which the charges are extremely moderate. The charge per head for conveying
passengers to or from the township is Is. The express train leaves Sydney at 5T5
p.m. on Mondays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Thursdays, and Fridays only, the
number of passengers being limited. The stopping-places are Mittagong, Bowral,
Goulburn, Yass, Harden, Cootamundra, Junee Junction, and Wagga Wagga. It
reaches Albury at 5‘50 a.m. next day, leaving at 6TO a.m., and arriving in Mel-
bourne at 11-16 a.m. (Victorian time). Passengers by the ordinary train from
Sydney are allowed the following times for refreshments, which are supplied at a
fixed moderate tariff :—Mittagong, 15 minutes ; Goulburn, 15 minutes ; Yass, 15
minutes ; Junee Junction, 32 minutes ; and Wagga Wagga, 10 minutes. Pas-
sengers by express are allowed : —Mittagong, 23 minutes ; Goulburn, 10 minutes ;
Yass, 5 minutes ; and Junee Junction, 10 minutes. Sleeping cars are attached to
both trains, but berths should be secured before-hand by post, telegram, or personal
application at the Central Booking Office, George-street, near the General Post
Office, Sydney. Between Albury and Melbourne the stopping-places for refresh-
ments are Benalla and Seymour, the time allowed varying according to the
particular train leaving Albury.
MELBOURNE TO SYDNEY, VIA ALBURY.
Passengers from Melbourne to Sydney can proceed either by ordinary train or
by express. The former, which leaves Melbourne at 6‘40 a.m. daily, Sundays
excepted, arrives at Albury about 2T5 p.m., stopping at all intermediate stations,
and leaving Albury for Sydney at 2*45 p.m., arriving at Sydney about 6 a.m. on
the following day. Passengers leaving Melbourne on Saturday will have to remain
in Albury for the train leaving that place at 245 p.m. on Sunday. The express
train leaves Melbourne daily, Sundays excepted, at 4-55 p.m., stopping at Seymour,
Benalla, Wangaratta, and Wodonga, and arriving at Albury at 10'48 p.m. Pas-
sengers leaving Melbourne on Saturday will have to remain in Albury for the train
leaving that place at 2-45 p.m. on Sunday. As this train stops at all stations
between Albury and Sydney, and is generally crowded, travellers would do well
to leave Melbourne on Friday or Monday, in preference to Saturday. Travellers
by the Sunday train should be careful in leaving their seats at the larger stations,
as the crush for places is some times very great. The arrangements for refresh-
ments are much the same as during the journey from Sydney to Albury, the time
allowed at each place being announced by the railway attendants. A sleeping car
is attached to each train leaving Albury, and berths can be secured either at Mel-
bourne, or by writing or telegraphing to the Station-master at Albury.


BRANCH LINES
SOUTHERN RAILWAY.


O . -


GRANVILLE TO PARRAMATTA AND
PENRITH.
Harris Park (14 miles from Sydney), where a fine view of the surrounding
country, with the Pennant Hills in the distance, is obtained. A few minutes
later, and
Parramatta (14 miles) is reached. This, next to Sydney, is the oldest
township in Australia. It was formerly known as Rosehill, but was afterwards
designated by the aboriginal title of Parra-mat-ta. It was established on the 2nd
November, 1788, on which day, we are told Governor Phillip chose the spot, and
marked out the ground for a redoubt and other necessary buildings. In July,
1790 he laid down the lines for a regular township, with a leading street a
mile in length, and 205 feet in width. Much of the early history of the Colony is
associated with that of Parramatta, the first wheat being grown and harvested
here. The township is situated on the Parramatta River a beautiful stream,
forming one of the arms of Port Jackson, a portion constituting the championship
course on which Trickett, Beach, and other aquatic celebrates have gamed several
of their proudest and most hotly-contested successes. There is an extensive park,
having several walks planted with oak-trees, which are among the finest m the
Colony. The surrounding district is principally devoted to fruit-growing, o
whic/ it is admirably adapted. The Parramatta orangeries have a widely-spread
reputation, some of the largest known orange-trees being found on the estate of the
late James Pye, who devoted the greater part of his life to the introduction and
cultivation of the best varieties of the fruit, the earliest being planted soon after
the Colony was founded. It is said that upwards of 10,000 oranges b een
obtained ‘in a single year from a single tree. According to official returns, the
number of oranges produced annually in the Parramatta district is about 4 000,000
dozen, or 48,000,000 of single fruit. The township is a sehHI rad'
makers from Sydney, especially during the summer months. The Rosehill race-
course, near the town, is prettily situated, the races generally attracting a large
attendance. remainder of route see Division II of this work.]
CAMPBELLTOWN TO CAMDEN.
A steam tramway connects Campbelltown with Camden, the distance between
fheTo places being about 74 miles. The tram stops at Rupp’s Gat* s (36nute
from Sydney), Kenny Hill (37 miles), Curran s Hill (38 miles), and Narellan
(39 miles). “ The latter is a pretty little township situated about 2 miles from the
Nepean, the surrounding country being studded with elegant villas, frut
orchards, and large dairy farms. Cobbitty, an Enghsh-looking village, is about 3
miles from Narellan. The next stopping-place is Kirkham s Lane (40 mdes), and
then another mile brings us to Campen (41 miles), m the heart of a fertile district,
and in the vicinity of which is Camden Park, the seat of the Macarthui family,
where sheep-breeding and vine culture were first introduced into Australia, there
are several industrial establishments in the township, including a tweed factory,
in which excellent cloth is produced. The surrounding country is beautifully
grassed, and in many places the vine grows in perfection.


GOULBURN TO MICHELAGO AND COOMA.
Passing Goulburn, the line branches off in a direct southerly direction at
Joppa Junction, so called, it is asserted, from its proximity to a farm named
Jerusalem, in the immediate vicinity. Traversing the rich pastoral country
known as the Goulburn Plains, on portions of which fruit and cereals are exten-
sively grown, we reach
Bangalore Platform (143 miles from Sydney), near the creek so named, a
small tributary of the Mulwarrie Ponds, which the railway crosses by means of a
handsome viaduct. There are large quantities of fine marble here. Proceeding
almost parallel with the Mulwarrie Ponds, which form a tributary of the Wollon-
dilly River, we arrive at
Lake Bathurst Platform (153 miles), close to the lake discoved by Hume in
1817. It is 2,217 feet above sea-level, and varies from 3to 5 miles in diameter,
according to the volumn of water brought down by its tributary streams. The
platypus was formerly found here in large numbers. It is frequented by large
flocks of wild fowl; but sport is difficult, on account of the absence of cover.
The surrounding country consists principally of grassy hills sloping towards the
lake. Regattas are frequently held on the lake.
Tarago (157 miles) is situated on Merigan Creek, at the head of the Mulwarrie
Ponds, and is surrounded by a country abounding with picturesque scenery,
especially in the direction of the Mountain Range, which here separates the waters
of Lake Bathurst on the east from those of Lake George on the west, and forms
the southern end of the Great Dividing Range, which extends to the Blue
Mountains, and of which the Gourock Range, which is crossed near
Fairy Meadow (166 miles), may be regarded as a continuation, leading to
the Manaro Range. The range increases in elevation as it progresses south, the
highest point being Jinduhan, 4,000 feet above sea-level. The scenery about here
is of a wild romantic character, the range having a rugged and broken appearance,
with broad fertile tracts here and there. As we approach
Bungendore (177 miles) the waters of Lake George, lying in the basin of a
large plain, with a background of lofty mountains, gradually make their appear-
ance. The surrounding country is admirably adapted for agricultural and pastoral
pursuits, and several gold-bearing quartz reefs are being worked within a few miles
of the township.
LAKE GEORGE.
This lake lies about 4 miles north of Bungendore, from whence it is easily
reached by coach or buggy. It is about 21 miles in length, -with an average ividth
of 7or 8 miles. It is surrounded on two sides by gigantic towering mountains,
rising in grassy slopes from the water’s edge, and assuming vaster and vaster pro-
portions as they recede fromit. Ithas no outlet, and for a longtime previous to 1852
it had been perfectly dry, its centre being occupied as a sheep-station ; but in that
year the lake became filled up, and has never since become completely empty.
Although fed by fresh-water streams, the waters of the lake are saline, and unfit
for human use, but are eagerly drank by live stock. There is an abundance of
wild fowl, including ducks, swans, pelicans, and spoonbills, also plenty of fish,
which makes Lake George a favourite resort of those fond of sport. The
surrounding country is a picturesque combination of romantic beauty and wild
sublimity, with grandly-swelling downs, rugged peaks, wide and fertile plains,
and lofty snow-capped mountains. On the shores of the lake is a Government
Observatory Station for recording the rise and fall of the waters of the lake.


Crossing the Molonglo Plains, a wide tract of rich pastoral country, watered
hy the Molonglo River, which is fed by the Primrose Valley, Yandyganulla, and
other creeks, and the vicinity of which is believed to be rich in silver ores, we
enter
Molonglo (188 miles), situated on the river, a few miles from its junction
with the Queanbeyan River. It is a pretty little township, the residents being
engaged mostly in agricultural and pastoral pursuits.
Queanbeyan (194 miles) is situated on the river of the same name, and is a
busy, thriving place, possessing several fine buildings. The surrounding country
is largely occupied by agriculturists and pastoralists, large quantities of cereals
and other produce being annually raised. English fruits grow readily in the
vicinity of the township, which is sheltered by the neighbouring hills from the
cold winds of winter. Gold, silver, lead, iron, and copper abound in the district,
which is rapidly becoming an important mining region.
Passing Tuggeranong (203 miles) and Rob Roy (210 miles), both thriving
and busy townships, we reach
Michelago (224 miles), also known as Micalago, or Micaligo, and situated
on the creek of the same name, about 2 miles from its junction with the Mur-
rumbidgee River, which, about a mile from the township, is confined between
hills, rising abruptly from its edge to the height of 300 feet. The surrounding
country, which is well grassed and heavily timbered, is largely utilized for agri-
cultural and pastoral purposes, cereals growing luxuriantly on the banks of the
various streams. Gold has been found in several places, and at the mouth of the
creek are large beds of limestone, containing numerous fossils. Some of the rock
here is a beautiful hard grey porphyry, with rich salmon-coloured crystals of
felspar. Michelago Creek is crossed by a timber viaduct, with seven spans of 26
feet each and two of 15 feet each ; and shortly afterwards Ryrie’s Creek is crossed
in a similar manner. Crossing Ingalara Creek, a tributary of the Murrumbidgee,
by means of a timber viaduct, having five spans of 42 feet each and two of 20 feet
each, we speedily reach
Collinton Platform (236 miles), formerly known as Tinderry. It is situated
on Colyer’s Creek, a tributary of the Murrumbidgee, which is about 1 or 2
miles distant from the township. The district is undulating, abounding with rich
pasture lands and dense forests ; while a few miles to the east is the Tinderry
Range, a chain of lofty mountains running between the Murrumbidgee and
Queanbeyan Rivers, the northernmost point, about 2 or 3 miles from
Michelago, being known as the Twins, or Tinderry Pie. The range has a wild
and rugged appearance, being almost destitute of vegetation. Leaving Collinton,
Colyer’s Creek is crossed by a handsome timber viaduct, and soon afterwards the
line enters a tunnel, 328 feet in length, cut through the solid rock. Crossing
Gangoandra Creek by a brick arch, we approach
Bredbo (243 miles), so called from being situated on the Bredbo River, which
takes its rise near Mount Big Badja, a portion of the Great "Dividing Range.
Leaving the station, the line passes over several creeks, and then the river is
crossed by a timber viaduct, with ten spans of 42 feet each. Following the
course of the river, the line ascends rapidly, and at 249 miles 55 chains, its highest
point, 2,700 feet is reached. Henceforth the line gradually descends, crossing
the Umaralla River by means of a main timber viaduct, having five spans of 42
feet, and forty openings of 20 feet each. There is a smaller viaduct in each of the
approaches to the main viaduct.


Umaralla Platform (254 miles) is the centre of a fine pastoral country, portion
of the celebrated Monaro Plains, the township, which is situated near the junction
of the Big Badja and Umaralla Rivers, being some miles distant. There is some
good agricultural land about here, and copper has been found in places, also agate,
chalcedony, greenstone, calcareous spar, &c. Skirting the Umaralla River and
its tributary, Cooma Creek, for about 5 miles, the latter stream is crossed by a
couple of viaducts, and another mile brings us to
Bunyan (259 miles), situated on Cooma Creek. The surrounding district is
agricultural and pastoral, the country being flat, with a background of mountains
of rocky appearance, covered with timber and scrub. In the vicinity is Rose
Valley, with beautiful grassy slopes, and about 4 miles off the township is Blue
Peak, one of the more pi’ominent points of the Monaro Range, and which derives
its name from the blue appearance it presents at a distance.
Cooma (264 miles), which forms the present terminus of the line, is prettily
situated on Cooma Creek, which takes its rise in the Kiandra Ranges, the river
Murrumbidgee being about 5 miles distant. It is the centre of one of the finest
agricultural and pastoral districts in the Colony, the district being also rich in gold
and other minerals. There is also a coal seam at Myalla Creek, near the town.
Cooma Hill, a lofty peak, the lower portion of which is heavily timbered, lies
about 3 miles from the town, and about 8 miles to the south are three lofty
and conspicuous mountains, portion of the Monaro Range, known as the Brothers.
In the vicinity of one of these, the Rev. W. B. Clarke found some timber
partially mineralised. There are also the Peak,'Jenny Brothers, and one or two
other isolated mountains. The Jenny Brothers are about 5 miles to the south of
the Brothers, and between them there is a range of peaks and lofty masses of
basalt which strike obliquely across the Manaro District from the head of the
Maclauglin River, on the Illawarra Range, to the head of the Murrumbidgee, on
a spur of the Snowy Range. The Peak is one of the summits of this transverse
range, and may be said to divide the Manaro country into two basins—those of the
Murrumbidgee and Snowy River—and to unite the Coast or Illawarra Range with
the Snowy Range. In winter the cold is frequently intense, snow falling in
Kiandra and other more elevated portions of the district. At Rock Flat, about 12
miles from Cooma, is a seltzer spring; it issues from the chinks of a rock-hewn
wall, close to a great pile of rugged stones. There is a considerable traffic
between Cooma and Nimitybelle and Bombala, and thence to Bega and other
portions of the south-eastern coast.
HARDEN TO YOUNG AND COWRA.
After passing Murrumburrah, situated on the main line, the line to Young
and Cowra branches off at
Demondrille Junction Platform (231 miles from Sydney), so called from the
creek of that name, which flows through portion of the Burrangong Gold-field. The
land on either side is good agricultural and pastoral country, and valuable deposits
of the precious metals are believed to exist in places.
King’s Vale Platform (238 miles) is the highest point between Harden and
Cowra, being 1,728 feet above sea-level.


Young (249 miles) is one of the leading mining centres of the Colony. Its
existence dates from 1860, about the middle of which year gold was accidentally
discovered in the neighbourhood, then known as Lambing Flat. It is situated on
the upper portion of Burrangong Creek, which gives its name to the auriferous
district around, and is famous as the scene of the great riots arising out of
the determination of the gold-miners, who had congregated here from all parts of
Australia, to drive out the Chinese, who were assembling in great force. So
serious was the situation that the military had to be sent from Sydney for the
purpose of maintaining order. Traces of the old mining days are yet to be seen
around the township. The district is highly auriferous, but the majority of the
residents are engaged in pastoral and agricultural pursuits, the soil being remark-
able for its extreme fertility. The town, which is well laid out, the leading streets
being planted with ornamental trees, possesses numerous handsome public and
private buildings, and is illuminated by the electric light, the system adopted
being, perhaps, the most complete in Australia.
Monteagle Platform (261 miles) is surrounded by good agricultural and
pastoral country, in portions of which gold is believed to exist. Passing Bendick
Moeell and Crowther, the latter place so called from the creek of that name,
we reach
Koorawatha (277 miles), which was a busy roadside township during the
earlier days of the Burrangong Gold-field. It is situated on the Crowther and
Bang Bang Creeks, the residents being engaged principally in agricultural pur-
suits, the soil about here being extremely fertile.
Cowra (295 miles) is prettily situated on the slope of a hill, on the north side
of the Lachlan River, which the railway crosses by means of a fine iron bridge,
one of the best structures of its kind in the Colony. The country on either side of
the river is alluvial, and of exceptional fertility, some of the wheat grown being
of the finest possible quality. Formerly the district was devoted almost exclusively
to sheep-farming, but, with the opening of railway communication between Cowra
and the Southern and Western lines, the area under crop is rapidly increasing.
The country is also rich in metal deposits, gold being found over a large area, and
silver having been discovered in payable quantities in the Bronla Range at Break-
fast Creek and other places. Copper lodes are also being worked in the district,
and there is likewise a fine marble quarry.
From Cowra there is railway communication, via Carcoar, with Blayney, on
the Western line, for description of which see Division 2 of this work.
COOTAMUNDRA TO GUNDAGAI.
Leaving the main line at Cootamundra a run of 7 miles brings us to
Brawlin Platform (260 miles from Sydney), which is surrounded by an
extensive pastoral district, portions of which are said to be auriferous.
Muttama Platform (266 miles) is situated near Muttama or Mutta-Muttama
Creek, and was formerly an important mining centre, rich gold-bearing quartz
being found in the neighbourhood, which is extremely auriferous.
Coolac Platform (276 miles), situated near Muttama Creek, is in the heart
of an extensive agricultural and pastoral district, in which auriferous tracts are
believed to exist. The scenery around is picturesque, but the population is thin
and scattered.


Hay (450 miles) is the lowest portion of the line, the height above sea-level here
being 305 feet. The township, which has a population of over 3,000, is one of the
neatest looking, best laid out, and most thriving in the Colony. There are numerous
handsome public and private buildings, the appearance of the place being much
improved by several of the leading streets being planted with shade-trees.
The Murrumbidgee is crossed by a fine iron bridge, 400 yards in length, and
having a swing in the centre, to enable steamers to pass, during flood seasons, to
and from Wagga Wagga and places between. The surrounding country, consisting of
extensive grass plains, lightly timbered, is interspersed with belts of myall scrub
and swampy flats, covered with reeds and saltbush, on which large numbers of live
stock are depastured, the number of sheep within the district being estimated at
over one and a half millions. The quantity of wool received here is enormous,
the Hume, Ivanhoe, Hillston, Balranald, and other districts surrounding Hay
containing several million sheep, affording employment to thousands of shearers
during the season. From Hay there are several coach routes to the _ north-
western portions of the Colony, including Wilcannia, Silverton, Broken Hill, and
Mount Browne.
NARRANDERA TO JERILDERIE.
Crossing the Murrumbidgee River by means of a massive iron lattice girder
bridge, the line reaches
Colombo Platform (367 miles from Sydney), situated near where the line
crosses the creek of that name. It is a branch of Yanko Creek, running for many
miles parallel with the railway. The country around here is wholly pastoral, as is
that surrounding the other stopping-places on the line, and there is an abundance
of wild turkey and kangaroo in every direction.
Widgiewa Platform (377 miles) is so called from the station of that name
situated on the opposite side of Colombo Creek. From
Coonong Platform (284 miles), near Coonong Creek, there is a road to Lake
Urana, formed by the confluence of Colombo and Urana Creeks, and which in dry
weather becomes a huge swamp. Beyond the lake is Urana, in the neighbour-
hood of which traces of gold have been discovered.
Bund tire Platform (391 miles) derives its name from the station so called,
situated to the north-west of the line. Near
Yathong Platform (399 miles), is a stream known as Turn Back Jimmy
Creek, a branch of Yanko Creek, and a few miles further on we reach
Jerilderie (412 miles), about’ 40 miles from the Murray frontier of New
South Wales and Victoria. It is situated on the Billabong Creek, also known as
the Edwards River, which runs through some of the most fertile portions of the
Riverina District, much of the surrounding area being suitable for the cultivation of
cereals, which has lately made such progress that over 200,000 bushels of wheat
are now annually grown. From Jerilderie there is communication by coach with
Deniliquin, Tocumwal, Corowa, and other places.


THE ILLAWARRA RAILWAY.
NATIONAL PARK, &c.






Lithographed and Printed at the Department of Lands Sydney NSW It


THE ILLAWARRA RAILWAY.
SYDNEY TO THE NATIONAL PARK AND KIAMA.
■Shortly after leaving Eveleigh Station, the railway branches off to the left,
affording glimpses of the open country in the direction of Randwick and Coogee.
At
Erskineville (1| miles), the populous suburbs of Alexandria and Waterloo,
inhabited largely by workmen and their families, come into view. Then a large
limekiln on the left indicates our approach to
St. Peters (2 miles), the principal centre of the Sydney limeburning and
brickmaking industries, the latter being largely favoured by the abundance of clay
below the alluvial soil. Passing several brickyards and market-gardens, we reach
Marrickville (3 miles), around which are more market-gardens and brick-
yards, together with tanneries and other industrial establishments. In the vicinity
is Graham’s Nursery. Much of the land about here and Tempe is flat and low,
being only 13 or 14 feet above sea-level; consequently they are liable to become
flooded in many places after a heavy rainfall. On the higher lands, towards the
west, are numerous pretty villas, surrounded by luxuriant gardens. Approaching
Tempe (4 miles), the imposing block of buildings known as the Warren is
seen on the right. This was formerly the residence of the late Hon. Thomas
Holt, and is a most beautiful place, being situated on high rising ground, with
wooded hills in the distance. Close to the station Cook’s River widens into a
broad shallow lake, across which the railway passes, and traversing a region of
market-gardens and poultry-farms, we reach
Arncliefe (5 miles), where the scenery becomes more picturesque and
interesting. Leaving the station, the line proceeds through a heavy stone-cutting
and tunnel, the latter passing under the Hurstville Road. Most of the cuttings
on the line are very heavy, the rock being extremely hard and solid. As we
advance, the country becomes more rural in appearance, portions being wooded
and picturesque, while others are open, and dotted here and there with country
residences. At
Rockdale (6 miles), which is rapidly increasing in population, there is a
tramway to Lady Robinson’s Beach, at the head of Botany Bay, one of the favourite
resorts of Sydney holiday-makers. Leaving the station, the landscape retains its
attractive character, although it becomes somewhat open and stony on the right
as we near
Kogarah (7 miles), which has virtually become one of the marine suburbs of
Sydney, by reason of its proximity to the waters of Botany Bay and George s
River. From here a tram-line, in connection with the railway, runs to Sans Souci
and Sandringham, and then returns to the station. At both of these places are
large hotels and other accommodation for tourists and holiday-makers. ’Busses run
to Tom Ugly’s Point, where there is a punt across the river, in which there is
plenty of good fishing. At Kogarah Bay is the aborigines’ camp, and in the
neighbourhood are countless spots suitable for picnic parties. The township itself
displays numerous indications of rapid progress, and its broad streets and numerous
handsome houses create a good impression on the visitor. The main thoroughfares
are planted with trees, and there are several fine public buildings. As we proceed,
the line turning abruptly in a westerly direction, we notice a curiously-gnarled tree
on the left, one of the old kings of the rapidly-disappearing bush, aud further on


we obtain a lovely view of the distant country, with glimpses of the broad watery
expanse of Botany Bay. To the right, the land has been cleared in places, among
which is
Carlton (8 miles), where, to the left, is obtained a magnificent panoramic view
of the country in the direction of Botany and George’s River. Near to the station
is a large hotel, rising where, only a few years ago, there existed nothing but almost
impenetrable bush. Just past the station the line rapidly rises, until at
Hurstville (9 miles) it is 217 feet above sea-level, while at Kogarah it is
only 69 feet, being a difference of nearly 150 feet in 2 miles. The surrounding
country is extremely beautiful, and there is a pretty drive known as the Forest
Road from near the station to the neighbourhood of Arncliffe. There is also a road
to the shores of Kogarah Bay, at the point where the entrance to Goerge’s River
is crossed by the Woniora punt, and a continuation of the Forest Road in a westerly
direction leads to Lord’s or Gannon’s Forest and Peakhurst Heights. This latter
route forms part of the old Illawarra Road. From the vicinity of the station there is
a tine view over Botany ; while, in an easterly direction, the white sands of Coronulla
Beach are seen glistening in the bright sunshine. Hurstville forms the limit of the
suburban traffic on the Illawarra line, the trains to stations beyond here running
less frequently.
Penshurst (10 miles) is in the heart of an elevated and most picturesque
district, and the same may be said of
Oatley’s Platform (11 miles), which is close to several of the creeks and
bays of George’s River, the whole of the country retaining its natural aspect, with
the exception of a clearing here and there. The scenery here becomes more varied
and beautiful, and soon the river comes into view. It is a picturesque stream, the
shores being indented with innumerable creeks and bays, the sloping sides of which
are covered with a luxuriant growth of native shrubs, ferns, and trees, forming a
delightful foretaste of the scenic glories awaiting the gaze of the visitor to the
National Park. Crossing the river by means of a handsome iron lattice-girder
bridge, 900 feet in length, we have a fine view of the river on either side, including
Bottle and Glass Head, Lime Kiln Head, and Jew Fish Point to the right, and of
Double Bay, Green Point, and Caravan Head to the left.
Como (13 miles) is situated on the southern bank of the main stream formed
by the junction of the Woronora and George’s Rivers. The former runs for some
distance in the same direction as the railway, and forms portion of the boundary of
the National Park. A considerable portion of the country between Como and the
sea forms the Holt-Sutherland Estate, the owners of which are doing their utmost
to make the place a leading marine pleasure resort, the facilities for boating,
fishing, bathing, picnicking, and camping, being practically unlimited. The
scenery around is of the loveliest character, ferns, native shrubs and flowers, in-
cluding many kinds of orchids, growing in luxuriant profusion. Leaving Como,
where the height above sea-level is 50 feet, _tbe line again begins to rise very
rapidly until it reaches
Sutherland (15 miles), where it is 360 feet above sea-level. The surrounding
country abounds in beautiful scenery, and forms a fitting approach to one of the
grandest public reserves in the world. Shortly after passing Sutherland, the line
enters the National Park, and at
Loftus Junction (16 miles), a branch railway, nearly 2 miles in length,
runs across Loftus Heights, a magnificent plateau, to


'RIVER SCENE IN THE NATIONAL PARK. —(See page 49.)




National Park, formerly Loftus (18 miles), the station being 290 feet above
sea-level. We are now fairly in
THE NATIONAL PARK,
which, for accessibility and wealth of natural beauty, is without a rival. It
contains an area of 36,300 acres, its boundaries including over 12 miles of
water-frontage, 1£ miles of which are to the Woronora River, 3| miles to Port
Hacking, and 7J miles to the Pacific Ocean. On the sea-coast there is a good boat-
harbour at Wattamolla, and inlets, with ocean beaches, at Marley Beach, Little
Marley Beach, Curracurrang, and Grarie. The southern shores of Port Hacking,
so far as they bound the National Park, have been declared a public oyster reserve,
and are exempt from lease.
The Port Hacking River flows through the northern portion of the Park
for nearly 10 miles of its course, 5 miles of which are navigable for boats. The
upper four of these five miles have been formed into a beautiful lake by the con-
struction of a dam below the confluence with Kangaroo Creek. The brooks on the
eastern bank of Port Hacking River are designated by native names, as follows,—
Mullion (Eagle), Warrul (Bee), Burowa (Bustard), Karoga (White Crane), Gorra
Worra (Laughing Jackass), Buralga (Native Companion), Kobardo (Parrot),
Borumba (Plover), Dirijiri (Wagtail), Murrendum (Quail), Lumbal (Crow), Tamur
(Bronze-winged Pigeon), Burunda (Swan), Karari (Duck), and Palona (Hawk).
Among the other watercourses are Bola Creek, Kangaroo Creek, South-west Arm
Creek, Cabbage-tree Creek, Mangrove Creek, Forbes Creek, and Temptation
Creek. The valleys of most of these are to a large extent covered with rich
foliage, including cabbage-tree and Bangalow palms, tree-ferns, Christmas-bush,
myrtle, and other handsome shrubs, and numerous large well-grown blackbutt,
woollybutt, turpentine, and other noble forest trees, rising in places to heights
up to nearly 200 feet, and bordering beautiful streams, having occasional long
reaches of deep, shaded, pure, cool, fresh water.
How to see the Park. —The Illawarra Railway, after passing Loftus Junc-
tion, continues its course across the north-west corner of the Park, running along
its western boundary to Heath cote and Waterfall Stations, the latter being the
best for visitors desirous of seeing in the course of a few hours much of the more-
beautiful portions of fern, forest, and semi-tropical palm foliage which form one of
the great attractions of the Park. Leaving Waterfalls Station, we proceed along
the Waterfalls Road, 3 miles in length, to Lady Carrington Road. On our
way we have a fine view of the waterfalls at Waterfall Creek, the lower waterfall
having a sheer fall of 111 feet, and the upper a fall of 46 feet. For three-
quarters of a mile above the falls, and for the whole of its course below, the creek
is a permanent stream, with a succession of fine pools of pure fresh water. One of
these pools, about a quarter of a mile above the falls, affords an excellent bathing-
place, with a clear, smooth rock bottom, and a miniature sandy beach. From
the summit of the lower fall, an uninterrupted view is obtained of a large forest
in the valley of the creek, which forest extends across Port Hacking River.
The Forest Path. —On arriving at Lady Carrington Road, we turn to the
right, and then, for about a mile, until Palm Creek Bridge is crossed, we find
ourselves surrounded by masses of beautiful foliage, forming a fairy-like picture,
of which the eye never becomes wearied. Retracing our steps along Lady
Carrington Road, we can either return to Waterfalls Station, or, continuing our
course past Waterfalls Road, proceed to the bridge across Bola Creek, where the
scenery is of the loveliest description imaginable. To the left of Lady Carrington


Hoad, near its junction with Waterfall Road, and starting from a point called The
Curve, is a romantic path leading to a fine forest, consisting principally of gigantic
blackbutt trees, several of which, near the path, have girth measurements up to
25 feet, at a height of 5 feet from the ground, and rise, in some cases, to the height
of 200 feet. This route, known as The Forest Path, passes round the western
slopes of “The Island,” and crossing Bola Creek, rejoins Lady Carrington Road
near the confluence of the waters of Bola Creek and Port Hacking River. Just
before leaving the Forest Path, there may be seen, on the other side of the river,
a great mass of cabbage palms, so dense that all other foliage, including several
kinds of eucalypti, turpentine trees, &c., is completely hidden by the palms,
hundreds in number, varying in height from a few feet up to about 80 feet.
Through the Parle. —On regaining Lady Carrington Road we can return to
Waterfall, or continue our way to National Park Station. If the latter route be
chosen, we proceed along Lady Carrington Road, almost parallel with Port
Hacking River, which, the only one running from south to north between high and
precipitous mountains, is shaded from the sun more than any other known river in
New South Wales. Here large quantities of live trout and English perch have
successfully been introduced. About a mile and a half from Bola Creek Bridge,
between Tamur Brook and Burunnda Brook, a magnificent collection of palms and
hanging vines attracts attention on the opposite side of the river. Crossing a
number of small creeks, on several of which native names have been bestowed, we
reach the dam at Audley, so called in honor of Licensed-surveyor Audley, who, in
1864, made the first accurate survey of Port Hacking River, and had his main
survey camp at the place. From here a pleasant walk of about a mile brings us to
National Park Station, from whence to the Park gates, at Sutherland, and parallel
to the railway, is a fine road called “The Avenue,” 2J miles in length, planted with
double rows of ornamental trees. Another road, Florence Parade, running in an
easterly direction from National Park Station, affords a number of beautiful and
extensive views, including the waters of Port Hacking River, Botany Bay, the
Pacific Ocean, Loftus Heights, and the more elevated portions of the Park.
Several days, even weeks, may be enjoyably spent in becoming familiar with
the many beauties of the Park. Opposite the junction of Waterfall and Lady
Carrington Roads, a road leading to Garie Beach is being constructed. It will be
called Garie Road, and will enable visitors to view the grand coast scenery from
Garie trigonometrical station, 762 feet above sea-level, and other places.
The Deer Parle, in which several head of deer are kept, is near Gogerly and
Hacking trigonometrical stations, at the northern end of the Park, at the confluence
of Kangaroo Creek with the waters of Port Hacking, and can be reached by a road
from Audley Dam. A considerable portion of the Park is well grassed, and there
is a never-failing supply of water, including that of the brook, which terminates
at the Fountain, opposite Mangrove Island. There is also a keeper’s cottage near
the entrance to the Park, which contains about 100 acres, and is enclosed, where
necessary, by a 6-foot fence of nine wires. There is a good road leading to the
Park, from portions of which very beautiful and extensive views of the wider
portions of Port Hacking River in the direction of the North-west Arm and Gymea
Bay are obtained. For those who have only a few hours to spare, a walk from
Loftus Junction to Audley, and thence in the direction of the Deer Park, would
afford much pleasure, enabling them, without incurring the risk of fatigue, to
see much that is beautiful and interesting, the length of their excursion being
arranged according to the time at their command.


FOREST SCENE IN THE NATIONAL PARK.




The Cascades. —Returning to Audley Dam, we find a main road running to
Clifton, several miles distant from the southern side of the Park, Garie trigono-
metrical station being passed on the way. About midway between Audley Dam
and Garie trigonometrical station the road turns off in an easterly direction to the
left, crossing the South Arm Creek at Flat Rock Crossing, then running by the
side of Cascade Creek until the cascades which give the stream its name are
reached. About 200 yards from the lower cascade a footpath leads to a fine
bathing-place in the creek. Three-quarters of a mile from here we reach the Main
Coast Road, which, running southward, forms a junction with that from Audley
Dam to Clifton, about half a mile before Garie trigonometrical station is reached ;
while, in a northerly direction, it branches off at Saddle trigonometrical station, the
western road running to the waters of Port Hacking, on the western side of Cabbage-
tree Creek, opposite Buffanear Bay, and the eastern road running to Wentworth
Beach, near the Yarmouth Estate, at the entrance to Port Hacking, and through a
village reserve to Jibbon Beach, on the western side of Port Hacking. The main
road from Sydney to Wollongong enters the Park near Sutherland, running parallel
with the railway through the Park and along its western boundary to Waterfall,
where it takes a more westerly direction. These are the only roads in existence,
the other portions of the Park, with the exception of the clearings at Loftus
Heights and elsewhere, remaining in their primitive condition of luxuriant wildness.
Loftus Heights. —This portion of the Park, so named in honour of Lord
Loftus, comprises the high land between the Illawarra Railway, where it crosses
the Park, and the lower portion of Port Hacking River. An area of about 200
acres has been cleared, all the good sheltering trees, Christmas-bush, waratahs,
gigantic lilies, &c., being preserved, to afford sites for recreation grounds, and it is
here that one of the annual Easter military encampments is now regularly held.
From the heights fine views are procurable of Port Hacking, the Pacific Ocean,
Botany Bay, Randwick, and portions of Sydney. Visitors to this portion of the
Park should proceed vid Loftus Junction, to National Park Station.
Hints to Visitors. —Those visiting the Park should take supplies of refresh-
ments. There are no restrictions imposed as regards traversing any portion of the
Park, but visitors are not allowed to injure any of the trees or shrubs, or carry
away any of the native plants. In leaving any of the roads it is unwise to travel
far without the assistance of a guide. The accompanying plan will assist visitors
in gaining a knowledge of the topography of the Park, which may be generally
described as high table-land, with deep gorges and rich flats covered with beautiful
foliage, bordering running streams of the purest fresh water.
Returning to the Illawarra Railway at Loftus Junction, we proceed across the
north-western portion of the Park, after which, crossing Bottle Creek, and entering
the district known as Bottle Forest, we arrive at
Heathcote (20 miles), where an extensive view of the surrounding district,
bounded in the distance by low hills, greets the eye. In the neighbourhood are to
be found numerous species of beautiful native plants and flowers, and a couple of
hours’ ramble in the vicinity of the station will enable the lover of nature to obtain,
during the season, many fine specimens of the Native Rose, Waratah, Everlasting
Flower, and other charming representatives of the Australian Flora. The Giant
Lily is found here in great profusion ; its stem, averaging about 7 or 8 feet in
height, and surmounted by an immense tuft of flowers, forming a brilliant spectacle.
In former years it covered the country about here in every direction, and even
now, after the ruthless destruction which has been ceaselessly going on, it is


sufficiently abundant to impart a distinctive character to the landscape. Leaving
the station the scenery becomes wilder and more romantic in appearance, an
extensive valley, with wooded slopes, bursting into view on the right, while, on
the left, as we approach Waterfall, an opening in one of the heavy cuttings reveals
a couple of immense boulders crowned with beautiful native plants. At
Waterfall (24 miles) we have another grand panoramic view of the
surrounding country, the crest of Mount Westmacott towering proudly on the
right. The station is situated near the south-western corner of the National
Park, to which there is an excellent road communicating with the whole of the
roads which give access to the more beautiful portions of the park. After leaving
Waterfall the most difficult portion of the line begins, the route being continued
through a series of cuttings and tunnels, several of the former being of a heavy
character. The breaks between these afford glimpses of delightful scenery, the
country between here and Helensburgh being specially exempted from the operation
of timber licenses. Passing a romantic valley to the left, we enter a deep cutting
through the solid rock, leading into a tunnel, about 726 feet in length, and ending
in another cutting, emerging from which we have a peep at an extremely picturesque
valley, with a smiling brook gracefully meandering through its midst, a series of
bold swelling eminences forming an effective background. To the right the scenery
is broken and rocky, and enriched with masses of ferns and other native plants,
enormous boulders being strewn about in every direction, the silent evidences
of stupendous physical convulsions in the remote past. More cuttings, more
enchanting views, and we enter another tunnel, 1,254 feet in length, after which
the country becomes more wildly beautiful, forming a fascinating combination of
thickly-wooded hills, luxuriant valleys, silvery creeks, and here and there a tiny
waterfall, the waters of which drop among thick masses of fern and moss. Passing
along a steep embankment, 62 feet in height, crossing a broad valley watered by a
winding creek, which escapes through a large culvert, a third tunnel, 264 feet in
length, is entered. Emerging from this we have another beautiful landscape,
consisting of mingled vale and forest, and then
Helensburgh (27 miles) is reached, A short distance from the station, a
fourth tunnel, over 2,000 feet in length, is traversed, followed by a couple of
embankments of considerable size, one being about 76 feet in height. These carry
the line across a wide gorge, at the bottom of which flow the waters of a large
creek, which, during periods of heavy rainfall, assumes the proportions of a large
river. Another tunnel, 264 feet in length, an embankment having in the centre a
long timber bridge spanning a creek, a sixth tunnel, 858 feet in length, and then
the line crosses the Port Hacking River, which has its rise among the hills on
the right, by means of a long timber bridge, with brick foundations, the spans
being about 42 feet each. Here the country assumes a yet more lovely appearance,
enrapturing the gaze with each changing feature, until, arriving at
Oxford (30 miles), the railway, looking from the right, is seen describing a bold
curve, thenceforward running along the coast, which it approaches here. Shortly
afterwards a seventh tunnel, over 5,000 feet in length, is traversed, emerging from
which the bright waters of the Pacific Ocean suddenly burst on our gaze. To the
right, lofty slopes of rock, covered in places with masses of forest, form, as it were,
the commencement of the Hlawarra Range, their base being covered with rich
luxuriant vegetation. We are now at the threshold of the Hlawarra District, the
“Garden of New South Wales,” declared by many to be the fairest and most
enchanting portion of the Colony, and which was as a sealed book to the majority
of tourists and holiday-makers until the opening of railway communication with
the metropolis, although for more than half a century it had been the chosen home


of the cedar-cutter, the dairy-farmer, and the miner. It was first traversed in
1797 by Mr. Clarke and others belonging to the crew of the “ Sydney Cove,”
which had become wrecked off the Furneaux Islands. Making their way to the
shore, near Cape Howe, in the ship’s longboat, the party explored thecountry
northwards as far as Wattamolla, a few miles south of Port Hacking, and now
forming portion of the National Park. On arriving in Sydney, Clarke spoke
favourably of the country seen by him, as did Bass, who visited it a few weeks
later in consequence of the representations made by Clarke. It is supposed to
have been approached from the land side about 1820, if not several years earlier,
the first-comers being a few cedar-cutters, who were followed in 1826 by a detach-
ment of the 40th Regiment, for the protection of the settlers against the
aborigines, who were beginning to be troublesome. Continuing our journey the
route becomes exceedingly interesting, fresh scenic beauties continually being dis-
covered while passing from one cutting to another. On our left we have the broad
blue waters of the sea stretching out in their sublime immensity towards the far
horizon, or dashing into snowy foam or glittering spray against the base of the cliff
over which the line is carried. As we approach Clifton, passing through the
district known as Stanwell Park, the inland scenery becomes more and more semi-
tropical in character, and has been likened to that of the Island of Ceylon, a lofty
wall of rock rising far above the tallest trees in the dense forest which conceals its
base. It is a favourite resort of fern collectors, the numerous glens, chasms, and
gullies being filled with innumerable varieties of beautiful ferns, delicate mosses,
and native plants of incomparable beauty. All who have visited this part of the
Colony are enthusiastic in their praise of its countless attractions. Sir Thomas
Mitchell warmly extolled the glories of its landscape, designating the whole district
as an earthly paradise; while more than one writer of eminence has described it as
one of the most enchanting regions on the face of the earth. Some distance before
reaching Clifton the line recedes in a westerly direction from the sea, enabling a
fine view of Coal Cliff, rising perpendicularly from the ocean to a height of about
1,350 feet, to be obtained from the left, until within half a mile of Clifton, when it
becomes concealed by the cuttings and tunnel through which the line proceeds.
It was here that coal was first discovered in New South Wales. In 1796, Flinders
and Bass had seen, lying under the high land and cliffs about here, black lumps,
apparently of slaty stone, rounded by attrition. In the following year Mr. Clarke
discovered similar lumps, with which he and his companions kindled a fire.
Bass was afterwards sent, as previously mentioned, to verify Clarke’s discoveries,
and passing to the south of Point Solander, on the southern side of Botany Bay, he
found in the face of a steep cliff washed by the sea a stratum of coal about 6 feet
thick, and extending southwards about 8 or 9 miles. But, says the chronicler,
“it was thought from its almost inaccessible position that no great advantage
could ever be derived from it. ” That opinion is not shared at the present day.
The seam, seen from the ocean, resembles a broad black band, running along the
face of the cliff about 20 feet above sea-level, and dipping as it proceeds north-
wards into the sea. It is worked by two adits driven into the face of the rock, a
jetty 500 feet in length running from the mouth of the mine into the ocean. This
has been described as forming one of the boldest and most remarkable under-
takings for working a mine to be found in any part of the world. Passing round
the north-western base of the cliff, crossing Coal Cliff Creek, and passing through
the tunnel before mentioned, we reach
Clifton —formerly North Clifton (35 miles). It is situated about 300 feet
above sea-level, and has a most picturesque appearance. It commands magnificent
views of the ocean, rivalled only by those from the summit of Coal Cliff, or from
the crests of the inland hills. At


South Clifton— late Clifton (36 miles)—the scenery becomes more majestic
and imposing. To the right are lofty walls of rock, rising with abrupt steepness
from the masses of forest which cover the slopes at their base, while to the left is
the vast watery expanse bounded on the extreme right by a thin line of coast,
broken by Long Point in the distance. Proceeding through beautiful country,
heavily timbered in places, we pass on the right a number of miners’ cottages,
several of which display, in their rude attempts at ornamentation, the latent
artistic instincts of their occupants. At
Austinmere (39 miles) the walls of rock approach the vicinity of the station,
giving it the appearance of being situated at the bottom of an immense chasm.
Here the indications of the coal-mining industry become more apparent, but as the
journey is continued the country resumes its wonted appearance, the land
between the railway and the sea being well grassed and undulating, while to the
right we have the now familiar spectacle of dense masses of forest, from which
springs a long line of lofty inaccessible cliffs. Between Austinmere and
Robinsville (40 miles) the line crosses Flanagan’s Creek, a stream running
from the hills into the sea. The township forms, as it were, a connecting link
between North Bulli and Bulli. Here the long line of cliff, which has gradually
receded from the sea all the way from Coal Cliff, suddenly sends out a spur in the
direction of Bulli, between which place and Austinmere the actual line of hills known
as the Illawarra Range may be said to commence. It runs from north to south
for several miles, generally lying within about 5 miles of the sea, but receding
further inland as it approaches the Shoalhaven River, where it becomes known as
the Cambewarra Range. The views obtained from the summit of the range are of
the grandest character, especially those in the direction of the sea. “The eye,” says
a writer, “tired of the surfeit of beauty that claims its admiration on every hand,
glances out from the many spots of vantage that face the Pacific, and then beneath,
and vanishing away in the distance, is spread out a panorama of almost unlimited
extent, with a narrow streak of sandy beach, and the distant blue of the ocean as a
background.” There are, indeed, few sights that more amply repay the fatigue of
ascent than those obtained from some of the hills of the Illawarra Range. A
visitor who encamped a few days on an elevated portion of the range declared that
he never beheld a sight more glorious or sublime than the rising of the sun on the
distant horizon. “It was far more impressive,” he said, “than sunrise on the
Righi, in Switzerland, which hundreds of tourists from all parts of the world
undergo considerable fatigue and inconvenience to behold. It is a spectacle which
can never become effaced from the memories of those who have enjoyed it, a picture
which a Milton alone could describe, or a Martin depict.”
Bulli (42 miles), like most of the townships in the district, is charmingly
situated between the hills and the sea. Here the Illawarra Range is within a
short distance of the coast, from which it imperceptibly recedes as it progresses
southward towards the Shoalhaven River, where it becomes merged in the Cam-
bewarra Range. The Bulli coal-mine is in the side of the mountain at the back
of the township, about 400 feet above sea-level, the adit, or tunnel, running about
2 miles into the heart of the mountain, and the coal being conveyed in trucks to
the ocean jetty, 450 feet in length, situated about H miles from the mouth of the
mine. At the summit of the range is the famous Bulli Pass, by which the place
is reached from the land side. The summit of the pass is 1,000 feet above sea-
level, and Judge M'Farland, alluding to the manner in which it was approached


VIEW FROM THE BULLI PASS.




from the direction of Appin and Campbelltown, says :—“ The transition from the
sandy soil and stunted trees, the brown heaths, coarse grass, wretched herbage,
and utter loneliness that one sees and feels before arriving at the Pass, to the rich
red soil, fig and gum-trees, cabbage-tree and other palms, fem-trees and ferns,
sassafras and ‘lilly pillies,’ trailing vines, coral-trees and sweet briar, note of birds,
and hum of insects, that burst on the eye and ear from the moment it is gained,
until one arrives at the foot, is almost incredible —so great and instantaneous is it;
for the Pass, curving along the mountain’s brow, winds its way amid earth and
rocks, precipitous cuttings, and overhanging trees, shrubs, and plants on the right,
and upon the left, hundreds of feet below, are deep abysses of forest rolling from
you to the sea, and each covered by innumerable trees, palms, myrtles, and vines,
impenetrable bush and quivering foliage of endless variety, outline, and beauty ;
while the wailing and flashing of the sea can be seen and heard at many a point,
as it frets against the beach or stretches to the far horizon; and the north-eastern
shores of Illawarra, its strands and promontories, knolls and meadows, homes and
villages, sweep inwards, and complete the magic picture.” Between Bulli and
Bellambi the line approaches rather closely to the sea, thence continuing in a
straight line to Wollongong. After leaving Bulli we have patches of rich undu-
lating land between the railway and the ocean, while to the right, at the base of
the towering cliffs, are magnificent clusters of tree-ferns, bangalows, and cabbage-
tree palms. Passing the decaying stem of one of the former giants of the forest,
a race which are rapidly disappearing under the axe of the woodman, and crossing
the tramway by which coal is conveyed from the South Bulli mine to the ocean
jetty, we reach
Bellambi (44 miles), where the eye ranges over an extensive tract of open
country, sheltered by extensive woods from the sea-breezes, and protected on the
west by the Illawarra Range, the rugged summits of which assume new and
fanciful shapes and proportions as the point of view becomes changed ; one of the
peaks, which drops suddenly towards the south, being unpoetically designated the
“Broker’s Nose,” and giving its name to a coal-mine in its vicinity. At
Corrimal (45 miles), so called by reason of the mountain similarly named in
the immediate neighbourhood, the scenery is simply a continuation of that at
Bellambi, the cabbage-tree palm being abundant in the direction of the hills.
Para Meadow —formerly Cramsville (46 miles)—derives its name from Para
Creek, a picturesque stream flowing from the heights of Mount Keira into the sea
near here. The country around the station is open, and is bounded on the right
by the ranges which here assume majestic proportions, one of the principal peaks
being Mount Kembla, which appears to isolate itself from the adjoining heights.
From hence to
Wollongong (48 miles), the eyes ceaselessly discover fresh scenic attractions,
especially to the right of the line, where, amid the wealth of sub-tropical vegetation
which forms the predominating feature of the landscape, the cabbage-tree palm is
ceaselessly conspicuous. Nowhere in the Colony does the tree grow so abundantly
or so luxuriantly as in the Illawarra District. It is to be seen at all heights, from
1 foot up to 60, 70, or 80 feet. During the earlier stages of its growth it is very
bushy or leafy, but when it, attains a height of about 20 feet the lower leaves drop
off, and the stem shoots up tall, straight, and slender, but supple as a thin piece of
whalebone, with a thick mass of foliage clumped cabbage-shape at the top,
whence its name. Formerly the leaves were much used for making cabbage-tree
hats, for which purpose they were boiled, bleached, and otherwise prepared.
The scenery about Wollongong is exquisitely beautiful, and no words can do


justice to its surpassing loveliness. The town itself the harbour, which
has been greatly improved and enlarged by the construction of a breakwater
at the entrance. At the end of the breakwater there is a lighthouse to guide ships
into the harbour. The town is well built, has numerous substantially-constructed
public and private buildings, and furnishes numerous unmistakable indications of
commercial and industrial prosperity. It is situated at the base of Mount Keira, a
lofty hill or cliff, forming portion of the Illawarraßange, and rising to a height of over
1,500 feet. For a considerable portion of its elevation it is perfectly perpendicular,
and overhangs the fertile valley below. The old mail-road from Sydney, which now
descends the range at Bulli, formerly came this way ; the road, which was cut in
the face of the cliff, being steep and dangerous, although enabling those using it to
obtain many fine views of the surrounding country. The Illawarra Range, it may
be mentioned, forms the eastern boundary of the great reserve for the metropolitan
water supply. The coal-mines here are situated about 600 feet above sea-level,
and are connected by steam tramways with the staiths in the harbour, the seams
of coal ranging in thickness from sto 17 feet each. One remarkable feature of Lie
district is that, apart from the tramways, the shafts and debris of coal near the
mines, there is nothing to indicate to a casual observer the presence of a coal-field,
“ though the whole mountain range, from Keira to Bulli, is believed to be a bed
of coal, for the earth is as red, the grass as rich, and the foliage as green as if there
were not a pound of coal in the district.” Leaving Wollongong the line bends to
the west, having on its right the waters of Tom Thumb Lagoon, so called from the
little boat, the “ Tom Thumb,” in which Bass and Flinders prosecuted their dis-
coveries along this portion of the coast in 1796. , Beyond the lagoon are the Five
Islands, agroup of small islets ; and southward, where the coast projects into the
ocoan, is Red Point, so named by Captain Cook from the colour of the land about
it. Close to here is an islet known as Red Point Island. To the right, Mount
Kembla is seen in all its sublime majesty. It is supposed to be the Hat Hills
mentioned by Cook, who, in his Journal, says that “to the north-west of Red
Point, and a little way inland, stands a round hill, whose top looks like the crown
of a hat.” In the foreground stands, in solitary state, one of the enormous fig-
trees so numerous in the district, especially in the vicinity of the hills that rise
behind Kiama. Some of these trees are said to be over 200 years old. The
country as we approach
Ux ANderra (52 miles) is beautifully undulating in places, and picturesquely
wooded in others. The village is prettily situated, and after leaving the station
the line bends still further in a westerly direction, for the purpose of skirting the
waters of Lake Illawarra on the left. The country between the railway and the
sea resembles the famous Sussex Downs, and takes rank among the richest
pastoral land in the Colony. Crossing American Creek, a beautiful stream,
having its rise in the mountains, and which aids largely in imparting increased
loveliness to the scene, its vicinity being rich in kerosene shale, works for the pro-
duction of the oil having been established many years ago at a height of 529 feet
above sea-level, we have another magnificent view of Mount Kembla, and of the
grandly-spreading range of which it forms such a striking feature. To the left we
have a series of fine undulating grassy plains, bounded by low hills, the waters of
Charcoal Creek flowing for some distance by the side of the line, by which they
are finally crossed. To the left, as we approach Dapto, the swelling outline of
Mount Kembla becomes bolder, its wooded slopes forming an imposing background
to the rocky scenery at the base. The mountain overlooks townships of
Kembla and Dapto, the coal from the mines being conveyed by a railway, about 6
miles in length, from their entrance to Wollongong, passing through a romantic
valley, in which are countless nooks and gullies crowded with beautiful shrubs,
plants, and trees.


Dapto (56 miles) will long be associated with the name of William Beach, the
redoubtable sculler, whose home is situated on Mullet Creek, near the waters of
Lake Illawarra, which are not seen from the line until the vicinity of Shellharbour
is approached. Clifford, another aquatic celebrity, was one of Beach’s neigh-
bours. The country around here, like nearly the whole of the available land in
the Illawarra District, is used principally for dairy-farming, immense quantities of
butter and other dairy produce being sent annually from Wollongong, Kiama, and
other ports, as well as by railway, to Sydney. Formerly extensive forests of cedar
existed along the coast, but these have gradually disappeared, and comparatively
few trees of large size remain. The scenery to the right of the line is of the
grandest character, rivalling in majestic beauty the mountainous regions of
Central Europe. At
Yallah— formerly Albion Park (59 miles). The surrounding country,
watered by several creeks, has a richly luxuriant appearance, the mountain ranges
to the right assuming vaster and more imposing proportions as they recede from the
coast. Shortly after leaving the station we have a peep at the broad glittering
surface of Lake Illawarra, the famous sheet of water on which Beach gained the
skill and experience which aided him in wresting the Sculline Championship of
the World from the hitherto invincible Edward Hanlan. It is an inlet, or wide
ai’in of the sea, about 10 miles in length by 5 in width, and much frequented by
those fond of boating and shooting. There are also fine oyster-beds on the shores
of the lake, which is entered from the sea by a narrow channel, through which
Bass and Flinders rowed in 1796. “ Many a pleasant hour,” we are told, “ may
be spent in rowing over the lake, or wandering by iis shores ; when seen from its
eastern banks as the sun is sinking beyond the western range, and the shades of
evening are mingling with the shadows of the mountains, these last seem to spring
from the edge of the lake, and to guard its peaceful repose. ”
Albion Park —formerly Oak Flats (61 miles) —is situated on the Macquarie
River, or rivulet, a stream flowing from the Wingecarribee Swamp into Lake
Illawarra, and is surrounded by rich grassy flats, bounded on the right by the
receding mountain ranges. Continuing, our course through a rich pastoral country,
in portions of which large tracts of woodland are being ringbarked, we again
approach the coast at
Shellharbour (66 miles), a pretty seaport, situated at the head of a bay
midway between Lake Illawarra and Point Bass. The latter extends some dis-
tance into the ocean, and has a peculiar appearance by reason of the alternate
tracts of thick dark scrub and of short green grass which cover its surface.
Leaving the station, we have the ocean again coming into view, our gaze being
interrupted only by a series of cuttings through the solid rock forming portion of
the cliffs rising above the sandy beaches. Soon we are crossing the Minumurra,
a stream having its rise in the distant range, and flowing past the township of
Jamberoo into the sea. Opposite to where it joins the sea is a rocky islet, from
which, soon after the wreck of the “Rangoon,” in 1870, a party of men were
rescued, after three days’ exposure to the fury of the elements, by one of the
settlers, who risked his life to save theirs. On the beach between the river and
Point Bass gold has been found, but not in payable quantities. To the right, the
scenery is very beautiful, consisting of grandly swelling uplands bounded by a vast
amphitheatre of distant hills, whose serrated outlines appear softened amid the
bluish haze which surrounds their summits. Among the nearer eminences is
Mount Terry, so called from the owner of the rich estate on which it is situated.
Occasionally the stumps of immense cedars, relics of the once far-spreading


primeval forest, are seen. Shortly afterwards we have a fine view of the Saddle-
back Mountain, which rises at the rear of Kiama. Turning again to the left, we
catch sight of the rocky promontory which shelters the bay, or inlet, on which
the township is situated, and a few minutes afterwards we reach a broad expanse
of sandy beach, not unlike that at Manly, known as Porter Garden Beach, or
North Kiama (70 miles), where, within a few yards of the ocean, the line at
present terminates, Kiama which is about 1 mile distant, being approached by a road
cut through the basaltic rock. Kiama is one of the prettiest coastal towns in the
Colony, and promises to become at no distant period a favourite sea-side resort.
At the back of the township rise the Saddleback Mountains, forming portion of the
Illawarra Range, which partially surround the town, enclosing a picturesque district
of grassy vales, winding creeks, and semi-tropical vegetation. On the promontory
which protects the southern side of the harbour is the famous Blow Hole. It is a
cave in the rock, having an opening above, through which the sea, in rough weather,
sends immense gusts of foam or spray, often to a great height above the surface.
It was first seen by Bass, in 1797. In his description of this curious natural
phenomenon he says that, being obliged to stop, during his coasting voyage, in a
small bight, a little south of Alowrie, as Illawarra was formerly called, he, on
looking round amongst the black rocks, scattered over a hollow circular space,
behind the shore, found a hole of 25 or 30 feet in diameter, into which the sea
rushed by a subterraneous passage. Many pleasant excursions may be made from
Kiama, one of the most interesting being that to Jamberoo, 5 miles distant, from
whence the Whispering Gallery may be reached by a walk or drive of about 3 miles.
It consists of a romantic chasm, somewhat in the shape of a horseshoe, the rocky
walls of which rise precipitously to the height of about 120 feet, and having a
width of about 300 feet where most widely apart. Into this opening runs a creek,
forming a picturesque waterfall in its descent, and escaping among the boulders
and ferns which line the bottom of the chasm. The scene has been thus graphically
described:—“Here and there, from out of the great masses of fallen rock that strew
the floor of this sunken amphitheatre (and are decked with many a staghorn fern),
the tall sassafras, the gleaming myrtle, and an occasional fig rear themselves aloft,
and fill the chasm from cliff to cliff with their leafy branches, and the twining
vines that hang from them on every side to the ground below, green banners
yielding to every breath of air, and imparting a delicious sense of coolness. The
descent to the chasm is a little to the right of the waterfall, where the ledges
of the former begin to contract, down to the ‘Parson’s Steps,’saplings resting
between crevices in the cliff, and a straight tree springing from the edge of a
narrow stony path that detaches itself from the cliff, about 5 feet from the top,
and winds to the bottom; down the ‘ Giant’s Stairs, a tunnel, either cleft through
towering rock or having the original cliff on the left, and on the right enormous
blocks reft from its side, and resting, as they fell, in upright walls; next over
rough shingle and great stones, ropes of vine crossing the path at every step, or
suspended in coils like writhing snakes. When the descent is accomplished, and
the bed is gained, a wondrous scene presents itself. The stream that had dis-
appeared from the creek above is seen trickling down the face of a sheer precipice
of about 100 feet, and then falling over the front of a cave some 20 feet in height,
which the elements have scooped into the base of the rock, from the limit of the
precipice to the bed of the chasm. The water strikes upon a confused heap
of black, dripping boulders, sinks among them, and is hid from sight until it
emerges a good way down the ravine, and at a still lower level, but which cannot
be reached—directly at least—so big, high, and steep are the intervening rocks
that block the way. Between the boulders on which the stream descends and
the side of the cave there is a curving space of half a dozen yards, from which


THE BLOW HOLE, KIAMA.




one can scan the falling spray, the mounds of debris raised by the rushing
waters, after heavy rain, the great rocks and tall trees, the trailing vines and rich
ferns that strew the bed, and fill the space enclosed by the surrounding cliffs, and
revel at the same time in the lullaby of the fall, the glinting sunlight and dark
shadows that swell, quiver, and flit from side to side. The facility with which the
voice is carried along the smooth walls of the cliffs and cave have earned for the
place its name of ‘ Whispering Gallery,’ but this is the least of its attractions.”
Excursions may also be made to Shoalhaven and many other places.
THE SHOALHAVEN DISTRICT.
From Kiama almost every portion of the fertile region known as the Shoalhaven
District may be reached by coach or other licensed vehicle. This part of the
Colony is so called by reason of its being watered by the Shoalhaven River, which
was discovered by Bass during his voyage of exploration along the south coast.
He had previously visited its mouth, which he designated “ shoals-haven,” in con-
sequence of its being mostly shoaled up with sand, and the inner portions with
sand and mud, leaving only a small channel, sufficiently deep for boats. While
making an inland trip from the coast, Bass fell in with the river, and observed the
fertile character of its banks, which he attributed to frequent inundations. The
river is about 260 miles in length, having its rise in an extensive swamp, nearly
3,000 feet above sea level, on the northern side ef the Great Dividing Range, near
Big Badja Mountain. After flowing a considerable distance in the direction of
Marulen, the river bends to the eastward, entering the sea a few miles south
of Kiama. It is fed by numerous streams, one of the largest being Broughton
Creek. Many of these creeks are auriferous, as is the upper portion of the river,
which flows through scenery of a strangely wild and magnificent character, part
of its course being through stupendous gorges from 500 to 1,500 feet in height, the
sides in several places being almost perpendicular. As the river approaches the
coast it widens and becomes navigable for about 12 miles from its mouth. The
lower portion of the Shoalhaven passes through an extensive region of rich low-
lying agricultural land, nearly all of which has become occupied for farming pur-
poses, enormous quantities of cereals, vegetables, and dairy produce being sent
annually to Sydney and other markets. Starting from Kiama, a pleasant trip
may be made to
Gerringong, about 10 miles by coach, in a southerly direction along the
coast, the road running so close to the sea that nearly every bay and headland,
lawn, slope, and vale, field, and strip of land, homestead, and hut, lying between
them, may be overlooked. Some of the valleys about here are lovely, one,
situated near Gerringong, recalling that described by Dr. Johnson in his story of
Rasselas. The township itself is delightfully situated, being “rich in dairy
farms, enclosed by strand, sea, and mountain, and fronted by the hills that
divide it from the ‘ Seven-mile Beach,’ the ‘Brush,’ the ‘ Foxground,’ and the
farms which stretch towards Broughton Creek.” Beyond Gerringong is the
Crooked River, on the opposite side of which begins the Seven-mile Beach, ex-
tending to the mouth of the Shoalhaven, which, when the tide is well out, “can-
not be surpassed as a cantering or trotting ground, so smooth and so firm is it. ”
From Gerringong a pleasant trip may be made to
Broughton Creek, although the route is a very hilly one. It is situated on
the stream from which it is named, and which was so called from its discoverer,
one of the early settlers in the district. The surrounding country is mountainous,
several of the higher peaks, including Coolangatta, Good Dog, and Curry’s Moun-
tain, being from 1,000 to 1,200 feet above sea-level. Coal and copper have been


found in the ranges, hut the leading industries of the district are those connected
with dairy farming, butter, cheese, and pigs forming the staple articles of produce.
Large quantities of maize and other cereals, potatoes, &c., are also raised each
season, both here and in Kangaroo Valley, Barrangarry, Woodhill, Broughton
Vale, Broughton Village, Cambewarra, and other parts of the surrounding neigh-
bourhood. Broughton Creek joins the Shoalhaven nearly opposite to
Nowra, the principal township of the Shoalhaven district, which is situated
on the southern side of the river, about 26 miles from Kiatna, and 38 miles from
Moss Vale. It is built above flood level, and, therefore, safe from the inunda-
tions to which the low-lying lands on either side of the river are frequently ex-
posed. These lie principally between Nowra and the sea, the country to the west
being rugged and hilly. The river, which here has a width of over 1,000 feet, is
crossed by a handsome iron bridge, one of the longest in Australia, erected at a
cost of £42,000. “The town, from its situation on a gently sloping eminence,
bounded on the north by the Shoalhaven River, which swarms with fish, and on
the west by Nowra Creek, with the superb beauties of tropical plant life,
including an extensive variety of the most delicate ferns which adorn its banks,
commands a splendid view of the rich pastoral and agricultural alluvial flats of
Shoalhaven, of the unsurpassed mountain and water scenery along the coast
range, from Saddleback north to Kiama, and south-west to the mist-covered peaks
through which the Upper Shoalhaven leaps along in its serpentine course, all
forming a panorama matchless in the Colony for the varied beauties of settled and
unsettled country that it contains.”
Between the mouth of the Shoalhaven and Ulladulla, are Crookhaven,
which is connected by a canal with the Shoalhaven, and forms the real practical
entrance to the river, Greenwell Point being the stopping-place of the Sydney
steamers ; Jervis Bay, discovered by Bass in Angust, 1791, and having room for
about 200 vessels, being well sheltered from all winds; Sussex Haven, south of
St. George’s Cape, on which is a light-house, and connected by a small opening
with St. George’s Basin, a small lake, fed by the Mooria-Mooria and Wandrawan-
dean Creeks ; and Green Island, a rocky islet, lying off the entrance to the Con-
jurong Lake. The harbour at Ulladulla is about a mile in length by half a mile in
width, and well protected by high land, with a sufficient depth of water for large
ships, the entrance being indicated by an iron light-house. From here large quan-
tities of dairy produce are annually sent to Sydney, the whole district between
the coast range and the sea being extremely fertile. The coast range, extending
from the Shoalhaven southward in the direction of the Moruya River, forming a
grand background to the scenery west of Ulladulla, is known as the Budewang or
Curroo billy or Corrock-billy range, the loftiest peak, Mount Budewang, being
3,800 feet above sea level. Gold has been found in portions of the range, but the
country has never been systematically prospected.
Many other places might be mentioned, but those abovenamed will suffice to
illustrate the attractions afforded by the Shoalhaven district to the lovers of beau-
tiful scenery. The country is new to the tourist, but with the extension of the
Illawarra railway to Kiama its manifold charms are certain to become more widely
known. To those fond of adventure the exploration of the country between the
Shoalhaven district and Moss Vale affords a task full of pleasurable excitement,
although it should not be attempted without the assistance of some one tolerably
well acquainted vvith the country. Sport of every description is abundant. The
disciple of Izak Walton will find ample opportunities of indulging his piscatorial
tastes on the Shoalhaven and its numerous tributaries, while the lover of the gun
can exercise his skill on the shores of the lagoons near the sea or in the dense
forests which clothe the sides of the lofty mountain ranges that look grandly down
on the garden of New South Wales.


TOWNSHIPS, &C.,
NEAR
RAILWAY STATIONS ON THE SOUTH, SOUTH-WESTERN,
AND ILLAWARRA LINES,
THEIR BRANCHES.




TOWNSHIPS, Etc.,
accessible by coach or otherwise from Railway Stations on the Southern, South-
western, and Illawarra Lines and their Branches.
FXote. —Travellers to and from places situated between Bourke and Blayney,
and Albury and Harden, should proceed via Blayney or Harden respectively, ine
following stations or platforms can be reached by rail by the Western Line via
Blayney, or by the Southern Line via Harden ;—Carcoar, Mandurama, Lyndhurst,
Fernside (late Baker’s), Myalla (late Burley Jackey), Woodstock, Holmwood,
Cowra, Koorawatha, Crowther, Bendick Morell, Monteagle, Burrangong, Toung,
King’s Yale, Demondrille Junction, Murrumburrah, and Harden.]
Railway Station.
Route.
Adaminby
Adelong
Adelong Grossing.
Annandale
Appin..
Araluen
Argoon
Ballababa .
Ballanafad.
Balranald .
Banks town.
Bannaby .
Barmedman
Bargo
Barren] oey
Barwang
Bateman’s Bay ....
Baulkham Hills .
Beaconsfield .......
Bega
Bell’s Creek
Belmont Forest....
Belmore
Bengalia.
Bermagui
Berrellan
Berrigan...
Berrima
Berry (formerly
Broughton Creek)
Bexley
Cooma
Gundagai
Gundagai
Petersham or
Stanmore.
Campbelltown .
Tarago
Jerilderie
Tarago
Bungendore
Hay
Burwood ..,
Goulburn ...
Cootamundra
Picton
Moss Vale.
Murrumburrah
Tarago
Parramatta
Burwood ..
Cooma .
Tarago .
Gunning
Ashfield
Tarago .
Tarago ....
Moss Yale.
Jerilderie .
Moss Vale.
Kiama ....
Rockdale
Coach, 26 miles,
» 23 ~
„ 11 »
„ 10 „
„ 52 ~
»» 4/ ~
„ 47 » „
~ 24 „ thence 7 miles.
„ 125 „
„ 5 „
„ 28 „ to Taralga, thence 10 miles
>t 62 ~ via Temora.
10 miles.
Coach, 21 miles.
16 miles.
Coach, 65 miles, thence 5 miles.
»> 5 ~
1 mile.
Coach, 74 miles.
„ 49 „
” 5 :: via Canterbury.
„ 91 „ „
~ 138 ~ viaCobargo, thence 2 miles.
Coach, 38 miles, thence 2 miles ; from
Kiama, 30 miles, thence 4 miles.
Coach, 30 miles.
~ 6 „
„ 20 „
1 mile»


Bigga ...
Big Hill
Bimbi. „
Binda ...
Blakney Creek
Blowering
Boambola
Bobundurah ...
Bodella
Bolong or Bomadary
Bombala
Bookham .
Booligal ....
Booroorban
Boro
Bowna
Braidwood ~
Brendabella
Brogo
Broken Hill
Broughton Creek
(see Berry).
Brownlow Hill ....
Brown Mountain .
Brownsville
Brucedale
Brundah Creek
Brungle
Buckley’s Crossing
Bull Plain ...........
Bungonia ..,
Bungowanna
Burns
Goulburn
Marulen
Young ..
Goulburn
Gunning
Gundagai
Yass
Burnt Yards
Burragorang
Burrawang...
Burner
Burrowa
Burrumbuttock
Cooma
Tarago ....
Moss Vale.
Cooma
Bowning ....
Hay ..
Hay
Cooma
Albury
Tarago
Queanbeyan.,
Cooma ,
Camden.
Cooma ..
Dapto ,
Bomen, or
Wagga Wagga.
Young
Gundagai
Cooma
Albury
Marulen
Albury
Wagga Wagga,..
Carcoar
Picton
Moss Vale.
Moss Vale.
Binalong
Albury .
Coach, 41 miles, thence 26 miles.
15 miles.
Coach, 39 miles, via Morangarell.
.. 51 „
~ 8 ~ to Dalton, thence 17 miles.
48 „
14 miles.
Coach, 25 miles.
99 9 9
Coach, 38 miles to Nowra, thence 4 miles ;
from Kiama, 26 miles to Nowra, thence
4 miles.
Coach, 54 miles.
„ 12 „
„ 50 „
„ 26 „
» 8 ~
„ 12 „
„ 30 „
~ 26 ~ thence 18 miles.
» 'B4 „
Coach, 462 miles, or via Albury, Melbourne,
and Adelaide.
5 miles.
Coach, 49 miles.
1 mile.
Thence 1 mile.
Coach, 38 miles to Grenfell, thence 8 miles.
19 miles.
Coach, 32 miles.
Coach, 40 miles to Corowa, thence 32 miles.
Corowa can also be reached by Victorian
rail, via Wodonga and. Springs.
12 miles.
Coach, 10 miles.
Coach, 59 miles to Tumberumba, thence 6
miles.
8 miles.
15 „
Coach, 10 miles.
Coach, 38 miles, thence 18 miles; from
Kiama, 26 miles, thence .18 miles.
Coach, 18 miles.
18 miles.
Cambewarra Moss Vale
Coach, 34 miles.


Railway Station,
Canberra
Candelo .
Canterbury ~
Captain’s Flat
Caraboot
Carnsdale .
Castle Hill.
Cataract....
Cathcart
Cavan ..
Cawley’s Creek.
Charleyong ....
Chidowla
Cobargo
Cobitty
Cochrane Creek
Collector
Collingallie
Conargo
Concord
Ooryola
Cookardina.
Coree
Corowa
Corrowong.
Corunna
Cowans
Cox’s River
Craigie ....
Crookwell
Cross Roads
Cullinga
Cunningham
Currawaug..
Curraweela..,
Dalton
Darlington Point
Day Dream
Queanbeyan
Cooma
Ashfield,.
Bungendore ..
Wagga Wagga
Albury .....
Parramatta
Douglas
Cooma
Yass .
Waterfall
Tarago ...
Bowning
Cooma
Narellan
Jerilderie
Yarra....
Wagga Wagga.
Jerilderie
Burwood
Moss Yale.
Culcairn .
Jerilderie
Albury ..
Cooma
Tarago
Cootamundra
Picton ..
Cooma
Goulburn
Moss Vale.
Wallendbeen
Cunningar....
Goulburn
Goulburn .
Gunning .
Darlington
Hay
11 miles.
6 „
Route.
Coach, 7 miles; from Yass, 38 miles.
76 „
1 mile.
Coach, 24 miles.
Coach, 51 miles to Little Billabong, thence
20 miles ; from Gundagai, 67 miles,
thence 20 miles.
Coach, 20 miles, thence 29 miles.
.. 6 „
6 miles.
Coach, 62 miles.
20 miles.
2 ~
Coach, 30 miles to Braidvvood, thence 16
miles.
Coach, 12 miles to Bookham, thence 12
miles,
Coach, 91 miles.
5 miles.
Coach, 95 miles ; from Hay, 115 miles.
8 miles ; from Breadalbane, 10 miles.
16 miles.
Coach, 46 miles.
2 miles.
Coach, 63 miles; from Kiama, 53 miles.
» 16 „
Coach, 20 miles.
Coach, 40 miles. Can also be reached by
Victorian rail, via Wodonga and Springs.
Coach, 82 miles, via Delegate, thence 16
miles.
Coach, miles to Bodella, thence 16 miles.
>» 15
30 miles.
Coach, 54 miles to Bombala, thence 15
miles.
Coach, 24 miles ; coach, via Laggan, 35
miles.
22 miles.
Coach, 30 miles to Taralga, thence 10 miles.
„ 8 „
» 8 ~
Thence, via Wilcannia; or via Albury,
Melbourne, and Adelaide.


Railway Station.
Daysdale
Delegate
Deniliquin
Dight’s Forest
Downside
Druitt Town ~
Dural
Eden
Enfield
Eurobodalla
Euringilly ..
Euston
Fairfield (Krawarie)
Fig Tree
Forbes
Foxlow
French Park
Frogmore ..
Fullarton ..
Garryowen.,
Gegedzerick
Germanton .
Gerringong..
Gilmore
Ginnindera,.
Gnalta
Gocup
Golspie
Good Hope
Goomfcargona ...
Graham
Grahamstown ~
Greenfield Farm
Greenwell Point
Greenwich Park
Grenfell
Gullen .
Gunbar
Gundaroo
Gurrundah.
Haslem’s Creek
Hillas Creek
Jerilderie
Cooma ..
Hay
Albury ,
Wagga Wagga,
Burwood
Parramatta
Cooma
Ashfield.
Tarago .
Illabo
Hay
Tarago
Wollongong
Borenore ...
Bungendore
The Rock ...
Binalong ...
Goulburn
Gundagai
Cooma ..
Culcairn
Kiama ..
Gundagai
Yass
Hay .....
Gundagai
Goulburn
Yass
Gerogery .
Cowra ....
Gundagai .
Yass
Moss Vale.
Marulen
Young ..
Goulburn
Hay ....
Gunning
Breadalbane....
Rookwood.
Gundagai
8 miles.
Route.
Coach, 49 miles.
j » 82 ~
~ 80 miles ; from Jerilderie, 54 miles.
j> 10 ))
„ 6 ~
’Bus, 3 ~
Coach, 13 ~
„ 108 „
2 miles.
Coach, 10 miles.
10 miles.
Coach, 282 miles,
~ 45 ~ thence 21 miles.
„ 3 „
~ 67 ~ from Cowra, 58 miles.
16 „
4 miles.
Coach, 23 miles,
99' 45 „
67 miles ; from Wagga Wagga, 51 miles.
Coach, 20 miles.
„ 17 „
„ 10 „
» 30 ~
j> 30 ~
„ 328 „
» 10
»> 38 ~
15 miles.
30 miles.
Coach, 16 miles,
17 miles.
Coach, 38 miles, thence 8 miles; from
Kiama, 26 miles, thence 8 miles.
16 miles.
Coach, 38 miles ; from Cowra, 24 miles.
5*
~ 40 miles; from Carrathool, 40 miles.
Coach, 20 miles; from Queanbeyan, 24
miles.
\ mile.
Coach, 25 miles.


Railway Station.
Hillston
Holt’s Flat.
Hoskins Town
Howlong
Huskisson
Iron Cove Bridge .
Ivanhoe
Jamberoo
Jembaicumbene...
Jerrong
Jindabyne
Jindera ....
Joadja Creek.
Jugiong
Kameruka
Kangaloon
Kangaroo Valley
Khancoban
Kiandra
King’s Grove.
Kiora
Krawarree (Fair
field).
Kyamba
Laggan ....
Lanyon ....
Leichhardt.
Little Billabong
Little Bombay ~
Long Reach .....
Lower Gandaroo
Lowesdale
Luntsvale
Lyttleton
Major’s Creek
Mana
Mangopla
Maracket
Marengo..
Marsden’s
Hay .
Cooma
Bungendore
Albury
Kiama
Ashfield.
Hay ....
Moss Yale.
Tarago ...
Goulburn
Cooma ...
Albury ...
Mittagong
Coolac ...
Cooma
Bowral
Moss Vale.
Gundagai .
Cooma ....
Ashfield.
Tarago
Tarago
Wagga Wagga
Goulburn
Queanbeyan...
Petersham ...
Wagga Wagga
Tarago
Marulen
Gunning
Jerilderie
Wagga Wagga
Cooma
Tarago
Tarago
Wagga Wagga
Albury *
Young
Young
1 mile.
Route.
90 miles ; from Carrathool, 75 miles.
Coach, 34 miles.
~ 6 ~ thence 3 miles.
Coach, 20 miles, or coach from Gerogery,
15 miles.
Coach, 39 miles to Tomerang, thence 8 miles.
Coach, 139 miles.
Coach, 34 miles, or coach from Kiama, 6
miles.
Coach, 18 miles.
» 36 ~
„ 42 „
~ 20 ~ to Berridale, thence 15 miles.
» 10 ~
Tramway, 16 miles.
14 miles.
Coach, 61 miles, via Lyttleton or Bega.
10 miles.
Coach, 23 miles.
~ 113 thence 50 miles.
„ 50 ;,
»> •* »
~ 81 ~ thence 2 miles.
~ 45 ~ thence 21 miles.
~ 36 miles ; from Gundagai, 52 miles.
„ 27 „
„ 16 „
1 mile.
Coach, 50 miles ; from Culcairn, 30 miles.
~ 30 „ thence 6 miles.
8 miles.
Coach, 23 miles.
Vehicle, 6 miles.
Coach, 40 miles.
j» 49 ~
>» 45 ~
„ 22 „
„ 21 „
„ 79 „
„ 12 miles ; Binalong, 18 miles.
» 75 ~


Marshall Mount
Mathoura
Merimbula
Merry bung
Merilla
Middle Ann ..
Milburn Creek
Milparinka
Milton
Mitta Mitta ..
Moaraa
Mount Adrah
~ Browne
„ Gipps
~, Hope
~ Keira
~ Kembla....
~ Macdonald
~ Macquarie.
~ Hunter
Creek.
Mullenderree.
Mulloon
Murraguldrie
Railway Station.
Dapto
Hay .
Hay ~
Tarago
Hay ..
Cooma
Hay ..
Breadalbane
Goulburn ...
Woodstock
Hay
Moss Vale.
Bethungra
Hay .......
Tarago
Albury
Hay
Bungendore ...
Tarago
Young .
Tarago .
Culcairn
Hay .. .
Gundagai
Hay
Hay .....
Hay
Wollongong
Wollongong
Woodstock
Blayney
Camden.
Tarago ..
Tarago ~
Albury ~
Goulburn
Borenore
Wagga Wagga
12 miles.
6 „
Route.
4 miles.
Coach,. 80 miles to Deniliquin, thence 22
miles by rail; from Jerilderie, 54 miles
to Deniliquin, thence by rail.
Coach, 36 miles.
„ 8 ~ to Boro, thence 12 miles.
„ 355 „
~ 104 thence 10 miles.
Coach, via Hillstone, or from Carrathool.
7 miles.
Coach, 11 miles.
„ 433 „
~ 74 miles ; from Kiama, 62 miles.
12 miles.
Coach, 80 miles to Deniliquin, thence rail
44 miles ; from Jerilderie, 54 miles to
Deniliquin, thence by rail.
Coach, 97 miles.
48 miles.
(See Mathoura.)
Coach, 10 miles.
Coach, 30 miles to Braidwood, thence 6
miles.
Coach, 46 miles.
„ 81 „
~ 9 ~
~ 105 „
Coach, 145 miles ; from Albury about same
distance. . ....
Coach, 23 miles, thence 13 miles.
. ~ 433 . „ thence 6 „
Coach, 340 miles, or via Albury, Melbourne,
and Adelaide.
Coach, 163 miles.
3 miles.
’Bus, 5 miles.
Coach, 21 miles.
17 miles.
Coach, 79 miles.
. ~ 8. „ to Boro, thence 10 miles.
to „
„ 72 „
„ 31 „
Coach, 21 miles to Tarcutta, thence 30
miles.


Kailway Station.
Murray Hut
Murrumbateman
Myrtleville
Nangus .
Narrawa.
Nelligen
Nerriga
Nerrigundah
Nimity belle
Noorong
North Gobarlong
North Berry Jerry
Nowra
Numba
Numbugga...
Numerallan
Ournie.
Oxley .
Pambula.
Parkesburne
Peakhurst ..
Peelwood
Pejar
Perricoota
Pooncarie
Port Hacking
Prospect
Purnamoota
Pyree
Rankin’s Springs
Reedy Flat
Reidsdale
Reid’s Flat.
Robertson .
Rock Flat .
Rocky Hall
Jerilderie
Yass
Goulburn
Gundagai
Goulburn
Tarago
Tarago
Tarago
Cooma
Hay ..
Coolac
Coolaman .
Moss Vale
Moss Yale.
Cooma
Cooma
Picton
Albury
Hay ..
Cooma
Breadalbane.
Hurstville....
Goulburn ....
Goulburn
Hay
Hay
Kogarah
Fairfield
Moss Vale.
Whitton .
Gundagai .
Tarago ....
Binalong .
Moss Vale.
Cooma ....
Cooma
Route.
Coach, 21 miles.
„ 17 „
„ 20 „
17 miles.
Coach, 26 miles, thence 15 miles ; frpm
Binalong, 40 miles, thence 15 miles.
Coach, 65 miles.
„ 30 ~ thence 35 miles,
no „
„ 24 „
~ 150 ~ via Deniliquin.
15 miles.
Coach, 12 miles.
~ 38 ~ from Kiama, 26 miles.
Coach, 38 miles, thence 3 miles; from
Kiama, 26 miles, thence 3 miles.
Coach, 66 miles.
20 miles.
9 »
Coach, 72 miles.
•n 75 ~
~ 100 ~ via Bega.
5 miles.
2 h „
Coach, 60 miles.
~ 20 ~ to Woore, thence 9 miles.
Coach, 80 miles to Deniliquin, thence rail
to Moama 44 miles, thence coach 13
miles. May also be reached from Jeril-
derie.
Coach, 456 miles, via Balranald,
„ 13 „
Conveyance, 3 miles ; from Parramatta, 4
miles.
Coach, 396 miles, or via Albury, Melbourne,
and Adelaide.
Coach, 38 miles, thence 6 miles; from
Kiama, 26 miles, thence 6 miles.
Coach, 83 miles.
~ 23 ~ to Adelong, thence 30 miles.
~ 35 ~ thence 5 miles.
~ 58 ~
~ 16 „
>9 1U 99
~ 10 ~
~ 74 ~ via Bombala.


Railway Station.
.Round Hill
Eye Park
Sandringham ...
Sans Souci
Sebastopol
Sheppard’s Town
Silverton
Smithfield
Sutton
Sutton Forest
Sylvania
Tangmangaroo
Tanja
Tankarooka ..
Taralga
Tarcutta.
Tarlo
Tathra
Temora
Terara
Thackaringa
Tharwa
The Reefs
Thurgoonah
Tiboo hurra..
Tilba Tilba
Timbilica ..
Tocumwall
Tomorong
Toolyhue
Tooma
Towamba
Tuena
Tullimbar
Tumberumba
Tumut
Turlinjah
Ulladulla
Upper Araluen.
Gunning
Kogarah
Kogarah
Junee Junction
Gundagai
Fairfield .
Gunning .
Moss Yale.
Kogarah ,
Bowning
Cooma .
Hay
Goulburn
Gundagai
Goulburn
Cooma ~
Cootamundra
Moss Vale
Queanheyan ....
Junee Junction
Albury
Hay ..
Tarago
Cooma
Jerilderie .
Moss Yale,
Hay
Wagga Wagga..
Cooma
Goulburn
Kiama ..
Culcairn
Gundagai
Tarago ...
Moss Yale.
Tarago
Route.
Coach, 457 miles via Wilcannia ; or via
Albury, Melbourne, and Adelaide.
Coach, 34 miles; same distance from
Binalong.
Tram, 3 miles.
„ 2 „
Coach, 25 miles.
„ 21 „
Coach, 462 miles to Broken Hill, thence
17 miles by tram, or via Albury, &c.
5 miles ; same distance from Parramatta.
Coach, 18 miles.
3 miles.
Coach, 5 miles.
12 miles.
Coach, 74 miles via Bega, thence 10 miles.
~ 353 ~ via Wilcannia.
„ 28 „
Coach, 38 miles ; from Wagga Wagga, 21
miles,
doach, 10 miles.
~ 124 ~ via Bega.
5 > 30 ~
Coach, 28 miles, thence 3 miles ; from
Kiama, 26 miles, thence 3 miles.
Coach, 462 miles via Broken Hill, thence
29 miles; or via Albury, Melbourne,
*and Adelaide.
Coach, 16 miles.
j> 3 ~
4
99
„ 207 „
„ H 8 „
~ 108 ~ thence 33 miles.
„ 37 ~
~ 51 ~ from Kiama, 39 miles.
~ 155 ~ via Balranald.
~ 103 „ via Tumberumba.
~ 108 ~ to Eden, thence 16 miles.
~ 59 ~ from Newbridge, 52 miles.
V 18 ~
~ 74 „ from Gundagai, 97 miles.
j> 20 ~
?> 36 ~
~ 78 ~ from Kiama, 66 miles.
„ 20 „


Railway Station.
Upper Bankstown..
Upper Burragorang
Upper Gundaroo ...
Urana..
Uriarra
Wagongra ..
Wagra
Walbundrie
Walla Walla .
Walli
Wandandian
Wandella ...
Wanganella
Wanstead
Wattamolla
Weddin
Wentworth
Werombi .
Whealbah
Wheeo ..
Whinstone Valley
Wilcannia
Wild’s Meadows .
W illanthry
Wilton
Windellama .
Wollongough
Wolumla ....
Wombat
Woniora.
Woodhill
Woodhouselee
Woomargama
Woonona
Woore.
W yndham
Yalwal
Yammatree
Yarrara ....
Yatteyatah
Yarrunga
Burwood
Picton ~
Gunning
The Bock
Queanbeyan....
Tarago
Albury
Albury
Albury
Mundurama
Moss Yale...
Cooma
Hay
Tempe ....
Moss Vale.
Young .
Hay ....
Camden.
Hay ....
Goulburn
Cooma ..
Hay
Moss Vale.
Hay
Douglas Park
Marulen ....
Young
Cooma
Murrumburrah
Kogarah
Kiama
Goulburn
Culcairn
Bulli
Goulburn
Cooma ..
Moss Vale.
Bethungra
Culcairn .
Moss Vale.
Moss Vale
Route.
Coach, 64 miles.
34 miles.
Coach, 22 miles; same distance from
Queanbeyan.
Coach, 55 miles ; from Widgewa, 18 miles.
» 26 ~
» 102 „
~ 30 ~ from Culcairn, 51 miles.
Coach, 32 miles ; from Culcairn or Gero-
gery, 20 miles.
Coach, 68 miles ; from Gerogery, 14 miles.
„ 15 „
~ 158 ~ from Kiama, 46 miles,
„ 91 ~ to Cobargo, thence 8 miles.
» 50 „
Coach, 22 miles to Kangaroo Valley, thence
6 miles.
Coach, 12 miles.
„ 259 ~ via Balranald.
11 miles.
Coach, 80 miles; from Carrathool, 95 miles.
» ~
40 miles.
Coach, 245 miles.
12 „
~ 120 „ from Carrathool, 95 miles.
7 miles.
32 „
122 miles ; from Wagga Wagga, 135 miles.
Coach, 84 miles via Bega.
» 11 „
„ 4 „
~ 20 ~ to Berry, thence 6 miles.
» 16 „
~ 24 ~ from Albury, 21 miles.
1 mile.
26 miles.
Coach, 84 miles.
Coach, 56 miles ; from Kiama, 45 miles ;
thence from either point, 7 miles.
15 miles.
Coach, 17 miles, thence 26 miles.
~ 69 ~ from Kiama, 57 miles.
.. 10 „


LODDON FALLS AND WOMBEYAN CAVES.
With the continual opening up of the country by means of railways, and
the consequent increased accessibility of formerly remote districts, fresh
natural marvels and beauties are continually being discovered. Recently, a
picturesque cascade, to which has been given the name of
The Loddon Falls,
situated near the Bulli Pass, in the South Coast district, has attracted much
attention, by reason of its romantic appearance and lovely surroundings,
and appears destined to become one of the most attractive features of the
beautiful Illawarra district.
The Wombeyan Caves.
These natural curiosities, situated near Goulburn, are beginning to
attract visitors more largely in consequence of the recent discovery of new
caves. The entrance to these is in the face of a steep hill, about 600 feet
distance from the old caves. After passing through the entrance into the
new cave, a perpendicular descent of 25 feet is made, and then a further
descent for a like distance on an incline, the passage progressively increasing
in size until the bottom is reached, when it opens out into a large chamber
about 50 feet by 30 feet, and averaging 10 feet in height. This chamber
contains a fine collection of stalactites and columns, &c., the small caves
radiating from it in three different directions. The first branch to the right
of the entrance runs about 100 yards in a zigzag line on a comparatively
level floor, and averages about 10 feet in width and 12 feet in height. The
floor for 20 or 30 feet from the entrance is remarkably pretty in its forma-
tion, resembling a stream of crystals overflowing from a large basin, the
stream below the main basin'being composed of innumerable miniature
basins in terraces, each basin being filled with a pure white coral-like forma-
tion. Other parts of the floor are covered with spherical stalagmites resem-
bling snowballs. The stalactites in this, as also in the other branches, are
grouped more regularly than is usually the case, as they run in almost parallel
lines across the limestone roof. These, as well as the other formations, are
remarkable for their snowy whiteness and transparency, the only exception
being an occasional nest for stalactities resembling terra-cotta in appearance,
and so lending a pleasing variety of colour. A very singular feature is a large


column of stalactites having small stalactites, varying in size from the thick-
ness of a needle to half an inch in diameter, projecting at all angles round
its base, the whole resembling the trunk of a tree with the young shoots
sprouting up all round.
The middle branch cave, which is considerably the largest, consists of
a chain of chambers, ranging from the size of a small cabin to that of a
lofty cathedral. These are formed by immense rocks falling and wedging
themselves together in all shapes, which necessitates the making of a number
of steep ascents and descents. The chambers are well filled with all the
prettiest formations met with in other caves. An instance is also observable
of a large column formed by a number of stalactites having been naturally
broken across at a point about half-way between the floor and the roof, the
broken surfaces being separated from one another by a space of about 2 inches,
so that the upper part of the column remains suspended from the roof. A
further extension of this cave, recently discovered, consists of a roomy
chamber at the extreme end (as far as yet known) of this branch, the floor
of which might appropriately be named the “ Crystal Lakes,” the so-called
lakes being a large number of pure white and transparent basins formed into
a succession of terraces, each basin being partly filled with minute crystals
having the exact appearance of water, the illusion being discovered only
by touch. The sight will repay the visitor for the trouble experienced in
reaching it.
The third branch to the left of the last described is comparatively small,
and consists of a narrow winding passage, at the end of which is an almost
circular chamber, being the main part of the branch. It contains a good
collection of stalactites and stalagmites, and also some fine coral-like beds,
the floor being of a crystallized dripstone. Fossilized bone deposits are found
in some parts of the cave. The roots of the kurrajong tree growing 50 feet
overhead appear through the roof of the cave, and seem to take root again
below the floor, some of them having a thick crusting of lime. The cave
resembles very much the Imperial and Lucas Caves at Jenolan, the former
in the fineness, transparency, and delicacy of its stalactite structures, and the
latter in some of its spacious and lofty chambers. Arrangements for visiting
the caves can be readily made at Goulburn.


BOWiRAX..
J. L. CAMPBELL, Proprietor.
The Prox’RIEToB, of the above Hotel begs to inform public generally
that “ THE GRAND” is now open for Visitors and Tourists, and is replete with
every comfort and convenience.
The Cuisine is under the charge of a first-class Chef, and the Wines and
Spirits are the very best procurable.
“ THE GRAND” commands splendid views of the Gib and the surrounding
district of Bowral. Single rooms or suites of appartments at moderate charges.
Two splendid Billiard Rooms.
Bowral being situated on the Main Southern Line, 80 miles from Sydney, at
an altitude of 2,171 feet above sea-level, is at once the most convenient and health-
giving resort in the Colony. The Melbourne Express Train stops at Bowral on both
journeys. Trains leave Sydney for Bowral at 9‘6 a.m., 5T5 p.m. (Express), and
9 p.m. (Mail).
Splendid Drives to Fitzroy Waterfalls, Macquarie Pass, &c.
Buggy leaves Hotel every Morning for the Mittacong Mineral
Springs, returning in time for Breakfast.


ADVERTISEMENTS,
SYDNEY PERMANENT
4J-Vccholtt mul
PITT AND BATHURST STREETS.
ESERVE FUND, £6 5,0 00
BOARD OF MANAGEMENT.
UruoteTo :
HON. J. F. BURNS, M.P. ; JAMES GREEN, J.P.; GEORGE WITHERS, J.P,
IPimtors :
J. P. WRIGHT, J.P.; WILLIAM HEZLET, J.P. ;J. W. WATKIN;
S. T. WHIDUON, J.P.
MONEY RECEIVED on Deposit at Current Rates of Interest.
MONEY ADVANCED on Liberal Terms on the Security of Real
Estate.
SAVINGS BANK Department open daily.
FIRST-CLASS Suburban Building Allotments on sale on easy terms.
Money Advanced to Build.
Five and Ten Acre Blocks—excellent land —conveniently situated and suitable
for Orange Groves, Farms, or for Country Residential Sites for sale
from £l5 per acre.
333, pitt-street J. W. BIBBY, Secretary.


GOUT, RHEUMATISM, RHEUMATIC GOUT, LUMBAGO, SCIATICA, &G„
ARE POSITIVELY CURED BY
Dr. Delated Gout and Rheumatic Drops,
Read the following, all of whom may he referred to .
Mr. T. Reid, Station-street, Petersham, says,— Nov. 2nd, 1888.
“ I was laid up for six weeks and had a well-known medical man attending me, but got no relief
until I tried ‘ Delabarre’s Drops,’ with two bottles I was well and strong.”
Mr. W. Whiting, Parramatta Road, Leichhardt, testifies, —
“ I have found them to have no equal, and cure when doctors failed.
Mr A. J. Swinnerton (of Messrs. Swinnerton and Frew, Ironfounders, Annandale), writes,—
20tn May, looy.
« s orne time ago I was a sufferer from Rheumatism for eleven weeks, doctors were of no ser-
vice, when I was persuaded to try ‘ Delabarre’s Drops,’ in three days I was able to go to my work,
and have never since been troubled with the same disease. Hundreds of people would forfeit an} •
thing to get this really good remedy.”
TO BE OBTAINED OF ALL RESPECTABLE CHEMISTS.
Dr. Barber’s Liquorice Cough Balsam is infallible for Coughs, Colds, Consumption, Bronchitis,
Asthma, &c., also Dr. Barber’s Cough Syrup for Children (without opium).
If not obtainable at your local Chemist, write to the Agent, 291, Parramatta Road,
Leichhardt.
LOUSE’S
“ MAIGLOCKCHEN ”
(Lily o! the Valley.)
SOLD BY ALL HIGH CLASS PERFUMERS.
AGENT=
JULIUS LEVY, Wholesale Druggist,
CHARLOTTE PLACE, SET ID IST IE IT,
LITTLE FLINDERS-STREET, MELBOURNE.
Sydney : Charles Potter, Government Printer.—lBB9.




W OOLCOTT'S
TOURIST BUREAU,
6, BRIDGE-STREET,
CENTRAL RAILWAY OFFICE, NEXT G.P.O. GEORGE-ST.,
IS THE
B O OIKIIIRTGF OFFICE
FOE THE
JENOLAN (Late Fish River) CAVES,
HAWKESBURY RIVER,
BLUE MOUNTAINS,
ILLAWARRA DISTRICT,
AND SIGHTS OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
Rooms Secured at Hotels and Boarding Houses in
Town and Country
Ctoeyanets engaged fen any number at ill tie piineipl
Tourist resents.
STEAMERS CHARTERED AND PICNICS ARRANGED.
Luggage Received, Collected, Stored, or Delivered at Low Rates.
Best Collection of Landscape Photo?s in the Colonies on Sale.
Save time, trouble, ami expense by booking' at this
W. C. WOOLCOTT, Manager.
Melbourne Agents: F, Tate L Co., 28, Market-st., Melbourne.
