

fiZchh
o o
THE
TEACHING OF THE DEW.
BY
REV. ARCHIBALD N. MACKRAY, M.A.j
/
FROM \
/
“ THE PULPIT NEWS.” j
Published by
GEORGE LOXTON AND CO., j
42, New Pitt Street.
o U.8.7./J C




lU'lo
szsiE^iMionsr
PREACHED BF THE REV. ARCHIBALD
N. MACKRAY, M.A.,
At St. David’s Church, Ashfield, 3rd
December, 1871.
“ I will be as the dew'unto Israel.”—llOSEA xiv. 5.
I wish to resume, this morning, our occa-
sional search in Nature’s chambers of imagery
for illustrations and confirmations of the
great verities of our faith. Happily, it is
now a common-place with every Christian
thinker that ‘ earth is but the shadow of
heaven,’ and that the highest purpose
of the kingdom of nature is to prefigure
by exquisite types and symbols the mys-
teries of the Kingdom of God. 1 have
tried at intervals to unfold to you some
of the truths which God. has wrapped
up in the clouds of the sky, which an old
psalmist sublimely calls ‘ the chariot of
Jehovah in the Wind or Breath which God
bringeth out of His treasures ; in the great
mountains which, according to Ruskin, have
been built for the human race, as at once
their schools and cathedrals ; and in the home-
less ocean with its ‘ weary oar, and weary


wandering fields of barren foam,’which, as
the type of unrest, tumult, disaster, and
desolation, has no place in the vision of the
new heavens and new earth wherein dwelleth
righteousness.
But the night-side of creation is not with-
out its typical gospel. ‘God, our Maker,
giveth us songs in the night.’ And not only
when we consider His heavens, the work of
His hands, the moon and the stars which He
has ordained, but when we brush aside the
dewy grass, and examine * the pearl hung in
every cowslip’s ear,’ may we ask, ‘what is
man, 0 fiord, that Thou art mindful of him
or the son of man that Thou visitest him ?’
In a country like Palestine, where little
tain falls from May to September, the re-
freshing, fructifying properties of the dew
would be fully known and appreciated.
Hence ‘the dew of heaven’ was one of the
blessings which were specially invoked by the
Patriarchs upon their children, while for a
people to be cut off from its grateful influ-
ences was tantamount to their being aban-
doned to barrenness and want. To the pious
Hebrew the falling dew was a symbol of the
grace and Spirit of the Lord. Better, per-
haps, than any other natural phenomenon, it
prefigures certain features of God’s character,


and His dealings with the children of men,
and more than once in the Old Testament the
fulfilment of the symbol is claimed by God Him-
self, as when, inlsaiah, He says—“ 1 willbelike
a cloud of dew in the heat of harvest ,” or here,
when to His repentant people who had
raised to Him their self-condemning cry, and
cast themselves upon Him, as the Father of
the fatherless, and the Helper of the desti-
tute, He makes this gracious promise,—“/
■will heal their backsliding , I will love them freely ,
for mine anger is turned away from him — 1
will be as the dew unto Israel
When God planned and perfected the laws
of radiation and condensation, by the action
of which the phenomenon of dew is produced,
He designed, likewise, to prepare a symbol
of Himself, that in every
“Globe of dew,
Filling in the morning new,
Some eyed flower whose young leaves waken
On an unimagined world,”
men, if they had but eyes to see, might dis-
cover bright reflections of His grace and
Spirit.
But it is only when we become disciples of
the- Lord Jesus, the true ‘lnterpreter and
High-priest of nature,’ because its eternal
Archetype, and by His teaching, in miracle


and parable, obtain the key to nature’s
hieroglyphics, that a text like the present
can be apprehended in its full significance,
and is found to yield manifold lessons of
faith and hope, self-distrust and patience,
gladness and strength.
“ 1 will be as the dew unto Israel —Our
theme, this morning, is full of suggestive
thought ; and it will be well for us to con-
sider not only the representation which it
gives of God’s character, and mode of deal-
ing with His people, but likewise the spiri-
tual laws which it suggests, as necessary to
be observed by us, if we would be the
recipients of His grace and salvation.
I. Thefirst thought which the text suggests is
the sovereign grace of God.
Although the language may not be scien-
tifically correct, we still speak of the falling
dew, as if, ‘ like the gentle rain from
heaven,’ it came down upon withered grass
and drooping flower the free gift of God. It
was an ancient fancy, that the dew was
actually shed from the stars, and that it thus
possessed a pure celestial essence. More-
over its fall is apparently arbitrary both as
regards time and quantity. And therefore,
when God likens Himself to the dew 1 that


tarrieth not,’ as the prophet Micah says, ‘ for
man, and that waiteth not for the sons of
men,’ He seems to robe Himself in that
sovereignty of grace and grace of sovereignty
to which, in the last resort we must cling, if
we would have hope of ourselves, or the
' church, or the world. In the night season,
when deep sleep falleth on men, the dew
of heaven descends upon the thirsty
ground, and when we awake to find
every leaf and flower, untouched by
human hand, fretted with sparks of sunlight,
must we not ask with Job, “who hath be-
gotten the drops of dew?” And with like
sovereign grace does God visit His people.
He chose Abraham to be His friend, and led
him forth from the black tents of his sires
to be the father of the faithful. He chose
David, His servant, and took him from the
sheepfolds to feed Jacob, His people, and
Israel, His inheritance. He chose Paul, a
blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious,
to preach the faith which once he destroyed,
and to bear His name before the Gentiles
and kings. He comes as the de« r . “By
the grace of God I am what I am.” Like
Israel we have forsaken God and gone after
vanities and lies. Our efforts to recover and
save ourselves only worsened matters, until


in the humbled, contrite, and self-renouncing
spirit which breathes through this closing
portion of Hosea’s perplexing prophecies, we
cast ourselves upon the mercy of God in
Jesus Christ, and the word of the truth of
the gospel distilled like the dew, and the
grace of God, bringing salvation, came down
upon us ‘like rain upon the mown grass,
and as showers that water the earth. ’ \s
M. Napoleon Rousel once said in his Mission
Chapel at Lyons, and the word was with
saving power to at least one poor devotee
who had long been trying to buy the grace of
God by the scrupulous discharge of her
‘duties,’ ‘God does not sell salvation, He
gives it.<’ It is from first to last free and
gracious like the dew of heaven. Whence
your filial fear of God, tenderness of con-
science, delight in prayer, in the word of
truth, and in the fellowship of the saints ?
What has produced such a revolution in
your inner life, and made you so trustful,
patient, pure, and gladsome ? “Who hath
begotten the drops of the dew?” You are a
mystery to yourselves, until you fall back
upon the graciousness of God, who is to His
people like the dew that forms unseen, and
men know it not, until a sparkling globe
hangs trembling on every blade of grass.


“Uphold me,” prays David, “with Thy free
Spirit.” It is true that just as the deposition
of dew is in accordance with natural laws,
which are the expression of God’s will, so is
there nothing arbitrary or capricious in the
working and co-w r orking of the Spirit of God
in the individual soul, and in the Church of
Christ. But the dew of the Lord falls not
when, and where, and as we expect. There
are troubled questionings ever arising out of
our strange, eventful histories, God’s moral
government of this world, and the singular
reticence of His word of truth, regarding
which, at present,
“ Not Gabriel aslcs the reason why,
Nor God the reason gives.”
His grace is like the dew that waiteth
not for man. His thoughts are not our
thoughts, nor are His ways our ways. He is
sovereign in His grace, and He is gracious in
'His sovereignty. * I will be like the dew unto
Israel. ’
2. A nother lesson of the text is the gentleness
of God.
Noiseless and unseen is the falling of the
dew. No herald announces its approach. It
spreads in silence its gossamer web over the
morning meadow, and without ruffling the


down of the tenderest flower globes itself in
her bosom. Jehovah is like the dew unto
Israel. The great and terrible in nature are
not the truest symbols of the God of our
salvation. The silvery dawn, the gentle rain
and the silent dew best prefigure His coming
to the soul of man. He will not break the
bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax.
He does not force Himself upon us. His
kingdom cometh not with observation. It
begins far beneath the surfa.ce in the heart’s
deepest solitude, and slowly works from
within outwards, until it takes possession of
the whole man, and brings within its royalty,
his work and play, his week-day and Sabbath-
day, joy and sorrow, life and death, just as we
find every shrub and flower drenched with the
dews of heaven, through the secret processes
of nature, working silently while wc slept.
God may be visiting some of you, even now,
as softly and unobserved as the falling dew.
There may be no outward tokens of the inner
crisis. The calm, mirthful, careless counten-
ance may give no sign of the hidden strivings
of God’s Holy Spirit. You may sit quietly
in your pew, like Lydia at the river-side,
when the Lord opened her heart to attend to
the gospel preached by Paul, and she became
faithful to Him and His cause. But the dew


of God is falling. He makes you ‘ a willing
people,’ His own volunteers, in the day of His
power. His gentleness makes you great.
And in the heart’s penitent confession, in the
life-choice of Christ, and in unreserved con-
secration to God my text is receiving its ful-
filment :—‘ I will be as the dew unto Israel. ’
3. Another thought suggested by the text is the
bountifulness of God.
Who can count the dew drops of the morn-
ing ? And who can number the mercies of
our God which are new to us every morning
and evening ? Take your stand, after a clear,
calm night, on any grassy field, while day is
still young, and its merry sunlight is making
a diamond of every dewdrop, and as you cast
your eye over the lustrous expanse, you will
bettor understand God’s great liberality,
when he promises to be as the dew unto
Israel. ‘The seven Spirits are before the
throne’, and in His seven-fold, or perfect ful-
ness, the Holy Spirit is shed forth abund-
antly through Jesus Christ our Saviour. In
Him dwelleth in bodily fashion all the ful-
ness of the Godhead ; and ye are therefore in
Him complete—filled to the full for all that
pertains to life and godliness. There is, as
Wesley puts it, “ enough for all, enough for


each, enough for evermore. ” Bread enough,
my brethren, in our Father’s house, and love
enough in His heart, and to spare, and yet
some of us perish with hunger! “Let the
wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous
man his thoughts, and let him return unto
the Lord, and He will have mercy upon him,
and to our God, for He will abundantly par-
don.”—
“Plenteous grace with thee is found,
Grace to cover all my sin,
Pet the healing streams abound,
Make and keep me pure within.
Thou of life the fountain art,
Preely let me take of thee.
Spring thou up within my heart,
Rise to all eternity.”
4. But it is not, I think, so much the ful-
ness, as the particularity of Divine grace ,
which is suggested by the figure of the text.
‘ Ilka blade of grass keps its ain drap o’
dew.’ And God may well liken Himself to
the individualizing dew, for He does not deal
with men, simply, en masse. ‘He enters,’ as
Emerson, strikingly remarks, ‘by a private
door into every individual. ’ Like the dew
He has a blessing for each as well as for all.
Nature mayseem ‘ careless of the single life,’
and the mocking voice of the poet may
whisper its treason in my mind,
Though thou wert sca'tered to the wind,
Vet i« there plenty of ’vho kind.”


But Jehovah is as the dew unto Israel, and
each blade a-field has its own sparkling glo-
bule. Social reformers may sink the indi-
vidual in the class, and seek only the greatest
good of the greatest number. But the Gos-
pel of Jesus Christ invests with transcend-
ent importance the poorest waif of humanity,
and makes its appeal to each as well as to
all, —“ Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and
thou shalt be saved.” Our individuality is a
sacred thing, and the Holy Spirit in His
dealings with us, and in making us an holy
temple in the Lord, respects it, preserves and
sanctifies ' it. ‘ Christ calleth His own
sheep by name and leadeth them out,’
and they, in turn, know Him as
their own Lord and Saviour. Each of them
becomes an Israel in solitary wrestling with
the Angel, while the dew of God’s grace is
falling, and they cling to Him with the grip
of a personal faith, which carries the whole
man with it, —“ He loved me, and He gave
Himself for meT Look abroad on the dew-
besprent field, where on every blade of her-
bage the dew of heaven incloses itself, and
remembering the typical significance of this
grateful aspect of nature, let your hearts be
filled with large and loving thoughts of the
grace and Spirit of God, and doubt not that


there is a blessing, also, and always, for each
of you. The same Spirit divideth severally
to every man as He will ; and in the white
stone which shall at last be given to him that
overcometh, there shall be a new name writ-
ten, which no man knoweth saving he that
recciveth it.
11. But time passes, and I have only
broken ground -on this suggestive theme.
Like all God’s words, this Old Testament
promise grows in significance as we ponder
it, until we feel ourselves like little child-
ren on the shore of a boundless sea.
The text, as I stated at the outset, not only
discloses many endearing features of God’s
character and ways, as He visits us in His
grace and salvation, but likewise suggests
certain conditions, on our part, which must
be observed, if we would be healed, revived,
and made fragrant and fruitful,
1. Dew falls only in the night, when
through quicker radiation of heat the
ground has become colder than the atmo-
sphere, the moisture held in which is, con-
sequently, deposited in dewdrops upon leaf
and flower. And it is in the night-season
that the dew of God’s grace descends most
plentifully. Into the wilderness (v. 14) God
allures His faithless Israel, there to speak


comfortably to her, and make the valley of
Trouble for a door of hope, and give her her
vineyards from thence, that she may sing
again as in the days of her youth, when the
great exodus was accomplished. Black night
often gathers upon a man’s spirit, when he
awakens to the conviction that hit! erto his
life has been a ruinous failure, clutching at sha-
dows, or searching for the rainbow, and when
over against God’s goodness and holiness he
places his own abhorrent sinfulness, till from
his heart is wrung the bitter cry, * what
must Idoto be saved ?’ But in this horror
of great darkness the grace of God appears,
like the dewfall overnight, bringing salva-
tion. The Holy Spirit convinces of right-
eousness as well as of judgment, takes of
Christ’s and shows it savingly to the anxious
soul, till he is filled with peace and Joy in
believing. It is not possible to know the
rare sweetness and abundant consolation of
my text until the world’s garish day has
been shut out, and in the night of weariness
and pain, of desolating bereavement and
bitter death, we are alone with God, who is
as the dew unto Israel. The best o f us are
apt to become dry, withered, fruitless in our
spiritual life, when the sun blazes overhead,
and all goes merry as a marriage bell.- We


soon lose the finer traits of Christian charac-
ter, and grow hard and proud, unsympa-
thetic and urloveable, when fortune smiles
on our every effort, and we have no
‘changes.’ But God in love and faithful-
ness sends the night down upon us, and
with the night His soft, refreshing dew.
Health fails. We suffer reverses in business.
Friends are scattered. The hungry grave
swallows up all that made life dear to us.
We walk in darkness and have no light.
And then the promise is fulfilled. Our God
and Father is to us like the dew. He re-
vives, strengl hens, gladdens us. He proves
Himself better than all His gifts—sings to us
His songs of the night, and makes us glory
in our infirmities. He imparts to our natures
a tender grace and quiet loveliness and
delicate sympathy, never befoie possessed.
And as He lifts up upon us the light of His
countenance, we rise from the depths of lone-
liness and sorrow on dew-lapt wings of faith
and love, to the gates of the morning, and
pour forth our thankfulness in a great gush
of song.
2. It is only under a calm , cloudless sky that
the dew of heaven descends upon the thirsty soil.
Overhanging clouds, by preventing the radia-
tion of heat from the earth, arrest the de-


pression of its temperature and the dew-fall
is scanty. God cannot be as the dew unto
Israel when the descent of His grace is inter-
cepted, as in Hosea’s days, by sins and back-
slidings and abominable idolatries. There is
no dew fall in the cloudy night. You com-
plain of weak faith, flagging zeal, lack of
spirituality of mind, and inward growth. But
it were better earnestly to bestir yourselves
to have the intercepting clouds and fogs re-
moved. You do not keep a conscience void
of offence before God and man. You often
condemn yourselves in the thing which you
allow. Your feet are not washed. You re-
press the Spirit’s promptings, and make a
compromise with duty. You do not wholly
follow the Lord. There can be no dew-fall
in such circumstances, and without the dew
of God’s Spirit you cannot grow as the lily,
or strike your roots as Lebanon. “ 0 Israel,
return unto the Lord, thy God 5 for thou
hast fallen by thine iniquity.”
3. The dew is freely deposited only when the
object is in a stale of repose. If we would be
healed, revived, strengthened, and glad-
dened by the grace and Spirit of God, we
need distrust of self, weanedness of soul and
quiet confidence in God, our Saviour. ‘He
giveth,’ as we have it in one of the Songs of


Degrees, ‘to His beloved, in sleep, ’ —while
they take no thought for the morrow, and are
as free from carking care and withering
anxiety and burdensome enterprise as the
sleeping babe. Our religious life, even in its
better moods, is parched and feverish. We
are readier to work, speculate and fight,
than to kneel and pray and wait. We are
cumbered with much serving, and grow
weary in well-doing, because we will not be still
enough to know God as the dew of Israel.
Only in the repose of faith and love can the
dew of God’s grace lie all night upon our
branch.
4. One remaining lesson I can only men-
tion. Some objects are more receptive of the dew
than others , as you will easily perceive by
passing your hand, at night, over a grass-
plot, and then over a gravel-walk or pave-
ment. Rough, porous bodies take dew most
readily. And there is a similar law in the
Kingdom of God. If we would be refreshed
and strengthened in our spiritual life, and
filled with the Spirit of God, there must
forthwith bo an end of pride, and self-com-
placency. Stretch out the empty hand of
faith. Raise the self-renouncing cry, and
give loud and urgent voice to the better
longings of your nature. Take with you the


Lord’s own words, and turn to Him, and say,
take away all iniquity, and receive us
graciously. ‘His biddings,’ as John Brown
of Haddington used to say, ‘ are His ena-
blings.’ His words are acts. And while
all around may be parched and desolate, you
will find Him healing, refreshing, gladdening
you like the dew of heaven.
While seeking to interpret the natural
parable of the dew, and to apprehend its
heavenly meanings, there has often
come before me the memorable scene
in the Song of Songs which our Lord
has applied to Himself in His message
to the church of Laodicea :—lt is night. The
dew is on the ground. Stars of promise
sparkle in the blue. And at a fast-closed
door stands One who is the Light and Life
of men. He knocks, and as He knocks, He
cries, “Open to Me, My sister, My love, ;
for My head is filled with dew, and My locks
with the drops of the night. ” His head is
filled with dew. God giveth not the Spirit by
measure unto Him. He comes to fulfil this
old Word of promise. He is dew and sun-
shine, light and life, and all to you. And of
His infinite fulness of grace and salvation
may we each and all receive. Weary, droop-
ing, dying soul, let Him in, let Him in !


ftaoCoQ,
N CQIO.
