

Resources and Prospects
QUEENSLAND.
M. HUME BLACK,
Special Agent to the Queensland Government.
Office of the Agent-General foe Queensland:
1, VICTORIA STREET, WESTMINSTER, S.W.
1894.
onion:
Printed by Lake & Sison, 11, Victoria Street, Westminster; & 135, Upper Thames St.




Resources and Prospects
QUEENSLAND.
M. HUME BLACK,
Special Agent to the Queensland Government.
Office of the Agent-General for Queensland
1, VICTORIA STREET, WESTMINSTER,3S.W.
1894.
liDitiiott:
Printed by Lake & Sison, 11, Victoria Street, Westminster; & 136, Upper Thames St.


INDEX OF CONTENTS.
Introduction ... , ••• ••• ••• ••• ...page 8
pr
Area of Queensland
Expenditure of Loan
Land Grant Railways
Mineral Resources ...
Pastoral do.
Artesian Water Supply ...
19
Frozen Meat
Agricultural
25
Sugar Industry
28
Marine Industry ... ... •••
29
Conclusion Summary
Appendix


The Resources and Prospects of
Queensland.
BURKE’S saying, that “ a great Empire and little minds go
ill together,” has become a truism of high politics. A
narrow intelligence and limited imagination cannot grasp the
noble significance of those great Colonies, swelling to future
nationhood, which form our Empire beyond the seas.
Sixty years ago while the settlement of Australia had practi-
cally only begun, while but a fringe of the country in the
neighbourhood of Sydney Cove had been sparsely peopled, while
Victoria was unknown and Queensland undiscovered, still
sufficient had been done in laying the foundation of that Com-
monwealth of Mistresses of the Southern Hemisphere as to
excite the admiration of the great Naturalist and Philosopher,
Charles Darwin. “It is” he wrote “ a magnificent testimony
of the power of the British Nation. Here in a less promising
country scores of years have done many times more than an
equal number of centuries have effected in South America.”
It is well that the greatness of Britain’s inheritance should be
fully appreciated. And when that is done the kindling senti-
ment must be that of the immortal evolutionist. We “ congratu-
late ourselves that we are born Britons.”
A due estimate of an Empire’s resources can only follow
detailed knowledge, and it is a pleasing duty to submit an
account of the Resources and Prospects of Queensland —one of
the largest colonies within the sway of the British Crown, and
one too, which offers as great variety of natural and industrial
wealth as is to be found under the sun.


Queensland sharing the gloom of Australia a year ago seemed
to the unthinking, the hasty, the nervous, down in the depths of
Commercial and Industrial depression from which there was no
or at least only slow recovery. Such pessimists lacked Darwin’s
common sense, and restrained enthusiasm. They forgot the
inborn buoyancy of the Anglo-Saxon race—that mental and
physical vigour which as Emmerson finely says develops energy
as the sun breeds clouds. The qualities which within the range
of Her Gracious Majesty’s reign opened up to civilisation and
settlement a country as large as France, Germany and Austria
combined, which had freighted these sunny seas with argosies as
numerous as the whole mercantile fleet of Cook’s time, was not
to be paralysed by a passing Commercial crisis. The dark days
are already past; on every hand the activity of the Colonists has
attacked the ever fresh, ever interesting problems of the develop-
ment of a grand new Country. In the desert the rocks have
been struck by the Canadian borer and from the long-hidden
fountains sweet water has flowed to the blossoming of the thirsty
land. Flocks and herds have increased at a greater than the
wondrous ratio of patriarchal times. Further north and further
towards the distant West the ploughshare scars the bosom of
virgin earth, and the seed beds have already been measured
which will feed the teeming and hungry millions of the old
world. From the hills and the recesses thereof metaliferous
riches are being withdrawn at a rate which gives assurance of
Queensland being in the very near future one of the greatest
mining centres of the civilised world. And a harvest of the sea
is being reaped that the gourmands of Pekin and London may
feast on Turtle and Beche-de-mer, that British maidens may
wear the virgin pearl, and that Birmingham and Sheffield
workmen may create those marvels of ingenious usefulness and
adornment from the lovely Mother-of-Pearl.
Facts are not the dross but the ore of history, and a sober
enunciation of a few that can be verified will enable you to
understand that my outline of the resources and prospects of


Queensland may possibly be under but not over estimated.
Briefly then, Queensland has an area of 668,497 square miles,
or five-and-a-half times greater than that of the United Kingdom.
It is in length from North to South 1,300 miles, and 800 miles
in breadth. It has a coast line of 2,250 miles indented by
numerous bays, estuaries and natural harbours which offer every
facility for the expansion of a Continental commerce. This
Coast is protected nearly throughout by the Great Barrier reef
which makes navigation in what may almost be called the
inland waters, a holiday cruise.
ithin the territory of Queensland which is covered by nine-
teen degrees of latitude and fifteen of longitude there is every
variety of climate (except the Arctic) from the hot, though
not too sultry north, to the dry elastic invigorating air of the
Western and Southern uplands. Every known vegetable pro-
duct has been or may be grown within the four corners of
Queensland, from the fruits and grains of the temperate zone to
the sugars, tea, coffee, rice and spices of the tropics.
Towards the development of this enormous territory with its
multiform natural wealth, government has expended during the
thirty-four years of its independent existence a capital sum of
31 millions—the amount in fact of the Colony’s public debt. We
have had no wars of defence or aggression to absorb either the
principal or interest of our National wealth. Our expenditure
has been made in the conquest of nature, of the wilderness, and
in a series of great public works which must command admira-
tion of every impartial student of colonisation.
First of all Queensland has been perhaps the most progressive
Colony under the Crown in its immigration policy. Since 1859
two and three-quarter millions of Loan money have been spent
in bringing to our broad lands immigrants from every part of
the United Kingdom. Nor have desirable immigrants, patient,
industrious, adaptable, from Germany and Scandinavia been
rejected. The greatest and most solid wealth of a country is
in its population. Experience has demonstrated the profit and


wisdom of Queensland’s liberal immigration policy. Although
the stream of State-aided immigrants has for the moment
for economic reasons been checked at its source in this country,
the inducement offered by our Land Laws —incomparably
liberal compared with those of any other civilised country —
invite a steady inflow of small farmers with a moderate capital,
and men of the yoeman class with perhaps larger means for the
enterprising occupations of Homestead and other Selections,
fruit farms, the sugar lands, and grazing areas of from 10,000
to 20,000 acres.
Then seventeen and three-quarter millions sterling have been
spent on the 2,378 miles of our railway System—comprising
three great main lines running out west 400 to 500 miles from
the Coast and at a distance of 250 miles from each other.
These have many branches as feeders and they bring the pastoral,
agricultural and mining produce from the interior to the shipping
ports of Brisbane, Rockhampton and Townsville. There are
besides seven other lines of which the most important are from
the Gulf of Carpentaria to the Croydon gold field, from Cooktown
towards the Etheridge and Palmer gold fields, from Cairns to
the great agricultural and mining table land round Herberton,
and from Brisbane along the Coast towards the New South
Wales border, and from Brisbane northwards via Gympie to
Maryborough, and Bundaberg to Mount Perry. There is now,
therefore, continuous railway communication from Adelaide in
South Australia via Melbourne, Sydney and Brisbane to Mount
Perry, a total distance of over 2,000 miles.
On the construction of harbours, lighthouses, and the deepen-
ing and improvement of navigable rivers, two millions sterling
have been spent; and three-quarters of a million on main roads
and bridges—as essential to development as railways. On public
buildings a million has been laid out; £827,000 has been spent
in erecting and equipping fO,OOO miles of telegraph lines;
£1,418,000 has been advanced to local bodies for the purpose of
carrying out local improvements.


Our public debt, therefore, represents not dead but living
capital, reproductive directly and indirectly, reaping untold
benefits and yielding a cash return which is growing more and
more efficient towards meeting the full charge upon it, and its
eventual extinction.
By an Act passed in 1892, inducements of a most liberal
nature are offered Capitalists for the construction of Land Grant
Railways, the principle of which has long been familar in America
wheie it is recognised that in a new country, railways can be
built as cheap as a first class turnpike road, and are far more
economic in maintenance and transit facilities. The railway, if
not the precursor, is at least the foundation of settlement, pro-
duction and prosperity. It is a necessity to the development of
the natural resources of the country, and hence it more than
pays the State to exchange part of their fixed capital—the land
for that more valuable instrument of production—the railway.
It is acknowledged that these Land Grant Railways have done
more to open out the. North-west territory—the prairie country
of Canada—in twenty years, than the whole resources of the
State has been able to do during the previous two hundred
years.
The Dominion Government rightly considers its enormous
possessions of Agricultural land in Manitoba and the North-west,
as of little value unless opened up by railways, and settled by an
industrious and thrifty population.
The success of the Land Grant railway companies depend on
the settlement of a large population on their lands along the
lines of railways and in the towns that so rapidly spring up, to
minister to the wants of the settlers. Consequently, the com-
panies become at once, most active emigration agents in the
great centres of population in the Old World, and it is to their
interest to assist, by every means in their power, those new-
comers whom they have induced to lay the foundation of new
homes in, to them, a new land. The success of the scheme has
een phenomenal, population has increased by leaps and bounds


and prosperity,’ more or less manifest, marks the progress of the
Land Grant Railway system. The State also participates in the
general prosperity, retaining as it does, alternate blocks of land
along the lines, the increased value of State lands, together with
the advantages to its revenues, caused by such a large addition
to its population, more than compensates in money value alone,
for the concessions granted in the first instance, of land which
without railways was practically valueless, and would probably
have remained so for some generations.
In this respect, Canada differs somewhat from Queensland.
The Western half in both countries, consists of a soil suitable
for tillage. Large parts of Queensland back from the coastal
range, are quite as rich wheat country as that of Manitoba, but
until the railways, and with it, the farmers, come, in the
Canadian North-west the lands are practically useless. On the
other hand, owing particularly to climatic conditions, the West-
ern lands of Queensland, including its great tablelands, is the
finest pastoral area in the world, and produces a quantity of
wool, and a size and quality of cattle, unrivalled in any part of
the Empire.
It follows then, that if Land-grant Railways repay the enter-
prise of companies promoting their construction in Canada, the
profitable return to the enterprise of such companies in Queens-
land would be proportionately greater.
Experience has already proved that the wool production and
the Stock traffic alone, will pay a fair interest on the money
expended in the construction of trunk railways. But railways,
if in private hands, through their owners, will bring closer and
more rapid settlement. With the growth of population, the
area of land under natural grasses will be encroached upon by
tillage. This process, though opening up new industries, increas-
ing the resources of the Colony, providing additional remunera-
tive traffic for railway, need not reduce the number of Stock.
Indeed, as the paddocking of sheep on the most extensive runs,
enabled the pastoralist to profitably manage a larger number of


stock than in the old unenclosed and shepherding days, so closer
settlement and cultivation inevitably promotes the increase in
number of stock in any district, and tends very directly to
improve their quality and that of their products—beef, hides*
wool, tallow, and the like.
The advantage then of railways if built on the Land-grant
principle in Queensland will be that there is already at hand,
traffic in wool and fat stock and a return traffic of station stores,
fencing materials, and Artesian water plant, &c., sufficient to
pay interest on cost of construction.
Further, in Canada the Company which builds the railway
can make little or no use of the land until a farming population
has been placed upon it. But in Queensland the company may
mmediately utilize the land as pastoralists, and under managers,
reap the full advantages of wool growing and cattle raising,
which has been so successful in the past to well-directed and
intelligently applied energy. Then comes the question of the
disposal of the lands to third parties, that is, to Colonists who
will make their homes there, and engage in every branch of
agriculture, and daily add to the profitable railway traffic.
The value of subsidy land will increase with every mile of
railway made and opened. It is a well recognised fact, especially
in new countries, that the value of land in any particular district,
is doubled the moment it is opened up by a railway connecting
it with the settled districts. The railway brings new settlers,
and by the operation of the principle of betterment, increasing
population is accompanied by increasing value of the lands.
It will be the business of the railway company to formulate
schemes for the close settlement of their subsidy lands, to
encourage the emmigration of skilled agriculturalists and agri-
cultural mechanics, and to create a series of rural townships in
each of their blocks. From such a population the return to the
company and the benefit to the Colony should be steadily increas-
ing. The purchase money of the homestead, spread it may be
over five or six, or even ten years, will recoup the companies


the cost of railway construction, and the population, with
their industrial products, will swell in ever-increasing rates, the
railway traffic receipts.
The most important lines to be constructed are
1. Charleville to Western Boundary of the
Colony ----- 550 miles.
2. Longreach to the Western Boundary - 420 „
8. Hughenden to the Western Boundary 420 „
4. Normanton to Cloncurry - - - 250 ~
On either side of these routes the Government would set apart
a sufficient area of Crown lands to provide for the land subsidies
to the railway companies in the blocks alternate with similar
areas retained in the hands of the Crown.
The value of the lands so reserved and proposed to be granted,
is to be assessed at the fair market value immediately before
making the Contract and without regard to any prospective value
that may be given to the land by the construction of the proposed
railway.
The blocks of land handed over as subsidies would be not less
than twelve miles in depth, and ten miles frontage to the Rail-
way on either side.
The average area of each alternate block would be about
75,000 acres.
The routes are mostly over the Artesian water bearing area of
the Colony and are for the most part over open rolling plains,
with no great engineering difficulties. Much of the construction
will be surface work, and the rivers to be crossed are of a similar
nature to those already crossed by comparatively inexpensive
low level bridges in many parts of the Colony.
It is estimated that the lines, which if of the same guage as
the existing Queensland lines, would be 3 ft. 6 in. guage, can be
built and equipped for £2,500 per mile. The average assessed
value of the lands to be granted may be taken at 6s. Bd. per acre.
Let me now pass in review, in not too much detail, the basis
of our National wealth.


MINERAL RESOURCES.
From an industrial point of view the mineral resources of
Queensland may be said to first arrest attention. They contain
all the potentialities of great and expansive manufacturing
enterprise in the future. But they offer in the present, now
and at hand, opportunities for the reproductive employment of
capital and of skilled labour surpassed by no mining centre
in the world and equalled by few. As a matter of fact the
mining industry of Queensland gives employment to 49,000
of our population, or about a ninth of the total population
of 432,298.
Coal and Iron.— lf the secret of England’s manufacturing
pre-eminence be her coal and iron deposits, the industrial future
of Australia is assured from the enormous deposits of these
minerals already discovered and proved in Queensland. The
mining and smelting of iron ore is a late development of manu-
facturing activity in a new country. It was so in America, and
there is no reason to think that it will not be so in Australia.
When the time comes there is in every section of the Colony an
abundance of iron ores, including clay-iron, carbonate of iron,
hematite, magnetic iron and chrome-iron, and that prime
necessity in smelting, limestone.
An immediate supply of fuel, good in quality and cheap in
price, is an important factor in settlement, development and
expansion. It is as necessary to local and internal trade as it
is to external or foreign commerce. In almost no part of the
vast territory of Queensland is coal absent. The hard and
bituminous coals of the valley of the Brisbane and its tributary
the Bremer, furnish a supply of fuel as cheap as on the banks
of the Clyde or Tyne, to the coastal and oversea shipping, and to
the growing manufactures of the capital.
On the Logan and Albert Rivers, 20 miles south of Brisbane,
seams of coal seven feet six inches thick have been opened at a
less depth than 300 feet. The coalfields of the Burrum and the
Mary basins have a high reputation. On the Bowen River, and


still further north inland from Townsville, excellent coal has
been proved, and in Cape York peninsula, within a few miles of
Cooktown, beds of phenomenal thickness and ease of working
have been tested and are partially worked. It is to be noted
that all these fields are on or near the coast, or on navigable
rivers, whence an export trade may be economically manipulated.
But in the interior there is no lack of coal. On the great
table land of the Darling Downs the mineral is worked and
supplies local railway needs. In the central district, a coalfield
immediately adjoining the great copper deposits of Peak Downs
is being opened up. It is only the fringe of a great coal bed
stretching over four degrees of latitude covered by the head
waters of the Fitzroy.
Although the timber round Charters Towers is becoming
denuded, the future of that great goldfield, with its rich returns
from deep mining, is assured from the discoveries of coal in the
valley of the Burdekin. In the basin of the Flinders there is an
outcrop in several places of coal which will meet the future
needs of the Qountry round the Gulf of Carpentaria.
The coal trade, in fact, is in its infancy. Last year the out-
put was 265,086 tons, valued at £128,308.
Tin.— Stream tin has been worked for many years at Stan-
thorp, on the mountainous border of New South Wales. Lode
and alluvial tin has been worked near Cooktown, at Mount
Spurgeon, Port Douglas, and on the Palmer River, but the
greatest enterprise in this valuable branch of mining is shown
at Herberton, the rich and salubrious table land overlooking the
picturesque valley of the Barron, whose deep gorges and lofty
waterfalls, and surpassingly beautiful tropical scenery, will
render this district in time the health resort of the Australian—
and even of the European tourist. The total production of this
metal since its first discovery in 1872 has been £4,100,000.
Copper, Lead, Silver.— There has been an arrest in the
development of copper, silver, and lead mining by the excessively
low rates ruling of late for these metals. In the Ravenswood


district watered by the Burdekin, the whole hill region behind
the headwater of the Barron, the Johnston, and the Herbert
Rivers is argentiferous and invites exploitation. Every little
range has yielded more or less rich discoveries, and a rise in the
price of the white metal would give at once a fillip to the
development of the mines and smelting works in and around
Berber ton.
The drop in the price of copper and the want of ready access
to our greatest supplies of rich and pure ores, have brought this
particular mining industry to a low point. The extensive works
at Mount Perry, some sixty miles from the port of Bundaberg
the landing-place of the telegraph cable to New Caledonia, are
still working.
The opening of the Gulf Railway to Cloncurry, which it is
proposed to build on the Land Grant system, will bring the
virgin ore, the carbonates and oxides of copper of that district,
into more than even competition with the red metals of Chili
and Lake Superior.
Minor Metals.— Bismuth and antimony have.been found in
many parts of the Colony both north and south, but the mining
of these metals is confined for the most part to the Gayndah,
Bowen and Hodgkinson districts.
Cinnabar, Cobalt and Plumbago have been mined at Kilkivan
and on the Mary River, and will yet secure greater attention
from the enterprising capitalists.
The search for these minor metals, to coin a phrase, is pro-
gressive, for the value of the exports of silver, lead, copper,
bismuth and antimony has increased from £292,000 in 1891 to
£816,018 in 1892.
From a special silicious clay in the valley of the Bremer and
Brisbane, first-class building bricks and pottery are made.
Precious Stones. — Diamonds and rubies have been found in
the district west from Rockhampton, but the principal precious
gem of Queensland is the rainbow-hued and glowing opal, of
which last year there was exported a value of £14,437.


Gold.— Gold mining, however, is at present the chief mining
industry of Queensland. The precious metal has been found in
every part of the Colony from the extreme south at Warwick to
the north on the Gulf of Carpentaria and Cape Aork peninsula,
on the sea coast on the slopes of the coast ranges, on the dividing
range, and on the table lands 500 miles and more inland. There
are twenty-two proclaimed goldfields, and rewards of £5OO and
£l,OOO are still offered by the Government for the discovery of
new payable deposits.
The most important fields are Gympie and Eidsvold in the
south, Rockhampton in the central district, and Charters Towers,
Ravenswood, Etheridge, Gilberton, Palmer and Crojdon in the
north.
The laws regulating gold mining are extremely liberal. A
miner’s right costs only 10s. a year, and with that a man may
take up a claim of 50 feet by 50 in dry alluvial diggings ; 100
by 100 in wet alluvial. The quartz claim is 50 feet on the line
of reef with a depth of 400 feet. The capitalist is invited to aid
in the reaping of the golden crop by offers of leases of auriferous
ground not exceeding 25 acres for 21 years at a - rent of £1 per
acre per annum.
Perhaps the richest single gold mine in the world is Mount
Morgan. This Mount, held partly freehold and partly lease-
hold by a limited liability company, is 22 miles from Rock-
hampton, forming the centre of a ring of hills, and according to
Mr. Jack, the Government geologist, was formerly a geyser.
In days of old the water from this wonderful hot spring held
the gold and other materials in solution, and they were
chemically precipitated from the natural fountain and consoli-
dated into a feruginous stone. Treated by the chlorination
process, this feruginous stone yields a very pure and fine gold
valued at £4 4s. the ounce—the purest and most valuable gold
in the world. During the last seven years the dividends paid
by the company to the shareholders have amounted to £3,380,000
sterling, and during the last few weeks a new discovery of a


very rich reef in an open gallery of the Mount has inspired an
added and fresh interest in that mine.
The total yield of gold of Australasia was in 1892 1,806,763 oz.
of the value at £8 10s. per ounce of £6,323,670. Of this amount
Queensland returned 615,558 oz. valued at £2,154,453 or fully
one third of the total Australasian output. Ten years ago the
Queensland yield was only a third of the present or 224,893 oz.
valued at £787,125 10s.
It is important to note that the quartz crushed in 1891 was
469,045 tons yielding 660,418 oz. of gold or an average yield of
1 oz. 8 dwts. 21 grs. per ton. The quartz crushed in 1892 was
446,219 tons or 22,826 tons less than in 1891 owing to a partial
drought on some of the Northern gold fields. But the yield was
richer than in 1891 —598,519 ozs. being retorted from 446,219
tons crushed, or an average of 1 oz, 6 dwts. 20 grs. per ton.
Since the discovery of gold in Queensland in 1858, the total
yield has been 8,630,472 ozs. which, valued at £3 10s. per oz.,
represents £30,206,652.
PASTORAL
In the development of any country Pastoral settlement pre-
cedes agricultural; the shepherd is the forerunner of the tiller.
And Queensland has been no exception to the rule. There were
special reasons indeed why in Queensland the undivided energy
of the early inhabitants was devoted to pastoral pursuits.
The territory was still an outlying appanage of New South
Wales, and the land laws were devised for the encouragement of
wool growing and cattle breeding. For long the country was a
sealed book. Its geography was as unknown as its climate or
the productiveness of its soil.
The discovery of the rich plains and downs of the Southern
table-lands by Allen Cunningham, and their first invasion from
New England were followed in 1842, by the opening of what is
now Southern Queensland to free settlement. The explorations
of Leichardt and Sir Thomas Mitchell gave an impetus to the


conquest of the wilderness by flocks and herds, but it was not
till 20 years afterwards, and some time after Queensland had be-
come an independent Colony, that the full extent of the territory
had been traversed, and other 20 years before the country from
the Macpherson range to the Gulf of Carpentaria had been taken
possession of, and a beginning made by stocking with either
sheep or cattle. Remembering that the area of Queensland is
five-and-a-half times that of the British Isles, the enterprise and
the heroic vigour of the Colonists in accomplishing so much in
so brief a period will remain an honour to our race. They were
of course assisted by the Liberal land laws which the infant
Legislature passed for their benefit. It is doubtful whether in
the history of new countries has a Government shown more
wisdom —(I speak in a broad sense, of course, for there were
mistakes as practical experience revealed ; only, however, to be
corrected) —than Queensland in the liberal land laws extending
from the Pastoral Leases Act of 1869, to that of this year under
which co-operative and communal settlements may be established
with State assistance for tools, seed, building material and
rations.
Experience in Queensland has upset many an argument put
forward with the assurance which a professor of mathematics
does a problem of Euclid. It was said that the Darling Downs
would not grow a cabbage. They have become the fruit garden
of Australia. White crops, it was argued, were impossible
below the main dividing range ! It is actually found that they
flourish with a luxurious productiveness which is amazing.
Sheep it was contended, would not thrive, or their wool would
deteriorate to hair, beyond the Tropic of Capricorn. The table-
lands as far as the Gulf of Carpentaria, almost bordering on the
Equator itself, have proved so excellent a home for the merino
that with ordinary management the quality of the wool has im-
proved, and with care reaches as high an excellence as any in
the world. It would be difficult to choose any country where so
remarkable progress has been make with stock as in Queensland,


both as to numbers and as to quality. So carefully has the
grading of cattle been gone about and with the very best blood
of the two standard breeds, Shorthorns and Herefords (polled
Aberdeen-Angus although established in a few pure herds are
not sufficiently numerous to count in a wide generalizaion) that
the average draft of “fats” from a herd grazed, say on the rich
grasses of the Mitchell or the Esk Valley would compare with
the choicest specimens stalled in the London markets. It is this
special and precious qualtiy of the Queensland natural grasses
and herbs which gives the juicy and sweet excellence to the beef,
and which as it becomes known in the English and Continental
markets will secure for it an unfailing demand.
So also with the sheep. The best blood of Saxony and
Vermont and their improved stocks of Tasmania and Victoria
has been freely and without stint of capital used in impressing
their character on the Queensland flocks and with the best
results. It is admitted on the Wool Exchange, that Queens-
land clips have as good a reputation for fineness and staple in
London, Bradford, Antwerp, Eouen and New York as the
choicest of New South Wales and Victoria, With the growth
of the Colony has come the extension of its wool trade, and the
clip of last year was valued at the customs counter at £4,183,178,
or only a million less than the value of the total exports from
Queensland ten years ago.
A series of good seasons and improvement in the herds and
flocks have aided in securing an unusually large increase in the
live stock. Twenty years ago the total sheep in Queensland
numbered 7,286,946. In 1892, they had increased to the enor-
mous total of 21,708,310, more than a fifth of the whole sheep
in Australia, which in turn has a fifth of the whole sheep tally
of the world! In the same period cattle have multiplied in even
greater ratio. Twenty years ago they numbered in Queensland
1,343,093. In 1892, they totalled 6,591,416.
Nor is there anything likely to arrest this enormous extension
of the live stock of the Colony.


Barcakline
.. 175,000
691 ft.
102 deg.
17 lbs.
Blackball
.. 300,000
1,638 „
119 „
65 „
Cbarleville .
.. 3,000,000
1,571 „
106 „
100 „
Cunnamulla
.. 540,000
1,402 „
106 „
185 „
The discovery and utilisation of artesian water has made a
large part of the area of what was formerly regarded as water-
less or, notwithstanding the richness of the soil, practically
barren country, capable of carrying a heavy stocking of sheep or
cattle. During the past ten years the Government have spent
£275,000 in constructing tanks on the great stock routes, and in
bores in various parts of the western country so as to prove the
water bearing area. The success of the Government experiment
was prodigious and has revolutionised squatting in these “ back-
blocks ” from a speculative and uncertain occupation to an
assured enterprise. Of the fifteen Government artesian wells in
different parts of the western country yielding most excellent
drinking water for both man and beast, and which is moreover
adapted for woolscouring, irrigation, and steam boilers, the
following are the chief :
Bore. Gallons per day. Depth. Temperature. Pressure per
sq.inch.
Generally speaking, the effect of these bores is to add at once
to the permanently productive area for the pastoralist and agri-
culturalist no less than 88,300 square miles, embracing 9 degrees
of latitude, 20 to 29 degrees on 540 miles from North to South,
of which 15,000 are in the district of Burke, 1,300 in Gregory
North, 20,000 in the Mitchell, 27,000 in the Warrego, and
25,000 in the Maranoa.
Private enterprise followed the Government experiments, and
there are by last report of the Hydraulic Department, 137
private artesian bores on runs held under the long leases of the
1884-92 Land Acts. These have tapped only a small portion of
the water bearing area although they yield 100 million gallons
per day. On one station in the south west there are several
bores yielding from 19,000 to 1,500,000 gallons per day, which


afford from 60 to 70 miles of running water. The most im-
portant private bore is Noorama, which is 1,502 feet deep, has a
flow of million gallons per day at a temperature of 112
degrees, and at a pressure of 200 lbs. to the square inch. This
pressure alone will in the future prove of unmistakable value
as a motive power for freezing, woolscouring, and other works.
Returning to the question of the live stock of the Colony, we
see that their increase is no longer dependent altogether on wet
or dry cycles. The limit to the increase will only be the profit-
able utilisation of this magnificent natural wealth. Another
and a larger outlet is required. Britain’s necessity is Queens-
land’s opportunity. The meat bill of Great Britain is computed
by Professor Long at £100,000,000 sterling, of which about 30
millions worth is imported from abroad.
The necessity of preserving the home flocks and herds from
contagious disease has led to the prohibition of the importation
of live stock from many parts of the Continent, from the United
States and Canada except under conditions, in certain cases, of
slaughter at the port of debarkation. The greater part of the
present demand then must be supplied by chilled or frozen
meat —towards a safe acceptable and profitable trade in which,
from the most distant quarters of the Globe the resources of
science have recently contributed so largely.
There are two reasons why we look to an immediate extra-
ordinary and profitable development of the meat trade from
Queensland which, as I have shewn, the Colony is so well able
to supply.
First of all trade follows the flag in a very real sense. The
Imperial sentiment is very strong in commerce : and all other
things being equal, our merchants and people will deal with
customers within the Empire rather than with foreign.
In the second place, consumption in America is steadily gain-
ing on production, and the supply of the United States has
probably reached its highest point.


Above all the Queensland product is quite on a par with the
American as to quality, and far ahead as to price. A grazier in
Queensland can deliver at a profit a fat bullock at the freezing
works for £4, while for a similar class of bullock the Chicago
butcher and exporter must pay up to £lO.
The Queensland meat industry, though in its initial stages,
has already proved of unmistakable benefit to the Colony. It
has given a fillip to pastoral enterprise; it is creating a most
desirable and remunerative occupation to a large number of
workmen : it is adding a new value to the public estate. The
Government have wisely noted all this, and in the session of
Parliament just closed they took legislative measures to encour-
age the expanding trade which promises so hopefully, and for
the National benefit.
The British Australian naval squadron is supplied with fresh
and cured beef from the Queensport works owned by the Graziers’
Butchering and Export Company, on the Brisbane Eiver, which
have also some contracts for the supply of the Dutch Army and
Navy in Java and Sumatra.
The oldest works in Queensland are at Lake's Creek, Rock-
hampton. This Company combines in their operations the
freezing of fresh beef and mutton, canning of beef and mutton,
tongues, etc., the manufacture of beef extract, and boiling down
for the extract of tallow. The freezing department, now in full
swing, is capable of turning out 312,000 sheep or 26,000 cattle
per annum. The boiling down establishment has a capacity of
treating 2,000 sheep daily, or 624,000 per annum.
The Queensland Meat Export and Agency Company have estab-
lished magnificent works at Brisbane and Townsville with a
capacity, recently tested to the utmost extent, of freezing and
forwarding to the London and Continental markets 60,000
cattle, or 720,000 sheep per annum. There are in addition boil-
ing down establishments at Oakey Creek, on the Darling Downs,
at Alligator Creek near Townsville, and at Normanton and
Burketown, on the Gulf of Carpentaria.


New freezing works are expected to be forthwith commenced
on the Coast, and at different points on the three great Trunk
railways, while the machinery of the existing works is being
largely increased, as the result of the Act passed a few weeks ago
entitled “ The Meat and Dairy Produce Encouragement Act.”
Under its provisions a tax is imposed on the whole stock of the
Colony, and the fund so raised is to be devoted to assisting in
the erection of freezing and chilling works, and the export of
the prepared products to Europe and elsewhere. According to
the chief Inspector of stock the cast of cattle suitable for export
this year will be 650,000; and 10 per cent, of the 22,000,000
sheep could be fattened for freezing and boiling down. That the
industry has been started with earnest purpose to command
success to the promoter, and benefit alike the Colony, and the
hungry population of the whole country, may be shewn by the
fact that in 1892, the sheep preserved or frozen numbered
587,577. The catfle preserved or frozen in 1892, numbered
141,149. In 1892, the tallow exported was 6,788 tons.
The exports of pastoral produce in 1892 reached £6,290,931
—over a million more than the total exports of the whole
Colony ten years ago : and a reasonable, legitimate, unexagger-
ated estimate may add 25 per cent, to these handsome figures as
the immediate result of the new expansion of the meat industry.
AGRICULTURAL.
“ After the shepherd comes the farmer.” So says an old
proverb. There were reasons for the late beginnings of Agri-
culture in the sense of crop-growing in Queenslaed. Its dis-
couragement was a State policy so long as Queensland was an
outlying province or Appanage of New South Wales. Then the
early squatter from a purely selfish but surely shortsighted policy
regarded with disfavour the invasion of his domain —sometimes
as large as a German Duchy—by what were called cockatoo
farmers or selectors. By so doing he made himself heir to many
labour troubles. The interlacing of large graziers and farmers, —


of pasturage with tillage—would not only have advanced and
completed the development of the National wealth from the
soil: it would have provided the squatter with labour at his
need, and the farmer with monetary assistance in the shape of
wages at his need. There would not have arisen the nomad
shearer and rousahout who brought in their train the absurd hut
somewhat expensive socialist campaign.
Queensland at the present moment probably offers a wider and
more varied field for agricultural settlement than any other
single State in the world.
The chocolate and black soils of the Darling Downs with an
elevation up to 3,000 feet above the sea level, and a proximity
to markets both for green and preserved fruit, present facilities
for fruit culture incomparably more favourable to the emigrant
with a small capital than California or Florida. The drawback
hitherto has been that the settlers were ignorant of the first
principles of the fruit growing art, or the conservation of the
fruit when garnered. Vines planted experimentally matured
grapes whose flavour challenged the produce of English hot-
houses or the famed vineyards of Europe. Peaches and nectarines
after a few years fruited with such prolificness that even
the settler’s pigs tired of their luscious fruit. Our farmers
neither knew how to make wine or raisins, to manufacture
preserves or jams. But in the near future with the practicalities
of the skilled fruit grower, of the canner and the conserver, all of
which are permeating southern Queensland through the influence
of Government instructors and experts, the hundred odd brands
of fruit from California, Florida, etc., are being displaced by
neatly packed and; attractive Queensland pine-apples, peaches,
nectarines, plums, apples, pears, quinces, loquats, oranges,
rosellas and raisins.
The true metier of the farmer in Queensland was degraded by
the extensive public works policy rather than encouraged.
Horse provender was what was locally demanded, the majority
of farmers devoted themselves to its production, which conduced


neither to close settlement, nor the growth of a peasant or
yeoman proprietary. Moreover the possibility for grain crops
over an enormous area of the Colony were undreamed of. The
idea that a farmer could perennially make a living out of horse
provender in a country which has probably more rich natural
grasses than any other, has of course proved a delusion and a
snare. The possibility of the soil for higher and closer culture
has since been studied. Professor Shelton, an eminent American
farming authority, has, on behalf of the Government, as instructor
in Agriculture, explored, I might almost say exploited the Colony
in order to estimate scientifically its capabilities for close settle-
ment. He has devoted himself heart and soul, orally and by
official bulletins to the instruction of settlers large and small.
He reports that there are no less than 80,000 square miles
or 51,200,000 acres of wheat lands in Queensland, a larger
area than in all the rest of the Continent of Australia. The
area under wheat cultivation has increased 25 per cent, during
the past two or three years, and with it the erection of flour
mills in different parts of the Colony. There has been a recent
rush for wheat lands by old and new settlers in the Roma
district. 33,332 acres were put under crop last year, and the
yield per acre represents 20-94 bushels per acre, with an average
of 17*20 bushels since 1879, compared with 13*89 bushels in
New South Wales, 11*11 in Victoria, 7*56 in South Australia,
and 11*86 in Western Australia. Here is what a practical Scot
recently travelling in these Western wheat lands wrote of them:
“I n the hollows of the billowy country the grass is high, and as
the buggy rolls silently along the smooth track, ever and again
may be heard a Pirr-rr like the thunder-plump on the leafage of
the forest. It is the patter of a flock of sheep disturbed as they
browse among the rank vegetation which hides them even from
the vantage of the buggy. Zigzagging down into the bottom of
some nearly dry watercourse, the enormous depth of the soil is
noted—a combination of disintegrated volcanic rock, and the
humus of the decayed grasses and shrubs of thousands of bygone


seasons. A wheat soil this as rich as that of black Russia, or the
western prairies of America. And the imagination pictures a not
very distant future when pioneer pastoralists shall give place to
agriculturists —the units of squatters to the thousands of tillers,
the natural grassess supporting comparatively few sheep to waving
fields of golden grain for the sustenance of the teeming millions
of the busy cities of the Coast lands and the hives of industry of
the Old World This magnificent country only
waits the advent of population and capital, the conservation of
the rain which falls on the surface, and the tapping of the hidden
supplies of artesian water whose existence has been abundantly
proved, to make it, with its upland climate and life-giving air, a
veritable garden of the Lord.”
As an instance of the wonderful strides taken in mixed
husbandry in the Colony, may be cited the development of the
dairy industry and that of ham and bacon curing, both of which
owing to enlarged general knowledge of the capabilities of the
country, and also to the concrete personal instruction given by
travelling dairies and peripatetic teachers employed by the
Department of Agriculture, local requirements are being rapidly
overtaken. For instance, in 1886 Queensland imported 726,436
lbs. of butter; in 1892 imports had fallen to 35,688 lbs. In
1886 the imports of cheese were 1,115,338 lbs.; in 1892 they
were restricted to 4,101 lbs. In 1886 the imports of ham and
bacon were 937,027 lbs.; in 1892 they had fallen to 138,746 lbs.
With the assistance of the Dairy Produce Encouragement
Act, passed a few weeks ago, and referred to in connection with
the meat indnstry, from the creameries of the Logan and Albert
(where the grasses yield a higher percentage of butter fat than
those of any other district of Australia), and from those of the
Darling Downs and Mary River sections we may anticipate a
large export of butter and cheese in the immediate future to the
English markets, and a share in the 12 millions which Great
Britain pays annually for dairy produce to Denmark, Holland,
Sweden, France and America.


With a simple reference to the enlarged area under rice and
coffee, tobacco and cotton, and to the factories and mills which
have been established at large cost for the manufacture of the
raw materials of the two latter crops into tobacco, cigarettes
cigars, and cotton fabrics, I pass to the great
SUGAR INDUSTRY,
which assuredly in the past has been the backbone of purely
agricultural enterprise of Queensland.
There is no finer sugar soil in the world than the delta lands
of Central and Northern Queensland, although all along the
coast from the Southern border the cultivation of cane may be
carried on with profit. For a few years cane growing and sugar
manufacture languished, undoubtedly owing to restrictions on
the employment of Polynesian labour. These restrictions have
been removed, while the interests of the coloured labourers, both
in regard to recruiting at the Islands of the Western Pacific and
on the plantations, have been carefully safeguarded. The
industry has been as it were re-established on a sounder basis
than ever before.
Hard experience proved that cane could be more economically
grown on small holdings than on large plantations, and that it
was better in all respects to separate as much as possible the
purely agricultural work of cane growing from the manufacturing
enterprise of crushing the cane and converting the juice into
sugar and its bye products. Many of the former large sugar
estates have been broken up into moderate sized holdings, and
Government land favourable to the growth of cane has been
thrown open to selection on the most liberal terms.
The Central Mill system has in fact already had marked effect
in settling a numerous white population of farmers on the soil,
and the opportunity offered to energetic farmers with a small
capital of acquiring in a few years the freehold of a rich homestead
and a moderate competency at middle life is deservedly attracting
attention here and elsewhere. Last year 369 of these farmers


of £25,000, advanced by the Government in 1887.
Tons of Cane crushed
20,273
Tons of Sugar made
2,875
Tons. cwts. qrs.
Tons of Cane used per ton of Sugar
. 8 10 3
Price paid farmers per ton of Cane
... 13/11
Cost of manufacture ... ... £1 10
lid. per ton.
Total cost of Sugar per ton exclusive of
interest, f.o.b.
, £8 4 6i
had 11,908 acres under cane for Central Mills and the yield
averaged tons to the acre, while the total area under cane
cultivation was 40,572 acres —an increase of 3,751 over 1891.
61,368 tons of sugar were manufactured, an increase of 10,149
tons over the previous year. The crushing of 1893 yielded
80,000 tons of sugar, of which 60,000 tons will be available for
export, leaving 20,000 tons for local consumption of the value
with the bye products, of a million-and-a-half sterling. The
Government have of late still further recognised the value and
importance of the industry by passing the “ Sugar Works
Guarantee Act of 1893,” by which specifically constituted Sugar
Companies are empowered to raise the money necessary for the
erection of Central Mills by debentures. These Debentures are
repayable in fifteen years —the Government guaranteeing repay-
ment of capital, with interest at 5 per cent, thereon. Although
this Act only received the Governor’s assent last year, several
Companies are being formed in the South as well as in the North,
and the axe and plough are at work bringing fresh lands under
cane culture.
As an evidence of the success of the Central Mill System, the
following recently-published facts will prove interesting. They
relate to the transactions of the North Eton Sugar Mill at
Mackay for the year 1893. This Mill is owned by the surround-
ing farmers and was purchased and erected by means of a loan
Net price realized per ton of Sugar ... 12 0 0


The Company made a profit of £7,730 14s. lid. on its year’s
transactions after allowing for depreciation.
The transactions of the Racecourse Central Sugar Mill Com-
pany at Mackay for 1893 was equally favourable. This Mill is
owned by the surrounding farmers and was purchased and
erected by means of a loan of £21,000 advanced by the Govern-
ment in 1887.
Tons of Cane crushed 21,458
Tons of Sugar made 2,670
Tons. cwts. qrs. lbs.
Tons of Cane used per ton of Sugar... 8 4 0 15
Price paid farmers per ton of Cane ... ... 14/4
Cost of manufacture per ton £1 10s. 10£d.
Total cost of Sugar per ton f.o.b.
exclusive of interest £7 18s. s£d.
Net price realized per ton of Sugar ... £l2 os. Od.
After payment of interest and redemption to the Government,
and allowing 5 per cent, for depreciation, the Company made a
profit of £8,935, out of which a further sum of Is. per ton of
Cane was paid the Shareholders on the Cane delivered, making
the price paid them 15/4 per ton of Cane for last season.
In one of these figures and facts it will be seen that the
prospects of those who are about to take advantage of the
Sugar Works Guarantee Act are of the most promising nature.
It will be apparent to all that as soon as the interest and
redemption due to the Government have been paid, these profits
will be available for distribution in the form of dividends, or
bonuses on the amount of cane which the shareholders bring
to the works.
I can only claim a few sentences in regard to our extensive
forest wealth. From the coast to the table land the whole of the
country is more or less heavily timbered. Eucalypti occupy the
stony ridges of the hills and the open country, but the principal
forests of trees of commercial value are to be found on the coast
ranges, with the exception of the Araucaria Bidwillii, which


clothes the Bunya Bunya range on the northern boundary of the
Darling Downs. There are large supplies of iron bark, blood-
wood, and other hard-wooded varieties of the Eucalyptus, un-
equalled for railway sleepers, piles and other public works; Kauri
and other pines, She oaks, &c., for building purposes. Local,
certainly continental, requirements will more than overtake the
supplies of such timbers. But there are over a hundred varieties
of woods whose capabilities for cabinet making, interior fittings
and decorations have been proved, and whose beauty can only be
realised by an inspection of rough and polished specimens. This
can be done in the museum of the Imperial Institute. From the
Tweed River to Cape York peninsula, the cedar has been cut by
timber-getters for export since the early days of the Colony.
Millions of trees of large, even Mammoth size, especially in the
Herberton district, the Blackall range in Moreton Bay, and the
Mary district wait the lumberer, and this beautiful and excellent
timber having already gained a footing on the London markets,
the trade (under conditions which experience alone can teach the
timber-getters and exporters) is sure to expand to considerable
proportions.
A small shipment of genuine Mahogany arrived last year from
Southern Queensland.
MARINE INDUSTRIES.
One other industry must be briefly noticed—that of the
Fisheries. The well-known naturalist, Mr. Saville Kent, spent
several years, under engagement to the Government, in studying
the life history of the fishes of Queensland waters, and the
possibility of their utilisation in a commercial sense.
Three hundred species of fishes have been found in the bays
and estuaries of the Queensland coast whose human food value
has been proved. With the growth of population local fisheries
will give employment to a large fishing fleet. The incredible
myriads of mullet, anchovies, and other migratory fish which


periodically visit the coast will some day give rise to an industry
like that of the herring in Scotland and the sardine in France.
Schnapper, the cod of the Southern Hemisphere, is found off
the coast in as great numbers as the cod on the banks of New-
foundland. The edible oyster of Moreton and Hervey Bays is
famed throughout Australia. The beds are extensive and pro-
lific, and strictly preserved, scientifically managed, and leased to
companies which exported to the Southern Colonies in 1891,
21,555 packages of oysters valued at £29,191. The Dugong
Fishery for its “ pork ” and medicinal oil is expanding.
The Beche-de-Mer and Pearl shell fisheries are at present,
however, the most valuable fisheries, and give employment to
numerous fleets of schooners, ketches and cutters, and several
hundred white and coloured fishermen. Mr. Saville Kent has
demonstrated the possibility of artificially cultivating the pearl
oyster, and the foreshores of Somerset Sound, and several
islands in Torres Straits, have been set apart to initiate this
novel and interesting industry. Last year the value of pearl
shell and beche-de-mer, exported chiefly from the northern ports,
was £121,992.
CONCLUSION.
In expounding the resources of Queensland, I have necessarily
given a more or less clear notion of its prospects. These, I need
hardly say, are of the brightest and soundest. I have shown
that our public debt, though large, has been wholly expended on
works of a reproductive character, which materially enhance the
value of our public estate, and consequently give added security
to our bondholders. The public estate consists of 427,838,080
acres, only Ilf millions of which have been alienated.
Expenditure from Loan has practically ceased, and strict
economy has been introduced into every department of adminis-
tration. The whole strength of the population is now available
for those pursuits connected with the development of the


pastoral, agricultural and mining resources of the soil. If our
indebtedness be large, the means of meeting its annual charge
and its final extinction are infinitely greater. These may be
measured even now by the excess of exports over imports. That
excess in 1891, was £8,226,883, and in 1892, it was no less than
£4,761,180. The total exports in 1892 reached £9,170,408, of
which £6,290,931 was the value of pastoral products, £2,290,232
mining, £588,453 sugar, and £121,992 pearl shell and beche-de-
mer. This is equal to £2l per head of the population —a pro-
portion unparalelled in the history of any country in the world !
The value of Imports for the same year was £4,382,657, of
which £4,204,474 was from the United Kingdom and British
Possessions. These figures leave a balance of £4,787,751 of
excess of exports over imports in favour of the Colony.
I have failed in my intention if I have not convinced you that
with the expansion of the meat and sugar industries, to say
nothing of the increasing returns from our principal mines, the
exports in the next few years will go on increasing by leaps and
bounds, and the consequent solid and deep-rooted prosperity of
our vast and sunny land be the joy of its people, the pride of the
Empire, and the envy of the nations.
To the practical man with moderate means Queensland offers
opportunities agricultural, pastoral and mineral, not excelled by
any country in the world.
To the Capitalist there are openings for investment which if
made with anything like ordinary care must ensure success.
Above all to the young and energetic, to the steady, self-
reliant man who desires to lay the foundation of a new home
and honest independence, and bring up his family in comfort on
his own freehold, away from the anxieties and grinding com-
petition of the old world, Queensland must take the lead among
the Colonies under the glorious British Flag.


APPENDIX
Showing Increase of Exports in Ten Years.
In 1888 the value of the exports were ... ... £5,276,608
In 1892-
Pastoral.
Wool £4,188,178
Tallow 249,142
Meats 894,411
Hides 240,804
Live Stock 723,325
6,290,931
Mining.
Gold 2,041,090
Tin, &c 249,142
2,290,232
Sugar ... ' 588,453
Marine: Shell and Beche-de-Mer 121,992
£9,170,408
Increase in Ten Years, £3,893,800.
Increase in Meat Export Trade
Live Stock.
In Colony. Horses. Cattle. Sheep. Pigs,
1891 ... 399,864 ... 6,192,758 ... 20,289,633 ... 122,672
1892 ... 422,769 ... 6,591,416 ... 21,708,310 ... 116,930
1891 ... Sheep preserved or frozen ... 151,133
1892 ... „ „ ... 587,577
1891 ... Cattle preserved or frozen ... 30,703
1892 ... „ ~ ... 141,149
1891 ... Tallow exported ... ... 2,632 tons
1892 ... „ 6,781 „


Production of Gold and other Minerals.
Gold obtained in 1892 ... ... 615,518 ozs.
1891 576,489 „
Increase in 1892 ... ... 89,919 ~
The total yield of Gold, from its discovery in 1858, to the end
of 1892, for the whole Colony was :
8,630,472 ozs., valued at £3 10s. per oz. ... £30,506,652
Quartz crushed in 1891 —
469,045 tons, yielding 660,418 ozs., average 1-3-21
446,219
„ 698,519 „ „ 1-6-20
MINERALS.
Tin obtained in 1891
„ „ 1892
2,236 tons.
2,389
Coal „ 1891 ... 271,603 „ ... Value £128,198
„ „ 1892 ... 265,086 „ ... „ 123,808
Silver. Lead, Copper, ] 1891 ... ... ... ~ 292,024
Bismuth, Antimony [1892 ... ... ... ~ 316,018
Opals and Gems ... 1892 ... ... ... ~ 14,437
AUSTRALIAN COLONIES.
Gold Returns for 1892.
Queensland.
Victoria ... 654,456 ozs,
Queensland ... 615,558 ~
New Zealand ... 238,079 ~
New South Wales 156,870 ~
South Australia 88,974 ~
Western Australia 69,548 ~
Tasmania ... 43,278 ~
1,806,763 „
at £3 10s. per oz. ... £5,823,670
Queensland ... 615,558 ~ , , £2,154,453


Increase of Dairy Produce in Five Years.
Butter imported, 1886 726,486 lbs.
„ 1892 35,688 „
Cheese „ 1886 1,115,338 „
„ 1892 4,101 „
Ham and Bacon imported, 1886 ... 937,207 ~
» „ „ 1892 ... 181,746 „
Increase in Agricultural Development.
QUEENSLAND AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE.
Wheat grown in 1892 462,583 bush
1891 892,309
Increase ... ... 70,274
Sugar Manufactured in 1893 80,000 tons.
„ 1892 61,368
Increase 18,632 „
Cotton grown in 1892 ... ... ... 212,370 lbs.
„ » 1891 48,746 „
Increase 163,124 „
Area in cultivation under Wheat in 1892
33,332 acres
20,519 „
„ „ „ 1891
Increase 12,813 ~
Average Return for 10 years, 16J bushels per acre.
SUGAR-CANE CULTIVATION.
Area under cultivation, 1892 ... ... 40,572 acres.
„ „ 1891 36,321 „
Increase 3,751 „
1892, 359 farmers had 11,908 acres under Cane for Central
Mills, yielding about 1-J tons per acre.
RICE.
Rice imported in 1892 ... ... ... 2,800 tons.
~ grown in Colony 800 ~


Barcaldine
Gallons
per day.
.. 175,000 .
Depth
ft.
691
Temperature
degrees.
... 102 ...
Pressure
per sq. in.
17 lb.
Blackall
.. 300,000 ..
. 1,663
... 119 ...
65 ,,
Charleville .
..3,000,000 ..
. 1,571
... 106 ...
100 „
Cunnamulla .
.. 540,000 .
.. 1,402
... 106 ...
185 „
Queensland Artesian Bores.
PROVED WATER-BEARING AREAS.
District of Burke ... ... ... 15,000 square miles.
~ Gregory N. ... ... 1,800 ~
„ Mitchell 20,000
~ Warrego ... ... 27,000
~ Maranoa ... ... 25,000 ~
88,300
There are 15 Government Bores, the chief being: —
Private enterprise followed the Government experiment, and
we have 137 private Artesian Bores, yielding 100 million gallons
per day. One Station in south-west had Bores of from 19,000
to 1,500,000 gallons per day, giving 60 to 70 miles of running
water.
Government have spent in Bores and Tanks £275,000, adding
an enormously increased value to the public estate.
Excellent drinking water, well adapted for wool scouring,
irrigation and steam boilers. Temperature up to 170 degrees.
The largest yielding private bore is Noorama, in the Warrego
district, yielding 3£ million gallons per day, 1,602 ft deep, 112
degrees temperature, and 200 lb. pressure to the square inch.


■


■
■
