

Presbyterian Union
of 1865
AND NOTICES OF SOME WHO WROUGHT IT
By A. C. GEIKTE, D.D.,LL.D.
ANGUS & ROBERTSON, 89 GASTLEREAGH ST.
1896




for review.
V(ITH ANGUS & ROBERTSON'S COMPLIMENTS,
com of the paper containing your notice
this booh will be eUeemed a jauour.
0 , THE
'9 Castle reagh btreet,
Prettyterian Union
of 1865
AND NOTICES OF SOME WHO WROUGHT IT
By A. C. GEIKIE, D.D.,LL.D.
J?gim.crr
ANGUS & ROBERTSON, 8U CASTLEREAGH ST,
1896




A) ihSS/r
5,6-5
THE
Presbyterian Union of 1865;
AND NOTICES OF SOME WHO WROUGHT IT,
I arrived in Sydney on a Sunday evening, October
27, 1861, and when the “ Tasmanian,” a slow but
comfortable vessel, was tied up, things seemed lonely
enough. Nor was the loneliness lessened by the fact
that, in one of the boats on the starboard side, there
lay the dead body of an old man, who had died on the
passage from Melbourne, for from Melbourne we had
last sailed. I had, unhappily and most stupidly,
taken our passage from Glasgow in a ship which
proved a wretched one in sailing qualities, in accom-
modation, in the company on board, in the skipper,
and in the provision laid in for our bare necessities.
We were one hundred and nineteen days on the pas-
sage, and, with my wife’s uncomplainingness and the
sufferings of my two children, all now no more here,
it was a portion of my life to be thought of, when
inevitably recalled, with great sorrow. When we lay


on that Sunday night at the wharf, the bells of St.
Phillip’s were ringing, but all else was still. On the
Monday morning I went out to see if I could find
any one to speak with, for I did not then know a
soul in Australia. It was a sunny morning, and I
found my way to Messrs. Sheriff and Downing, book-
sellers, George-street. Both are gone, but in those
days they had a large place near Senior’s. I need
hardly say that I was kindly received, but where to
go to they knew as little as I did, for there was no
“ Reception Committee ” in those times, nor was any
one prepared to receive us. Through the help of the
late Dr. Moon, however, we were housed before
bedtime, and remained in our lodging while we re-
mained in the city.
On returning to the “ Tasmanian,” I found that
the Rev. Mr. Leishman, then supplying the iron
church vacated by Mr. Salmon and afterward occu-
pied by Dr. Steel, had called. He had, like myself,
been in Canada, and he was my first and only visitor
that day and for some time to come. The next
clergyman I met was the Rev. John Dougal, who
received us with that graciousness for which the
manse of St. Andrew’s Scots Church was then
and for long after famous; and the friendship thus
commenced continued without arrest until his
lamented death at Maitland soon after he moved
there, a sphere in which he was very happy. Not
long after I saw Mr. Dougal, we came to know the
Rev. Adam Thomson, another whose venerable form
is ever memorable, and whose kindness cannot be


forgotten—a kindness which lasted till his dying day, so
soon after he oecame Principal of St. Andrew’s College.
I was sent to this country by the Rev. Dr. John
Bonar, then Convener of the Colonial Committee of
the Free Church—a charming man, whose cultured
and considerate correspondence is now by me. He
was, as I think, an admirable convener, most con-
siderate and painstaking in his intercourse with such
as he had to deal with. He seldom, I believe, sent
any one to the colonies without first hearing him
preach, and he followed this plan with me, for he
came to hear me in a church near the Pleasance,
Edinburgh, and complimented me on my voice, which,
he said, “it was a pity I should spoil with snuff,” as
I was then a great snuffer. I was in his room in
York-place one day, and I asked him, as I was going
to New South Wales, to tell me how many vacancies
there were in that country. He at once turned up
his book, showed me name after name, and, if I am
correct, he read out to me thirteen places in all.
Whereupon I asked him if he believed there were so
many. He used an eye-glass, which gave him the
look which eye-glasses usually give their wearers,
replying : “I can’t tell you ; but these are the names
of vacancies sent to me.” Who sent them I cannot
tell, but I know that, as a fact, there was not one
vacancy in the colony, much less thirteen. He was
a delightful man, with the appearance and the ways
of a gentleman, a minister of the class who made the
Disruption of 1843 ; nor do I know that this species
is being reproduced largely in these altered times.


My commission and other papers had been for-
warded to Dr. Mackay, formerly the minister of St.
George’s, Castlereagh-street, which was, though with
an empty pulpit, not ready to call any man, and
there I was sent to preach. Of this fine specimen of
a Highland minister and scholar. I fear but little is
known now-a-days. He had been in the parish of
Dunoon at the period of the Disruption, but why he
was sent to Sydney I never could understand, for
this was not the place for men of his type. A great
Gaelic scholar, an antiquary, a collector of articles of
vertu , wholly of the past, with much natural and
acquired ability, a new country was not his home,
and it never became this. He built St. George’s
nevertheless, and, in despite of all his efforts, it was
at the date of my arrival heavily in debt, and, if it
got a minister for the future, must call one who
needed no stipend. He was settled on his return to
Scotland in the Island of Harris, I believe, and the; e,
I presume, he ended his work, dying at Portobello in
1873.
He was greatly thought of by Sir Walter Scott,
who enjoyed his friendly visits, and ever spoke of him
in the warmest terms. In 1828, when minister of
Laggan, he was visiting Scott, and then nearly done
with his well-known Highland Dictionary. “ Modest,
intelligent, and gentle,” is the judgment passed on
him by his host, who wrote Sir R. Peel, asking for
him the parish of Cupar-Angus, and he was more
than angry when that statesman gave it past his
friend. In 1829 he was with Scott again. On May


25, 1829, the Diary says : —“ Dr. Mackintosh Mackay
came to breakfast, and brought with him, to show
me, the Young Chevalier’s target, purse and snuff-
box, the property of Cluny Macpherson ” It was
much to know and be known by the author of
“ Waverley,” the greatest man of letters amongst us
since Shakespere.
The portion of the Presbyterian Church to which I
was accredited was “ the Synod of Eastern Aus-
tralia,” and it met on November 6, 1861, a few days
after my arrival. The report of its proceedings is
now before me. In size it is of the smallest, six
inches long by three inches broad, and badly printed.
It describes itself thus : —“ Proceedings of the annual
meeting of the Synod of Eastern Australia. The
Synod of this Church met on Wednesday, the 6th
instant, in St. George’s Church, Sydney. The retiring
Moderator, the Rev. Charles Ogg, having been pre-
vented from being present, the previous Moderator,
the Rev. James McCulloch, of Ahalton and Raymond,
terrace, preached the opening sermon from Reve-
lations second chapter and first verse, last clause, —
‘ These things saith He that holdeth the seven stars
in His right hand, who walketh in the midst of the
seven golden candlesticks.’ Mr, McCulloch then
constituted the Synod by prayer. The following
members were present during the sittings of the
Court: —Presbytery of Sydney: Rev. James Cameron
of Richmond and Rev. John McSkimming, Chalmer’s
Church, Sydney (ministers), and Mr. Rennie and Dr.
Moon (ruling elders). Presbytery of Maitland : the


Rev. William Mclntyre of Maitland, the Rev. Allan
Mclntyre of the Manning River, the Rev. A. W.
Sherriff of Dungog (Synod Clerk), the Rev. Archi-
bald Cameron of Wellingrove, the Rev. James
McCulloch of Ahalton, the Rev. Adam Gordon of
Singleton, the Rev. William Bain of Newcastle
(ministers), and Messrs. D. Dickson, McMillan and
McLeod, (ruling elders). The Presbytery of llla-
warra : the Rev. William Grant of Shoalhaven, the
Rev. John Kinross of Kiama, and the Rev. Colin
Greig of Eden (ministers), and Messrs. Miller and
Mackenzie, (ruling elders).” Adding the names of the
Rev. Colin Stewart and the Rev. S. E. Mackenzie to
these given, the Synod, so far as I know, consisted of
fourteen ministers, with such elders as were from
time to time sent to attend its meetings. A few still
remain, but the most have been swallowed up by the
inexorable.
These small ecclesiastical bodies were curious. We
of the Synod of Eastern Australia in 1861, were not
quite so narrow as Mr. Barrie’s “ Auld Lichts,” but
there was great narrowness. The head of the Synod
was a student, a good man and able, but he was a
man whose reading moved in a small circumference.
It may be said that we have got out of all that now,
and so we have; but is this getting out of sharply-
defined beliefs and beliefs most firmly held, all gain 1
It may well be questioned whether it is gain at all;
for surely a man may be very tolerant, very broad,
more and more able to hold in his spirit many views
on vital questions, and yet have very definite


•opinions. A man may have greater and greater
charity for others, while he stands by the beginning
of his confidence steadfast to the end. The folly
with multitudes lies in this, that they mistake
indefiniteness for comprehensiveness, while it is
too frequently the outcome of indolence and self-
sufficiency. Clearness of views on theological questions
is judged by many as a proof of smallness of intelli-
gence, while in truth it is, with a student, a proof of
hard, honest, self-satisfying effort. To live in a
theological muddle may, when pompously described,
impose on many ; but it is not power. It is mere
nebulosity, but one of our fads is to mistake this for
profundity.
From the standpoint of many in our time, there
was no chance of the men of the Synod of Eastern
Australia being accounted profound, and yet I
venture to say that there were men in that small
communion who had toiled to apprehend the meaning
of the faith they professed, and before whom the
high pretentiousness of many to-day is pitiful.
The worst feature in the Synod was its Sec-
tarianism. The Disruption in this colony took place
in the year of grace 1846, and the leader of the party
who deemed it their duty to leave the Synod con-
nected with the Church of Scotland was the Rev.
William Mclntyre, an astute man, an admirable
debater, and a merciless logician. But he was more
than all that put together. He was a man whose
high character gave him influence, not only in Mait-
land, but all over the colony. Whether there was ever


any need for a split in the Presbyterian Church here
is not for me to debate now. There are not a few,
however, who in 1896, see things differently from
many in 1846 ; but Mr. Mclntyre always saw them
in the same light. To him the unity of a Church
was as nothing compared with the need for his
“emitting” and continuing to “ emit a testimony.”
Thus, when negotiations for union were re-commenced
in November, 1862, he viewed them with grave
suspicion. “ Time but the impression deeper made,”
and his dread of Erastianism seemed to dominate his
whole ecclesiastial life. Then he was, more or less,
master of his Synod, largely composed of much
younger and less influential men, hitherto accustomed
to follow his leadership. Nevertheless, when a com-
munication from the Synod in connection with the
Established Church of Scotland was read by the
Clerk, the Synod of Eastern Australia was the scene
of a lengthy debate, and, on the motion of the Rev.
A. C. Geikie, seconded by the Rev. Dr. Steel, a com-
mittee was appointed to confer with the Established
Church Synod. This committee did what it was
appointed to do, negotiations began, and the business
of union went on from that hour. Of the many
attempts which were made to prevent union, I need
say very little. They were very frequent and by no
means satisfactory, for the non-union section of the
Synod was resolved that there should be no union if
that were possible, and, while the basis was modified
to please them especially and repeatedly, and after
each modification declared by them to be perfect,.


there ever cropped up some fresh difficulty from the
same quarter. So frequently did this happen, that
at last the majority saw that they must move on,
■or there would be no union at all. Thus, while
the non-union minority strongly objected to any
fraternising with Dr. Lang’s Synod, and supposing
that negotiations with that party would be peculiarly
distasteful to all the rest, it was proposed by them,
as a last resort, that this Synod should be brought into
the negotiations. To their astonishment and sorrow,
this was unanimously agreed to be done, and by a legal
arrangement, after conference with Dr. Lang and his
friends, it was arranged that that gentleman and
those who adhered to him should unite with the
Synod of Eastern Australia under the name of the
“ General Synod of Australia in New South Wales.”
Thus the way was cleared, and in 1864, seeing that
it was, Mr. William Mclntyre, Mr. Allan Mclntyre
(his brother), Mr. McCulloch (his nephew), Mr. Colin
Greig and Mr. McSkimming, protested and withdrew,
appropriating the old name which their successors
hold to this day.
The last two years of union negotiation had wiped
out a good deal of Sectarianism from most of the
minds of the members of the Synod of Eastern Aus-
tralia. They found that the men of the other Synod
were their equals in all things, theological, scholarly,
intellectual, social and religious. When I came to
Sydney, it so fell out that a few of my close friends
were in that Synod, and to some in my own this was
a matter of surprise. One Jew, at all events, was at


home with the Samaritans; and when the union took
place on November 8, 1865, all differences were for-
gotten, and the Presbyterian Church entered on a new
life, and, if it be careful and progressive, that life
should continue to lead to good results in days to come.
Only, there must be care ; care in the maintenance
of a high ministerial standard, and care to keep the
Presbyterian ideals and usages before every congre-
gation. Looking back on the thirty years which
have passed since the memorable meeting in the
Masonic Hall, York-street, when the Presbyterian
Church of New South Wales felt that it was one
Church, we see much to rejoice at and something to
regret.
The Masonic Hall was the spot where the union
took place, and the day was November 8, 1865. The
Rev. James Fullerton, LL.D., was Moderator of the
Synod of Australia in connection with the Established
Church of Scotland, the Rev. Archibald Constable
Geikie was the Moderator of the General Synod of
the Presbyterian Church in New South Wales, and
Rev. Adam Thomson, then the minister of Philip*"
street Church, was the Moderator of the Kirk Session
of the United Presbyterian Congregation. These
three jointly presided. The Moderator of the Synod
of Australia gave out the Hundredth Psalm, and the
Moderator of the General Synod offered up prayer
for the direction and blessing of Almighty God
on the solemn proceedings of the day. Then the
Moderator of Australia in connection with the
Church of Scotland called on the Clerk of that


Synod, the Rev. John McGibbon, to read the Final
Act and Declaration of that Synod, which was as
follows ;
“ Whereas this Synod has had under its anxious
and prayerful consideration the question of union
with other Presbyterian Churches in the Colony of
New South Wales; and whereas, after lengthened
negotiations, a Basis of Union has, in the good provi-
dence of God, been mutually agreed upon between
this Synod of the first part and the General Synod of
the Presbyterian Church in New South Wales of the
second part, and the United Presbyterian Church in
the City of Sydney of the third part; and whereas
this Synod did in connection with the aforesaid
parties agree to unite on the aforesaid Basis and to
form one Church, to be designated ‘ the Presbyterian
Church of New South Wales,’ the supreme judicatory
of said Church to be designated ‘ The General
Assembly of the Presbyterian Church of New South
Wales’; and whereas an Act of Parliament has
been passed, called ‘ The Presbyterian Church
Act of 1865,’ protecting the civil rights, titles and
privileges of all the aforesaid parties respectively;
and whereas this Synod is of opinion that it is for
the glory of God and the good of the Church of
Christ that the union of the aforesaid parties should not
be longer delayed : therefore this Synod, in the name
and on behalf of the Church under its jurisdiction,
hereby agrees forthwith to repair to the Masonic
Hall, York-street, Sydney, there to declare that it
has dissolved its ecclesiastical connection with the


Established Church of Scotland, and, at the same
time, with the aforesaid parties to consummate the
union agreed to on the aforesaid Basis, praying that,
through the Grace of the Great King and Head of
the Church, they may henceforth walk together in
the fear of God and in the comfort of the Holy
Ghost, and be enabled to contend earnestly for the
faith once delivered to the saints, to maintain the
purity of the worship, discipline and government of
the Church, and to extend the blessings of the Gospel
of Christ in this land and throughout the world.
(Signed) “ John McGibbon,
“ Clerk of the Synod of Australia in connection
with the Established Church of Scotland, St.
Andrew’s Church, Sydney, September 8, 1865.”
The Moderator of “ the General Synod of the Pres-
byterian Church in New South Wales ” then called
on the Clerk of that Synod, the Rev. James Cameron,
M.A., to read the Final Act and Declaration of that
Synod, which he did, but as it is a repetition of the
one given above, I shall not reprint it.
The Moderator of the Kirk Session of the United
Presbyterian Congregation of Sydney then called on
the Session Clerk, Mr. James McNaughton, to read
the Final Act and Declaration of that Session, and,
as this is the same as the other two, it need not be
reproduced.
The Rev. Adam Thompson, who had officiated as
Clerk of the Conferences since the resumption of
negotiations in November, 1862, then read the articles


of the Basis of Union, as follows, the members of the
several Synods standing ;
“ That the designation of the United Church shall
be ‘the Presbyterian Church of New South Wales,’
and that the Supreme Court of the same shall be
designated ‘the General Assembly of the Presbyterian
Church of New South Wales.’
“ That the Word of God, as contained in the Scrip-
tures of the Old and New Testaments, is held by this
Church as the supreme and only authoritative rule of
faith and practice.
“ That the Westminster Confession of Faith, the
Larger and Shorter Catechisms, the Form of Presby-
terial Church Government, the Directory for the
Public Worship of God, and the Second Book of Dis-
cipline, are the subordinate standards of this Church.
“The subordinate standards above enumerated are
received with the following explanations ;
(1) “ That while the Confession of Faith, contains
the Creed to which as to a Confession of his own faith
every office-bearer in the Church must testify in
solemn form his personal adherence, and while the
Catechisms are sanctioned as Directories for cate-
chising, the Directory for Public Worship, the Form
of Church Government, and the Second Book of Dis-
cipline are of the nature of regulations rather than


tests, and are not to be imposed by subscription upon
ministers and elders.
(2) “That in adopting these standards this Church
is not to be held as countenancing persecuting or
intolerant principles, or any denial, or invasion of
the rights of private judgment.
(3) “ That by Christ’s appointment, the Church is
spiritually independent, and is not subject in its own
province and in the administration of its own affairs
to the jurisdiction or authoritative interference of
the civil power.
“ That this Church asserts for itself a separate and
independent position in relation to other Churches,
and that its highest Court shall possess supreme and
final jurisdiction over its inferior judicatories, office-
bearers and members.
“ That this Church shall receive ministers and
probationers from other Presbyterian Churches
applying for admission, on their affording satisfactory
evidence of their qualifications and eligibility and
subscribing the Formula.”
The Moderator of the Synod of Australia in con-
nection with the Established Church of Scotland
then read this final declaration :
“ I, James Fullerton, Doctor of Laws, Moderator
of the Synod of Australia in connection with the
Established Church of Scotland, do hereby and in
terms of the Act and Declaration of Synod now read


by the Clerk, declare that this Synod has dissolved
its ecclesiastical connection with the Established
Church of Scotland; and Ido now in terms of the
same Act and Declaration and also in terms of the
Articles of Union just read by the Clerk of the Con-
ference, further declare the union of the said Synod
with the General Synod of the Presbyterian Church
in New South Wales and with the Session repre
senting the United Presbyterian Church, Sydney, to
be now on the part of this Synod consummated.”
Precisely similar declarations were read by the
Rev. A. 0. Geikie on bebalf of the General Synod in
New South Wales, and by the Moderator of the
United Presbyterian Kirk Session, the Rev. Adam
Thomson, and the Union was complete. The three
Moderators signed the Articles of Union, gave each
other the right hand of fellowship, and the members
of Synods or Sessions they represented did the same,
and the work was visible. Then the Moderator had
to be elected, and it was moved by Dr. Fullerton,
seconded by the Rev. A. 0. Geikie, and unanimously
carried, “ that the Rev. Adam Thomson, minister of
the Presbyterian Church, Phillip-street, Sydney, be
elected Moderator of the first £ General Assembly of
the Presbyterian Church of New South Wales,’ ”
whereupon Mr. Thomson was led to the chair by the
Moderators of the uniting Synods, and he consti-
tuted it by the singing of Psalm 147 : 1-3, the
reading of the 17th chapter of St. John’s Gospel, and
prayer.


Finally the following declaration was passed ;
■“That the General Assembly, now constituted, ex-
press their gratitude to the Great King and Head of
the Church for His manifold providence and guidance
throughout all the negotiations for union and for the
happy consummation of the union, in answer to the
prayers of the people in the formation of the Presby-
terian Church of New South Wales ; and, further,
that the Assembly do order the Articles of the Basis
of the Union to be engrossed and bound up with the
Records of Assembly and signed by all the members
of this, the First Supreme J udicatory of this Church,”
and they were signed accordingly, the Assembly
adjourning at half-past two, to meet the next day at
ten o’clock in the forenoon, within Phillip-street
Church, for the despatch of business.
Some may judge all these details wearisome, but
fewer could not have been given if a record was to
be set down, and I was anxious that this should be
done, for every year has made it more obvious that,
as the older members of the United Church were
passing away, there was no attempt being made to
instruct the new-comers in the ordinary story of their
adopted Church. In the Victorian Church there
has been a history drawn up which men can refer to,
but we have nothing, however imperfect. Thus I
hope that these memories of the past may not be
vainly set down.
On November 8, 1865, there were of the Synod of
Australia not fewer than twenty-three ministers, of
whom fourteen are gone, chiefly by death. Nine


only can speak of the good then achieved from any
personal knowledge. Nor could it well be otherwise.
Their Synod was not a Synod of octogenarians,
neither was it a Synod of boys. Its members were,
for the most part, mature men who were busy with
their work, and acceptable as well as busy. They
were persons, too, who contributed both personally
and socially to the strength and dignity of the United
Church. Looking at the list of names lying before
me, one recalls the sound-headed men in whose
keeping the newly-formed Church could not suffer.
And it was well it should have been so. It is vain
to deny, however, the tendency to deteriorate, and no
orie who knows our early story, or wishes to know it,
can fail to discover that our Assembly in those days
consisted of men who ever remembered in all their
discussions that the honour of their Church was in
their keeping, and who kept it. There was much
good speaking ; and there is a difference, perpetually
forgotten, between the addresses which belong to
proper debate and the loose talk which wastes time
and tries those who must hear words as, with little
coherence often and still less eloquence, some ramble
on and make an Assembly a place of weariness, and
oftentimes worse. The mode of procedure was, for
the most part, well known by the majority and
insisted on by the Chair. Our early Assemblies were
most orderly and dignified.
One cannot restore, even imperfectly, the leaders
of that formative period, but there rises to the
memory one name I cannot forget, and that is the


name of the Rev. William Purves, He was, I
believe, a Borderer, and he had the stamp of his
early home. Possessed of unusual elegance of manner
and much manly beauty, he charmed all who had the
pleasure of knowing him, and was always listened to
with that respect which was due to his capacity
and culture. The Rev. John Dougal was a
scholar, kindly in his speech and worthy as a friend
and a minister of the newly-born Church. Dr.
Fullerton, too, was there, shrewd and temperate
in all he said, and a strength to any side he upheld.
Hor was Dr, McGibbon, though younger than those
named, less conspicuous in the work. He was a keen
debater, and, while health remained, a visible force
in the Assembly. Hor does any man of that time
forget the Rev, Adam Thomson, the minister of
Phillip-street—a church then without a steeple, un-
decorated within, and unknown by the name even of
so good a man as Saint Stephen. Born in Coldstream,
where his father lived and died in honour, he did his
work in Hawick while health endured, and in 1861
name out here, hoping that this might be restored.
Of a medium height, in spite of broken health, of a
fair countenance, with natural dignity in every move-
ment, he was a pleasant companion, the pink of
hospitality and a man of truth and unostentatious
devoutness. When union matters were broached, he
at once stepped forward, feeling his own isolation
and seeing the criminal folly of the Presbyterian
position in this country. A Voluntary, but wholly,
rational, he was on most intimate terms with men of


all parties. He had the confidence of them all, and
did a great deal to bring that union about; and he
stood, by common consent, before the Church and
the Churches at large, as the man fitted, without
individiousness, to grace the day of our union by
being chosen as our first Moderator. His whole
bearing was that of a clergyman trained in a
school which believed that the clergy should appear
according to their calling in public and in private,
heeding all the amenities of society; wise, when
advice was wanted; decided, where action was called
for ; and capable in all their ways. The Rev. James
Brotherton Laughton must also be named. He was
our first Clerk, and he filled the office well, writing a
fair hand, apt to draw up his paragraphs,' and fond
of forms. He was a Liverpool Scot, and his degree
of B.A. was taken in Glasgow, while he was licensed
by the Presbytery of Edinburgh. In Glasgow he
boarded with the well known Dr. Heugh. By-and-
bye he came out here and filled various charges,
especially that of Bathurst. Orange was his last
congregation. With a full voice, destitute of all
harshness, he was, with his studious habits, always
seen in the pulpit to advantage. Then he was a man
of wit and humour—two qualities not by any means
common at this time; and whether you entertained
him or he entertained you, his company was always
of the best. Those who knew him and the few
named, alone can recall the brightness of that
ministerial circle who had so much else to speak of
that, when they came together, they never needed


to talk “ shop,” the dreary refuge of too many, and
the destruction of all pleasure, if not worse.
The Synod of Eastern Australia, transformed as I
have already said for the nonce into the “ General
Synod,” for the purpose of arranging with Rev. Dr.
Lang, had its able men, two or three of whom still
remain. The Rev. James Cameron, D.D., of Rich-
mond, is still amongst us, grayer than he used to be,
but, for the most part, much as he was in 1865. He
was always wise in council, and, when he pleased,
admirable in debate ; and long may he live to tell a
younger, or another order of men, that we had good
and true men with us on our festal day. The Rev.
William Grant, D.D., remains, aged and feeling the
work of years, but retaining, as he must ever retain,
the high regard of all who knew him. A close
friend of the Rev. William Mclntyre, he could not
stand by him when he saw the necessity of a united
Church. A staunch free Churchman, the only one
now in these colonies who left the Establishment in
1843, he became one with us all when divisions were
ended. Dr. John Kinross is busy as ever, sound-
headed as ever, studious as ever, given to balancing as
ever, unobtrusive as ever, as capable of debate as
ever, and as unwilling to take part in it. His
identity with St. Andrew’s College is an historic fact,
and long may he continue to fulfil his important
ministry there. The importance of his congregation
is as great as that of any in the land, be this large
or small. The Rev. Dr. Steel was for many years a
power in Sydney and New South Wales generally.
Preaching was diligently heeded, and only such as


have faced the same people for thirty years can know
what it takes out of a man to prepare and to preach
two sermons every Sunday. I say sermons , for there
are effusions which go by that name and are not fit
to be so called. The plea at the present is that the
old “ discourses ” were too long, and the excuse for
the production of brief utterances in their place is,
that such are more suited to what is called the
“ times.” But the briefer the utterance the less
there may be in it and often is in it, and the easier
the task laid on the utterer. Of this there can be no
question. No doubt there have been men in all ages
of the Church who spun spider’s webs and called
them sermons—long enough always, and, by their
length, giving the idea of something; but the average
sermon of the older preachers involved actual study,
for these were not merely longer than at present, but
altogether more full of matter than seems requisite
for the modern pulpit Dr. Steel, by no means the
lengthiest of the brethren, was by no means the
briefest; and he took pains with his double duty,
not choosing sensational headings for what he did,
but doing what he thought of from week to week and
ever maintaining his position. He came to Sydney
in 1861 and died in 1894, as vigorous as he was when
he came from Cheltenham. His forte, however, was
not the pulpit; the platform was his place. To
public meetings he gave his stores of information and
his well-prepared sentences. But there was more
than this about Dr. Steel. He was a man of courteous
manners, his face was never grim with affected
sanctity ; the pleasant and honest smile of a kindly


nature was ever on it. His whole “get up,” too,
became himself and his office, and, in church or
market, he appeared as became a minister of religion.
No dandy he, but he looked like a servant of Christ
in externals, as far as these could convey the idea,
and they convey much. All classes in the land
respected Robert Steel. I have not spoken of the
Rev. Dr. Lang, so long in various ways a famous
man in the land. For years, however, he and the
“ Synod of Australia ” had stood apart. Thus when
he and those who acted with him came into the
United Church, his ecclesiastical labour, as far as
Church Courts went, was not conspicuous. Thence-
forward he attended our Assembly, taking, never-
theless, little part in its proceedings. He was chosen
Moderator in 1872 But it is the less necessary to
speak of one so well known. His varied activities are
set forth in the histories of the colony, whether they
were from his own pen or by other hands.
I have now glanced at some of the facts and the
men of the past; I would only say a word about our
ecclesiastical future; and I hope the men of to-day
will bear with me.
We desire of all things to keep up a series of good
and fit men in the Presbyterian Church of New South
Wales. It is essential that the ministers of the
Church shall be good men and true, but it is also
essential that they be fit as well as true. We are, I
need not say, living in a new land, and the men we
want must needs be able to adapt themselves to the
rising generation. This they must needs do. We
know that peculiarities are thought little of in old


lands, but they strike the population of new ones.
No Scot or North of Ireland man need try to get rid
of his tone ; this he can never do. Nor should he
ever try to speak after an English fashion. Still,
if he speaks of a “ shop,” he need not pronounce
it as if it spelt “ shope.” If he speaks of the
“morning,” he need not pronounce it “mourning,” or
by way of improvement, “ marning.” If he speaks
of the “ Sabbath,” he need not pronounce it
“ Sawbath.” And so generally. He need never
make himself ridiculous by trying to pass for an
Englishman, but he need not cling to the pronoun-
ciations and phrases he had when he used the Doric
as a boy. I need not say, for it would be insulting,
that our men must know the ways of social life in the
country—a matter capable of extensive illustration.
They should also be careful as to matter of dress.
There are tailors and tailors, and one who is much
before the public should employ such as can dress him
not only in black cloth, but in garments made after
the manner of men. To some, such remarks may
seem trivial, but our speech, our manners, and our
appearance, are never trifles. There are scores of men
who are powerful as ministers of religion greatly
because they fit in to the ways of the people. A
clown, however learned, will be of no use in New
South Wales. All this is felt, and it is delightful to
know that our native and rising ministry feels it, sees
the dignity of the office to which it aspires, and is
sure to have the air about it which belongs to the
ministry. We need a native ministry more and more.


Our Church in Canada has grown strong in its native
ministry.
While these matters are not small if they add
to a man’s power, there are two qualities essential to
our future success in this territory, and these are,
studiousness and godliness. Some men are always
students. They began early, not as mere seekers of a
pass, but as lovers of knowledge. It was grained in
them and it has never died, so that whatever their
honours and successes, they seek knowledge and are
happy when they acquire it. To them their ministry
is no mere profession for which in some form or
other they are qualified, or, at least, authorised :
it is a string on which they are ever stringing pearls,
rejoicing in each acquisition, and strong in their work
as they know always more. They go from strength
to strength. Thus their Bibles are ever fresh and
luminous. Thus their sermons have always in them
things new to them and to the listener too. When a
student speaks to you, you recognise him. You feel
that he travels in search of truth and makes ail he
finds help him in his ministry. But there are those
who study not, but who talk much; little is the
wonder that we find, in such cases, the pews forsaken
and the pulpit despised. A studious clergy is needed
for ever.
The other qualification is godli/ness. This, however,
is a solemn thing to handle, and one of the dangers to
certain persons is, that while they are ever vociferously
and glibly telling all round them to become holy, it
is possible they may not themselves become so. We
have a class whose whole work is holding special


services and telling the crowd whom they contrive to
attract that they must needs grow in grace ; but do
these men grow themselves ? That question can only
be answered by their lives. In any case, however, it
is an awfully solemn thing to be often telling others to
be walking closer with God, nor has any man the
right to tell this, unless he feels that he is seeking to
do so himself. If otherwise it be with him, then the
exhortation is a hardening of his own soul. Hence,
the minister of Christ must preach always as to him-
self and pray always as for himself, and read God’s
Word as for himself. A professional repetition of
sacred work is a risk most terrible. Nor is there any
safety except in a deepening desire and effort on the
part of the Christian minister to be, by prayer, by
study, by supplication, by thought, by act, daily
striving to be better than he ever was, and daily
watching his whole being. When a man is thus doing
his work, his work is well done, and good will remain
when it is over. If, on the other part, a man struts
into his pulpit with neither the oil of the sanctuary on
his head nor God’s awe in his soul, he may elocu-
tionise and please for the hour, but! Thus it is
that all must feel, if they are to succeed in the work
of our Church, or rather if our Church is to succeed
in its work ; —first and forever and increasingly they
must seek God to be with them wherever they are
and whatever they do.


