

V.*-■ '*
::: ==S=g) 1 (5== : =5 = g(5 ::^
| THE DRINK EVIL |
in y
AUSTRALIA
. • 1
* t, •
\ I
- ■ v- <i|
j
By f
v , , ■ ;
. ■ ' I
1 ■ ' t
W
■> i .-- ‘ ' .... -■ i I :^
'' • ■
VERY REV. W. J. LOGKINGTON, S J.
2 MELBOURNE: j
AUSTRALIAN CATHOLIC TRUTH SOCIETY, //
312 LONSDALE ST.
/W ( 1915. Lyj
-
No. 230
One Penny




l«tv,
PRESIDENT.—Most Rev. T. J. Carr, D.D., Archbishop of Melbourne.
VICE-PRESIDENT.—Most Rev. Daniel Mannix, D.D., Coadjutor-Arch-
'blshop of Melbourne.
TREASURER.—Right Rev. Monsignor M’Carthy, V.G.
HON. SECRETARIES.—Rev. John Norris, St. Michael’s Presbytery,
North Melbourne; Mr. J. T. P. O’Meara.
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.—Very Rev. J. O’Dwyer, S.J.; V. Rev. Prior
Klndelan, 0.C.C.: Rev. L. Martin, P.P.; Very Rev. W. J. Locklngton,
S.J.; Mr. T. C. Brennan, LL.B.; Mr. J. S. Meagher, 8.A., LL.B.; Mr.
Benj. Hoare, Dr. G. R. Baldwin.
ACTS.
Publications
on Hand
1. Priests and People of Ireland. A
Vindication. (Cardinal Moran.)
3. Mary Immaculate and Demo-
cracy. (Most Rev. J. Keane.)
7. Catholic Church and Temper-
ance. (Very P. Hays.)
12. Dlfe of Fr. Mathew. (Very
Rev. P. C. Hays.)
13. Holy Week (fr’m Cl’t’n Tracts)
16. St. Brigid. (Cardinal Moran.)
17, St. Cplumbkille. (Card. Moran.)
21. Life St. Patrick. (Card Moran.)
22. On Condition of Labour. Ency-
clical Letter of Pope Leo. XITJ
23. Through the Furnace. (Benj.
Hoare.)
25. Socialism. (Rev. E. J. Kelly.,
D.D.)
26. Indifference in Religion. (Rev.
J. J. Malone.)
27. St. Francis Xavier. (Rev. J.
J. Malone.)
28. Catholics and Crime. (Benj.
Hoare.)
.12. The Church and the Fine Arts.
(J. W. Foster Rogers.)
34. Holy Week. The Gospel Narra-
tive of the Passion.
36. Christian Marriage and Divorce.
(Archbishop Carr.)
37. The Lost Child: A Story.
(Translated from German.)
38. Religion and Human Liberty:
or, The Bible the Charter of
Men’s Rights. (Rev. J. O’Dwyer,
S.J.)
39. The Church and Education.
(MHist Rev. Dr. Higgins.)
50. Faith Moves Mountains: A
Story Founded on Fact. (Benj
Hoare.)
51. Great Betrayal (2nd Edition).
(Benj. Hoare.)
52. Pastoral Archbishop
and Bishops of Prov. of Melb.
63. Third French Republic and the
Church. (Most < Rev. Patrick
Delany, D.D.)
55. Spiritism. (Fr. Hogan, 0.P.)
56. Church’s Greatest Treasure:
Adorable gaerifieg 8f tii§ Altar.
(Rev. M. Watson. S.J.)
57. Discovery of Australia by De
Quiros, 1606. (Cardinal Moran.)
58. Fr. Burke, O.P. (Fr. Hogan.)
59. Lost; Heir; or, A Mother’s Faith
Rewarded. (Peggy O’Connor.;
60. Immortality of the Soul. (Fr,
Stanislaus M. Hogan, 0.P.)
62. Catholic Monuments: 20 Years
of Catholic Education, Church-
es & Charities. (Benj. Hoare.)
64. A Chat About the Index: Why
Books are Condemned. (Rev.
J. Whyte.)
65. The Catholic Church knd Medi-
cal Science. (Rev. J. O’Dwyer,
S.J.)
67. Blessed Eucharist. (Rev. James
O’Dwyer, S.J.)
68. Christopher Columbus and Dis-
covery of America. Card. Moran
69. Blessed Gabriel, Passionlst.
(Fr. Reginald Lummer, C.P.)
72. Religion of Napoleon. (James
W. Wallace.)
73. Veneration for Our Dead (2nd
Ed., Revised). (Rev. M. Watson.
74. Pillars of Socialism. (Rev. M.
Phelan, S.J.)
75. Priests and People in Ireland
(Another View). (Rev. Ernest
R. Hull. S.J.)
77. Catholic Young Men’s Societies.
(Rev. John Norris.)
(Continued on page a of covet.)


THE DRINK EVIL
AUSTRALIA
3A
VERY KEV. W. J. LOCKINGTON, S.J.
FOREWORD
HIS GRACE MOST REV. DANIEL MANNIX, D
Coadjutor-Archbishop of Melbourne.
Melbourne:
run: Australian catholic truth society
312 LONSDALE ST.


FOREWORD.
This is an urgent call to Catholic Australians to
join the great army of the Total Abstinence Society
of the Sacred Heart. Volunteers are badly needed.
There is no age limit, no class or sex distinction. A
personal appeal is made to young and old, to men and
women, to cleric and layman. I trust that the appeal
will not fall upon deaf ears, but that many will answer
“Yes,” and that those who answer “No” will, within
their own consciences, try to give a straight and truth-
ful answer to the question, Why not?
* D. MANNIX.
16th December, 1915.


THE DRINK EVIL IN
AUSTRALIA
TOTAL ABSTINENCE.
“W hy should I become a total abstainer?” is a
question that springs naturally to the lips of many
good people when they read or hear of the temperance
crusade of the Sacred Heart. An answer to the ques-
tion may be found if one study well the scene told in
the 22nd chapter of St. Matthew, where Christ was
surrounded by eager questioners.
They were interrogating. Him as to His aims and
interests. "Master,” said one, “what is the great com-
mandment in the Law?” Listen to the answer that
our Leader gave: "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God
with thy whole heart and with thy whole soul and
with thy whole mind. This is the greatest and first
commandment. And the second is like to this, thou
shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. On these two
commandments dependeth the whole law and the
prophets,”
Thou shaft love thy neighbour as thyself! Here is
Christ’s definition of piety. His interests on earth
can be summed up in one word —soul-saving. He
came on earth to save souls, lived on earth to save
souls, died on earth to save souls, and now in heaven
His Sacred Heart is hungering to save souls. lie
counts nothing as failure except the loss of a soul. Ile
would have climbed up Calvary willingly to save even
one soul,


We proclaim ourselves His followers, and by that
proclamation are bound to be devoted to His interests.
The measure of our enthusiasm is our knowledge of
His cause and 1 Ids wishes. Lack of enthusiasm arises
generally from lack of knowledge. Did men but
realise the ruin to His interests that is caused by drink,
Christ would be surrounded instantly by numberless
willing workers, for. if the human heart but be moved,
it is capable of any sacrifice. If, for example, a man
sec his neighbour sinking in a flooded river, and cry-
ing for help, there is no hesitation, no pausing to pon-
der whether *T' should or should not rescue him. As
the agonising cry of the drowning man rings out, he
plunges in on the instant to the rescue, utterly heed-
less of personal danger.
Do you, reader, wish to help? Step, then, into the
ranks.
Caught in the deadly flood of drink that surges
across the land are tens of thousands of our neigh-
bours, and daily they sink in hundreds beneath the foul
flood that dishonours and degrades all whom it engulfs.
We can save multitudes of them, and also guard others
from ignorantly falling into the black maelstrom. Are
we going to sit quietly on the bank—heedless? Christ
has left His work in our hands. Are we going to
help Him and them? It is a question of souls—-souls
-—souls; souls that Christ died for! To-day we can
fight for Him. To-morrow, who knows! The night
conies when no man can work, and it comes with
.terrific swiftness often.
Do you, reader, wish to help? Step, then, into the
ranks of the regiment. Union is strength, and Christ
is calling, calling for earnest workers to help Him hi
the work. Mark the enthusiastic heroism shown to-
day to preserve national life! See how men are lay-
ing down their lives to repulse the enemy that
threatens them. They realise what subjugation
means, and willingly give their lives for their sacred
heritage—Liberty.


Ye-t the foe within the gates that we are asking you
to hel)) us to fight is a deadly foe of Liberty, enslaving
hundreds of thousands, and slaying- -not with the swift
bullet, but by the slow poison of disease. Drink is a
greater menace to national life than war. What
think ye of Christ? The life that He gives to us is
higher than national life and liberty, and both depend
on it. Life with (lod, that is the only test of success!
Liberty that is the liberty of the sons of God —the only
liberty that is worthy of the name.
Let us fight, then, for the interests of our neigh-
bour and the interests of Christ, and thus fulfil the
whole Law.
n.
HEROIC OFFERING OF THE TOTAL
ABSTINENCE LEAGUE.
The interests of Christ, to-day more than ever, re-
quire sterling, enthusiastic fighters to uphold them.
Our spiritual leaders are earnest in their warnings,
and energetic in their action, against this vice, for it is
degrading the children of Christ and ruining a multi-
tude of souls.
Intoxicating drink is a deadly enemy to those in-
terests —an enemy that ruins souls. Voices are raised
in warning everywhere, and voices that must be be-
lieved by us here in Australia and New Zealand. Our
leaders in material things are confronted with pro-
blems of labour, housing, poverty, and crime and
health ; the question of drink is interwoven with them
all.
Nor can we wonder at this when we learn that Aus-
tralasia spends each year in strong drink the sum of
£16,353,300. This would mean a total loss if it were
cast into the sea, but spent in strong drink it means
far more to our nation than mere monetary loss,
serious though that be. It means the degradation of


many men that otherwise would be good citizens; it
means poverty; it means crime; it means wrecked
homes and ruined souls.
1 herefore is it that every lover of his nation and of
his God should take an active interest in a question
that touches both so vitally, nullifying frequently both
human and Divine authority. There arc many held
in this degrading slavery, who cannot escape unless
we help them. To give this help means that I love
my neighbour, a love that Christ has made-the distin-
guishing mark of His followers: “By this shall all men
know that you are My disciples if you have love for
one another.” (Jo. xiii., 35.)
“Take up your Cross”—mortification.
“Follow Me”—actual service; “let us love not in
word but in work.”
In the practice of total abstinence we have a mor-
tification that can be undertaken easily, and one that
.means actual service in the cause of our Leader. This
means a strengthening of character not only in our-
selves, but in those whom, by our good example, we
influence, It also means an increased harvest of souls
—souls that the Sacred Heart of Our Lord is hunger-
ing for.
The Total Abstinence League is a regiment of
active fighters in the temperance cause, moved thereto
by love of the Sacred Heart; therefore is it that none
are admitted to its ranks before they have fulfilled the
following conditions :—•
The applicant—•
1. Must have been a total abstainer for two con-
secutive years.
2. Must have attained the age of sixteen years.
The emblem of the League is a pendant, pin, or brooch,
bearing the device of the Sacred Heart, and must be
worn publicly.
The League also admits probationers, consisting of
those under sixteen years of age and those who have
not been total abstainers for two consecutive years.


The emblem of the probationer is a pin, pendant, or
brooch, bearing a red cross. The depot for cards,
pendants, pins, brooches, and explanatory leaflets is
the Convent of the Faithful Companions, Vaucluse,
Richmond, Melbourne.
Members and probationers must be thoroughly con-
vinced of the necessity of the movement, which is to
supply whole-hearted workers, who will combat the
vice of intemperance, and help to reform and elevate
our people, morally, socially, physically, and industri-
ally. Therefore, they must be leaders by their ex-
ample and by their prayers. Thanks be to God, loyal
lovers of the Sacred Heart, to the number of several
thousands, have already enrolled themselves in the
ranks of this regiment, and by word and deed are doing
all in their power for the cause.
For information concerning the working of the
movement, apply to
REV. W. J. LOCKINGTON, S.J.,
St. Ignatius’, Richmond, Melbourne.
111.
WAR TIME; DRINK A TRAITOR.
Our nation to-day is fighting for its sacred heritage
of liberty. The flower of our manhood has leaped to
the front, and is fighting fearlessly against the foe that
would w-rest that priceless possession from us.
In these days of deadly striving, ample confirma-
tion of the reality of the danger of the drink evil is to
be found in the statements and insistent commands of
those who are responsible for the fighting efficiency
of our soldiers. This time of stress is a time of
strenuous action, needing the free,- full strength of
vigorous manhood.
Our leaders have no patience now for the enemy
within our gates. That enemy, that in the careless,
thoughtless times of peace was often welcomed as he


masqueraded under the form of friendship, now stands
repulsed, stripped of the folly of custom, and is re-
vealed as a lethal, man-marring menace. This enemy,
the evil spirit of alcohol, has had sentence of banish-
ment cast against it. Where men are needed there is
no place for its nerve-shaking, sight-blurring, muscle-
weakening, mind-muddling poison.
Russia sacrificed an annual revenue of £93,000,000
to protect her men. The advice that Napoleon, made
wise by wide experience, gave his soldiers was: “It is
only a sober army can succeed; the foe is less to be
feared than wine.”
The leaders of our allied forces are equally insis-
tent in striving for an army of total abstainers. They
have condemned unhesitatingly the evil that destroys
discipline, weakens resistance, and saps manhood.
“Touch no wine,” was the last word of that giant
among men, Lord Kitchener, to the troops going to
the Front.
General Joft're has issued stringent orders for the
protection of those in the field from the attacks of this
deadly enemy, who, smiling traitor-wise, would bind
him in deadly thrall and leave him helpless.
These great leaders thus strive to protect and guide
their followers, for they know that their efforts would
be nullified, and heroic self-sacrifices rendered useless,
if the camp be tainted by the leprous flood and
mephitic fumes of debasing drink. Therefore, in
thunder tones they cry against it.
We are the followers of the Leader of leaders. Hear
His cry to us to save His subjects, our brothers, from
this soul-ruining foe. Our life is perpetual warfare.
He warns us, and do we act as if it were perpetual
peace?
Sixty thousand souls, grasped by this fell foe —
drink —go yearly to meet our Leader, from the black
degradation of the grave of a drunkard. Here is need
for action. What have you done, Reader, to protect
and guide souls that pass within your sphere of in-
fluence?


Do you ask me what can you do? Listen, and I
shall tell you. Human passion, remember, is curbed
and guided by human example. Give an example in
the fighting of this plague to your weaker brethren,
and our Leader will bless you.
“The whole of the Law is fulfilled in one word-
thou shall love thy neighbour as thyself,” He told one
seeker for truth, and proclaims that we are His fol-
lowers if we take up His Cross. Here we have the
foundation of Christianity-—kindness to all men, and
character-formation by personal mortification.
People have written lately to the public Press, re-
commending that a day be set aside as a “day of humi-
liation.” What precisely they mean by this Ido not
know, but this 1 do know, that the following of our
Leader by “taking up His Cross” in penance will be
the most effective road to manhood and liberty and
love.
I give you one suggestion. Our men are at the
Front, and in the firing line beside them are our
priests, aye, and our brave, holy nuns, giving life for
Cod and country. For the sake of these grand souls
that are fighting for our liberty and nationhood, for
love of the Christ that is watching over them, “take
up the Cross,” and as an act of mortification, of repara-
tion, enlist for one year in the ranks of those fighters
for Christ, who are marching in that regiment that is
doing so much to banish drink from among us—the
Sodality of the Sacred Heart Total Abstinence League.
IV.
WHAT OTHERS ARE DOING AGAINST DRINK.
The sharp, determined action of England, Russia,
and France in dealing with the deadly drink vice that
threatened the efficiency'of their soldiers is but a single
manifestation of the determined fight that is being
carried on against this national menace to-day.


In little Belgium there were 5500 temperance socie-
ties, with 176,168 members, active and energetic. For
long years past this fearless fighter foir Catholic truth
-—and Catholic truth means the whole truth and noth-
ing hut the truth, unmixed by earthly error—has in-
sisted that in all her schools there be given an anti-
alcohol instruction of half an hour each week.
Her neighbour, France, has had temperance teach-
ing in her schools since 1897. In 1908 the French war
authorities ordered anti-alcohol instruction for the
army, saying: “No forbidding of the sale of spirits will
have a wholesome effect except through the moral in-
fluence of the officers, and by teaching the soldier to
look upon alcohol as an enemy.” The army officials
provide restaurants and clubs for the soldiers, which
sell milk, coffee, chocolate, and other healthy, harm-
less drinks, and one official states that these will ulti-
mately suppress the canteen.
Hungary allows no reading-book in the schools that
does not contain at least one reading piece dealing with
the alcohol danger, and one day is set aside in all
schools for the study of this danger. The Swedish
Government gives 66,000 kroner yearly to the central
union for temperance teaching, for the thorough educa-
tion of 40 normal and 100 other teachers in the alcohol
question. The Swedish Central Union has a staff of
89 speakers, 150 publications, and a magazine against
alcohol. More than 1000 Catholic women teachers
are grouped there in this union. In the Swedish army,
half the regiments have temperance societies. In Hol-
land, special efforts are made to get all the teachers
enrolled in the ranks of active temperance workers.
Universities give lectures on such subjects as “Crimi-
nality and Alcohol,” “Alcohol as a Medicine,” “Ethics
and Alcohol.”
Problems for the betterment of the workman of to-
day would be solved easily if the drink devil were
banished from the home of every worker, for the devil
of drink is the devil of sickness and accident and ineffi-
ciency. The council of one Labour union declares:


“Alcohol is the enemy of the workman in factory and
workshop, in closed room and in open air. It in-
creases the hazards of one’s occupation, and accident
insurance must, therefore, lay special weight on check-
ing its action.'’
We hear much to-day of the steel works of Krupp
and Co. Since the year 1910 that firm has forbidden
the sale of beer in their works, and milk booths were
opened in the interests of the workmen. In some
other commercial firms employers give tea gratis to
ail their workers, with profit to employer and em-
ployed.
These examples should make us reflect long and
seriously, and after reflection let each one of us care-
fully appraise the value of the actual work that he or
she has done against this evil, and weigh that actu-
ality against the work we might have done with the
powers that, as Catholics, we possess. The saying,
“Knowledge is power,” but it is power quiescent and
“Knowledge is power,” but it is power quiescent and
useless unless character force it to action. We, as fol-
lowers of the Sacred Heart of Our Lord, have ample
knowledge. Let us, by our character and energy,
cause it to bring forth fruit.
Weigh well these words of Tolstoi; “Whether they
wish it or not, men are divided to-day into two camps.
The one fights, by word and example, against the use-
less custom of drinking a poison; the others, by word
and example, arc equally the defenders of the poison.”
Worthy of note, too, are these sentences of Castelar:
“The history of humanity is that of a standing battle
between ideas and interests. For the moment, the in-
terests always win, but, in the long* run, the ideas.”
These words are true when the ideas put forth
are those of the Gospel of Our Lord, with its basis of
confidence in God, and love of our fellow-men. Love
of our fellow-men is the best argument for total
abstainers. What are you doing and for them?


ARMIES AND ALCOHOL.
\\ hat a lesson for us Catholics has been taught by
the leaders of our allied armies in the present time of
national stress! They are striving with might and
main to train men to the highest possible point of effi-
ciency. There is no balancing of interests, no bowing
to human opinion, no careful trimming of pronounce-
ments to suit conflicting elements. No. They want
men, efficient men, vigorous men, men filled with en-
thusiasm, and such men they are determined to have.
Regardless of all else, they work to attain this end,
casting out unhesitatingly everything that may hinder
the attainment of this essential efficiency. Foremost
among the enemies of the efficiency of our soldiers
they place the spirit of alcohol, and with one voice
they declare that strong drink is worse than a traitor
in the camp. In careless times of peace it masque'
raded in a thousand forms as. the friend of man, and
was tolerantly smiled upon by the thoughtless. To-
day, in strenuous war-time, that same spirit stands re-
vealed as a nerve-shaking, sight-blurring, muscle-
weakening, mind-muddling, man-degrading poison.
Our leaders to-day have no place for an enemy that
will make the soldier a traitor to the country that
trusts him, and will cause his weapons to fall from
palsied hands. Listen to Lord Kitchener, the centre
and pivot of the Empire to-day, and mark his words
as he pillories drink: “Touch no strong drink, boys,”
were his last words of warning to the men going to the
Front, men on whose efficiency the fate of our nation
depends at this very moment.
The French military authorities have been fighting
against this foe for years. v By careful experiment,
they found that alcohol lowers the power of resist-
ance to fatigue, and retards the healing of wounds.
For example, in a trial made to test its effect on the
staying powers of the men, it was found that 92 per


cent, of the abstainers reached their goal, and only 42
per cent, of the non-abstainers. In 1900 the Minis-
ter for War prohibited the sale of distilled liquors in
all the canteens of the French army, and for years past
French officers have been lecturing and working with
great success to promote total abstinence among the
soldiers.
What a lesson, as 1 said before, do these men teach
us Catholics! Catholics at the Front to-day are
astonishing the world by their splendid manifestation
of faith and fearlessness! Men are gaffing in reverent
amazement at the mighty power of our religion ! What
are we, as Catholics, doing?
Christ is above, waiting for us, and watching us,
longing to “gather us” round Him-—as He so touch-
ingly expresses it, when He burst into tears over re-
calcitrant Jerusalem. And to that Sacred Heart, so
full of burning affection, there ascends each year,
slowly and reluctantly, a stream of wrecked souls —
60,000 in number, rising from the black degradation of
the grave of a drunkard. Sixty thousand souls! ! !
Look at the tears of Christ! Look at the injury
to souls! Look at that unending stream that ascends
to the Judgment Seat! And then —easy-going, world-
respecting Catholic, look at yourself and carefully
study what effect your actions have had in preventing
this evil. You can, by an act of self-denial that is
almost trivial, help to check this awful ruin of souls.
Put, then, the force of your good example behind our
movement by enrolling yourself in our regiment.
Take the pledge for one year, if you will, and wear —
that all may know you are with us—the Red Cross
emblem ; or take the pledge for life, and wear publicly
the Sacred Heart emblem; or, if you will help still fur-
ther, become a promoter, and enrol thirty-two other
members, who, with yourself, will number thirty-three
—one member for each year of Our Lord’s life.
These emblems are in the form of a brooch for
women, and pin or pendant for men. d hey can be
obtained, with card of enrolment, for one shilling,


from the Superior, Vaucluse Convent, Richmond, Mel-
bourne. Get one, and cause your enthusiasm to be-
come practical.
VI.
THE ROOT OF THE DRINK EVIL.
Nations to-day are striving to cope with the drink
evil, because at this time of national stress men clearly
realise that it is a national menace. On every side
earnest workers, animated by love of God and love of
their fellow-men, are strenuously trying to check the
terrible tide. The crying urgency of the evil and its
magnitude impel them to throw themselves into the
light with impetuous ardour. This enthusiasm, how-
ever, is a very dangerous asset if it be not steadied by
a scientific knowledge of the evil to be attacked, for
action based on false principles must of necessity fail.
We must realise that the root of the drink evil is
to be found in the passionate, wayward heart of man.
This is the centre of the whole question. We are
confronted by the mightiest force, save one, on earth
—Human Passion. The controlling of the drink evil
means curbing human passion, and, therefore, means a
reformation of the heart, for the defect of the people is
one of morals, and not one of knowledge. A drunkard
means a man who—his moral fibre enervated —is trail-
ing his manhood in the mire. This vice clouds the
intellect, and his character is weakened, because by
this habit he surrenders that control of the intellect
and that steadiness of purpose that differentiates him
from all the other creatures of earth.
A reform intended to uplift such a one must attend
primarily to the inner life of the man, to that which
goes to make up character. In the words of the great
bishop Kettelcr, one of the greatest social reformers
of modern times, “True reform is always thorough,
from the root upwards, from within outward, not from


without inward.” It must be a reform of the will, of
the character, the conscience—in short, a reform of
soul. All is based on the training of the soul, “the
interior regeneration of the heart," that the Sacred
Scriptures speak of. All reform must grow out of
the character of the people and their faith.
Human Passion is the root of the evil—it is a ques-
tion of virtue. Instruction is not a guard against
immorality. Lectures, for instance, on what is euphe-
mistically called “sex-hygiene” can no more enshrine
the glorious Christian virtue of Purity in the human
heart than can a list of skilfully-arranged statistics
cure a drunkard. Training must not be merely in-
tellectual, but spiritual and moral also.
We have said that human passion is the strongest
force on earth save one. That one force that we ex-
cepted—the mightiest force on earth, the force before,
which all others yield, is the Grace of God. Grace is
the only foundation of Virtue, and is absolutely in-
dispensable. “Without Me, you can do nothing,” says
Christ (Jn. xv„ 5). “No man can come to Me except
the Father, who hath sent Me, draw him” (Jn. vi.,
44). “No man can say The Lord Jesus’ but by the
Holy Ghost” (I. Cor. xii., 3). “By grace you are saved
through faith, and that not of yourselves; for it is the
gift of God” (Ep. ii., 8,9). The logic of this is plain.
To conquer drunkenness, the drunkard must attain vir-
tue. To attain virtue, the Grace of God is indispen-
sable. Therefore, to conquer drunkenness, the Grace
of God is indispensable.
How is the drymkard to gain this grace? Let him
go to our Holy Mother the Church —she is waiting for
him in love, and with power. She is the guardian of
the certain means of gaining grace—the Sacraments.
These are given by God for this purpose. Let him
who is enslaved by drunkenness use the Sacraments of
Confession and Communion as our Holy Father wishes
them to be used, and he will soon be freed from his
degrading fetters by the strengthening force of God’s
Holy' Grace.


VII.
CAUSES OF THE EVIL
We saw in the last chapter that the root of the
drink evil is to be found in the wayward heart of man,
that the checking of the evil means the controlling of
passion. There is an innate craving in man for a
stimulant of some kind. From the savage on the
coral-girdled islets of the Pacific, to the wandering
Indian of the American forest; from the subtle Chinese
in the East, across the continents to where the dull
Esquimau dwells by the Yukon flood, we find that all
have this craving in common. Slumbering in many
hearts, dominated by a powerful will in others, in.
alas! a great number it needs but occasion to break
all bounds and hurry its victim along the path of de-
struction.
History shows that this craving is as old as the
human race itself, and is a primal cause of the preva-
lence of the evil. Among the Egyptians, as far back
as the year 3600 before Christ, we find this warning in
a papyrus: “My son, do not linger in the wine shop.
Thou fallest upon the ground. Thy limbs become
weak as those of a . child.” The most ancient
Chinese, hooks, dating back to the year 2300
before Christ, condemn the use of intoxicating
drink and tabulate its effects. Plato, in his
“Laws,” says that: “No wine should be drunk
by persons when engaged in important business,
whether in war or civil affairs or common life.” Rome,
in the days of her strength, forbade absolutely the use
of drink by women, and Caesar, speaking of one of the
most warlike of the tribes that he encountered, the
Suevi, said: “They forbid the importation of wine, be-
cause they consider it makes men effeminate and unfits
them for labour.” Assyria and Egypt were addicted
to intemperance, and the fall of Babylon was helped
by the same cause. The Sacred Scriptures vividly
portray the drunkenness of the Israelites,


Pliny the Elder, speaking' of the evil in Rome, said:
“So vast are our efforts, and so regardless of cost,
which we lavish on wine that deprives man of his rea-
son, and drives him to frenzy and the commission of a
thousand crimes.” W hen Rome turned to Bacchus,
Rome fell.
And the history of our own people is tainted with
alcohol. In 1644 Milton asks: “What more foul, com-
mon sin among us than drunkenness?’ In 1688 the
English Parliament, with almost unique folly, passed
laws encouraging the manufacture and free sale of dis-
tilled spirits. The result to the nation was awful.
For instance, in 1725 De Foe wrote of London and its
gin palaces; “I am told that there are about 5000 gin
doctors set up in this city within a few years past, and
that all, or most of them, have a very good practice —-
our ancestors had nothing but outrageous methods of
suicide, but now we have nothing to do but drink and
die.” Another writer refers to “that execrable plague
of distilled spirits, which do all, without exception,
operate as a slow 7 poison, preying on the vitals and
wasting the strength of body and soul.”
And the state of things against which these warn-
ings were issued bears no comparison with that exist-
ing to-day. In ancient times distillation was un-
known, and the wine-drunkenness of the ancients can-
not be compared with the dehumanisation of man
through the abuse of ardent spirits that causes such
havoc in our midst. ' It remained for our time to pro-
vide the maximum of temptation. Our national con-
science has growm callous in regard to this vice, and as
Dean Farrar writes : “The world, the flesh, and the devil
swagger on together arm in arm. laughing at our im-
potence to overthrow the combined forces of tempta-
tion and self-indulgence, of plethoric wealth and poli-
tical combination, of interest, prejudice, and pride.”
This fight against passion is the most difficult of
all. It is the warfare of which the Holy Scriptures
speak in the sentence, “Man’s life on earth is a war-
fare.” Many who are otherwise splendid souls find


in this drink disease their strongest opponent. These
need help. “How? you ask. Well, let me give yon
the advice that 1 heard given to a voluble young man
by one of those listening to him.
It was at a crowded meeting, where remedies for
the drink curse were being discussed. The young
man was on the platform. He had prefaced his speech
by an explanation of why he did not believe in total
abstinence, and then proceeded to propound what he
considered to be efficient remedies. He was a fine
speaker, and the crowd listened with attention while he
painted a vivid picture of the desolation of the
drunkard’s home. He concluded his portraval of the
horrors of drink slavery by asking in impassioned
tones: "What, my friends, are WE to do to help these
poor creatures? ' What are WE to do?" One of the
audience rose in the hall. He was a big, deep-chested
man, with a slow, deliberate voice, that sounded like a
deep-sea fog-horn. It boomed through the silence
that followed the rhetorical pause of the speaker, as its
owner addressed him. “C limb on the water waggon,
my son, ’ he shouted, slowly and forcefully hurling
each word, as if it were a missile; “climb on the water
waggon, and —-stay —there. ’ He then solemnly sat
down, quite unmoved by the thunderous applause of
the crowd.
“Climb on the water waggon, and stay there!”
Catholic Reader, what about YOU?”
VIII.
DRINK CAUSES DEEP DEGRADATION.
Jn times of great crisis, some issues are clear cut.
and some truths shine unobscured. Many evils stand
naked and revealed, stripped of their manifold trap-
pings, by the lash of national necessity. In this day
of our national need, intemperance in drink looms
before us as a monster evil. It is as deadly as is in-


fidelity in the religious sphere, or looseness of morals.
In the modern world these find many to defend them
in one way or another. This is a notorious fact.
Law courts, for instance, are built to defend some
forms of incontinence; infidelity in religion is canon-
ised by men like Nietzsche and those others who are
responsible for the German idea of the “superman/’ a
form of degradation that has caused the red deluge of
blood submerging Europe to-day. Intemperance is,
as I have shown, canonised under the name of good
fellowship and hospitality.
It is well for us to group these three evils together,
and get the intemperate man to look at his own vice
with the same abhorrence that he regards the man
who is false to his marriage vows or who boasts of his
infidelity. There is a hard, cruel selfishness in the
man who ruins wife and family. This malice and
deliberate cruelty—for it is not blind —of the intemper-
ate man is too often obscured. The “jolly good fel-
low”, is allowed repeatedly to lapse unblamed, while we
are quick enough and just enough to perceive and to
denounce the evils of divorce and atheism.
Excess in drink is like excess in the matter of
continence or of infidelity; it goes down deep, and
twines chokingly about the very roots of life. As we
have seen, it degrades the individual. The appalling
degradation of family life that follows this excess is
in evidence on all sides, and thus it follows that
national life, which depends absolutely on family life,
is injured also. To-day the whole world stands
aghast at the brutal excesses committed by our
enemies on helpless women and children. So awful
are these that it would seem that no human being in
possession of his senses could perpetrate such enormi-
ties. The only excuse for them is the dreadful fact
that these men had drunk themselves into a mad fury.
Look' for a moment, if you can, on the sight that
met the gaze of our soldiers, on that day in November
last, as they entered the French villages whence they
had driven the enemy.


What is it that makes those strong men, used to
the carnage and roar of battle, recoil in horror? Why-
do those fearless hearts stand still for one awful in-
stant, as if doubting the evidence of their senses?
See their leader, as he goes hesitatingly forward to
where a huddled mass shows white above the blood-
stained street! Listen to his own words describing
what he saw: “A devilish brute had stuck on the
prongs of a hay-fork a pretty little girl between three
and four, who had been foully murdered.”
Reverently the soldiers stand round him in silence,
as he takes into his arms the dreadful burden of the
prongs, reverently they bear it to the village church-
yard by the side of the desecrated church, reverently
they bury the tiny, broken body, and, as they cover it,
tears are brushed from eyes unused to such.
How can a Catholic dare to say that drink, that
has led so many thousands as good as himself to such
revolting extremes of cruelty and shame, can be treated
as the friend of man and the comfort of his daily life?
Christ, Our Lord, is to come. His judgment in this
matter must be decisive for the Catholic, nay, for the
world, which respects Him without having the faith of
the Catholic. What means would Christ take, what
counsel would He give to those who have to grapple
with the evil in their home circle, or in giving example
to their neighbours?
We see in the Gospels the energetic decisiveness of
Our Lord whenever there was question of com-
bating evil that was injuring souls. He makes active
love of our neighbour the foundation and test of piety;
'‘All the law is fulfilled in one word; thou shalt love
thy neighbour as thyself.” We, as His followers,
should imitate His resoluteness in grappling with evil,
and surely there is need of such action to-day, when
every year sixtv thousand souls go to meet their God
from the black degradation of the grave of a drunkard.
It is a question of a malignant, existing evil, causing
daily loss of souls.
Here in Australia we are trying to build up a
nation, and yet we spend each month of every year


more than £1,000,000. Place in one scale the effects
of this ever-present evil—the wrecked homes, the
broken hearts, the ruined souls, and the degradation
of many who otherwise would be good citizens, and
weigh against it the other evils that from time to time
afflict us. Mark well how the deadly weight of the
drink evil makes all else seem light.
The wail of the widowed and orphaned pierces the
heavens and moves the Heart of God. Can we re-
main deaf to such a heartrending cry from our neigh-
bours, when, by an act of self-denial, so slight that it
is almost trivial, we can silence that cry and dry the
tears of the mourners? We as Catholics have the
power of reforming the world. For Catholicism
means civilisation, Catholicism means culture. Catho-
licism means complete obedience to the commands of
God. If the Catholic Church, priests and people,
move, and move enthusiastically, in this matter, the
strongest force on earth will be arrayed against the
drink evil, a force enrolled under the leadership of Him
who has promised to His followers certain victory. If
this fact were realised by every soul of the 300,000,000
in the Church, what a fighting army we should have!
If enthusiasm should be shown anywhere, it is
among us. We are the people of God pre-eminently;
we are the nation of God. See what the nations in
another sphere do when their temporal liberty and
temporal destiny are attacked! Mark to-day what a
wave of fearless enthusiasm can effect in defending
national life! Look at the example of magnificent
heroism shown by our armies to-day!
But we, the nation of God, the Church of Christ,
are fighting for the liberty of souls, and how much
more, then, does enthusiasm befit us! Belgium, Eng-
land. France, Russia, are blazing with deep en-
thusiasm, and rightly so, against great and terrific evil.
Much more should we, the nation of God, be fired with
enthusiasm for the sake of the souls whom our Leader
of leaders has died to save.


NATIONAL APATHY.
V\ e have seen that a great obstacle in the cause of
temperance is the indifference to it that is shown so
often by good people, and the difficulty of arousing
them from their apathy. But the difficulty of sending
the truth of the drink evil home to the heart of the
individual is as nothing compared to the almost im-
possible task of opening the eyes and stirring the con-
science of a nation. To do this, nothing short of a
great national calamity, a great world evil, is needed.
This can be seen to-day, when our nation is fighting
for its sacred heritage—Liberty. As the call to arms
sounded, men sprang to their feet and rallied like
heroes round the flag. Pessimists who had spoken of
decadence stood in reverent amazement as the answer
to that call came ringing like thunder round the whole
earth. The flower of our manhood leaped to the
front, arid is fearlessly fighting against the foe that
would wrest the priceless possession of Freedom from
us. The whole nation stands at attention, ready to
sacrifice all to the last man to preserve national exist-
ence. Here is a crisis that has stirred our life to the
depths, and has aroused a fire of enthusiasm that has
burned away the dross that relaxing peace had gath-
ered and set the gold that God puts in every human
breast glowing with clear flame, and lighting up hearts
now filled with lofty purpose. No wonder that God
so loves His creature, man. He, the Creator, knows
him better than any other, and knowing with perfect
knowledge, loves with more than parent love the big,
small, straight, crooked, splendid heart of man, capable
of any baseness, and capable of any sacrifice. Let
the heart be but aroused, and it will lead man to un-
dreamt-of heights of heroism and sacrifice. This is
why our Temperance crusade is one of education, and
not of reproach, for we know that if men can but be
aroused to a sense of the danger to the nation that


drink is, we shall have with us an immense army eager
to fight against it.
This enemy has been banished from the camp as a
traitor that would rob the soldier of his senses, bind
his limbs in deadly thrall, and leave him helpless. Our
leaders have done this to protect our men, for they
know that their efiforts would be nullified, and heroic
self-sacrifice be brought to nought, if the camp be
tainted by the leprous flood of degrading drink.
Therefore, in thunder tones they cry against it. Nor
is this action taken because indulgence in strong
drink affects physical fitness only. It affects most
seriously the mentality of man. His Will, the motive
force and the controlling force of his being, is always
weakened by the indulgence, and, in cases of inebriety,
is paralaysed by it. In the latter case, the physical
man, freed from control, goes jerking aimlessly and
foolishly in a paroxysm of temporary insanity, a slave
driven by the lash of the dominant drink demon.
When this governing force is dethroned, there stands
the ungoverned animal, dangerous to himself and to
those who trust in him. Again, his Intellect, the guid-
ing force of the mind, is clouded, and there is a loss of
discretion. That loosened tongue, freed from the con-
trol of the guiding brain, will babble secrets and fatu-
ously betray precious confidences. Guided animal-
like by sense impressions, he has sunk below the level
of an irrational animal. Place such a man on guard,
and he will sleep on watch, none the less treacherously
because unconsciously. Drink will make him a
traitor to the country that trusts him, and in the fight-
ing line a menace rather to his friends than to his foes.
Drink has been banished from the camp; are we
going to banish it from the home? Our men in camp
are fighting for home; shall we sit idly by while this
debasing flood saps the foundations of that home? Do
you, dear reader, realise the depth and power of the
flood that beats against our Australian homes? For
instance, if we devoted to the Red Cross Fund for our
wounded soldiers the price that is paid by Australia


in one week for drink, that fund would be augmented
by the sum of £250,000! Take that fact and medi-
tate upon it.
X.
PERSONAL APATHY.
We have seen that the primary cause of the preva-
lence of the abuse of strong drink is uncontrolled pas-
sion. This conquest of passion is the first difficulty
that the labourer for temperance meets, a difficulty
that has meant arduous strife for the human race since
passion conquered the first created man. Not with-
out reason are we told that he who conquers himself is
greater than he who takes a city, for the curbing of
the wayward heart of man means an unceasing
struggle against a most relentless enemy. All acknow-
ledge this, even those who fail to fight.
There are many’secondary causes. Often, a very
powerful though negative secondary cause is the in-
difference so many good people display towards the
evil. Sometimes this indifference arises from ignor-
ance, sometimes from thoughtlessness; but from what-
ever cause it arises, the fact is that the indifference of
good people is a powerful and paralysing factor against
the correction of the evil. It must be kept well in
mind, though, that this indifference is a subject for
education and not for blame. For if men can be
brought to realise the magnitude of the evil, the good-
ness that is innate in every human heart would be
stirred, and thousands of those who to-day are indif-
ferent would be changed into enthusiastic workers
against this enemy.
One reason for this indifference is the unscrupu-
lously clever way in which the evil is cloaked. Alcohol
is a spirit that is chameleon-like in its guises. It has
ciept into our social life in a manner that is astonish-
in&- It poses as the spirit of hospitality, and pre-


lends to knit closer the bonds of friendship. The
“flowing bowl” is sought for consolation in adversity
and for satisfaction in prosperity. From birth to
death it shadows the life of man, so shrewdly dis-
guised as often to be welcomed as a friend by the
thoughtless many.
It is because of this close companionship with it
that men are not so easily aroused to a sense of the
deadly dangers that follow the acceptance of the
proffered services of this cloaked assassin. They smile
tolerantly because unreflectingly, and gladly accept the
fatal friendship of an enemy so attractive. The zeal
of the temperance advocate merely sounds noisily in
their ears, and, according to temperament, they either
lazily smile in wonder at such energy, or they angrily
proclaim against intemperate temperance propaganda.
Here one announces that his taking of drink con-
cerns no one but himself, and is not a matter for com-
ment by the speaker who is so vigorously haranguing
the multitude. This objector forgets that our mode
of life deprives such a statement of truth. If he were
alone in a wilderness it mi girt have some justification;
but he is part of a social system wherein lives impinge
constantly upon other lives, and at every point of con-
tact influence them for good or ill. Besides what he
owes to himself, man has obligations to his parents,
to his brothers and sisters, to his wife, maybe, and his
children, to his employer, to society, to God. Drink
injures every one of these relationships. The world
is drink-sick at present, and does not realise its condi-
tion. Men, as we have said a moment ago, smile tole-
rantly at the plague, because they do not know how
deep-seated it is. It eats into the very vitals of
national existence, attacking, as it does, not only the
individual, but also family and social life, from which
national life springs. When is it that men are brought
to realise the gravity of the evil? Often only in a
moment of crisis, or through some blow that, by its
shock, awakens them to the eternal verities—the
clammy grip of disease, the swift rush of chill Death


passing- close, or perhaps darkening life by snatching
a cherished one from the narrow circle of love. Such
visitations, by driving home the lessons of the eternal
truths, often change careless worldlings into men who
walk through life with their eyes steadily gazing at the
final Judgment Bar, and mould their acts accordingly.
Dear reader, are YOU one of these?
XI.
PERSONAL PROHIBITION
A slum cottage was burning. A pile of pitifully
scanty household goods was piled in the middle of the
road, and by them stood a poor woman and two chil-
dren, whom the fire had made outcasts. A sympathe-
tic crowd stood round, and expressions of condolence
filled the air. Suddenly one man took his hat from
his head, and dropping some money in, called out:
‘Afy sorrow for this poor woman is worth 10/6; what
is yours worth?” He passed through the crowul, hold-
the upturned hat. Some gave, but many dried
their tears and moved quickly away, giving nothing.
The attitude of these latter is like the attitude of
many to-day towards the drink curse. They will
argue learnedly, praise writers and speakers, commend
methods—do anything, in fact, save the one thing that
lays the axe to the root of the evil—namely, undertake
a little self-sacrifice. They are of those of whom St.
Paul says, “they fight as one beating the air”—splen-
did shadow-boxers. Let us not stand in their ranks.
The flood of drink is surging through our cities,
crawling into workshop and factory, crippling the
strong worker, and striking the tool from his hand, ft
goes licking round the sacred door of Home, sapping
its foundations and submerging it. It goes running-
out along the highways and stealing along quiet coun-
try lanes—a creeping horror, not only devouring the


substance of our people, but living on a holocaust of
souls.
Ordinarily, the evil is cloaked in an unscrupulously
clever way, but to-day W ar has focussed all eyes on
Drink, and it stands revealed as a deadly menace. At
a time when all the energy of our leaders is needed for
a ruthless, powerful foe, they are compelled to take
action against this enemy within the gates.
The results of such action show that the human
heart is good, once you can fire it with enthusiasm.
For instance, did you see that the King had banished
alcohol from his household and become a Total
Abstainer himself, and in consequence “peers, society
leaders, and commercial men are joining in the Anti-
Liquor movement? Mr. Lloyd George has received
100.000 Pledges of Total Abstinence, and in Edinburgh
50.000 people have signed.”
His Majesty had many means at his command to
check the flow of this foul itreatti, but he began with
the one that is most potent of all; he took that first
step that Our Lord demands of everyone who would
be His follower: “Let him deny himself,” and drew
himself clear of the devastating torrent, in a way plain
for all to see, by an act of self-sacrifice.
This is a vital question here in Australia, for our
people, standing by that foul stream, cast in as offer-
ings to the Demon of Drink more than a million
pounds each month, and with it sinks good health,
good citizenship, good home and happiness.
Much attention has been aroused lately, and our
newspapers have had some masterly articles on the
evil; but one of the most effective pronouncements on
the subject has been made by the Prime Minister of
the Commonwealth. It is only a few lines in length,
but these few lines contain the solution of the drink
difficulty. Here are his words ; —-
“During the whole course of my life I have
never had occasion to alter the opinion I formed
very early with regard to intoxicating drink. I


am glad to be able to state publicly that I do not
take it nor keep it in my house.”
ilcie we have the solving of the difficulty without
any external aid. When a man becomes a Total
Abstainer, the drink question for him is settled defi-
nitely. ‘A drastic remedy,” someone objects. It
is, but drastic measures are necessary when a plague is
raging, and are willingly submitted'to by all.
Self-sacrifice and the striving- for self-control! And
to help us we have prayer and the Sacraments, the
channels of the Grace of God, which give certain vic-
toiy to him who will use them. Get us determine to
use all the influence that we possess to help the in-
terests of the Sacred Heart in this saving and purify-
ing of priceless souls.
XII.
TOTAL ABSTINENCE LEAGUE OF THE
SACRED HEART.
To the Promoters of the League,—
My Dear Promoters,—We want a word with you.
You are the officers of our regiment, and on your zeal
depends in great measure the amount of good work
that it will do for the Sacred Heart. There are nearly
15,000 enrolled in our ranks. It is your duty to
organise these, to send their names in to the central
register at St. Ignatius’, Richmond, to order their
badges for them from the Convent, Vaucluse, Rich-
mond, and to keep working “in season and out of
season.” Each of you has only thirty-two members
to enrol. Have you done this yet?
Some of you are girls in convent schools—see to it
that every convent school-girl becomes a member.
Some of you are boys in our Catholic schools and col-
leges—it rests with you to work up a spirit of erp


thusiasm for the cause. Some of you arc young men
and women in factories and offices, at work-bench and
desk—are you wearing the badge yourself, and also
doing your level best to make others join?
Get out of the trenches; get into the open, and
advance vigorously against our deadly enemy, Drink.
Study carefully the case against drink, so that you can
show the strength of our cause. Such facts, for ex-
ample, as the following Report of a Royal Commission
appointed by command of his Majesty, to inquire into
the causes of the decline of the physical powers, should
be well known. The Report states
“The abuse of strong drinks is a most potent and
deadly agent of decline of the physical powers.
“Those who indulge in such drinks are specially
liable to consumption and inflammatory disorders.
“In abstinence from strong drinks is to be sought
the source of muscular vigour and activity.
“Certain insurance tables show that, of 61,215 men
between the ages of 25 and 65, 1000 died in one year;
but in abstainers, only 560 died in the same period.
“Alcoholism is a chronic poisoning, resulting from
the habitual use of alcohol, which may never go as far
as drunkenness.
“It is a mistake to say that those doing hard work
require stimulants.
“Alcohol is in no sense a food, and cannot repair
tissues.
“In short, alcohol is the most terrible enemy to per-
sonal health and family happiness, and to national
prosperity.
“Remedy for alcoholicism ; —•
“Total abstinence from all alcohol
“The teaching of temperance in elementary
schools.
“The improvement of the home and its sur-
roundings.
“The provision of plenty of good and properly-
cooked food-


“Education of girls and young women in home
management.
“Physical training of young men.”
The above is the conclusion of, the Commission
after thoroughly investigating the subject, from the
standpoint of physical degeneration. We, too, are
concerned with that point of view, but our primary
purpose is to check the moral degeneration that is so
closely connected with the passion of intemperance.
Get to work, then, dear Promoters, so that when our
nsen Leader looks out on the world at Eastertide,
His Sacred Heart may be gladdened by the sight of
you all actively co-operating in labour for Him. He
will surely bless you.
XIII.
THE TEACHER AND THE CHILD.
This is the month of the coming of Christ—the
month of the Cradle of Bethlehem and of the Nursery
of Nazareth. Almighty God in human form has
visited the earth. A helpless child in the safe sanc-
tuary of Mary’s encircling arms Our Saviour nestles,
the centre round which the whole universe swings.
The child has ever been the centre of the Church,
and the object of the attacks of her enemies. “Let
the little children come to Me” is the unceasing cry of
her Divine Founder, and our Catholic schools is the
answer of our Church. These schools are our glory.
In them a force is at work far greater than the power
of battleship or battalion. Each tiny child of all
those clustering little folk has its mind and its will
moulded by the Truth of God, its hands taught to
uplift the Cross, its whole being filled with our faith—
a possession that raises even the poorest child from


Time to Eternity, and makes it a sharer in the work of
God.
The teacher, as the trainer of the child, holds the
key of the future, and to-day is one of the mightiest
of the forces at work for good. The school is the
workshop whence issue the men of the future, and it
is the teacher who fashions them. The lessons of the
Catholic teacher sink into the receptive heart and mind
of the child with a sacred sweetness whose fragrance
never disappears. We appeal to the Catholic teacher,
standing between the child-soul and evil, to make a
special effort to impress upon our children an abiding
horror of drink. Good work is being done, thanks be
to God, but we must do more. It is not enough to
get them to take the pledge at Confirmation. There
must be some positive and constant teaching, to drive
home to the mind of the child the continued need for
such self-denial.
Each year our Catholic schools send into the world
children who are our boast and our pride, yet, alas!
too often they are enslaved by the drink demon, that,
lies everywhere in wait for them, and many fail to
realise the bright hopes of the Church, their teachers,
and their parents.
The main cause of their failure is their ignorance
of the deadly danger of a subtle, insidious evil. If at
school this horror were unmasked, and they were in-
structed thoroughly against it, our children in after
years would shrink from it and realise that its glitter
and sparkle is but the phosphorescence of corruption.
Great good has already been done, but it is an ever-
present evil, and our teachers must be tireless in their
efforts in the interests of the Master. Priest or lay,
nun or Brother, they are the leaders, the captains at
the head of their little armies in each Catholic school,
and must never weary in constant instruction to their
little soldiers of Christ, pointing out to them the many
snares and wiles of the enemy.
May every teacher in Australia fight in this cause
with vigour, undaunted by difficulties and discourage-


merit. Catholic teacher! You stand on guard against
the forces of evil to-day, one of the most heroic figures
in the army of the Church. Your power for good, if
fully used, is irresistible, and will bring close to the
Sacred Heart multitudes of the little children whom
He so loves. As these cluster in safety round Him
He will look across their heads to you who sent them
to Him, and the music of His “Well done !” will thrill'
your heart with exquisite joy.
\ Iv icate Press, 284 Lonsdale St., Melbourne.


A.C.T.S. PUBLICATIONS ON HAND.
78. Eternal Punishment. (Fr. Stan
islaus M. Hogan, 0.P.)
80. Miracles. (Fr. Hogan, 0.P.)
83. Gentleman Jack: A Story. (H.
G. Bartlett.)
89. A Garland of Hope—Stories on
Promises made to Blessed Mar-
garet Mary by Our Lord Jesus
Christ. (Constance M. Le Plas-
trier.) —No. 1.
90. No. 2.
9.1. No. 3.
92. No. 4.
101. Ferrer the Anarchist: .Facts of
His Life and Trial. (Rev. M. H.
Maclnerny, 0.P.)
102. Marriage. (Fr. Charnock, S.J.)
103. Belief in Creative Power in
Light, of Science. (Fr. Gerard.)
105. Mission of St. Ignatius Loyola.
(Bishop Phelan.)
108. For the Holy Souls; and Othe
Stories. (Miriam Agatha.)
119. Billie; and Other Stories
(Miriam Agatha.)
122. Ethics of Subscription. (Re
Sydney F. Smith.)
124. Christian Marriage. (Bishop
Phelan.)
128. Simple Talks for First Commu-
nicants. (Miriam Agatha.)
132. Virgin Mother. (Rev. M. Wat-
son. S.J.), 2nd Edition.
133. Paula’s Visit; and Other Sto-
ries. (Miriam Agatha.)
135. Literary Suicide of James An-
thony Froude. (Rev. M. H.
Macln'ernv. 0.P.)
141. Catholic Press: Its Scope and
Mission. (Benj. Hoare.)
142. Little Nellie of Holy God: Story
of Life of a Saintly Irish Child.
(A Priest of C-ork.)
143. Church and Socialism. (J. A.
Scott, M.A., LL.B.)
144. Great Historical Event. (Ed-
ward J. Sydes, S.J.)
145. Memoir of Fr. James Dixon.
(W. H. Grattan Flood.)
146. Democratic Government: Some
Errors Incidental Thereto. (V.
Rev. Andrew Murphy, P.P.)
147. Blessed Eucharist: Belief of
Early English Church. (Dr
Carr.)
148. Jack’s Vocation: and Other Sto-
ries. (Miriam Agatha.)
149. Tales of Converts. (By One.l
The Last, Sermon. (H. Hughes.)
150. The Infidel. (From Diary of a
Missionary Priest.)
151. Short Life, St. Gerard Majella.
Redemptorlst Lay Brother.
152. The Sabbath, or Sunday. (Rev.
P. C. Yorke, D.D.)
153. Blessed Eucharist, the Source
of Strength and Happiness.
(Rev. M. Watson, S.J.)
154. The Referendum: A Protest.
Edited by Bishop Phelan. (25th
thousand.)
Lost Holiday; and Other Sto-
ries. (Miriam Agatha.)
157. Purification After Death. (Rev.
M. J. Watson, S.J.)
161. Choice of Books. (Rev. A.
Murphy.)
162. Consecration of a Bishop.
163. Dermot / Blerne, Speculator.
(Mirlani Agatha.)
165. Vocation of the Celt. (Rev.
Robert Kane, S.J.)
167. On Ghosts In General. (Rev.
P. C. Yorke, D.D.)
168. Syndicalism. (Dr. Bourne, Car-
dinal-Archbp. of Westminster.)
170. Culture and Belief. (Very Rev.
M. J. O’Reilly, C.M.)
172. The Church: A Mother to Love
and be Proud of. (Rev. Dr.
Keane, 0.P.)
173. Spiritualism and Christianity.
(Rev. P. J. Manly.)
176 v y6hould the Irish National Scrip-
ture Lessons be Introduced
into the ■'State Schools of Vic-
toria? (Speech by Dr. Pear-
son, M.L.A.)
177. The Gospel—the Real Social Re-
medy. (Rev. Stanislaus M.
Hogan, 0.P.)
178. The Church and Social Study.
(Rev. M. O’Byrne, 0.P.)
180. False Prophets In Social Ques-
tions. . (Rev. H. E. Cock, S.J.)
181. Bernadette: A Play for Chil-
dren. (T. S. Cornish.)
185. Ven. Bernadette Soubirons and
Lourdes. (Rev. Alph. Coen.)
186. Mr. Morlan’s Mistake; and Other
Stories. (Miriam Agatha.)
187. Religion’s W r elcome to Science.
(Rev. C. Wlddowson, S.J.)
189. Were the Middle , Ages Dark?
(Right Rev. Francis Thomas
Brennan, D.D., Bishop of St.
John’s, N.F.)
192. Ancient Guilds. (Edmund Wrlg-
glesworth.)
193. The Rights of Man from the
Catholic Standpoint. (George
Milligan.)
194. I-—Out-Back; ll.—About a No-
vena. (Miriam Agatha.)
195. The Forty Hours’ Adoration
(Arranged by a Priest.)
196. Newman’s Alleged Opposition
to Scholasticism. (Rev. W. J
Tucker.)
(Continued on page 4 of cover.)


' " * ■ ' —- ' '* ' ■■ 'I " ■ ■ ■■■"*
A.C.T.S. PUBLICATIONS ON HAND.
197, ?> £ ra S cls of Aa ® lsi ; ( Rev - p i 213 - The Christian Ideal of the
1Q » M. MacSweeney, M.A.) Home. (Cardinal Gibbons.)
!98. Brendas Friend: and Other 214. The Priest on the Battlefield.
iqq Stories < Miria ™ Agatha.) {Vy.Rev.W. J. Lockington, S.J.)
199. Peter, Prince of the Apostles. 215. Catholicism and Peace. (Rev
(Rev. James P. Conroy.) j. Keating, SJ)
200. The Holy Hour. (Translated 216. Children’s Early and Frequent
m r> It 1 allan Lu< S he S-> Communion. (Rev. J. Husslein,
201. The Origin of Life. By Rev. S.J.)
909 V ’^ iU ’ f J c! * , 217 - Mates. (Miriam Agatha.)
202. The Blessed Sacrament and 21S tp+v,.-- „
Catholic Unity. (Most Rev. 218 ’ °J T^ ar - (Rev. E. Mas-
J. C. Hedley, O.S.B., Bishop of 21Q A „ _
Newport ihe Children s Army—Enlist
203. Pius X. ' (Bishop of Salford.) 22n Asr atl m.)
Benedict XV. (“Benedict.”) 220 ‘ Whiathorst. (P ’ S '
204. National Education.—Statement 221 ...
of Principles and Comparison 9 , ’ „° nts . la Jp a . tl ? ol,c Polity,
of Systems. (P. S. Cleary.) 222 - Personal Prohibition Needed-
205. Some Xmas Letters, A Soldier’s t 0t i at j onal - (Very Rev. Fr.
Son, and Other Stories. (Miriam
Agatha.) 222 - c „ Flaming Cross. (Rev. F. C.
207. Little Tl>erese: True Story 99A D . ’T> Chl^ g0 . ~ „
for Little Readers. (Miriam %\\' p / a . s , ant p ° ntl u ff - (M. A. S.)
Agatha ) 225, V Mothers of the Saints. (Rev.
208. m . Ti, A* P„ to ,al
209. Blessed Peter Chanel: a’ Play NRdFnes 3 ) Mercier ’ Archb,sh °P of
for Children. (T. S. Cornish.! 227 ««a' TJttlo rhtiri r
210. Thoughts on a First Reading “ 7< Them” \josIe h M^v) S - h “A Bov’s
of the Life and Poems of Prayer” (T Llovd) ’ A B
Francis Thompson. (Miss N. 228. “\v ill The’y Never Come?”
... , , xt rr \ * (Constance Clyde).
2H. Church Music in New Zealand. 229. Noel; A Christmas Story. By Chris-
Mary Catherine Callan.) tian Reid.
212. The Mass: A Liturgical Dfama. 230. The Drink Evil in Australia. By
(Rev. W. Devine, B.A., B.D.) Very Rev. W. J. Lockington, S.J.
e ■
• v ....... ' j : ■ ■ , ’ ...i y. r . ■. . ; - ,
Advocate Pfess, 284 Lonsdale Street, Melbourne.
