

With Dr. Stirling's Compliments.
THE POLITICAL
FRANCHISE FOR WOMEN
SPEECH
IN THE HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY, SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
E. C. STIRLING, M.D, M.P.
22nd July, 1885.
Reprinted from “ Hansard."
jpdaik:
BUEDEN & BONYTHON, PKINTEES, ADVEETISEE OFFICE.




i i i 11 oi
Cljc political jfraitcljise foe Women.
s IP is e o zee
In the House of Assembly, South Australia, bt
E. 0. STIRLING, M.D., M.P.
Dr. STIRLING- moved (amid cheers) —“That in the
opinion of this House, women, except while under coverture,
who fulfil the conditions and possess the qualifications on which
the parliamentary franchise for the Legislative Council is
is granted to men, shall, like them, be admitted to the franchise
for both Houses of Parliament.” He thanked hon. members for
the sympathy which they had shown, and would offer no
apology for the introduction of this measure, which had for its
object the initiation of a somewhat scant and tardy measure of
justice to a class of persons who had never failed to prove
themselves devoted and law-abiding citizens. Although feeling
his inability to do full justice to the subject there was one
respect in w'hich he might claim to be qualified for the task he
had undertaken, and that was in his earnest conviction of the
justice of his cause, and in his sincere desii’e to bring it to a
successful issue. He trusted the natural difficulties he must
inevitably encounter would not be increased by the importation
into the debate of anything like party feeling—(Mr. Symon—
“ Hear, hear”) —and he did not think such would be the case.
He was not aware of the position which the Ministry intended
to take towards the motion, but he knew the sentiments of one
hon. member occupying a seat on the Treasury benches, whose
views were always iii the direction of the removal of disabilities
of any kind and of reform generally. (Hear, hear.) He felt
sure of that hon. member’s support, and hoped he might have
been able to influence the opinions of some of his colleagues.
(Laughter.)
Although this was, he believed, the first occasion on
which this question had been debated in the Parliament of


South Australia it was no new one to those who had followed
the great social and political questions of the day, and it might
he said that since the publication of the essay on the “ Subjec-
tion of Women,” by the late John Stuart Mill, the whole
question had come within the domain of practical politics. Its
progress had further been aided by the debates that had taken
place on the subject in the English House of Commons. But
long before this we found that so old a philosopher as Plato
had considered the question, for he wrote —“ There is no
natural difference between the sexes except in strength, and
both should equally participate in the government of the State.”
He had no wish to be pedantic in his references, and he merely
mentioned this to show that the argument founded on
the novelty of the proceeding had no validity. The
subject was first brought forward in the House of Com-
mons by the late Mr. Mill in 1867 in the form of an amendment
to the Beform Bill of that year, the amendment proposing to
substitute the word “person” for “man ” throughout the Bill.
He need scarcely remind hou. members that this amendment
was rejected by a large majority —196 to 73, and since that
time the question, in one form or another, had been before the
Commons no less than ten times. He would not trouble hon.
members with the details of the divisions in each successive
debate, but he would like to mention that on the second occa-
sion, when the removel of the Women’s Disability Bill was
brought forward by Mr. Jacob Bright in 1870, owing to the
failure of Mr. Mill to secure his re-election, it was carried by
a majority of 33 at the second reading. It was, unfortunately,
painfully true that the opponents of the measure rallied in
great force when the Bill came into committee, and it was then
thrown out. He would now pass on to the year 1883, when
Mr. Hugh Mason brought in a motion to the effect that “in
the opinion of this House the Parliamentary franchise should
be extended to women who possess the qualifications which
entitle men to vote, and who in all matters of local government
have the right of voting.” For that motion 114 voted, and
against it 130; so that by 1883 the majority against the grant-
ing of the franchise to women had been reduced from 123 to 16.
(Hear, hear.) Last year the question was brought forward again,
in the form of an amendment to Mr. Gladstone’s Beform Bill,
tabled by Mr. Woodall, as follows: —“For all purposes of and
incidental to the voting for members to serve in Parliament
women shall have the same rights as men, and all enactments
relating to or concerned in such elections shall be construed
accordingly. Provided that nothing in this Act contained
shall enable women under coverture to be registered or to vote
at such elections.” That amendment, he regretted to say, was
defeated by 271 votes to 135, so that looking at the figures only
it would appear that the cause had retrograded since the pre-
ceding year. But he could show in a few words that this
apnnrent defeat was in point of fact a victory for the


principle contended for. (Mr. Coglin—“ Hear*, hear.”)
That vote was taken under a strong declaration from
Mr. Gladstone that his Reform Bill was already laden
with as many provisions as it would safely carry, and
that he would, if the clause were introduced, abandon the whole
Bill. As a matter of fact, among the 271 who opposed the
amendment there were 104 members who had declared them-
selves in favor of the principles of the measure as an abstract
and independent question, and if only a fair proportion of that
number had voted according to their convictions it would have
been undoubtedly carried by a considerable majority. (Mr.
Rees —“ Mr. Gladstone himself supports the principle.”) Yes,
the right hon. gentleman’s speech showed him to be a supporter
of the principle, although he had voted against it except, he
believed, on one occasion, and he understood that Mr. Gladstone
had notified his intention of voting for it when next brought for-
ward as a separate motion. The measure would be brought forward
again this year by Mr. Woodall, with whom he (Dr. Stirling) had
had some correspondence on the matter, and he understood the
motion would be very much on the lines of that of the preceding
year; in fact it would have much the same scope as the proposition
now before hon. members.
In considering now the question on its merits he anticipated
the chief difficulties he would have to encounter would
be not so much the arguments based on logical reason-
ing, but rather on the fact that very much of the opposition in
the minds of hon. members rested upon the somewhat intangible
basis of popular sentiment, and on a belief which was none the
less strong because unacknowledged, that anything which tends
to disturb the existing order of things, especially with regard
to our social relations, is contrary to what he had heard termed
“ instinct.” He would ask whether the mere substitution of
instinct for reason as a basis of argument was not in itself a
confession of the weakness of their cause, and if he must, as he
feared he must, accept such an assertion in the place of an
argument, might he not require hon. members who used it to
define precisely what they meant by this somewhat shadowy
term, and to show also conclusively that this instinct to which
they appealed as an unerring mentor is itself founded upon a
sound and reasonable basis ? He would await such a definition
and such proofs with very keen interest. But apart from all
exigencies of logic he would make an appeal to hon. members
who might do him the honor to listen to his arguments, to put
aside any of their preconceived ideas for the justice of which
they bad not good grounds, and to judge this question apart
from the prejudices of sex. He would also ask hon. members
not unduly to obtrude in this debate their humorous proclivities.
(Hear, hear.) He was glad for this reason that Mr. Kingston
was not in his place, and he ventured almost to hope that he
would not put in an appearance until that debate was concluded.
(Laughter.) There was no doubt that that question was not to


be laughed out of court. (Hear, hear.) It was a very serious
question not only for the persons directly concerned, but for all
who belonged to the body politic, (Hear, hear.) The motion
before the House defined as accurately as he had been able to
define what women should be entitled to exercise of the franchise.
He was perfectly well aware that the terms he had employed
might expose him to a charge of inconsistency, or it might be
to a worse charge of having assumed an illogical ground. His
opponents might say that in bringing forward this motion two
courses were only open to him, either that he should have based
his arguments on the grounds of sex, which of course would
have had for its end the inclusion to the franchise of all women,
irrespective of anything in the shape of a property qualification ;
or that he should have based his arguments on the ground of
property, in which case there would have been no reason for the
exclusion of married women, who, undoubtedly, were now able
independently to hold property. He was free to admit that either
of these courses would have been more logical. If he had
followed his inclinations he thought he would have adhered
throughout to the property qualification, and have made no
exception in the case of married women. There was no
doubt, as had been stated, a distinct anomaly in the
idea that a woman might possess a vote as a spinster,
lose it when she got married, and recover it again when she
became a widow. He was, however, compelled to recognise that
a very great many of the objections in the minds of some members
to the principle of this measure rested upon the objection to a
vote being possessed by married women. (Hear, hear.) These
were liberal enough to desire that unmarried women should
possess a vote, but they were not quite so liberal when it was
sought to make the same concession to the married women.
(Mr. Cogliu—“ Why not ?”) There was in the minds of some
hon. members a distinct idea that a vote in the hands of a
married woman might lead to its being exercised antagonisti-
cally to that of the husband, and it raised horrible visions of
households politically divided, and of a strong and factious op-
position not to be tolerated anywhere outside of a Legislative
Assembly. He did not share these views, but he was compelled
to recognise their force and the influence they possessed. He
recognised that in the minds of many men, chiefly married ones
he hoped, the idea as to the married state was that the husband
and wife were one person, and the husband was that one.
(Laughter.) Therefore, being above all things anxious that
some measure of reform in the direction he had indicated should
be initiated, and being assured of the cordial support of many
members if married women were not included within the terms
of the motion, he had reluctantly felt constrained to follow the
course he had adopted. It was with considerable regret that he
had done so, for he not only recognised that their exclusion was
scarcely warranted under the advantages married women had
gained by the recent legislation with regard to the independent


power they now possessed of holding property in their own
right, but also that in point of judgment and experience they
were probably the superiors of their unmarried sisters. Still the
exclusion of married women was not quite so illiberal as it ap-
peared at first sight. Some of the arguments that he would
bring forward for the admission of certain women would be
found to rest upon the fact that the views of women were un-
represented or not fairly represented, but if there was a
class of women to whom this least applied it was the
married women, who through their husbands probably got
some sort of recognition of their views and opinions, if
that were only an imperfect and indirect one. He was
far from saying that it was a satisfactory or sufficient kind
of representation, but at any rate there was no doubt that
they did have a better chance of having some attention paid to
their opinions and aspirations than those who had no sympathetic
companions. It might also be fairly urged with some degree of
reason that if married women had the vote it would be in many
instances simply duplicating the votes of their husbands. He
felt somewhat justified also in making this exception by the
knowledge which he believed was accurate, that the measure
which was to be brought forward this year in England would
contain a similiar provision to that which it contained when it
was brought forward last year. He trusted he had now suffi-
ciently explained with all candour the reasons which had induced
him to take the course he had adopted, and that he would at
least not be charged with a sinister attempt to limit the
efficiency of a measure which, if carried out in its entirety,
would be a beneficial one, and which he himself would
gladly see extended. In short, he might in common par-
lance say that though he would have much preferred
the whole loaf he preferred the half of it to no bread at all.
Practical considerations had compelled him to make some
limitations, and he believed that those he had made would
commend themselves to reasonable and moderate men.
It seemed to him that in claiming the franchise even for this
limited class he had to contend with an assumption which in any
other case would be deemed unfair and unreasonable. In all
other cases where rights, privileges, and penalties were con-
cerned, it appeared to him that the law set itself up to be no
respecter of persons, save where there were positive reasons for
making exceptions which were beneficial to the body politic.
It was very properly urged that it was those who advocated
disabilities of any kind who should maintain and prove their
case without the possibility of doubt or error. Was that the
case in the present question ? Had not the incapacity of
women to exercise the franchise beneficially been assumed
throughout rather than proved ? (Hear, hear.) If not he
asked when and how was it shown that women should be classed
with minors, idiots, lunatics, and criminals, as unworthy and
unfitted for a simple duty of citizenship ? AVas it not most


unfairly the case that throughout the whole course of this
question the burden of proof was held to rest with the advocates
of freedom, justice, and impartiality, instead of as it should be
with those who sought to restrict their exercise. He said most
unhesitatingly that this assumption would be intolerable in any
other question, but he had no option but to accept the con-
ditions as he found them, unfair though they were. Was it
necessary for him to vindicate the claims of the women here
indicated from a purely intellectual point of view ? Was there
a single member of that house with the experience he must have
had of the opposite sex who would seriously affirm that iu his
opinion the intelligence of women was so low, so debased, as to
unfit her from exercising a right which had beeu accorded without
hesitation to the most illiterate of men ? He would not say that
there were no differences whatever between the mental
attributes of men and women. The question was rather whether
there existed in women as a class such an absolute mental
inferiority when compared to men as should entitle the one to
the franchise and exclude the other. He denied altogether any
such absolute inferiority—(cheers)—and if members whose
thirst for information on an interesting subject had led them to
look into these things asserted the undoubted fact that the
average weight of the brain of man was greater than that of
women, and that therefore he must be cleverer, he would
retort that relatively to the weight of the body the weight of the
brain in woman was greater than in the case of man; and that
so far as this kind of argument was worth anything the balance
of advantage was on the side of the so-called inferior sex. If
an absolutely efficient standard of intellect was held to be
requisite, which it was not, why did they admit the men of
small brains and weak intelligence? (Hear, hear.) The
question whether the intelligence of any women had ever
reached the same high standard that had been reached by some men
was also altogether beside the matter. He was only contending
now for the point that the exclusion of women was not justified
■on any purely intellectual grounds of absolute inferiority of
intellect. Women as well as men had been carried along on the
great educational wave of recent years, but the women had had to
encounter the sharp and hard rocks of popular prejudice. Every
opposition, fair and unfair, had been made at one time or another
to their legitimate aspirations towards self-support or self-
improvement—and by whom ? By those very persons who
claimed that they were able to represent them sufficiently. But
one by one they had triumphed over these obstacles, using no
violence, uttering no threats, but exercising only the most
legitimate and constitutional means they had peacefully gained
entrance to within the gates of the highest educational
establishments ; and within those portals they had competed
successfully and on equal terms with their masculine antagonists,
asking no favours and receiving none, seeking only for liberty
to use to the best advantage the talents -with w r hich they -were


endowed. He honored these women. He respected and
admired their courage, their energy and pertinacity, their
patience, and their endurance ; and he asked whether these
were not some of the attributes of good citizens, and whether
their conspicuous forbearance from riotous agitation could he
held as a reason for withholding from them privileges
which in the other sex had sometimes been gained by
threats and violence verging on revolution. He con-
fessed that he could see no humour whatever in the
derisive epithets with which it was often sought to cast
ridicule upon such persons. (Mr. Rees —“ They never harm.”)
To turn from the old country to our own more limited sphere,
freed from the trammels of ancient prejudices, we had re-
cognised the equality of the sexes from an educational point
of view by admitting women to all the privileges of our Uni-
versity on terms of perfect equality with men. Speaking now
as a teacher of both sexes, he had no hesitation in saying that
he could recognise no essential difference in the mental capa-
city of men and women. It was part of his duty to hold an
annual examination and make a recommendation to the Council
of the University with reference to the award of two con-
siderable prizes, which were muniliciently given by Sir Thomas
Elder, on the subject he had the honor to teach. As a man
and as a member of the so-called superior sex he now had to
make the somewhat humiliating confession that out of the four
prizes already awarded three had been gained by women in open
competition with the men, and on the only occasion, this year, in
which none of the candidates were considered worthy all the
candidates were men. (Laughter.) He would not pursue the
subject further. He did not wish to occupy the time of the
House by controverting the plea of intellectual inferiority, as
he thought it was wholly untenable. It might, however, be
urged with perhaps a greater semblance of truth, either that
the character of women was so emotional as to prevent them from
exercising a sound judgment, or that in experience of political
matters there was an absolute inferiority to men, even though we
might admit their equality in other things. To discuss fully the
first alleged disability of the emotional temperament and its bear-
ings would lead him into a digression scarcely proper for that
Assembly ; but perhaps he might be permitted simply to point
out that the emotional temperament was not at all confined to
women, though he admitted it might be more prevalent with
them, and if it were in itself a real bar to the exercise of a
political privilege it should be held to be so in the case of man
as well as woman. He would ask Mr. Coglin whether he thought
an emotional temperament made him unfit for the exercise of his
political franchise. (Mr. Coglin —“ Certainly not.” Laughter.)
Like the hon. member he denied that it was any bar whatever.
Hon. members who had had a longer experience of the human
character than he had would, he thought, have recognised that
an emotional temperament was often the accompaniment of


mental attributes of a very high order. In the case of women
particularly the emotions were often the channel for the
expression of a superabundant energy, for which the ordinary
avocations of well-to-do young women who lived at home at ease
afforded no suitable outlet. But when marriage, the care of a
family, or the necessity of hard work, provided a suitable outlet
for this pent up energy, the emotional side was subdued, and the
nervous force, of which it had been the expression, could be recog-
nised in the patient endurance and untiring devotion which so
many women exhibited in the face of trouble, danger, or adversity.
(Cheers.) It had also been pointed out by a very distinguished
writer on education (Professor Bain) that there was a distinct
correlation between the emotions and the intellect ; in other
words, that by proper training the emotions could be transformed
into intellectual faculties with a corresponding diminution in
the former. As regards the other alleged objections, that there
was in political matters a real and actual ignorance as compared
with men, he ventured to say that the statement was not
generally true as regarded the limited class whose claims
they were now discussing. The class of women whom this
measure sought to emancipate were women of fair average
education and intelligence compared with the majority
of men voters. They would be found also of exceptional
competency, because having lost, or because they never
had any natural protectors or breadwinners, they had been
obliged themselves to occupy these positions, and to take
upon themselves many of the burdens and responsibilities which
would otherwise have belonged to men. He was sure hon.
members who had had business transactions with any of those
women who held property in their own right or occupied
responsible positions as heads of households, would have dis-
covered that they had just as keen as interest as men in what
as benefical, and what prejudicial, to their own interests and
that of the property they represented. Besides, even assuming
that women as a class did take less interest in abstract politics
than men, the men who made the laws excluding women from all
share in the Government were fairly responsible for the failing
Did not a personal interest in any matter always represent the
keenest interest in it, and had it not been the case in every
instance where additional extensions of the franchise had been
made to men that this extension had itself created an interest
in political matters where this did not previously exist, or
intensified it where it was before only languidly felt ? The
same thing would happen in the case of women. A large class
of excellent citizens with a natural bias in the direction of order
and good government, would be led to take an active and
healthy interest in the principles of politics, rather than as was
now the case in its mere personnel. The personal concern
women now felt in the political successes of their male relatives
would be leavened with a new and wholesome interest in the
opinions they represented, and this would be manifestly to the


benefit of all parties concerned. (Mr. Burgoyne—“ Hear, bear.”)
If be bad dwelt so mucb on these aspects of tbe case it was
because, judging from wbat be read of tbe debates that bad taken
place on tbis subject in other places, be expected that some
of tbe objections would be of tbis character. They would be
mere assertions, appealing only to tradition, popular sentiment,
or masculine prejudices. There were other objections no doubt
which would be raised, and which be would have to anticipate,
but he would endeavour now to show that tbe claim for these
women to vote rested upon reason, justice, and expediency.
He very gladly took an opportunity of acknowledging tbe
liberal spirit in which he knew some members were prepared to
listen to his arguments. It was at all times difficult to divest
one’s mind of ideas to which it had become long accustomed,
and it was highly creditable to some bon. members with whom
he had discussed this question outside the House that they had
said —“ Well, this idea of yours does appear new fangled and
contrary to the sweet reasonableness of things, but there seems
to be a good deal of force in what you say, and I can assure you
1 will listen to your arguments with attention, and if I find
that thay can overcome my instinct in the matter, I will go with
you.” (Hear, hear.) If debate was worth anything at all, it
seemed to him that this was the spirit in which it should be
entered on, and he gladly thanked those members who were
prepared to extend to him tbe very valuable consideration of a
mind open to conviction. As to the justice and reasonableness
of the claim which he was advocating, he confessed it appeared
to him almost humiliating to common sense —almost to verge
upon the absurd, that the cudgels of argument should be seriously
taken up to prove, that in a country where the supreme political
functions involved in sovreignity might be discharged by a
woman, and as a matter of fact were discharged with admix able
tact, judgment, and sagacity, the lowest of them was denied, to
her on the plea that she was a woman and incapable of exercising
them. Surely Gulliver himself related nothing more absurd
than that. It seemed to him that throughout the world’s history
women had shown a remarkable capacity for for political
functions, of which the highest were involved in governing. If
they compared the more limited number of women who had
reigned with the greater number of men who had reigned, he
confidently asked any student of history whether the number
of great queens was not relatively larger than the number of
great kings. Without going very far back into remote times
he would recall to the minds of members the names of our own
Elizabeth and Victoria, of Isabella of Castile, and of Maria
Theresa of Austria. (Mr. Johnson —“ Catherine of Russia. ) A es;
Catherine of Russia, though in some respects she was an objec-
tionable person. All of the queens he had named exhibited in a
high degree the qualities of decision, firmness, and judgment
which were essential to a great ruler. Then he asked was not
the whole tendency of modern social ideas to break down the


ancient barriers instituted by the accident of birth? As was
said by the great writer who had made the subject peculiarly his
own —“We recognise and admit the principle that human
beings are no longer born to their place in life, and chained
down by an inexorable bond to the place they are born
to, but are free to employ their faculties and such favorable
chances that offer to achieve the lot which may appear
to them most desirable. At present the disabilities of women
are the only case, save one, in which laws and insti-
tution take persons at their birth, and ordain that they shall
never in their lives be allowed to do certain things. The one
exception is that of royalty. In no other instance than this,
which comprehends half the human race, are the higher func-
tions closed against any one by a fatality of birth which no
exertions and no change of circumstances can overcome.”
Now on what grounds could this restriction be maintained or
justified consistently with our boasted ideas of justice, freedom,
and progress ? It was impossible to read the speeches of such
reformers as Mr. Bright and Mr. Gladstone in favor of the
extension of the suffrage to men without feeling that every one
of the arguments contained in those speeches applied with
equal force to women. The reason which made it desirable
that men should be represented made it equally desirable that
the women too should be represented, and he believed it would
one day be thought incredible that there ever was a time when the
idea of giving votes to women was regarded as dangerous and
revolutiouar}'’. Even so eminently practical a statesman as the
great Duke of Wellington was afraid of the Reform Bill of 1832,
and honestly believed it would bring down in general ruin the
Crown, the State, the Church, and all property ; but it did not
do so, and we have made many advances since then. As Mr. John
Bright once said, “ Men are afraid of the first experiment of
something which they think has a dangerpus appearance, but
if they find their fears are altogether imaginary they make a
second experiment without fear.” Some people thought at one
time that the whole order of society, the very laws of nature
themselves, would be reversed if suffrages of any kind were
extended to women, but a first experiment had been made in
giving women the municipal and the school board suffrages.
The fears at first expressed had been altogether imaginary.
Society had not been turned upside down. The possession of
a vote in these matters had not made women different from
what they were before. They still preferred pretty gowns to
ugly ones ; they were not regardless of their personal appear-
ance of which men thought so much; they were not averse
from the admiration of the opposite sex; they still took a
lively interest in domestic matters and small economies ; they
were not indifferent to society or to their friends and relations ;
and they asked that a second experiment might be now made
without fear or misgiving. When one looked around
and saw the number of devoted women who had been


in the forefront of every great movement of social re-
form which had for its object the lessening of crime, vice,
poverty or intemperance, the advancement of education, the im-
provement of our hospitals, asylums, and criminal establishments,
and the bettering of humanity generally, it did seem to him in-
credible that within these walls they should be the objects of
distrust and indifference. It was no use meeting this measure
with the bare assertion that the proper sphere of woman was to
many. He admitted of course that a happy marriage was one
of the happiest lots that could befall a woman. But it was not
all who wished to marry, and there was an ever increasing
number of women who, for various reasons not always within their
control, could not get married if they would, and it was for these
that his measure was particularly intended. Women had been
unfortunately too long brought up to believe that marriage was
the one vocation open to them, and to neglect the training
which would enable them to fill their part in life without the
aid of a companion ; and though this state of things was being
rapidly removed by the great advances made in their education
and in the facilities for their admission to avocations previously
closed to them there yet remained the patent fact that women
were at a great disadvantage as compared to men in the increa-
sing struggle for existence from which they were not exempt.
Physically weaker, she yet had often to work longer hours for
less pay. Contrast the wages of an ordinary working man with
his eight hours’ work with those of many a working woman,
and the advantage was not on the side of the so-called protected
sex. Women, moreover, often had the mortification of seeing
many of the positions wdiich they could worthily fill occupied
by men. As Hr. Gladstone himself was obliged to confess,
although he at that time voted against the movement, “We
scarcely ever see in the hands of a woman an employment
which ought more naturally to be in the hands of a man, but
we do constantly see in the hands of a man employments which
might be more beneficially and more economically in the hands
of a woman.” But though they are thus handicapped by their
relative weakness, by their smaller earnings, and by the limi-
tation in their opportunities of self support, these disabilities
gained for them no consideration when it came to the burdens
of the State. The State, with rigid impartiality, exacted its con-
tributions from all alike, but when it came to the question as
to how this money, contributed by all irrespective of sex, was to
be spent, where was the voice of even-handed justice ? It was
not heard, but instead one-sided legislation spoke and said —
“ You are only a woman, and therefore not a capable citizen, you
are incapable of having any voice in the selection of the people
that are to represent you and your property. We will take
your money, but we cannot allow you any control over its
disposal.” Was this consistent with that justice and fair play
on which Englishmen so often prided themselves? Then again,
with regard to an absolute capacity for exercising a judicious


selective faculty, did we not tacitly admit the possession of this
faculty by the right, with one accord conceded to women, to
make "the most important selection that could possibly happen
to them in their lives —to choose their partners for life ? (Mr.
Caldwell —“ Hear, hear.”) But altogether apart from such an
argument as that, the privilege of exercising a free and inde-
pendent choice had already been conceded to women in other
matters which wmre precisely of the same kind, and demand
precisely the same kind of qualities as the political suffrages.
Women who had the proper qualifications could now vote in
municipal elections, and in England they could both vote for
and become members of school boards and boards of guardian
of the poor and other public bodies, and there was a universal
consensus of opinion that their influence on these bodies
had almost invariably been judicious and productive of
very great benefit. (Mr. Eees —“Hear, hear.”) It
seemed to him that the same kind of reasons which had
so amply justified the admission of women to these other
franchises held good with regard to the political franchise.
He had always heard it stated as an axiom of constitutional
statecraft that taxation and representation should go hand-in-
hand. Did not a woman who owned property pay taxes like
the man in a similar position P Then why should the one and
not the other have a voice in the selection of the most proper
person to be entrusted with the spending of a fund which was
partly derived from her contributions. Surely in contributing
to the burdens of the State she was entitled to some share in
the management of it. (Hear, hear.) There must be many
instances within the knowledge of hon. members of women who
without any helping hand had struggled successfully against
the heavy odds to which they were subject to maintain a credit-
able and honorable career and to support not only themselves
and their children, but sometimes also worthless and dissolute
male relations. lie had in his mind such an instance of a lady
now far advanced in years with a little property of her own
which would be just sufficient to keep her in ease and comfort
in her declining years. But the maternal instinct—always
strong, and often strongest in such cases —constrained her to
support her son —a miserable, drunken, useless fellow, who
lived upon her savings, and whose expenses had actually brought
it about that his aged mother, now verging upon her eightieth
year, found herself in straightened circumstances, and compelled
to deprive herself of everything save the bare necessaries of life.
Yet the law said the man was a capable citizen, and gave him
a vote, while the woman who supported him and who paid her
taxes, and was in all respects a competent citizen, was held to
be of no account whatever politically, and was not allowed to
vote. (Mr. Caldwell —” Shame.”) Then take the case of a
woman who was left with the management of a farm, or of
a business —who had in fact what was usually called a
stake in the country. She employed laborers, whose


wages were derived from her earnings. These, if they were
men, all had their votes, while their employer in whose services
they were was not a capable citizen in Ihe eyes of the law and
could not vote. It was needless to multiply such instances;
they were quite numerous enough to have came within the
knowledge of every member of this House. Ho had often heard
the statement —and he believed ft to bo a sound contention —
that a rich man could not satisfactorily represent the views
and aspirations of the poorer classes. But if that were true
with how much greater force could it be said that a man could
not properly represent the views and aspirations of the opposite
sex. Hon. members were familiar with measures which had
been brought forward only recently in the House, and one such
would again shortly be before them, which deeply concerned
the privileges, status, and welfare of the female sex, and its re-
lations to the other sex. Was it possible for any legislation
on such a matter to be satisfactory (however much hou. members
would try to be just) which was based on the feelings and pre-
judices of one side only? Yet that was what hon. members
proceeded to do with a complacent satisfaction that they were
doing the best that could be done, and that they were to consti-
tute themselves the sole judges in a matter which concerned
the other sex, to say the least of it as much as it coucerned
themselves. (The Hon. .1. Colton —“ They had the right of
petition.”) That did not effect the general question as to the
character of the general legislation passed on the opinion of the
one sex only. (Mr. Rees —“ Hear, hear.”) Such laws could
not be satisfactory, and they were not likely to be just or fair.
If any proofs were necessary of the outrageous injustice that
was likely to spring from this one-sided legislation it was only
necessary to point to the divorce laws as they stood at present.
Those laws alone would be sufficient to show that the laws of
the country were made by men. (Hear, hear.) There was no
doubt that it was the great social questions which were becoming
more and more the objects for legislation. Women were just
as much concerned in these as men, and justice and humanity
claimed some means for the expression of their views in matters
which so deeply concerned them. (Hear, hear.) Were women
less suffers than men from the evil effects of intemperance, or
were they less concerned than men in the diminution of the vice
of drunkenness which brought to them as much sorrow and suf-
fering ? ( Hear, hear.) Was not education the same great bless-
ing to women as to men, and was it in fact from a woman that
we received our earliest and best lessons in the foundation of
our character ? (Hear, hear.) Did not war itself bring to
women the same burdens of taxation as to men, and did it not
often bring besides the pain and anguish of a desolated home?
(Hear, hear.) And yet it was considered that the voice of
women should be unheard and of no influence in the deter-
mination of these momentous questions. So long as half the
human race was unrepresented our boasted representative


government was a hollow mockery of an ideal which it did not
even approach. Now, out of this rose two objections which
had been urged. It was said that the influence already wielded
by women was considerable, and was as much as was good for
them. He admitted that no one who was a student of history
or an observer of the ways of the world could deny that a great
deal of influence was wielded by women. We did not like
always to admit this of ourselves, though we did take a certain
amount of satisfaction in commenting upon the process in other
people, and we were familiar with such terms as petticoat
government, henpecked husbands, and so on. (Laughter. An
hon. member —The “ grey mare.”) But he said most unhesi-
tatingly that this irresponsible influence which might be called
the influence of tbe boudoir or of the back stairs was unsound in
its consequences. It was neither healthy for the State nor for
the people who practised it. Any influence which women might
be able to exert should be open and above board if it was to be
really valuable. It should be exercised in the wholesome light
of public opinion, and subject to that wholesome if not always
agreeable criticism which had ever ’been a beneficial and a
powerful factor for good in political as in all other matters.
Exercised under such circumstances he believed that the vote
of women would make itself felt as a thoroughly beneficial
element in the body politic. Then it had been urged by one
of the ablest opponents of this measure that the physical unfit-
ness of women to bear arms was a sufficient disqualification for
the franchise. Well, the logic of this ground of exclusion
would appear manifest to him when all the men who were too
ill, too old, too weak, and too infirm were likewise disqualified.
And if it was the mere offering of life which was to be looked
upon as the qualification of a capable citizen he thought that
the exercise of the maternal function might be looked
upon as a fair equivalent on the part of the sex for the
military service for which we now deemed them incapable.
Besides, ministers of religion did not bear arms, but
they were none the less deemed capable of voting, and he was
not aware that anyone had proposed that they should be dis-
franchised on this account. And again, if women did not
actually engage in warfare, they most certainly contributed
towards the taxes out of which war was waged —not to speak
of the conspicuous part such women as Florence Nightingale and
the rest of that noble sisterhood had played as hospital nurses,
partaking of all the hardships and more than the ordinary
dangers of actual combat. (Hear, hear.)
He would now drop down from the claims of women for a share
in the political franchise, which were based upon reason and justice,
to the somewhat lower grounds of expediency. This measurehad
in times past fared badly when it had been discussed upon these
grounds. Good old fashioned Tories had objected to it, on the
score that it was highly radical and revolutionary, and they had
consequently voted against it. Brand-new, red-hot Radicals


had declared that it was a truly Conservative measure, and
therefore of the devil, and they had condemned it. (Laughter.)
Between these two stools the measure had often come to the
ground. On the other hand, valuable and unexpected support
had often been received from members of parties holding the
most diametrically opposite views on other matters. It was
not a little surprising to find on the same side of a question
such names as Lord Beaconsfield, Lord John Manners, Professor
Fawcett, Sir Stafford Horthcote, Mr. Stansfield, Sir Charles
Dilke, Sir Hardinge Gifford, Sir Eobert Peel, Mr. Sclater
Booth, Mr. Gathorne Hardy, Sir Wilfred Lawson, Mr. Leonard
Courtney, and many other notable names which on most subjects
were habitually found opposed to one another. He would only
trouble hon. members with the opinion of one out of many,
whose remarks in favour of this question he held in his hand.
He chose it in preference to many who held more distinguished
positions, because the speaker was a man who was the embodi-
ment of common sense, respected alike by both sides of the
English House of Commons. The late Eight Hon. Mr. Henley,
for many years member for Oxfordshire, made the following
remarks in a speech on the second reading of a Bill for the
enfranchisement of women : —“ Sir —I have always voted against
this Bill, but I have lately watched carefully the operation of
the exercise of the franchise both in municipal and school board
elections by women, and as I think it has been beneficial, I do
not see any reason why it should not be beneficial in
Parliamentary elections. The principal is that women should
have the right of voting. I confess that I have always
hitherto voted against the Bill, but for the reasons I
have stated I shall now give it my hearty support.” For
his part he neither proposed this as a so-called Eadical
measure or as a Conservative measure. He cared not whether
these women would vote blue or whether they would vote yellow,
or even whether with the blackest ingratitude, which he was far
from attributing to them, they should use their newly-acquired
privileges against him in the next election. (Laughter.) He
only wished that their opinions, whatever they might be, should
receive fair representation, and if he might express an opinion
he believed that the women sought to be enfranchised would not
belong to any distinct party. Like men they would receive
their political bias from their education and from their surround-
ings, and their votes on most questions would incline in the
same direction as the votes of men of an equivalent station in
life. (Hear, hear.) But if the question at issue were one in
which the interests of women as a class was deeply involved,
leading to a solidarity of opinion amongst them, then justice
required their expression of this opinion as a quarantee of just
and equal consideration. And there was no doubt whatever
that every class which had contended for the franchise at any
time had done so ostensibly with the object of furthering its
own claims. (Mr. Eees —“ Hear, bear.”) It was very easy to


enumerate a number of matters now often the subject of discus-
sion both in this house and outside, where the cordial co-operation
and candid opinions of thinking women would be of the greatest
value. He need only mention such questions as education,
especially of the young; the condition and treatment of the
poor and sick ; the discipline and management of prisons and
reformatories ; the regulation of the hours of labor for women
and children in factories and other piaces ; the efficient main-
tenance of charitable institutions, and the distribution o
charities ; and the laws relative to the protection of females.
(Hear, hear.) All these were questions which were particularly
associated with women’s work, in which their peculiar knowledge
would be of invaluable assistance in any legislation upon the
subject. And far as regards the principles of judicious economy,
not' passive but active, he would undertake to say that the
Treasurer might take a lesson from the mistress of his own and
of many another household. These were some of the reasons
why it appeared to him to be not only just and reasonable but
also expedient w r hy the franchise should be extended to a limited
number of the female sex who seemed in all respects to deserve it.
He had no fear that such a privilege would be used injudiciously;
on the contrary the qualities of frugality and prudence
which enable women to occupy their responsible positions were
all guarantees that their votes might be relied on to be given
in the direction of order and good government. (Hear, hear.)
He had touched upon some of the objections which experience
of what had taken place in past debates led him to think would
be raised ; there were others no doubt which would be
brought forward, but he would have to rely upon the utterances
of some hon. members, who he knew would spead in favor of the
measure, to supply many of the omissions in his remarks. There
were, however, just one or two which were considered of such
importance that he must allude to them. It was sure to be
alleged that if this measure were passed it would be only the
thin end of the wedge, of which the thick end would be not only
the admission of all women to the franchise, irrespective of any
qualification whatever. (Mr. Bees —“ Why not ? ) Well, it
this measure were passed it might follow that a further exten-
sion of the franchise in the same direction would be proposed at
some future time, and perhaps passed. It was impossible to say
that we should at any point have reached finality of reform.
(Hear, hear.) But that was not now the question. If it ever
should happen that any further extension in this direction was
passed, he was sure it would only be after the very fullest
consideration by the House, made in the full light of the
experience that would have been gained from the working
of the present limited measure. Then as to the other
argument, that if the franchise were granted the logical
sequence would be a seat in the House, and perhaps on the
Ministerial benches. (Laughter. The Hon. J. Colton ‘ No. )
Of all the objections this was the one he had heard urged more


frequently than any other. Well, it might he an objection to
some hon. members to think that we-might possibly have a lady
occupant of the Treasury benches. Mr. Rees —“ Commissioner
of Public Works, to wit.” (Loud laughter.) He would assume
such an hypothesis, and such an occurrence might perhaps
upset all political calculations by the fact of a member of the
Government marrying the leader of the Opposition—(loud
laughter) and so giving rise to a coalition Ministry.
(Laughter.) He was not sure that under certain circumstances
that might not be a good thing. (The Hon. J. Colton—“No,
no,” and laughter.) But he wished to point out that the right
to share in the choice of those w T ho were to exercise a public
trust was altogether a distinct thing from competing for the
trust itself. (Mr. Symon —“Hear, hear.”) If no one could
vote for a member of Parliament who was not fit to be a candi-
date, the Government would be a very narrow oligarchy in-
deed. It did not follow because a woman was allowed to vote
that she must necessarily reach a position in the House. (Mr.
Rees —“ You would have to specially legislate against them.”
Ministers of religion could not sit in the House, but he was not
aware that any one had suggested that they should be deprived
of their vote because of their disability in this respect. It
by no means followed that because a woman could vote for
her representative she should become a representative herself.
This was like the question of the further extension of the
franchise —a matter which the House was ferfectly competent
to determine if ever the question should arise.
There remained but one more objection which he would meet,
and that was the allegation which one so frequently heard,
that the exercise of the franchise was outside the proper
sphere of women, and that they did not themselves wish
for it. By what right, he ashed, did one half the
community set itself up as the judge of what was the
proper sphere for the other half? Would not a similar
obiter dictum made by one-half the community of men with
regard to the other half be considered a piece of arrogant
assumption not to be tolerated for one moment? He had
already endeavored to point out that the whole tendency of our
modern ideas of progress was to break down the ancient
barriers created by the mere accident of birth, and to recognise
that all persons were free to make the best possible use they
could of their abilities, and to avail themselves to the fullest
extent of every opportunity that presented itself of improving
their position —to recognise that the proper sphere for every
one was the highest and best he or she could attain to. Then why
should any exception be made in the case of women ? They
too, many of them, had talents ; not less than men were they
imbued with a spirit of patriotism and love of country, and they
were not less than them interested and concerned in its
prosperity and progress. Yet there was denied to them every
opportunity of legitimately making their voice felt in the selec-


'fcion of men who were to rule their destinies, and to make or
mar the State of which the were citizens, whose material
burdens they like the men bore. I was by no meaus the first
dime we had heard this kind of allegation as an argument for
the continuance of an abuse. Precisely the same kind of thing
had been said on every fresh proposal to extend the franchise
to men. It was said when it was proposed to set free the slaves;
but these reforms had nevertheless been carried out to the
immeasurable advantage of the human race. It might now be
said in reference to the subordinate and degraded position
occupied by Eastern and Asiatic women at the present day, and
if the plea were admitted as valid it would be an effectual bar
to any improvement in their position, for there was no doubt
that a long period of ignominious subjection had made these
servile-minded, and with few exceptions they themselves made no
protests against the restrictions which made their position little
short of slavery. But there was no one, he thought, who would
say that this servile subjection was either good for themselves or
for their masters, and that it ought not to be removed. And the
same thing precisely might be said for the continuance of every
•case of injustice where the injustice was not noisily obtruded on
the public ear. It was not to be expected that women whose
natural aspirations towards better things had been systematically
repressed by the subordinate position they had always occupied,
■whose feelings were always in the direction of peace and order,
should manifest the same noisy and active agitation as men who
had always had the control of the machinery of legislation in
their own hands, and who had very often found by experience
that thebest way to geta thing was to cry out loudly enough for it.
It was unfair that the justice of a claim measured by the noisi-
ness and perhaps violence with which it was put forth. It was
.a premium to agitation to wait always for such a manifestation
before considering the justice of the demand. Besides, suppos-
ing for one moment that a part of the allegations were true,
that in point of fact women did not want to vote —what was the
necessity for the law which prevented them doing that for which
they had no inclination ? Surely the existence of what was
practiclly a prohibitory law against the right of women to vote
effectually disposed of that excuse —for it was nothing more —an
excuse which they were, perhaps, prone to cherish because it
gave some sort of unselfish air to the .upholding of a selfish
proposal. He did say, however, most unhesitatingly that the
.statement was not true. In England from first to last there had
been presented to Parliament petitions in favor of the measure
signed by nearly half a million of persons. Last year alone
■ (1881) there were 675 petitions with 36,469 signatures. Public
meetings had been held in nearly all the large towns, liesolu-
tions in favour of it had been adopted by a very large number of
both Liberal and Conservative associations throughout
the country. There had been petitions in favour of it
from seventeen town councils in England, including such


important centres as Manchester, Birmingham, Newcastle,.
Huddersfield, Exeter; and from eighteen similar bodies in'
Scotland, including Edinburgh, Paisely, and Aberdeen. A very
large representative gathering of men in the Tradesmen’s
Union Congress passed a resolution in favour of it with only
three dissentinent voices, and there had been throughout both
England and the United States a very strong and growing,
albeit quiet and orderly movement, in favour of the measure.
He was glad to say he had nearly concluded his remarks, but
before doing so would answer briefly a question that would
most certainly and most properly be asked. That was, supposing
this measure to pass, what accession of numbers will the
register receive ? He regretted he could not undertake to
answer this with any degree of accuracy, because the facts were
at present unobtainable. None of the departments which had
to do with the compilation of the statistics of the colony could
give him any satisfactory information on the subject. He was
authorised by the collector of taxes, who had more machinery at
his hands, and -whose opportunities for ascertaining the requisite
particulars were probably greater than those of anyone else, to
say that he could not himself, with all the means of information
on his hand, make anything like a reliable estimate. He thought,,
however, that some approximation could be made. In England
it was found that by taking as the basis of calculation the
range of the municipal franchise, which there as here applied
equally to men as to women who were duly qualified, the
women ratepayers were to men as Ito 7. Again, if they were
to take the number of owners of land throughout England and
Wales as the basis, the proportion of women owners to men
owners was also as nearly as possible as Ito 8. Passing from.
England to Ireland —a country the conditions of which were
different in many ways —the proportion remained about the
same. Putting therefore these facts together, if any com-
parison whatever could be made between the conditions which
obtain here and in England, there would by this measure be
added to the register about one-seventh or one-eighth of the
number now* on the roll of the Legislative Council. He found
in reference to the last “Statistical Register,” this number to be
about 30,000. The register could consequently receive an addition
of between 4,000 and 5,000 women to the electoral franchise. He
did not claim that the comparison was necessarily an accurate one r
but it was the nearest approach to an accurate computation that
he could make. (Mr. Rees —“ It would be much more. You do not
state the proper qualifications.”) Well, he thought the con-
clusion he had arrived at was a fair and reasonable one. Now
to precedent, on which point the Attorney- General might possibly
require a word or two. The political franchise for women which
he was now seeking was already exercised in the Isle of Man
by the very class of women whom he now proposed to enfranchise
—that was, women of certain property qualification with the
same exception made in the case of married women. In the


territory o£ Wyoming, in the United States, there was universal
suffrage in the full sense that every adult man and woman had
a vote, and from all accounts the quality both of the legislature
and the legislation had been much improved since the admis-
sion of the influence of women. He believed the same principles
were extended to women in Oregon with similar results. In
Italy he understood that certain women could vote, but it must
be done through a male delegate. As he had already stated,
the municipal franchise had been extended to women both here
and in England, and in the latter country they could besides
vote at the election of school boards, overseers of the poor,
poor law-guardians, churchwardens, overseers of roads, and
boards of health. These were instances of precedent which he
was able to bring forward, but too much stress would not be
laid on precedent in a country that had already had the inde-
pendence to pass measures of its own which had themselves
formed a precedent for other countries. (Hear, hear.) We
required no precedent when we passed Torrens Act, nor had we
a precedent, he believed, in English-speaking countries when
we passed the law permitting marriage with a deceased wife’s
sister, and we did not now require a precedent if this measure
appeared reasonable and just. It would be another creditable
page in the record of South Australia if from the legislature of
this distant colony there should proceed yet another measure
based upon equity and justice which should serve as a precedent
for the law-makers of other countries, whom we usually
accustomed to imitate rather than to instruct. Such an
example now lay in the power of hon. members to afford, and
he submitted the motion to them confident in the justice of his
cause, and confident that it would recommend itself by its
principles and by its moderation to the good sense and sense of
justice of that House. (Cheers.)
C£o'®
Burden & Bony than, Printers, Advertiser General Printing Office, Adelaide.


3 1508 01256073 1


