

THE
National Council
of
'f /307?
of Women
NEW SOUTH WALES.




n<ji>
On Friday, June 26, a public meeting
was held at the Town Hall, Sydney, to
consider the formation of the National
Council of Women of New South Wales.
The meeting was largely attended, and
representatives of many societies and
committees were present. Lady Hamp-
den took the chair. She expressed her
interest in the movement, but said that
like many others she wished to hear more
concerning the idea of the National
Council, and would ask Miss M.
Windeyer to explain the object of the
meeting.
Miss M. Windeyer said that as the
meeting had assembled to consider the
formation of the National Council of
New South Wales, it would be of
interest to hear of the time and place
where the first National Council of
Women was formed. In March, 1888,
there assembled at Washington an
International Convention of Women,
at which the 63 different organizations
were represented by delegates from
England, France, Norway, Denmark,
Finland, India, Canada, and the United
States. This International Council was
convened to celebrate the 40th anniver-
sary of the first Equal Rights Conven-
tion, which was held at Seneca Falls,
in the State of New York in 1848. The
Committee who organised the great
Convention under the name of the
International Council of Women held
at Washington in 1888 were of opinion
that it would be a matter of regret
were the representative women as-
sembled there to take their separate
ways, having formed no permanent
bond of union. Mrs. May Wright
Sewall brought forward a plan for the
formation of two permanent organiza-
tions — one, the National Council of
Women of the United States, the other,
the International Council of Women ;
the former to be composed of organiza-
tions, associations, and societies of
The National Council of Women of N.S.W.
y\ 3355 ) f*iso-1 &
women, the work of which is of
national character or of national value ;
the latter, namely, the International
Council of Women, to be composed of
representatives of National Councils of
Women. For work to be of national
character would imply that it is
organised in such a way and so widely
extended that it enters into the life
of the nation ; for work to be of
national value would also imply that the
work is of value to the life of the nation,
though perhaps it may not have
largely entered into the life of the
nation. Among the 17 organizations
which have membership in the National
Council of Women of the United States
are the National Woman’s Christian
Temperance Union, National Free
Baptist Woman’s Missionary Society,
Illinois Industrial School for Girls,
Universal Peace Union, National
American Woman Suffrage Association,
International Kindergarten Union, and
the National Association of Women
Stenographers.
On lines similar to those laid down
by the International Council of Women
at Washington in 1888, National
Councils of Women have been formed
in Belgium, Bohemia, Canada, Finland,
France, Germany, Great Britain, New
Zealand, and the United States. In
considering the formation of a National
Council of Women it must be re-
membered that whole organizations
would have membership in the Council,
those who would vote in the meetings
of the Council would be delegates from
the entire body to which they belong,
chosen to represent the principle
for which their special organisation
exists, but any individual woman
member of any organisation federating
in the National Council would be
eligible to take part in the proceedings
of the Council, though she may not
vote.


The words of one speaker at the
first meeting of the International
Council express the opinion of many
—congresses stimulate the desire to do
better } they instruct by exchange of
ideas ; they throw light on points
hitherto obscure.
The principle of the Council may
be rendered available for local use
through the federation of the societies
in any community in a local council of
women, which would do for the dis-
trict what it is hoped the National
Council will do for the country at
large, that is give to every cause rep-
resented by a district society the in-
creased moral force which would result
through the federation of that society
with others.
All organisations would reap the
same advantage from membership in
the National Council that individuals
reap from membership in any organisa-
tion, and the Council would tend to
establish solidarity of sentiment and
purpose among women, now working
in every direction in the hope that
they may leave the world a little
better than they found it.
The formation of a National Council
of Women would increase the interest
of individual women in associated
work. To see the value and import-
ance of organisation we need only turn
to the examples of Lord Shaftesbury
and Baroness Burdett Coutts Their
philanthropic endeavours have resulted
in such organisations as the National
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to
Children, and the Royal Society for
he Prevention of Cruelty to Animals ;
they have not merely relieved
individual cases of suffering, but
they have put in motion machinery
which will work with an incalculable
power for good. To combine with
others for noble ends must increase
our efficiency and teach us “ the value
of organised as against isolated efforts
for human betterment.”
“ While friendship is a love between
individuals, philanthropy is the love
of the race —the stooping of the higher
down to the lower, the stretching out
of the hand and opening of the heart
to all less fortunate than ourselves,”
and of what great advantage it would
be that each group of women which
exists for some philanthropic obj ";ct
should have the sympathy and moral
support of others whose methods may
be different, but who are all working
to the same end—the uplifting of the
race.
From the National Council many
would learn that the work of those
that come after them will be lessened
if generous support be given to those
societies which make for the moral
development of children ; which show
them their duty towards animals 5
which teach them the value of tem-
perance ; which lead them to a habit
of self-denial in order that they may
minister to others less fortunate than
themselves. Much overlapping in work
would be prevented if representatives
of different organisations and com-
mittees met in conference at stated
periods. The meetings of the Council
would secure for each organisation
having membership in it a wider
hearing and a larger interest on the
part of the public that it could com-
mand alone. The annual reports of
many of our charities, prepared as they
are with much patient care, do not
reach many persona other than those
who are known to be supporters of this
or that movement, but if the informa-
tion contained in these reports were
more widely known, many charities
would find supporters among those who
when their sympathes were evoked
would find it in their power to assist in
the work of alleviation or cure.
The National Council would serve as
a means of prosecuting any work of
common interest, it would put the
wisdom and experience of each at the
service of all, it would unite all
societies of women, that with a mighty
aggregate of power they might move
in directions upon which all could
agree.
From the formation of the Council the
sense of public and private responsi-
bility which induces women to join
associations and societies, such as are
represented here to-day, would grow in
an increased degree, and their sym-
pathies quickened and impulses stirred


by a knowledge of the good work that
others are doing, the energy of women
social workers would be intensified.
In the absence of Lady Renwick, who
was prevented by illness from attending
the meeting, Miss Macdonald moved
the first resolution, —“ That a National
Council of Women of New South
Wales be now formed,” and spoke as
follows :—The national characteristics
of Australia may probably in such a
scheme alter and modify in detail the
arrangements of tbe American original,
but there can be few Australian women
concerned, as most of us are, in one or
more societies for helping their neigh-
bours, who would not be glad to see a
similar Council established and at
work among us. No one who has
attempted work outside her own home,
whether it be social, charitable, or
political, can fail to be struck with two
apparently contradictory fac e—on the
one hand that everything depends on
individual effort and influence, on the
other, by the extreme helplessness of
the individual when alone or when in
unsuitable surroundings. The whole
problem indeed of social organization
lies here, to arrange that each indi-
vidual shall have fullest opportunity
and inducement to put forth his
personal effort, while at the same time
preventin'; independence becoming
isolation or ending in failure, or the
effort being at the expense and to the
detriment of the weaker neighbour.
The more or less conscious attempt to
solve this problem has called into
existence the numberless societies,
clubs, and associations of every shade
of purpose which abound in every
country. But in the very multiplica-
tion of societies there is a certain
danger. As the number of societies
increases, the w> rk to be done by any
one is continually and rightly more
and more restricted to a special sphere,
and the more devoted the workers the
more tendency there is that their
horizon of interest, and even sympathy,
grows limited. Most of us, it may be,
belong to several societies at once, but
there is always one whose claims are
paramount. The formation of such a
National Council as is advocated to-day
would do away with this possible
narrowness, even in the case of those
whose time, or principles, or inclination
confined them to a speci 1 interest. At
the meetings of the Council a view
would be given of each and every
Society represented on it. The women
to whom education and culture seem
the first needs of humanity might
receive much subject for thought from
the consideration of work to be done in
supplying the primary necessities of
food and clothing to the helpless ;
while those again to whom the thought
of feeding the hungry and clothing the
naked was all-absorbing might meet
for mutual instruction with the workers
for political and economic ends.
But a National Council of Women
will do more than this. All these
things might be accomplished by the
conventions of women workers of which
we hear so much in England, But the
National Council will be in fact a per-
manent body of advice and guidance in
all that pertains to woman’s work. The
constant change of members, by election
of delegates and retirement of Vice-
Presidents would ensure that there
would be no stagnation of its thought
and counsels. And everyone who con-
siders for a moment the labour, the
thought, the experience, the faith and
patience that has gone into work done
by women, and women’s societies in
this colony, must feel stirred by the
possibilities that lie before a Council
formed by the heads and representa-
tives ©f them all.
The motion was seconded by Miss
Edwards, and carried.
Mrs. D. E. Armitage, secretary of the
Type-writers’ Association, moved the
second resolution, 4< That the Constitu-
tion drafted by the Provisional Commit-
tee be adopted,” and spoke as follows:
Before putting my resolution to the
meeting, perhaps it may not be out of
place to say a few words as to
the usefulness, from a business
woman’s point of view, of such a body
as the National Council of Women.
I have the honour to represent here
to-day a small, though I am glad to
say ever growing, community of women
engaged in clerical work iu this city.


the typists. These are women who in
earning their living ask for a more
enlarged field for their activity than
the time-honoured employments of
teaching and nursing and such like.
I want to point out how the sym-
pathy of a combination of women
helped the profession to which I belong
when entering upon a hitherto un-
known business career in 1887, and no
doubt the benefit was felt by others
also. Clerical work as an occupation
for women had been very little tried,
and I can assure you it was with fear
and trembling that I approached the
business men of Sydney, asking them
to encourage this new venture, and
here I should like to bear testimony to
the unvarying courtesy and kindness
always received by us at their hands,
from Government officers, and members
of the medical, legal, theatrical and
mercantile | rofessions generally. The
Exhibition of Women’s Industries was
being initiated at that time by some of
the leading women of Sydney, and
much interest was taken in the matter,
by Lady Carrington as president, by
Lady Windeyer, the mother of our
valued hon, secretary, by the heads
of the different departments and by
my ever-valued friend, Ludy Fairfax,
then of Admiralty House; in whose
department the mechanical type-
writing was included. A few of
the practical effects of the Exhi-
bition were these. The first cl.sses
for typewriting in Sydney were started
in connection with Lady Fairfax’s
department, the first woman’s copying
office was opened then, and the first
women who went into offices in Sydney
to any known extent were I am proud
to say the pupils of that Exhibition,
and the interest taken in the profession
helped to raise it to a high standard, so
that any well educated woman may be
proud to enter its ranks. We are still
climbing the hill, and have old-world
prejudices to overcome and w© have to
show our adaptability for the business,
and what sort of stuff we are made of,
no one can help us in that but our-
selves, but I acknowledge with grati-
tud© that the combination in connection
with the Exhibition of Women’s In-
dustries helped to launch our pro-
fession in a way that would have
been difficult for any pioneer to
do unaided, no matter what her
previous experience may have been.
Then I see before our National
Council a much wider field than aiding
women who are starting or who have
started in new professions, helpful
though that may be. Are there not
crying evils in this fair city to be
remedied amongst our sister workers ?
I refer to the Factory Girls, the Tailor-
esses, the shop assistants and so on.
If we can help to bring their grievances
before the public—and surely we can do
so—in order that the law may step in and
make thier condition better, our Council
will not have been formed in vain.
We all know individually how sweet
and helpful it is to have sympathy
from our friends in any work in which
we are engaged, well, as the friend is
to the individual, so will this Council
be to the body represented by its dele-
gates, and we may look forward to the
tirrfb when the little seed sown to-day
under such auspicious circumstances,
will later on grow into the beautiful
tree spreading its protecting branches
over those who need shelter, and bring-
ing beauty and comfort to all those
who have to tread on life’s rough road.
The resolution was seconded by M
MacCallum, and supported by Mrs.
Wolstenholme.
After discussion it was resolved that
the adoption or the amendment of the
Constitution should be left to the in-
coming members of the National Coun-
cil of Women.
Madame Rougier moved, and Mrs.
C. J. Martin seconded the motion, —
“ That Lady Hampden be elected
president ; Lady Darley and Lady
Ren wick, vice-presidents ; Miss M.
Windeyer, corresponding secretary ; and
Mrs. Robjohns, recording secretary.”
The proceedings terminated after a
vote of thanks had been accorded to
Lady Hampden for presiding.


Constitution of the National Council of New South Wales,
adopted at a Publip Meeting held in the Town Hall,
Sydney, on June 2jSth, 1896.
Preamble.
We, women of New South Wales, sincerely
believing that the best good of our homes and
colony will be advanced by our greater unity
of thought, sympathy, and purpose, and that
an organised movement of women will best
conserve the highest good of the family and the
state, do hereby band ourselves together in a
confederation of workers to further the appli-
cation of the Golden Rule, to society, custom
and law.
CONSTITUTION.
Name.
I. This federation shall be called the
National Council of Women of New South
Wales.
General Policy.
11. This Council is organised in the interest
of no one propaganda, and has no power over
the organisations which constitute it, beyond
that of suggestion and sympathy ; therefore, no
society voting to enter this Council shall
dents at large, ex-officio Vice-Presidents, Cor-
responding Secretary, Recording Secretary and
Treasurer.
Sec. 2. The President of any Local Council
of Women organised in harmony with the
National Council of Women, and the President,
if a woman, of each society, association or com-
mittee federating in the National Council,
shall be ex-officio Vice-President of the National
Council.
Sec. 3. By the Constitution of the Inter-
national Council of Women, the President of
the National Council of Women of New South
Wales is Vice-President of the International
Council of Women.
Executive Committee.
VI. The officers shall constitute an executive
committee, of which seven members shall form
a quorum, to control and provide for the
general interests of the Council.
VII. (Sec. 1.) The National Council shall
meet biennially ; or oftener upon the call of
the President.
Sec. 2. The Executive Committee and one
representative from each Local Council, and
v w CCHJII JJUCctI V/UUUCii) child
thereby render itself liable to be interfered with o ne delegate from, each soqfiety or committee
in respect to its complete organic unity, A federating in the 'National Council shall con-
pendence or methods of work, or be committed stitute the Committee on resolutions.
to any principle or method of any other
society, or to any act or utterance of the
Council itself, beyond compliance with the
terms of this Constitution.
Local Councils.
111. Local Councils may be organised in har-
mony with the National Council of Women.
Members.
IV. (Sec. 1.) Any society, organisation or
committee of women, the nature of whose work
is of national character or of national value,
may become a member of this Council by its
own vote and by the annual payment of £1 Is
to the honorary treasurer of the National
Council.
Sec. 2. The committee of any national
society, association or institution, whose work
is of national character or of national value,
if the committee is composed of both men and
women, may connect themselves with the
Council by electing two women to represent
them in the Council, and by the payment of the
regular annual fee to the treasurer of the
National Council of Women, providing always
that no society association or institution be
represented by more than two women.
Sec. 3. Local Councils of Women, organised
in harmony with the National Council of
Women may become members of the National
Council.
Officers.
V. (Sec. 1 ) The officers of the National
Council shall be a President, two Vice-Presi-
Sec. 3. The President, if a woman, and one
delegate from each organisation, society or
committee, that has membership in the
National Council, together with the Executive
Committee shall alone have the right to vote
at the meetings of the National Council, pro-
viding always that no society, organisation
or committee shall be represented by more than
two women.
Sec. 4. Other members of the Council may
attend the meetings of the Council and take
part in the discussions but may not vote.
Sec. 5. All new business to be brought
before the biennial or other meetings of the
Council, must be first submitted to the Execu-
tive Committee as a notice of motion.
Associates.
VIII. (Sec. 1.) Any person whose name is
accepted by the Executive Committee may
become an associate upon the payment of
10s fid annually, or of fifteen guineas at one
time.
Sec. 2. Associates are entitled to be notified
of the business meetings of the Council, which
they have the privilege of attending, and in
which they may take part in all discussions
but may not vote.
Amendments.
IX. This Constitution may be altered or
amended by a majority vote at any biennial
meeting notice thereof having been sent to each
member of the Executive Committee at least
two months prior to such meeting.


■
\ I -v. SrjpsvQ < r
The “Christian World” Printing and Publishing House,
