





THE AUSTRALIAN
Cricketers’ Tour
THROUGH
AUSTRALIA, NEW ZEALAND
AND
GREAT BRITAIN,
BY ARGUS.
CONTAINING A FULL, EACY ACCOUNT OF THE
MATCHES, DINNEES, EXCUESIONS, &c., IN
WHICH THEY HAVE BEEN ENGAGED.
PRICE, ONE SHILLING.
ALL BOOKSELLEES AND NEWS VENDOES.
(SglJuBS :
JARRETT & CO., PRINTERS, 229 GEORGE STREET ; STEAM
WORKS, 92 & 94 LIVERPOOL STREET.
1878.




W. P. WELCH
VENETIAN,
G-AUZE-WIEE,
AND GENERAL
fill ill
MAKER,
2821 PITT STREET, SYDNEY,
Opposite School of Arts.
AGENT FOE HODKINSON & CLARKE’S PATENT MET ALIO
VENETIAN WINDOW BLINDS.
Old Blinds Repaired and Renovated at Lowest Rates.
KEAREY BROTHERS, 290 Pitt-st.
Coach Builders
I-
co
u
«
EE
<
W
U
X
H
THE VARNISHED HAMPSHIRE TURNOUT SEAT BUGGY.
Price, £36
AND IMPORTERS OF
Every of iLmerican B-o-g-g-ies
KEAREY BROTHERS, 290 PITT ST.


To Travellers by Rail or Steamboat
The Undersigned invite attention to the following requisites
SOLID LEATHER PORTMANTEAUS in six sizes, the smallest
will hold a Dress Suit, change of Linen and Toilet Brushes. Ihe largest
is suitable for a Lady, or will hold complete outfit for a Gentleman.
AMERICAN LEATHER PORTMANTEAUS— covered with
canvas. These are exceedingly strong, and are fitted-up with compart-
ments for Bonnet, Laces, Gloves, &c., making them very suitable for a
Lady. .
SARATOGA TRUNKS— with strong iron clamps, admirably suited for
Families visiting Europe; having numerous compartments, they are as
useful as a Chest of Drawers.
SCARBORO’ TRUNKS— made of strong sheet iron, neatly japanned,
and with secure hasps, are damp proof and very serviceable.
BONNET BOXES— Japanned iron, a useful companion for a Lady.
TRAVELLING BAGS— fitted with all Toilet necessaries, and having
room fora change of Linen.
ASHANTEE POCKET HAMMOCKS— PortabIe, and easily fixed
and comfortable.
A Large Assortment of other Necessaries as follows ;
Dressing Cases, Hand Bags, Toilet and Hair Brushes,
Razors and Strops, Opera and Field Glasses, Pocket
Compasses, Revolvers all sizes, Rifles and Sporting
Guns, Life Belts, Cork Mattresses, Pocket Drink-
ing Cups and Filters, Pocket Flasks, Cabin
Lamps, Swing Trays and Cabin Toilet Sets.
iassattar &Ccu limited
421 GEORGE ST., SYDNEY.


D. GREGORY, CAPTAIN OF THE TEAM,
CEfITUyU- TEA /WO COffEE WAHEttODSE
W. lET- ROKES,
Wholesale and Family Grocer,
TEA BEAIpEB, &c..
559 GEORGE STREET,SYDNEY
(Between Liverpool and Goulburn Streets),
Keeps the Best 2s. 6d. TEA in Sydney.
The Choicest 2s. TEA. (very Superior).
The Whitest* Best 4:cl. STJCKA-iO. in Sydney.
Country Buyers particularly requested to Inspect the Stock before making
their Purchases elsewhere.
W. N. HOKES, 559 George St.


RILE? BROTHERS’
HMMVBID
OO MUMB 00
FIVE £5 POUND
——oo —oo —
BALES
OP 1
DRAPERY.
CARRIAGE PAID EVERYWHERE.
Send for Patterns and Price Lists to
608 GEOEGE STREET,
STDITET.
RILEY BROTHERS,
608 George St., Sydney; 167 and 169 Oxford St., Sydney
Auburn St., Goulburn ; High St., West Maitland.


F, SPOFFORTH,


HARDY MOTHERS.
HYDE PARK
Furnishing Inhibition,
OX l-'OR l) STREET,
SY©W iY,
Is the Best and Cheapest House in Sydney to buy your Furniture.
They keep the most extensive Stock of
Household Furniture
—AND—
GEEUSTEH AXj EFFECTS
In the Colonies, and their Prices are fabulously low.
The Goods are all marked in Plain Figures
Amongst the many Bargains offered at the Hyde Park Furnishing
Exhibition is a
Brilliant Toned Trichord Piano, in handsome Walnut
Case, for £23 XOs.
Chests of Drawers, from 255. Chiffonier Safes, from 225. 6d.
Chiffoniers, 555. Iron Bedsteads, 16s.
Side Boards, 3 Drawers and Cellerets, £6.
Bedding of the Best Quality at Prices not to be competed with.
Houses Furnished from <£l2los. to £5OOO
All Goods delivered in Town and Suburbs, free of charge.
Country Orders Promptly Executed. Goods Carefully Packed
by Experienced Hands, at
HARDT^BROa^
Site


C. BANNERMAN.
THE LONDON AND CONTINENTAL BOOT COMPANY,
IMPORTERS OF
LADIES’, GENTLEMEN’S, AND CHILDREN’S
Boots & Shoes,
90 KING STREET, SYDNEY.
Every Article is perfectly new, of the very latest style, and cannot
be surpassed (if equalled) in New South Wales.
ALL GOODS MARKED IN PLAIN FIGURES.
PLEASE NOTE THE ADDRESS:—
LONDON & CONTINENTAL BOOT COMPANY,
©O STREET,
RIGHT IN THE CENTRE OF ALL THE DRAPERS.
N.Pf —Parcels sent to all i arts of the City and suburbs.


Cricket! Cricket! Cricket!
HOUSWORTH, GARDYI, & Co,
zFnrißiDsrrsiEiiTDsra-
GENERAL SRONHONGIIi
458 GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY,
Beg to call the attention of the Public, and especially those who
indulge in the above noble art of Science and favorite pastime, to their
LARGE STOCK
—co OF oo
mini MiM
Best Selected in Sydney, ALL PICKED,
From the Bebt Makers,
NEW SEASON’S STOCK NOW LANDING.
H. G. & Co. also Import Boxing Gloves, Lawn Tennis, Croquet
Sets, Badminton Bowls, &c., &x.
AGENTS FOR
Wolter and Echberg’s Patent Prize Washing Machines,
AND THE
Californian Paint Co.’s Celebrated Averill Mixed Paints.


PANTER AND PARRY’S
fl
w O
1 m
| ~ >3
& -i »=
3 d CD
■d <j >"■
a r? 03
«3 W
02 "*
to « I
C 3 uJ
t_JLj
E-I £
I H
I £ s
03 UCJ
o _ C 3
W 5° _
'O Sh
j S *r
< g >-
H <1 Sf
g & S
I - I
I*l Qj Z
5 | i
* I
<J
P 4
►u
p
P M
* <-t- rrj
I 5 >
3 8P Si
I* hd g
►g pH
1 3 w
" *<J ©o
| OB*
£. co H
W >1)
M t>
d td
d &d
W
j> 02
M
cc O
M
« 5
£ g
d 171
LJ
W g
CQ
ft- to
t-j o
o Jr*
y ®,
or? •
r-t*
tr
If You Want a First-class Well-fitting Fashionable
Hat, try
FALSER & AUSTIN,
318 i GEORGE ST., NORTH,
WHERE YOU CAN GET
Of every Style and Quality made to order on the shortest
possible notice.
Cricketing and Rowing Caps in Great Variety.
ssasiß a> Aracnr,
3184 GEOSGE STREET NORTH,
BETWEEN KING AND HUNTER STREETS,
§Y®m ey q


Sippol Brothers,
jkmmmt&MM
526 GEORGE STREET,
(OPPOSITE CENTRAL POLICE OFFICE,
iYMtEYo
Brancli. 3E3sta/tolisla.inents:
MAIN STREET YOUNG I GEORGE STREET ..GRENFELL
HERBERT STREET.'. .GULGONG \ FORBES STREET..! PARSES
Country Orders Punctually Attended to.
s*'«
feAWt
Practical Hat & Cap Hannfactnrer,
686 GEORGE STREET, 686
(ItTear 0-cco.rto-a.rn. Street,)
IY.
Awarded First Prize, Exhibition 1878, for Excellence of
Workmanship and Superiority of Style,
Hats and Caps of every description manufac-
tured on the premises.


JARRETT & CO.,
ami mwmm*
$ €asstx-^htt
220 George Street,
and Steam Worlzs,
02 and 04 Liverpool Street .
—o-~-
CRICKETING CLUBS SUPPLIED, more Cheaply than by
any other House, with
CARDS OF MEMBERSHIP,
BALL es PICNIC TICKETS
SCORING CARDS,


GRAHAM. she m\\o%
George 531 Street
No. 1 Table. Trousers to Order, 12s.
No. 2 Table. Trousers to Order, 17s.
No. 3 Table. Trousers to Order, 21s.
No. 4 Table. Trousers to Order, 255.
Vest. Sac. Paget.
6d. I os. 6d. 275. 6d, 375. 6d.
6d. ns. 6d. 30s. od. 40s, 6d.
od. 1 2s. 6d. 325. 6d. 425. 6d.
od. 13s. 6d. 375. 6d. 475. 6d-
WHITE COLONIAL CRICKETING TWEED TROUSERS TO ORDER
IT7s. Sc 3..
OVER 500 PATTERNS TO CHOOSE FROM.
crlaL. Hit Jailor,
GEORGE rdjj STREET.
TO FARMERS AND OTHERS.
Wheat, Maize, Barley, Oats, &c,, taken in exchange
for other Produce.
JAMES PEMELL & GO.,
VICTORIA MILLS, SUSSEX STREET,
(near the haymaeket.)
OFFICES & STORES—797 GEORGE ST. SOUTH, SYDNEY,
(opposite the railway station).
Silk-dresssd, Superfine, Fine, and Good Seconds Floui; Wheat Meal,
Maize Meal, Bran, Pollard, Prepared Cattle Food, Whole and Cracked Corn,
Barley, Oats, Peas, Straw, Oaten and Lucerne Hay and Chaff, Potatoes. &c.
Guaranteed Best Qualities. lowest Prices.


TOUR OF AUSTRALIAN CRICKETERS
THROUGH
mmm> m asaai hi
GREAT BRITAIN,
By “ARGUS.”
The opening of the Cricketing Season 1877-8, was marked by
rather more than the usual amount of interest, owing to the pro-
positions of Mr. Conway to get together an Australian Represen-
tative Team, to be sent to Great Britain at the close of the
Australian season. The announcement caused general satisfaction
amongst all classes of these communities, but in cricketing circles it
was viewed askance, most unfavourable comments were passed
upon it, great dissatisfaction was expressed in the business arrange-
ments, and the great majority of cricketers looked upon the elected
team as anything but the strongest Eleven which the colonies
mjght have put together. It occupied many weeks of patient
negotiation to complete the arrangements, and notwithstanding
that a series of Australian and New Zealand matches were
absolutely necessary to raise the funds to cover the expenses of
the team to Great Britain, obstacles were raised by the various
Cricketing Associations in countenancing the speculation, and in
providing teams to meet the Eleven. Regarding the subject from
other than a cricketer’s standpoint, the visit to England of a strong
team of Australian cricketers was calculated to bring the colonies
into prominent notice, and prove to the residents of the old world
what a proud position the Greater Britain is destined to hold in
all athletic sports.


WHO THE CRICKETERS ARE.
—:o:—:o:
Frank Allan is 28 years of age, a native of Victoria, over 6ft.
high; is engaged in the Civil Service in Melbourne.
G. Bailey, 24 years of age, sft. roin. high ; is a native of Ceylon,
but learned his cricket in Tasmania; engaged in a bank.
A. Bannerman, 21 years old, sft. sm. high, born in Sydney ;
engaged in the Government Printing Office, Sydney.
C. Bannerman, 25 years old, sft. Bin., born at Woolwich, Eng-
land, but came to New South Wales when a child ; a professional
cricketer.
J. Blackham is 23 years of age, sft. gin., a native of Victoria;
engaged in a bank.
H. F. Boyle, 28 years old. 6ft. high, a native of New South
Wales, but learned his cricket, and now resides in Victoria ; engaged
in Victorian Civil Service.
T. W. Garrett is 20 years old, sft. nin. high, a native of New
South Wales ; engaged in the Supreme Court. Sydney.
D. W. Gregory is 32 years of age, sft. nin. high, native of New
South Wales; engaged in the Audit Office of New South Wales.
T. Horan is 23 years old, sft. roin. high, born in Victoria ;
engaged in the Victorian Civil Service.
W. Murdoch is 23 years of age, sft. roin. in height, born in
New South Wales ; a solicitor.
F. Spofforth is 22 years old, 6ft. 2 in. high, born in New South
Wales ; engaged in banking.


WHAT AUSTRALIANS THOUGHT OF IT.
Considering that it was scarcely twenty years since the first
intercolonial match was played, and that, met by the first All
England Eleven, the best “ Colonial Twenty-two’s ” were never
successful, the strides which we have made in cricket, and the
ardour with which the game has been prosecuted, must be apparent
when our best judges were confident of at least a fair measure of
success for the team which had been elected to go home. The
speculation was arranged upon a joint stock basis, each member of
the team contributing pro rata towards the expenses, and having
an equivalent in any profits which might be made. This plan put
each one upon his mettle, and ensured his best efforts to make the
undertaking a success. The Melbourne contingent of the team
proceeding to Sydney were joined there by Mr. Bailey, of Tas-
mania, and with a half-dozen furnished by New South Wales, the
team, now, for the first time together, proceeded to Brisbane. It
was decided from the outset that no members of the Anglo-
Australian team should play in any match against each other until
they returned from England, and this had the effect of greatly
damping public interest in the two usual intercolonial matches.
One of the first rumours which reached the colonies from England,
as if in ridicule of Australia’s great expectations of victory, was as
follows : —“ There is, we are told, a very novel movement on foot
at Bombay to send a select team of Parsee cricketers to England
next season to play there a series of matches with several clubs in
England. Members of the Parsee Cricket Club, the best club of
the Parsees in Bombay, have been already asked to enlist their
names in the Eleven. What a horrible fate if the pick of New
South Wales and Victoria should meet defeat by the sable
Eleven.”
While the Associations in Sydney and Melbourne guarded their
prospects of revenue with the most jealous care, New Zealand, on
the contrary, proffered to deal with them in the most liberal
spirit. If it had been desired to show how little interest the
cricketing communities felt in this Anglo-Australian speculation,
it was most apparent by the handful of cricketers who assembled
at the A. S, N. Co.’s wharf to welcome the Melbourne contin-
gent, and up to the time of the departure of the team to
Brisbane, even the Sporting newspapers disposed of but little
of their space to the notice of their movements.
THE TEAM LEAVES FOR BRISBANE.
On Saturday, the 3rd of November, the Australian Eleven, con-
sisting of Messrs. C. Bannerman, D. Gregory, W. Murdock, T.
Garrett, F. Spofforth, New South Wales; G. Bailey, Tasmania,
H. Boyle, Kendall, Blackham, Allan, and Horan, from Victoria:
took their departure for Brisbane, in the presence of about one


hundred well-wishers. The Brisbane folks made quite a public
affair of the visit of the team, a four-in-hand drag, banquet, &c.,
being included in the programme. The bowling of Allan and
Kendall, and the batting of C. Bannerman was far too much for
the Brisbaneites, and an easy victory was scored by the Eleven.
The match was opened on the Prince of Wales’ birthday, in the
presence of about four thousand persons, and Sir Arthur and Miss
Kennedy. In the first innings the Brisbane Eighteen scored 58,
and in the second 68 runs; the Australian Eleven scoring 149
runs, winning in one innings, with 20 runs to spare ; of this C.
Bannerman scored 74. They then proceeded to the Darling
Downs, where they were equally successful against the “ Twenty-
two. ”
THE ELEVEN IN NEW SOUTH WALES.
The Eleven were next called upon to encounter a team in
Sydney, strong in batting and bowling talent, comprising the fol-
lowing 15 players:—E. Gregory, Sheridan, Humphreys, Geary,
Evans, Rush, Powell, Tindall, Dummett, Pocock, Burrows, Docker,
Webster, Hannigan, and Brown. That the representative team
would show excellent cricket was never doubted, but a large
section of the public regarded it in the light of a practice match,
and only some two hundred spectators assembled, when, if it had
been properly advertised, ten or twelve thousand might have been
expected. Both teams displayed excellent cricket, Horan, 37,
and Bannerman 83, for the Eleven; and Geary 29, and Webster
24, for the Fifteen, securing the highest scores. The bowling of
Spofforth is deserving of mention, he having obtained 19 wickets
for 108 runs. The next contests of the Eleven were at Maitland
and Newcastle. At Maitland they won by 77 runs, and at New-
castle, in the first innings, by 50 runs. The bowling of Spofforth
and Kendall, and the batting of Bailey and A. Bannerman at
Maitland, being specially good. The team sailed for Adelaide on
the 4th December, having already established a reputation, if they
had failed to furnish themselves with the sinews of war. They
did not tranship at Port Phillip Heads for Adelaide, as was
intended, and therefore only reached that city on Wednesday, two
days before they had to cammence their match.
THE TEAM AT ADELAIDE.
The match was played at the Adelaide Oval, against the picked
Eighteen of that colony, the Eleven winning by 1 run, with 9
wickets to spare. The attendance at this match -was the most
encouraging which had so far welcomed the Eleven. The batting
of Horan 34 and 26 not out, A. Bannerman 25 and 44 not out,
were the remarkable features. The bowling of the Eleven was
scarcely so good as their previous displays.


AT MELBOURNE.
They at once returned to Melbourne, where, upon the 31st
December, they commenced a match against a picked Fifteen of
Victoria and New South Wales, when a very exciting contest was
witnessed by a moderate attendance of the public. Only 1 run
was wanted as Kendall, the last man, went to the wickets, and so
great was the interest and excitement, that a pin might have been
heard to drop as he faced the redoubtable Evans, whose second
ball scattered his stumps, and the match was neither won nor lost.
Neither the bowling nor batting of the Eleven were commendable,
with the exception of the bowling of Boyle in the second innings..
Scores were as follows :
COMBINED FIFTEEN.
ist Innings. 2nd Innings,
Sheridan, b Boyle 38 c Bailey b Boyle o
Thompson, b Spofforth 14 st Murdoch b Kendall o
G. Gibson, c Boyle b Spofforth ... o b Boyle 16
Cooper, c Garrett b Kendall 33 b Boyle 6
Gregory b Boyle o b Kendall 4 1
E. Evans, b Kendall o b Boyle 7
F. Baker, hwb Boyle 6 b Boyle 0
W. Gaggin, b Kendall 3 s Murdoch b Boyle o
T. Powell b Spofforth 18 b Boyle o
E. Elliott, b Kendall 13 b Kendall o
J. Geary, 1b w b Spofforth o b Boyle 5
J. Hodges, b Spofforth 3 h Boyle o
C. Alice, hit ball twice o c Bailey b Boyle o
J. Coates, s Murdoch b Kendall ... 1 not out 7
T. Scanlan, not out o run out 8
Byes 7, leg byes 2 9 Byes 4. leg byes 3 ... 7
Total 138 Total 97
AUSTRALIAN ELEVEN.
ist Innings. 2nd Innings.
A. Bannerman, b Hodges 4 c Sheridan b Evans 10
C. Bannerman, c Alice b Coates ... 9 B Evans 19
T. Horan, b Evans 13 run out 19
F. Spofforth, b Evans 25 b Hodges 5
TT tC 1 n • 1. T7* L ITirnnf n
H. Boyle, c Gaggin b Evans 2 b Evans o
W. Murdoch, b Geary 20 run out 24
T. Kendall, c Baker b Evans o b Evans o
D. Gregory, 1b w b Evans 19 run out 13
Jl/. Vji J J J. »•* " ' ✓ *
J. Blackham, not out 10 1b w b Hodges x 6
T. Garrett, b Evans 7 ™n out 0
G, Bailey, b Evans H not out .. o
Byes... .~ I 3 Byes 4, leg byes 2 .. 6
Total 123 Total 112
Combined Fifteen Grand Total •• 2 35
Australian Eleven do do 2 35


Combined Fifteen.
Ist Innings.
Bowling Analysis.
Spofforth .... 132 balls, 10 maidens, 56 runs, 5 wickets.
Kendall 222 » 37 » 47 » 5 »
Boyle 88,, 12 ~ 15 » 3 »
Garrett 3 2 » 4 » 11
2nd Innings.
Spofforth 40 balls, 2 maidens, 18 runs
Kendall 133 » 16 »» 43 » 3 wickets
Boyle 96 » n 2 9 » 10 ”
Boyle
Australian Eleven.
Ist Innings.
Evans 2 °7 balls, 31 maidens, 44 runs, 7 wickets
Coates i 24 » J 3 » 3*5 » 1 »
Hodges 3 2 » » 2 3 >» 1
Geary 3 2 » 4 » x 7 » 1 »
2nd Innings.
jr vans 171 balls, 27 maidens, 42 runs, 4 wickets
Coates. 2 8 »» 2 » IS »
Baker. 2 4 » 1 » 12 *>
Hodges ... .. 81 ~ 12 ~ 19 s> 2 »
Geary 12 0 .>> 9
AUee 16 ~ 1 » 9 »
Against Twenty-two of Bendigo the Eleven secured a victory in
one innings, Horan scoring 54 and Garrett 48.
On the 3rd January the Eleven sailed from Melbourne for New
Zealand, Allan, who was suffering from sciatica remaining behind
with the purpose of joining them subsequent to their return to
Sydney.
AT NEW ZEALAND.
They commenced their New Zealand tour at Invercargill, where
they “put through” a 22 in grand style, winning in one innings with
148 runs to spare, their score being 267 against 80 and 39 of their
opponents. C. Bannerman scored 128 and was not out. At
Dunedin, on the 12th of January, they met 22 of the Province,
the match resulting in a draw, with a good show of the Dunedin
team winning the match. The Eleven then adventured against
22 of Oamaru, winning by 43 runs. They then played 15 of
Canterbury, where, during the three days of the match, there were
18,000 visitors. The Eleven here suffered their first and only
defeat, the Canterbury team having 3 wickets and 3 runs to spare.
The next contest at Wellington against the best Twenty-two of the


district resulted in a grand victory for the Eleven with 9 wickets
to spare. About 2000 persons attended. On the Ist and 2nd
February they encountered a Napier Twenty-two and scored
another victory in one innings and 38 runs to spare. They next
beat an Auckland Twenty-two in one innings with 25 runs to
spare.
THEY RETURN TO SYDNEY.
The Eleven then returned to Sydney by the Californian
mail steamer Zcalandia , wherd they were joined by Allan the day
prior to the second great match against a combined Fifteen of
N.S.W. and Victoria. The match was commenced on Friday,
22nd February, four of the team which had been selected to play
.against the Eleven declined to take part in the match on the terms
offered by Mr. Conway, and others took umbrage and would not
play on account of derogatory reflections which some members of
the Eleven had injudiciously cast upon them. The match had
.awakened a great deal of enthusiasm, and over ten thousand
people had assembled to witness its commencement. The Grand
Stand was full to overflowing, the Lawn well occupied, and the
Terraces densely packed. The Eleven went to the field, and the
story of the innings of the Fifteen was soon told, for all were out
for 78. It was cpiite painful to witness the Fifteen “ come like
shadows so depart Allan bowled with crushing effect as shown
by the analysis given below. The fielding of the Eleven was a
treat which has scarcely ever been equalled in Sydney even during
the visits of the All England Elevens. The following are the
.scores: —
COMBINED FIFTEEN.
Ist Innings. 2nd Innings.
Thompson, c Garrett b Allan . ... 3 h Spofforth o
X Ji V 7 liij'OV/llj V \juii viw X q
;Sheridan, run out 2 b Spofforth °
Tennant, b Spofforth .. .. 2 c Blackham b Spofforth .. .. 1
Gregory, E., c Murdoch b Allan ... 3 c Murdoch b Boyle 3°
Massie, b Spofforth 5 c Blackham b Spofforth 5
VJ k 'pv/livitll .. •• •• ••• J I
Baker, c and b Allan 14 h Allan .. . • • • • ■ o
Powell, b Allan u cD. Gregory b Allan .. .. 37
Woolf, b Allan 10 c Horan b Allan o
‘Geary’l bw b Spofforth 2 3 Murdoch b Boyle 5
Tindall, c Spofforth b Allan 13 b Allan .. H
.Scott, runout 8 c Murdoch b Spofforth .. .. 7
Alice’, c Boyle b Allan 3 c Blackham b Spofforth 8
Scanlan, st Blackham b Allan ... o not out 0
McDonnell, not out o b Allan 0
Evans, cD. Gregory b Allan o run out . 2 3
Leg bye .. !.. .. 1 Byes 4, leg bye 2 6
Total 78 Total 150


AUSTRALIAN ELEVEN.
Ist Innings.
Bannerman.C., cThompson b Tindall 7
Bannerman, A., run out 45
Horan, b Evans .. 4
Spofforth, c McDonnell b Evans ... 38
Boyle, c and b Evans o
Bailey, c McDonnell b Evans ... 24
Murdoch, c Powell b Tindall .. 1
Garrett, c Powell b Tindall 3
Blackham, c Powell b Tindall ... o
Gregory, D., not out 1
Allan, b Tindall o
Leg byes 2
Total 125
Australian Eleven, grand total, 230.
Combined Fifteen, grand total, 228.
2nd Innings.
c Evans b Tindall 15
run out 4
b Evans 3 1
c and b Evans 2
hwb Evans 9
not out 3
not out 3^
b Evans 5
Total for 6 wickets 105
BOWLING ANALYSIS
Combined Fifteen.
Ist Innings.
Spofforth ... ... 156 balls, 20 maiden overs, 46 runs, 3 wickets.
Allan 172 „ 27 ~ 26 ~ 9 „
Garrett 16 „ 1 „ 5 ~ o ~
2nd Innings.
Spofforth . ... 196 balls, 30 maiden overs, 50 runs, 6 wickets.
Allan 157 „ 15, .. 58 „ 5
Boyle 52 ~ 6 ~ 17 ~ 1 „
Garrett 28 ~ 1 ~ 18 ~ 1 „
Horan 8 ~ 1 ~ 1 ~ o ~
Australian Eleven.
Ist Innings.
Evans ... ... 180 balls, 22 maiden overs, 51 runs. 4 wickets
Tindall 154 ~ 21 „ 35 „ 5
Alice 24 „ 1 „ 16 ~ o ~
Scott 48 ~ 5 ~ 21 ~ o „
2nd Innings.
Evans 148 balls, 22 maiden overs, 37 runs, 4 wickets.
Tindall . 92 ~ 6 ~ 52 ~ 1 ~
i'COlt ... ... 40 ~ 5 ~ II ~ o „
Alice 8 ~ 1 ~ 2 ~ o ~
Geary 1 ~ o ~ 3 ~ o ~
The Eleven immediately proceeded to Melbourne, met an
Eighteen from the principal Metropolitan Clubs there, and by the
most patient and, at the same time, brilliant play, secured an easy
victory. Without any rest “ our boys ” immediately set out over-
land to Sydney, arriving on the 28th of March, and setting sail
8


the following day in the R.M.S. “ City of Sydney,” via San Fran-
cisco. The successes which had everywhere attended their
efforts had so worked upon public enthusiasm, that everyone
looked forward eagerly to hear with what measure of success they
would face the Elevens of Old England. The evening previous to
their departure the team were entertained by some of their friends
at Punch’s Hotel, where the heartiest wishes were expressed for
their success in contests in the old country. The following is a re-
capitulation of their Australian and New Zealand matches prior to
their departure:—
AGAINST WHOM, RESULT.
Eighteen of Brisbane Eleven won in one innings.
Twenty-two of Toowoomba Eleven won easily.
Fifteen of Sydney Eleven won by four wickets.
Twenty-two of Maitland Eleven won easily.
Twenty-two of Newcastle Eleven won in one innings.
Eighteen of Adelaide Eleven won by ten wickets.
Twenty-two of Sandhurst Eleven won by one innings.
Twenty-two of Sandhurst Drawn.
Combined Fifteen, at Melbourne ... Tie.
Twenty-two of Invercargill Eleven won in one innings.
Twenty-two of Dunedin Drawn.
Twenty-two of Oamaru Eleven won easily.
Fifteen of Christchurch Local team won by six wickets.
Twenty-two of Wellington Eleven won in one innings.
Twenty-two of Napier Ditto ditto ditto.
Twenty-two of Auckland Ditto ditto ditto.
Combined Fifteen, at Sydney Eleven won by four wickets.
Twenty-two of Geelong Eleven won easily.
Twenty-two of Ballarat Drawn.
Melbourne Eighteen Eleven won easily.
THE TOUR OF THE AUSTRALIAN ELEVEN
THROUGH THE COLONIES.
We extract the following from the “Australasian ” of March 30th :
We now publish a summary of their doings in the colonies, with the
bowling and batting averages ; and a glance through these tables
should satisfy anyone that the team, which has now left us to
uphold our cricketing honour in the old country, is in every way
worthy of the trust reposed in it. The Eleven have played alto-
gether 21 matches —all against odds—and have w r on 17, lost only
one, and the remaining three were drawn, one of these being the
famous tie match played on the Melbourne Ground last New Year’s
Day. Comparing this performance with that of Lillywhite’s team,
we find the latter played 23 matches —three of which were against
Elevens —w r on eleven matches, lost four, and eight were drawn. The
performance of our men, therefore, stands out in very favourable


contrast to that of the Englishmen. Turning to the averages, we
find that C. Bannerman heads the list with an average of 24 ’2B
runs per innings for 31 innings played, Horan not being far
behind with 23’23 runs per innings for 30 innings played. Again,
turning to the records of Lillywhite’s team, as set out in “ Con-
way’s Annual,” we find that Ulyett heads the list with 22-20 runs
per innings for 35 innings played, Charlwood coming next with
20-14 for the like number of innings. The two crack colonials
may therefore claim precedence ; while U. Gregory with 20-19 * or
27 innings is quite on a par with Charlwood. It must also be
borne in mind that our batsmen had odds in the field against them
in every match, while the English had the advantage of playing in
three matches with only eleven in the field. In bowling the reputed
bowlers of the team have all secured very good averages, while the
two wicket keepers, Blackham and Murdoch, performed wonder-
fully well on the one or two occasions when their services as
bowlers were called into requisition. Spofforth’s must be con-
sidered the best performance, he having bowled by far the greater
number of balls, and his average of 4-102 runs per wicket places
him second to Alfred Shaw alone, whose wonderful average of
3-190 runs per wicket for 5,181 balls bowled, no other bowler can
hope to equal. Garrett comes next to Spofforth, with 3-28 runs
per wicket for 1,472 balls bowled, while Boyle, Allan, and Kendall
have all secured fine averages. Bailey has the best average on
paper, but he bowled so little, comparatively speaking, that his
average cannot fairly be contrasted with those above mentioned.
He is however undoubtedly a very good bowler, and will probably
prove of great service in the English tour. Kendall’s analysis'
certainly does not justify his omission from the team, and we
cannot help thinking that the Eleven have made a great mistake
in leaving him behind, more especially as it is at any rate doubtful
whether they will be able to secure Midwinter’s services.
BATTING
AVERAGES
Number I Times
Most in
4
Match.
Average
per
Innings.
Total
Runs.
Player.
of 1 not
Innings. | out.
C. Bannerman
T. Horan
3i
30
24 ’2B
23-23
D. Gregory ...
A. Bannermann
T. Garrett
20 ’l9
W. Murdoch .
G. H. Bailey.
F. Allan... .
F. Spofforth .
J. Blackham .
H. F. Boyle .
T. Kendall
3
4
3
* Signifies not out.


BOWLING AVERAGES.
Bowler.
Number
of
Innings.
Balls.
Runs.
Maiden
Overs.
Wickets.
Average
Runs per
Wicket.
G. H. Bailey
5
312
75
30
28
2 - I9
W. Murdoch
2
168
44
24
12
3-8
Blackham
3
264
83
23
23
3'H
T. Garrett
24
1472
337
169
103
3-28
F. Spofforth*
33
3845
1226
368
281
4 - I02
D. Gregory
1
28
6
3
1
6-
H. F. Boyle
24
1502
5°i
i37
83
6-3
F. Allan
14
1488
421
162
68
6-13
T. Kendall
26
2103
638
223
102
6-26
A. Bannerman
1
86
27
10
2
I3' 1
T. Horan
3
60
17
8
1
iT
* Spoftorth bowled one wide ball.
To afford an opportunity of comparing the above averages with
those of Lillywhite’s team
, we append the latter, as
given in “ Con-
way’s Annual ”
Times
Most
Most
Player.
Innings.
not
• in
in
i OlcIJL
Average.
out.
Innings.
Match.
Ulyett
35
1
95
US
768
22 "20
Charlwood
35
1
66
74
694
20T4
Selby
34
1
88
82
589
17'28
Greenwood
35
1
66
7i
530
15-20
JuPP
17
1
63
67
233
14-9
Emmett
33
1
48
56
420
13 - 4
Poolley
20
3
39
39
210
12'6
Hill
33
5
49
66
312
11-4
Shaw
32
2
86
86
326
10 - 6
Armitage
32
3
38
40
286
9 '25
Lillywhite
33
6
30
30
179
6-17
Southerton
32
13
16
16
95
5‘
BOWLING AVERAGES.
Average
Bowler.
Balls.
Maidens.
Runs.
Wickets.
per
Wicket.
Shaw
5181
816
883
231
3.190
Lillywhite
2786
395
631
138
479
Southerton
1582
209
463
99
4-67
Hill " ..
2415
321
394
111
5’39
Emmett
1462
225
291
58
5i
Armitage
238
i7
1 17
13
9’
Ullyett
1070
145
312
30
IO *2


THE TRIP HOME.
There were upwards of 128 passengers on board the steamer in
which the Eleven sailed, including the Troubadours so that the
voyage was made tolerably pleasant. It is said that the Eleven
kept themselves in practice by about a couple of hours’ play on the
spar deck each day. They were landed at San Francisco on the
evening of the 26th of April, and stopped for that night at the
Palace Hotel, and early on the following morning they proceeded
by the Central Pacific Railway to New York, which was reached
on the fourth of May. Several prominent members of the St.
George’s Cricket Club met the Eleven upon the wharf, and wished
them every success in England. The Eleven proceeded imme-
diately on board the Inman steamer City of Berlin, and reached
Liverpool on the 13th May. On the 14th May they were met by
Conway, who had preceeded them by the Suez mail, and pro-
ceeding at once to Nottingham, arrived there about noon. An
immense crowd of people had gathered at the railway station, and
a splendid band was playing Auld Lang Syne,” but so great and
long-continued was the cheering, that the music was completely
smothered. An omnibus, drawn by four splendid greys, and headed
by the band, took them at once to the Maypole Hotel, the streets
being lined all the way with upwards of 8000 spectators. Many of the
lace spinners and hose weavers expressed disappointment at the
colour of the visitors, whom they evidently expected to find black,
Dave Gregory being the only one who at all saved the team from
reproach in that respect. One onlooker was heard to observe,
“ Whoy, Bill, they beant black at all; they’re as white as wuz.”
The usual welcome over bumpers of champagne was proposed by
Mr. Hoyles. Captain Gregory responded, and within two hours
the team were practising on Trent Bridge Ground. All shaped
very badly, the ground being very sloppy.
AT NOTTS.
The three following days practice was regular, but the
weather was very unsettled and showery. The Trent Bridge
Ground is not so large as the principal colonial cricketing
arenas. The match, fixed to commence on the 20th May,
was the all-absorbing topic of conversation, but the weather
continued most unpropitious, and when the toss had been won by
Gregory, and Notts was about to take the field, a heavy shower
fell, lasting about half an hour. At half-past 12 the weather
cleared up, when the two Bannermans emerged from the enclosure
their blue and white scarfs and caps looking uncommonly well;
there was loud and prolonged applause.


FIRST MATCH.
■o
AUSTRALIAN ELEVEN v, NOTTS.
The Nottingham field was as follows :—Wild, at wicket;
Selby, short leg ; Oscroft; point ; Tolley, long on ; Flowers,
mid on; Daft, short slip; Cursham, square leg; Shrewsbury,
long slip; Barnes, long stop and mid off; Shaw and Morley
being the bowlers. A. Bannerman received the first ball
from Shaw, who led off with a maiden. Morley then faced
C. Bannerman, and the premier batsman started the account
by getting the second ball past point for a single. In the next
over from Shaw he placed another ball in the same spot with like
result; he then made a fine drive off Morley for a couple, after
having been narrowly run out. He next got Morley away splen-
didly for 3, but the third run was such a very tight fit that Alick
was nearly sacrificed. Charley’s dashing style had already made
him popular, but in the next over from Shaw he was neatly caught
by Flowers at mid on for 9 well and quickly obtained. 1-9-9 was
recorded as Horan joined Alick, who had received the last four
overs without scoring. At this juncture the bowling was extremely
puzzling, and Horan’s style appeared far from taking ; he succeeded,
however, in putting Morley to cover for 2, and Alick made his first
figure hy sending Shaw neatly to leg for 3 well run ; he followed
this up by travelling Morley to the chains by a hard hit for 4, and
loud applause came from all parts of the ground. Morley soon
had his revenge, however, for in the next over he displaced the
Stonewaller’s centre stump with a fast shooter. 2-7-19 looked
rather blue for the Australians when Spofforth filled the vacancy.
The new arrival sent Morley past point for 2, and Horan hit
Shaw’s first very hard back, and was magnificently caught by the
bowler. 3-2-20. “ The Infant Midwinter,” who had at this time
arranged to play as much as possible with the team, except when
his professional engagements with Gloucestershire interfered, next
appeared on the scene, and his partner immediately fluked Morley
in the slips for a brace. Mid. soon showed how greatly his style
had improved since he had returned to England, nothing seeming
to tempt him but loose balls. Spofforth’s fluky example had no
effect upon him, but the New South Welshman now made a good
drive to the off for 2, and another brace and single from the same
bowler. His life, however, was doomed, for the second of Shaw’s
next over, an easy one, was too many for him. 4-7-36. Dave
Gregory came next, and loud cheers greeted his appearance; he
had only time, however, to see Mid. put Morley to the off for a
single, and though playing with extreme caution, and not too eager


to get runs, he was sent back to the Pavilion by a beautiful break-
back from the lefthander; 5-0-27 was a very shy average for this
maiden effort on British soil. Murdock now joined Midwinter,
and finished the over, and the former, for a splendid on drive,
lifted Shaw to the chains for 3, and elicited loud applause.
Murdock next cut Shaw hard, but a very smart piece of fielding
on the part of Shrewsbury enabled Wild, at the wickets, to lift the
bales quietly, and his colonial comrade of the gloves went back
with a downcast face to the Pavilion. 6.0.30. Garrett faced
Midwinter, and the only stand of the innings was made; both
batsmen set themselves to play with great care and patience, a fact
which five successive maidens will testify. Garrett now drove
Shaw in good style to the on for 2, and in his next over had him
into Cursham’s hands at square leg, but the chance was refused,
and 2 runs resulted. Midwinter now punished Morley for 4
to the off, and another was added for an overthrow by Oscroft;
five consecutive overs only resulted in a single to Garrett, and
when the luncheon bell rang at 2 o’clock, the register was 6 for 43.
A nice luncheon was provided in the Pavilion, a comfortable and
commodious one, and the bleak wet weather was the only draw-
back to the comfort of every one. Forty minutes were devoted to
refreshments, the turnstiles the while being constantly busy with
the thousands pouring through them, showing that it required
something more than rain to keep away the men of Notts when
their particular pet, Alfred Shaw, was being handled by the
colonials. With commendable punctuality the two “ not outs ”
appeared at the wickets, and for some time very fair cricket was
shown. Garrett batted well and confidently, but the run-getting
was extremely slow, as no liberties could be taken with the bowling
at either end. This may be judged from the fact, that in 8 overs
only 1 run was obtained, this by Mid,, who supplemented the
score by placing Shaw for a single ; he followed this up for another
from Morley past point, and Garrett now opened his shoulders
freely and drove Morley to the off for 2 and 4, amidst rounds of
applause. Shaw now sent down 4 or 5 maidens in succession,
when the series was broken by Garrett making a capital hit to the
on, for which, however, only 1 run was obtained. Midwinter’s
time was now come ; he hit one of Morley’s into cover point’s
hands, and Tolley secured a neat catch. The leviathan’s score of
13 was a display of the most cautious play; 7 out for 54, of which
24 had been added since the last wicket fell. 7-13-54. Things
were not destined to improve, for Blackham, who followed, only
stayed for 3 overs; each batsman had got a single, Garrett drove
Morley splendidly for 2, a boundary hit being neatly saved by
Cursham ; when another single had been credited to Garrett, a hot
break-back from Morley sent Blackham to the Pavilion, and 8-1-60
met Bailey’s gaze as he emerged from the dressing-room, and as if
the category of misfortunes were not already complete, his vis-a-vis
gave an easy chance to Daft off Shaw at short slip, and Garrett


retired for a well-got 20. He deserved great credit for his contri-
bution, and though he had been let off by Cursham when he had
made 2 early in his innings, he showed good cricket, and was more
at home with the bowling than any other member of the team.
Allan, the last man, had no sooner joined Bailey than uproarious
laughter greeted his grotesque actions. He had not long to stay,
for no sooner had Bailey driven Morley to- the off for 3 in grand
style than the Victorian bowler fell a victim to a splendid ball from
Shaw, and the innings terminated at half-past 3 for a very poor
total of 63. The slow sloppy wickets upon which the Australian
players made their first effort, combined with an over-anxiety to
get runs, is quite sufficient to account for the smallness of the
score. Rain now fell in torrents for half an hour, and when at
half-past 4 the sky had cleared, the Eleven took the field as fol-
lows : —Gregory, short slip ; Blackham, wickets ; Midwinter, cover
point; C. Bannerman, short leg; A. Bannerman, mid off; Horan,
leg; Murdock, point; Garrett, mid on; and Bailey, long stop.
Notts sent in Daft and Oscroft, the latter taking the strike off
Allan, who started with a maiden. Spofforth’s first over was less
fortunate, and resulted in 5 runs, Oscroft hitting him to the off for
3, and each of the batsmen securing a single. Spofforth con-
tinued in bad form in the trundling department all the afternoon,
but the players were so chilled with the cold, and the ball so
swollen and soft, that the bowlers could do nothing with it. 10
runs only were made when Oscroft skied the ball to short leg,
where it was secured, and before another run had been added Daft
was given out leg before wicket. Shrewsbury and Selby were now
together, but could do little with the bowling. At 21 Shrewsbury’s
off stump was struck. Tolley aided Selby in bringing the score up
to 40, when Spofforth handed the ball to Midwinter, and in the
latter’s second over the amateur was smartly caught at wicket.
Wild joined Selby, and at 6 o’clock, when stumps were drawn, 61
runs were scored without further loss of wickets.
The second day, Tuesday, the 21st May, was miserable and
cold, and the clouds surcharged with rain. The attendance of
7,000 on the first day, considering the weather, was extraordinarily
large, but before the afternoon of the second day 10,000 specta-
tors had assembled. At half-past eleven, down came the rain
with a leaden sky and boisterous wind, and though it was very
doubtful whether there would be any play, streams of people were
passing the turnstiles. At one o’clock, the umpires having in-
spected the wickets, pronounced them unplayable ; but at half-
past one the bell rang, and the Eleven promptly turned out,
Selby and Wild, the not-outs of the previous evening, soon follow-
ing. The fielding showed a great improvement on the first day’s
form, and Alick Bannerman was greeted with frequent rounds of
applause. Blackham, with numbed fingers behind the wickets,
was very mild. Selby hit Allan to square leg for 2 and, after a
bye had been stolen, repeated the dose in Midwinter’s first over.


After six overs for 15 runs Allan retired in favour of Garrett, and
not long after Midwinter was succeeded by Spofforth. At this
time go were up, and Selby made a capital straight hit off Spofforth
for 4, when the luncheon bell rung with but four wickets down for
95. At a quarter-past three play was resumed, Garrett bowling
well with six consecutive maiden overs, whilst a dozen were got
off the same number from Spofforth. Gregory sent Horan to the
relief of the latter, and Wild was neatly caught off a head ball by
the new trundler, after a good innings of 28, 5-28-110. Cursham
now joined Selby, who commenced freely off both bowlers, but
after scoring 7 he was well caught by Alick off Horan, 6-7-133.
Barnes came in only to see Selby caught at mid on by C. Banner-
man off Horan, after a splendid innings of 66, made up of two
4’s, three 3’s, fourteen 2’s, and 21 singles. He was warmly ap-
plauded on retiring, and Flowers, who succeeded him, was clean
bowled by Horan with a bailer for a duck, when A. Shaw filled
the breach. Shaw slogged at everything, and sent Horan for 3to
long-on over Murdoch’s head, but in endeavouring to do the same
thing to Spofforth he was clean-bowled. Morley, the last man,
put a catch into Midwinter’s hands at cover-point off Horan’s next,
and the innings closed at half-past four for 153, leaving the Aus-
tralians 90 to get to save a one-innings defeat. The wicket having
been brushed and rolled, Bannerman and Midwinter appeared,
opposed to Shaw and Morley, and the former ran up 13 very
rapidly. Horan followed, but after making a couple of singles he
was splendidly caught at the wickets by Wild, off a leg ball from
Morley, and Alick Bannerman was given out leg before wdcket to
Shaw, 3 for 27. Midwinter, who was batting very patiently, was
now joined by Spofforth, who also, greatly to the surprise of his
comrades, followed his example, and maidens were the order of
the day. At length, however, after scoring 2, he had the misfor-
tune to play one of Morley’s on to his wicket, 4 out for 34,
Garrett next, and as on the previous day showed good defence ;
when play was up for the day, he and the infant had increased
the total to 46 for the loss of four wickets ; Midwinter notout, 13 ;
and Garrett not out, 7. The attendance during the afternoon was
over 10,000. The Australians returned to the Maypole very down-
hearted, but had hopes of yet pulling the match through, or making
it a drawn game, until at last Dave Gregory remarked that “he
thought their present form was not good enough.”
On Wednesday the weather was fine, but cold, and very few
persons were attracted to the ground owing to the match being
thought all over. At half-past twelve, however, play commenced.
Garrett and Midwinter brought the score up to 65, when Garrett
was well taken at point by Oscroft 5 for 65. Blackham followed,
but playing a ball on to his wicket, returned to the pavilion without
scoring. Allan went in and ran up 6, when he was caught by
Flowers off Shaw. Gregory next, who was clean bowled by Morley,
thus completing his spectacles. Blackham was caught by Wild


off Shaw for i, and Bailey, the last man, was caught by Oscroft
before troubling the scorers. The Australians were thus defeated
in their first match in England in an innings and 14 runs. The
batting of the Australians was, with the exception of Garrett, Mid-
winter, and C. Bannerman, a miserable display.
AUSTRALIAN ELEVEN.
Ist Innings. 2nd Innings.
A. Bannerman, b Morley ... ... 7 1b w b Shaw ... ... ... 4
C. Bannerman, c Flowers, b Shaw 9 c Barnes, b Morley ... ... 13
T. Horan, c and b Shaw ... ... 2 c Wild, b Morley ... ... 2
F. Spofforth, b Shaw ... ... 7 b Morley ... ... ... 2
Midwinter, c Tolley, b Morley ... 13 notout ... ... ... .. 16
D. Gregory, b Morley ... ... o b Morley ... .. .. o
W. Murdoch, run out ... ... o b Shaw ... ... ... ... o
T. Garrett, c Daft, b Shaw ... 20 c Oscroft, b Shaw ... ... 21
J. Blackham, b Morley ... ... 1 c Wild, b Shaw .. ... 1
G. H. Bailey, b Shaw ... ... 3 c Oscroft, b Shaw ... ... o
F, Allen, not out ... ... ... o c Flowers, b Shaw ... .. 6
Bye .. .. .. I Byes 9; 1 Byes 2.. .. 11
Total 63 Total .. ... .. 76
NOTTINGHAM.
Daft, 1b w b Allan ~ ... ... ... ... 3
Oscroft, c Horan, b Allen ... ... ... .. 6
Shrewsbury, b Allen ... ... ... ... ... 8
Selby, cC. Bannerman, b Horan ... ... ... 96
R. Tolly, c Blackham, b Midwinter ... ... ... 7
Wild, c Murdoch, b Horan ... ... ... ... 28
A. W. Cursham, cA. Bannerman, b Horan ... ... 7
Barnes, not out ... ... ... ... ... ... 5
Flowers, b Boran .. ... ... . v . ... ... o
Shaw, b Spofforth .. .. ... ... 11
Morley, c Midwinter, b Horan ... ... ... ~ 3
Byes 4 ; 1 Byes 5 9
Total 153
BOWLING ANALYSIS.
Australian Eleven.
Ist Innings.
Shaw .. .. 147 Balls 25 Maidens 20 Runs 5 Wickets.
Morley .. .. 144 „ 17 ~ 42 ~ 4 ~
2nd Innings.
Shaw .. .. 232 Balls 40 Maidens 35 Runs 6 Wickets,
Morley .. .. 228 ~ 39 ~ 30 „ 4 ~
Nottingham.
Ist Innings,
Allan .. .. 164 Balls 23 Maidens 43 Runs 3 Wickets.
Spofforth .. 112 „ 12 „ 39 ~ i „
Midwinter .. 72 ~ 9 ~ 17 „ 1 ~
Garrett .. 68 ~ 10 ~ x 5 » 0 ~
Horan .. .. 70 „ 5 „ 30 „ 5 „


THE BANQUET.
A grand complimentary dinner was in the evening given to the
Visitors by the Notts County Cricket Club, includingabouta hundred
people, all prominent citizens of Nottingham. Capt. Holden, the
chairman, in proposing “ The Australian Eleven,” referred to the
qualities they had displayed, and, notwithstanding their recent
defeat, predicted they would win many matches on English soil.
Charles Bannerman accompanied Midwinter to Dublin, at the
close of the match, to play with the United South of England
against the Dublin University. The Eleven now prepared to leave
for London, where quarters had been prepared for them at the
Horseshoe, in Tottingham Court Road. Before leaving Notting-
ham, however, they were entertained by the Sheriff, and festivities
were kept up to a late hour in the morning. Around the tastefully
decorated room flags were hung bearing the inscription, “ The
Sheriff welcomes the Australian Team to Nottingham and in
front of each member of the Eleven was placed a souvenier in the
shape of a book of photographic views of the buildings and gardens
in Nottingham, bearing an inscription, with the Sheriff of Notting-
ham’s compliments. Next day the team visited the old castle of
Nottingham, and the public parks and gardens, and some of the
team in the evening proceeded to the celebrated Sherwood Forest,
where now scarcely a tree is to be seen. Here, as late as 9 p.m.,
the rising generation of Nottingham were practising vigorously at
cricket, and sometimes they are able to play later. Clifton Grove
was visited, made memorable by the poet Kirk White. The
Theatre of the town is small compared to the principal Melbourne
and Sydney theatres.
On Friday, May 24th, the team started from Nottingham for
London, but there were very few to meet them in the old village
of four million inhabitants, their hour of arrival not having been
announced.
SECOND MATCH.
AUSTRALIANS v. MARYLEBONE CLUB AND GROUND.
On Monday, the 27th May, the team put in an appearance on
Lord’s ground, the appointments of which are scarcely equal to
the Melbourne Cricket Club. The weather was still stormy, and
so cold though fine between times that the Australians were still
at a great disadvantage, a couple of heavy storms lasting about an
hour each, swept over the city at 10 and noon. When play
commenced, about 1000 persons had gathered, but by 2 p.m„
when the weather had cleared a little, fully 6000 persons were
present. Gregory having lost the toss, Ridley took possession of
of the wicket, sending in the 2 great batsman of England, W. G.


Grace and Hornby. Allan and Boyle took up the bowling, but
the pitch was in such a very sodden state that long scoring was
out of the question. Murdock took the place of Blackham, who
had not been in good trim at Nottingham, when Allan delivered
his first ball to W. G. Grace, and was hit to square leg for 4 amidst
loud cheers. Who could have supposed that this splendid English
team would have been got rid of for the insignificant total of 32 ;
even Hornby, who was the only one who reached double figures,
was caught at the wickets before he scored, and let off twice
besides. The second ball from Allan was fatal to the Leviathan,
as he put it into Midwinter’s hands at square leg, loud cheers
greeting the Australians. Hornby, who hits at everything, takes
no guard at all, and when playing, his bat is fully 4 inches from the
leg stump. Booth came next, but was clean bowled by Boyle in
the first over ; 2 for 5. Ridley now joined Hornby, and though
a stand was made, the splendid bowling and fielding prohibited
runs being got, and elicited loud and frequent applause. While
these two remained together, however, they ran the score up to 25,
Hornby playing grandly, putting Boyle to square leg for 4 and
making three 2’s off Allan’s next over. Gregory now substituted
Spofforth, and the change came off with a vengeance : in the
second Hornby was clean bowled. 3 for 27. Now came Spof-
forth’s triumph, for he delivered 23 balls for 4 runs and 6 wickets,
and the fielding was so good all round that the applause became
tremendous; indeed, when Midwinter had caught W. G., it
seemed the applause would never cease, and when Spofforth re-
turned to the pavilion (3 successive balls having disposed of Hearne,
Shaw, and Vernon) he received a perfect ovation. Ridley’s time
had also come, for he was no sooner faced by Flowers than he
hit one to Alick Bannerman at mid off, and the little field held it
securely. When Vernon was stumped by Murdock, the hat “trick”
fairly brought down the house with 9 wickets for 32, and imme-
diately afterwards Spofforth caught and bowled Flowers. The
rush to the gate to view the wonderful Australians as they reached
the pavilion was something to be remembered, the innings of
the crack club of England being over in an hour and a quarter
for a hard earned 33. The public were fairly stunned by the per-
formance, but every one said that W. G. would make up for it in
the next innings. At half-past one the Australians commenced
their first innings, Midwinter and C. Bannerman facing the two
lions they had so badly fared with at Nots. Shaw and Morley
each sent a maiden, and from the second of Morley’s next poor
Charley, unluckily doomed, was splendidly caught by Hearne,
with the sun in his eyes, who ran a considerable distance sideways
and caught it, judging the ball with great accuracy. It was a re-
markable catch, and the crack Sydneyite was highly chagrined.
1-0-0. Rather a bad start for the team. As soon as Horan joined
Midwinter, the latter hit Morley in fine style to the on for 3, but
Shaw was so good that the runs came very slowly. Horan next


made a neat leg glance for a brace, and a single was credited to him
from the next ball, ro was now hoisted; but Horan was well
caught by W. G. Grace off Morley at point. Young Bannerman
was caught at short leg by Booth from the first ball he received.
3-0-1 1. Garrett came next, and had scored 2 when the bell rang
for luncheon. Play was resumed at a quarter to 3, and Garrett
skied one, which Ridley held, off Morley. 4-6-19. As the great
Sydney bowler left the pavilion, he was greeted with hearty ap-
plause, but was not destined to distinguish himself with the willow.
Midwinter’s time was now come, for with all his caution he just
touched one of Shaws and was well caught at the wicket by Wild.
The captain succeeded, and having already completed his spectacles,
was doomed to further misfortune, being bowled by Shaw’s first
ball. 6-0-20. In 16 or 17 overs from Shaw, only 1 run had been
made. Boyle now joined Spofforth, and sent Shaw’s next to the
on for 2 ; but the East Melbourne man succumbed to Wild at the
wicket very soon afterwards. 7-2-23. The probabilities were that the
Australians would not top the Englishmen’s score when Spofforth
was softly bowled by Shaw as soon as he was faced by Murdock.
Allan followed, and though his style caused immense laughter, he
clung tenaciously to his bat, and by steady and careful play the
pair brought 30 up on the board. When 4 more had been secured,
Murdock was tempted out to one of Shaw’s, and missing it, heard
the ominous rattle. 9-9-34. Baily now joined Allan, who hit
Morley for a brace and a single, and then returned Shaw hard and
was held by the bowler, and the Australians, after an innings of
two hours, were disposed of. Shaw throughout had bowled
plendidly, bowling 134 balls for 5 wickets and 10 runs. After a
short interval, the M.C.C. commenced their second innings with
the utmost confidence, little dreaming that the disaster of the first
innings would be turned into an absolute route, in the second.
Grace and Hornby faced Spofforth and Boyle, and now followed
the most extraordinary bowling triumph ever witnessed in a great
match. The first ball from Spofforth completely puzzled the great
batsman, and his uncertainty was quite apparent to the spectators.
The Sydneyite’s second, a beautiful breakback, just lifted the
bails, and a perfect storm of applause, lasting till the Leviathan
had reached the pavilion, gieeted the bowler. Webbe followed bent
on improving the state of the register, but Spofforth’s third ball was
equally fatal to him, and the crack Oxonian secured the objection-
able egg. 2-0-0. Booth next. Hornby now scored a single from
Boyle. Booth was evidently very unhappy, and succumbed to
the second ball from Boyle. 3-0-1, as Ridley came forward to
retrieve, if possible, the falling fortunes of his club. The last
ball of Boyle’s had his leg stump, and the 4 English cracks were
out for a single. Wild followed, when Hornby was hit hard by
Spofforth and had to retire, his place being filled by Flowers, who
played steadily and brought xo on the telegraph. He now fell a
victim to Boyle. 5-11-16. Hearne, the new comer, was bowled
by Spofforth without scoring. When Vernon arrived, Boyle found


C. Booth, b Boyle
o
b Boyle
o
A. Ridley, c A. Bannerman b Boyle
7
b Boyle
o
A. J. Webb, b Spofforth
i
b Spofforth
o
Wild, b Boyle
o
b Spofforth
5
Flowers, c and b Spofforth
o
b Boyle
ii
G. G. Hearne, b Spofforth
o
b Spofforth
o
Shaw, st Murdoch b Spofforth
o
not out
2
G. F. Vernon, st Murdoch b Spofforth o
b Spofforth
O
Morley, not out
I
c Horan b Boyle
.. o
Leg bye ..
I
Total ... _
33
Total
19
Wild’s weakness, 7-5-17. Hornby reappeared again amidst great
cheering, W. G. Grace coming out to run for him. This assistance
was, however, not needed, for Spofforth bowled Vernon and Boyle
followed suit on Hornby, who was manifestly not at home. Shaw
and Morley, now together, were not more fortunate, for after the
former had pulled Spof. for a couple, Morley was caught by Horan
at mid on, and the second innings of the grand old club terminated
for ig. This astounding collapse was entirely due to Boyle’s
extraordinary bowling, 33 for 3 runs and 6 wickets; considering
the batsman he was opposed to, a most miraculous performance.
Spofforth, too, secured 4 wickets for 16 runs. The enthusiasm
of the spectators was unbounded, who, some 5000 in number,
rushed the grounds and cheered the Australians in the most
vehement manner. A more exciting scene was never witnessed
on a cricket ground. Only ten minutes had elapsed when the
bell rang, and Midwinter and C. Bannerman appeared at the.
wickets. Charley was again doomed to disappointment, for he
had no sooner hit Morley for a single than he played Shaw o n
When Horan joined Midwinter, he commenced by cutting Morley
to the boundary for 4. His comrade secured a single past poi nt.
10 appeared on the board; two maidens followed, and Horan
made the winning hit in the slips for 2at half-past 5 p.m. Thus
the four innings, including luncheon and intervals, occupied only
five and a-half hours.
The news spread like wildfire, and created a sensation in
London and throughout England. Present amongst the
spectators in the pavilion were upwards of 400 Australians;
Sir Charles Du Cane, late Governor of Tasmania; Mr. De Pass
and Colonel Ward, of Melbourne; the Hon. Mr. Thorne, of
Queensland; and Mr. Butterworth, who, in the old intercolonial
days, was regarded as the prince of longstops. The newspapers of
England were flattering in their notices, and while some tried to
account for it, others honourably acknowledged a great victory.
The Globe had a very flattering little article, asking what the
boasted supremacy af England in athletics is coming to, beaten on
the river and now on the cricket field.
MARYLEBONE CLUB AND GROUND.
Ist Innings. 2nd Innings.
W. G. Grace, c Midwinter b Allan 4 b Spofforth o
A. N. Hornby, b Spofforth 19 b Boyle 1


AUSTRALIAN ELEVEN.
Ist Innings,
'C. Bannerman, c Hearne b Morley o
W. Midwinter, c Wild b Shaw ... to
T. Horan, c Grace b Morley 4
A. Bannerman, c Booth b Morley... o
T. Garrett, c Ridley b Morley ... 6
F. Spofforth, b Shaw. i
D. Gregory, b Shaw o
H. Boyle, c Wild b Morley ... ... 2
W. Murdoch, b Shaw 9
F. Allan, c and b Shaw 6
G. Bailey, not out 3
2nd Innings.
b Shaw I
not out 4
not out 7
Total 41 Total for I wicket... 12
BOWLING ANALYSIS.
Marylebone Club and Ground.
Ist Innings.
F. E. Allan 36 balls, 4 maidens. 14 runs, 1 wickets.
H. F. Boyle ... ... 56 7 14 3
F. E. Spofforth 23 3 4 6
23 3 46
2nd Innings.
Spofforth .. ... ... 36 balls, 2 maidens, 16 runs, 4 wickets
Boyle 33 6 3 6
Australian Eleven.
Ist Innings.
Shaw 134 balls, 25 maidens, 10 runs, 5 wickets.
Morley 132 19 31 5
The next two days being at their own disposal. The Eleven
visited the Tower of London, the Buckingham Palace, and Rotten
Row, and w r ere everywhere greeted with enthusiasm. On his visit
to Dublin C. Bannerman in his first innings was disposed of at
forward-cover for 1, and was caught at the wickets in the second
for 7, wflrile Midwinter had made a capital innings of 64. The
following is the article in the Glohe , above referred to : “ The
match played at Lord’s Ground yesterday between the Australians
and a picked eleven of the Marylebone Cricket Club, resulted in
something which may fairly be described as a sensation. A victory
won by the strangers against the crack club of the country w r ould,
under any circumstances, have been a notable, and even an extra-
ordinary event. But the peculiarity of the game yesterday was
not perhaps so much the mere fact that the Australians won, but
that they should have made such a pitiful example of their
antagonists. Seldom in the annals of modern cricket has so small
a score been made as by the Marylebone Club yesterday, and
never was so severe a humiliation inflicted individually and collec-
tively upon the members of the Club. The Eleven was as good a
one as could be found to represent London and England, and
probably nearly as good as the Club has ever turned out. Yet its
best batsmen were bowled out one after ‘ another, as if they were
novices. The disasters of a first innings were far excelled by the
22


catastrophies of a second,and the strangers, in spite of every effort
to turn the tables on their batsmen, were hailed the victors by nine
wickets. The defeat of the home Eleven was complete and,
looking at the figures, easy. No pretence of luck or chance, even
if it were made, could avail to explain the unprecedented event.
It is no dcubt a most singular thing that the scores on either
side were so ridiculously small; and the state of the ground was
certainly as unfavourable to the batsmen as it was propitious to
the bowler; but it was a circumstance from which the Australians
deserve all credit, and of which they are entitled to the full
advantages that they should have been especially strong in the
latter department. They have brought over bowlers with them who
fairly puzzled the best men in the country, and it is not impossible
that they will be found to have introduced a new system, by which
once more the scale will be turned in favour of the ball, and against
the bat. However that may be, and whatever may be the result
of future matches, the reputation of the Colonial Eleven is made;
and they will be welcomed with enthusiasm wherever they now
appear. Australia is advancing indeed, in sports, as in everything
else. She has beaten the mother country on the Thames, and
now she beats England at Lord’s. At the present rate we shall
have nothing left of our long-boasted athletic pre-eminence.”
The following is from the Home Xaos ; —
THE DEMON BOWLER.
The progress of the Australian Eleven is quite dramatic. Their somewhat
tame dehut at Nottingham was in the nature of an unpretending overture, but
the curtain fell to the first act at Lord’s to rounds of applause at their splendid
performance. When Grace, the far-famed batter, went out for four, and the
wickets went flying right and left, so that the last fell to a ridiculously small
score, it was clear that our Antipodean cousins could more than hold their own
with the best cricketers in this country. Indeed, the Australians are so good
“all round ” that they will be difficult to beat. Their fielding is the admira-
tion of all who behold it ; they have among them many excellent bats, but
their great strength is in bowling. Their bowlers have long enjoyed peculiar
soubriquets indicative of their powers. Left-handed Allan is known as the
“ Crouching Panther, ” or the “ Bowler of a Century;” Boyle is described as
the “very devil ; ” but Mr. Spofforth, as the “demon bowler,” carries off the
palm. His delivery is quite appalling ; the balls thunder in like cannon shot ;
yet he has the guile when seemingly about to bowl his fastest to drop in a
“slow,” which is generally fatal to the batsman. Spofforth is a Yorkshireman
by extraction. His father was well known as a sportsman, and rode as straight
as the best with the York and Ainsty and other hounds. But whether from
Yorkshire originally or not, he and his colleagues are all of our own flesanis c
blood, and we welcome their prowess cheerfully as a proof that the old sh kodt
not degernerating in those fa-off lands.
23


THIRD MATCH.
AUSTRALIA v. YORKSHIRE.
The team having been entertained at London, with Viscount
Fitz-Hardinge in the chair, left on Wednesday, the 29th May, and
arrived at Huddersfield, Yorkshire, a distance of 200 miles, in five
hours. The Thursday on which the match commenced was agree-
ably fine and warm, but the pitch was very soft, partly owing to the
bursting of a drain-pipe, which had flooded the enclosure. Gregory
having won the toss, elected to take the field, and sharp to time
the Australians filed out from the Pavilion, amidst the loud cheers
of the spectators, and, what to them was quite as agreeable, the
gracious sunshine.
Yorkshire sent in Ulyett and Lumb, and were opposed by Messrs. Boyle and
Allan, the latter handling the ball, which was cut by Lumb for a single, and off
the fourth Ulyett added one. He then spooned Boyle to forward cover, where
Garrett secured an easy catch. 1 for 3. Lister took his place, but he was run
out the first ball, through a very smart piece of fielding by Horan at mid off.
Loud cheers continued until Lockwood stepped into the crease, and a good
stand was made, both batsmen scoring freely, especially off Allan. Gregory
sent the “Demon,” and the change came off once more, for in his second over
he clean bowled Lumb with a very fast Yorker. 3-10-18, of which number
Lumb had made 10. A. Greenwood filled the vacancy, and shaping very badly
at Spof-, played forward at a slow one from the wind-jammer, and was held by
the bowler. Eight successive maiden overs testified to the quality of bowling
and fielding after C. J. Armitage had joined Lockwood. The latter, however,
then comftienced to score freely off both bowlers; but Armitage, who was very
uneasy, was clean bowled by Boyle. Emmett (the captain) was loudly cheered as
he came in, but having secured one run, the bell rung for luncheon. Emmett
had already had one life, Boyle, having tried desperately to reach the first ball.
When he had secured the run, on reaching the other end, exclaimed aloud,
‘‘l am very glad —I boosted it !” When the luncheon bell rung the score stood
at 37. When the hour’s interval was over, the Yorkshire captain succumbed to
Blackham, at forward short leg, off Spofforth. 6-2-41. Armitage, who fol-
lowed, hit Spofforth to the off for a couple and a single ; but letting out hard
at Boyle, Garrett took him at forward cover point with a well-judged catch,
amidst uproarious applause. 7-2-44. Beaumont next, whose stay was brief,
for he had only secured a couple and two singles, when Garrett had him—his
third in the same spot. 8.4.51. Hill opened his innings by sending Boyle over
the ropes for 4, by which he brought down the house. After another single,
Spofforth, with a beauty, clean bowled him. 9.4.56. Binder, the last man,
displayed some pretty cricket. He speedily ran up a dozen, scoring freely from
both bowlers, letting out at every ball, and being well supported by Lockwood,
whose life, however, was taken by Boyle off his pad. He had contributed 33
out of the total 72, and was loudly applauded all over the ground. His innings
was decidedly the feature of the day. He batted patiently, but with utmost
confidence and skill, which no person could expect, as his gait is extremely
awkward. During the innings the fielding of the Australians was very conspi-
cuous, their smart throwing in being particularly so. The bowling of Spofforth
and Boyle puzzled the Yorkshiremen —the former taking five wickets for 30,
and the latter 4 for 32. Murdoch kept the wicket badly.
The elder Bannerman and Midwinter were the first to face the bowling of
Lockwood and Emmett, three byes from the latter being the result of the first
over. C. Bannerman now set himself to retrieve his past misfortunes. Mid-
winter placed Lockwood to short leg for a single, and Bannerman sent the next


ball in splendid style over the ropes for 4. Midwinter, however, in attempting
to cut one in Emmett’s next, was caught by Lumb at third man— 1 -1-8., when
Horan joined Bannerman. The new-comer immediately troubled the scorers
by cutting Emmett to the ropes for 3, and both batsmen appeared in splendid
form. In Lockwood’s next, Horan secured a brace of 2’s to leg. Bannerman
drove Emmett hard to the off for 3, and got a couple past point in Lockwood’s
next, his fine dashing style receiving rounds of applause. The best hit of the
day was made by him for a straight one off Lockwood out of the bounds.
Armitage relieved Lockwood. Runs came faster than ever, and Bannerman
smote the new trundler to the off for 3. Horan had Armitage for 2 with a neat
cut, with 3 for a hard straight drive, and 30 appeared on the board. Banner-
man drove him to the off for 3, and with several singles between them the bats-
men soon ran 40 up. When 1 run had been added, Bannerman was clean
bowled. The Sydney crack having secured 22 in capital form, was loudly
cheered all round the ground. Alick Bannerman succeeded him, and pulled
the very first ball he received to square leg for 3, while Horan scored a single ;
2 to Alick off Armitage, and 3 singles to the same batsman, when 55 was
reached. Hill now succeeded Emmett, and with his first ball disposed of the
younger Bannerman, who by good cricket had scored 10. Garrett joined
Horan, and by steady play the two had increased the score to 71, when the
latter played out to a break back from Hill, and retired for a well-earned 25,
amidst the plaudits of the spectators, of whom there were now 5000 upon the
ground. Allan joined Garrett, and the two ran the score to 87 when time was
called at 6 o’clock—the former being 3, not out, and the latter 19.
On Friday play was commenced at half-past 12, but the very first ball from
Hill to Allan sent him to the right-about—s.3.B7—and Garrett found a new
partner in Spofforth. The new-arrival snicked his first in the slips for 2. He
was let off the next ball by Armitage at point. He had another life also, being
badly missed by Lockwood. The century was not long in appearing on the
board. Spofforth was now smartly run out, having quickly run up 10 by hard
hitting. 6-10-105. The captain was the substitute, while Hill changed ends,
and Emmett went on instead of Ulyett. Emmett’s first effort—a regular trim-
mer, to Garrett—sent the batsman to the Pavilion, after securing a freely, well-
earned 25. 7-25-105. Murdock joined his captain, but the latter, with the
inevitable duck, altered the board to 8-0-108. Boyle followed, scored a brace,
and was caught and bowled by Emmett, the catch being a very hot one.
9-2-114. Blackham followed, added a single, and was bowled by Emmett.
Emmett had secured 5 wickets for 23, and Hill 3 wickets for 27 runs.
Yorkshire commenced their second innings with a deficiency of 45 to be
wiped out from their first. Ulyett and Lumb faced Spofforth and Boyle.
Ulyett put the first ball to leg for a couple, and Lumb had scored 3 singles,
when Spof. made a Prince of Wales’ feather of his stumps. Lockwood—the
admired of the public after his previous day’s display—had safely negotiated a
couple of overs, when the luncheon bell rung. On resuming, Lockwood hit
Spof. over the ropes to square leg for 4, and to the off for 3. Ulyett was also
busy, and both bowlers were considerably knocked about. Allan succeeded
Spofforth after 10, 20, and 30 had quickly appeared. Garrett also went on
instead of Boyle, and when 2 runs were added to the score, Ulyett, letting out
at Garrett, Boyle secured a good catch at long-on. Ulyett played a dashing
innings for his 13, 2 for 32. T. Armitage then appeared, and immediately
cut Garrett for 2. The score was steadily increased to 46, when Armitage was
beautifully caught and bowled by Midwinter, who had relieved Allan. 3-9-46.
Greenwood next, to see Lockwood beautifully caught by C. Bannerman, at
mid-off, from Spof., who again had charge of the ball. 4-16-46, Lockwood
haying again played a good innings. C. J. Armitage joined Greenwood, and
after making 5, was caught at short slip by Gregory, off Midwinter. Emmett
here filled the gap, but soon lost his partner, Greenwood being well caught at
long-on by C. Bannerman, off Spofforth. 6-3-55. Lister followed, and then
Emmett was easily bowled by Spof. 7-0-55. Hill joined Lister, and both
playing very steadily, made 7 between them, when Lister was bowled by Boyle,
who had just relieved Midwinter. Pinder then joined Hill, and the score was


ncreased to 72, when Hill was magnificently caught at long-on by C. Banner-
man, off Spof, 9-7-72. The last man, Beaumont, then went in, and Binder,
mfter scoring another I was bowled by Boyle. The “Demon ” again had the
palm in bowling, having obtained 5 wickets for 31. Murdock was very good
at tfie wickets, this innings, and the fielding of the eleven a treat to look at, not
a chance being thrown away.
At 5.15 Midwinter and C. Bannerman went to the wickets to obtain the
required 28. Bannerman was caught at deep square leg by Ulyett, off Hill,
for 3, and Horan had just got to the wicket when Midwinter was bowled by
Emmett with a fast shooter. 2 out for 5. A. Bannerman next, The rain here
Interfered with the play, and the stumps had to be drawn for the day. The
attendance during the day was about 5000.
At half-past 12 on the following day Horan and A. Bannerman resumed
their places at the wickets, against the Bowling of Hill and Emmett. Hill’s
first, Horan sent to leg for 3, and after Alick making a single he was well taken
by Ulyett at long-off, from Emmett. 3-6-13. Garrett then came in, and after
making a single, played Hill on to his wicket. 4-1-15. Allan then joined
Alick, and by very good play, won the match—Allan being not out with 8,
.Alick not out 7. The bowling of Hill was very puzzling on the soft wicket.
YORKSHIRE.
Ist Inning:,.
2nd Innings.
E. Dumb, b Spofforth ... ... 10
b Spofforth ... ... .. 3
Ulyett, c Garrett, b Boyle ... ... 1
c Boyle, b Garrett .. ... 13
Ulster, run out .. ... ... o
b 80y1e... ... ... .. 4
Uockwood, b Boyle .. ... ... ■ 33
Greenwood, c and b Spofforth ... o
cA. Bannerman, b Spofforth .. 16
cC. Bannerman, b Spofforth... 3
C. J. Armitage, b Boyle
c Gregory, b Midwinter ... 5
Emmett, c Blackham, b Spofforth... 2
Armitage, c Garrett, b Boyle ... 2
b Spofforth ... .. . o
c and b Midwinter ... ... 9
Beaumont, c Garrett, b Boyle ... 4
Hill, b Spofforth ... .. ... 4
notout .. .. ... ... o
c C. Bannerman, b Spofforth.. 7
Binder, notout ... ... 12
b Boyle .. ... ... 6
Bye, 1 ; leg bye, 1 ... 2
Byes, 5 ; leg bye, 1 ; w., 1 7
Total ... ... ... 72
Total 73
AUSTRALIANS.
Ist Innings.
2nd Innings.
C. Bannerman, b. Armitage
c Ulyett, b Hill 3
b Emmett ... ... .. 1
Midwinter, c Lumb, b Emmett ... 1
T. Horan, b Hill ... ... 25
c Ulyett, b Emmett ... ... 1
A. Bannerman, b Hill .. ... to
notout ... . ... ... 7
T. Garrett, b Emmett . . ... 25
b Hill 1
F. Allan, b Hill 3
not out .. ... ... ... 8
F. Spofforth, run ont ... ... 10
D. Gregory, c Hill, b Emmett ... O
W. Murdoch, not out ... ... 9
H. Boyle, c and b Emmett... ... 2
J. Blackham, b Emmett
Byes, 6 ; leg byes, 3;w. 1 10
Wides ... ... ... 2
Total ... ... ... 118
4 wickets for... ... 28
BOWLING ANALYSIS
YORKSHIRE.
Ist Innings,
Allan... .. .. 32 falls 4 maidens 8 2runs o wickets
Boyle 147 18 3 5
•Spofforth .. ... Ix 6 14 30 4


Spofforth
Boyle..
Midwinter
Garrett
... 108 balls
- 73
... 48
... 24
12 maidens
9
5
5
31 runs
IS
12
2
5 wickets-
2
2
1
AUSTRALIANS.
Emmett
Lockwood
Armitage
Hill
Ulyett
1st Innings.
... 120 balls. 17 maidens
... 28 a
... 88 6
84 11
... 12 2
23 runs
16
37
27
5
5 wickets
0
1
3
0
2nd Innings.
On the evening of the second day a grand dinner was given to
the Eleven at the George Hotel. The Mayor proposed the health
of the Australian Eleven, and Captain Gregory responded in suit-
able terms. The team left Huddersfield by the 9.10 p.m. train on
Saturday, a tremendous crowd of people assembling to see them
off, the cheers being deafening as the train glided away. It is said
that at most of the stations on their way back to London hundreds
of people assembled to have a look at them, and the windows of
the saloon carriage set apart for their use was darkened by the faces
pressed against it. The team had innumerable instances given
them of the general ignorance of Australian geography, very few
persons appearing to understand that Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide,
and Brisbane are hundreds of miles apart. Some one inquired
about a Mr. Blank, at Ipswich, and a Mr. Dash in Western Aus-
tralia, and one of the cricketers stated that even their fellow-
lodgers looked steadfastly at them, surprised to find them fashioned
as they were, and their habits and customs the same.
FOURTH MATCH.
AUSTRALIA v. SURREY.
On Monday, the 3rd June, the team met the County of Surrey,,
and were all greatly pleased with the oval, which is said to be the
fastest run-getting ground. The gathering which assembled to
witness the match was by many thousands the largest that had
ever been seen on the ground. The committee had all along ex-
pected a large attendance, but they had taken no precautions, and
some 20,000 persons were left to be managed by six policemen,
and as many Club servants. The facts are, that in the first place
the fame of the Australians had been noised about, and many a
thousand people who had intended to go to Lord’s the second day
determined not to miss this chance of seeing the Colonials.
So great was the pressure of the crowd that the turnstiles could


not admit half of them. Small doors were broken open in the
fence, and money-takers were placed who received one shilling
and half-a-crown, and neither gave nor were asked for change. It
was evident that the crowd would give anything so long as they
could get in and get a sight of the play.
Mr. Strachan, the Surrey captain, won the toss, and sent Lucas and Shuter
to the wickets. Allan and Boyle bowling, a leg bye was got off Allan’s first
ball, and Shuter cut the next neatly for 3. The great Victorian bowler had
stated before leaving the pavilion that he had never been warm since he landed ;
and he evidently was not yet in good form. Boyle first bowled a maiden,
a single to Lucas off Allan, 2 to Shuter for a cut, and another 2 for an over-
throw by Spofforth ; 3 more to Shuter for a beautiful cut, and all off Allan’s
bowling, sent 10 up. Some six or seven runs were quickly added, when Allan,
who was all abroad, was relieved by Spof. Twenty appeared on the board
when Captain Gregory took Lucas off a bailer from Boyle, 1-5-21. Jupp came
in, and hit Boyle’s first ball to square leg for 4, 1 to short leg for a single, when
Spof had him with a fast one, the stump spinning end over end to long stop. Mr.
Game, who followed, finished the over, and Shuter cut Boyle into Murdoch’s hands
at point, who dropped it, and Shuter then showed his gratitude for the life by
cuttingthe next ball forabrace. Spof, however, dissolved the partnership by turning
turtle Game’s middle stump, 3-0-28, and Lindsay came in. He fluked Spof.
Shuter cut him for 3, hit his next to square leg for 4, and seemed fairly able to
withstand the bowling. He again cut Spof for 2 and a single, and 40 appeared
on the board amidst great applause. Lindsay next had Spofforth for 3 by a
hard straight hit, and 5 singles were secured by the two batsmen. Shuter made
a fine hit for 3 off Boyle, and 50 appeared amidst excitement amongst the specta-
tors. Mr. Lindsay, who had succeeded Game, struck Spofforth’s next hard
into Gregory’s hands, 4-5-52. Mr. Carmichael, who had succeeded him, suc-
cumbed to the next ball, a fast Yorker, 5-0-52, and Pooley, who joined Shuter,
sent one of Spofforth’s head balls to the fence for 4, and commenced
to run up runs fast—6o telegraphed. After 3 more runs Spof, who had been
bowling at a terrific pace, was amongst Shuter’s timber with a very slow leg
break. Shuter’s display of cricket was simply splendid. Boyle then handed
the ball to Allan. Strachan next, who cut Spofforth in the slips for 4, and
Pooley served Allan in the same way, 70 up. Pooley continued to make the
running hot till 80 appeared. Strachan had secured 8, when he fell a victim in
the slips to the Australian captain off Spofforth, and this being the third of very
difficult catches made by Gregory during the innings, 7-8-81, and Allan retired
in favour of Garrett. Barratt, who succeeded Strachan, took the first
opportunity to put Spofforth into Boyle’s hands at mid-oft, and 8-0-81
were the figures. Jones, the incomer, drove Spofforth to the off for 2,
and the last ball of the over secured Spofforth’s eighth wicket-levelling,
Jones leg stump, the ball being a very fast one, 9-2-83. Southerton
came, and the old man played with extreme caution against Spofforth and
Garrett. 90 and too appeared on the board in very short time, and 7 more
were secured before Boyle, who had again relieved Garrett, took Pooley’s leg
stump with a shooter. His innings was a dashing display for 29, and all were
out for 107, Southerton being not out 13. Spofforth had taken eight wickets
for 52 runs, and the Surrey batsmen admitted themselves entirely nonplussed
by his peculiar delivery and change of pace. Luncheon took place, and a little
after three o’clock Gregory sent in Bannerman and Midwinter to face the
veteran Southerton, and Barratt; the Sydney man received a maiden, and Mid-
winter drove the last of Barratt’s first over outside the circle an off hit. Banner-
man hit Southerton into Strachan’s hand, who declined the gift, and another 4
off Southerton was credited to Midwinter. Bannerman had scored a single,
and then put Barratt up to forward cover. This time Strachan held him.
Horan joined Midwinter, and made a good stand, cutting Southerton for a
brace, and a single to short leg. Midwinter drove Southerton to the on
for 2, and Horan served Barratt in the same way, and again with 4 off the


same bowler for a capital drive, saw 20 appear. Both batsmen kept the pace
up and 30 appeared, when Horan, who had made 3 more singles, went ont to
Barratt and, missing him, was stumped by Pooley. He had made his 16 in
splendid form. Alick Bannerman pulled Barratt to square leg for 3, but Pooley
caught him at the wickets off Southerton’s next, 3-3-38. As Spofforth arrived
Midwinter drove Barratt again to the off for 4. Spofforth put Southerton to
point for a single, and then made a left-handed stroke past Pooley for 4, amidst
laughter and applause, 50 up. Spofforth seemed very anxious to get runs, and
going out to Barratt was promptly stumped by Pooley, 4-8-55. Garrett came
next and, hitting at Barratt, was caught by Strachan, who was greeted with
enormous cheering, having effected perhaps the most difficult catch ever seen.
He ran m from mid off to cover point, and while running at full speed secured
the ball with his left hand three inches from the grass, 5-0-55. Murdoch com-
menced by cutting Barratt nicely for 4, and the two brought the score to 66
When the “Infant was easily caught at, third man off Barratt, he had played a
patient innings for 32. Boyle succeeded hjm, and the score began to mount
rapidly, when he was bowled by Jones, who had relieved Southerton. Gregory
followed, and for the first time began to show his true form. He commenced
by driving Barratt for a single, and a round of applaure greeted the first run
made by the Australian captain on English soil. He then had Jones to the
long-on for 4, and had increased his score to 10 when he was caught in the
slips by Southerton off Barratt, 9 for 106. Murdoch in the meantime had been
caught by Lindsay oft Barratt, and Blackham and Allan represented Australia
at the wickets. Blackham added 4to the score, when Allan was caught by
Jones off Barratt 10-0-110, and only three runs ahead of Surrey. Eight wickets
fell to Barratt for 58 runs. He is a medium-pace bowler, and curls every ball
to the off, eight men being stationed on that side, six of the Australians falling
into the snares laid for them. Play was continued until seven p. m., in the hope
that the match would be finished on the second day, to admit of the team visiting
the Derby. Lucas and Shuter faced the bowlers, and when 11 runs had been
scoied Spofforth scattered Lucas’s stumps in all directions, l-6-11, when time
was called. When play had commenced there were about 3,000 spectators,
but by four p.m. the attendance had incressed to upwards of 15,000, at sixpence
and one shilling per head. Such a crowd had never previously been seen
upon the oval, and it was never anticipated, the three or four policemen
present being quite inadequate to prevent encroachments. Some idea of this
may be gathered from the fact that the crowd had closed in until the oval was
half its usual size, and all efforts to keep the ground clear were unavailing.
On the second day there was again a large attendance, but not nearly so
large as on the first, the weather being cold and squally, and most unfavourable
for cricket. When play commenced, Jupp cut Boyle for 2, but in his next
over, in trying to do the same thing, was smartly caught by Murdoch at point
2-3 -I 3- Oame succeeded, and play was extremely slow, the wicket being soft
m the extreme. Spofforth now sent a loose one to leg, and Game lifted it clean
out of the ground for 6, amidst thunders of applause. This was by far the best
hit of the match, but the Sydneyite soon had his revengeas he clean bowled him with
a windjammer, amidst great applause, for a fairly obtained 10. Spofforth’s con-
fidence and full intention for revenge was shown by deliberate preparation, the
removal of his cap, and a medium-paced delivery. The crowd acknowledged
his prowess by cheers whenever he resumed the ball. Pooley and Shuter by
brilliant cricket increased the score to 46, when Midwinter sent Shuter into
Gregory s hands, while Pooley was well caught by Murdoch off the same
bowler, 5-7-47. When Carmichael joined Lindsay, who as 50 appeared was
caught in the slips by Gregory, 6-1-52. Strachan filled the vacant crease", but
only a single had been added when the fast bowler had again dispersed the
sticks, 7-0-53. Barratt secured a couple, but soon succumbed to Murdoch at
point oft Midwinter, 8-2-58. Jones appeared, but was smartly run out, 9-6-Te
and Southerton, the last man, joined Stiachan. He had contributed 8, when
Boyle had him 1. b. w., Strachan carrying his bat for a carefully made "11, all
out, 80. The wicket having been well rolled, Midwinter and Horan went in
to get the required number of runs, viz., 78. The effort was not promising how-


ever, for Horan drew Strachan right on to his wicket, and retired for nought.
Alick Bannerman appeared, but rain for some time interfered with the play.
After luncheon Midwinter offered Lucas a hot chance at cover point, but he
could not accept it. Alick drove Strachan for four and one, and was then
caught in the slips from Barratt by Southerton, 2-5-15, and Spofforth appeared.
He drove Barratt twice for 4, and in trying to do the same thing, was held by
Game at long off, and 3-9-25 looked like a close match. Charlie Bannerman
now came forward, played cautiously but brilliantly, and let no chance escape
him. When 40 appeared Midwinter was well caught at cover point by
Strachan off Barratt, 4-15-40, not looking very rosy for Australia. Murdoch
appeared next ; and now Sydney’s premier batsman settled down, and played
in the most brilliant and confident manner. He hit one ball hard to the
pavilion for four, another into the gallery, and another four which narrowly
missed a lady. 50 —60—70 appeared, and still the runs were coming,
when Charley in hitting at Jones, a new bowler, popped the ball to cover point,
and retired by a clever catch by Strachan, 5-31-71. Garrett now went in and
got the next 7 runs in four balls from Jones, three 2’s and a single, and at a
quarter to five, amidst a perfect storm of applause, the Australians were again
winners by five wickets. Murdoch and Garrett were rushed by the crowd, and
patted on the back all the way to the pavilion. There was then an attendance
of 10,000 persons, and had the weather been more propitious it would probably
have been much greater. The victory perfectly electrified the English cricketing
world ; “and that’s Spofforth, and that’s Boyle, and that’s Allan,” were the
remarks to be heard wherever the cricketers went.
SURREY.
Ist Innings.
2nd Innings.
A. P. Lucas, c Gregory b Boyle ..
J. Shuter, b Spofforth
Jupp, b Spofforth ...
W. H. Game, b Spofforth ...
W. Lindsay, c Gregory b Spofforth
J. Carmichael, b Spofforth ..
Pooley, b Boyle
G. Strachan, c Gregory b Spofforth
Barrett, c Boyle b Spofforth
Jones, b Spofforth ...
Southerton, not out...
Leg bye
b Spofforth ... ... ... 6
c and b Midwinter ... ... 15
c Murdoch b Boyle ... ... 3
b Spofforth ... ... ... 10
c Gregory b Midwinter ... 1
c Murdoch b Spofforth ... o
c Murdoch b Midwinter ... 7
not out ... ... ... ... 11
c Murdoch b Midwinter ... 2
run out ... ... ... ... 6
1b w b Boyle .. ... ... 8
Byes 5, 1 b 6 ... ... 11
Total... 107
Total ... ~ 80
AUSTRALIANS.
Ist Innings.
2nd Innings.
C. Bannerman, c Strachan b Barratt
Midwinter, c Lindsay b Barratt ....
T. Horan, st Pooley b Barratt
A. Bannerman, c Pooley b Southerton
F. Spofforth, st Pooley b Barratt ...
T. Garrett, c Strachan b Barrett ...
D. Gregory, c Southerton b Barrett
W. Murdoch, c Lindsay b Barrett ..
J. Blackham, not out
H. Boyle, b Jones ..
F. Allan, c Jones b Barratt
c Strachan b Jones ... ... 31
c Strachan b Barratt . ... 15
b Strachan ... ... ... o
b Strachan ... ... ... o
c Southerton b Barratt ... 5
c Game b Barratt 9
not out ... ... ... ... 7
not out ... ... ... ... io
Leg bye... 1
Total... ... no
Total, five wickets for 78


Australians.
1st Innings.
Southerton
... 160
Balls. 19 Maidens.
39
Runs.
1
Wickets.
Barratt
... 186
26
58
8
Jones ...
... 28
3
2nd Innings.
13
1
Strachan
... 72
Balls. 13 Maidens.
16
Runs.
1
Wickets.
Barratt...
... 172
26
35
3
Southerton
... 32
8
0
0
Lucas
... 56
7
14
0
BOWLING ANALYSIS,
Surrey.
Ist Innings.
Allan ... ... 32 Balls. 2 Maidens. 22 Runs. o Wickets.
Boyle ...... 82 7 24 2
Spofforth ... 108 10 52 8
Garrett ... 16 2 8 o
2nd Innings.
Spofforth ... 156 Balls. 19 Maidens. 42 Runs. 3 Wickets.
Boyle 72 10 13 2
Midwinter ..64 13 14 4
Jones
15 i 13 i
On the following day, after having been feted by the Surrey
Club, the Australians visited Epsom, and witnessed the sight of
the world, 500,000 persons present when the Derby was run.
FIFTH MATCH.
■o
AUSTRALIA v. EIGHTEEN OF ELLAND.
o-
We extract the fallowing from Bell's Ltje. 'This was the first
contest in which the colonial team had had to face superior numbers.
The weather on Thursday was particularly fine, and the ground in
good condition
The Australians having lost the toss were sent in, and were first represented
by C. Bannerman and Midwinter to the attack of S. Hay and Osborne. Both
batsmen played very carefully, singles being the order of the day. Eventually
the spell was broken by the crack, who despatched Hay to the on for a couple.
The next thirteen overs yielded but a single, and then Bannerman let out at
Osborne, and sent him to the on for another brace. With the score at 20 the
bowling was changed, Hudson going on in place of Hay, and H. Lockwood
took the ball at (Jsbome’s end. Bannerman then made the only four in the
innings from one of Hudson’s, landing the bowler to the on over the
boundary. At dinner time, 2 o’clock, the score was 33, Bannerman being
credited with 21 out of the number. On resuming he tailed to increase his
score, being well caught by Osborne from his own bowling. Horan followed
him, and though he was at the wicket for a considerable time, he had not made
a single run. Murdoch fared little better, as he just managed to subscribe a
single before his retirement. Midwinter, during his innings, played very
patiently, though he gave a very hot chance at mid on, which was not accepted.


Biackham also returned without troubling the scorers. Spofforth made a 3
from one of Osborne’s, and then he retired. Midwinter was loudly cheered on
retiring, having been at the wickets four hours for his 43. After this the end
soon came, and the innings realized but 90. The home team sent in young
Lockwood and Lumb to face the bowling of Spofforth and Boyle. After 5
overs had been delivered, all of which were maidens, the stumps were drawn.
Play was resumed on Friday. The weather again proved fine. Boyle
achieved a magnificent feat with the ball, capturing 11 wickets for 12 runs.
None of the Eighteen seemed able to resist him, except Hay, who carried out
bat. Although the weather experienced at Elland on Saturday was of an
adverse character, a large number of persons assembled to witness the conclu-
sion of the above contest. On the previous evening the Eighteen, who wanted
at the commencement of the second innings 146 to win, had lost one wicket
for 8 runs. Lister and Walker resumed batting to the bowling of Spofforth
and Boyle. Before a separation was effected 24 runs were made. Lister
retired at 41, and by the luncheon interval 8 wickets had been disposed of for 52
runs. On resumption the rest gave very little trouble, and by 4 o’clock the
Australians had won by 80 runs.
AUSTRALIANS.
Ist Innings.
C. Bannerman, c and b Osborne ... 21
W. Midwinter, b Osborne... ... 43
I. Horan, c Walker, b Osborne ... o
W. Murdoch, b Osborne ... ... 1
J. Biackham, b Osborne ... ... o
F. Spofforth, b Foster ... ... 3
T. Garrett, b Robinson ... ... 12
D. Gregory, b Osborne ... .. 2
G. H. Bailey, Ibw, b Hay ... 2
H. Boyle, b Hay ... ... ... 3
F. Allan, notout ... ... ... 1
Bye, 1; No ball, 1 ... 2
Total... 90
2nd Innings.
c Kendall, b Osborne ... ... 10
c Lester, b Osborne ... ... 5
c Foster, b Osborne ... ... o
st Aspinall, b Osborne ... 16
b Hay ... ... ... ... o
b Lockwood ... ... ... 2
b Osborne ... ... ... 22
not out... ... ... ... 6
b Hay ... ... ... ... :6
b Osborne ... ... ... 2
c Aspinalßb Hay ... ... 5
Bye 1
ELLAND.
Ist Innings.
H. Lockwood, c Bannerman, b Boyle
Lumb, b Spofforth ...
Lister, c Horan, b Boyle ...
Marsden, b Spofforth
Foster, c Bannerman, b Boyle
Walker, b Spofforth
Osborne, b Boyle ...
Robinson, b Spofforth
Hay, not out
Pennington, b Spofforth ...
Kaye, b Boyle
Byrom, 1 b w, b Boyle
Rev. W. J. Rendle, c & b Boyle ..
Tong, c Bannerman, b Boyle
Hudson, b Boyle
Rev. E. A. Sanford, b Boyle
Aspinall, b Spofforth
Shaw, c Bannerman, b Boyle
Bye
2nd Innings.
2 c sub, b Spofforth .. ... o
o c Bannerman, b Midwinter ... o
2 b Spoffooth ... ... ... 16
2 b Spofforth . ... ... 2
3 b Spofforth ... ... 2
1 b Spofforth ... ... ... 13
o b Boyle ... o
o absent ... ... ... ... o
9 b Spofforth ... ... ... 3
o b Spofforth ... .. ... o
8 b Spofforth ... ... ... 3
o b Spofforth ... .. ... o
o c Murdoch, bMidwinter ... 2
o b Midwinter ... ... ... 2
o run out ... ... ... ... 10
o b Midwinter ... .. ... 1
1 c Garrett, b Spofforth . .. 9
o not out ... ... ... ... o
1 Byes, 2; L. Byes, 1 ... 3
Total 29 Total 66
32


SIXTH MATCH.
AUSTRALIA v. EIGHTEEN OF BATLEY.
The Eleven left Huddersfield by the nine o’clock train on
Sunday night, and reached Batley in half-an-hour, the" distance
travelled being about 10 miles. A few cricketers met them as
they emerged from the carriage, and conducted them to the Station
Hotel close by. There it was found there was insufficient accom-
modation for the Eleven, the landlord only being able to provide
for 7, and so rest had to go to the Talbot, another hotel, a few
hundred yards down the town. Before the Talbot contingent
went their way, an old Yorkshireman came up and said to Charley
Bannerman, who was standing at the door, “ Be they coom yet ?”
“ Who ?” asked Bannerman. “ Whoy, the chaaps !” “ What
chaps ?” “ Whoy, doant you noa the chaaps—the craaketers !”
And Bannerman, laughing, told him that they were the cricketers.
The old man was much astonished to hear it, for he had been led
believe that the Australians were blackfellows.
Next morning they commenced their match against eighteen of the district
with Allan Hill, the well-known bowler. The Batley ground is beautifully
situated at the base of a richly grassed and gently sloping hill, on the summit
of which we could see the ruins of an old castle destroyed by Cromwell. The
ground is not of the best for cricketing purposes, the fielding ground being
very uneven. In this match, unfortunately, the whole enclosure was almost a
marsh, and the players were splashed from head to foot. Dave won the toss,
and, as usual, sent in C. Bannerman and Midwinter to oppose the bowling of
Champion and Ackroyd. Mid. led off with a single past point in Champion’s
first over, and hit Ackroyd also for a single. 3 maidens having been delivered,
Mid. drove Champion hard for a single, and sent Ackroyd to long off for 2
doubles and a single. Bannerman, who, wonderful to relate, had been 20
minutes at the wickets without scoring, now fluked one for a single in the
slips, which caused 10 to appear on the board. Ackroyd, whose balls were
getting up, handed the leather to Hall (his captain), from whose first over a
single by each batsman was scored. Several maidens having been delivered,
Allen Hill relieved Hall, and Bannerman placed his first ball to short leg for a
single. 20 up, nearly all being obtained by Mid,, whose batting now is a treat
to witness. After a few more runs were scored, the players adjourned for
luncheon. On resuming, Bannerman was caught by Champion at short slip
from Hill. 1-6-32. Bannerman was at the wickets for an hour and a half for
6 runs. He says he will never stop so long again for such a small number,
Horan filled the vacancy and finished the over. The rain here came down in
torrents and the players fled for shelter, but the spectators, as usual, kept their
places, and in an hour the downpour ceased. About 4.30 Midwinter and
Horan resumed their places, the pitch at this time being a perfect puddle.
Mid. cut Sykes, who had gone on at Hall’s end, for a single, doing ditto in
Hall’s next. Horan cut Hill for a brace, and then had Sykes to leg for a
couple, sending 40 on the board. 6 more runs had been obtained, when Mid.
was disposed of with a regular trimmer from Hill. 2-28-46. Murdock joined
Horan, and seven or eight maidens followed in succession ; each batsman
secured a single, and Horan 2by a leg hit. 5° U P- Several changes were
made in the bowling, but the runs mounted up by single and doubles to 70,
and so on until 6 p.m,, when the stumps were drawn for 81 ; Horan, not out,
23; Murdoch, notout, 17.


Rain fell all next day, and there was no play. On the third day, the site of
the former being a perfect swamp, a fresh wicket was pitched on more elevated
ground. The score reached 100, then Murdock was caught in the slips.
3-24-102. Alick Bannerman next made a single, and knocked his wicket
down in the coolest manner. 4 for 105. Garrett next, who hit Smith over
the ropes for 4, and after a single had been added, he also hit Hill out of the
bounds for 4. Hill’s next, a beautiful breakback, clean bowled him. Bailey
obtained a couple, and then succumbed to a shooter from Hill. 6-2-127.
Boyle was caught in the slips for o, and Allan took his place. Allan’s curious
style again amused the crowd, and no one thought he would stay long; but he
and Horan made a lengthy stay and brought 140 up on the difficult wicket.
The ball cut all sorts of capers, smothering the batsmen with mud. Horan
now retired with bailer, after a well-earned 50 got against a field of 18 men
and a swamp to bat upon, 8-50-142. Blackham made 5 singles, and was out
leg before wicket. Gregory, the last man, joined Allan. The latter ran out
to Hall, and missing him was smartly stumped. All out for 160.
The Batley team then commenced their innings about 4 p.m., Stockesand
Huntsman at the wickets, Garrett and Boyle bowling. Stockes hit at every
ball, and at 10 was clean bowled by Bailey, who had relieved Garrett. Hunts-
man was stupidly run out for 10; then the wickets fell in rapid succession
until time was called, when 10 were out for 59. In the evening the players
gave us a banquet in Batley Town Hall. The weather and the hotel accom-
modation were both horrible, and the cricketers were right glad when they
the cricketers returned to Huddersfield, which place they left by the 9
■o’clock train for Manchester.
AUSTRALIANS.
Ist innings.
Midwinter, b Hill ... ... 28
C. Bannerman, c Champion b Hill ... 6
Horan, b Hill ... ... ... ... ... ... 50
Murdock, c Swires, b Smith ... ... ... ... 24
A. Bannerman, hit wkt b Smith ... ... ... 1
Garrett, b Hill ... 11
Bailey, b Hill 2
Boyle, c Swires b Smith ... ... ... ... o
Allan, st Stocks b Hill 18
Blackham, Ibw b Sykes... ... ... ... ' ... 5
Gregory, not out ... ... 2
Byes, 9 ; Leg byes, 2 ; Wides, 2 13
Total 160
BATLEY AND DISTRICT.
Ist Innings.
Stocks, b Bailey ... ~ ... ... ... 10
Huntsman, run out ... ... ... ... ... 10
Taylor, c Horan b Midwinter ... ... ... ... 9
Easeby, b Bailey .. ... ... ... ... 2
Ackroyd, c Midwinter b Boyle .. ... .. 6
Sykes, c Horanb Boyle ... ... .. 6
Hall, c Boyle b Midwinter .. ... ... 3
Clegg, c Gregory b Boyle ... .. .. ... 3
Smith, c Horan b Midwinter .. .. ... 1
W. Shaw, st Blackham b Boyle .. ... .. 6
Hill, notout .. ... .. .. .. ~ 1
Swires, not out .. . .. o
Leg byes .. .. .. 2
Total.. .. .. ... 59


Champion
116 Balls
1st innings.
20 Maidens
13 Runs
0 Wickets
Ackroyd
96 „
14 >.
18 „
2
Hall ...
86 „
10
27 „
1
Hill
276 ,,
44 >>
44
5
Sykes ...
24 „
1 ,,
10 ,,
1
Smith ..
, 108 ,,
9
3i „
3
BOWLING ANALYSIS.
Australians.
oiiuui.. .. IUO ~ y „ ~ j „
Stocks 12 ~ I „ 4 ~ O „
Batley.
1st innings.
Garrett 28 Balls 5 Maidens 9 Runs o Wickets
Boyle 72 ~ 10 ~ 29 ~ 4 ~
Bailey 36 ~ 3 ~ 12 ~ 2 ~
Midwinter 56 ~ 8 ~ 7 ~ 3 ~
SEVENTH MATCH.
AUSTRALIA v. EIGHTEEN OF LONGSIGHT.
On arriving at the Waterloo Hotel, the cricketers found
G. F. Grace and Gilbert their fellow-lodgers, who had joined the
Longsight team to meet them on the morrow.
After two or three days’ rain, the ground was nearly as bad as that at Batley,
and the Australian captain having won the toss, sent in Mid. and C. Banner-
man to face the bowling of Sully and Gilbert. Mid. secured a couple past
point off Sully, and Charley drove Gilbert for a single. Mid. saved another
single, when Charley hit hard back to Gilbert who could not hold it; singles
to each batsman sent 10 up, when Mid. was caught at mid-off off Gilbert—
-1-10-19. Horan joined Bannerman, and when the score had been increased
by 7, was clean bowled —-2,1, 26. Murdoch succeeded and Bannerman put
Gilbert out of the bounds ; 30 up, Murdoch was now easily bowled—3-0-35
Alick Bannerman next, and maidens were the order of the day, a couple of
singles to each batsman sent 40 up, when Charley was caught at mid-on by
Norton—4-36-46. Spoff. joined Alick, who hit Gilbert for a couple, but the
Sydney bowler was immediately stumped—s-1-50. Gregoiy, upon his appear-
ance, promptly put away Gilbert for a couple, but Alick was soon bowled
by Hyndes for 6—6-6-52. Garrett, who succeeded, was sent back for o, then
Blackham joined his Captain, when 60 was up ; Gregory was caught oft
Hyndes—B-6-61. Bailey joined Blackham, but lost his partner on a shooter
from Hyndes, and having secured another in Boyle, was taken himself at long-
field-off —10-4-67. Longsight commenced their innings at five, and at six
o’clock had lost five wickets for 19 runs, Grace and Gilbert holding the wickets.
On the second day they brought the score up to 40 before Gilbert was
bowled by Boyle ; G. F. Grace, after being let off four or five times, was at last
secured by C. Bannerman at point after a very fluky innings of 23 ; how the
rest of the team fell before the bowling of Spofforth and Boyle, with a total of
63, may be told in the fact that eight wickets fell to Spoff. for 37, and 7 to
Boyle for 21 runs. The Australians commenced their second innings at four,
Bannerman’s facing Gilbert, and Hyndes bowling from the other end; in
the second over Charley fell to'Hyndes for o—l-0-2. Horan, after storing
three singles, hit Gilbert into Young’s hands at short-leg; Murdoch followed,


and commenced by hitting Hyndes to the off for 3, and then with a
tremendous hit amidst tumultuous applause lifted Gilbert clean out of the
ground and over the railway for 6. The score stood at 30 when Mid. was
caught at cover-point ; Alick and Murdoch made a good stand and brought 50
up, when the latter was bowled by Sully-—4-17-57. Spoff. faced his partner
to see him caught and bowled by Gilbert; Garrett and Gregory followed him,
and were each bowled for o, and at 60 Spoft. was caught at mid-in ; Blackham
was soon taken at short slip, off Sully, and Boyle at the wickets off the same
bowler by Meller, when both innings had closed for the same score. The eighteen
secured 74 for 15 wickets. G. F. Grace being missed two or three times, and
securing the only double figures of the innings, 42. The decisions of the
Longsight umpire were two or three times palpably wrong, and caused much
dissatisfaction. Ihe aggregate attendance of the three days was 26,000,
AUSTRALIAN ELEVEN.
Ist Innings.
Midwinter, c Mills, b Gilbert
O. Bannerman, c. Morton, b Hind
Horan, b Sully
Murdoch, b Gilbert ...
A. Bannerman, b Gilbert ...
Spofforth, st Mellor, b Gilbert
Gregory, c Bonsfield, b Hind
Garrett, b Hind
Blackham, b Hind .
Bailey, c Sully, b Gilbert
Boyle, not out ...
Sundries
Total ... ... ... 67
2nd Innings.
c Bonsfield, b Gilbert... ... 22
b Hind... ... ... ... o
0 rlmd... ... ... ... o
c Young, b Gilbert 3
b Sully... ... ... 17
c and b Gilbert 14
c Norton, b Sully ... ... 3
b Gilbert ... ... ... o
b Gilbert ... ... .. o
c Mills, b Sully ... ... 3
notout... ... o
c Mellor, b Sully .. ... 4
Bye 1
Total ... ... 67
EIGHTEEN OF LONGSIGHT.
Ist Innings.
Clay, run out...
Dixon, c Midwinter, b Boyle
Hare, b Spofforth ...
Young, c Bailey, b Spofforth
G. F. Grace, c C. Bannerman, b
Boyle ...
Wild, b Spofforth
Mellor, run out
W. R. Gilbert, b Boyle
Bonsfield, b Spofforth
Mills, b Boyle
Hodson, b Boyle
Morton, c Murdoch, b Spofforth ...
Hind, cA. Bannerman, b Boyle ...
Sully, 1 b w, b Spofforth
Dakes, not out
Hargreaves, c A. Bannerman, b
Boyle ...
Prest, b Spofforth ...
Ashworth, b Spofforth
Sundries
2nd Innings.
6 c Bailey, b Spofforth ... ... o
2 b Midwinter ... ... ... o
1 b Midwinter ... ... ... 2
7 b Spofforth ... ... ... o
b Midwinter ... ... ... 42
23
o b 80y1e... ... ... ... g
2 st Blackham, b Boyle .. .. 1
11 runout... ... ... / .. 4
0 b Midwinter ... ... ... o
1 b 80y1e... ... ... ... 3
o notout .. ... .. 3
0 not out ... ~
2 b Spofforth ... o
1 b Spofforth ... ... ... o
o b Garrett ... ... ... 0
o d uarrett ... ... .o
2 b Spofforth ... ... ... o
not out o
o b Garrett ... ... ... 6
5 Sundries ... ... 5
Total ... ... ... 63 15 wickets for ... 74
36


BOWLING ANALYSIS.
Australian.
Ist Innings.
Sully ... ... 96 Balls. 18 Maidens. 12 Runs. 1 Wickets.
Gilbert 181 21 40 4
Hind 72 9 12 5
Mills 16 3 1
2nd Innings.
Gilbert 118 Balls. 15 Maidens, 39 Runs, 4 Wickets.
Hind .. ... 76 14 l 6 1
Sully 94 19 8 5
G, F. Grace ... 24 6 2
Longsight.
Ist Innings.
Spofforth 72 Balls. 9 Maidens. 37 Runs. 8 Wickets.
Boyle 108 14 21 7
2nd Innings.
Spofforth 108 Balls. 11 Maidens. 28 Runs. 5 Wickets.
Boyle .. ... 88 9 23 3
Midwinter... ... 48 5 14 4
Garrett ...... 11 1 4 2
The team left Manchester on Saturday the 15th, and on the
following day had a capital trip up the Thames to Windsor, but
just after luncheon the rain, which raineth every day in England,
came down steadily for two hours; they had a peep at Windsor
Castle and the classic grounds of Eton, and were back at the Horse
Shoe Hotel about 10 p.m. They met Sadler sculling upon the
river, whom Trickett beat so gloriously, and they returned saluta-
tions. Monday the 17th was the day fixed for the grand match
against the gentlemen of England at Princes.
EIGHTH MATCH.
AUSTRALIA v. GENTLEMEN OF ENGLAND.
——o
When the team arrived upon the ground it was well lined all
round by spectators, and by 1 p.m. they were standing twenty
deep upon a level turf all round : 14,000 paid for admission at is.,
a great many more at 2s. 6d., and a goodly lot ss. for reserved seast.
The latter were deprived of these by the crowd, and the police
were frightened to attempt to dislodge them in case of an uproar,
those who paid for them having to do the best they could. The
members of the club, accompanied by their families, mustered in
great numbers.
Gregory won the toss from Grace, and sharp at noon the usual pair, Mid-
winter and Bannerman, went in to play on dead wickets. They were opposed
by W, G. Grace and A. C. Steel, the great Cambridge bowler. Twenty


minutes elapsed before the first 10 appeared on the board, composed of singles-
and a 3 to Bannerman, who got Steel to square leg for that number. Maiden
after maiden were then bowled, when the Sydney crack got hold of his
English compeer, and beautifully drove him to the off, for which four resulted.
(Great applause. Twenty up when the Doctor caught Midwinter at point
from his brother’s bowling. 1-6-20. Horan was next sent in, and dragged
the first ball from W. G. to square leg for 2. Two or three more maidens fol-
lowed, Bannerman hitting well, but the sphere beautifully fielded by Strachan.
Each bat scored a single, when Horan got on to Steel and drove him to long-
on for 3, amidst great cheering. Trying to pull Grace’s next, which was a long
hop, round to leg, his stumps were disarranged, and Horan returned to the
Pavilion. 2-7-32. Murdoch appeared on the scene, and maidens were again
the order of the day. Bannerman having broken the spell with a couple of
singles, again drove W. G. past point for 4, and the immense crowd were
becoming excited. The Doctor here relieved Steel, and commenced with his
lobs, his first over being a maiden. A single to each batsman sent 40 up.
Charlie again got hold of the leviathan,and sent him splendidly to the off for 4,
all along the carpet, and was greeted with thunders of applause and bursts of
cheering. Before another was added this brilliant bat hit hard at one of the
Doctor’s lobs, and was beautifully caught by Strachan at mid off. 3-28-44.
Bannerman’s innings was a perfect display of batting, treating all the bowling,
including W. G.’s, with the greatest nonchalance. As he returned to the
Pavilion the crowd was ready to appropriate him in their enthusiasm. Alick
Bannerman was the substitute, and obtained 2 singles, when the inevitable rain
caused the players to seek shelter. Being nearly 2 o’clock luncheon followed,
and play was resumed as soon as possible. Maiden followed maiden, and play
became monotonous. Alick then put W. G. to square leg for a brace, and
getting two more singles, put $o on the semaphore. The bowling was straight,
and the fielding so excellent, that only singles could be obtained. Steel
replaced E. M. Grace, and Murdoch cut one of his first into Hornby’s hands
at cover, and had to retire, having been at the wickets for over an hour for a
single. Spofforth taking his place soon went to work hitting a full toss from
Steel to square leg for 4. 60 up. When 64 were reached Bush well caught
the Sydney trundler at the wickets off W. G.. 5-6 64. Alick was next caught
and bowled by W. G. without altering the register. Allan was had off the
next ball by E. M. Grace off Steel at point, and Garrett stupidly ran himself
out, and the register showed 8-0-64. Blackham and Gregory remained a very
short time, and the Australian captain was caught by Hornby at long on off
W. G. The last man, Boyle, raised the score, with the help of Blackham, to
75, when he was caught at point off Steel. 10-3-75. The innings closed
about 4 p.m., and shortly after W. G. Grace and Gilbert were prepared to do
battle for the gentlemen, opposed to the bowling of Spofforth and Allan. The
former s first over resulted in a leg bye, and Allan led off with a maiden.
W- G. obtained 2 off Spofforth for a fluke, and was then missed at the wickets,
a rather easy chance of catching him on the off side. The leviathan did not
appear to like the bowling at either end, and was much knocked about by
Spofforth on legs and body. He soon made a desperate smite at Spofforth,
and only just put the ball beyond the bowler’s reach for a single. Gilbert sent
S]Dofforth twice to long off for a couple in one over, and 10 went up on the
board. Another of W. G.’s flukes for a brace, and then a single off Allen in
the slips was followed by a hit off Spofforth to square leg for 4, the ball just
crawling to the chains. W. G. again damaged Spofforth’s analysis by sending
him to long on for 4, Boyle making a desperate attempt to stop it. Gilbert
then.had Allan in the slips for 2, and singles to each batsman caused 30 to be
hoisted. Spofforth changed ends, and Boyle relieved Allan. W. G. played
the new trundler to mid off for a couple to short leg for a similar number, and
several singles sent 40 in sight, the appearance of consecutive decades damping
the sprits of the Australians. They were, however, greatly relieved when the
champion, in trying another fluke, was clean bowled by a simple toss from
Boyle. The great player had had a great deal of luck, and had not played
in anything like good form. 1-25-43. Hornby came in, and as usual, com-


menced hitting, obtaining a single from the first ball. Gilbert got another, and
Hornby put Boyle into Allan’s hands at long off, but the Melbourne bowler
•declined it. Hornby’s luck was very good, for the next ball Blackham, too,
let him off at the wickets, the batsman being a yard out of his crease. 50 up.
Spofforth, who had been some time previously relieved by Midwinter, again
took the ball. A double and two singles raised the score to 54, and Blackham
beautifully caught Gilbert after he had completed a good innings for 20.
2-20-54. Lucas joined Hornby ; the score became slow, Boyle being especially
difficult to play. 60 had scarcely appeared on the board when Hornby let out
:at Boyle, and was easily caught at mid on by Spofforth for a streakily obtained
9. 3-9-61. G. F. Grace came in next and gave Murdoch the simplest of
chances at point, but was not held. G. F., in appreciation of his generosity,
sent away the next ball to the ropes for 4. Lucas had Boyle to the off for a
■couple, another couple to Grace, followed by two or three singles, sent 70 up,
when Mid. again relieved Spofforth. After two or three maidens Grace put
Mid. to long leg for 4, and then Lucas’ time was come, as he was caught and
bowled by Boyle. The Doctor joined his brother, and when 3 runs were
.-added G. F. spooned into Spofforth’s hands at mid on. 5-11-77. A. Lyttel-
ton filled the vacancy. Allan relieved Midwinter, and the Doctor made
desperate, but useless efforts to drive him. The noted hitter was also completely
stuck up by Boyle, and when 4 or 5 more singles had been obtained, he was
splendidly caught at the wickets. 6-1-82. A. G. Steel helped Lyttleton to
increase the score to 25, and the stumps were drawn at half-past 6 p.m. Boyle
throughout bowled with great judgment and precision of pitch ; the 6 wickets
were secured for an average of 20 runs. The Sydney bowler was not on the
spot.
Play was resumed at noon on the following day, and Spofforth was then in
much better form, and stuck both bats up considerably. After 4 runs had been
.added, a lightning streak from Spofforth occasioned Steel to return to the
Pavilion, who had played at the ball when his leg stump was half way to long
stop. The two brothers were now in partnership, which, however, was soon
dissolved by Boyle bowling him with a good length ball. 8-1-90. Strachan
filled the breech, and rain again fell in drizzling showers. The ball was soon
soaked, and Boyle, unable to hold it, was knocked about. After 2or 3 singles
Lyttleton had Boyle to the off for 3. A few more and the century went up
.amidst great cheering. Six runs were added when Gregory distinguished him-
self in the slips by catching Lyttleton off Spofforth. 9-16-106. Bush took
his place, and hit Spofforth to deep leg for 4. Strachan skied Boyle to long on
for 4, and Garrett relieved Spofforth. Blackham dropped a chance from Bush
in the new trundler’s first over, and 130 appeared. Mid. took Boyle’s place,
and Allan relieved Garrett. Blackham was all abroad again, missing an easy
chance of stumping Strachan. Bush was at length caught by Murdoch at
point from Mid., after putting 16 together. 10-16-39. The fielding of the
Eleven was far inferior to any of their previous displays on English soil. With
64 runs to the bad they started their second innings with Horan and Midwinter
.as their representatives, W. Grace and A. G. Steel bowling. Horan cut Grace
for a single, and Mid. drove him to the off for 4, but next ball had a life by
Lucas at cover point. Two maidens followed, when Horan placed one of
Steel’s into Strachan’s hands at forward cover. 1-1-5. Alick followed, but
was run out before scoring, and his brother succeeding him, received several
maidens, and was then bowled by Steel, the ball travelling right round his legs.
3-0-14. Spofforth, after luncheon, joined Mid., and commenced hitting hard
at every ball. He soon made 8, and was then caught at mid on by Lyttleton
off W. G. 4-8- 25. Murdoch joined the Infant, who at once sent Steel’s next
to the ropes for 4, a capital hit. Murdoch scored a single. After this disasters
followed each other in rapid succession, and the only batsman making any stand
was Garrett, who got 15, Midwinter’s score finishing at 26. The match was
thus lost to the Australians, who were defeated in 1 innings with 1 run to spare.
The colonials played a plucky game to the end, and could well afford to be
beaten for excellent play. Boyle might well be singled out, and the great
-crowd that had assembled on the ground cheered them to the echo, and insisted


on their repeated reappearance, one Irishman remarking, “and begad they
can’t be winning always ; ” but they soon wiped out their defeat, and re-com-
menced their triumphant tour.
AUSTRALIANS.
ist Innings.
C. Bannerman, c Strachan, b E. M.
Grace ...
Midwinter, c E. M. Grace, b W. G.
Grace...
T. Horan, b W. G. Grace ...
W. Murdoch, c Hornby, b Steel ...
A. Bannerman, c and b Steel
F. Spofforth, c Bush, b W. G. Grace
T. Garrett, run out ...
F. Allan, c E. M. Grace, b Steel
D, Gregory, c Hornby, b W, G.
Grace ...
J. Blackham, not out
H. Boyle, c E. M. Grace, b Steel
Bye, X : Leg byes, 3
Total... ... ... 75
2nd Innings.
b Steel ... ... ... ... o
c Hornby, bW. G. Grace ... 26
c Strachan, b Steel ... ... 1
c Bush, b Steel ... ... 7
run out... ... ... ... o
cA. Lyttelton, bW. G. Grace 8
cG. F. Grace, b Steel ... 15
b Steel ... ... ... ... o
cE. Lyttelton, b Steel ... o
cW. G. Grace, b Steel ... 5
not out ... ... ... ... o
Bye 1
Total ... ... 63
BOWLING ANALYSIS.
ist Innings.
W. G. Grace 208 Balls. 38 Maidens. 25 Runs. 4 Wickets.
Steel 129 17 39 4
E. M. Grace 76 12 9 1
2nd Innings.
W. Ct. Grace 108 Balls. 14 Maidens. 27 Runs. 2 Wickets.
Steel 107 8 35 7
GENTLEMEN OF ENGLAND
ist Innings.
W. G. Grace, b Boyle ... ... ... ... 2 5
W. R. Gilbert, c Blackham, b Boyd ... ... ... 20
A. N. Hornby, c Spofforth, b Boyle ... ... ... 9
A. Lucas, c and b Boyle ... ... ... ... ••• 6
G. F. Grace, c Spofforth, b Boyle ... ... ... n
E. M. Grace, c Blackham, b Boyle ... ... ... 1
Hon. E. Lyttelton, b. Boyle ... ... ... ... 1
Hon. A. Lyttelton, c. Gregory, b Spofforth 16
A. G. Steel, b Spofforth 5
G. Strachan, not out ... ... ... ... ••• 21
J. A. Bush, c. Murdoch, b Midwinter 16
Byes, 6; Leg-byes, 2 ... ... 8
Total 139
BOWLING ANALYSIS
ist Innings.
Spofforth ~ 140 Balls. 13 Maidens. 53 Runs. 2 Wickets.
Allan ... ... ... 80 14 14 o
Boyle ... ... ... 140 ii 4$ 7
Midwinter ... ... 6 15 1
Garrett 12 I 4 0
40


THE DISPUTE WITH GRACE.
The Australian cricketers stood pluckily to their work in all
their matches, notwithstanding that some of the crack players
followed them from county to county, a by no means fair
proceeding ; and that the so-called Gentlemen Cricketers who beat
the team at Prince’s was not really wholly composed of Gentle-
men Cricketers. Messrs. W. G. Grace and Gilbert received a
sum of for their services, and when Mr. Conway raised an
objection to it, it was asserted that W. G. Grace, G. F. Grace,
and Gilbert were invariably paid for playing. It is manifestly
unfair that such men should be included in an Amateur and Gen-
tleman team. Notwithstanding that the Eleven accepted this
verdict so quietly, they were subjected to further annoyances, which,
however, were subsequently fairly if tardily apologised for. Just
before the match with Middlesex was commenced; and Mid-
winter, who had played in every match, being with the cricketers
in the pavilion, W. G. Grace and Bush, hearing of it and being
evidently desirous of Australia’s further defeat, came into the pavilion
and entered into conversation with Midwinter. The result of
this was that Midwinter, under his engagement with Gloucester,
was compelled to go and join in a match with Glouscester against
Surrey at Kennington Oval. A great deal of unpleasantness
arose from this untimely interference ; and as if bent on creating
mischief, Grace said on leaving the ground, “You haven’t the
ghost of a show with Middlesex.” Perhaps the result of the
match surprised him somewhat; and then to complete the halo
of success which surrounded the team, Surrey, which the Austra-
lians beat by 5 wickets, defeated the Great Western County with
all the cracks, including Midwinter, by x 6 runs. After a con-
sultation subsequently held, the Australians determined not to
play against Gloucestershire until Grace made a suitable apology
for his conduct.
Some interesting intelligence appears in the Melbourne papers concerning
the quarrel between Grace and the Australian cricketers. It appears that he
made, in the first place, a sort of apology, to Boyle and Gregory, but left out
Conway. This did not suit the Australians, and as Grace said he would make
no further apology, they resolved not to play at Gloucester. Since then the
great man seems to have changed his mind, and this a copy of a letter sent to
Gregory :
“The Cottage, Fingswood Hill,
“ Bristol, July 21.
“Dear Sir, —I am sorry that my former expressions of regret to the Austra-
lian cricketers have not been considered satisfactory. Under the circumstances,
and without going further into the matter, I wish to let bygones be bygones.
I apologise again, and express my extreme regret to Conway, Boyle, and your-
self, and through you to the Australian cricketers, that in the excitement of
the moment I should have made use of unparliamentary language to Mr.
Conway. I can do no more, but assure you that you will meet a hearty
welcome and a good ground at Clifton.
“Yours truly, W. G. Grace.”
41


NINTH MATCH.
AUSTRALIA v. MIDDLESEX.
This match took place at Lord’s Ground on Thursday, the 20th
June, and was witnessed by an assemblage of between 7000 and
8000 persons. The weather was beautiful. Great interest was.
manifested in this match.
At 12 minutes past 12 the Middlesex Captain, having one the toss, sent the
Australians to the wickets. The brothers Bannerman were not long taking,
their places opposed to the bowling of Henderson and Hadow. Off Hender-
son’s first over Alick scored 4 for a nice hit to square leg, Charley then got 2:
for an off drive. The last ball of Henderson’s next over, however, proved
fatal to Alick, as he was well caught by Hadow at point. 1-4-6. His place
was taken by Horan, who, after scoring a single, was well caught by A.
Lyttelton at long on. 2 for 12 appeared on the board when Gregory succeeded,
only to see Charley Bannerman caught at point. Garrett then filled the
vacancy. Gregory obtained 3 for an off drive, and Garrett obtained 1 for a hit to
the on. Slowly the score reached 28, when Garrett got hold of both bowlers,
and drove each of them for 4. This brought Robertson on at Hadow’s end,
and the last ball of the over dismissed Garrett for a quickly and pluckily got
19. 4 for 39. Spof. joined his captain, and at once gave an easy chance to
Spof. at long on, the result being 3 runs. In the last ball of the following over
Spof. shared the same fate as Garrett, for, in attempting a leg hit, he was clean
bowled. 5 out for 45 was the state of the poll when Murdock came to the
rescue, but he did not trouble the scorers, being caught at point after standing
a couple of overs. Bailey followed, and then Dave drove Robertson for two
2’s, which caused 5° to be telegraphed. Gregory then drove Henderson for
2. Bailey opened his account by a drive for 3, and then sent Robertson to
square leg for 4. Here Robertson changed ends, Hadow going on at the other,
Bailey got 4 for an off drive of Robertson and a square leg hit for 2, and Dave
drove him for 3, all off the same bowler. I. D. Walker then relieved Robert-
son, and off his first over Bailey obtained 6 by 2 drives of 2 and 4 res-
pectively. The players here adjourned for luncheon. Play was resumed at 13
minutes to 3, Dave Gregory obtaining a couple in the slips off the first over.
The next 8 overs produced 7 singles, causing the century to go up amidst great
cheering, the batsmen appearing well set. Various changes in the play were
resorted to, Gregory driving Henderson to the on for a couple, well to square
leg for 3, and a fine on drive for 4 off the other bowler, while in the meantime
Bailey had put away the same bowler for 3. Just as 120 had gone up, this
gentleman was caught at point. 7-39-124. He was greatly cheered as he
returned to the pavilion. He had played a fine and very fair innings. Black-
ham was the eighth man, and immediately commenced his account with a
single ; but Gregory, attempting another drive, tipped the ball into Lyttelton’s
hands at short leg. 8-42-125. His chief hits had been 3 fours, 3 threes, and
4 twos. He was third in with the score at 12, and eighth out with the total
125. His 11 previous innings had only secured a total of 23, and most persons
had come to the conclusion that he could not bat even a little bit. This com-
ing out of his shell created intense astonishment ; his form was magnificent,
and from first to last he did not give the slightest shadow of a chance. The
way in which the crowd cheered him as he returned to the pavilion, was some-
thing to be remembered. Boyle filled the vacancy. Hadow again took the
ball, and when 11 had been added to the score, Boyle was adjudged run out, a
very doubtful decision and not the first doubtful one even in this match. 9-5-136.
Allan offered the usual amount of amusement to the spectators, but set himself
industriously at work to score. This, however, he could only do slowly in
spite of well-meant efforts, and he kept his wicket for a long time, 150 and
42


160 appearing before he played one upon his foot, from which it cannoned on
to the wicket. He made one beautiful hit to the pavilion for 4. 10-15-165.
Blackham’s play for 20, not out, was very deservedly applauded.
It was about half-past four when Walker and Webb appeared to bat for
Middlesex ; Spofforth and Boyle bowling. The Demon’s attempts were
■severely punished ; at first Walker made a single off the second ball, and Webb
put the next through the slips for 4. Spoff.’s fourth over was alike disastrous ;
.the second ball Walker placed to square-leg for 4, and broke his bat in driving
at the last ball. The following overs from the same bowler, he put him
through the slips and drove him to the off for 2 each, while in the meantime,
Webb had only made a single, while Boyle had sent down 8 overs for 3
runs. Webb then hit Boyle to leg for 4, the ball almost grazing Bannerman’s
head at comet-like speed. Twenty-five had been reached, nearly all from
Spofforth’s bowling, when Allan relieved Boyle, and still the runs came, 30 and
40 quickly appearing, Mr. Webbe driving the fast bowler to the off for 3, when
Garrett took the ball from him. Mr. Walker still kept the pace hot—an off
drive, and a cut for two couples, and a 3 to leg, off two overs from Allan ;
but after snicking Garrett for 4 he was caught off the same bowler at short-leg
—l-24-46. Hadow commenced by sending Garrett to leg for 2 ; but from the
same bowler the next ball—a fast shooter —was too many for him. The Hon. A.
Lyttlelton joined ,Webb, who hit Garrett to square leg for 4, and Lyttleton
getting a single from the other end, the same batsman made an off-drive for 2
off Garrett, and the 2’s, 3’s, and 4’s came at an alarming rate, both batsmen
hitting hard and vigorously. At 81 Boyle relieved Allan, and Bailey super-
seded Garrett, but not until after the Demon had made another unsuccessful
attempt. In Boyle’s first over, Lyttleton gave the wicket-keeper a chance
which was missed. Bailey commenced badly, 6 runs coming oft his first over,
while Lyttleton drove him to the pavilion, the ball being muffed by Spoft.
50, 60, 70, 80, 90 had gone up in rapid succession, and now the too was
registered amidst tumultuous applause. Garrett and Allan now had the bowl-
ing, and changing ends made a wonderful alteration in the aspect of affairs.
Allan’s third ball—a regular trimmer —clean bowled the Oxonian —3-50-107.
He had had three chances, but the 50 contained six 4’s, four 3’s, and four 2’s.
Hon. E. Lyttleton joined his brother, but after 4 runs had been added Mr.
Alfred came to grief by playing Garrett on—4-25-1 11. A complete route now set
in, Webbe no sooner faced the bowler than he was sent back — 5"°' 111 • Scott
was the next to come and also the next to go ; an appeal for a catch at the
wicket having been made, Scott stepped out of his ground before the decision
was given and immediately paid the penalty, being stumped by Blackham.
Studd was bowled by Allan for o, and Henderson having snicked Allan
for 2 and driven him to the on for 3, was sent back with a regular trimmer
from Garrett, and the very next ball disposed of the new comer, Salmon.
The innings terminated with a total of 122.
Garrett’s bowling was splendid. He took seven wickets for 38 runs ; and
Allan getting into his own style, got three for 27. Blackham’s wicket-keeping
was simply superb, his smart actions bringing forth rounds of applause.
On the following day, Friday, the weather was even finer than at the com-
mencement of the match, the attendance reaching 10,000. At twelve o clock
the brothers Bannerman appeared amidst great cheering, Henderson and
Hadow bowling. Alick made a single, and Charley drove Henderson for
2, the younger brother putting Hadow through the slips for a similar number.
With a total of 11 he was caught at cover-point for 3. Horan followed, and
Charley put Mr. Henderson well to the oft for 4. Horan got him to leg for 2,
and was caught at the wickets off the same bowler’s next over—2-2-13.
Sydney Crack was joined by his Captain, and immediately got 4 by a late cut
and on drive off Hadow. Gregory cemented the partnership by on and off
drives for the same quantity. Thirty went up on the board almost entirely
from doubles, and then Charley was clean bowled by Henderson for 23, made
in his usual dashing style— 3-23-35- Garrett filled the vacancy, and had a life
off the first ball. In great gratitude for his escape he sent Henderson to
square leg for 4, and through the slips for 2, while the Captain kept up the fun


by driving him to the off for 4, the pace getting hot. Garrett was very hot on
Hadow with pn and oft drives for 4 and 2 respectively. The score standing
at 59, Robertson relieved Henderson, and at 69 the runs coming very fast,
E. Lyttleton went on instead of Hadow. The slow underhand lobs exactly
suiting the batsman. Gregory drove the fast bowler for 4, and repeated the
performance in the next over. Robertson changed ends at 87, and Henderson
relieved Lyttleton; 70 and 80 having appeared in a few minutes. When 4 singles
had been added the luncheon bell rang with the score at 91. Garrett and
his Captain running a close race with 32 and 33 respectively,and not out. After
luncheon, Garrett made a flukey couple in the slips; but the next ball, made a
lofty hit to long-on, and Studd made a well-judged catch—4-34-93. Garrett
retired after a very lively innings amidst ringing applause from the spectators.
And now came the great Sydney trundler, who was destined to distinguish
himself with the top score for his side. To welcome him the Captain made a
grand hit off Henderson to the on for 4, and a cut from the other end
for 3. Spoff.’s first contrbution was to leg for a brace, and Gregory
again put Henderson away for 4, 100 and 110 appearing within 3 minutes.
This, however, was Gregory’s last run. After 4 splendid exhibition of cricket
he had scored 42 as in the first innings, without giving a single chance, having
tied the score he made in the first innings. It must have been with feelings of
intense relief that that the Middlesex men saw him retrace his steps. The en-
thusiasm of the spectators, and especially the ladies, must have been very grati-
fying to the captain. Murdoch joined Spofforth, and the latter began hitting
safely and grandly. He made 14 runs off 3 overs, off Robinson, by an on and
straight drive and a cut for 4 each, and 2 to square leg. The tens went up alarm-
ingly fast. Hadow relieved Robertson at 129. Spof. sent Henderson to square
leg for 4, and this was the prelude for somewhat smaller scoring. Hadow sent
six maiden overs in succession, and then the “Australian Express” again pun-
ished Henderson to the tune of 6 in one over—leg on and off drives and a cut
for 2 each. Scott relieved the bowler at 142. Spof. put him away for 1, Mur-
doch drove him for 4, and there were 4 byes. At 20 minutes to 4 the
total was 150, and the cheering loud and prolonged. 9 runs were added, and
Scott clean bowled Murdock. 6-13-159. Bailey now came in, and the newly-
partnered Spof. assisted him to make the scoring rapid. Bailey made Bin one
over off Henderson, by an on drive and square leg hit. As 170 appeared,
I. D. Walker went on instead of Hadow, and then Bailey had a life at point
off Henderson, and he was prompt to show his gratitude by putting his next to
leg for 4. Runs came apace. Spof. scoring a couple of doubles off Scott,
caused 180 to be hoisted, and that bowler was relieved by Henderson. The
“ Express ” welcomed him with two splendid drives, and 8 more were added to
the score, and the “electric spark,” just half satisfied, totted on 7 more to the
score. He was now caught at the wicket, and was cheered to the echo. He
had made the highest and best Australian score in England. His 56 runs were
got in less than an hour by the most brilliant and dashing cricket, and there
was only one chance, and that a very difficult one, in the whole
performance. His chief hits were—five 4’s, two 3’s, and twelve 2’s.
7-56-197. Blackham joined Bailey, who was doing as he pleased with the
bowling. At half-past four 200 was up, followed very quickly by 210, Bailey
putting Henderson away for two 4’s in succession. Blackham, encouraged by
the example, commenced to score rapidly— 4to square leg off Walker, 2in the
same place, and an on drive at the other end, sending 220 up. Webb now
came on, and opened his over of “underhand peculiars,” his style producing
much merriment, and the change not doing much good. Henderson displaced
Hadow at 229, and Webb gave way to Robertson at 235. The last change
worked, as in the second over from Robertson Bailey was clean bowled with
the second ball. 8-32-240. Boyle filled the vacancy, but had to retire imme-
diately, the next ball of the same over dislodging his stumps. Allan’s fate was no
better, for he also was clean bowled with the fourth ball of the over—an achieve-
ment for which Mr. Robertson was loudly cheered. 10-0-240. The bowling
of the Middlesex team had been fairly collared, and with a very little patience
the Australians could have run their score into a fourth century.


AUST
KALIANS.
1st Innings.
2nd Innings.
C. Bannerman, c Hadow, b Hen-
b Henderson ...
23
derson
8
A. Bannerman, c Henderson, b
c Scott, b Hadow
3
Hadow
4
T. Horan, c A. Lyttelton, b Hadow
i
c Salmon, b Henderson
2
D. Gregory, c E. Lyttelton, b Hen-
c Hadow, b Henderson
42
derson
42
T, Garrett, b Robertson ...
19
c Studd, b Henderson...
34
F. Spofforth, b Robertson ...
6
c Salmon, b Henderson
56
G. Bailey, c Hadow, b Henderson
39
b Robertson
32
W. Murdoch, c Hadow, b Hender-
b Scott ...
13
son ... ...
o
J. Blackham, not out
20
not out ...
21
H. Boyle, run out ...
5
b Robertson ... ... ...
O
F. Allan, b Robertson
i5
b Robertson
O
Byes, 4 ; Leg byes, 2
6
Byes, io ; L. b., 3 ; W. i
14
The Middlesex team were heavily handicapped when they went to the
wickets, with 284 runs to get to win. E. Lyttleton and Webb faced Allan
and Garrett, and the attendance had increased to 12,000 persons. Lyttleton
drove the last of Allan’ first over to the on for 2, and a single in "his next, but
was splendidly caught by Blackham, off Garrett, at the wicket. 1-3-6. Gar-
rett’s bowling was dead on the wicket. Scott joined Studd, when the latter
was clean bowled by Allan ; and W. H. Webbe, the substitute, played Allan
on to his wicket. As Hadow came to the wicket, his partner became unfortu-
nate, Scott being caught at point off a hot one from Garrett. Walker then faced
Hadow, and as speedily lost his partner, for Hadow was clean bowled by
Allan. 5-0-14. A series of misfortunes such as these might have discouraged
the best eleven, but the Hon. E. Lyttleton, facing Walker, turned the scale of
fortune in their favour for a time, and the Australians were treated to as fine a
dose of leather-hunting as they had yet encountered on British soil. Mr. Wal-
ker made 11 runs in 3 overs from Garrett, —4 to leg, and cuts for 3 and 4.
Lyttleton cut the Melbourne bowler for 4, and sent Garrett to leg for another
quartette. At 42 Spofforth relieved Garrett, and the score mounting steadily
to 71, Boyle relieved the “ Electric Spark,” and with his third ball disposed of
I. D. Walker, who had well earned his 23. The decisions of Nixon,
the umpire, were most unsatisfactory, for both batsmen had been called
leg before wicket, but he decided against the Australians, and the Hon. E.
Lyttleton was heard to remark, “Quite right, Nixon.” Once, it is stated,
Lyttleton was hit right before the wicket, but a verdict against him could not
be procured. Webb filled the vacancy. At 6 p.m., when the stumps were
drawn, the score stood at 79.
There was another good attendance on the third day, about 5000 persons
being present. Allan and Garrett resumed the bowling. Runs again came
rapidly, Lyttleton getting two 4’s and a double in Allan’s second over. 100
was up in a few minutes. Spof. took Allan’s place. Lyttleton got three 4’s in
succession off his first over. Boyle relieved Garrett, and Horan relieved Spof.,
but still the runs came. Boyle made place for Allan, and then the change
came off, Webb being bowled with a leg break. 7-17-148. Robertson hit
Garrett for 4, then Allan dismissed him with a Yorker, Lyttleton meantime
scoring off every ball. 8 for 162. Henderson was soon bowled by Garrett.
Salmon succeeding him, and at last Lyttleton came to grief in the slips, off
Allan. He played a magnificent innings for 113, made in two hours and a
quarter. He gave two chances in addition to the l.b.w.’s, but they were diffi-
cult ones. The innings concluded for a total of 185, leaving the Australians
victors by 98 runs. Allan’s bowling was good—6 wickets for 76 runs on a fast
ground. Spof. did not come off at all.
Total 165 Total 240


BOWLING ANALYSIS.
Ist Innings.
Henderson ... ... 192 Balls. 20 Maidens. 60 Runs. 4 Wickets.
Hadow ... ... 140 14 47 2
Robertson ... ... 83 10 31 3
Walker ... ... 28 1 18 o
18 o
Scott... ... ... 20 3 30
2nd Innings.
Henderson 208 18" 96 5
Hadow ... ... 168 19 59 1
Robertson ...... 64 6 35 3
Hon. E. Lyttelton... 24 2 6 o
I. D. Walker
32 2 14 o
32 3 15 1
A. J. Webbe
24 2 40
MIDDLESEX.
Ist Innings.
A. J. Webbe, b Allan
I. D. Walker, c C. Bannermaii, b
iKicHw*" Garrett
2nd Innings,
b Allan ... ... ... ... o
b 80y1e... ... ... ... 23
W. H. Hadow, b Garrett ...
Hon. A. Lyttelton, b Garrett
Hon. E. Lyttelton, b Allan
H. R. Webbe, b Garrett ...
S. Scott, st Blackham, b Garrett
J. E. K. Studd, b Allan ...
R. Henderson, b Garrett ...
E. H. Salmon, b Garrett ...
b Allan... ... ... ... o
c Blackham, b Garrett ... 3
c Gregory, b Allan ... ... 113
b Allan ... ... ... 17
c Murdock, b Garrett ... ... 3
b Allan ... ... ... ... 7
b Garrett ... ... ... 7
not out ... ... ... ... 5
J. Robertson, not out
Ryes, 5 ; Leg bye, 1
b Allan ... ... ... ... 4
Leg byes, 2 ; Wide, 1... 3
Total... ... ... 122
Total 185
BOWLING ANALYSIS.
Middlesex.
Ist Innings.
Spofforth 88 Balls. 13 Maidens. 29 Runs. • o Wickets.
Boyle 51 12 16 o
Allan ... ... 80 7 27 3
Garrett 120 15 38 7
Horan ... ...40 60
2nd Innings.
Allan 167 16 76 6
Garrett 80 14 44 3
Boyle 24 o 13 1
Spofforth 56 3 34
Horan ... ... 12 o 13
The team were treated to a magnificant luncheon at the Welsh
Harp Hotel, Hendon, and left by the 5 p.m. train on Sunday for
Birmingham. The Home News says:—
THE CHANCES OF CRICKET.
The old saying that “ a game of cricket is not lost till its “ won ”
is receiving fresh corroboration every day. There have been times
in the recent big matches between the Australians and our best
elevens when victory inclined to either side. The fall of five


wickets of the Middlesex eleven to fourteen runs in the last great
match at Lord’s promised to bring the Australians more strongly
to the front than ever. But the prowess of a single hand promptly
changed the state of affairs. Mr. Lyttelton’s splendid score of
one hundred and thirteen somewhat abated what at one time
promised to be an overwhelming triumph for the Australians.
These chances and changes warrant the inference that our
cricketers may yet do something to retrieve their laurels before the
season is ended. It becomes more and more plain that the Aus-
tralian strength is mainly in the bowling and fielding. As to the
former, Mr. Spofforth’s skill is extraordinary—he appears to be
one of the players who can supplement tremendous speed with the
astutest and coolest of minds. It is true that he is not always in
the best “ form,” and when off his play his bowling gets hand-
somely knocked about. But then his team can replace him with
others little less effective than himself. Again, in fielding, the
agility of the Australians is quite wonderful. Batting alone
appears a weak point, and perhaps this may in the long run bring
them and their opponents nearer together.
TENTH MATCH,
AUSTRALIA V. TWENTY-TWO OF BIRMINGHAM.
This match which was unfinished for want of time was com-
menced on the 27th June at Boarnbrook, near Birmingham.
Jupp and Barratt of Surrey playing with the twenty-two.
The two Bannermans faced Barratt and Talboys and twenty soon
succeeded ten, and when four more runs had been added the crack
lifted Barratt to long on and Allan secured a difficult catch. 1-17-24.
His successor Horan only made a single and a brace, and was sent to the
pavilion by Talboys. 2-3-27. Gregory succeeded the Victorian, and at
luncheon time the score stood at seventy-one. Immediately afterwards Gregory
got a couple of triplets and Talboys sold him with a head ball. 3-6-37.
Garrett letting out in free style at the first ball had his leg stump floored.
4-0-39. Spofforth was next. Alick secured a couple, and Spoffbrth by
spirited cricket ran up sixteen, and was caught at long on. 5 for 61. Murdock
came on and the two raised the score to eighty-four, when Alick lost his part-
ner who played Talboys on. 6-11-84. Bailey came next, and the Rev, O.
Mordaunt relieved Barratt, he soon deceived Bailey with his lobs, who had
made eight in three hits. 7-8-97. Jupp stumped Blackham before he had
time to score, and Boyle succumbed to a “fast slow.” 9 for 97. Allan only
made four singles, and the innings closed at forty minutes past five for 105.
Alick, the stonewaller of the team, who had been five hours at the wickets,
carried his bat through scoring 31 without a chance. He was greatly
applauded on returning to the tent, and an old gentleman was heard offering
to bet anyone that the whole of the twenty-two could not bowl him out in a


3 1
b Ratcliff
... 16
i7
st Jupp, b Barrett
•• 3i
3
c Preston, b Barrett ...
... 13
6
run out ...
... 22
o
c Price, b Mordaunt ...
... 16
16
b Tallboys
... 15
ii
not out ...
0
8
not out ...
0
o
4
9
9
Sundries
- 3
6 wickets for
... 116
week. The Rev. O. Mordaunt secured four wickets for three runs off twenty-
three overs, twenty of which were maidens, but nearly all his bowling fell to
the lot of Bannerman, who contented himself with carefully stopping them.
Allen and Firth represented the twenty-two, and Allan and Spofforth were
bowling. The former was immediately stumped, and Docker was the incomer
when the stumps were drawn. There were eight thousand spectators present,
the weather being magnificent.
On the following day play commenced at half-past twelve, and both Docker
and Firth fell to Spofforth. Jupp and Barratt, now together made a fair stand
until the former also fell to Spofforth, and Barratt to Garrett, who had relieved
Allan. The only noticeable features in the remainder of the innings was the
play of Preston and Price. The twenty-two being disposed of for one hundred
and twenty-three. Allan bowled up to his best form, and Spofforth got eleven
wickets for sixty runs. Blackham’s dexterity at the wickets evidently aston-
ished the spectators, and it has been pretty generally admitted in England that
he is at present superior to any English wicket-keeper. At half-past four the
Bannermans again appeared at the wickets, and the elder one slated the bowl-
ing severely, three times in an over he sent Mordaunt to the long field, on, once
for four and twice for three, but at last in running out to slate Barratt he missed
him and was stumped by Jupp. Horan joined Alick, and when the stumps
were drawn they were respectively eleven and fourteen not out. At noon on
the third day, Alick having added a couple was sent to the pavilion for 16.
The captain supplied his place, but Horan was caught off Barratt. 3-12-66.
Garrett associated himself with Gregory, and seeing too many men about the
field, after having hit Barratt twice for three in an over, lifted him clean out of
the bounds over the heads of the spectators and into the middle of an artificial
lake adjoining. A boat had to be secured, and it was some minutes before they
secured the ball. At the close of the fishing excursion, Barratt handed the leather
to Talboys and Mordaunt came on at the other end, the performances of the
eleven creating quite a furore of excitement. At 87 Garrett was caught at long
on. 4-16-87. Spofforth taking his place commenced hitting hard, and one
hundred ran up. Gregory had been playing steadily, and when his score had
reached twenty-two was stupidly run out. Spofforth immediately fell to
Talboys, and just as Bailey had joined Murdock, a heavy thunderstorm lasting
for the remainder of the afternoon put a stop to the play with every prospect
of another victory to the Australians had time and weather permitted.
AUSTRALIAN ELEVEN.
Ist Innings.
2nd Innings.
A. Bannerman, not out
C. Bannerman, c Allan, b Barrett
Horan, b Tallboys
Gregory, b Tallboys
Garrett, b Tallboys
Spofforth, c Perkins, b Tallboys
Murdoch, b Tallboys
Bailey, b Mordaunt..
Blackham, st Jupp, b Mordaunt
Allan, c Docker, b Mordaunt
Boyle, b Mordaunt ..
Sundries ...
Total .. ... 105
BOWLING ANALYSIS.
Tallboys .. 224 Balls 37 Maidens 37 Runs 5 Wickets.
Barratt ... 192 ~ 25 ~ 47 ~ 1 ~
Preston ... 28 ~ 6 ~ 1 ~ o ~
Mordaunt ... 92 ~ 20 ~ 3 ~ 4 ~
Smallwood 36 ~ 6 ~ 7 ~ o ~


BIRMINGHAM TWENTY-TWO.
Ist Innings.
Docker, b Spofforth .. .. ... ... ... 6
Allan, st Blackham, b Allan ... ... ... ... o
Firth, st Blackham, b Spofforth ... ... ... ... 2
Tallboys, runout ... ... .. ... ... ... o
Jupp, b Spofforth ... .. ... . .. ... 12
Barratt, b Garrett... ... ... ... . . ... 16
Mordaunt, b Spofforth ... ... ... ... ... 6
Brown, b Spofforth ... ... ... ... .. 1
Ratliff, b Spofforth .. ... ... ... ... O
Williams, b Garrett .. ... ... ... .. 4
Wicklow, b Garrett .. ... ... .. •• o
Preston, c Allan, b Spofforth ... ... ... ... 11
Elliott, b Spofforth .. ... .. ... ... 3
Albert, b Spofforth .. .. .. .. ... 6
Smallwood, b Allan ... ... ... .. ... 9
Perkins, Ibwb Spofforth ... ... ... ... 8
Price, c Bannerman, b Allan ... ... .. ... 12
Jones, b Allan ... .. .. .. ... ... o
Pears, c Horan, b Spofforth .. ... .. ... 3
Maulin, notout .. ... .. .. ... ... 9
Preston, Jim., c Bailey, b Spofforth .. .. ... 3
Glover, b Allan ... .. ... ... .. ... o
Sundries ... ... ... ... ... 12
total 123
BOWLING ANALYSIS
Allan ... too Balls 20 Maidens 7 Runs 6 Wickets.
Spofforth ... 160 ~ 11 ~ 60 ~ 11 ~
Garrett ... 80 „ 8 ~ 23 ~ 3 ~
Boyle ... 28 ~ 4 ~ 11 ~ o ~
The team left Birmingham on the 26th, and reached the
Hunslett ground to play Eighteen of Leeds.
ELEVENTH MATCH.
AUSTRALIA v. EIGHTEEN OF LEEDS.
Gregory won the toss, and with a fast wicket decided to send
in his men.
The two Bannermans faced Bates and A. Hill, and at fifteen Alick was
given out, l.b.w. Horan joining Charlie ran the score up to thirty-seven.
when he was struck on the chest by the ball which cannoned to the wicket.
2-11-37, Motley deliberately throwing the ball. He himself hitherto unchal-
lenged, admitting the charge, Gregory decided, Satan reproving sin. that, if
Motley continued the team should abandon the match, and after some dis-
cussion he was displaced by A. Hill. After luncheon Gregory and Bannre-
man gave the Eighteen a rare treat in leather hunting until at 104 Bannerman
sent one into Plill’s hands. Garrett was not less easy on the bowling hitting,


the first ball he received out of the bounds and repeating the dose the next
over. Gregory was now caught and bowled by Hall and Spofforth took his
place 4-31-117, The two added 27 when Garrett was caught in long field
5-27-144. Murdoch did not score, and Bailey had scarcely partnered Spofforth
when the latters leg stump was dislodged by Blackburn ; Conway a substitute
for Blackham, who had hurt his finger played Blackburn on, and Allan came
in; Bailey was now caught at point, and Boyle and Allan entered into a
partnership for the rest of the day, the score standing at 175, when the stumps
were drawn at noon. Next day play was resumed, and when Boyle was
caught at mid off, 10-10-205 was the score. Allan had scored 38 amidst the
great merriment of the onlookers. The weather was delightfully fine, and
there were 4000 spectators present. Britton and Hill faced Allan and
Spofforth, and the Twenty-two ran the score up to 228 before the last man
was secured. The Australians Second Innings commenced unfortunately, but
Murdoch and Garrett for 49 and 48 respectively, and Boyle and Horan for 28
and 24, brought the total to 180, Boyle’s display being very fine, and Garrett’s
the very best form he can show. The Eighteen in their Second Innings lost
nine wickets for twenty-eight runs, Hall, Jarman, Hindle, Landon, and
Gilbert failing to score ; when twenty-eight runs had been secured at half-past
six time was called. This was said to be the strongest Eighteen which had
ever been got together in Yorkshire, and the general impression had been
that the Australians would be completely routed.
AUSTRALIAN ELEVEN.
Ist Innings.
C. Bannerman, c Hale b Blackburn
A. Bannerman, Ibw b Hill
Horan, b Motley ..
Gregory, c and b Hall
Garrett c Jarman b Bates
Spofforth, b Blackburn ..
Murdock, c Hill b Blackburn
Bailey, c Motley, b Bates..
Allan, not out
Boyle, c Britton b Bates ..
Conway, b Blackham
Sundries
Total
2nd Innings.
52 b Yates ... .. .. 5
3 c Myers b Bates .. .. 3
11 run out .. . .. 24
31 c Landon b Bates .. .. I
27 b Blackburn .. .. 48
14 Spillman b Myers .. .. o
o c Hill b Gilbert .. .. 49
4 b Bates .. .. .. 8
38 b Bates .. .. ..
10 notout .. .. .. 28
o c Britton b Gilbert.. .. o
15 Sundries .. .. 7
Total
BOWLING ANALYSIS.
Ist Innings.
Bates 109 Balls 5 Maidens 53 Runs 3 Wickets
Hill .. .. 164 ~ 21 ~ 44 »» 1
Reynolds .. 60 ~ II ~ 10 ~ o ~
Motley .. 8 ~ 1 ~ 4 »> 1 >»
Riley .... 24 ~ I „ 8 ~ o ~
JXIJLCy . • • • 99 L 99 9 9 '*'9 9
Blackburn .. 136 ~ 18 ~ 28 ~ 4 „
Landon .. 16 ~ 7 ~ 7 >» 0 »
Gilbert .. 40 ~ 6 ~ 8 ~ o „
Hall .... 28 ~ I ~ 28 ~ I ,»
2nd Innings.
Hill .. .. 92 Balls 9 Maidens 22 Runs o wickets
Bates .... 92 ~ 4 » 7° >. 5 »»
.... ~ 4 ~ 3 >»
Gilbert 73 9 .. 3 6 .. 2
Myers.. .. 36 „ 6 „ 6 ~ I ~
Blackburn (I no ball) 80 ~ 11 ~ 24 ~ 1 ~
Motley.. .. 32 ~ 3 » *5 » 0 >.
50


EIGHTEEN OF HUNSLETT, LEEDS.
Ist Innings. 2nd Innings.
Bates, b Allan o run out I
Stringer, not out ... .. .. o b Allan ... .. ... I
Motley, Ibw b Allan .. .. 5 b Allan .. ... ... 7
Myers c Murdoch b Spofforth ... 6 b Spofforth .. ... .. 6
Hall, c Boyle b Garrett .. ... 79 c Boyleb Allan .. .. o
Jarman, b Garrett .. .. o c Gregory b Allan o
Landon, b Spofforth . • .. 11 b Spofforth .. . • .. o
Hurdle, run out o b Allan ... .. . o
Spillman, b Allan .. .. o notout ... .. .. 9
Britten, b Allan ~ .. .. 38
Gilbert, b Spofforth .. .. 12 Ibw b Spofforth o
Smithson, b Allan .. .. o
Hill, c Murdoch b Allan .. 2
Blackburn, cC. Bannerman b Spofforth 4
Clark, c and h Spofforth .. 3
Riley, c Murdoch b Spofforth 28
Easuy, st Murdoch b Spofforth 9
Reynolds, c C. Bannerman b Spofforth 16
Sundries ... 15
Total
9 wickets for 28
BOWLING ANALYSIS.
Ist innings.
.Allan... .. 228 Balls 28 Maidens 56 Runs 6 Wickets
Spofforth (1 no ball) 268 ~ 34 ~ 77 j> 8 ~
Garrett .. 68 ~ 5 » 2 4 » 2 »
80y1e... ... 2 8 ~ 1 „ 2 9 » 0
Conway (l wide) 16 ~ 2 ~ 10 ~ o ~
Bailey... .. 24 „ 1 ~ n ~ 9 >»
Horan .. .. 24 ~ 3 » 6 ~ o ~
2nd Innings.
Allan 60 Balls 9 Maidens 9 Runs 5 Wickets
Spofforth .. 60 „ 9 »> I 9 » 3 >»
The Eleven visited the Theatre Royal, Leeds, and all the
attractions in the neighbourhood, and stopped at the Great
Northern Railway Station Hotel. The return match with York-
shire had been arrenged for the Ist and 2nd of July. The team
arrived at Sheffield from Leeds about half-past ten a.m., and
arrived at the ground, Bramall Lane in half-an-hour. The
ground is a very large one, and has the advantage of a terrace
and sloping embankment, and the wickets are extremely good.
The Yorkshire team included the Rev. E. S. Carter who will be
remembered as visiting Australia in 1869, and playing on the
side of Victoria in the Intercolonial Match, when he scored
sixteen and sixty-three.
51


TWELFTH MATCH.
AUSTRALIA v. YORKSHIRE.
RETURN.
The Yorkshire Team had lost tlie services of Emmett and
Finder. The team was captained by the Rev. E. S. Carter, and
18000 onlookers, were upon the ground ; the fielding of the
Eleven was first-class, but Spof. and Allan were badly knocked
about. The weather was splendid ; there was no police protec-
tion or either chains or ropes, and very greatly owing to this may
be attributed the defeat of the Australians. The spectators had
ringed in until the slightest tap gave the Yorkshire batsmen 4
runs : the Australian Team were thus heavily handicapped,
and its members had the satisfaction of hearing many re-
marks about themselves as they ran through the crowd after the
ball; many were heard to remark in astonishment that they were
so white; for the smoke of Sheffield certainly gives the skin a dull
leaden colour which is foreign to all Australian natives. A rougher
looking assemblage could scarcely be imagined, their applause
was very one-sided, and very rough language was used when the
Australians met with any success. Every member of the Eleven
had been very disagreeably nick-named long before the day was
over. The smoke from the factories of Sheffield completely
smothered the ground, the smut rested upon their clothing and the
cricketers were right heartily glad when they got back to their
hotel at Wharncliffe and could indulge in a bath. They were
shown over the great cutlery establishment of J. Rogers & Son,
and were somewhat puzzled to know where all the knives and
scissors went to. Irrespective of the hollow defeat they suffered
the Eleven left the place with anything but agreeable recollections.
The following is a resume of the play:—
Yorkshire having lost the toss, the brothers, Bannerman opening the batting
for the Australians, C. Bannerman was soon disposed of —caught at slip for 4.
Horan and A. Bannerman raised the score to 37, when the latter left. Gre-
gory scored 13, Horan made 20, and Bailey 23 ; the innings terminating for 83.
Yorkshire commenced their innings after the interval for luncheon with Ulyett
and Haggas to the bowling of Spofforth and Allan. At 24 Ulyett was run out,
and Haggas bowled ; Lockwood and Greenwood made a fine stand, the former
making 30 and the latter 31. A long stand was also made by Armitage and
Hill, the innings ultimately closing for 167, stumps being then drawn for the
day. On the following day, July 2, the match was continued. At ten minutes
past twelve the Australians, being 79 runs to the bad, began their second in-
nings with Horan and A. Bannerman to the bowling of Bates and Ulyett.
Each batsman opened with a 4, and Bannerman hit Bates to leg for 4 and 2.
In this way the score was soon up to 16, when Horan played a ball on to his
wicket. Then came a series of disasters for the Australians. Gregory was
caught at mid-on and Garrett was bowled after scoring a single. C. Banner-
man and Murdoch were each got rid of for small scores. Spofforth was bowled


off his foot —thus six of the very best Australians’ wickets were down for 46.
A. Bannerman who had been batting very steadily and well, was now joined
by Bailey. After hitting Hill for two 2’s, Bailey was neatly caught at mid-off,
and Blackham was caught and bowled without scoring. When the score was
up to 90, Bannerman was caught and bowled for a sound and most praise-
worthy innings of 33. Boyle was last man in. Allan hit Bates for 4, and
Ulyett for 2, bringing the 100 up amidst great applause. After making an off-
drive for 4, Allan was run out for a well-played and serviceable 33, the innings
finishing at a quarter past two for 104. Yorkshire, with 25 runs to get to win,
began batting with Lockwood and Ulyett to the bowling of Allan and Boyle.
Runs came freely, and when the score was 20 Ulyett was caught at mid-on.
Greenwood came in and Lockwood made the winning hit, the match resulting
at twenty-five minutes to four in a victory for Yorkshire by nine wickets.
Ist Innings.
A. Bannerman, b Ulyett
C. Bannerman, c Hill b Watmough
Horan, b Ulyett
Gregory, b Hill
Garrett, b Ulyett
Spofforth, c Armytage b Bates
Murdoch, b Ulyett
Bailey, c Boden b Bates , ..
Blackham, not out .. ..
Boyle, b Hill
Allan, c Lockwood b Bates
Sundries
Total
Bates
AUSTRALIAN ELEVEN.
2nd Innings.
12 c and b Ulyett .. . .. .. 33
4 b Ulyett o
20 b Ulyett 6
13 c Landon b Bates o
o b Ulyett x
o b Hiil 10
2 b Bates 1
23 c Watmough b Bates 4
5 c and b Bates o
o not out i
6 run out 33
6 Sundries 15
88 Total 104
BOWLING ANALYSIS.
99 Balls 14 Maidens 30 Runs 3 Wickets
Watmough ... 32 3 20 1
Ulyett (1 wide) 52
7 14 4
Armitage ..16 o 13 o
Bates
Ulyett
Hill
Ist Innings.
Ulyett, run out
Haggis, b Spofforth
Lockwood, c and b Boyle
Bates, c Bannerman, b Spofforth ...
Rev. E. S. Carter, b Allan ..
Landon, b Allan
Greenwood, c Murdoch, b Spofforth
Boden, b Allan
Armitage, c and b Boyle
Hill, not out
Watmough, c A. Bannerman b Boyle
Leg byes
21 3 5 2
Second Innings.
4
4
1
YORKSHIRE.
2nd Innings.
II cC. Bannerman b Boyle .. 9
30 not out 17
31 not out o
Total 167 One wicket for 26
53


BOWLING ANALYSIS.
Allan
140
First Innings.
Balls 18 Maidens
58 Runs
3 Wickets
Spofforth
... 152
19
68
3
Garrett
28
2
21
0
Boyle
5°
6
11
3
Bailey
24
2
8
0
Allan
8
Second Innings.
0
9
0
1
Boyle
12
2
4
1
Spofforth
.. 11
0
13
0
THIRTEENTH MATCH.
AUSTRALIA v. EIGHTEEN OF STOCKPORT.
This match was commenced at Stockport on July 4th, The
Australians commenced hatting with the brothers Bannerman to
the bowling of MTntyre and Brown.
With the score at 11, A. Bannerman was caught and bowled; at 27 C.
Bannerman was taken at cover point; Bailey and Blackham made a good stand,
the former scoring 34, and the latter 33, not out; Garrett made 22 ; and Spof-
forth, 19; the innings terminating for 163. The Eighteen commenced their
innings with Vaughan and Seaton, to the bowling of Allan and Spofforth.
Seaton was soon stumped, and Vaughan caught at the wicket. Gilbert was
easily stumped without scoring. Brown and Boulton made a slight stay, and
took the score to 44 ; Brown was then caught at slip, and Boulton bowled. At
luncheon time seven wickets were down for 55 runs. After the usual interval
the wickets still fell rapidly, and 13 were down for 92. The remaining bats-
men did not give very much trouble, and the innings terminated at five minutes
to four for 105. Blackham’s wicket-keeping was very fine throughout. He
was the means of getting rid of seven men, four being stumped, and three
caught. A new wicket was allowed by mutual consent, and A. and C. Banner-
man began the second innings of the Australians, against the bowling of Brown
and MTntyre. C. Bannerman opened by hitting MTntyre for two 3’s, and
each batsman hit Brown for 3. The brothers made a capital stand, and before
they were parted 67 runs were scored, C. Bannerman being then bowled for 31.
By good steady play the hundred was brought up amidst great cheering. A.
Bannerman hit two 3’s in one over, and was then caught at short leg for a re-
markably well-played innings of 42. Allan was bowled without scoring, and
Boyle, after making 7, was well caught at long-off. At 151 Murdoch fell to
a catch at short leg, and Garrett was clean bowled. Bailey followed, and the
score was 176 for the loss of six wickets. Boulton bowled in place of Mr.
Gilbert, and soon got Horan caught at cover point for a splendid innings of 70,
made up of three 3’s, five 2’s, and singles. This is the highest innings played
by an Australian in England. Horan was greatly applauded on his retirement.
Blackham came in, and was bowled off his pads after scoring 7. Spofforth and
Bailey then caused 200 runs to be put up. At 223 Spofforth was cleverly
caught at short leg for 14. Gregory was the last man in, and, with two runs
added, Bailey, for the second time in the match, was thrown out for a capital
35. Thus the innings closed for 225.
The Eighteen, who had 284 runs set them to win, entered on their second
innings with MTntyre and Gilbert to the bowling of Allen and Spofforth. The
score was up to 27 when Gilbert was neatly taken at the wicket. MTntyre


was shortly afterwards finely stumped, and four wickets were down for 48.
Brown and Boulton took the score to 65, when the latter was caught at point.
After this the match was practically over. The remainder of the batsmen could
do little or nothing with the bowling, and just before six the innings closed for
134, thus leaving the Australians winners by 154 runs.
AUSTRALIAN ELEVEN.
Ist Innings.
A. Bannerman, c and b M‘lntyre 5
C. Bannerman, c Marsland, b Brown 10
Horan, b M‘lntyre .. ... ... 14
Gregory, b M‘lntyre ... .. 3
Garrett, b Brown .. •. .. 22
Murdoch, runout .. .. ... o
Spofforth, c Mitchell, b Brown ... 19
Bailey, run out ... ... .. 34
Allan, b Brown .. ... .. 18
Blackham, not out ... ... ... 33
Boyle, c Vaughan, b M‘lntyre ... o
Sundries .. .. 5
Total ... ... 163
BOWLING ANALYSIS
Brown
MTntyre .. 132 „ 12
Gilbert ... 16 ~ 20
Whatmough 56 ~ 4
Boulton ... 32 ~ 3
2nd Innings,
c Vaughan, b Brown .. ... 42
b Boulton .. ... ... 3
c Borlas, b Boulton .. .. 70-
not out ... .. ... ... o
b Brown .. .. ... o
c Vaughan, b Brown .. ... 14
c Whatmough, b M‘lntyre .. 14
run out ... ... .. .. 35
b M ‘lntyre .. .. >.
b Brown .. ... ... 7
c Hollins, b M‘lntyre... ... 7
;, b MTntyre... ... 7
Sundries ... .. 11
Total ... ... 225
Ist Innings,
x6o Balls 17 Maidens 51 Runs 4 Wickets.
j> 55 » 4 »
9 9
»> 17
3 .. 15 »
Second Innings.
Brown .. 199 Balls 19 Maidens 75 Runs 4 Wickets.
MTntyre .. 136 ~ 9 ~ 59 „ 3 „ I no-ball
Gilbert ... 44 ~ 3 >. 3 1 .. 2 Wides
Boulton .. 60 balls 3 maidens 35 runs 2 wickets 1 wide.
Whatmough 28 ~ 5 ~ 4 ~
Seaton ... 16 ~ 10 runs.
STOCKPORT EIGHTEEN.
Ist Innings. 2nd Innings.
Vaughan, c Blackham. b Allan ... 4 c Boyle, b Horan .. .. 4
Pearson, Ibw, b Allan .. .. 13 cC. Bannerman, b Horan .. o
Boulton, b Allan ... 14 c Allan, b Boyle 17
Seaton, st Blackham, b Spofforth .. 2 c Boyle, b Horan .. .. 8
Gilbert, st Blackham, b Allan .. o c Blackham, b Spofforth .. 19
Brown, c Gregory, b Allan .. 7 b Spofforth 23
Whatmough, c Murdoch, b Allan... 9 e and b Boyle 8
MTntyre, run out 4 st Blackham, b Horan .. 19
Hollins, c Boyle, b Allan 1 c Murdoch, b Spofforth ... 9
Mitchell, b Horan 7 c Horan, b Spofforth ... 3
Hassal, 1 b Horan 10 Ibw, b Spofforth 6
Marsland st Blackham, b Allan .. 15 c Bailey, b Horan 6
Torkington, c Blackham, b Allan., o b Allan O'
Sinclair, st Blackham. b Allan ... 7 b Spofforth O'
M‘Lachlan, b Horan o c Murdoch, b Boyle ... 4
Bowlas, c Blackham, b Horan ... 5 $t Blackham. b Spofforth ... o
Burrows, b Horan o c Horan, b Spofforth ... o
Horner, notout .. ... ... 1 notout ... •• ... o
Sundries 6 Sundries 8
Sundries ... .. 6
Total 134-
Total 105
55


BOWLING ANALYSIS,
Ist Innings.
Spofforth .. So balls 5 maidens 33 runs 1 wicket 1 no-ball.
Allan ... 121 11 50 10
Horan .. 40 2 16 5
2nd Innings.
Allan .. 76 balls 7 maidens 34 runs 1 wicket.
Spofforth ... 84 9 30 8
Boyle ... 57 3 39 3
Garrett ... 24 4 3
Horan ... 60 3 35 5 wickets.
From Stockport the Eleven travelled to London on the Satur-
day night, to play a match against the Orleans Club, otherwise
Mr. Thornton’s Eleven, on the Bth and 9th July. The grounds
of the Orleans Club are at Twickenham, and are magnificent.
The Eleven weredriven inafour-in-hand drag by Capt. Womb well,
and as the weather was magnificent it was a delightful treat.
The house is situated amidst indescribable beauty between Rich-
mond and Hampton Court; and not the least of the pretty sights
were the number of drags which followed Captain Wombwell,
containing noblemen, and gentlemen members of the four-in-
hand and coaching clubs. On the first day the drags of the Duke
of Beaufort and that of Sir Thos. Peyton, and some fifteen others,
were on the ground. It wasexpectedthat the Prince ofWales would
accompany the Duke, but the attractions at Newmarket were too
many for him. A. good deal of time was spent in rambling
about the grounds. The team chosen by Mr. Thornton included
three professionals, Wild, Barratt, and Rylott, and Messrs.
Yardley, Walker, Webbe, and Steel, were about the hottest
quartette that could be got together, so that Australians saw
set before them a very arduous task.
FOURTEENTH MATCH.
AUSTRALIA v. THORNTON’S ELEVEN.
The Australians distinguished themselves more in the field than with the bat,
amf their bowling was not up to their usual standard. Everything was hot,
stuffy and wasting when the Australians went in, the brothers Bannerman
took the wickets. He of herculean shape banged Powys and Barratt about in
approved form, boundary hits were the order of the day, with him, who is
generally a Stonewaller; the score was run up to 21, when Charley was caught
at the wicket for 3. Horan was completely out of form, but Hercules con-
tinued to punish the bowling most severely. Gregory followed Horan, and
after making 3 spooned one into the bowler’s hands. All efforts to disarrange
Alick’s timbers were futile, though particular attention was constantly devoted


to him. Tennant, an old Melbourne native, played in place of Blackham,
whose finger was still bad. He just saved his duck, when there were 4 out for
37. Garrett coming in made a better stand, but was stumped when the score
had reached 61. Murdoch scored rapidly, and played well, and had got 22
when Rylott accepted a hot chance from him. Spof. “ the Australian Express”
and Hercules had got the figures to an even 100 at luncheon, and on resuming the
tall one went in for hard hitting, and for a time was fairly successful. Presently
Rylott had him off his own bowling. 7-13-118. The Tasmanian joined Alick,
who still punished every loose ball without giving a chance, and Bailey following
his example, the two merited much commendation and were greatly ap-
plauded. Webb presently had Bailey for 24 off Fryer, and the score stood at
164. Allan only made a single and Boyle 4, when the innings terminated for
171, and Hercules carried out his bat in great triumph, having accomplished
the finest bit of batting done by the team since their arrival in England, as
regards style, safety and total. He made 12 3’s and 9 2’s. Spof. and Allan
commenced bowling against Walker and Thornton, the latter being had after a
finely got 15. The play of Mr. Fryer was worth a long journey, and the
“ Kangaroo Signet ” deputed to bowl got lambed without mercy. Gregory had
I. D. Walker in the slips for 15, and 4 wickets were disposed of for 38. The
innings terminated at 6 o’clock for a total of 132, and the two Bannermans had
run, in the Australian 2nd innings 11, when the stumps were drawn. On Tues-
day the gathering was large and fashionable. The Bannermans remaining but
a short time in partnership, and Horan showing all the play of the day, until
he was clean bowled by Barratt, with 64, got in splendid style, including
11 3’s and 7 2’s. The innings closed with a total of 172. The Orleans Club
commenced with 212 runs to get, Thornton and Walker lifting Allan and
Spof. clean out of the grounds and running the score to 40, s°, & 6° in rapid
succession. The stumps were drawn when the score stood at 167, so the match
ended with a draw, with only 75 to get, which looked like a possible victory for
the Orleans C. C.
AUSTRALIAN ELEVEN.
First Innings.
A. Bannerman, not out 7 1
C. Bannerman, st Yardley, b Bar-
ratt 3
Horan, c Yardley, b Barratt
Horan, c Yardley, b Barratt ... 3
Gregory, c and b Barrat 3
Tennant, c Powys, b Barratt .. • 1
Garrett, st Yardley, b Fryer ... 11
Murdoch, b Rylott 22
Spofforth, c and b Rylott .. .. 13
Bailey, c Webbe, b Fryer .. 24
Allan, b Rylott 1
Boyle, b Barratt 4
Sundries 15
Total 171
Second Innings,
c Steele, b Barrett ... .
b Rylott 23
b Barratt 64
b Powvs 9
b Rylott 2
c Webbe, b Barratt ... .. .. 4
b Barratt 15
c Walker, b Barratt 15
c Steele, b Barratt 12
st Wild, b Barratt 2
not out o
Sundries 20
Total 172
BOWLING ANALYSIS
Barratt ... 152 balls 12 maidens
Powys .. 64 6
Rylott .. 120 13
Fryer 12 o
Thornton ... 8 i
Barratt ... 172 balls 15 maidens
Rylott .. 141 l 6
Powys .. 40 2
Walker ..8 o
First Innings.
71 runs 5 wickets o wides ono balls
35 0 21
36 3 00
o o
11 2 o O
30 00
Second Innings.
udens 70 runs 7 wickets o wides ono balls
58 2 00
16 1 20
70 00
57


THORNTON’S ELEVEN.
First Innings.
■Thornton, c A. Bannerman, b
Spofforth 9
I. D. Walker, c Gregory, b Spof-
orth 15
H. R. Webbe, 1b w, b Allan .. 1
Fryer, b Horan 61
Wardley, c and b Allan .. .. o
■Capt. Brander, b Allan , ... 2
D. L. Steel, run out 7
Powys, c Allan, b Horan .. .. 26
Wild, c and b Spofforth . .. 4
Barratt, run out 3
Bylott, not out 2
Sundries 2
Total 132
Second Innings.
cC. Bannerman, b Bailey ... 40
not out .. . 60
not out 14
cA. Bannerman, b Spofforth .. 12
Sundries 11
Two wickets for 137
BOWLING ANALYSIS
First Innings.
Allan 100 balls 7 maidens 45 runs 3 wickets
Spofforth ..84 3 57 3
Garrett ~12 O 11 o
Boyle .... 12 o II o
Horan 9 o 6 2
Second Innings,
Allan 68 balls 9 maidens 36 runs o wickets
Spofforth 48 5 24 1
Boyle 48 2 30 o
Horan 32 2 25 o
Bailey 16 I 91
Garrett 16 3 2 o
The Australian Team were fe/ed by the Thornton Eleven on the
first evening, and had been invited to a ball, but excused them-
selves on the score of fatigue. The perpetual work, change and
travel, without rest, telling considerably upon them ; and it is
■doubtful if ever a team of cricketers went to contest a match in a
more weary frame of mind than the Australians were when they
reached Swansea, South Wales, on the 10th July. Mr. Conway
seeing that this was the case, had made several efforts to avoid
some of the Eighteen encounters, but the fame of the Eleven had
became so great that every town had made its arrangements, and
did not want to be disappointed. That at Swansea he had par-
ticularly wished to avoid, but the reply came that they had better
forego one of their English matches as they had only one arranged
for South Wales. Some idea of the work they had done this week
may be gathered from the fact that they concluded a match at Stock-
port on Saturday night, played at Twickenham on Monday and
Tuesday, attended the dinner on Monday night, on Tuesday
night were 7 hours travelling to Swansea, Wednesday and Thurs-
day play at Swansea; left there at 3 a.m. on Friday, arriving at
Oldham at half-past 10, played there Friday and Saturday, and
58


A. Bannerman, c E. Bannerman, b Cobden
• • 17
C. Bannerman, b Lewis
... 27
Horan, b Cobden
.. 38
Gregory, c Llewellyn, b Cobden
.. 0
Garrett, b Cobden ..
•• 25
Murdoch, b Lewis ..
.. 10
Spofforth, b Cobden
.. 8
Bailey, b Lewis
••• 45
Conway, c and b Lewis
... 12
Blackham, c E. Bannerman, b Lewis
- 5
Boyle, not out
••• 5
Sundries
... 27
Total '
... 219
then from there proceeded to Leicester with but one night’s rest
Conway trted to relieve the team as much as possible by playing
instead of Allan, Boyle and Spofforth in succession, and but for
the desertion of Midwinter this could have been readily arranged.
The following is a report of the matches at Swansea and Oldham.
FIFTEENTH MATCH.
AUSTRALIA V. EIGHTEEN GENTLEMEN OF SWANSEA,
SOUTH WALES.
The Eighteen got together only a moderate side. The brothers Bannerman
opened the Australian innings, and they were opposed by Mr. C. P. Lewis
and Mr. Llewellyn. The elder batsman scored freely. He made twenty-seven
out of thirty-seven, and then was bowled off his pads. Horan joined A. Ban-
nerman, and between them they raised the score to sixty before Bannerman
was caught at cover-point. Gregory did nothing. On Garrett joining Horan,
however, runs again came freely, the batting of both men being very good, and
the score was raised to one hundred and nineteen, or fifty-nine since the fall of
the two previous wickets, before the batsmen were parted. Horan left first
having made thirty-eight. After luncheon Murdoch joined Garrett. The
latter was quickly got rid of, while Spofforth only made eight before being
clean bowled. Murdoch was out with the total at one hundred and fifty-five,
and seven wickets were down. The total of the Australians reached two
hundred and nineteen. When the Eighteen went in to bat, Spofforth’s bowling
told with deadly effect. Ten wickets fell to him, and the innings closed for
ninety-four, or one hundred and twenty-five behind. On the following day the
match was brought to a conclusion, the Australian Eleven winning in a single
innings with thirty-seven runs to spare. About such a hollow match there is
very little to say. The bowling of Spofforth and Boyle was remarkably good.
The second innings of South Wales amounted to eighty-eight. Mr. L. Jenkins
batted in very good style for fifteen, and Mr. E. M. Bannerman made thirteen,
also by good cricket. These two were the only batsmen who got into double
figures. Mr. Llewellyn, the captain of the team made nine. The match was
over by about half-past three.
AUSTRALIAN ELEVEN.


BOWLING ANALYSIS.
Lewis 123 Balls 5 Maidens 60 Runs 5 Wickets.
Llewellyn ... 84 ~ 10 „ 33 ~ o ~
Jones 76 ~ 7 ~ 36 ~ o „
Cobden ... 112 ~ 13 5
Jenkins
31 „ 2 „ 22 „ O „
EIGHTEEN OF SOUTH WALES.
First Innings.
Young, c Gregory, b Boyle ... ... 2
Riches, c. Bannerman, b Spofforth... o
Ellsington, c. Blackham b Spofforth
Bannerman, c Murdoch, b Spofforth 6
Cobden, b Spofforth ... o
Curteis, b Boyle ... ... ... 12
Jones, T. 8., b Boyle ... ... 5
Lewis, b Spofforth 11
Jenkins, cC. Bannerman, b Boyle .. 3
Wontner, c Garrett, b Boyle .. 3
Chambers, b Spofforth ... .. 8
Morris, b Spofforth . .. .. 5
Llewellyn, cC. Bannerman, b Spof. o
David, c and b 'Spofforth .. .. 8
Dickinson, c Horan, b Boyle .. 10
Jones, E. W., not out 2
Ord, b Spofforth ... ... ... o
Davis, absent .. o
Sundries .. .. 17
Total ... .. 94
BOWLING ANALYSIS.
Second Innings,
c Blackham, b Spofforth
not out ... 5
c Bailey, b Boyle ... ... o
b Spofforth ... ... .. 13
b Spofforth ... ... ... 5
c Blackham, b Spofforth ... 2
c Murdoch, b Boyle ... ... 6
c Boyle, b Spofforth .. .. 2
c Boyle, b Spofforth .. .. 15
b Spofforth .. .. .. 3
1b w. b Boyle .. .. 2
b Boyle .. .. ... ..8
st. Blackham, b Boyle .. 9
c Garrett, b Boyle .. .. 1
c Bannerman, b Boyle ... ... o
b Boyle ... .. ... .. 2
b Boyle ... ... ... ... o
Sundries ... ... 15
Total ... ... ... 88
First Innings.
Spofforth.. .. 105 Balls n Maidens 35 Runs 10 Wickets,
Boyle 104 ~ 9 „ 42 ~ 6 „
Second Innings.
Spofforth .. 124 Balls 13 Maidens 40 Runs 7 Wickets.
Boyle 124 „ 19 ~ 33 „ 9
SIXTEENTH MATCH.
AUSTRALIAN v. EIGHTEEN OF OLDHAM.
On July 12th the Australian cricketers commenced a match
against Eighteen of Werneth and Oldham. There was a good
attendance of spectators, and the success which attended the
local players gave general satisfaction. The Australians were
naturally fatigued after their journey from Swansea, which
occupied seven hours and a-half, and the howlers proved less
difficult than usual. Gregory won the toss for the Australians ;
but, as the light at the time for commencing play was very bad,
he determined to put the Eighteen in to bat.
60


The ground was in good order, and the Eighteen made a capital show
against the bowling of Spofforth, Boyle, Garrett, and Horan. Some very fair
batting was displayed. Mr. Ireland, a young batsman, scored 28 in promising
style. Seaton made 21 by some smart hitting, and Hickton, Hind, and Mr.
laylor all rendered good service to their side. The Eighteen scored 138. Of
the four bowlers who were tried Horan and Spofforth were the most success-
ful. Horan took seven wickets for forty runs, and Spofforth six wickets for
forty-one runs. Having received a painful blow on the hand in the single
wicket match at Swansea, A. Bannerman stood out of the match. His place
was taken by Hyslop, an Australian by birth, who played for Hampshire three
or four years ago. The Australians made a bad start when they went in, the
bowling of Hickton and Hind proving veiy effective. Murdoch, C. Banner-
man, and Garrett were all out when the score had reached thirty-five.
Spofforth left at fifty-two, but then Bailey and Gregory got together, and put
on . f uns a ver y ra pid rate. Gregory played with remarkable pluck and
spirit till, with the total at 86, he was bowled for a capital innings of 42, the
score reaching 125 before the last wicket fell. With 13 runs in hand, the
Eighteen entered on their second innings. The batting was less successful
than on the previous attempt. Hickton and Hind, who hit vigorously on
Friday, went down for small scores. Mr, Ireland again displayed patient
defence, and Bailey hit with spirit and vigour. Seaton, too, played a second
good innings. For the majority, however, the bowling of Spofforth and Boyle
was far too good, and each bowler was equally successful, taking eight wickets
Boyle was far less expensive. The total was 117, which left the
Australians 131 runs to win. The task was not a severe one ; but to make the
runs very rapid scoring was required. Charles Bannerman and Murdoch went
in first, to the bowling of Hickton and Hind. Both batsmen were in form,
and except that Bannerman gave a hard chance at cover-point the cricket was
exceedingly good. Hickton and Hind gave way to Seaton and Lockwood,
but no parting was effected till at 53 Bannerman was caught at long-on for 30,
Horan was soon bowled, and two wickets were down. Gregory on going in
made a vigorous effort to win the match, and set to work in a very business
like fashion. Unfortunately the support he received was indifferent. In
trying to play a hitting game against time several batsmen failed signally, and
in the end the match resulted in a draw, the Australians wanting nineteen
runs to win and having three wickees to fall.
EIGHTEEN OF BERNETH AND OLDHAM.
Ist Innings.
Taylor, b Garrett
Haslam, 1.b.w., b Spofforth
Andrew, b Spofforth...
Seaton, c Blackham, b Horan
Lockwood, c C. Bannerman, b Spof.
Hillkirk, b Garrett ...
Ireland, c C. Bannerman, b Horan
Bailey, b Horan
Holroyd, b Garrett ...
Smith, run out
Hind, b Horan
Hicton, b Spofforth
Dunkerley, st. Blackkam, b Horan
Wild, c Garrett, b Horan ...
Mayall, c. Bailey, b Spofforth
Kaye, c Murdoch, b Spofforth
S. R, Platt, c Spofforth, b Horan...
J. E. Platt, not out...
2nd Innings.
15 c Conway, b Spofforth... ... II
o b Spofforth ... ... ... 9
12 b Spofforth ... ... ... 5
21 1.b.w., b 80y1e... ... ... x 6
1 b Spofforth ... ... ... 9
1 b Garrett ... ... ... I
28 b 80y1e... ... ... ... 15
17 b 80y1e... ... ... ... 19
1 c Blackham, b Spofforth ... 6
1 c and b Boyle ... ... ... o
15 c Blackham, b Boyle ... ..1 3
16 c Bailey, b Spofforth ... ... 8
4 c Spofforth, b Boyle ... ... 1
o b Spofforth ... ... ... r
3 b 80y1e... ... ... ... o
3 not out ... ... ... ... 5
o c and b Boyle ... ... ... o
o b Spofforth ... ... ... 1
Sundries ... ... ... 7
Total 138 Total 117
61


BOWLING ANALYSIS.
Ist Innings.
Spofforth .. ... 94 balls 10 maidens 41 runs 6 wickets
Boyle ...... 48 5 20 o
Garrett v 92 13 37 3
Horan ... ... 76 3 40 7
2nd Innings.
Spofforth .. • ... 136 balls ir maidens 56 runs 8 wickets
Boyle 77 8 27 8
Garrett 44 4 15 1
Horan ... ... 12 o 12 o
AUSTRALIAN ELEVEN.
Ist Innings.
2nd Innings.
C. Bannerman, b. Hind ... ... 8
c Holroyd, b Seaton ... ... 30
Murdoch, c Myall, b Hind... ... 1
b Seaton ... .. .. 24
Horan, b Hickton ... .. ... 10
b Lockwood ... ... o
Gregory, b Hickton... .. ... 42
not out ... ... ... ... 37
Garrett, b Hicton ... ... ... 4
b Hicton .. ... o
Spofforth, c Myall, b Hickton ... 5
Bailey, b Hind ... . ... 21
st. Myall, b Hind .. ... 8
c Hickton, b Hind ... ... 3
Hyslop, b Hind ... ... ... 6
st Myall, b Hind ... .. 1
Conway, b Hind ... ... ... 7
not out ... .. ... ... o
Blackham, run out ... ... ... 7
Boyle, not out ... 6
Sundries ... ... ... 9
Sundries ... .. ... 9
Total.. ... ... 126
7 wickets for... ... 112
BOWLING ANALYSIS.
Ist Innings.
Hickton ... 176 balls 22 maidens 52 runs 4 wickets
Hinds .. 128 13 45 5
Seaton ... 53 7 9 o
Lockwood 16 1 11 o
2nd Innings.
Hickton ... 108 balls 12 maidens 40 runs 1 wicket
Hind ... 84 9 22 3
Seaton ..64 7 24 2
Lockwood 32 1 17 1
The match against the County of Leicester was the next contest
arranged for the Australians. The Leicester Club was foremost
in coming to terms with Conway, and giving a lump sum down
for the treat of a game with the Australians. It was an absolute
speculation upon their part, and but for the great fame acquired
by the Australians might have entailed a considerable loss. As it
wasit induced by far the largest attendance of any of their matches,
between 15,000 to 18,000 being present and all expenses paid,
accruing a profit of over As we before stated, the team
left Manchester on Tuesday, the 14th, and arrived at Leicester at
8 p.m. They were escorted to the White Hart Hotel and on
Monday were accompanied to the ground, which is an exceeding
large one, and is surrounded by a substantial brick wall. The
wicket is beautifully true and fast. The attendance when play
commenced was over 5000.
62


SEVENTEENTH MATCH.
AUSTRALIA v. LEICESTER.
The Leicestershire captain won the toss and chose the wickets,
play commencing at 12.30, Wheeler and Sankey occupying the
wickets.
The spectators evidently expected to see their countrymen mowed down by
windjammers, but Wheeler commenced off Spofforth for 3, and off Spof.’s next
3 more resulted, and in a quarter of an hour 20 were up. Wheeler hit Garrett,
who had relieved Spof., and then Allan to leg for 3. 40 and 50 followed
amidst tumultuous applause, and then Boyle took Allen’s place, and Wheeler
drove him to long field for a triplet in his first over. Allan relieved Garrett,
but the runs came until 70 appeared, and then Horan relieved Allan. Every
possible change in the bowling succeeded, but without effect, and a century
■was recorded amidst uproarious applause just as the luncheon bell rung.
Wheeler’s batting was a splendid exhibition, and he gave no chances. At 3
o’clock play was resumed against Spof. and Bailey, when Wheeler, hitting
hard at Spof. to leg, was well caught by Boyle. 1-60-113. Banter followed,
and he and Sankey ran up the score to 151. Garrett relieved Bailey and clean
bowled Sankey with a Yorker, who had made another splendid innings of 70.
2-70-151. Marriott joined Banter, but lost him immediately, for he was
smartly caught in the slips. 3-20-156. Banter, too, had commenced by snicking
Spof. for 4, and it was evident that keeping Spof. on on so fast a ground was
a mistake. Now came the much needed tumble down. Collier joined Mar-
riott, and was well caught by Horan at mid on. 4-7-167. Barnham was out
the second ball of Spof, for o, and Walter was caught by Allan off Spof. for a
couple ; so what promised to be a tremendous innings, terminated in a panic
with a total of 193. By this time there was a company of over 11,000 specta-
tors.
C. Bannerman and Murdoch represented Australia at the wickets, and when
time was called had scored 6 and 8 respectively.
Tuesday, July 16, was a roaring hot day, but before play commenced 14,000
people had paid for admission, and it is fair to say that they applauded most
impartially, and seemed to cousin to the Australians. Murdoch made 5 runs
from the first over by cutting Randon behind point. Charley made a single,
and his partner then cut Rylott for a triplet ; but when his score had reached
16 and the total 23, Rylott bowled him off his thigh. Horan joined the
Sydney crack, scored 1, and was run out foolishly going half-way, and, calling
upon Bannerman, did not attempt to get back although he had ample time to
do so. The Australian captain joined Bannerman, and immediately afterwards
the latter was smartly taken by Bishop off Rylott. 3-15-34. The score care-
fully made. Garrett now joined his captain, who was playing carefully and
well. The new comer began well, but after running up 13, he hit wildly at
Randon and lost his leg stump. 4-7-53. Spof. ran up 7, while his captain
was content with 1, and then he was caught by Marriott off Randon.
5-7-61. Bailey, with the prospects of Australia anything but bright, went out
to keep his captain company, and was caught by Banter off the first ball he
received. Allan contributed 5, and was then caught by Rodwell at long off.
7- Blackham followed and batted well and steadily, when all at once
Gregory, who had been playing so steadily, fell a victim to Bishop at short slip.
8- Conway joined Blackham, and both players set themselves to save
63


the follow-on which had just seemed so likely, and just after luncheon Conway
made the saving hit. He had made a good 12, when he was caught by Bishop
off Parnham. Boyle and Blackham carried the score up to 130, until the
former was bowled by Rylott, Blackham carrying his bat for a very neat 24,
having stayed well and no doubt saved the game. The Australians were thus
handicapped to the extent of 63 runs, but Bannerman remarked, 44 At least
two of us ought to make one hundred runs on such a wicket as that.” How
well he 4 4 came off” remains to be told, But the Midland men had still an
innings to score, and they handled the willow to some tune.
At a quarter to 4 Sankey and Wheeler again came out, but Panter had to
relieve Sankey on account of a sprain. The two played vigorously and bril-
liantly ; the runs came fast, and 50 appeared before a dissolution was secured.
Marriott was next, and was very rough on the bowling until 100 appeared,
amidst tremendous applause. Blackham was put on as an off chance bowler,
and in his second Marriott was cleaned bowled. Collier appeared next, and
the two ran up 129, when Collier was given out l.b.w. just as the stumps were
to be drawn. Wheeler, who had again made a splendid display, was caught
off Spofforth by Blackham. 4-65-129. He was treated with a perfect storm
of applause on his return to the pavilion by the 12,000 people present. At
dinner that night the Australian team, nothing daunted, remarked 44 that they
had only the tail to get rid of,” and the next day verified their belief.
At noon on the third day Parnham and Rodwell appeared at the wickets,
and the former was splendidly caught at short slip off Garrett’s first over, who
had relieved Boyle. Walters came in and then wanted a new companion, for
Rodwell was caught by Bailey at long on, off Spofforth. 7-6-135. Walters,
Rylott, and Randon succumbed for the obnoxious egg, Rylott to Garrett’s
bowling and the other two to Spof., the innings closing at 1 o’clock for a total
of 145. Spofforth in 33 balls took 4 wickets for 25 runs, and Blackham 12
balls for 4 runs and one wicket, so that he has earned quite a reputation as a
bowler amongst the Eleven.
With 209 runs staring them in the face, Bannerman and Murdoch led off
against Rylott and Parnham, evidently bent on run-getting. Bannerman drove
the first ball he received straight for 4, the third off the over to the off, and the
last he cut for similar numbers, making 12 runs for 3 balls. When the
luncheon bell was rung at 2 o’clock, Bannerman had made 58 and Murdoch 18.
On resuming at three o’clock, the company had increased to between four
and five thousand. Bowling changes were resorted to at each end, Parnham
going on to the Aylestone-road end, and Rylott at the reverse. In succeeding
overs Bannerman cut the first-named bowler for two 4’s, and drove the other
to the off for 2, and again cut Parnham beautifully for a quartette ; and then
Murdoch was bowled off his pads. One for 93. Now followed a long
course of superlative batting on the part of Bannerman.
At seven minutes past four Bannerman completed his hundred, and was
loudly cheered. 200 was up at a quarter to five, directly after which he was
thrown out by the substitute fielding for Mr. Sankey. Bannerman had made 133
in a masterly style, and it would be difficult to imagine an innings more fault-
less, or in which tremendous hitting was accompanied with such an amount of
scientific cricket. This is the first hundred made by an Australian in England,
and it is almost needless to state that Bannerman’s reception on his return to
the pavilion was of the heartiest description. His score included one 5, twenty-
three 4’s, three 3’s, and nine 2’s. Two for 201. Gregory joined Horan,
and the nine runs required were soon made, the Australians winning a
most interesting match by eight wickets at five minutes to five—Horan 40, and
Gregory 3, both not out.
The fielding of both teams was excellent throughout the match :
Bannerman’s scoring was as follows :—4, 4,4, 4,4, 2,4, 4,4, 4,4, I, 4,4,
1,4, 2,1, 4,4, 1,1, 5,3, 4,1, 4, I, 2,2, 4,2, 1,4, 4,4, 2,3, 3,2, 1,1, 1,
2, I, 4, I, 2.
Horan’s score (not’out) :—3, 1,2, 4,4, r, 3,1, 4,4, 2,4, 1,4, 1, 1.


LEICESTERSHIRE
Ist Innings.
Wheeler, b Garrett ... ... ... 70
Sankey, c Boyle, b Spofforth ... 60
Banter, c Gregory, b Garrett .. 20
Marriott, c Horan, b Garrett ... 7
Collier, not out .. ... .. 20
Rodwell, b Garrett . ... ... 4
Walter, c Allan, b Spofforth ... 2
Rylot, run out ... ~ ... 4
Randon, b Spofforth ... ... 2
Bishop, b Spofforth... ... ... o
Leg byes ... ... ... 4
Total... ... ... 193
2nd Innings.
retired hurt ... o
c Blackham, b Spofforth ... 65
b Bailey 32
b Blackham ... ... ... 18
Ibw, b Boyle ... ... 6
c Bailey, b Spofforth 6
c Boyle, b Spofforth ... ... o
b Garrett ... ... ... o
Ibw, b Spofforth ... ... o
not out ... ... 10
Byes, 5 ; Leg byes, 3 ... 8
Total 145:
BOWLING ANALYSIS.
Ist Innings.
Spofforth ... ... 108 Balls. 4 Maidens. 60 Runs. 5 Wickets.
Allan... ... ... 96 9 44 o
Garrett ...... 88 10 30 4
Boyle ... ... 72 8 27 o
Horan ... ... 24 1 15 o
Bailey ... ... 40 o 13 o
2nd Innings.
Boyle ... ... 64 8 22 1
Spofforth ... ... 73 2 25 4
Allan... ... ... 44 4 23 o
Bailey ... ... 44 3 19 I
Garrett ... ... 32 3 28 2
Horan ... ... 24 2 16 o
Blackham... ... 12 1 41
AUSTRALIANS.
Ist Innings.
2nd Innings.
Murdoch, b Rylott ...
C. Bannerman, c Bishop, b Rylott
T. Horan, run out ...
D. Gregory, c Bishop, b Parnham
T. Garrett, b Randon
F. Spofforth, c Marriott, b Randon
G. Bailey, c Panter, b Randon
F. Allan, c. Rodwell, b Parnham...
Blackham, not out ...
Conway, c Bishop, b Parnham
H. Boyle, b Rylott...
Byes, 1 ; Leg byes, 4
16 b Pamham ... ... ... 24.
15 thrown out by Substitute ... 133
1 not out ... ... ... ... 40
23 not out ... 3
7
7
o
5
12 Byes, 8; No balls, 2 ... 10
Total ... ... ... 130 2 Wickets for ... 2i&
BOWLING ANALYSIS.
Ist Innings.
Rylott ... ... 171 Balls. 25 Maidens. 45 Runs. 3 Wickets.
Randon 108 14 39 3
Parnham ...... 60 3 34 3
6O 3 34 3
65


Rylott
120
11
66
0
Parnham
... 76
6
40
1
Randon
... 48
4
30
0
Bishop
26
3
12
0
Wheeler
l6
0
26
0
Panter
12
0
20
0
Collins
l6
1
6
0
2nd Innings,
Collier bowled 2 no balls.
Thus the Australians won superbly, with 8 wickets to spare.
The spectators crowded around the tent and called lustily for
them. They were hand-shaken and questioned in the most con-
fidential manner. It was evident that they had also made an
impression on the ladies, for one fair one was heard to remark
that they were really as nice-looking as the English people. The
team started for Hull the same evening, expecting to meet an eigh-
teen of the town and district. The club had, however, altered their
tactics, and brought down four or five gentlemen and profes-
sionals from neighbouring counties—Rigby, Smith, Martin,
Greenwood, and Mclntyre—making altogether a very strong
team, the club stating that they thought such an eleven would
draw better than if the Australians had to meet a muff twenty-
two.
EIGHTEENTH MATCH.
AUSTRALIA v. HULL,
Rigby and Taylor were sent to the wicket to face Allan and Spofforth. Runs
came fast off Allan, and faster still when Garrett relieved him. Gregory for a
wonder missed Rigby in the slips, when 40 was telegraphed, and the batsmen
continued their career until they had completed 71. Bailey then splendidly
caught Rigby, and Greenwood undertook his duties, the two getting the cen-
tury up before luncheon. The captain tried Bailey and Horan, and 123 had
been got before Gregory caught Taylor. The next feature in the innings was
the grand way in which Blackham stumped Clarke. Wood and Waldgategave
some little trouble, and then Rawlinson helped to get the score up to 250
before he was disposed of.
On Friday there were 7,000 persons present when the match was resumed.
Bannerman made 8 and Murdoch 14. and Gregory was run out without scoring,
Garrett brought the runs very fast to 44, and was then bowled by Mclntyre.
Under Spofforth’s eye the board showed 94, when he was caught by Clarke.
A change now took place, and Bailey and Horan made a good stand until the
latter was caught in the slips for a well-got 50. Then the bowler of a century,
Allan, to the surprise of everyone, got runs at a terrible pace, a hundred being
added to the score before a wicket fell. Conway out-heroded Herod, and run
up 6o", until Allan, who had made 78, was caught by Clarke. Conway con-
tinued very busy with Boyle as his partner, and had managed to compile 46,
when he was bowled by Wallgate, 10.46-305.


On Saturday the Hull team commenced their second innings, with 55 runs to
get, but Boyle’s bowling was all too many for them. He got eight wickets for
30 runs, and the whole team was sent to the right-about for a total of 68.
Spofforth 8 and Bailey 6 got the required number, and Australia was again
victorious by nine wickets.
NINETEENTH MATCH.
THE AUSTRALIANS v. UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE.
The cricket-loving portion of the London public were afforded
a rare treat at Lord’s on Monday, when these famous teams came
together. The wonderful successes of the Australians at the com-
mencement of their career, against some of the strongest
elevens in England, have made their visit the great feature of this
season’s cricket, and wherever they have played crowds have gone
to see them. Of the Cambridge Eleven it may be said that it is the
strongest University team that has played for some years ; perhaps
as strong all round as any that has ever appeared at Lord’s. Cap-
tained by Edward Lyttelton, the Cambridge men have won every
match they played, though, until this occasion, some have been
understood to say they were never pitted against a really strong
team. As the weather was fine and warm, the crowd of specta-
tors, as might have been expected, was large from the very
beginning ; and, as everyone present came bent on watching the
cricket, the interest taken in the game never for a moment ceased.
The wicket was an excellent one, and the ground fast, so a fairer
field for the contest could not be provided. At the end of the
first day it was palpable that the Australians had met with more
than their match. Great, indeed, was the disappointment on
Tuesday, when the game was brought to a speedy close, Cambridge
winning a most decided victory by one innings and 72 runs. This
is all the more meritorious, as they played without Lucas, who is
as fine a bat as any in the Eleven.
The Cambridge captain, having won the toss, sent in the Hon. A. Lyttelton
and Whitfeld, the Australian bowling being entrusted to Allan (pavilion end)
and Boyle. Both the Cambridge men played with great confidence, and, not-
withstanding the good fielding of the colonial team, runs came steadily. When
the score had reached 30 Spofforth took the ball from Allan, but for some time
the change was ineffectual. At last the new bowler succeeded in bowling
Whitfeld off his legs, the first wicket thus falling for 44 runs. The Hon. E.
Lyttelton then joined his brother, and, as usual, lost no time in setting to work.
In the next over Mr. A. Lyttelton was badly missed at point, his brother
getting four in the slips off the next ball. In Boyle’s next over the Cambridge
captain made a fine leg-hit for 4, and with a 4 to the off and a 3 to the on in
the following over, raised his score to 15 ; but this was all he was destined to
get, as immediately afterwards he ran himself out, having made 15 in four hits.
His successor was A. G. Steel, and the run-getting increased in pace, though


Boyle
37
7
82
3
Allan
7
0
0
Spofforth
32.1
4
85
3
Garrett
3
0
10
0
Horan
4
0
20
0
Murdoch
6
46
2
few big hits were made. At one o’clock 80 runs were recorded, followed soon
after by 90. Garrett relieved Boyle at 92, and in the next over a drive for 2
and another for 4, by Steel, brought up 100 after an hour and a quarter’s play.
At 111 Allan resumed bowling in place of Garrett; Steel hitting his first ball
to leg for 4. 130 runs were posted after ninety-five minutes’ play, every over
since Whitfeld was bowled having produced something. Boyle then took the
ball again, and his second over was a maiden —the first in 30. The changes of
bowling were now frequent, but the scoring continued as fast as ever. Horan
went on for 4 overs, which produced 20 runs. At 1.58 Spofforth relieved
Boyle, and at 161 Murdoch took the ball from Horan. At luncheon time the
score was 167, the product of two hours’ play. After the interval, at twenty
minutes to three, a separation was soon made. Steel drove a ball hard past
the bowler, and called to Lyttelton to run, which the latter did not do, as it
was fielded, the result being that both batsmen found themselves at the same
wicket, and Steel was run out. He had played a first-class innings of 59, made
up of three 4’s, three 3’s, eight 2’s, &c. D, Q. Steel took his brother’s place,
and soon after Lyttelton was clean bowled, having made 72, an innings which,
but for one chance, was quite faultless ; his chief hits were one 5, two 4’s, three
3’s, and six 2’s. Jarvis came in, and Steel drove Spofforth to the off and to
the on, each time for 4 ; but the latter soon after had his revenge, as he cleverly
secured one returned to him very hard. This made five wickets down for 187.
The Hon. Ivo Bligh was the next in, and, when 6 runs were added, was let off
by Spofforth. The latter’s next over produced a dozen runs—a 4 to the off,
and another in the slips, and an off-drive for 3 by Bligh, and a single from
Jarvis, bringing up 200 at ten minutes past three. A fine off-drive by Jarvis in
the next over quickly brought up 210. Boyle then went on instead of Spofforth;
and each batsman drove him to the on for 4; but at 227 Bligh put one into
slip’s hands, making way for Morton. The pace now got slower for a few overs,
till Morton hit Boyle to square leg for 4; and Jarvis in the next over got
Murdoch away to leg for the same amount. The next ball, however, bowled
him, making the seventh wicket down for 243. The next to represent the Uni-
versity was C. Pigg, who, with Morton, raised the total to 259, when the latter
was easily taken at point. The next man in was Ford, soon after whose advent
Pigg was missed at short leg. A little later on, at 262, the latter was bowled
by Boyle ; and the last man, Wood, came in. The pair made a good stand,
Ford scoring freely off both bowlers, cutting Murdoch for 4 and 3 in one over,
and bringing on Spofforth at 278. The first ball of the latter’s second over
upset Wood’s off stump, and the innings came to a close at a quarter past four,
the total being 285. Analysis :
Overs.
Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Bowler.
The Australians lost no time coming in, their first representatives being C.
Bannerman and Murdoch. The Cambridge bowlers were Steel and Morton,
the former delivering the first over from the nursery end. Fast scoring was
again the order of the day. Bannerman hit Steel to leg for four, and twice
drove him for three; while Murdoch, in Morton’s first over, made a pretty cut
to the boundary for four. The first half-dozen overs produced 23 runs, and
then matters changed somewhat. Steel sent down a maiden, and the second
ball of Morton’s next over dismissed Bannerman, cleaned bowled ; and the
very next ball upset Horan, his successor’s, off stump. This feat of course
provoked loud cheering. Gregory then faced Murdoch, and the latter played
some excellent cricket, hitting Morton twice to the off for four. The score was
raised to 45, when a catch at the wicket caused Gregory’s retirement, Garrett
filling his place. The latter went in for hitting, and succeeded in hitting Steel


Bowler.
Overs.
Maidens.
Runs.
Wickets.
Mr. A. G. Steel
25
7
59 •••
3
Mr. Morton
24.2
10
45 ...
7
to the on and to leg in one over, each time for four, Murdoch meanwhile cut-
ting each bowler for a similar amount. The score soon reached 71, when Garrett,
who was twice very nearly stumped off the slow bowler, was bowled by Morton.
Spofforth came in, and Murdoch again cut Morton for four, but soon after lost
his partner, who was bowled by Steel, the fifth wicket falling for 78. Bailey
was next in ; but when ten runs were added Murdoch at last succumbed to
Morton, having played a fine innings in really good form, his score of forty-
seven including six fours, two threes, four twos, &c. The rest of the innings
requires little description. Morton’s next ball caused Blackham’s retirement—
leg before. At 96 Bailey was caught by the wicket keeper, and Boyle came in.
The latter, with Allan, made a slight stand, bringing the hundred up a few
minutes after six o’clock. Allan then hit Morton to leg for four, and Boyle
scored a similar amount from an off-drive off Steel; but was easily stumped the
next ball. A. Bannerman, the last man, added a single to the score, when
he was bowled by Morton, the total being in. From the following analysis it
will be seen how effective Morton’s bowling was :
The innings was over just before half-past six, the Colonials being no less
than 174 behind the Cambridge team. A follow, of course, was the result,
and the remaining half-hour was utilised. Allan, the not-out of the previous
innings, and Spofforth were the first to come to the wickets, the Cambridge
bowling being the same as before. Steel delivered the first over—a maiden—
to Allan, Spofforth hitting Morton’s third ball to leg for four, and getting the
last ball of the over through the slips for three. This he followed up a couple
of overs later by driving the slow bowler to the off for four, and hitting Morton
to leg again for three. The lattei then gave the ball to Ford, and the next three
overs produced one run, after which the stumps were drawn ; and a most en-
joyable day’s cricket brought to a close, the score at the time being 17, without
the loss of a wicket. The interest of the spectators never seemed to flag for a
moment during the game, and few left the ground before it was over. The
collapse of the Australians in their first innings was a great surprise ; but it was
generally prophesied that in their second venture they would give a far better
account of themselves.
All hope of their doing this soon Vanished next morning. Play began at a
quarter to twelve, the same bowlers as at the beginning of the match doing
duty for Cambridge. Each batsman scored a couple, and a bye was added,
and then the fast bowler dismissed Spofforth, the first wicket falling for 22.
C. Bannerman came in, and there seemed some prospect of a stand being
made. Both he and Allan hit hard. With the help of a three from the latter,
and a couple of fours from the former, the total was raised to 41, at which
point Allan retired caught and bowled. Horan now faced Bannerman, and
on these two everything depended. The new comer cut Steel twice for three,
and his partner drove Morton for four ; but when 60 was reached a tide of bad
luck set in against the Colonials. A fine shot at the wicket from cover point
by Mr. Bligh got rid of Bannerman. His successor, Murdoch, who had played
so well in the first innings, was caught off the next ball. Three and four
wickets for 60. Gregory made a single, but in the next over was bowled by
Morton, Bailey who followed meeting the same fate the last ball of the same
over. Garrett, who joined Horan, made eight, and helped to raise the score
to 77, when he too fell to Morton. Blackham was the next man in, and soon
after his arrival Morton was taken off. A chance of running out Horan, and a
hard catch from Blackham were missed, the result being that the bowler seemed
to get wild, and was hit to the square-leg and to the on for four. Ford went
on at 96, and in his second over clean bowled Horan, who had played a most
careful and patient innings. Boyle came in, and the 100 was reached ; but
when two more had been added the innings closed, Blackham being caught at
the wicket, and A. Bannerman being absent through illness.
69


CAMBRIDGE.
Ist Innings.
Hon. A. Lyttleton, b Murdoch... 7 2
11. Whitfield, b Spofforth
Hon. E. Lyttleton, run out .. 15
A. G. Steel, run out ... ... ••• 59
D. Q. Steel, cand b Spofforth 13
L. K. Jervis, b Murdoch ... ... ... ... ... 28
Hon. Ivo Bligh, cC. Bannerman, b Boyle 21
P. H. Morton, cC. Bannerman, b Boyle ... .. n
C. Pigg, b Boyle ... .. ... •• ••• ••• 11
A. F. J. Forde, not out ... ... ... ... ••• 22
H. Wood, b Spofforth 2
Byes 3 ; leg-byes, 4 ... 7
Total 285
BOWLING ANALYSIS.
Ist Innings.
Boyle 148 balls 7 maidens 82 runs 3 wickets
Allan 28 o 26 o
Spofforth .... 129 4 85 3
Garrett.. .... 12 o 10 o
Horan ...... 16 o 20 o
Murdoch ... ... 88 6 46 2
AUSTRALIANS.
Ist Innings.
C. Bannerman, b Morton
W. Murdoch, b Morton ... ... 47
T. Horan, b Morton ... ••• o
D. Gregory, c Lyttleton, b Morton 5
T. Garrett, b. Morton 13
F. Spofforth, bA. G. ‘Steel ... o
G. Bailey, cA. Lyttleton, b Steel... 5
J. Blackham, 1.b.w., b Morton ... o
F. Allan, not out ... ... ••• 12
H. Boyle, st. A. Lyttleton, b Steel 9
A. Bannerman, b Morton
Byes, 2 ; leg-byes, 5 .. 7
Total in
2nd Innings.
thrown out by Bligh ... .. 26
c Whitfield, bA. G. Steel ... fo
b Forde... ... ••• 24
b Morton ... ... ... 1
b Morton ... ... .. 8
b Morton ... ... .. 17
b Morton ... ... o
cA. Lyttleton, b Steel ... 13
c and b Morton .. ... 6
not out .. . • • • • • o
absent
Byes 7
Total 102
BOWLING ANALYSIS.
Ist Innings.
Steel 100 balls 7 maidens 59 runs 3 wickets
Morton ... ... lO 415 7
2nd Innings,
Steel 97 balls 7 maidens 47 runs 2 wickets
Morton 76 9 45 5
Ford 24 3 3 1
70


The following is from the Home Hews ;—
DINNER TO THE AUSTRALIAN CRICKETERS,
JULY 23.
A grand banquet to the Australian Cricketers took place at
Willis’ Rooms, the Duke of Manchester in the chair.
The Chairman gave the loyal toasts. He said : I have to pro-
pose to you to drink “ The Health of Victoria, by the Grace of
God Queen of England, Empress of India, and Sovereign of the
most-populous and widely-extended empire that the world has
Hver seen.” (Cheers.) There was a talk a while of the diminu-
tion of that empire, but I am happy to see symptoms of its
increase. (Loud cheers.)
In proposing the toast of “ The Prince of Wales,” the Chair-
man said His Royal Highness had visited and appreciated Canada.
He had not yet visited Australia or New Zealand, but it was to
be hoped the day would come when His Royal Highness would
be able to do so. (Loud cheers.) He had, however, set all who
had not yet acted on it a good example, for he had joined the
Colonial Institute—(laughter and cheers) —and by so doing he
had shown his appreciation of the colonies, and of their value in
extending the Empire over which his mother ruled. (Cheers.)
He (the chairman) was proud to be there to meet so many
colonists who would one day be His Royal Highness’s subjects.
.(Cheers.) It was said that their guests had come to England to
play cricket, but he believed they had come more for the sake
of seeing the Princess of Wales. (Cheers and laughter.) The
toast was drunk with great cordiality.
In proposing the next toast the Chairman said : I have now to
.ask you to drink the health of our guests this evening. (Cheers.)
lam ashamed to say that I am ignorant, disgracefully ignorant,
of the game of cricket, and as the eyes of so many experts are
on me, I will not venture to say much on that subject ; but there
is one point to which I can most sincerely advert, and most
cordially remark upon, and that is the pluck and spirit which
have induced the Australian cricketers to come half-way round
the -world to play an old English game on the soil of Old Eng-
land. (Cheers.) lam happy to know that they have not been
altogether unrewarded. Glear, hear.) They, of course, did not
expect to come all this way, encountering all the risk of times
;aud seasons, and win every match they played in ; but I am
happy to hear that they have won ten matches against five lost,
whilst three have been drawn. (Cheers.) I think that is an
;ample success and reward for the enterprise, and I will add also,
the patriotism, t'.ey liave shown in coming to England. (Heir,
hear.) The spirit which I have said I admire in them is precisely
the same as that which induces the Canadians to come every
year now to shoot at Wimbledon. They and you come in


friendly rivalry in national sports, but the ground of my admira-
tion is that I take it as a proof that our colonists are ready to
share with us in any enterprise which England, or any portion
of the Empire, may he called upon to undertake in more serious
rivalry, if unhappily we should have to enter the lists against a
foreign enemy. (Cheers.) That is a spirit which we all admire
in them, and that is the spirit in which we all welcome them to
“ Home, sweet home.’' I beg to give you “ The Australian
Cricketers, coupled with the name of their captain, Mr. Gregory.”
The toast was drunk with three times three, the company rising
to do it honour.
Mr. D. W. Gregory, who was very warmly received, said :
My lord duke and gentlemen, I have to thank you very much
for the kind manner in which your grace has proposed the toast
of the Australian cricketers, and you, gentlemen, for the extremely
cordial manner in which you have accepted that toast. I am
sure it will be gratifying to our friends in the colonies that leading
men from Australia should have done us so much honour this
evening, by inviting us to this brilliant assembly, and I am con-
vinced that the recollection of this festival will ever be treasured
in *the mind of every member of the team. We shall carry back
nothing but agreeable recollections of our trip across the ocean
to visit the dear old country from which we all sprung, and we
shall ever be grateful to our friend John Conway, from whom the
idea emanated; but for his idea the majority of us probably
would never have seen Old England. Not that we lacked the
good-will, for many Englishmen who have come over lately have
told me that Australians are more English than you are here.
(Laughter and cheers.) lam sure in one thing we are quite as
English as you, and that is, in our love of cricket; and on that
point I may say that we did not come here with any idea of
defeating your best men, like the Gentlemen of England or the
splendid team we have been playing yesterday and to-day. Our
idea was to measure our strength against your county elevens,
and against such antagonists we have more than held our own.
(Cheers.) I beg again to thank you very cordially, and I only
hope in some future year we may be able to send teams to cope
with the flower of England, not merely at cricket, but in every
manly sport. (Cheers.) Mr. Conway tried to make the team as
representative in its character as possible ; but, unfortunately, in
Queensland and South Australia they were not so far advanced
in cricket as in New South Wales, Victoria, and Tasmania, and
consequently he had to make up his number from the latter
places. He had to work hard to get it together, but he has done
so with much more success than any of us anticipated. (Cheers.)
There being calls for Mr. Conway, that gentleman rose and
added a few words, stating that all his trouble had been amply
repaid by the very creditable and harmonious manner in which
all the members of the team had worked together.


Mr. Childers, M.P., said lie bad been entrusted with a toast
which would be received with enthusiasm, for it was “ England
and her Colonies.’' (Cheers.) At present, when public attention
bad been drawn for months to another part of the world, it was
right to look once more in the direction of the colonies—(hear,
hear) —and to propose a toast in the spirit of “ Ships, Colonies,
and Commerce,” which used to be the backbone of meetings like
these. (Hear, bear.) In regard to the subject to which he had
alluded, he had heard that a battle royal was going on at the
present time as to which public department was to have the
honour of administering the affairs of Cyprus. The War Office
claimed it, the India Office claimed it, but he hoped the colonies
would get it —(cheers)— and he trusted that, under the administra-
tion of that great department, they would have in this latest
addition to Her Majesty’s dominions another of those brilliant
countries such as were the colonies, with which the greater part
of that assembly was connected. He spoke to them as a colonist
himself, one who, having passed the best and most active years
of his life amongst bis brother colonists, bad come back to an
active life here. He knew what the colonies were worth, and he
was most anxious to maintain in full force that great Imperial
system to which the mother country owed so much. Whatever
might have been said in regard to maintaining the integrity of
the Empire, the knowledge that the prosperity of the Empire
was tied up with the prosperity of the colonies was thoroughly
appreciated at the present time, and such assemblies as these
were likely to cherish and foster the feeling here. (Cheers.) In
regard to the special occasion which had brought them together,
there was a time when many would have been surprised that
cricket should have found its way with brilliancy and success to
the Antipodes ; but now it was understood that Englishmen
carried with them to their new homes, not only the same mind
and principles, but the same amusements. There were few
things better calculated to bind all together than the knowledge
that it was not only in the counting-house and the Senate that
Englishmen and colonists had the same feelings, but that in
their moments of leisure and amusement both naturally turned
to the same sports. Whether in the field, on the racecourse, or
in the cricket field, Englishmen were Englishmen all the world
over. (Cheers.) In Gleig’s “ Life of Wellington,” the great
duke, speaking of the younger officers who distinguished them-
selves at Waterloo by showing the coolness for which all English
officers are distinguished, said, “ My younger officers behaved as
if they were in the cricket field.” (Cheers.) If that were so in
the army, so also was it in other walks of life, and we could not
better describe a good Englishman than by saying he makes a
good cricketer. (Cheers.) He had just come from a place where
proceedings w T ere carried on very much after the manner of
cricket. Some of them were “in” and some of them were


“out.” (Laughter.) The party to which he belonged had had a
very good “ innings ” some years ago. (Laughter.) But of course
they could not alwavs win the game. The triumphant Eleven
seated near him would understand that those who got the best
first innings did not always win in the long run —(“ Hear,” and
laughter)—and he was afraid that as his party was “ out ”at
present it would have to do the fielding for some short time
longer. But they would not despair. Englishmen were good
cricketers because they could last and stay well, and he hoped
that it would always be the characteristic of public men that,
they, too, could be patient and “ stay,” showing all the good
cricketing qualities of the Eleven beside him He had been
asked to connect the toast with names which would be respected
and honoured by all who had been there. Proceeding by seniority
of the representatives of the colonies, he would call first upon Sir
Henry Barkley to reply for the Cape—(cheers)—from the suc-
cessful government of which he had lately returned, though he was
better known to many here —himself amongst the number, for
he had had the honour of being a member of his Cabinet—as a
successful and beloved Governor of Victoria. (Cheers.) Captain
Jupp, in the absence of the agent-general, would respond for
New South Wales ; Mr. Deniston Woods for Victoria, Sir Arthur
Blyth for South Australia, while for New Zealand, last, but by
no means least, Sir Julius Vogel would respond. (Cheers.)
The toast was drunk with great enthusiasm.
Sir Henry Barkley said that although the Cape had not had
the daring, like the Australian colonies, to send home a team of
cricketers to beard the British lion in his den, he could assure
them that during his term as Governor there had been no lack
of enthusiasm on the subject of cricket, and one of the favourite
annual matches always was Colonial born against the Mother
Country, in which, he was bound to say, on account of their
youth and greater practice, the Colonial born were generally vic-
torious. As the right hon. gentleman (Mr. Childers) had said,
this love of cricket and all open-air manly exercises amongst
our colonists is by no means the least important of the guarantees
for the progress of the colonies, which all here are as anxious
as I am to see. We all desire to see that great British
Empire a greater Britain—built up on a solid and enduring
basis ; and though, no doubt, community of race and nationality
and the love of civil and religious liberty which actuates them all
was sure to join the widely-spread British colonial communities
together, at the same time it was no light matter that they
should also sympathise with each other even in their amuse-
ments. As their noble chairman had said, it was that com-
munity of feeling which would enable colonists to stand side by
side with our soldiers and sailors whenever the need came for
acting together—(cheers)—and would tend to that great federal
council of the empire which some of them were dreaming of.


With such widely-spread sympathisers they would he all the
better qualified to take a seat in that Imperial Parliament which
still regarded the Derby Day as a great national festival —
{laughter) —and to send teams to compete at Wimbledon and
elsewhere.
The other gentlemen named having responded for their re-
spective Colonies,
Sir Charles Clifford proposed “The Health of the
Chairman,” the toast being honoured with the heartiest recep-
tion. The Duke of Manchester briefly responded, and the pro-
ceedings then terminated.
The banquet itself was the most largely-attended affair that
has ever met before in London, where Australia was concerned.
The company numbered about two hundred, and would have
been very much larger but the capabilities of the room prevented,
and many coming up to the last moment for tickets had to go
without them. The charge for admission was two guineas, and
the banquet will be a red-letter day in Australian annals, and was
a credit to all who had a share in its management.
TWENTIETH MATCH.
AUSTRALIA v. TWENTY-TWO OF CREWE.
After a refreshing rest since their defeat by Cambridge, the
Eleven commenced this match on the 26th July, and defeated the
Crewe of Eighteen by 99 runs.
Gregory sent in Bannerman and Murdoch, and the latter was soon had at
cover point for 1. Horan followed, but C. Bannerman lost himself in cutting
high balls. Gregory followed, and Horan was had on the same suite, and the
Crewites were jubilant. Gregory was caught at the wickets for 23, Spofforth
made a short stand, and Garrett followed his captain’s example for 35.
Bailey enjoyed but one ball, and was caught and bowled. Blackham followed,
and Allan and he ran up 10, when Allan was caught. Boyle had no chance
of scoring, and Alick Bannerman could not bat on account of his hand. Ihe
innings terminated for 130. In the 10 minutes which were left before time was
•called, Spofforth and Garrett dismissed 2 of the opposing Crewe ; the rest of
the innings fell principally to Spofforth and Boyle on the morrow, the Eighteen
being disposed of for 54 runs. _
The Australians made 102 in their second innings, of which Charles Banner-
man made 29, Blackham 24, Spofforth 18, and Gregory 10. On Saturday the
weather was very fine, and play was resumed at noon. Spofforth got 10
wickets for 33, and Boyle 10 for 43. Only Forde succeeded in obtaining
double figures, and for a total of 79, Crewe were defeated by 99 runs. The
Eleven proceeded to Keighley, and on Monday, July 29, commenced a match
against Eighteen of Town and District.


AUSTRALIANS.
Ist Innings.
C. Bannerman, c Lyons b Dillon...
2nd Innings.
7 c Rylott b Turnbull 29
Murdoch, c Lyons b Dillon
Horan, c and b Dillon
Gregory, c Banks b Dillon
Garrett, c Banks b Dillon
Spofforth, c Rylott b Holden
Bailey, c Trevithick b Dillon
Blackham, c Banks b Dillon
Allan, c Moorcroft b Rylott
Boyle, not out
A. Bannerman, hurt
Bye, 1; leg bye, 1 ; wides, 4
1 c Wilson b Rylott 3
I c Laird b Rylott 1
23 b Rylott 10
35 c Holden b Timmis 6
24 rut out » 18
o c Moorcroft b Turnbull 2
23 c Rylott b Timmis 24
10 c Laird b Rylott 2
o c Rylott b Turnbull 4
o not out o
6 Bye, 1 ; wides, 2 3
Total 130 Total 102
BOWLING ANALYSIS.
Ist Innings,
Rylott .. 64 Balls. 7 Maidens. 25 Runs. 1 Wickets.
Dillon .. 100 5 54 7
Wilson .. 36 4 20 o
H assail
Hassall ... 40 6 6 o
Holden ... 40 1 9 j
2nd Innings.
Rylott ... 180 Balls. 28 Maidens. 32 Runs. 4 Wickets.
Dillon ... 20 o 10 o
Wilson
Wilson ... 44 3 14 o
Holden ... 8 o 8 o
Turnbull (1 wide) 12 o 9 2
Timmis
92 8 26 3
TWENTY-TWO OF CREWE
Ist Innings.
Ist Innings. 2nd Innings.
Lyons, b Garrett 3 c Garrett b Boyle o
Turnbull, c and b Garrett o cC. Bannerman b Spofforth... o
Holden, b Boyle 5 c Murdoch b Spofforth o
Lawler, b Boyle 2 c Murdoch b Spofforth 4
Forster, st Blackham b Boyle ... 1 absent o
Trevithick, b Spofforth 12 cA. Bannerman b Boyle ... 1
D. H. Brownfield, b Spofforth ... 1 b Boyle 2
Moorcroft, b Spofforth o cA. Bannerman b Spofforth .. 3
Dillon, c Murdoch b Boyle
Wilson, b Spofforth
Timmis, b Spofforth
Rylott, c A. Bannerman b Boyle ...
Hassell, st Blackham b Spofforth.
Banks, c Blackam b Boyle
Davenport, c A. Bannerman b Spoff.
Worsdell, c C. Bannerman b Boyle
Brown, b Boyle
Laird, c Koyle b Spofforth
Ford, c Murdoch b Spofforth
2 c Blackham b Boyle 9
o b Boyle 7
o 1b w b Boyle 7
I c and b Boyle ... 3
7 c Boyle b Spofforth 6
o b Spofforth 2
o c Horan b Spofforth 3
I st Blackham b Boyle o
b Spofforth 3
5 c Garrett b Spofforth o
5 st Blackham b Boyle 18
2 c Murdoch b Spofforth 6
Broughton, b Spofforth 2 c Murdoch b Spofforth 6
Owen, c Bannerman b Boyle .. 1 not out o
Allan, not out ... o b Boyle 2
o b Boyle 2
4 Byes 3
Bye, 1; wides, 3
Total 54 Total 79
76


AUSTRALIANS.
1st Innings.
2nd Innings.
C. Bannerman, b Reynolds
54
c Normington, b Nash
... 9
A. Bannerman, c Normangton, b
b Nash ...
... 6
Nash ...
55
Horan, b Nash ...
47
not out...
... 6
Gregory, run out ...
I
Murdoch, run out ...
2
not out
4
Boyle, b Roberts ...
3
Spofforth, c and b Roberts
3
Garrett, c Smith, b Roberts
o
Blackham, c Nash, b Reynolds ...
12
Bailey, c Normington, b Nash
17
Allan, not out
o
run out ...
••• 5
Byes, 9 ; Leg byes, 2 ; Wides, I
12
Byes, 2
... 2
BOWLING ANALYSIS.
Twenty-Two of Crewe.
Ist Innings.
Boyle
Garrett
m Balls. ii Maidens. 25 Runs. 9 Wickets.
48 6 12 2
Spofforth
60 6 13 1
2nd Innings.
Boyle
Spofforth
TWENTY-FIRST MATCH.
AUSTRALIA v. EIGHTEEN OF KEIGHLEY.
The weather was fine, the wicket good, and Gregory won the toss. The
two Bannermans represented Australia and Nash and Reynolds bowled. The
brothers displayed splendid cricket, Charley in his usual dashing style contri-
buting 54 in a short time, while Herculean Alick played with his usual patience,
and was at last caught by Nash. Horan played brilliantly, but sadly misjudged
a run. Garrett secured a duck egg and time was called.
On the 30th July the weather was still fine, and Bailey, having partnered
Blackham, gave place to Allan. The innings concluded for a total of 206.
Of the play of the Eighteen, the only noticeable feature was the innings of
Tobin, who scored 49 with very steady batting. He is the son of a well-known
squatter m Victoria, and was lustily cheered by his brother Australians. When
Tobin was disposed of the end soon came, the innings closing for 104. When
time was called, the Eighteen had lost 6 wickets for 38, having followed their
innings. At its conclusion the Australians had only 33 to get to win, to do
which, however, cost them the brothers Bannerman and Allan.
Total 206 Total for 3 wickets 32


BOWLING ANALYSIS.
Ist Innings.
Nash ... ... 240 Balls. 30 Maidens. [44 Runs. 3 Wickets.
Reynolds... ... 124 14 42 2
Roberts ... .. 104 8 39 3
Tobin ... ... 100 10 30 o
Barratt ... ... 20 4 40
Hawke .. ... 12 o no
Waring .. .. 28 1 12 o
Scott ... ... 48 8 12 o
2nd Innings.
Nash ... .. 52 Balls. 6 Maidens. 9 Runs. 2 Wickets.
Roberts ... ... 12 1 10 o
Reynolds... ... 40 5
11 o
EIGHTEEN OF
Ist Innings.
Smith, c and b Spofforth
Hawke, c Boyle, b Spofforth
Butterfield, b Spofforth
Reynolds, c Garrett, b Spofforth ...
Tobin, b Spofforth ...
Sedgwick, c and b Boyle ...
Priestman, b Spofforth
Normington, b Spofforth ...
Foulds, c Blackham, b Spofforth ..
Scott, b Spofforth ...
Roberts, b Spofforth
Warren, b Boyle
Barrett, c A. Bannerman, b Spof-
forth
Nash, b Garrett
Anderton, c A. Bannerman, b
Spofforth
Driven, run out
Asquith, c Spofforth, b Garrett
Allarton, not out ...
Byes, 3; Leg byes, 4 ... 7
KEIGHLEY.
2nd Innings.
b Spofforth 1
b Garrett ... ... ... 21
c and b Spofforth ... ... 3
cC. Bannerman, b Boyle ... 13
c Llackham, b Boyle ... ... 7
c and b Boyle ... ... .. o
b Spofforth ... .. ... 7
b Spofforth ... ... ... 5
b Spofforth ... .. ..14
b Spofforth ... ... ... 1
cA. Bannerman, b Boyle ... 1
1 b Boyle ... ... ... 4
c Murdoch, b Spofforth ... 10
c Bannerman, b Boyle ... 24
c Boyle, b Spofforth ... ... I
1 not out ... ... 8
6 c Gregory, b Boyle ... ... 8
o c Bailey, b Boyle ... ... o
Byes, 4 ; Leg byes, 1... 5
Total... ... ... 102 Total ... ... 133
BOWLING ANALYSIS.
Ist Innings.
Boyle 124 Balls. 14 Maidens. 39 Runs. 2 Wickets.
Spofforth 140 14 53 12
Garrett ... ... 18 2 9
2nd Innings.
Allan ... ... 32 Balls. 2 Maidens. 24 Runs, o Wickets.
Spofforth 144 8 59 8
Garrett ... ... 48 3 21 2
Boyle 76 2 34 7
78


TWENTY-SECOND MATCH.
THE AUSTRALIAN ELEVEN v. EIGHTEEN OF ROCHDALE
AND DISTRICT.
On August i st, at Rochdale, this match was commenced, and
excited a very great amount of local interest.
A start was not made until I o’clock, when the Australians began batting
with the brothers Bannerman, the bowling being shared by Tye, late of the
Nottingham County Eleven, and Bucklay. C. Bannerman commenced hitting
freely, driving two successive balls from Tye to the on for 4. When the total
was up to 29, C. Bannerman was bowled. Horan came in next, but the score
was unchanged when A. Bannerman was run out. Gregory followed, and at
36 Horan was bowled. Murdoch joined Gregory, and a good stand was made.
At 54 Taylor relieved Tye, and at luncheon time the score was 61. When
the game was continued the score was increased to 80, when Murdoch fell to a
catch, having played W’tll for 20. Garrett failed to score, and at 90 Gregory
played on, having batted in tine style for 30. Spofforth and Allan were each
caught at slip, and eight wickets down for 108. Bailey and Blackham then
got together, and offered a determined resistance, although several changes of
bowling were tried. The total was steadily raised to 159, wdien Bailey was
caught in the slips for a brilliant innings for 38. Boyd was absent, so the
venture closed at 5 o’clock for 159.
The Eighteen began their innings, but made a poor start, losing 3 wickets
without a run. When stumps were drawn they had scored 29 for 4 wickets.
Play was resumed next day at 25 minutes to I. Holroyd and Irving (not
out) with 6 and 16 respectively, went on batting to the bowling of Spofforth
and Garrett. Before adding a run to his score Irving was caught at mid-on,
and 12 runs later Holroyd was bowled by Garre, t for a well-played innings of
19. The next few batsmen made a veiy poor stand, and at luncheon time
12 wickets had fallen for 81 runs. When play was resumed the innings was
soon over for 124 runs, being 35 runs to the good.
The Australians entered on their second innings with A. and C. Bannerman
against the bowling of Buckley and Tye. The score was only up to 5 when
C. Bannerman was bowled off his pad. and at 7 Horan was bowled by Tye.
Gregory was taken at point without scoring, and when the total had reached
37 Murdoch was smartly caught at the wicket. Garrett came in, but was at
once bowled ; thus, for the second time during the match, failing to score.
A. Bannerman’s next partner was Bailey. Their partnership, however, did
not last Jong, as Bannerman was bowled at 55 for an excellent 29. Spofforth
was at once bowled. Allan came in, and shortly after, time was called, the
-9core being left as under. Owing to the heavy rain on Saturday, no start
could be made in this match until after luncheon. The Australians who had
lost 7 wickets for 63, soon finished off their innings for 72, leaving the Eighteen
108 runs to get to win. To accomplish this task they began batting with
Holroyd and Butterworth, to the bowling of Boyle and Spofforth. Five wickets
fell for 41, and at 10 minutes past 5 the rain came down and put a stop to the
game for 20 minutes. After a few minutes’ play rain stopped all further idea
of playing, and the match was left drawn.


AUSTRALIANS.
Ist Innings.
C. Bannerman, b Buckley ... ... 18
A. Bannerman, runout ... ... u
Horan, b Tye 5
Gregory, b Holroyd ... ... 3°
Murdoch, c Buckley, b Taylor ... 20
Garrett, b Taylor ... ... ... o
Spofforth, c Buckley, b Taylor ... 9
Blackham, not out .. 5
Allan, c Buckley, b Taylor ... 9
Bailey, c Tye, b Taylor 38
Boyle, absent ... ... ... o
Byes ... ... ... 4
Total 159
The Eighteen scored 124 and 50 for 6 wickets.
2nd Innings
b Tye 5
b Buckley ... ... ... 29
b Tye ... ... ... ... 1
c Mellor, b Tye ... ... o
c Pilling, b Tye ... ... 13
b Buckley ... ... ... o
b Buckley ... ... ... o
not out ... ... ... ... o
Ibw, b Buckley ... .. 6
c Pilling, b Buckley ... ... 8
c Boyes, b Tye .. ... 3
Byes, 6 ; Leg-byes, I 7
Total 72
TWENTY-THIRD MATCH.
AUSTRALIANS V. TWENTY-TWO OF BUXTON.
This match was commenced on Aug.- 5 at Buxton, in showery
weather, and in the presence of a very large company. Blackham
was suffering from a bad finger, and his place was taken by H.
Hyslop. The wicket was very dead, owing to the late heavy
rains, and the Australian captain showed great judgment, on
winning the toss, in putting the Twenty-two in to bat. Boyle and
Spofforth bowled capitally, and carried all before them.
The innings finished just after luncheon for 77. Spofforth took twelve
wickets for 30 runs, Boyle six for 38, and Garrett two for 6.
The innings of the colonists was commenced by A. and C. Bannerman, and
the bowling of the Twenty-two was opened by Brown and Marlow. Runs
came very slowly at starting, and the score was only up to 5 when C. Ban-
nerman wns easily caught at cover-point, and Horan caught at short-leg from
the second ball he received. At 10 Gregory was caught and bowled, and
then Murdoch came in The total was slowly taken to 25, when Flint relieved
Marlow. At 44 Murdoch played on, having batted carefully for 15. Spofforth
only made a single, and was then caught at short-leg. At 53 Bailey was
caught at mid-off, and five runs later Garrett was bowled. Allan was out leg
before at 66, and then Boyle and A. Bannerman played out time. On the
following day the match was brought to a conclusion in wet and dull weather.
The Australians went on batting at half-past eleven with A. Bannerman and
Boyle, to the bowling of Brown and Flint. The score was steadily increased
to Bx, when Boyle was bowled. Hyslop came in, but after scoring 4 lost
Bannerman, who was clean bowled for a very fine defensive innings of 42, in
which were two 3’s and eight 2’s. The innings finished at twenty minutes
past twelve for 97, or twenty to the good.
80


The Twenty-two went in, but when they had made 20 for one wicket,
a very heavy thunderstorm stopped the game for an hour and ten minutes.
When play was resumed ten wickets were soon obtained for 49. The play
was greatly interrupted by rain. The tail end of the team showed much bettef
form, and brought the total up to 134. With no chance of finishing the match,
the Australians went in a second time, and when time was called they had
lost one wicket for 17 runs, the match thus ending in a draw.
THE TWENTY-TWO.
First Innings.
A. Shipton, c C. Bannerman, b
Boyle .. .. ... ... 12
Marlow, b Boyle .. .. ... 1
Prior, c Bailey, b Boyle .. .. o
Milne, b Boyle ... .. .. 2
Chapman, b Spofforth .. ... 1
Brown, c Boyle, b Spofforth ... 8
Armitage, c Boyle, b Spofforth ... 3
Whatmough, c Gregory, b Spof-
forth ... ~ .. .. 6
Marsland, c Gregory, b Garrett ... 16
W. Shipton, run out ... ... o
Harrison, Ibw, b Spofforth ... o
Barry, st Murdoch, b Spofforth .. 2
Brewery, b Garrett .. .. o
J. Chappell, c and b Boyle ... 4
Hubberstey, b Spofforth ... .. o
Hartley, c Boyle, b Spofforth .. 3
F. Woodruffe, b Spofforth .. 1
Copes, b Spofforth .. ... 10
Flint, notout .. .. ... o
T. Woodruffe, b Spofforth .. o
C. Chappie, c Allan, b Spofforth o
Anderson, c C. Bannerman, b
Spofforth ... .. ... 4
Byes 2, leg byes 1 .. 3
Total .. .. 77
Second Innings.
b Spofforth ~ .. 3
c Gregory, b Garrett .. .. 5
b Boyle ... .. .. .. 5
b Boyle .. ... .. ... o
b Spofforth ... ... ... 3
b Garrett.. .. .. .. 13
cA. Bannerman, b Boyle ... 1
c Spofforth, b Boyle .. .. 14
c Horan, b Spofforth ... .. 1
b Boyle .. ... ... .. 17
b Garrett .. ... 4
run out .. .. .. .. 8
b Boyle .. ... ... ... 12
b Spofforth .. ... ... o
b Garrett,. ... ... ... 1
absent .. .. .. .. o
cA. Bannerman, b Garrett .. 11
c A. Bannerman, b Boyle .. o
b Spofforth ... .. ... 12
b Allan .. ... .. .. 3
notout .. .. ... •• 9
c Hyslop, b Allan .. .. 1
Byes 7, leg byes 4 .. 11
AUSTRALIANS,
First Innings.
A. Bannerman, b Whatmough ... .. ... ..43
C. Bannerman, c Anderson, b Brown .. ~ .. 4
Horan, c Harrison, b Marlow .. ... .. .. o
Gregory, c and b Brown .. ... .. ... .. 2
Murdoch, b Whatmough .. .. ... .. ... 15
Bailey, cJ. Chappell, b Flint .. .. .. .. 5
Garrett, b Whatmough .. .. .. ... . . 5
Spofforth, c Harrison, b Whatmough ... ... ... 1
Allan, Ibw, b Brown .. .. ... ... .. 5
Boyle, b Flint ... .. .. .. .. •• 14
Hyslop, not out .. .. ... ... .. .. 4
Total .. .. .. .. •• ..97
In the second innings, Allan scored (not out) 9, Gregory (not out) o, Hyslop
(b Whatmough) f ; byes 2 —total 17.
81


The Eighteen.
Riley, b Spofforth
•• 3
Boys, c Gregory, b Spofforth '
•• 3
Moore, b Spofforth
.. o
Melling, c Bailey, b Spofforth
.. 7
J. Bullock, st A. Bannerman, b Boyle
.. o
Parker, b Boyle..
•• 5
TWENTY-FOURTH MATCH.
AUSTRALIANS v. EIGHTEEN OF BURNLEY.
This ene-day match was played oa August 7th, at Burnley, the
weather dull and wet, but the attendance very large.
The eighteen went in first, against the bowling of Spofiforth and Boyle A.
Bannerman kept wicket. Hardly any of the local team could do anything
with the bowling. Fifteen wickets had fallen for 71, when the rain fell very
heavily, and stopped play for an hour and twenty minutes. On resuming, the
innings finished for 102. Burrows played a capital innings for 39. At twenty
minutes to four the Australians began batting, with C. and A. Bannerman, to
the bowling of F. Branch and Melling. C. Bannerman was easily caught at
slip, after making a single. Horan came in, and for a time the game was
played through a drenching rain. At four o’clock the men were obliged to
retire. After forty minutes’ interval, Horan scored 7, and was then bowled.
Murdoch and Allan were each bowled, and then Gregory and A. Bannerman
played steadily, and took the score to 35, when both were disposed of—Gre-
gory being well caught at long-on, and Bannerman Bowled. Spofiforth was
taken at cover-point without scoring, and seven wickets weredown for only 36.
Bailey and Boyle gave little trouble, and then Garrett and Hyslop played
pluckily to save their side from a defeat. They managed to keep their wickets-
up, and when time was called the Australians had scored 47 for the loss of nine-
wickets, the match being left drawn.
Jobling, b Boyle ... .. .. .. o
F. Branch, b JSpofiforth
Tunstal!, bbpofifoith
H. Bulloch, c Murdoch, b Boyle ... .. ..2
Roberts, b Spofforth
Burrows, c Murdoch, b Allan .. .. •• 39
Blake, st A. Bannerman. b Spofforth .. .. 3
Nash, c Boyle, b Spofforth ... ..6
F. Branch,run out .. .. .. .. o
Hayhurst, c Allan, b Boyle .. ... ... 5
Maudsley, not out ... ... ... ... lo
Byes, 3; leg byes, 5 ... ... ... 8
Total
... 102
Australians.
C. Bannerman, c Branch, b Melling
A. Bannerman. b Nash ...
Horan, b Melling
Murdoch, b Branch
Allan, b Branch..
Grego-y, c Boys. bNash
Spoflfonh, c Jobbling, b Nash
Bailey, c Tunstall, b Branch
Boyle, c Nash, b Branch...
Hyslop, not out...
Garrett, not out...
7
3
o
Total
o
o
o
82


TWENTY-FIFTH MATCH.
AUSTRALIANS v, EIGHTEEN OF STANLEY CLUB.
In the presence of a large company, this match was commenced at
Liverpool on August Bth.
The Australians, who were first at the wickets, scored 238. Mr Gregory
played a fine innings of 70, Boyle 58, and A. Bannerman 32. The Eighteen
had lost three wickets for 3 runs when the stumps were drawn for the day. In
fine weather, and in the presence of a large company, the match was continued
on the following morning, the Eighteen continuing batting, but made a poor
show against the bowling of Spofforth and Garrett. Three men—McCormack,
Roper, and Cotlam —got into double figures, but were badly supported. At
luncheon time fourteen wickets were down for 65, and on resuming the innings
was quickly finished off for 71. Spofforth obtained eleven wickets for 44 runs,
and Garrett five for 27. Having, of course, to follow their innings, the Eigh-
teen began their second attempt with A. Sharp and McCormack, to the bowl-
ing of Spofforth and Garrett. They made a rather worse exhibition in their
second innings than they had done before. The innings was thorougly unin-
teresting, and at half-past five closed for 91, leaving the Australians with an
•easy victory by an innings and 71 runs.
TWENTY-SIXTH MATCH.
AUSTRALIANS v. EIGHTEEN OF DUDLEY.
This match was commenced at Dudley on August 12th. The Eighteen won
won the toss, and put the Colonists in to bat. This proved to be very good
judgment, as a very poor show was made. The two Bannermans were got rid
of without making a run, and Gregory was soon caught at mid-off. Horan hit
his wicket after scoring 20, and the wickets fell rapidly. No one could do
anything, and the score was 35 for 9 wickets. Bailey and Blackham played
capitally and steadily, increasing the score. Bailey made two fine leg-hits for
.4, but at 59 he was well caught at point. The innings thus closed just after
luncheon for 59, After the usual interval, the eighteen went in against the
bowling of Boyle and Garrett, and lost two wickets without a run. Then the
wickets went down one after the other. Platts got into double figures, but
jne of the others did anything. The innings finished at ten minutes to five
for 33. Boyle bowled wonderfully, taking twelve wickets for 19 runs. The
Australians commenced their second innings with A. Bannerman and Black-
diam, to the bowling of Caldicot and Brookes Blackham was soon bowled,
and Bannerman caught at short leg. Murdoch and Tobin raised the score to
23, when the latter was bowled, and time was called, the score being 23 for
four wickets. On the following morning the Australians went on batting with
Murdoch and C. Bannerman, to the bowling of Brookes and Platts. Banner-
man scored very freely from Brookes, so that bowler gave way to Walker at
56. The change soon took effect, as in his second over Murdoch was caught


A. Bannerman, run out
15
not out
5
C. Bannerman, b McIntyre
.. 58
not out
•• 39
Murdoch, b McIntyre
4
Garrett, b McIntyre
. 0
Gregory, b Barlow ..
. I
Boyle, b Barlow ...
2
Blackham, b Barlow ..
4
Horan, c oft Barlow
33
Spofforth, c off Barlow
5
Allan, run out
3
•
Bailey, not out
. 10
Sundries ...
5
Sundries
3
at mid-on, Horan followed, and at 89 Bannerman was neatly caught at long-
on for a very brilliant and finely-played innings of 50, in which were
three 4’s, seven 3’s, and six 2’s. Gregory then came in, and at luncheon time
the score was xoB for five wickets. On resuming, the total soon reached 123,
and then Horan was caught at mid-off for a capital 30. Gregory was soon
afterwards caught at slip, and Garrett caught at long-leg. Boyle and Bailey
took the score up to 168, when the latter was run out through a good piece of
fielding. Allan joined Boyle, and offered a great amount of trouble. The
bowling was several times changed, but to no purpose. The rain fell heavily
at five o’clock, the score being then 218 for nine wickets. After twenty
minutes’ interval, play was resumed, but after five runs the rain came down,
again, and stumps were drawn.
TWENTY-SEVENTH MATCH.
AUSTRALIA V. LANCASHIRE.
This match against eleven of the county of Lancashire was commenced on
August l6th, and attracted a large attendance. The Lancashire eleven included
Hornby, Mclntyre, and Kershaw, and was a very strong team. In their first
innings the Lancashire team scored 97, the bowling of Spofforth and Garrett
being particularly severe upon them. The Australians commenced their
innings after luncheon, C, Bannerman and Horan scoring very rapidly against
many changes in the bowling. The Australians with the loss of two wickets
had scored 100 when play for the day ceased.
On the following day they were less successful with the exception of A.
Bannerman, who made 15, and Bailey ten. None of the others reached double
figures, and were disposed of for a total of 140. The Lancashire eleven faced
the bowling in the second innings more successfully. Spofforth and Allan
being knocked about considerably. R. G. Barlow made their top score with
40. Rowly and Kershaw each 27 and Appleby 20. The innings closed with
a total of 162. In their second innings, the Australians sent in the two Banner-
mans, who had scored 47, completely defying all attempts to dislodge them,
when unfortunately rain fell, and put a stop to the play. The game was drawn
greatly in favour of the Australians.
AUSTRALIANS.
Ist Innings. 2nd Innings.
140 With no wicket down 47


First Innings
91
Second Innings.
Grand Total
AUSTRALIANS.
.. 7i
.. 162
First Innings
. .. .. ...
54
Second Innings
... 84
•
Grand Total
... 1^8
LANCASHIRE.
Ist Innings, total 97
2nd Innings.
A. N. Hornby, b Spofforth ...
V. K. Royle, b Spofforth
I. E. Kershaw, c off Garrett ...
E. T. Taylor, b Boyle ..
R. G. Barlow, c off Hoyle
O. B. Lancashire, c off Boyle ..
A. Appleby, b Spofforth
E. R. Rowley, b Garrett
A. Watson, c off Spofforth
W. Mclntyre, c off Spofforth ...
R. Tilling, not out
Sundries ..
Total ...
TWENTY-EIGHTH MATCH.
AUSTRALIA v. EIGHTEEN OF YEADON.
On August the 19th, the Australian team commenced a match against eighteen-
of Yeadon District, who in their first innings scored 91. There was a
large attendance of spectators, but the ground was in a deplorable condition.
The eighteen was a strong one, including several good bowlers. The first
innings closed for 54, and the second innings of the eighteen for 71. There
was great excitement towards the close of the match, which was closely con.
tested, under most unfavourable circumstances. The Australians making 84,
in their second innings, and only falling short of the required total by
24 runs.
EIGHTEEN OF YEADON
85


TWENTY-NINTH MATCH.
AUSTRALIA v. EIGHTEEN OF SCARBOROUGH.
■O
The Australian Eleven secured another great Yorkshire victory against a
strong eighteen at Scarborough. The match commenced on August 22nd.
and the Australians taking first innings had only lost four wickets at the con-
clusion of the day’s play. The Bannermans and Horan completely collared
the bowling, and their opponents were thoroughly demoralised in the field.
On the second day the eleven completed their score of 295, and in a couple of
hours had disposed of ten of the Scarborough team for 79 runs. On the
third day the latter completed their innings for a total of 134, and were then
put through in fine style in their second innings for 125, the Australians
winning in one innings with 46 runs to spare.
AUSTRALIANS.
First Innings ... .. 295
EIGHTEEN OF SCARBOROUGH,
First Innings .. ... ... .. .. .. 124
Second Innings ... .. ... .. 125
Grand Total .. ... ... 249
THIRTIETH MATCH.
o-
AUSTRALIA v, EIGHTEEN OF HASTINGS.
This Match commenced on Monday, the 26th August, and
although the Hastings 18 was supposed to be a strong one, the
Match was a very one-sided affair. A very large attendance
assembled, the weather being fine, and the Australian Eleven
winning the toss went in to bat.
Bailey made the score of 100 runs before the stumps were drawn, and
Murdoch also not out 41. The Bannermans had comparatively short lives.
On the second day Bailey was had after making only 6 runs, but Murdoch ran
his score up to 73. The total of the Eleven being 260. The 18 in their Ist
innings scored 131, largely off Spofforth, but in their 2nd innings he was too
many for them, and they were disposed of rapidly for small scores with a total
•of 82, the Australians winning the Match in one innings and 47 runs to spare.
AUSTRALIANS.
First Innings .. .. 260
EIGHTEEN OF HASTINGS,
First innings .. .. .. .. •• •• •• 13 1
Second Innings .. ... .. ... •• ... ... 82
Second Innings
Grand Total .. 213


1st Innings.
Sharp
SUSSEX.
... 25
2nd Innings.
3
H. Whitefield
1
7
Chari wood...
• •
18
...
0
Whitefield...
. .
1
...
0
Butterworth
2
0
Greenfield...
9
21
Anstruther ..
9
0
Lillywhite ...
0
11
Weigall
0
..
...
4
Humphrey...
1
not out
..
O
Smith
8
O
Sundries ..
6
Extra...
1
Total ...
..
80
Total
47
1st Innings.
C. Bannerman
AUSTRALIANS.
.. IS
2nd Innings.
16
A. Bannerman
X
7
T. Horan ...
2
3
G. Bailey ..
..
0
not out
21
D. Gregory
5
not out
5
W. Murdoch
T. Garrett...
F. Spofforth
F. Allan ..
H. Boyle ...
J. Blackham
Sundries
Total
••
0
4
2
4
18
23
1
75
With 3 wickets down
52
The Australians won
by 7 wickets.
THIRTY-FIRST MATCH.
AUSTRALIA v. SUSSEX.
■o
This Match commenced at Brighton on the 29th August, the County Eleven,
including Charlwood, Butterworth, Lillywhite, and Humphrey. The County
Team went in first and scored 80 runs, Sharp made 25 and Charlwood 18. In
Australia’s first innings C. Bannerman made 15, Boyle 18, and Blackham 23,
their total being 75. In Sussex’s 2nd innings the Rev. J. F. Greenfield made
21, and Lily white 11, while six of the team were disposed of without scoring
their total being only 47, Spofforth fully maintaining his reputation as the
“ Demon Bowler,” securing most of their wickets. C. Bannerman scored 16,
and Bailey 21 in the Australian 2nd innings, the latter not out. They scored
a victory by 7 wickets with 1 run to spare. Garrett’s bowling was remarkably
good in this match, he secured 13 wickets for 39 runs.
87


1st Innings.
Ridley
PLAYERS.
... 18
2nd Innings.
... 10
Barlow
... 16
... 8
J. Phillips...
... 19
... 14
Hearne
... 8
... 12
McIntyre ...
... 10
... 3
Chari wood
0
... 12
Wheeler ...
0
4
Watson
0
7
H. Phillips
.. 0
2
Lilly white ..
0
2
Barratt
0
0
Sundries
... 11
Sundries ...
2
Total
... 82
Total
... 76
Grand Total
158
AUSTRALIANS.
THIRTY-SECOND MATCH.
AUSTRALIA v. PLAYERS
The Australians commenced a match on September 2nd v. the Players of
England, at the Oval. The Players ran up 82 in their first innings, Chari-
wood, Wheeler, Watson, Phillips, Lillywhite, and Barrett being all disposed
of without scoring, Spofforth’s bowling being very destructive, he obtaining 7
wickets and not meeting one batsman who appeared to understand him. The
Eleven, in their first innings, scored 77 runs. The Players, in their second,
76, only 4of whom reached double figures, the highest score being 14. The
bowling being just as effective, some of the best bats being disposed of for 2
and 3 runs each. In the second innings of the Australians, A. Bannerman
made 26, C. Bannerman 15, and Bailey 12, their total reaching 89, the match
■being won by the Australians by 8 runs only.
1st Innings, 77.
2nd Innings.
C. Bannerman
A. Bannerman
T. Horan
G. H. Bailey
D. Gregory, not out
H. Boyle
T. Garrett
F. Allan
W. Murdoch
F. Spofforth
J. Blackham
Sundries
Ist Innings
Grand Total


THIRTY-THIRD MATCH.
AUSTRALIA v. GLOUCESTERSHIRE.
This match, which at one time it was intended to abandon,
on account of the insulting conduct of W. Gr. Grace, but which
was reinstated in the list when the ample apology, published
elsewhere, was received, was commenced on Thursday, the sth
September. The Gloucestershire team included W. G. Grace,
Gilbert, Townsend Bush, E. M. Grace, G. F. Grace, and Miles-
This county, which was the champion county of 1877, had put
together as strong a team as the Australians could be called upon
to meet in all England, and following their defeat at Cambridge,
the result must have been highly gratifying to our team. The
match was played at Clifton in fine hot weather, on a splendid
wicket, the attendance during the progress of the match being
exceedingly large.
Spofforth was again the successful bowler, disposing of Gilbert, Cranston,
Townsend, Bush, G. F. Grace, R. P. Smith, and Miles in the Ist Innings, the
aggregate scores of these being twunty-four runs. In the 2nd Innings he was
equally successful, Gilbert, Townsend, Bush, Miles, and Cranston only
securing between them twenty-six runs ; Garrett had the champion leg before
wicket bowled, G. F. Grace and the Doctor was caught off him. Ihe total
score of the Gloucester Ist Innings was xi 2, of which W. G. Grace made 22,
Dr. Grace 22, and Moberly 23. Before the first day’s play was concluded the
Australians had scored Xll with the loss of only four wickets. Garrett’s play
was magnificent for 43? und Spofforth s brilliant, but lathei risky for 44*
C. Bannerman put his 33 together very rapidly, and when play com-
menced on Friday, A. Bannerman and Spofforth, who held the
wickets, continued a grand exhibition of batting, the former securing 19 and
the total reaching 183 runs. In Gloucestershire’s 2nd Innings none of the
reputed cracks could make any show against the bowling, and it was lefi foi
the tail of the team, if there could be such a thing in such a county to
make the few runs that were secured. The seventeen runs which were
required to win, Spofforth and Bailey knocked together in a few minutes, and
the Australians were victors by ten wickets and three runs.
GLOUCESTERSHIRE,
ist Innings. 2n d Innings.
W. G. Grace, c off Boyle ... 22 Ibw, b Garrett ...
\V. R. Gilbert, c off Spofforth .. 2 b Spofforth
J. Cranston, c off Spofforth ... o c off Spofforth
F. Townsend, c off Spofforth ... 10 b Spofforth
J. A. Bush, c off Spofforth ... 5 b Spofforth
G. F. Grace, b Spofforth .. 1 b Garrett
R. P. Smith, b Spofforth ... 4 notout
R. F. Miles, b Spofforth .. 2 b Spofforth
W. O. Moberly, c off Garrett .. 23 c off Allan
Rev. F. W. Wright, b Garrett ... n b Allan ...
E. M. Grace, not out ... •• 22 c off Garrett ••
Sundries ... •• 10 Sundries
Total .. 112 Total
Grand total ... ••• *97-


AUSTRALIANS.
1st Innings.
2nd Innings.
C. Bannerman, c off Miles
•• 33
T. Garrett, c off Miles
43
G. H. Bailey, c off Miles
... 6
not out
• • ...
9
T. Horan, b Grace
•• 5
A. Bannerman, run out .
19
F, Spofforth, b Gilbert ...
... 44
not out
... • •
... 4
W. Murdoch, run out
0
D. Gregory, c off Miles ...
.. 1
J. Blackham, b Miles ..
.. 0
F. Allan, c off E. M. Grace
.. 14
H. Boyle, not out
., 11
Sundries
•• 7
Sundries
... 4
AUSTRALIANS,
ist Innings.
A. Bannerman, b teel
o
2nd Innings.
2
F. Spofforth, b Meel
16
18
C. 1 annerman, c off Appleby
21
54
T. Horan, c off teel ..
16
16
T. Garrett, c off ."teel
8
j
H. Boyle, c oft' v teel
6
9
F. fi llan, c oft’ Steel ..
3
not out
i
G. Bailey, b Appleby
9
40
D. Gregory, b .^ppleby
15
o
J. Blackham, c off Rickey ...
H
not out
30
W. Murdoch, not out
44
• •
49
Sundries
5
Sundries
27
Total ... ... 183 With no wickets down .. 17
The Australians won the match by ten wickets.
THIRTY-FOURTH MATCH.
AUSTRALIA v. GENTLEMEN OF ENGLAND.
RETURN MATCH.
A certain victory for the Australians is apparent in this match had time per-
mitted its completion. The match was commenced on Sept. 9, at Scarborough.
Murdoch carried out his bat in Australia’s first innings for t a splendidly got 44.
The Sydney crack secured 21 ; Spofforth and Horan 16 each, the Captain 15
and Blackham 14, the total reaching 157. Before the play concluded for the
day the Gentlemen had made 76 runs for the loss of 2 wickets, but on the fol-
lowing day there was a complete collapse, Hornby, Forbes, Evans and Appleby
failing to score. ' pofforth took 6 wickets and Garrett 4. The total score
being 109. In their 2nd innings the Australians had scored 249 with the loss
of only 8 wickets when time was called, and the match was drawn. The
Sydney crack had the top score with 54, Murdoch 49, Bailey 40, Blackham,
not out, 30, Spofforth 18 and Horan 16. The fielding of the Gentlemen was
completely demoralised, 27 sundries being added to the score. The match was
the subject of most favourable comment in all the leading papers.
Total ... ... 157 Total with 8 wkts. down 249


First Innings.
C. J. Thornton, b Garrett
•• 17
A. Lyttelton, b Garrett
- 35
A. W. Ridley, b Spofforth
... 23
H. R. Webb, b Spofforth
... 13
A. N. Hornby, b Spofforth
... 0
Forbes, l^pofforth
... 0
W. H. Hadow, by Spofforth
... 4
A. G. Steel, c off Spofforth
- 3
A. W. Pearson, b Garrett
... 6
J. L. Evans b Garrett
, .
... 0
A. Appleby, notout
. .
... 0
Sundries
8
Total
The match was drawn.
... 109
GENTLEMEN OF ENGLAND.
THIRTY-FIFTH MATCH.
AUSTRALIA V. PLAYERS.
On September nth a return match between the Australian Eleven and the
best Professional Players was commenced at Prince’s. The Australians scored
236, and the Players 160. U, Gregory scored 57, the Sydney Crack 61,
Spofforth and" Blackham 25. For the Players, Ulyett scored 79 and
Ridley 27. The attendance was very large, and the weather fine. The whole
of the two days were occupied by these two innings, the Players being 76 runs
runs behind.
AUSTRALIANS.—First Innings.
A. Bannerman .. .. •• .. 1
C. Bannerman .. .. ... ..61
T. Horan ... .. .. ..16
F. Spofforth .. .. .. • ■ 33
W. Murdoch .. . .. ..14
G. H. Bailey .. .. .. ... 2
T. Garrett .. •• .. ..12
D. Gregory .. .. ... 57
J. Blackham ... .-. .. •• 25
F. Allan, not out ... ... ... •• 5
H. Boyle ... .. ... 6
Sundries... .. ..• •• 4
Rigley..
J. Selby
A. Shrewsbury
E. Lockwood
Flowers
E. Barratt
H. Phillips
A. Shaw
W. MTntyre
Blamires, not out
Sundries ..
The match was drawn.
Total
PLAYERS.—First Innings.
G. Ulyett .. • -
Total
... 236
91


THIRTY-SIXTH MATCH.
AUSTRALIA v. EIGHTEEN OF SUNDERLAND.
'The match between the Australian cricketing eleven and eighteen of Sunder-
land resulted in a victory for the latter by 71 runs. Spofforth, Horan, and
Bailey were absent.
THIRTY-SEVENTH MATCH.
AUSTRALIA v. TWELVE OF WEST SCOTLAND.
The Australian team commenced a match against twelve of the West of
Scotland Club, at Glasgow, on the 13th September. The first innings of the
Australians closed for 268 runs; the first innings of their opponents closed for
99, and the second innings for 85. The Australians won in one innings with
84 runs to spare.
Mr. T. W. Garrett, of the Australian team, writing to a friend in this city
from Dudley, in Staffordshire, says : —“ We are playing 22 here, and just fancy
what a team they have against us, Mycroft, J. C. Shaw, Platts, Hay, and
Rylott, five of the best professional bowlers in England, and everywhere we
go it is the same style of thing. They do all they can to beat us. Rylott has
played against us five times already, and the probability is he will play against
us three or four times more before we leave England. In this match, it will
be remembered Australians made 59 in their first innings, and disposed of
Dudley for 33, whilst in the second innings of our men only nine wickets were
down for 223, C. Bannerman making 50. The match was drawn in conse-
quence of rain. Regarding Midwinter, Garrett remarks that “Mid.” is very
sorry he allowed Grace to persuade him not to play with the Australians for
various reasons, not the least perhaps being the large sum he was offered to play
with our men, and it seems that he has gone off his play altogether since.
The engagements of the team in America are as follows :—They will play
the St. George’s Club, New York, on the Ist and 2nd October ; the German-
ton Club, Philadelphia, on the 3rd, 4th, and sth ; at Toronto, 7th and Bth ;
Detroit, 9th and 10th; Chicago, 12th and 14th; St. Louis, 16th and 27th.
They will, perhaps, make one day’s halt at Salt Lake City, and finish up at
San Francisco on the 24th, 25th, and 26th. They expect to leave for Australia
on the 28th October, and by that time they will have travelled some 60,000
miles during their trip. The balance of the money over from their banquet,
amounting to £BO, is to be used in gettling gold lockets as souvenirs of the
trip to England,


ADVANCE AUSTRALIA.
(From London Punch, August 10.)
“ They are coming up, Master,” cried Toby in a fever of excitement; “the
entire Eleven.”
“They are heartily welcome,” replied Mr. Punch, with one of his most
graceful bows, as the Ambassadors from the Antipodes, with t'poflorth, Boyle,
and the bannerman Brothers, at their head, entered the sanctum.
“ Be seated, my dear boys,” exclaimed Mr. Punch, cordially.
The Eleven sunburnt heroes looked at one another and smiled.
“We will sit down with pleasure,” said the spokesman, but our favourite
practice is to make a stand. You should see us at Lord’s.”
“ I have seen you both at Lords and Commons,” returned Mr. Punch, with
enthusiasm. “ I have seen you North, South, East, and West; I have seen
you all round. A splendid team ! Australia may well be proud of you, and
England, too, as branches of the British willow, though grown at the Anti-
podes.”
“ H’m, I don’t know,” exclaimed the spokesman; “we are pretty well.
But there are lots as good, or better, where we come from. Still I think that
we have given you a fair taste of the Cornstalk.”
“ Before or behind the wickets, in the field —everywhere, as the artfulest of
bowlers or the best of bats —you are simply magnificent.”
“Oh no, we are not, continued the spokesman, with modest pride. “As
you may have seen by reading the report of the speeches at the dinner the
other night, we don’t consider ourselves the top-twigs of the Australian willow.
But, as I say, we are pretty well, and quite equal to teaching our grandmother
—if not our own Alma Mater —a thing or two.”
“Ah ! Cambridge was rather too much for you, but think what an eleven it
was ! You should have tackled them at the beginning instead of at the end of
your campaign. But never mind that. Don’t be put out,” said Mr. Punch ,
good naturedly.
“We never are, except after a long innings,” returned the spokesman.
“Still, we don’t think you quite understand us. Now, sir, you are certainly
the best informed man in the Old Country.
“Undoubtedly,” replied Mr. Punch, who never flinches from the truth.
“ Well, Sir, what do you know about Australia? Now, don t look it out in
the Encyclopaedia Brilannica, but tell us off-hand. ”
“ Australia is a magnificent country,” returned Mr , Punch , with enthusiasm.
Then he added, with a little hesitation, ‘ ‘ and it s famous for all sorts of
things, ”
“ What things?”
“Oh, gold, and Australian beef, and kangaroos—and ’possums, wombats,
and ornithorhyncusses, black swans, black fellows, and bushrangers, and ”
then Mr. Punch came to a full stop.
“ I thought so,” said the spokesman, with a smile ; “ your ideas about Aus-
tralia are of the most zoological Gardenish character. Are you aware, Sir,
that our cities are full of magnificient buildings? Are you aware, Sir, that
trade and commerce are nowhere more prosperous than they are in our quarter
of the globe ? Are you aware, Sir, that with us all the learned professions are
represented by the ablest men, and that our Public Schools and Universities
are patterns which might be imitated with advantage in every quarter of the
globe ? Are you aware, Sir, that our Press is as free, as enterprising, and as
respectable, as the Press of Great Britain? Are you aware, Sir, that
“ Stop, stop,” interrupted Mr. Punch, “you overwhelm me. Believe me,
lam quite aware that Australia has taken gigantic strides in the march of
civilization, from the date of her first European settlement
“ You are alluding to Botany Bay, Sir.”
“ Not at all, not at all,” returned Mr. Punch, quickly.
“But we accept even the past of Botany Bay, Mr. Punch, said the spokes-
man. “ It is our boast that we currency-folk have been so sound at the core


that we have been able to absorb your convict refuse without contamination
from its criminal leaven. After all, it is only what our Old-Country ancestors
did about a thousand years ago, when they took to absorbing Danish pirates
first, and Norman cut-throats afterwards.”
“Then you know something of early English history?’’
“I should rather think we did! Even before it had the Green light
thrown upon it. What we complain of in the Mother-Country is—that it’s
not nearly English enough to suit our tastes.”
“Come, come,” remonstrated Mr. Punch. “Surely England takes the
lead in everything.”
” I like that !” replied the spokesman. “ Why, who taught you the bless-
ings of the ballot Act ? Who taught you ?”
“Well, you may, perhaps, be a little ahead of us in politics,” interrupted
Mr Punch ; but all social reforms begin in England.”
“You dare say that, when you know that Spiers and Pond came from Aus-
tralia 1 Oh, Mr Punch ! we blush for you !”
“Well, your hearts are in the right places, at any rate.”
“ I should rather think they were ! We love the Old Country. We know
how to handle the oar—as Trickett has taught you—as well as the bat;
and as for the rifle— should the time come— ‘ We don’t want to fight; but, by
Jingo ’”
“ ‘lf we do,’ dear boys, John Bull would rather, by a long chalk, rely on
Australian Volunteer Riflemen than Indian Sepoys. But a truce to all Jingo-
ism ; let us hope that is settled by the Berlin Treaty. Believe me, my dear
boys, when I assure you that I love you so that I have had serious thoughts,
on the invitation of a branch of my family settled in Melbourne, to pay you a
visit.”
“ You had better not ; for if you came we should certainly keep you And
although your presence in Australia would be the climax of our triumph, we
don’t want to ruin the Mother-Country right out ”
With this pretty compliment the Australian Eleven, after hearty handshakes
all round, withdrew.
“ Our counterparts, though our Antipodes ; and no blind side to them, big
bats as they are,” said Mr Punch. “No doubt about their nationality.
British Lions, every one. rinds of a feather, with the old cock, and no mis-
take ! May they and their great country, of a still greater future, prosper !
and may ‘ Advance Australia !’ long be the best description of her career, as
well as the device of her escutcheon !”
94


ALEX. BORTHWICK,
Manufacturer and Importer of
©Us, Colors, titllbitc tit ah,
GLASS, BBTJSHWAEE, &o.
Splendid Assortment, Stamped Golds, Decorations, Statuary,
Scene Papers, &c.
MANTELPIECES,
Marble and Enamelled Slate, Choice Designs.
SHOW ROOMS:
229 GEORGE ST., SYDNEY;
And at SO Market Street, MKh It O lit XE .
■m,
"Wholesale, Eetail, and Export
TOBACCONIST,
388 GEORGE ST., SYDNEY,
IMPORTER OF THE
Havanagh, Manila, and other Foreign Cigars,
The Celebrated GBD Pipes, and Tobacconist’s Goods in general.
C. B’s. CUT TOBACCOS cannot be excelled, if equalled. Packed in
Tinfoil Packets ftth, and in Tins of ilb, 2th, and 3th each.
The Trade and Country Storekeepers Supplied on liberal Terms.
ESTABLISHED 1864.


A Startling Problem Solved.
My friend, if Science us invites
Old ‘‘ things to bring to LIGHT,"
What study more improving is
Than that of Malachite ?
And strange it is that SaVANTS failed
To reach perfection’s goal
Until they tried experiments
On JOSEPH MITCHELL’S COAL.
This city never could he drained
Of sewage matter vile,
Until the Corporation tried
E. FOWLER’S PIPES AND TILES.
And why were they superior made
Than others, of the whole ?
Why simply this, because he burnt
J. MITCHELL’S SPLENDID COAL.
Substantial buildings spring around.
Despite contractors tricks,
Made durable as any stone.
By using NEWTOWN BRIQK-'.
And why in this peculiar line,
Are they head of the poll,
Why, ask them, and thev will tell you ’tls
By burning MITCHELL’S COAL.
To sing of Bell’s FELLMONGERED WOOL,
Or ELLIOTT BROTHERS’ GLASS,
Would be invidious since the claims
Of other friends we pass.
But every one in his own trade
Can reach ambition’s goal,
If he will do as these have done
And burn J. MITCHELL’i COAL.
The ROYAL stands of all Hotels
In town the very top,
THEY never serve their customers
A “ smoky ” steak or chop.
So HOUSEHOLDERS, yourselves, at once,
On Mitchell’s books enrol :
Do as the Koyal People do,
And burn NO OTHER COAL
MORALITY IA COALS.
When long cold wintry nights come on,,
What greater charm desire.
Than what a family find in
The circle round the fire ?
His little band of listeners,
The father then enrols,
And many a moral inculcates
Which can he taught from Coals.
The spark—the type of human life,
The blaze—of genius rare,
The smoke —of evanescent hopes,
In metaphor declare.
And at the last the ashes tell
Of death the end of all.
And as they calmly die away,
They vividly recall
How faithfully the Coal has burnt,
And thus they seem to say
“ We’re emblems of an honest life,
Which now have passed away I”
But dirt and cinders mean bad lives
And fruitless moments spent,
And Coals that end in such like waste
To burn are never meant.
That children should be taught these
J. MITCHELL much desires.
And that morality and warmth
Should jointly come from fires.
His Coals emit them both, so hence,
He strongly recommends
Their use for Household purposes,
To families and friends.
J. MITCHELL,
WHOLESALE AND RETAIL
COAL & FUEL MERCHANT,
HAY STEEET,
SYBMgT.
Mriaali Depots:-IFSWTOWM
MITCHELL’S Coal, 20s. per Ton, Cash
lls. Per Half-Ton, Delivered in Town.
Suburbs Extra Cartage. Correct Weight Guaranteed,
• ’f


/ ft
WIRE IN AUSTRALIANS,
AND SMOKE
NOAKE’S CIGARS
SMOKE MILD ! BURNT WHITE ! !
For Richness of Flavour,
Delicacy of Aroma,
And Parity of Tobacco,
NOAKE’S
ANCHOR MIXTURE
IS THE FINEST IN THE WORLD.
BUY YOUR SHIRT COLLARS AND TIES AT
J. H. HOARE & CO.’S,
472 ©JSOHSE ST.
Opposite the Markets.


CRICKETING SUITS
FOOTBALL SUITS.
YAOK.vtstt
ATHLETES' SUITS.
IMPORTED AND MADE TO ORDER.
David Jones & Company
Invite the attention of Cricketers, Yachtsmen and Athletes to their
superior stock pf
CRICKETING FLANNELS
YACHTING SERGES,
And specially Light and Durable Fabrics for Athletes’ use.
Tor Cricketers-
Flannel Trousers
For Yachting & Boating, For Athletes.
Blue and Scarlet 1 Jerseys Knickerbockers
Scarlet CausAk Frocks
Flannel Shirts
White Tights
Cotton Tulliw^^Sawers Trunks
Felt and Straw Hat:
Hat Ribbons
Leather & Elastic Bi
Carpet Cricket Bags
Serge Trousers’" Leotard Bodies
Serge Jackets . Caps
Leather Bat CaseSj with locks Hats, &c. Sash Ribbons, &c.
:o:
Cricketing, Boating and Athletic Clubs Supplied at
, Contract Prices.
AS’ Special Colors, Ribbons and other Requisites imported
when required.
David Jones & Company,
345 & 347, GEORGE STREET,
AND -
103 YOBK STEEBT,
