

The
Stafford Cox Collection
Red Lacquer Carved Chest
(Lot No. 79)


CONDITIONS OF SALE
1. The highest bidder to be the buyer, and if any dispute arise
between two or more bidders the lot so in dispute shall be,
immediately put up again, and re-sold, and the Auctioneer’s
decision to be final.
2. Every bid shall be at least 5 per cent, in advance of the previous
one, and no person will be allowed to retract his or her bid
after once taken.
3. With the exception of several lots, all items in this sale are
without reserve, but in the case of lots upon which there is
a reserve, the Auctioneers shall have the right to bid on
behalf of the vendor.
4. The clerk to sign the sale book for and on behalf of the vendor
and the purchaser.
5. The purchasers to give their names and places of abode, and to
pay part or the whole of the purchase-money, if required, in
default of which the lot or lots so purchased to be immediately
put up again and re-sold.
6. The lots to be taken away and paid for, whether genuine and
authentic or not, with all faults and errors of description,
at the buyer’s expense and risk, the day following the sale,
Messrs. Theodore Bruce & Co. not being responsible for the
correct description, genuineness, or authenticity of, or any
fault or defect in, any lot, and making no warranty whatso-
ever.
7. To prevent inaccuracy in delivery and inconvenience in the settle-
ment of the purchases, no lot can on any account be removed
during the time of the sale, and the remainder of the purchase-
money must absolutely be paid on delivery.
8. Upon failure to comply with the above Conditions, the money
deposited in part payment shall be forfeited; all lots uncleared
within the time aforesaid shall be re-sold by public or private
sale, and the deficiency (if any) attending such re-sale shall
be made good by the defaulter at this sale.
THEODORE BRUCE & CO.,
Auctioneers,
70a Grenfell Street,
Adelaide.


THE
STAFFORD COX
COLLECTION
TO d3E SOLD BY AUCTION
AT THE GALLERY BROOMS
OF THEODORE <BRUCE & CO.
ON THURSDAY AND FRIDAY
cNOVEMBER Ist and 2nd, 1923
Commencing each day at 11 a.m.
THEODORE <BRUCE & CO., Auctioneers
70a GRENFELL STREET, eTDELAIDE
1923


INTRODUCTORY NOTE
We have pleasure in presenting to the Australian public portion of the
Stafford Cox Collection, which has taken many years to gather together.
In 1920, under instructions from the Trustees of the late Captain Bedy,
we offered his collection in Sydney, and met with an appreciative response.
In April of this year we arranged similarly for the disposal of the collection
of Mr. Edward Gordon Lowder, late Commissioner of Customs of Shanghai.
We have had repeated requests from Adelaide people interested in Chinese Art
that the next available collection should be disposed of here. In certain of the
items, particularly the Ming period laquer furniture, Adelaide collectors should
deem themselves fortunate in having the opportunity of securing such excellent
specimens of an art of which Dr. Bushell asserts no good examples have been
produced for at least 150 years.
The collection contains pieces which range in age from the Han Dynasty
of more than two thousand years ago up to the early part of the reign of the
last Manchu emperor, Kuang Hsii. In it are items worthy of any Art Gallery
or Museum in the world.
The antiquity of Chinese porcelain, its variety and beauty, and the
wonderful skill of the Chinese craftsmen, accumulated from the traditions and
experience of centuries, have made the study of the potter’s art in China
peculiarly absorbing and attractive. There is scope for every taste in its
inexhaustible variety. Compared with it in age, European porcelain is but a
thing of yesterday, a mere two centuries old, and based from the first on
Chinese models,
Hobson, in his book on Chinese porcelain, says: “For my own part, I
consider that the decorative genius of the Chinese and their natural colour
sense, added to their long training, have placed them so far above their
European followers that comparison is irrelevant. Even the commoner sorts
of Chinese porcelain, made for the export trade, have undeniable decorative
qualities, while the specimens in pure Chinese taste, and particularly the Court
wares, are unsurpassed in quality and finish.’’
The notes throughout this catalogue are taken from the standard works
on Chinese Art by Dr. Bushell, Cosmo Monkhouse, Laufer, Hobson, Gorer and
Blacker, Chaffers, and others.
Commissions to purchase can be arranged, and the interests of clients in
the country and other States will be conserved and given the best attention.
TYRRELL’S LIMITED
6a Pirie Street, Adelaide, and 99 Street and
141 Elizabeth Street, Sydney


BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH
(Summarized from an account of Dr. Stafford Cox in the North China Daily
News, December 6th, 1922.)
£ ‘lt is not necessary to enlarge upon Dr. Stafford Cox’s qualifications as an
authority on Chinese Art, for they were established many years ago, and he is
well known as a lecturer on the subject. He has been collecting throughout his
long residence as a medical practitioner in China, and has had, during war
service in England, the curious experience of picking up treasures of Chinese Art
in London and being offered very much more than he paid for them by Chinese
connoisseurs when he took them back to China.
■'A long run of ill-health has necessitated a prolonged rest at Home. Dr.
Cox has therefore reluctantly decided to part with his collection,* with the
exception of his valuable paintings, which he will retain.”
* Portion of the collection is to be disposed of at Christie’s, part in Australia, and the
remainder in Shanghai.


THE PRINCIPAL PERIODS OF CHINESE ART
I. THE PRIMITIVE BRA.
1. The Period of Form. The actual beginnings of Chinese Art as such may
be said to have commenced with the Han Dynasty, B.C. 206-A.D. 221. During
that period form reached a standardized perfection of great variety, which has
been faithfully continued, with only minor modifications by the potters of
succeeding ages. The whole scheme of Buddhist symbols was utilized in the
designs of bronze and incised in the pottery wares, and also helped to provide a
basis for the decoration that followed in later centuries.
2. The Colour Period. Success in the attainment of a porcelain as dis-
tinguished from a more or less fine pottery belongs to this period, which may be
placed round about the beginning of the T’ang Dynasty, A.D. 618-906, and
developed gradually in monochrome colours, which were mixed with the glaze,
to the end of the Sung Dynasty, 906-1127, and the Yuan Dynasty, 1280-1368.
11. BRA OF DECORATIVE DESIGN IN COLOUR.
1. The First Period of Decorative Design. Hitherto no examples of designs
in colour having been applied to porcelain had been recorded. The Ming Dynasty
(1368-1643) saw this accomplished. The drawing is not well finished, but the
colours are of great richness. The palette is, of course, limited in range. Red
and blue, yellow and green, and aubergine being the only colours employed.
2. The Second Period of Decorative Design. This covers the Ch’ing or
Manchu Dynasty (1644-1908), including the reign of K’ang Hsi (1662-1722),
Yung Cheng (1723-1735), Ch’ien Lung (1736-1795), and from 1796 to the end
of the 19th century, during the reigns of Chia Ch’ing, Tao Kunng, and Kuang
Hsu, respectively.
The reign of K’ang Hsi is noted for the development of blue and white,
purity of paste, and also for the introduction of a new enamel, a green (Famille
Verte); that of Yung Cheng for a new colour, rose (Famille Rose) ; and that of
Ch ’ien Lung for the variety of its productions and the development of the famille
rose design.
No new designs were originated during the 19th century, but many of the
old forms were produced with modifications that give them an added charm.
Most of the pieces in this collection are fitted with carved Blackwood stands,
manv of which are works of art in themselves.


Flambe
Sang-de-boeuf and flambe, and their cognates, apple green and peach
bloom, represent the development of the earliest form of colour decoration in
China. The method was simply the mixing together of a colour or colours
with the glaze, which were then applied very thickly to the clay body, either
by the brush or by dipping. The process of firing them is governed by so
many contributing factors, over which the potter has little or no control, that
the results are mainly a matter of chance. Very few pieces realize the hopes
of the potter; the glaze may run badly in the firing, or the mysterious changes
that the chemical constituents undergo in the kiln may lack the indefinable
something which produces the perfect ruby red, or the clotted effect of the
sang-de-boeuf, or the rare apple green and peach bloom.
Some of the effects in the kiln are achieved by admitting currents of air
into it during the firing; but just what amount of air and at what point of
time in the process will produce the best effects is beyond the knowledge of the
potter.
1. Shallow flambe Bowl, 51 in. diameter, Tao Kuang.
2. Shallow 7 flambe Bowl, Ch’ien Lung.
3. Flambe and apple green Incense Bowl, 51 in. diameter, crackled, Tao
Kuang.
4. Large flambe Jar, 13 in. high, Yung Cheng. (This reign is celebrated
for its perfect flambes.)
5. Flambe Jar, Ch’ien Lung.
6. Ditto Vase, 8 in. high, Kuang Ilsh.
7. Ditto ditto, Bottle shape, 7 in. high, Kuang Hsii
8. Ditto Jar, 94 in. high, Tao Kuang.
9. Ditto Vase, Bottle shaped, Ch’ien Lung.
10. Ditto ditto, with splashes of sang-de-boeuf and apple green, 9 in. high,
Kuang Hsii.
11. Sang-de-boeuf Jar, with touches of flambe, Dog of P 6 handles, 10 in. high,
Kuang Hsii.
12. Ditto.
13. Flambe Jar, fluted, decorated with heavy unctuous colours, 11 in. high,
Tao Kuang.
14. Sang-de-boeuf Vase, 15 in. high, Kuang Hsii.


15. Flambe Jar, splashed with sang-de-boeuf and apple green, 10 in. high,
Kuang Hsu.
Lot 15
16. Japanese flambe figure of a Buddhist disciple, biscuit head, hands, and
feet. Hand slightly damaged.
17. Flambe Vase with white lip, 5 in. high, Tao Knang.
18. Liver colour Tazza, C'h’ien Lung. Slightly damaged.
19. Sang-de-boeuf Vase, with floral decorations in gold, crackled glaze,
Ch’ien Lung.
20.
21.
22.


23. Liver colour Bowl, 8 in. diameter, Yung Cheng.
24. Ditto Writer’s Water Pot, Yung Cheng.
25. Flambe Floating Bowl, Knang Hsii.
26. Small flambe Writer’s Water Pot, Kuang Hsii.
27. Sang-de-boeuf Vase, Bottle shape, with rare clotted effect, crackled glaze
overlaid with Imperial 5-claw dragon in gold. A Court piece. Early
Kuang Hsii. An exquisite example.
28. Flambe Jar, in deep unctuous colour, Yung Cheng. This, like Lot No. 4,
is typical of the early 18th century flambes.
Blue and White
Of all the ceramic wares of China, none has been more widely appreciated
throughout the Western world, as well as in China itself, than Blue and White;
and of the beautiful productions of the several periods none is so exquisite as
that made during the reign of K’ang Hsi. It possesses the five perfect points,
blue of the finest colour, white of the purest, the drawing clear and fine in
outline and shading, the shape elegant in form, and the glaze brilliant and
without flaw.
For intensity of colour, certain periods of the Ming dynasty and the reign
of Yung Cheng (the son of K’ang Hsi) are sometimes more attractive, even
though lacking the perfect whiteness of paste and brilliance of glaze. The
soft stippled effect of the Blue achieved by the artists of the reign of Ch’ien
Lung (grandson of K’ang Hsi) is also very beautiful, and its qualities com-
pensate largely for its lack of absolute perfection in paste and glaze.
The beginning of the reign of Knang Hsii marked a short-lived renaissance
of blue and white, as well as of other ceramic classes, and the examples
enumerated below approach closely the five perfect points of the K’ang Hsi
period. The blue of this class, as distinct from enamel blue, is an underglaze
form of decoration, and was the first colour to be used in design in China.
29. Wine Pot, figure of an infant, in blue panels, 7 in. high, K’ang Hsi.
30. Beaker Vase, decorated with the Taoist deities known as the Eight
Immortals, 18 in. high, Kuang Hsii.
31. Vase, Bottle shape, melon and foliage decoration, 8 ip. high, Tao Kuang.
32. Wine Pot, with original lid, fir tree decoration (typifying winter), handle
repaired, 6 in. high, Chia Ch’ing,


33. Set three Bowls, with Imperial dragons (5-claw) chasing the sun, 7 in.
diameter, Ch’ien Lung. Court pieces.
34. Tea Jar (popularly known as Ginger Jar), with ingenious design of
characters meaning happiness and longevity, formed by the trunks of
the bamboo, primus, and the pine tree. Conventional floral band
decorates the shoulders. 7 in. high. Ming.
35. Small round Tile or Jar Cover, with Imperial dragon chasing the sun,
3 in. diameter, K’ang Hsi. A Court piece.
36. Bowl, massively decorated outside with figures in various pursuits,
domestic and equestrian. A band of pheasants’ eyes diaper pattern,
surrounds the interior, while a round panel of children at play covers
the inside of the base. 8 in. diameter. Kuang Hsii.
37. Pair of Bowls, with very uncommon decoration, consisting of branches
of “Buddha’s Eingers” fruit and leaves. Yung Cheng.
38. Small Tea Jar, bearing the Empress’ own emblem (the phoenix) in
clouds. A very fine, delicate piece of decoration on faultless paste,
7 in. high, K ’ang Hsi.
Lot 38
39. Pair of Vases, with wave decoration around base, conventional floral
design on body, and Buddhistic emblems in small panels on shoulders.
The short necks are encircled by a joue-head band of fungus (typify-
ing happiness and longevity), 8 in. high, one cracked, Kuang Hsii.
40. Bowl, decorated with figures in a tea pavilion, landscape and figure panel
inside, 7 in. diameter, Yung Cheng.
41. Set six Wine Cups, with archaic scroll and key pattern decoration, Ch’ien
Lung.
42. Bowl, fine paste, band of floral design, 8 in. diameter, K’ang Hsi.
43. Writer’s Water Pot (suitable for pot pourri jar), floral design, 4 in. high,
Chia Ch’ing.


44. Bowl, uncommon design, horse and chariot, and figures in landscape,
four-claw dragon inside (insignia of the nobility not attached to the
Court), Yung Cheng.
45. Wine Cup, with conventional design, 2 in. high, Ch’ien Lung.
46. Vase, Flask shape, with “Long Eliza” and children in garden, 10 in.
high, Kuang Hsu.
47. Pair Bowls, conventional dragons on exterior, and fungus design inside,
7 in. diameter, Yung Cheng.
48. Tea Caddy, landscape panels, Ch’ien Lung.
49. Pair shallow Bowls, decorated with Korean Lion or Dog of F 6, diaper
border, Yung Cheng.
50. Plate, floral decoration, K’ang Hsi design, Kuang Hsii.
51. Pair Plates, decorated with conventional basket of flowers, K’ang Hsi
design, Kuang Hsii.
52. Pair Sweetmeat Dishes, Saucer shape, archaic design, 6 in. diameter,
Chia Ch’ing.
53. Three ditto, 8 in. diameter, Chia Ch’ing.
54. Beaker Vase, landscape decoration, 10 in. high, Kuang Hsii.
55. Vase, landscape decoration, metal rim, K’ang Hsi.
56. Set five small bowls, floral decoration, and key pattern border, Ch’ien
Lung. Excellent examples of the soft colouring of the period.
57. Bowl, landscape decoration, 5 in. diameter, Yung Cheng.
58. Jar, ring handles in relief, profusely decorated, floral bands, Ch’ien
Lung design, 10 in. high, Kuang Hsii.
59. Bowl, figure decoration, diaper border, four-claw dragon centre, Yung
Cheng.
60. Pair fluted Dishes, decorated with dragons and Buddhistic symbols,
K’ang Hsi.
61. Brush Holder, decorated in white relief on blue ground, 4 in. high, Chia
Ch’ing.
62. Small Bowl, decorated with “Buddha's Finger” fruit, slight crack,
K’ang Hsi. A gem of colour and glaze.
63. Pair small Dishes, Saucer shape, depicting a fisherman, Ch’ien Lung.
64. Small shallow Bowl, fungus decoration, Ch’ien Lung.
65. Pair ditto, floral decoration, Yung Cheng.


66. Tea Jar, with original cover, phoenix and floral decoration, Yung Cheng,
Porcelain covers of early pieces such as this are rare.
Lot 66
67. Pair Tiles, floral and Buddhistic symbols, Kuang Hsii.
68. Pair Plates, floral decoration, Kuang Hsii.
6!). Bowl, floral decoration, slightly cracked, K’ang Hsi.
70. Tea Jar, decorated with primus blossom breaking through ice (typifying
Spring), K’ang Hsi. A classic form of blue and white decoration,
and, in this instance, of the best period of blue and white.
Lacquer
The lacquered art of the Par East has long held the admiration of the
world European craftsmen have for centuries endeavoured to copy it by
means of copal varnish, an artificial mixture of resin, fatty oils, and turpentine.
Chinese lacquer, however, is not an artificial composition, but a ready-made


product of Nature. It is derived from the lac tree, or eh’i shu, which is
cultivated throughout Central and Southern China for the purpose.
The raw lac is coloured with a variety of materials, used singly or in
combination. The finest yellow transparent lac, called chao ch’i, is used as a
medium for metallic gold, as well as by the decorators as a final coat for their
pictures. Another yellow, the hua chin ch’i, “painters’ golden lacquer,” of
amber tone, owes its tint to an addition of pigs’ gall and vegetable oil. The
best red lacquer is elm ch’i, “cinnabar lac,” and is made by grinding native
cinnabar with the raw lac. A greenish-yellow is derived from orpiment; a
deeper and fuller green by the mixture of orpiment with indigo; a carmine red
from the safflower. In addition, mother-of-pearl, gold, and gold alloy of graded
silver tone are used for incrustation and inlay. All these colours and incrusta-
tions will be found in one or other of the examples of lacquer in this collection.
For a few notes on the craft of those pieces made during the Ming dynasty,
a small book, called the Ch’ing pi ts’ang, “Collection of Artistic Rarities,”
written by Chang Yin-wen and published in 1595, may be cited. After some
remarks on lacquer of the Yuan and Sung dynasties, the author proceeds:
“In our own Ming dynast} - the carved lacquer made in the reign of Yung
Ijo (1408-24), and that made in the reign of Hsuan Te (1426-85), not only
excelled in the cinnabar colouring, but in the finished technique of the body.
The craftsmen in their skill with the knife rivalled their predecessors. The
lacquer ware of thin body, flecked with powdered gold, the lacquer work
encrusted with mother-of-pearl, and the lacquer iidaid with plaques of beaten
gold and silver, these kinds are especially admired.”
Three types of lacquer are represented in this collection, the carved being
that of Soochow (the foremost centre of lacquer work from the Sung dynasty
to the reign of Ch’ien Lung); the stand supported by dragons, being the type
known as (and made at) Peking (the centre of the manufacture of carved
lacquer, as distinct from lacquered carved wood) ; and the round tray, etc.,
known as Foochow lacquer.
71. Foochow red lacquer Box, peach shape, emblem of longevity, decorated
with phoenix, Ch’ien Lung.
72. Black lacquer on Porcelain Brush Holder, inlaid with mother-of-pearl,
Yung Cheng.
78. Foochow red lacquer round Tray, Kuang Hsii.
74. Foochow red lacquer Box, 12 in. by 6 in., Kuang Hsii.
75. Foochow black lacquer carved square Table, Kuang Hsii.
76. Soochow Cabinet, lacquered in cinnibar red, standing on four handsomely
carved feet. The carved work is further lacquered in deep red and
overlaid with gold. Massively carved doors, the left one depicting
a woman with a fan and a boy with a set of reed pipes; the other,
a woman with a long pipe and a boy with books. The narrow panel
above the doors is bordered with charmingly painted landscapes and
Buddhistic symbols. The panel itself bears the inscription on a
banner carried by two men, “May all within thy house endure.” The


figured panel in the front of the hase is heavily overlaid with small
panels of gold. The principal reserves on the sides are deeply carved,
and depict various forms of ceremonial visitation.
Lot 76
From the style of the doors it would appear as though this piece
had been used originally as a shrine.


The top panel, composed of arches, has apparently been restored
in part, probably during the Ch’ien Lung period. The wood of the
side panels, door, and other reserves, is probably beech, the back cedar.
A handsome piece of furniture for a hall.
Height, 5 ft. C in.; 2 ft. 9 in. wide. Late Ming or K’ang Hsi
period.
Lots 77 and 78
77. Soochow lacquer Cabinet, lacquered in cinnabar red, the carved portion
bein'; further lacquered in deep red and overlaid with gold; the
bottom panel below the door encrusted with mother-of-pearl. Glass
front, sides, and shelf. Carved medallions of conventional floral forms,
phoenix and corner pieces of key pattern. Size, :J9 in. by 21 in. Ming
or K’ang Ilsi period.
78. Ditto.


7!). Soochow lacquer Chest (in two pieces) in cinnabar red lacquer, carved
portions overlaid with deep red lacquer, and further ornamented with
gold. In parts the deep red of the carved work is overlaid with black,
green, and yellow lacquer, and where this is done the gold is pencilled
on in fine scrolls. The mantel comprises two long, deeply carved,
figured panels, with pavilions and tea houses in rich gold relief; the
tiled floor is represented in various shades of satin-like lacquer, finely
pencilled over in gold and silver, other portions being encrusted with
mother-of-pearl. The two doors are of rich mellow tones, depicting
the tournaments in which military students were obliged to compete in
order to obtain the highest degree of rank. The four drawers are
delicately modelled scenes of ceremonial visits, in several tones of
lacquer super-imposed, and richly ornamented in burnished gold and
bordered with a narrow band of luminous texture, depicting landscapes
and Buddhistic symbols. Each side of the chest has seven carved
panels, describing pastimes and legendary scenes. Several woods
were apparently used in the making of this piece, and apart from the
variety of the craftsmanship is undoubtedly the work of more than one
artist. Beech, teak, and cedar, at least, are identifiable.
In assembling this piece it was found necessary to replace some
drawer bottoms, which were in too poor a state to be included.
Height, (i ft. by 3 ft. wide. Late Ming or K'ang Hsi period. (See
illustration on cover.)
80. Soochow lacquered Chest, in cinnabar red lacquer, some carved portions
overlaid with deep red lacquer and others with amber coloured
lacquer, and further ornamented with gold.
The door comprises two panels, depicting the reception of com-
petitors to the military tournament, illustrated in the large round
panel beneath. The base is fitted with a drawer depicting a cere-
monial scene. Each panel bordered with painted landscapes and
Buddhistic symbols.
Each side contains four carved and lacquered and gilt panels
describing the tournament games and the reception of the visitors at
its close.
The front feet are carved with figures and two fabulous animals
with riders.
Height, 4 ft. 3 in. by 18 in. wide. Late Ming or K’ang Hsi
period.
81. Soochow lacquered Screen, in cinnabar red, some carved portions over-
laid with deep red lacquer, and others with amber coloured lacquer,
and further ornamented with gold. Centre, round panel, depicting
scene at a military tournament. Carved Dogs of Fo on top edges
and carved fabulous animals forming the feet.
Height, 3 ft. by 18 in. wide. Late Ming or K’ang Hsi period.
82. Peking carved lacquer Stand, with polished black lacquer top, supported
by the spreading, interwoven tails of two four-clawed dragons, whose
spiked and scaly bodies curve down on either side to meet on a carved


red lacquer base, upon which the whole is supported. The base is
elaborately carved with clouds, hands of key pattern, and sweet-flag
design.
Height, 24 in.; diameter of top, 18 in. Ch’ien Lung period.
Lot 82
8.8. Pigskin (’best, lacquered in cinnabar red, with the Shon character (mean-
ing longevity) in seal script in gilt relief.
84 Ditto.
Jade, Agate, and Soapstone
Of nil tlic precious stones, jnde is the most esteemed by the Chinese. Chinn
is pre-eminently the motherlnnd of jnde. Wherens in Knropean literntnre
no such word existed prior to the loth century, the ancient lore of Chinn teems


with allusions to this stone, attributing to it all manner of miraculous
properties.
Perhaps the most effective use which the Chinese have found for this
beautiful stone is in the carving of sacrificial vases, incense burners, cups,
bowls, and the fashioning of the various Buddhas and the Taoist Immortals,
and in the inlay of lacquer and bronze. One of the most natural uses for it is
that of personal adornment. Laufer, in his book on jade, says: “Personal
adornment always exercised a deep influence upon social life, being full of
jmblematical significance, and speaking a language of their own understood
by the donor and the wearer. In their execution, the Chinese genius shows at
its best and rivals the greatest lapidaries of all ages. As long as there exists
in Chinese hearts the love of that which is beautiful, and as long as travellers
from other lands seek so eagerly these precious stones, so long will the story
of jade continue.”
85. Fluted Bowl of white jade, with two handles and engraved key pattern
border, Ch’ien Lung.
86. "White jade Ink Bowl, carved, Ch'ien Lung.
87 White jade Tray, with floral carving and key pattern border, 7 in. by
5 in., Ch’ien Lung.
88. Green jade standing Figure of a warrior holding a Sword of State, 7 in.
high. Ch'ien Lung.
89. Emerald green jade Figure of Kuan Yin (Goddess of Mercy), 3 in. high,
Ch’ien Lung.
90. Small white jade Bowl, with carved filigree handles and elaborately
carved blackwood stand, Ch’ien Lung.
Lot 91
91. Square incense Burner of white jade, with original jade cover, elephant
head handles and rings, on four feet and with Dog of F 6 on cover,
4 in. high, Ch’ien Lung.
A gem of dignified design and mellow tone.
92. Green jade Teapot, with dragon handle and elaborately carved with
floral scrolls and lotus-bud knob. Original jade cover. Ming.
93. 'White jade Sceptre (joue), 14 in. long, CVien Lung.
The sceptre is called a joue (meaning literally “As you wish”),
and was a favourable form of costly present from one highly placed
friend to another, and is part of the insignia of the Emperor and his
provincial viceroys.
94. "White jade Lotus Leaf, shaped writer’s water dish, Ch’ien Lung.


95. Carved grey jade Vase, with original cover surmounted by a Korean
Lion and with handles, 6 in. high. Ch'ien Lung.
Lot 96
96. Green jade Dog of Fo, 7 in. long, Ch’ien Lung.
The Dog of Fo or Korean Lion, “which has feet armed with
claws, and has a grinning face with sharp teeth and a curly mane.
It is the habitual defender of the thresholds of the temples and of the
Buddhist altars, and is very often represented in Chinese Art.”
Lot 97
97. Green jade-stone Vase, elaborately chased and carved, with elephant
head handles, with loose rings and original cover, surmounted by
Dog of F 6, 14 in. high, Ch’ien Lung.


08. Pair of brown (originally white; deeper colour due to age) jade Paper
Weights, with exceptionally deep carving of archaic dragons, and a
long inscription on side and bottom in obsolete script, S in. long, I lan
period.
00. Long piece Carved White Jade with sybolical landscape decoration,
6 in. by 4 in., Ynng Cheng.
100 Oreen jade Hair Ornament, carved with the seal character, meaning
longevity, Ch’ien Lung.
101. Ditto, with scroll carved handle. Ch'ien Lung.
102. Ditto, with carved reticulated handle, Ch'ien Lung.
103 Oreen jade Cup, reticulated double bandies, Ch’ien Lung.
104. Fungus shaped agate Vase, carved with leaves in high relief on each side,
and having handles carved to represent bamboo. The artist has
made great use of the colouring in the stone, (i in. high, Ch'ien Lung.
1 Oil. Agate Bowl, carved with lotus flowers, leaves, and stems, and bird in
high relief, stem fractured, Tao Kuang.
The infinite patience and skill required to cut such a hard and
brittle stone as agate is exemplified in the two pieces described above.
100. Carved Soapstone, standing figure of a Buddhist disciple, Ch'ien Lung.
107. Heated figure of Kuan Yin. in soapstone, delicate design etched on
draperies, 4 in. high, Kuang Hsii.
108. Standing figure of Kuan Yin. in soapstone, 4 in. high, Kuang Hsii.
109. Ditto.
Kuan Yin (the Goddess of Mercy) is the most honoured of all
Buddhist divinities in China. She is often portrayed as Kuan Yin
the Maternal, the favourite image of the domestic shrine, carrying a
child in her arms.
lit). Seated figure of Li T'ieh-Kuai, one of the Fight Immortals, represented
as a pilgrim, with gourd and staff, green soapstone, 8 in. high. Ch’ien
Lung.
Li T’ieh-Kuai is the scholar who left his body in charge of a
disciple while he went on a visit to heaven, and who, on his return,
found the body gone. He then entered the body of a lame beggar.
111. Mandarin’s Seal, name inscribed in old script characters, surmounted by
two Dogs of F 6, finely carved and engraved, 3 in. high, Ch’ien Lung.
112. Set of three Mandarin's Seals, inscriptions of the bases in seal characters
surmounted by Dogs of Fo, 2 in. liigh, Ch’ien Lung.
The softer qualities of soapstone render it a less difficult matter
to carve, but that does not give the mediocre artist any advantage.
In its graceful modelling and delicate chasing is the hall-mark of the
fine artist in jade, agate, or soapstone. Some jade is poorly carved,
as are also the commercial pieces of soapstone which appear in ship-
ments from time to time. The fine work in the pieces enumerated
speaks for itself.


113. "White jade oval Pendant in openwork floral design.
114. Ditto, openwork design in form of a Korean Lion or Dog of Fb.
115. Ditto, butterfly shape.
116. Ditto, triangular Pendant, parrot and foliage.
117. Ditto large Pendant, carved both sides with lotus pods and foliage,
phoenix, gourd, and peaches. An exceptionally fine piece of jade of
the “mutton-fat" texture and colour. Designed for Court use.
The above five Pendants are of the Ch’ien Lung period. Strung
by a black silk cord and worn with a dark costume, the beauty of these
pendants is greatly enhanced.
118. Green jade-stone Incense Burner, dragon handles with rings, Dogs of
Fb surmounting the feet, cover with elephants’ heads in relief holding-
rings, surmounted by Dog of Fb, 10 in. high. The whole is carved
out of two pieces of stone, and is engraved with floral scrolls and
emblematical designs. This is a monumental piece of carving, that is
further enhanced by the beautiful carving in the blackwood stand
upon which it rests.
Lot 118
119. Mottled green-jade Incense Burner, Dog of Fb handles hung with heavy
rings, the bowl supported on a tripod of Dogs of F 6 mounted on claw
feet. The cover is crowned with a Dog of F 6 carved in high relief,
with four elephant head handles hung with rings. Ch’icn Lung.


120. Brown jade (originally white; colour deepens according to age) temple
Ornament decorated with Pa-kna design. The eight diagrams or
symbols are said to have been developed by Fuh-hi (2802-2738 8.C.).
“The entire lines represent the male, strong, or celestial element in
Nature; the broken, the female, weak or terrestial, and by them the
Chinese philosophers attempted to explain all the secrets of Nature
and being. Han period. A remarkably rare piece.
Bronzes and Brasses
The art of moulding, chiselling, and engraving bronze and brass in China
goes hack at least:!,()()() years. A number of the very early examples are to be
found in the various National Museums, and also in a few private collections.
Cor a long period the form of the earlier pieces continued to be simple, and the
ornamentation severe. Not until the Han dynasty, perhaps, did any great
development take place. This was undoubtedly largely due to the introduction
of Buddhism during the first century of the Christian era (about the middle
of the Han period). The new sacred symbols, the various forms of the Buddha,
the sacrificial vases and incense burners necessary to the new religion, led to a
renaissance of the bronze craft, and incidentally standardized the decorative
design and the general form of much of the work in metals which followed.
The T’ang, Sung, and Yuan dynasties still further developed this more
elaborate decoration, until by the Ming dynasty the finest chasing and most
graceful modelling were accomplished. Not satisfied with the mere metal,
pieces were lacquered or painted, or covered with beaten gold, with exquisite
results.
The discovery of porcelain decoration in colours during the Ming dynasty,
offering a new and immeasurable scope for artistry, marked the decline of the
older medium at the close of the Ming period. Except for the beaten gold
covered brasses of the reign of Ch’ien Lung, when a revival of all the arts was
attempted, and expense was no object, brass or bronze of any great merit has
ceased to be produced. The tedious and necessarily expensive work involved,
and the unsettled political and financial state of China, during the past century
and a half, explains more than anything else the lack of any prolonged revival
of bronze and brass, whose existence depended in the past so largely upon the
support of the Court. The greater periods of Chinese art cost in the aggregate
millions sterling, paid for out of revenue by enthusiasts like the Emperors
K’ang Hsi, Yung Cheng, and Ch’ien Lung. Similarly, Royal Dresden, Meissen,
etc., could never have survived except for the royal patronage accorded them.
Modern Chinese brass, like modern lacquer, lacks all the finely etched
detail and the finished surface of the old wares.


The patina or curiously coloured surface of some of the examples is not
due to artificial means, hut is the result of pieces having lain in the earth for a
considerable time, and becoming affected by the chemical properties of the soil
peculiar to certain parts of China. So much does this patina become a part of
the metal itself that often only the application of strong acid is capable of
removing them. In most cases the patina is an added beauty, and is highly
prized by the Chinese.
121. Lacquered brass tripod Incense Bowl, double handles, 5 in. diameter,
Ming.
122. Lacquered brass tripod Incense Bowl, with plain handles, seal mark of
commendation incised on base. Stands on original brass stand. Pieces
with original stands are exceedingly rare. 34 in. diameter, Ming.
123. Square bronze Vase, with beaker top, decoration in relief on incised key
pattern ground, 11 in. high. Sung.
(See illustration.)
Lot 123
124. Gilt bronze Thibetan Buddha, seated on a lotus in the Meditative Mudra,
Ch’ien Lung.
There are twelve mudras or attitudes of the Buddha’s hands, each
with its own significance.
(See illustration, next page.)


Lot 124
125. Gilt bronze figure of Buddha, standing, (i in. high, Ming.
120. Bronze Vase, with large beaker top. 5 in. high, Ming.
127. Fluted brass tripod Incense Burner, with rope design handles, Clrien
Lung.
128. Bronze sacrificial Vase, with cylindrical handles and incised pattern,
heavy patina, 8 in. high, Han.
Lot 129
129. Lacquered brass Incense Bowl on original brass stand, incised date mark
on base, reading, “Made in the reign of Hsiian Te of the Great Ming
dynasty, 6 in. diameter, Ming.


130. Lacquered brass tripod Incense Burner, with Dog of F 6 handles and rows
of beading round base and rim, with carved tripod blackwood stand
and cover, 6 in. diameter, Ming.
(See illustration.)
Lot 130
131. Bronze Dog of K 6 Incense Burner. The head of the Dog forms the
cover. Sung.
132. Sitting Buddha (meditative mudra), coloured and gilt, seated on a lotus,
8 in. high, Sung.
133. Small lacquered brass Incense Burner, with double handle, carved
blackwood stand and cover, Ming.
134. Lacquered tripod Incense Burner, with incised wave pattern and Hsiian
Te seal on base, elaborately carved blackwood stand and cover, Ch’ien
Lung.
13i>. Lacquered brass Incense Bowl, with two handles and tadpole design
encircling rim, Ming.
Lot 135
136. Small bronze Thibetan Pocket Mirror on carved blackwood stand, Ming.
137. Circular bronze Mirror, with bosses in high relief. 4 in. diameter, Han.
138. Ditto, faced with black lacquer, 6 in. diameter, Ming.
139. Ditto, covered with heavy green patina, 3 in. diameter, Han.
140. Plain bronze Mirror, with green patina, 4 in. diameter, Ming.
141. Circular bronze Mirror, covered with a patina, 4 in. diameter, Ming.
The smaller mirrors were worn on the person attached by a cord
passed through the handle in the centre. Many of those produced
after the nth century reflect Graeco-Bactrian influence in their design.


These mirrors are always round, and are frequently hung up on the
outside of bed curtains or in the hall of a house, or placed on the roof.
Their principal use is to counteract, prevent, or dissipate devilish or
nnpropitious influences, ft is supposed that evil spirits, on approach-
ing to do harm, will be apt to see themselves reflected in the mirror,
and, becoming frightened at their own image, will take themselves off
without delay.
142. Bronze tripod Incense Burner, with rope design handles and floral bosses
encircling rim, 7 in. diameter, Sung.
143. Small lacquered brass Incense Pot, with handles, 4 in. diameter, Ming.
144. Small bronze Arrow Stand, with brass feet, reticulated with floral design
and Chinese characters in “Grass” script, covered with green patina,
6 in. high, Ming.
(See illustration.)
Lot 144
140. Bronze Incense Pot, with original reticulated cover surmounted by the
Dog of Fd. The bowl is finely chased and hung with iron rings. This
piece was originally coloured, traces of which remain. 6 in. diameter,
Ming.
146. Bronze Thibetan Buddha in Meditative Miidra, with crown, 9 in. high,
Ming.
It will be noticed that the Thibetan decoration is very distinctive
and easily identifiable, and more nearly resembles the original Hindoo
examples from which it is copied. The finely carved beading of the
necklaces and the elaborate design characterize all the Thibetan pieces.
The Korean form of the Buddha (from which the Japanese derived
their Buddhic figure) is simpler ami more closely resembles the
figures of the Chinese Taoist deities, being shorn of all the elaborate
jewellery of the Thibetan, and depending for the dignity of its effect
on the gracefully-hung draperies that are a feature of Chinese figure
modelling.


Lot 146
147. Bronze figure of Sun Sing, the God of the Pole Star and the North, seated
On Dog of P 6 and with a tortoise encircled by a serpent at his feet.
At the side a disciple holds a scroll. 13 in. high, Ch’ien Lung.
Lot 147
148. Buddhistic Stupa of jrilt brass, finely decorated with jewelled beading,
Dog of F 6, and medallions of Buddha, 8 in. high, Ch’ien Lung.
These stupas, of which this is an altar model, were erected in all
Buddhist countries to enshrine the relics of the cremated Buddha.


The piece described above is of Mongolian design, derived from the
Thibetan. The Lamaistic or Mongolian form of Buddhism became
practically the State religion during the Manchu dynasty, the Manchns
themselves having come under the influence of Mongolian Buddhism
before their invasion of China.
14!). Small brass Incense Burner, with original cover surmounted by a
detachable Dog of F 6, and with the same animal in relief on the sides
of the bowl. Standing on four legs. 4 in. high, Ming.
This piece has been cleaned, and the finely etched work shows to
advantage.
Lot 150
150. Iron Bell, with serrated base and Moral design on sides, very handsome
earved stand, ll’J in. high, of the (,'h‘icn Lung period, the bell being
of the Han or Sung period.


151. Bronze figure of Sun Sing, (lod of the Bole Star and the North, red
lacquered and gilt, 5 in. high, Sung.
The small lacquered medallion in relief below the figure is the
sacred tortoise encircled by a snake, which usually accompanies repre-
sentations of this deity.
152. Pair of square, brass trumpet-shaped temple Vases, with vertical dentated
edges and flanged lips, covered with beaten gold and decorated with
an inlay of enamels, Ch'ien Lung.
153. Pair of temple Candlesticks, similar to above, Ch’ien Lung.
154. Korean brass Buddha, seated on a lotus, heavily overlaid with hammered
gold, 18 in. high, Ming.
Lot 155
155. Ditto, in the Meditative attitude.
The workmanship of these two figures is finely carried out, as
will be seen in the modelling of the draperies and the design etched
upon them, and the expression of repose and dignity of the whole
figure.


156. Tripod brass Incense Burner, standing on a scroll base composed of
conventional forms of the Tao-t’ieh (a fabulous monster somewhat
resembling a tiger, the head only being used in decoration, and
intended as as a warning against evil deeds). The bowl is divided
into lotus shaped panels, each containing a pair of conventional
dragons in relief. Three rings are attached to elephant head handles.
The cover is decorated with a band of peonies in relief and sur-
mounted by a Dog of F 6. 6 in. high, Ming.
157. Bed lacquered and gilt bronze Thibetan Buddha, crowned, in the Mudra
known as “bearing witness,” seated on a lotus, 6 in. high, Ming.
157 a. Brass figure of Sun Sing, God of the Pole Star and the North, seated (on
a wooden block), 13 in. high, Ming.
157 b. Brass Vase, with square body and vertical edges and long neck. Incised
conventional design on body. 8 in. high, Sung.
157 c. Pair trumpet-shaped beaker brass Vases, with vertical edges and
elaborate design of key pattern and phoenix medallions, 6 in. high,
Cli’icn Lung.
Famille Verte
The green widen gives its name to the Famille Verte originated in the
reign of K’ang Hsi (1664-1722), and is considered by collectors to he the verte
par excellence. The green used in the Ming dynasty was equal to it in depth,
hut not in lustre. Green is an enamel colour; that is, it is used over the glaze,
and is used in such combinations as Five Colour, together with yellow,
aubergine and red and blue, and in Three Colour with yellow and blue; and
as Famille Verte singly or in combination with any other colours of the ceramic
palette, including rose. The presence of the latter, however, takes precedence
of the green in the classification of the piece so decorated, and would place it
in the Famille Rose class.
158. Large Vase, with figured reserves of Taoist divinities, 18 in. high, Tao
Kuang.


159. Large Vase, with reserves of figures and birds, and background decorated
in under-glaze red chrysanthemums, 18 in. high. Tao Kuang.
(See illustration.)
Lot 159
160. Large Vase, phoenix and floral design on under-glaze red background,
18 in. high, Tao Kuang.
The phoenix is the symbol of the Empress, as the five-clawed
Dragon is of the Emperor.
161. Large Vase, phoenix and floral design, Tao Kuang.


162. Tea Jar (generally called ginger jar), decorated with gold fish in under-
glaze red and floral sprays, 9 in. high, K 'ang Hsi.
A beautiful example of Famille Verte which, if undamaged, would
he worth at least £2,000 in London.
Lot 162
163. Pair large Vases, powder blue background, with reserves of figure
decoration in Famille Verte, Kuang Hsii.
164. Vase, floral and phoenix design, Kuang Hsii.
165. Jar. The body is of the K’ang Hsi period (1664-1722), traces of the
decoration of which can he seen in pencilled lines under the glaze.
Redecoration about Tao Kuang period. Damaged.
166. Jar, decorated with mermaids and fabulous animals disporting them-
selves in the sea, Kuang Hsii.
167. Pair Plates, depicting military figures, K’ang Hsi.
A fine example of the original Famille Verte period.
168. Plate, floral decoration, signed by the artist, a rare occurrence in Chinese
porcelain, K’ang Hsi.
169. Set of Tea Cups, decorated with the Imperial five-clawed Dragon, Tao
Kuang.
Court pieces.


170. Pair Bowls, decorated with Imperial five-claw Dragons, 6 in. diameter,
Ch’ien Lung.
The whole of the paste is finely incised with wave decoration.
Exquisite Court pieces made at the Imperial factories at Ching-te-
Chen.
171. Pair Sweetmeat Dishes, 5 in. diameter, Kuang Hsii.
172. Pair round Dishes, decorated with figures and Buddhistic symbols in
reserves, Kuang Hsii.
173. Pair five-colour small Sweetmeat Dishes, 4 in. diameter, Yung Cheng.
Three Colour
174. Pair Tea Jars, floral decoration, Kuang Hsii.
175. Tea Jar, floral, Kuang Hsii.
176. Pair Bowls, figure decoration, 5 in. diameter, Tao Kuang.
177. Pair Dishes, Saucer shaped, Yung Cheng.
178. Shallow Dish. K’ang Hsi.
179. Large Cover on stand, decorated with Imperial five-claw Dragons in
underglaze red and green enamel. Repaired, but worth a ransom
were it perfect. Ming.
Famille Rose
The green which predominated in the polychrome decoration of the Ming
period, and later, with an added lustre, in the reign of K’ang Hsi, was suc-
ceeded by the discovery of a rose colour during the reign of Yung Cheng
(1722-1785). This colour reached the zenith of its beauty during the following
reign, that of Ch’ien Lung (1736-1795), and gave the name to the new class,
that of Famille Rose. It is this class that gave to the English and Continental
potters their initial impetus, and explains why such a large proportion of
modern English porcelain still bears traces of Chinese influence in design and
colour.
No class shows a greater variety of decoration than tbe Famille Rose,
from the boldly-drawn designs of the older pieces to the miniature painting
found on snuff bottles and tiny bowls and wine cups.
To the reigns of Ch’ien Lung, Tao Kuang, and Kuang Hsu belong the
greatest development of the Famille Rose decoration.


180. Vase with cover, floral and figure decoration, 16 in. high, Kuang Hsii.
181. Jardiniere, decorated with flowers in underglaze red and heavy enamels,
10 in., Tao Kuang.
(See illustration.)
Lot 181
182. Square-shouldered beaker Vase, 20 in. high, Kuang Ilsii.
183. Wine Pot, with original cover, peacock green and landscape on band of
yellow enamel, Tao Knang.
184. Large oviform Vase, 18 in. high, Knang Hsh.
185. Vase, decorated in gold and full range of enamel colours, fine paste and
glaze, 15 in. high, Tao Kuang.
186. Vase, decorated in heavy enamels, 13 in. high, Tao Kuang.
187. Pair Vases, 10 in. high, Tao Kuang.
188 Vase, figure decoration, 12 in., Tao Kuang.
189. Vase, with cover (latter repaired), floral reserves, background of
unctuous green and yellow enamels, 16 in. high, Tao Kuang.
190. Set of three Tea Cups, decorated with finely-drawn underglaze red and
enamel colours, Kuang Hsii.
191. Set of three Tea Cups, with covers, decorated almost entirely in enamels,
Kuang Hsii.


Red and blue are painted directly on to the paste, and the glaze
added and then fired. In some cases successive coats of glaze are
added, and the piece fired after each addition. The enamel colours,
on the contrary, can only he painted on the glaze, thus involving
another firing, but at a much lower temperature, as the colours would
otherwise melt and become dissipated. This combination of methods
in one piece is one of the most charming features of Chinese porcelain.
192. Square Vase, reticulated panels, floral and gilt decoration, 12 high, Tao
Kuang.
193. Vase, figure decoration, 9 in. high, Tao Kuang.
194. Vase, background peacock green, phoenix and floral enamels, 12 in. high,
Tao Kuang.
195. Vase, with coral red handles, finely drawn landscape decoration, 9 in.
high, Kuang Hsii.
196. Tazza, tioral decoration, Kuang Hsii.
197. Set of four Bowls, floral decoration, Kuang Hsii.
198. Shallow Bowl, chrysanthemum decoration in enamels, Kuang Hsii.
Both the above are good examples of overglaze decoration.
199. Bowl, Imperial five-claw Dragon in underglaze red, Ch’ien Lung period.
The diaper hand and remainder of the blue enamel decoration has
been added, probably during the reign of Tao Kuang.
200. Cantonese Fruit Dish, with pitted surface known as “Orange Skin,’’
heavy enamel decoration, Tao Kuang.
201. Pair Cantonese Vases, conventional dragons and Dogs of F 6 in relief,
gilt, 16 in. high, Tao Kuang.
One defective.
202. Shallow Bowl, Saucer shaped, floral, Ch’ien Lung.
203. Ditto, with figure decoration, Ch’ien Lung.
The portrayal of foreign figures is a radical departure from the
Chinese tradition, and is seldom found in Chinese art. It originated
during the 18th century with the opening up of China to foreign
relations and commerce.
204. Tea Cup, inscribed with legends and decorated with military figures in
finely painted enamel colours, Tao Kuang.
205. Writer’s Brush Holder, landscape panels, prunus blossom border in blue.
Inscribed with mark of commendation. Kuang Hsii.
206. Figure of Lady with basket of flowers, Lan Ts’ai-ho (one of the Eight
Immortals), decorated in enamels, 12 in. high, Kuang Hsii.
207. Tile, landscape decoration, 10 in. by 16 in., Kuang Hsii.
208. Pair Tiles, floral decoration, Kuang Hsii.
208 a. Writer's Brush Holder, decorated with female figure (known as Lange
Lisjen, “long Eliza”), 5 in. high, Tao Kuang.


208 b. Plaque, with Imperial five-claw Dragon and phoenix design, 18 in.
diameter, Kuang Hsii.
A Court piece.
208 c. Nest of four Wine ('ups, Tao Kuang.
208 d. Figure of Pu-tai Ho-shang, the God of Contentment, brilliantly decorated
in enamels. A popular deity in China, Kuang Hsii.
Clair de Lune
This “Moonlight Colour” is somewhat similar to the grey-green known as
celadon. It is certainly a charming shade, and when used in conjunction with
an incised pattern is exceedingly beautiful. Its invention dates, at least, from
the Sung period, when it was generally used on pottery without pattern. The
latter was most fully developed during the reign of K’ang Hsi, Yung Cheng,
and Ch Ten Lung.
209. Shallow Floating-Bowl, with incised key pattern design, 10 in. diameter,
on handsome, hand-polished stand, Kuang Hsii.
210. Ditto.
211. Yase, with beaker top, incised floral decoration, with incised seal on
base, which reads, “Made in the reign of Ch’ien Lung, of the Great
ChTng dynasty.” ChTen Lung.
An incised date mark is rarely met with in Chinese porcelain.
212. Pair of very shallow Tazzas, finely incised decoration, 6 in. diameter,
Yung Cheng.
213. Deep Bowl, with decoration in white relief, Kuang Hsii.
Coral Red and Mirror Black
These are colours whose perfection dates from the K’ang Hsi period.
They are usually decorated with designs in finely-pencilled gold.
214. Coral red Yase, with Shou character (Longevity) and floral design in
gold, 8 in. high, Kuang Hsii.
215. Mirror black Floating Bowl, with floral decoration in gold, 9 in. diameter,
on handsome hand-polished stand, Kuang Hsii.
21 (i. Ditto.
217. Pair coral red Bowls, with reserves of Famille Verte decoration, Tao
Kuang.
218. Coral red Jewel Box, with panels of figures in famille rose, Tao Kuang.


219. Coral red Bowl, with Shou character (Longevity), written in one hun-
dred different ways, K’ang Hsi.
220. Set of six coral red and gold Bowls, Kuang Hsii.
221. Coral red Vase, 5 in. high, Kuang Hsii.
222. Mirror black and gold Vase, Bottle shape, Kuang Hsii.
223. Ditto.
224. Set of five Bowls, phoenix decoration, Kuang Hsii.
Court pieces.
225. Coral red and gold Vase, figured panels in famille rose, Tao Kuang.
226. Gourd-shape Vase, decorated with flowers and geese (emblematical of
conjugal felicity), prunus blossom in panels on sides, Kuang Hsii.
Powder Blue
This class, like the foregoing, belongs in its method to the Ch’ing or
Manchu dynasty. It originated in the reign of K’ang Hsi. The colour is
usually blown on the piece through a bamboo tube or sifted on through a gauze.
The pieces of the K’aug Hsi period approach nearest to the original form,
those of the Ch’ien Lung reign being of a deeper blue and less mottled in effect.
227. Set of four Imperial Bowls, decorated in gold, with an elaborate form
of the Shou character, bats, fungus (all symbols of Longevity), and
the phoenix in gold, 5 in. diameter, Kuang Hsii.
Court pieces of great beauty.
228. Tall Vase, with two elephant-head handles and bosses round base, Ying
and Yang design on base (symbols of the Male and Female principle
in Nature), 16 in. high, Ch’ien Lung.
229. Pair Vases with turn-over bossed lips and floral decoration in biscuit, in
relief, 12 in. high, Kuang Hsii.
230. Beaker Vase, decorated in enamels with five-claw Dragons, 22 in. high,
defective, Kuang Hsii.
231. Set of five Bowls, decorated with landscapes in gold, 3 in. diameter,
Ch’ien Lung.
232. Tea Jar, with carved stand and cover, Kuang Hsu.
233. Pair round Dishes, Ch’ien Lung.
234. Writer’s Ink Box, Kuang Hsii.


Pottery
Although it is the earliest form of colour decoration in China, colour-glazed
pottery has continued through all the periods of ceramic production. The
simple richness of its colouring has tempted the artists through many centuries
to perpetuate it. Some pieces, notably the Chai Yao “heaven-blue” was so
perfect, according to the ancient records, that Chinese poets have never ceased
to sing its praises. Certainly it is doubtful if a single whole piece is in exist-
ence, and no subsequent period has ever succeeded in approaching the perfec-
tion we are led to believe it possessed.
235. Brown souffle glaze Bowl, 3 in. diameter, Ming.
236. Ditto, Ming.
237. Ditto, 4 in. diameter, Ming.
238. “Heaven-blue” Vase, in-turning rim, 4 in. high, Kuang Hsii.
239. Ditto Jar, with splash of flambe, 3 in. high, Kuang Hsii.
240. Ditto Writer’s Water Bot, 4 in. diameter, Kuang Hsii.
241. Coffee-coloured Tse-sha Tea Cup, with cover, decorated with bats and
the character for Longevity in relief, Ch’ien Lung.
242. Peacock blue fluted Jar, with original lid, 5 in. high, Ming.
243. Yao-chun blue flambe Bowl, 3 in. diameter, Yung Cheng.
244. Coffee-coloured Incense Burner, Ch’ien Lung.
245. Ditto, Ch’ien Lung.
246. Peacock blue figure of Kuan Yin (Goddess of Mercy), Kuang Hsii.
247. Blue flambe Bowl in heavy unctuous colours, Yung Cheng.
248. “Heaven-blue” shallow Tazza, with brown rim, decorated in heavy,
unctuous colours, crackled glaze, Yung Cheng.
A fine example.
249. Mottled brown Floating Bowl, Tao Kuang.
250. Mirror brown Floating Bowl, Kuang Hsii.
Celadon
A grey-green monochrome, and one of the earliest types of colour-glaze.
It has been successfully produced in China through all the ceramic periods, the
best pieces being those with incised designs.
251. Vase with incised floral decoration, 7 in. high, Ch’ien Lung.
252. Ditto, 5 in. high, Ch’ien Lung.


253. Pair crackled glaze Vases, double handles with fixed rings, incised floral
panels, 5 in. high, Ming.
254. Bowl, with ring and bat handles, 6 in. diameter, Kuang Hsii.
255. Ditto, Kuang Hsii.
256. Figure of Kuan Yin (Goddess of Mercy) in shrine, Ming.
Imperial Yellow
This colour, varying in shade during the different reigns of the ruling
dynasties, is used alone when intended for Court use. This yellow was to
China what “Imperial Purple” was to Rome. It is now one of the rarest
types of Chinese decoration.
257. Plate, Saucer shape, with incised five-claw Imperial Dragons on inner
side and black lines encircling rims. Inscribed, “Made in the Reign
of K’ang Hsi of the Great Ch’ing Dynasty.” 4 in. diameter, K’ang
Hsi.
258. Pair Bowls, incised decoration on inside and underneath, 5 in. diameter,
K’ang Hsi.
259. Shallow round Dish, 7 in. diameter, Ming.
260. Plate, 10 in. diameter, Ch’ien Lung.
261. Tea Cup, 4 in. diameter, Yung Cheng.
These are, as their colour denoted, all Imperial pieces, made at the Imperial
factories at Ching-te-Chen.
Peach Bloom
Peach bloom and apple green were perhaps the two greatest ceramic
triumphs of that brilliant renaissance which took place during the reign of
K’ang Hsi (1664-1722). Together with Imperial yellow, they are the rarest
types to-day. The Emperor K’ang Hsi was himself an ardent patron of the
the arts, and with the appointment of Ts’ang Ying-hsuan, in 1683, to the
position of superintendent of the recently built factories of Ching-te-Chen, a
new impetus was given to ceramic production, and an era of unsurpassed
brilliance followed.
262. Bowl, decorated with Imperial five-claw Dragons finely pencilled in peach
bloom, K’ang Hsi.


263. Bowl, decorated on the outside with figures of the Pa Hsien, or Eight
Immortals, and Shou Lao (God of Longevity) inside in underglaze
blue. The scroll-like clouds surrounding them are in pencilled peach
bloom. Ch’ien Lung.
264. Writer’s Water Pot, with apple green markings, Kuang Hsii.
265. Writer’s Ink Pot, with apple green markings, Kuang Hsii.
266. Slender Vase, with apple green markings, Kuang Hsii.
Miscellaneous
267. Large Satsuma Vase, figure and landscape reserves, decorated in heavy
gold and enamels, deep blue background, 18 in, high.
A fine specimen of Japanese art.
268. Tmari Vase, with floral reserves, 13 in. high. Japanese.
269. Tmari Vase, 13 in. high. Japanese.
270. Small Japanese porcelain Jar and lid, decorated with carved red lacquer.
271. Carved Chinese blackwood figure of Shou Lao, the God of Longevity.
He is always depicted as gentle and smiling, his venerable head being
monstrously high in the upper portion. He holds in his right hand
the fruit of the fabulous tree Fan-tao, which blossoms every three
thousand years and only yields its peaches three thousand years after.
If he is surrounded by mushrooms, which give immortality, and wears
a yellow robe, he will be recognized as the supreme disposer of
earthly things and the eternal ruler of the seasons. In his left hand
he holds a jou-e, or sceptre of longevity. The enlarged ear lobes are
“a sign of a divine being.”
272. Cloisonee Saucer, 5 in. diameter, Ming.
273. Ditto, Ming.
This work developed in detail and execution in later periods, and
has been brought to perfection by the Japanese artists, but the colours
of these earlier pieces, and especially the blue, have never been
surpassed.
274. Blanc de Chine figure of Kuan Yin (Goddess of Mercy). Hands restored.
Ch’ien Lung.
275. Blanc de Chine, ivory tone, figure of Shou Lao (God of Longevity), Ming.
Blanc de Chine originated in the Ming dynasty, and its production
was limited entirely to the Province of Fukien. The graceful model-
ling and delicate glaze of this type needs no advertisement.
276. Japanese carved ivory Sword.


277. Table Screen of five panels of hung-mu wood, carved with birds and
foliage, Ch’ien Lung.
278. Screen, three panels, in hua-li wood, and lower panels exquisitely grained
and upper panels fitted with Chinese gold brocade (brocade added).
Screen is of the early Ch’ien Lung period.
279 Ditto.
280. Chinese hand-woven Carpet in blue ground with pagodas, and willow tree
decoration and narrow band of vieux rose. Size, 12 ft, x 9 ft.


SPRINTED AT
THE HASSELL PRESS
