

rNp
Asas
Of p
mv4
rv A 9 m a
l V v J / /
• V i i i
.!■


' wiMmamf
TfO—


THE
FORGOTTEN JAR
And Other Stories for Children
Printed by Morris & Walker, Melbourne,
for the Publishers, Offset Printing Ccy. Pty. Limited, Sydney.


The '
IRGl lOTi
JAR
/ s £9§
ftPpm ' DOROTHV DREW ITT
JSS0
FORGOTTEN
FOR ages and ages the old 'Jar had been standing
in a corner hidden away from the world and for-
gotten by everyone, with the dust of the years slowly
covering it
One day the King’s Chief Cook was cleaning up the
scullery and found the Jar in the corner. Picking it up
he flung it angrily out the window saying. For all
the good you are, you might as well be pitched out
on the rubbish heap!”
As the old Jar landed on the heap of rubbish out-
side the kitchen window, which the pages and scul-


lery maids were busily shifting to the big bins, it
chuckled gaily to itself, “Ha, ha!” If they only knew.
Such foolish people, heavy though I am, they do not
guess my real value.”
And it was true that no one thought very much of
it, for without a glance, one of the pages hurried it
away with a lot of unwanted tins and bottles, to bins
which the old rubbish man would empty into his
cart.
Once upon a time the old jar had been really beau-
tiful and shone brightly like silver and lived in the
King's palace. Then someone had placed it in a corner
and it had been forgotten ever since.
In the sunshine, once again, the old Jar reflected on
the new life that lay ahead. It felt some excitement,
as it said to itself, “Now I am bound for adventure.
Who knows? Perhaps I might find my rightful place
beside the King. Ten Kings have reigned since those
wonderful days. I only need a good polish to be my
own self. Appearances certainly do count in this
world!” Then the Jar had a short doze in the sun-
shine.
It was awakened by the slow tramp of a horse s
hooves and the turn of heavy cart wheels coming


down the street. The cart was already filled with
odds and ends of rubbish and was drawn by an old
horse driven by a poor looking man in old and ragged
clothes. They stopped beside the rubbish bin in which
the Jar was lying, and the old Jar grew very alarmed.
“Surely they are not going to bury me/' it thought.
“I would much rather have stayed forgotten on the
shelf of the pantry at the palace than that.” The man
climbed down from the cart and lifted the old Jar in
his hands, turning it over and over. “Ah, what's this
we’ve found?” he said, “This is just what my wife
wants. 11l take it home to her.” And he wrapped
the jar up in an old sack and hid it carefully under
the cart seat. Climbing into the cart, they then went
jogging down the street.
Presently he arrived at a small tumble-down hut
and, tying the old horse up, he took the jar from under
the seat and went inside. Here he lived with his wife
Sarah and his blind son. “Perhaps it's a treasure you
have found, John,” said Sarah when her husband held
up the old Jar. “Anyway, whatever it is, it will be
very useful here.
“There is little of value ever thrown my way,” John
answered, and inwardly the old Jar chuckled. “They


LT— o ’ I
n 1—r^l
THE SEAT AND SET OUT FOR HOME
HE HID THE JAR
UNDER
little know!” it thought, looking forward to the
future.
Next day, after John had gone to work, Sarah
polished the old Jar until it shone, like the real silver
it was. When John returned home at nightfall, Sarah
whispered, “A treasure has at last come our way. That
Jar is real silver. Look at it. Fit for a King’s palace.”
John was at first astonished, then he became fright-
ened. “I’d better take it back,” he said, “People will


think that I have stolen it.
"No, indeed,” cried Sarah. You'd have had it
thrown at your head, had you taken it back with all
the dust and cobwebs upon it. Yesterday without a
notion of its value, you brought it home to me. Be-
cause I've taken the trouble to polish it, very likely
the wrong ones would claim it. I've earned it, so I'll
keep it.”
The old Jar was very pleased to hear this, for it had
no wish to meet the angry cook in the King's kitchen
again. Suddenly it cried out loudly, "Don't take me
back! I'll repay you many times my own value. You
will prosper beyond your dreams. Also, your blind
son will be able to see.” Jbhn and Sarah jumped back
with fright and stared at the Jar with amazement.
Sarah was the first to recover ,and exclaimed joyfully,
"Oh John, this must be an enchanted Jar! Did you
hear what it said? And all the things it promised us!”
"Then it can't stay in my house,” cried John, still
quaking with fright.
"Indeed it does,” said Sarah, "You'd rather our poor
boy remained blind for the rest of his days, would
you?” She felt very angry with her husband for


SARAH POLISHED THE JAR UNTIL IT SHONE
wanting to throw the Jar out. After I spent all that
time polishing it so well too! she grumbled.
“Very well my dear,’’ said John, “We’ll keep the Jar
and see what happens. “Come on now, let us have
some dinner/’
They sat down at the table after Sarah had pre-
pared their simple meal of cheese and brown bread,
and the Jar was filled with water.
John looked at the frugal meal and sighed. I wish
this jar was filled with good hot soup and the bread
and cheese would change to roast beef and potatoes.
“Touch me, and repeat your wish, said the voice
from the Jar. They all looked at it with astonishment,


then, gingerly, the man touched the Jar and repeated
what he had said. In a moment a steaming dish of
roast meat and potatoes appeared upon the table and
they were surprised to find the Jar filled with excellent
soup.
They all fell to with enjoyment on this tasty meal,
the best they had eaten for a long while. The blind
child also enjoyed his share, and as soon as it was all
cleared away the Jar was put in his hands.
“Wish for your sight to be returned/'*cried Sarah.
“After what has happened Tm sure such a wish could
be granted." The blind child held the Jar closely to
him and whispered, “I wish I could see my parents
and all the beautiful things upon the earth. I'd be for-
ever grateful and do all the good I could my life
through, if that wish could be granted." Immedi-
ately his blind eyes were opened and he saw every-
thing. Some hours passed before the Jar was remem-
bered again. Sarah and John were so overjoyed that
they could not think of anything else. When John
said, “We need money to buy every comfort for our'
child. I wonder whether the power of the Jar could
improve our lot."
But the Jar did not respond to John's third wish.


“IT MUST BE AN ENCHANTED JAR!” SHE CRIED JOYFULLY
"Let me try,” said Sarah, but still the Jar did not
respond. She wished and wished again that they
should never know poverty again but without results
till at last they were ready to give up; then, at last the
Jar said, "Your wish will only be fulfilled when you
restore me to the King!” It was afraid that these
people would keep it forever, and now that it had
been polished up again and recognised for the valu-
able thing it was, it was anxious to return to its right-
ful place at the King's Court.
No, cried Sarah, Ive earned the Jar by polishing
it and so Fll keep it.”


“YOU SHALL HAVE YOUR JUST REWARD,” SAID THE KING


"Now Sarah, that wouldn’t be right. We must re-
turn it at once, said John.
After much coaxing by her husband, Sarah could
see that he was right, and she agreed to return the Jar
to the palace. The old Jar, bright and shining in its
true colour, could have jumped for joy.
The next day John harnessed up the old horse in
the cart and he and Sarah journeyed to the Palace
with the silver Jar hidden under a cloth. When they
arrived at the Palace grounds, the Guards would
not allow them to enter, and sent for some of the
King’s courtiers. At first the tall courtiers would not
let them pass into the King’s presence; but when John
declared he had a precious object to give him and
would not give it to anyone else, they were curious
to see what precious thing this old man could have,
and one door after another was thrown open.
When the King saw the lost Jar he was overjoyed.
"That old Jar, my good subjects, is worth thousands
of gold pieces. It is hundreds of years old, and the loss
of it has been great. It disappeared during my fore-
father’s reign after a Royal banquet and has never
been seen since.’’


After John and Sarah had told their story of how
they found the Jar, the King told them that they
would be richly rewarded. He gave them a comfort-
able home to live in and made good positions for
John and his son, each with a big salary for his life-
time. The old Jar was restored to its rightful place
in the King's Palace, and everyone was happy ever
afterwards.
THE END.
ALL WERE VERY HAPPY EVER AFTERWARDS


MUSIC-MAKERS
EDITH BECKETT
AS soon as the sun comes through the blinds.
Grand tunes start running in our minds
Till good-night time. It seems a sin
We have no flute, no violin,
To sound them to the family —
We have no trumpet blast — ah, me !
To shrill our tunes across the land;
If only we'd a bugle! And
If only we'd a drum to beat,
In splendid time with narching feet
To rumble out the tunes that come!
(Unhappily we have no drum.)
But sticks and tins and two small boys
Can make a lovely lot of noise!


ROCKIRG HORSE
pHERE was once a rocking horse who was very-
sad. He lived with a lot of other toys in the toy
shop around the corner.
Every day lots of children came into the shop and
wound up the clockwork toys, or picked up the dolls
and nursed them, or had a merry time riding the big
toy motor cars around the floor. But nobody ever
went near the rocking horse or even looked at him,
and that was why he was so sad.
As he stood there in the corner he couldn't move at
all because a piece of rope had been tied around his
legs. He could only stand there by himself and watch
all the other toys having a good time as the children
played with them, and this made him feel very lonely.
‘1 do wish someone would come along and untie
me," he used to think to himself sadly. "If they only
knew how lonely I am standing here, I’m sure they


NOBODY EVER RODE ON THE ROCKING HORSE
would/' But of course rocking horses cant talk and
the shopman didn't notice.
One day, when things were very quiet in the shop,
some of the other toys in his corner noticed how sad
he looked and they soon saw the reason.
‘‘How can we make the shopman see that the poor
rocking horse is all tied up?" they wondered. Then
they thought of a good plan. "Let's all fall over into
funny positions," they said. "Then, when the shop-
man comes around here cleaning, he will notice some-
thing is wrong, and perhaps untie him."
The next morning when the shopman came around
with his duster, he soon saw that something was
wrong in the corner, and while he was standing the


THE END.
Xtalium xrrmii^
toys up again he discovered the rope' on the rocking
horse.
“Goodness me!” he said. “I must have forgotten
to take the rope off when this rocking horse was
brought here/' Then with a “ snip-snip ” of the scis-
sors off came the rope.
The rocking horse was ever so glad and felt like
rocking all around the shop. The shopman took him
out of the corner and put him near the door, and the
very next child who came into the shop climbed up
on his back and had the loveliest ride on the happiest
Rocking Horse in the town.
THE ROCKING HORSE WAS HAPPY AT LAST!


'V;
J \


HOUSE Of
rouAiirr
SUNSHINE SERIES.
E 111 Wonderland of Fairy
Tales.
El 12 Three Billy Goats and
Cinderella.
E113 Dick Whittington.
E 114 Tom Thumb
E 169 Apple Cottage.
E 170 The Magic Cloak.
E 177 The Forgotten Jar.
E 197 Pets on the Farm.
V J
—' — —^
.
LOOK FOR THESE
Printed and Publilhed by OfHel Printing Coy. Pty. Ltd., 16? Phillip St., V/aterloo, Sydney. (All Right* Reserved;!
