





tTbe
Ibimala^a
APRIL —MAY, 1896.
XonDon:
Printed for Private Circulation by
BOOT, SON & CARPENTER, 24, OLD BAILEY, E.C.
©bserver.


London:
BOOT, SON, AND CARPENTER,
PRINTERS,
24, OLD BAILEY, E.C.


RECORD OF A VOYAGE
FROM
AUSTRALIA to LONDON,
In the P. & 0. Company’s R.M.S.S. “Himalaya.”
April— May, 1896.
THE
©bserver.
No. I.]
S.S. “ Himalaya,” Indian Ocean, [May 2, 1896.
OURSELVES.
N introducing The Himalaya Observer to the
gaze of the little world in which for awhile we
fs live, we may perhaps be pardoned for following
the usual custom of briefly stating the reason
of our existence. Nearly every man and woman
looks for, and is disappointed in not getting, his
or her paper with the current news of the day.
It may be their individual interests do not lie in the same
direction —his will probably be centred in matters political,
or connected with the business of daily life; it is just possible
hers may follow the latest styles and fashion in dress, or
she may even show great interest in the list of sacrifices at
the hymeneal altar—whatever it be, they want their budget
of news. No doubt the New South Welshman pines for


his Sydney Morning Herald , the Victorian his Argus , and
the South Australian his Register —but none of these are
available. We have around us a miscellaneous family
living for a brief season on the mighty deep, who naturally
enough feel the want of some such medium by which news
of interest to all may be disseminated. Being for the time
debarred the privilege of obtaining news from the outside
world, we submit that a record of items pertaining to the
life we live aboard the good ship “Himalaya” may fairly
be substituted. Hence, it is our purpose to supply the
want, and to run this Journal on lines of good fellowship
one towards another.. We promise our readers to abstain
from publishing anything that may tend to cause offence to
our fellows, our object being more to entertain and instruct
than to find faults and turn our temporary paradise into a
bear-garden.
We shall endeavour to furnish a true record of the chief
events of the present delightful voyage, including reports of
concerts, outdoor and indoor amusements, &c., and we
reserve space for any who have a burning desire to “ write
to the papers ” every week. There are such persons in
most lands—we go so far as to express a hope that there
may be some aboard.
Under the heading of “ Bunkum” our special contributor
“ Dotty” will supply jokes, funny sayings, &c., and a space
will be reserved for those who may wish to advertise—
matrimonially or otherwise. “The Duchess” will conduct
the column reserved for conundrums, &c., and if the arrange-
ments can be effected early our special artist will enrich the
pages of this Journal with characteristic sketches.
Having thus introduced ourselves, we would crave our
readers’ forbearance with shortcomings which may be
numerous in this first issue—as our staff becomes accustomed
to its new quarters, our work will, we trust, show marked
improvement.
In conclusion : many a fine ocean liner has been
launched by the P. & O. Steam Navigation Company, but


men were elected as General Committee : —
Mr. J.
Longmore
Chairman.
Mr. F.
J. Whittaker
General Secretary.
Mr. W
A. Macdonald
Hon. Treasurer,
Mr. J.
H. Hosking
Editor Journal.
Mr. A.
E. Exley
Manager Inside Games.
Messrs.
Geo. Hosegood, E. T. \
Committee of Outdoor Sports
Hynes, and W. onowley, J
Mr. A.
Fraser
Musical Director.
few, if any, to excel the good ship “ Himalaya,” on which
we are at present so very pleasantly imprisoned. Let us
then invite our readers to join with us in heartily wishing
the company, the officers, and the hands every success
throughout the future.
The Editor.
PUBLIC MEETING.
On Saturday evening, April 25th, 1896, a few hours
after the vessel had left Albany, notices were posted in the
companion calling a meeting for 8 o’clock, in the second
saloon. The attendance of ladies and gentlemen was good,
and Mr. J. Longmore was unanimously voted to the chair.
The Chairman explained that the meeting had been called
for the purpose of organising a Committee for the successful
carrying out of Concerts, Sports, &c., &c., during the
remainder of the homeward voyage. The following gentle-
It was resolved that a levy of is. be made on all male
passengers, and that an entrance fee of 3d. be made in
all sports or tournaments —all the money to go towards
children’s prizes.
COMMITTEE MEETINGS.
During the past week several meetings of the General
Committee have been held, and arrangements made for
Concerts, Sports, Dances, &c., as reported elsewhere in this
Journal.


THE “ HIM ALA YAP
By the Editor.
The following particulars concerning our “ floating
palace,” the good ship “ Himalaya,” which is so comfortably
speeding us to our journey’s end, will, we feel convinced,
be read with interest by the passengers now aboard her.
The “Himalaya” was built at Greenock in 1892, by
the world-famed engineers and shipbuilders, Messrs. Caird
and Co., Limited, at a cost of upwards of
Her engines are triple expansion, direct acting, inverted,
and of 10,000 horse power.
The dimensions of the “ Himalaya ” are as follow :
Length over all ... ... 456 feet.
Main breadth ... .. 52 ~
Depth ... ... ... 36 „
The gross tonnage is 6,898 tons, whilst the registered,
or nett tonnage is 3,597 tons.
Her general speed is about 17 knots per hour, but she
is capable of 18 knots, and she holds the record for the
fastest passage from London to Australia.
She is fitted with Haslam’s dry-air refrigerating system,
with a commodious cool chamber, and is also fitted through-
out with hydraulic machinery by Sir W. G. Armstrong,
Mitchell and Co., Limited, of Newcastle-on-Tyne.
The following is her present list of officers :
A. W. Adamson ... Commander.
G. D. Saunder ... Chief Officer.
E. W. Bruce ... ... 2nd Officer.
J. E. Crossland ... ~
S. St. J. Lydiard ... 3 rd Officer.
C. E. Hudson...
N, F. Kendall
A. P. James ...
L. H. Insoll ...
H. E. Hammett
R. C. Forrest
D. Murdock ...
E. G. Westmoreland
Ofth Officer.
Surgeon.
Purser.
Purser's Assistant.
Chief Engineer.
2nd Engineer.
3rd Engineer.


E.
W. Crawford
. ... Assistant Engineer.
J.
R. Hendry...
55 55
A.
R. Stuart ...
5 5 5 5
A.
Boyes
... Boilermaker.
H.
Duck ham ...
Refrigerating Engineer,
S.
Holbrook ...
2.nd Refrigerating Engineer
A.
Sheffield ...
Electrician.
II.
A. Beck
Head Steward.
In addition to the above 21 officers, the vessel is manned
by 4 warrant officers, 11 able-bodied seamen, 81 European
servants, 32 purser’s natives, 52 lascars, and 99 engineer’s
natives, making in all just 300 souls as the ship’s present
complement.
“BUNKUM
They say Britannia is still “ ruling the waves,” but soon
after we started to cross the “ Great Australian Bight ” it
became evident that the waves were ruling, if a line such
as ✓v'wvn/s/n/x can be called a ruled one. The consequence
can be called a ruled one. The consequence
has been that until after leaving Albany on Saturday last
much of our beauty and fashion was missed from the saloon
table. Even the “lords of creation,” as they were until
quite recently called, were not quite so devoted in their
attentions to pork and beans as they have since been.
Many have given their attentions to a study of marine
depths, meditating possibly the salt industry—not that they
have suffered sickness, of course—it has simply been a
coincidence !
THE OUTSIDE WORLD.
\Owing to the picking up of a cable by one of our fishing experts from
Dunedin {Mr. T. Ross) we are pleased to give the latest news of any
importance. We do not vouch for the authenticity of these messages ,
and accept no responsibility in publishing them. — Ed.]
Cork (France), April 27.
Moloney’s Fenian cat died yesterday, and the man that


struck O’Hara is not expected to live. Two Irish bulls are
missing. Good ones.
Germany, April 27.
Fritz sausage is up a id. per lb. The market is firm.
This, in spite of the painful intelligence from Ireland of the
premature decease of Moloney’s cat.
Russia, April 28.
Spitzfoflagapaloph, the lecturer, is starting to tour the
Australian Colonies, with a view of gaining the most reliable
information regarding woman’s suffrage. A Mr. T. Topping
will join the lecturer at Aden.
London, April 28.
The members of the ninth Australian Eleven landed this
morning, and were heartily welcomed. General regret was
expressed that Whittaker was not in the team, which is con-
sidered weak without him.
Egypt, April 29.
Great preparations are being made here to welcome the
S.S. “ Himalaya,” on which it is reported are the cream of
Australian story tellers.
London, April 30.
News from the S.S. “ Himalaya,” at present in the Indian
Ocean, advising that Messrs. Moses, Davis, and Snowley are
passengers has quite altered the prospects of the Australian
Eleven tour.
[Owing to dilatoriness on the part of our Agents in the Colonies , no
telegraphic news has been received up to the time of our going to
press. — Ed.]
CORRESPONDENCE.
[lt must be distinctly understood that the Editor accepts no responsi-
bility in the publication of matter under this heading. It may be well to
remind contributors that only short letters can be afforded room , and that
all letters must bear real name of writer, not necessarily for publication ,
but as a guarantee of good faith. The Editor’s special light weight will
receive enquirers and settle all disputes. — Ed.]


DECK CHAIRS.
To the Editor.
Sir, —Permit me to express my unqualified appreciation
of the great honour conferred upon me by those ladies who
so very gracefully recline in ray deck chair almost con-
tinuously. Although I purchased the chair for my own
personal comfort, I am more than repaid by the sense of
having innocently done the dear girls a kindness. Lless
their hearts, they shall use my chair, if they like even if I
have to stand,
I am, Sir,
“ Meph.”
CONUNDRUMS , &c.
Why is Buddhism like the sea around us? Because it
is an Indian notion.
To which officer of the “ Himalaya ” is the ship’s cat
likely to be most attached? The purr-ser, of course.
Why have flying fish been seen lately ? Because they
were out of the water.
REPLIES TO CORRESPONDENTS.
No. 364. —Your communication on “ Woman Suffrage”
duly received. You omitted to attach your name, conse-
quently the production cannot be published —in any case it
is too lengthy for such a Journal as we are endeavouring to
conduct.
‘■'Archie Fraser.” —Thanks for your article on “Bad
Musical Training and its Effects on Music in General.”
The contribution is altogether too lengthy for publication,
especially as the subject is foreign to the present voyage.
Annie. —No, Mr. H. is not a marrying man.


Divine Service was held in the first saloon of the
R.M.S. “Himalaya” on Sunday morning last, April 26th,
at 11 o’clock. Captain Adamson read the prayers. The
invitation to attend being open to all, a large majority of
the second saloon passengers availed themselves of the
privilege. The total attendance was about 180. The collec-
tion, in aid of the “ Dreadnought ” Hospital, amounted to
£7 os. 6d.
[JVe are pleased to announce that regular Morning Service will be
conducted as above by the Commander, and as arrangements are being
made for Choir practice the singing will, no doubt, be a special
feature. —Ed.]
In the second saloon, Commissioner Coombs and
Colonel Dowdle, of the Salvation Army, conducted service in
the evening at 8 o’clock, when a large number of first saloon
passengers joined in the service. No collection was taken
upon this occasion.
In consequence of the daily inspection of cabins, it is
currently reported in the suburbs that for tidiness the men’s
cabins take the cake ! Fie ! ladies. We suggest offering a
prize for best-kept cabin. This might cause young misses
to be more particular in their habits.
By the Withered Hand.
Palmistry is “all the go” now, second saloon way.
When we left Melbourne the popular craze on board was
“Trilby,” like its sister “ Palmistry,” an occult science, but
dealing with that interesting member, the foot, and all the
excrescences attached thereto. Now, the study of the


“ Trilby ” science was to some a very tender subject indeed,
and as such possessed great * disadvantages in the eyes of
those whose “ understandings ” were not in the best of
order. On the other hand, palmistry deals with the palms
and fingers, and as these portions of our anatomy have not
hitherto shown a tendency to cultivate corns and bunions,
we fearlessly declare in favour of a palmistry “ boom.
Yes !we are ail palmistry-mad ; old maids are searching in
their hands for long-awaited husbands; young maids for
lovers with at least per annum and a peerage in the
distance ; old men are looking to ascertain for how much
longer they may expect to ornament this terrestrial planet,
whilst the young ones seek only for fortunes without having
to work for them.
We are, most of us, extremely oblivious of the past,
moderately dissatisfied with the present, but frantically
curious and inquisitive as regards the future. They say
“Hope springs eternal in the human breast,” and from
the remarks one hears at a palmistry-reading one can’t help
feeling that everybody hopes to better himself in the “ sweet
by land by.”
At any hour between 6 a.m. and 11 p.m. (when the
electric lights are shut off, or we should probably get no
sleep at all, so fiercely does the palmistry fever rage) groups
of ;enthusiasts are always to be found practising the mystic
artj and so we will join one of these groups and have our
fortune told. We, however, approach the palmist with many
misgivings—to her nothing is sacred. Seated within a
crowded circle of admirers she “ gives you away ” with a
candour which would be positively charming were it not so full
of embarrassment to our tender feelings. With a side look at
“our best girl,” who is simply drinking in the delineation of
our moral character and physical imperfections, the fair
“ operator ” expatiates on the number and general undesir-
ability of our previous love affairs —“attachments ” she calls
them. She then goes on to inform us that our future wite
will be tall and dark (N.B. —“ Our best girl ”is short and


1.
; * . .Bfil
■k
Hi
|pP
. t
—& 4i
m m2
*
if i"J
r ** #s? f %
r
v /|- H ' i *
Sppy ■
Rpttr " 4S|
/
plfeL
A
j|
p ' >. 1
#' \\ -
m
■ * fs^";
A QUIET CORNER.


fair, but the palmist does not spare her feelings), delicate,
and without money.
Next, she proceeds to declare that she sees no money
ahead of us; all the bullion we shall ever handle will have to
be worked for by unremitting toil, whilst our old age will be
characterised chiefly by declining health and sordid poverty.
We feebly ask her to “ look again ” and see whether she has
not overlooked a legacy in the palm. You see we have a
maiden step-aunt with a year, and as she has no
kinsfolk in the world we have set great store by the close-
ness of our relationship. But the palmist is inexorable, and
opines “ that in the sweat of our brows we shall eat bread.”
We pass over such minor insults as “ your wife will rule
you with a rod of iron,” a contingency we feel pretty sure
will prove correct; also that “ you’ve a vile temper, and are
very sulky into the bargain,” but we do feel that it’s time to
rebel when we are informed that “ she never saw a hand so
full of indications of the subject taking to drink.”
After this we retire crest-fallen to “ the bar,” and, in
ordering a big brandy and soda to restore our mental
equilibrium, we cannot help feeling that we may be already
launching on the intemperate career predicted.
We pronounce palmistry “ a mug’s game,” and for a
moment or two seriously think of taking proceedings against
the palmist for defamation of character. We sigh for the
downfall of the palmistry craze, and almost wish we had
the Trilby one back again, but a downward glance at our
No. 12’s reminds us that we had rather imputation rested
upon our moral character than that the breath of suspicion
should rest on the anatomical symmetry of our physical
proportions.
We have two palmists in the second saloon, one a fair
damsel, from whom even condemnation such as the above
is but a passing pleasure; the other, a clumsy male-man
palmist, whose predictions are on a par with the rest of his
intellectual accomplishments. The saloon wit (taker) has,
with his usual vivacity, already dubbed these two “ artistes ”


Beauty and the Beast, and, being an Irishman, he must be
right. Wild horses would not draw from us the name of
the young lady aforesaid, but the premier letter of her
dynastic cognomen does not commence with either a U orW.
Like the ham in the sandwich, it “lies in between.” As for
the representative of the “ lords of creation,” his name
(ye gods !) is best pronounced by sneezing twice and tacking
a Z on to the result.
Several people have tried this recipe, but the practice has
been' discontinued, as the hospital is quite full, and it is
feared that after such extraordinary physical contortion,
patients would not be able to survive the Red Sea. We
conclude our instructive sketch on palmistry (no family
should be without it) by expressing the opinion that, under
the auspices of the two enlightened palmists as described
above, every single passenger will land in England with a
clear and comprehensive idea of the destiny which awaits
him.
USEFUL INFORMATION.
Judging Distances at Sea. —The distance in miles
of the visible horizon is a little more than the square root
of the height (in feet) of the observer’s eye above the sea.
For example, if the observer’s eye on the deck of the
“Himalaya” be 25 feet above the sea, the visible horizon
will be a little more than five nautical miles off.
Nautical Miles (or Knots). —All direct distances
in navigation are measured in nautical miles, or knots. A
nautical mile is the sixtieth part of a degree of latitude, and
being 267 yards longer than a statute mile, great care must
be taken not to confound the nautical with the statute mile
■the sea mile with the shore mile.
To convert knots into statute miles, multiply the number
of knots by I*ls ; or, roughly, add one-sixth of the number
of knots —six knots being equal to nearly seven statute
miles.


OUR PROGRESS, IN KNOTS.
From Sydney, April 11, to Hobart, April 13, 640 knots.
~ Hobart, ~ 14, to Melbourne, ~ 16, 468 ~
~ Melbourne, ~ 18, to Adelaide, ~ 20, 500 ~
~ 20, 500 ~
~ Adelaide, ~ 22, to Albany, ~ 25, 1,023 ~
Albany, ~ 25, to Mid-day to-day, May 2, 2,429
5,060 knots.
Or 5,819 statute miles from starting.
We arrived at Albany on Saturday, April 25, remaining from 12.30 to
3.30 p.m.
THE WEATHER.
For some days we have experienced very warm weather,
but our readers must expect a considerable rise in the
thermometer during the next fortnight, as we are about to
cross the equator to-morrow, and tropical heat will be a
certainty.
REPORTS
DEBATE.
On Monday evening, April 27, the second saloon passen-
gers were treated to a debate on “Should the Franchise be
Extended to Women ? ” The Chairman (Mr. J. Longmore)
introduced the speakers, Mr. Tom Topping taking the
affirmative and Mr. Thomas Ross the negative. Other
speakers were Miss Brackett, and Messrs. Babbage,
Griffiths, McLean, Whittaker, and Hosking. After a fairly
good and interesting debate, a show of hands resulted in
favour of the negative.
CONCERT.
On Tuesday evening, April 28, a Grand Concert was
given by the passengers in the second saloon. The night


being warm, the piano was taken on deck, and the awnings
arranged to make the best of the singing, &c., under the
circumstances. Mr. Rooney opened the programme with a
violin selection from “ Martha.” This was followed by
“My Sweetheart when a Boy,” by Mr. Pountney. Miss
Vivian then rendered “The Daily Question,” and Mr.
Whittaker followed with a recitation, capitally rendered,
entitled “In the Engine Shed.” Jude’s fine song, “The
Mighty Deep,” was next rendered by Mr. Hosking, after
which Miss Davis contributed “ Danse les Bois ” as a
pianoforte selection, and Dr. Smith’s burly voice rolled out
“ Father O’Flynn,” Four little maids then concluded part
one of the programme by rendering “ I don’t want to play
in your yard.” After a brief interval, Mr. Hosking, as
substitute for Mr. Crawford, sang “ Simon the Cellarer,”
and in response to an encore, repeated the last verse. A
well-rendered recitation, “The Elf Child,” by little Miss
May Longmore, was followed by the song “The Death of
Nelson,” by Mr. Whittaker,” who had to respond to an
imperative encore, and rendered “’Tis but a little faded
Flower.” Mr. Rooney next pleased his hearers with
another violin solo, “ Scipio March,” and was succeeded
by Mr. Macdonald’s rendition of “ Calvary.” The good old
“ Home, Boys, Home ! ” was then given by Mr. Pountney,
and the lads in the back seats fell in with the rollicking
chorus. The Chairman then gave a taste of Scotch
recitation, and Mr. Schwarz’s song, “ Love’s Old Sweet
Song,” concluded the programme, the audience rising and
singing the National Anthem before dispersing.
CRICKET.
The first Cricket Match of the voyage took place on
Wednesday afternoon, April 29, when Mr. Whittaker’s
team opposed that selected by Mr. Hosking. After an
exciting and amusing contest the scores tied and the game
was drawn.


LECTURE.
On Thursday evening, April 30, Mr. A. McLean, a
passenger touring the world on mission work, gave the
second saloon passengers a highly instructive and interesting
account of his travels through India, China, and the
Colonies. Mr. McLean warmed to his subject admirably,
and in a racy manner described many towns and villages
of the East, touching briefly on the manners and customs
of the people, and gave an outline of his field of future
labour.
His chat was listened to most attentively, and at the
close the Chairman (Mr. Longmore) called on Commissioner
Coombs to move a comprehensive vote of thanks, which
was seconded by Mr. Hosking, and carried unanimously.
DANCE.
Those passengers fond of dancing arranged an evening’s
amusement on deck on Friday evening, Ist May, when
several couples tripped the light fantastic toe to the capital
music of the £r Himalaya ” string band, consisting of two
violins, cornet, and piano. Although the weather was
rather oppressive, those indulging appeared to thoroughly
enjoy the dance.
SPORTS.
On Thursday and Friday afternoons the various Com-
mittees appointed were busily engaged in carrying out the
sports arranged. Quoits, bull, potato races, egg and spoon
races, tugs of war, skipping contests, threadneedle races,
etc., in addition to chess, whist, euchre, and cribbage
tournaments, provided an abundance of amusements for all
who participated, and passed off most satisfactorily. The
results are too lengthy for publication.


[ ■« ]
A GEORGIA OBITUARY.
Some of the rhymed obituaries of the Georgia news-
papers are ludicrous in the extreme. Here is a sample :
I gave him his medicine regular,
From morn till the set of sun,
He took two powders at ten o’clock
And another powder at one.
But doctors cannot help us,
When death knocks at the door ;
Good bye, my darling husband !
You left at ten to four !


RECORD OF A VOYAGE
FROM
AUSTRALIA to LONDON,
In the P. & 0. Company’s R.M.S.S. “Himalaya.”
April—May, 1896.
THE
Ibimalaga ®bsen>er.
No. 2.]
S.S. “Himalaya,” Indian Ocean. [May 9, 1896.
THE “ HIMALAYA'S ” FIRST
VOYAGE.
HIS is an age of record breaking, consequently
SB one of disappointment, and when the Penin-
sular and Oriental Steam Navigation Company s
(at the time) largest and most powerful mail
steamer, the “ Himalaya,” undertook, on her
maiden voyage, to break the record from
’SUpt England to Bombay, no one doubted but that
the record would be broken. Captain Orman was honoured
with the first command of the vessel, and the date fixed for
starting was Saturday, October 15th, 1892. Applications
for berths had been coming in for six months previously,
consequently on the appointed day, at xx a.m., the hour at
which the special train was to have left for Tilbury, Liver-
pool Street Station was thronged with Anglo-Indian Globe


trotters and their many friends. But it was soon whispered
that the train would not start till 12 o’clock, no reason being
given for the delay. Soon after 12 o’clock a start was made,
and in half an-hour the train came to a standstill at the
Albert Docks Station. Passengers and their luggage were
soon aboard the new and handsome steamer “ Himalaya,”
but they found that, owing to heavy fog on the river, it
had been decided to postpone the ship’s departure till the
following (Sunday) morning, but passengers were recom-
mended to remain on board that night. The Albert Dock
is not the choicest place to spend a whole day of pleasure at
any time, but when, as on this occasion, one is compelled
to spend a day and night, one of the chilliest days too, the
unpleasantness is increased. After a weary time the looked-
for Sabbath morning broke, and before some passengers
had left their bunks the “ Himalaya” had cast her moorings
and started on her “ record-breaking trip.” The weather
was not pleasant, a dull chilly sort of morning, with light
rains, but once past the white cliffs of Albion the weather
improved, and the run to Gibralter was the best recorded,
the 1,300 miles being covered in three days eight hours, or,
we understand, eleven hours less than the record time of
the “ Britannia.” The voyage from Gibraltar to Marseilles
was far from pleasant; a steady head sea most of the way
accompanied by high winds and heavy rain. It was particu
larly “ dirty” weather, and during the pitching of the vesse.
two or three of the Lascar hands suffered seriously through
being knocked about, one poor fellow sustaining a broken
thigh, and another a broken fore-arm. At 5.30 p.m. a start
was made for Port Said under favourable circumstances,
the weather being fine and the boat skimming along at over
seventeen knots an hour. Everything went well till the boat
was off Candia. It was the 25th October, and just as tiffin
was oyer the engines stopped. As usual the enquiries were
numerous and replies vague, but the real reason was that an
accident had happened to what is technically termed “ the
low-pressure crank-pin brass.” This delay lasted four hours


the monotony of the wait being relieved by the passing of
the “Arcadia,” bound for the Colonies. When matters
were righted in the engine room a fresh start was made, and
nothing of interest happened till Port Said was reached at
7.30 the same evening. The “Arcadia” had arrived some
hours previously. Having come from Marseilles, where one
or two cases of cholera existed, the “ Himalaya ” had to fly
the quarantine flag, which was kept flying till the last of
Suez was seen. No one was allowed to land, and no one to
board, so enforced stoppage under such circumstances was
extremely tantalizing. After a long stay at Port Said, during
which the engineers were kept busy repairing damages, the
canal was entered and Suez reached without further mishap.
Up to this time, even with the delays that had occurred,
many believed that the record would be broken, but on the
morning of Sunday, October 30th, an hour’s stoppage was
caused through “hot bearings.” The same night at 10
o’clock another stoppage from the same cause resulted in a
loss of three quarters of an hour. Next day Aden was
reached in safety. The “ Arcadia ” had been in some
hours, and the report that the “ Himalaya ” was disabled
together with our late arrival, caused considerable alarm
in Aden, and a steam launch had been sent out to search
for the disabled steamer. Having taken on the mails the
“Himalaya” got away on Tuesday, November Ist, and
passed the “Assam” on the 2nd all well. Just as a smart
run to Bombay was expected the engines were stopped on
the 3rd November, the stoppage lasting nine hours. At 7 p.m.
another start was made, at nearly lull speed, but at 9.30 on
Friday night, November 4th, they again slowed down and
continued slow throughout the night. Next morning,
Saturday, November 5 th, there was another dead stoppage,
lasting two hours. From that time to Bombay the average
speed was only about eight knots. Practically from
Marseilles, the passengers, as well as the engineers, had a
terribly rough time, which fortunately has not been repeated.
Altogether there were no less than six complete stoppages


(including Port Said for repairs), involving a loss of more
than 30 hours.
It may be worth recording, as a matter of interest to the
ladies in particular, that no less than twenty-three of the
passengers were young-or at any rate, unmarried—ladies
who were to be met by the same number of unmarried
gentlemen, who were willing to make them brides. Imagine
the anxiety experienced on both sides by the delays, and the
disquiet engendered when the news of the “Himalayas
disablement became known to those expectant and anxious
waiters !!
The Editor.
COMMITTEE MEETINGS.
Since our last issue the general routine work of the
Committee has been so hampered by the long stay at
Colombo that only two meetings have been held, and we
are pleased to record the fact that Messrs. W. Ross-Park,
and S. Cockburn were added to the Committee this morn-
ing. Mr. E. T. Hynes, one of the original Committee, left
the boat at Colombo.
THE CHILDREN ON BOARD .
By A. McLean.
Among the passengers in the second saloon no less than
29 are children. These add not a little enjoyment to their
associates. Some of them are not at all backward in
coming forward; a lot more than half of them are so good
that they are in danger of dying young. Nevertheless, they
are the chief source of amusement to most on board. The
voyage would be distressingly dull without their pranks and
quaint questions and laughter. The man who does not
find constant delight in these little ones has either a small
heart or a large liver, He is fit for treason, stratagem, and
spoil. Blessings without number and without end rest on
you little folks! May you be so guided and kept in the


THE CHILDREN.


slippery paths of youth that you shall reach a noble man-
hood and womanhood !
For what are all our contrivings,
And the wisdom of our books,
When compared with your caresses,
And the gladness of your looks ?
You are better than all the ballads,
That ever were sung or said ;
For you are the living poems —
And all the rest are dead.
ORIGINAL POETRY ! !
As you walk round the deck —
As you do, I suppose —
You are certain to notice
A lot of good hose !
And if you should want some,
As I think you should,
I gladly refer you
To Mr. Hose-good.
“ bunkum:'
By Dotty.
“ Double Sneeze and Z ” is supposed to be going into
the fruit trade —by appearances we should judge that the
fruit trade is going into him. —Which is it, Schwarz ?
The Lancashire boy is a great cricketer, his aim being
in “ Topping ” Babbage’s score.
\The writer of this is now on bail, for such a WICKET attempt at a
joke. — Ed.]
The “ Himalaya ” can boast of a number of special
conveyances for the ladies, having a large variety of Lass-
cars aboard !!
Although the passengers are not too liberally supplied
with fruit, it is generally known that our skipper is particu-
larly fond of such a commodity. His choice being
A-damson !
Griffiths caught a severe cold recently while playing the
final in the draught tourney.


Good friend “ Hynes ” left us at Colombo. Some
folks thought he looked sorry !
The lads say Whittaker was considerably frightened last
night during the thunderstorm, but the witty cur says he
was only electrified.
Our musical director appears to be always in trouble—
probably because he likes a fray—sir (A. Fraser).
\The writer of the above is now in irons. — Ed.]
While the “ Himalaya ” was coaling, &c., at Colombo
this week we inspected the town and afforded the natives a
treat. The first thing noticed by us was that the smells were
very distinked. Another thing was that half the population
seemed to be guides, and the other half mis-guides. All
were willing to “ take one in,” and one anxious enquirer
wants to know what Mr, Exley’s opinion is of the honesty of
the Cingalese.
THE STEWARDS.
Ev N.
The stewards, who care for our rooms and for us at table,
deserve special mention. They are attentive, polite and
efficient. They leave nothing that our comfort requires
undone. If anyone goes hungry or thirsty it is certainly no
fault of our stewards. As one who has travelled much on
sea and on land, I take pleasure in thus testifying on behalf
of these young men. The P. & O. Company has good
reason to be proud of the service they render; the
passengers have equally good cause to congratulate them-
selves that they are in such good hands. All the good
things that can be truthfully said about the stewards apply,
equally well to the two accomplished stewardesses, who look
after the children at table, and who minister to the comforts
of the ladies in their cabins and on deck. All honour and
praise to these devoted, faithful, and energetic public
servants!!


CONUNDRUMS.
Who is the best looking girl on board ? Can’t say ;
give a chap-an-easy one!
What is the difference between an egg and Bonny Black
Bess ? One is an EGG and the other is a she gee-gee.
When is a debater not a debater ? In nine cases out o f
ten, judging by the last debate we had.
\Our contributor forgets that he took an active part in that debate.
—Ed.]
Why is the second saloon deck like a well kept garden ?
Because it is generally be decked with Flowers, and can
boast of a fair-sized Park.
OUR PROGRESS.
Reaching Colombo on Tuesday, May 5, soon after
7 o’clock, we remained in harbour till 5.15 p.m. Thursday,
May 7.
Since our last issue, on 2nd inst., our progress has been
good, considering nearly half the week was spent in
Colombo.
Noon, May 2, to Colombo, May 5, 949 knots
Colombo, ~ 7, to noon to-day 560 ~
1,509 knots
Or 1,735 statute miles, making in all 7,554 statute miles from starting.
TELEGRAMS.
North Pole, May 8.
E. T. Hynes, a foreign traveller, is now at the “ head of
the pole,” trying to keep cool and look happy.
Berlin, May 8.
The Emperor Wilhelm congratulates Snowley on his
grand tactics at cricket match on board s.s. “Himalaya.”
It is reported that the Emperor intends to confer on him
the order of the “ Grand Sausage.”
London, May 8.
The Daily Dress of to-night contains a very complimentary
report of the cricket match, first v. second saloon, played


this day. W. G. Grace congratulates Babbage on the very
excellent stand made by him, and is about to arrange for a
public reception here.
Colombo, May 9.
The Rickshaw runners are calling a public meeting for
the purpose of proceeding against some of the “ Himalaya ”
passengers for forgetting to pay their fares.
PUBLIC NOTICES .
£lO Reward will be paid by a wealthy widower to any
person who can inform him what country allows a man to
marry his widow*s sister. Address replies to Editor.
“ Himalaya Observer,”
Law Court.—The General Committee purpose holding
a court bi-weekly. Passengers are free to lay charges against
their fellows, and a fair hearing will be accorded both sides,
Three or four new legal firms are prepared to undertake
cases, but-their names can only be inserted as advertise-
ments.
CHURCH NOTICES.
The usual morning service was conducted by Captain
Adamson last Sunday, and in the evening Commissioner
Coombs addressed the second saloon passengers on the open
deck.
To-morrow the services will be conducted by Captain
Adamson in the morning and Mr. A. McLean in the
evening.
COMPETE! lON.
A prize is hereby generously offered—not to exceed £lO
—for the best conundrum on any matter connected with
the P. and O. Company, the “Himalaya,” her crew, or the
present voyage.


REPORTS.
An exciting cricket match was played on Friday afternoon
last on the second saloon oval, between representative eights
of the first and second saloon passengers. The visiting team,
winning the toss, elected to bat on a perfect wicket, which
had frequent light rolling throughout the match. They
began badly, losing three wickets for no runs, and thp
innings closed for 24, of which Clemens, the captain, com-
piled 16. Davis and Dowling were very successful trundlers.
The home team only reached half the total of their
opponents, owing to the deadly bowling of Macdonald and
Steadman. In their second innings the first salooners made
39, of which their skipper again showed his skill by,knocking
up 28 in a few minutes. This left the second salooners 5 1 runs
behind, and, owing to the capital stand made by Babbage,
who scored 32 in faultless style, this total was reached, but
not passed, and the game ended in an even draw.


RECORD OF A VOYAGE
FROM
AUSTRALIA to LONDON,
In the P. & 0. Company's R.M.S.S. “Himalaya."
April—May, 1896.
THE
Observer
No. 3.]
S.S. <£ Himalaya,” Red Sea. [May 16, 1896.
THE “ HIMALAYA'S ”
LIFE-SAVING OUTFIT.
T will probably interest our readers to know a
little about the provision made by the P.. & O.
Company in case of shipwreck, fire, or other
disaster of a like nature. The “ Himalaya” is
provided with ten large life-boats, besides two cutters, a
collapsible boat, a steam launch, and a gig. The life-boats
are built to accommodate 505 persons, the two cutters 127,
and the collapsible boat 77, altogether a carrying capacity
for 709 occupants. As the crew and passengers never
exceed 671 persons, it will be seen that in these seaworthy
boats there is ample accommodation in case the good ship
had to be abandoned. The gig would be too small to be
of any use, and the steam launch could not carry coals
enough for a long voyage, so would be practically useless.
Each cabin is liberally supplied with serviceable life-belts,


of which there are 700. on board, beside 16 large life-buoys.
The life-boats are built of mahogany, this wood being
light and strong, and does not shrink. Each boat has a
copper air-chamber built inside, rendering them practically
unsinkable. One of these boats could be packed with
human beings and a store of provisions, and then filled with
water, and yet it would not sink to the bottom of the sea.
On each side of the life boats are bilge rails, to which
persons may cling; all along the gunwale are life-lines for
the same purpose. Each boat is always kept supplied with
masts and sails, and oars, and water. . The water, is .renewed
every second day, and a supply of food is always in readiness
in the ship’s storeroom in case of emergency. In case the
signal were given that the ship had to be abandoned, every
officer and every man would at once know his place and
duties. Some would bring the compasses from the bridge,
others the food ; some would loosen the keels of the boats
so that they could swing out by their own weight. Some
would release the ropes and allow the boats to drop into
the sea. The women and children would be put aboard
first, then the other passengers, then the officers and hands,
and the last man to leave the wreck would be the captain.
Two of these life-boats, hanging over the rail throughout
the voyage, are always in readiness for immediate use in
case of accident. They are lit up every night, and if the
cry “ man overboard ” were given, they could be lowered in
the twinkling of an eye and under ordinary circumstances
the man would be picked up in a few minutes. Such is the
provision made by the Company for the safety of all
passengers and hand?, in case of disaster while at sea.
COMMITTEE MEETINGS.
The General Committee for the management of Sports,
etc., during this voyage have continued to hold meetings
and arrange tournaments, &c. At the meeting held on
Friday morning, 15th inst., two additional Committee-men


were elected, viz., Dr. Scovelle and Mr. Lovejoy, both ot
whom joined our boat at Aden.
CORRESPONDENCE
PLEASURE IN STORE.
To the Editor.
Sir _I have much pleasure in informing you and your
readers’ that the P. & O. Company purpose building a
Social Hall for the second class passengers. This Hall is to
have a Piano and Organ, a Library, Writing Desks, and
Tables, at which ladies and non-smokers may play Whist,
Chess, Cribbage, &c. The proposed Hall is to be as com-
fortable and as convenient as the one in the first saloon.
The Captain and Chief Officer have informed the Company
that in their daily visits to the second saloon to entertain the
ladies and kiss the babies they have become convinced that
such a Hall is absolutely necessary. Sealed tenders for
building this Hall have been advertised for, and will be
opened and the contract awarded on June 31st next. You
will oblige the Company by giving publicity to this im-
portant matter through the columns of your most valuable
“ Observer.”
I am, Sir, &c.,
A. Fakir, Secretary.
IVAYSIDE NOTES.
By Observer.
Our “ wise man ” tells us there is a place and season for
all things under the sun. Some of our friends in the first
saloon seem to have chosen Thursday evening last for
disturbing the peace of the ship, while lying at anchor in the
Gulf of Aden awaiting the arrival of the “ Sutlej ” with the
Bombay mails. Their doings in the smoke room were
emphasized by the hilarious warblings of some of the party
suggestive of a total abstinence (from water) society’s
meeting. Surely that was neither the time nor the place


for such doubtful entertainments. There are some
passengers on board suffering from nervous prostration, who
are taking the voyage in hope of regaining health; but for
a doctor to order them peace and quiet in such a neigh-
bourhood is like Bumble offering a starving pauper a pair
of iron spectacles with which to appease his hunger. It is
hoped there will be no recurrence of such a disturbance.
“BUNKUMr
By Dotty.
At Colombo and Aden we noticed that the natives
don’t wear all their clothes at once. In some instances
the family washing had not come home, and the garb was
flesh-coloured skin, dun brown. The youngsters especially
are close friends of the travellers ; they stick very closely to
them, as adhesively as postage stamps, which suggests that
they may be gum Arabics !
Several donkeys were seen at Aden, and we noticed that
many of the passengers went ashore and paid their respects
to their relatives. There were also a great many “ Ships of
the Desert ” at Aden, and after getting Mr. Rooney’s ocarina
to toot out the “ Camels are coming,” we immediately
noticed sundry curious looking animals, consisting of a
humped back held up by four legs, one at each corner. Ihe
balance of power appears to be maintained by a neck with
a head attached wagging at one end and a tail dangling at
the other. This is used by the camel in assisting small
Arab boys up steep ascents —to which, probably, Mr. Camel
does not always assent. We hear that camels can go for a
long while without a “drink” —they must be very different
animals to some of those male men on board our boat.
COURT NEWS.
By Copper.
During the last week the Committee appointed several
Justices of the Peace to sit on those refractory passengers
whose actions might warrant investigation. The first Court


was held in the deck Court House on Tuesday morning
last,'when Messrs. Whittaker and Hosking, J.P.’s, heard a
trumpery charge laid by Sergeant Spinks against three
foreigners, named Gordon, Lynx, and Stewart, for causing a
disturbance in the village of Himalaya on the night of
May roth last. The Justices imposed a light sentence
as a warning to others inclined to similarly offend.
On Wednesday morning a serious case was heard by
Messrs, Hosking and Freame, J.P.’s, the charge being laid by
Sir Thos. Ross against one Ishmael Dowling, for occupying
a vacant chair at No. 4 saloon table contrary to Section 3of
the Dog Act, 1859.
Mr. Spinks, Q.C., appeared for the prosecution, and the
prisoner was defended by Lady Holman and Lady Brackett
(the noted “new woman” legal firm.) After very able
addresses by Council on either side and detailed evidence
by experienced witnesses, the Court found prisoner guilty
against his will,” and in sentencing him reminded him that,
although the law allowed a punishment of 7 5 Y ears on the
island of Socotra, they were desirous of shewing leniency,
as he was a young man just away from his mother’s apron
strings. The sentence of the Court was that prisoner be
imprisoned for one hour in the baker’s shop, there to be
carefully besmeared with golden syrup, after which to be
confined in the smoking room with two of the champion
squalling youngsters on board, and finally to be hung to the
mast-head till dry. Prisoner said he was already dry, and
evinced a desire for drink, but the sentence was received
by him without emotion.
BAZAAR NOTICE.
The children, young and old, have been busily engaged
for several days in working up scraps of silk, &c., for a
bazaar they propose holding on Wednesday afternoon next,
20th inst., at 3 o’clock, in aid of the Merchant Seamen’s
Orphan Asylum in London. Ihe honour of opening the


bazaar has been conferred on Mr. F. J. Whittaker, The
following lines have been handed us for publication :
Come to the sale arranged by the children,
To help the orphans and poor ;
Come, give of your money and other assistance,
To keep want away from the door.
You can get what you want if you look well around,
There are pin-cushions, mats, and bootees—
Oranges, lemons, bananas and apples,
And sweets, if you do not like these.
The children have worked, and now you must buy ;
If you want nothing—buy for your friends ;
Ornament, use, and beauty combined,
Are found ’mongst these odds and ends.
Then bring your companions, and come to our sale,
You’ll have music and afternoon tea,
Dealt out by fair hands, made sweet with bright smiles,
For the girls are quite gay out at sea.
’Twill be held on the deck of the good “ Himalaye ”
As she sails o’er the deep waters blue,
For at home or abroad^wherever we go,
We remember the poor—so will you.
CONUNDRUMS.
When is the “ Himalaya ” like a diamond pin ? When
on the bosom of a swell.
Why is the “ Himalaya’s ” screw like an elephant ?
Because neither can climb a tree.
\The above is original, and the composer is not likely to trouble our
readers with another —he cannot possibly recover. — Ed.]
Why is friend Rooney like the inhabitants of Ceylon ?
Because he is enjoying a life of single ease (Cingalese).
Why is The Himalaya Observer like this steamship ?
Because both have a good man in command, with efficient
help in all departments ; both have made a good start and
expect to finish well, and both must sink or swim together.


CONCERT.
On Monday evening last the second Concert of the
voyage was given on the aft deck. After the opening
overture, by Miss Davies (piano) and Mr. Rooney (violin),
Mr. Hosking sang “Queen of the Earth.” Miss Vivian
then sang a quaint little song, “ Maid of Arcadee, which'
was followed by “The Life Boat,” capitally recited by Mr.
Whittaker. Mrs. Boan then sang “The Old Lock” very
nicely, after which Mr. Hylands sang “ Maid of Athens,”
and Mr. Schwarz closed the first part of the programme
with that very pretty song. “The Garden of Sleep.” Miss
Davies opened the second part with a pianoforte solo,
“ Alice ” and Mr. Macdonald followed with “ I tear no
foe.” Another song, “Jack’s Yarn,” by Mr. Pountney,
preceded a Scotch reading by Mr. Longmore, entitled
“Bowl aboot,” after which a song, “The Skipper,” by Mr,
Whittaker, was deservedly encored, for which the singer
gave “The Irish Emigrant.” Mrs. Longmore next sang
“Listening,” and the programme was concluded by Mr.
Rooney’s rendition of selections from “Mantana” on the
violin. The National Anthem was then sung by the
audience.
CHURCH NOTICES.
The usual Morning Service will be held by the Captain
in the first saloon to-morrow morning, when all passengers
are invited to attend.
In the evening services will be conducted on the second,
saloon deck at eight o’clock.
Last Sunday the usual services were held, morning and
evening. The singing was very good.
OBITUARY.
Under Divine Providence, with a good ship splendidly
officered, our present voyage has been one of pleasure to


IP
1
«K| 1 M MH
f;--
! || f
• «**Jhk. .PwaPT-aK
p '■
11
|i;:j : , |
f^ :,£
x
j- - 1
o
UJ
BHhbi
llllflll
■' r /
z
IhBb
iiiil
iME^:
o
■SB
jilili
: ... ■ )
&| f ■ i , * f -#p"
■
||
- tr,f M f »* $S&
I ¥
i; If
•f *,;&* •■-^&r-*^iilBP |ta lP
* i
R: ip
g -
MB
■
:


most of the passengers, freed from serious illness, fire, or
wreck.*
But during the past week the uncommon experience of
attending a funeral at sea has been ours. One of the
passengers in the second saloon, a Mrs. Ditchfield, hailing
from Albury, joined our ship at Melbourne with her little
daughter, aged 13, whom she was desirous of placing with
relatives in England.
At the time of embarking, this lady was, we understand,
in very ill health, and early in the voyage it was rumoured
that she was not expected to live. In fact, on Sunday, 3rd
inst., it was not expected that she could survive the night,
and three of the second saloon passengers very kindly
visited her in the hospital and sang three verses of “Abide
with me,” which, it has since transpired, happened to be
her favourite hymn. The good lady lingered till Wednes-
day, 13th inst., when death relieved her of her suffering.
The cause of death was exhaustion following what is known
as Hodgkin’s disease. The same evening, at a quarter-past
six, the Captain conducted the funeral ceremonies. It is
not generally known, perhaps, that a Captain’s duty does not
end with conducting divine service on Sundays, he is also
expected to conduct, or read, the burial service over any-
one dying during a voyage and buried at sea.
A funeral service is at all times a most solemn service,
but especially so away on the ocean. Unlike burials ashore,
where a monument may be erected to mark the spot where
the remains of the loved ones rest, at sea the body is com-
mitted to the deep and at once disappears, and nothing
remains to mark the spot. Those of us who attended the
burial service last Wednesday will understand how terribly
solemn a duty has to be carried out by the Captain on such
occasions.
LECTURES.
On Tuesday evening last Mr. W. Ross-Park gave an
interesting account of his experiences in Java, and on Friday


evening Mr. A. McLean delivered a lecture on America.
In both instances large audiences gathered on the second
saloon deck and frequently expressed their thorough apprecia-
tion of the respective lectures by hearty applause. The
usual votes of thanks were accorded each lecturer.
FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE.
Colombo, May 13, 1896.
Seven deaths have occurred recently from eating too
freely of prawn curry. Mrs. Hoggan’s recovery is considered
marvellous.
Ireland, May 14, 1896.
A marble monument has been erected to the memory ot
Maloney’s cat.
Adelaide, May 15, 1896.
Candles are lighter—after dark. There is a tendency in
kerosene to go up; also in the servant girls who light the
fire with it.
[lnterruption in the cable. Mrs. Neptune has probably borroived it
for a clothes line , on which to hang out the family washing. Ed.J
OUR PROGRESS.
We are glad to report continued fine weather and
smooth seas. Arrived at Aden, Thursday, 14th May, at
7 a.m. Owing to late arrival of the “ Sutlej ” with mails
and passengers from Bombay, we were detained till 3’ J 5 a,ra>
next day.
To-day’s run of 407 knots is, so far, the record for this
trip.
The total run is as follows :
From noon (9th) to Aden (14th) ... ... i,54 2 knots.
From Aden (15th) to noon to-day ... 544 »
2,086
or 2,389 statute miles for the week, making in all 9,943 statute miles
from starting.


RECORD OF A VOYAGE
FROM
AUSTRALIA to LONDON.
In tie P. & 0. Company’s R.I.S.S. “Himalaya."
April—May, 1896.
THE
IDimalaipa ©bserver.
No. 4.] S.S. “Himalaya,” Mediterranean Sea. [May 23, 1896.
THE QUEEN OF ENGLAND.
NGLISHMEN the world over recognise and
commemorate the 24th May as the anni-
versary of the birth of Her Most Gracious
Majesty Queen Victoria. Her Majesty was
born at Kensington Palace on 24th May, 1819, and will, if
spared, complete her 77th year to-morrow. She succeeded
to the throne on 20th June, 1837, at the age of 18 years,
and was crowned Queen of England on 28th June, 1838.
Two years later, on 10th February, 1840, she married his
late Royal Highness, Francis Albert Augustus Charles
Emanuel, Prince Consort, and was proclaimed Empress of
India, at Delhi, on New Year’s Day of 1877. The Prince
Consort died on 14th December, 1861, leaving a family of
four sons and five daughters, of whom three sons and four
daughters are now living. The Queen reigns in her own


right, ho ding the Crown both by inheritance and by
election. That her reign has been an unusually long and
prosperous one there can be no doubt, and the earnest
prayers of her loyal subjects that she may long be spared to
exercise her influence for good over the British Empire
continue to ascend from all quarters of the globe, 1 o
morrow Her Majesty will enter her 78th year of life, and
on the 20th June, next —if she be so spared —she will begin
the 60th year of her glorious reign. The extent to which
the nation’s destinies were moulded 56 years ago, at the
marriage of Her Majesty to the Prince Consort, will
probably never be fully understood by her people. The
great moral influence and judicious counsels of his late
Royal Highness have, nevertheless, left their lasting
impressions on the whole nation. Ihe combined virtues ot
herself and husband have shed a lustre round Windsor, of
which one eminent writer remarks; “The white mantle
of their purity has covered the black character and history
of many royal generations within those walls
Here lived Queen Victoria—here she first became a mother
—here she was made a widow —and here a new race ot
English kings and queens was born, and bred, and trained
in the nurture of a purer life than any tihat ever filled the
British throne in past generations.”
What better could we say than this ? Our limited space
prevents our enlarging on the royal qualities ot Her
Majesty, and in closing this brief sketch we would, with the
officers, crew, and fellow passengers in this British ship
“ Himalaya ” quietly honour the 77th anniversary of her
natal day, and with united hearts and voices cry-
God save the Queen !
OCEAN EXPENSES.
Of the 30,000 ships afloat, Great Britain has 11,660, so
that her ships are not only more numerous than those of
any other nation, but of larger averoge size. Of these


30,000 vessels only 138 can steam more than 17 knots an
hour, and Great Britain owns 90 of them, hranee having
15, Germany 14, Holland and Belgium seven each, and the
United States five. Forty-three of these ocean greyhounds
can do their 19 knots. The P. & O. is the oldest, largest,
and best known shipping Company in the world. If the
P. & O. ships were placed end to end, in single file, along
the Thames, it is said they would reach from London Bridge
to Battersea, about five miles.
The Company has a revenue of more than two and a
third millions, and its fleet is worth about three millions.
It has 56 large steamships, and 24 steam tugs and steam
launches; its total register tonnage is 266,000, and its
total horse-power 255,000. The Company is as old as
Queen Victoria’s reign, having started business fifty-eight
years ago, and during its existence it has owned shipping
worth nearly seven millions of money. Its largest vessel is
the “ Caledonia,” of 7,558 tons and 11,000 horse-power its
smallest is a little 8-ton launch at Aden, named the u William
Fawcett.” The line is noted for punctuality, and out of more
than 500 voyages it has only been seven times late, a record
all the more noteworthy when we remember that the Com-
pany’s boats travel 2,600,000 miles every year. lo run
this fleet the wages’ bill alone amounts to a Y ear -
The meat consumed on a P. & O. boat during an aveiage
voyage is 16 tons, the poultry and game number 15,000
head, fish half-a ton, potatoes over 18 tons, and vegetables
and fruits run up to nearly a thousand pads and baskets
The bread is made every morning, the baker being the fils':
to get about; then the stewards follow with their early cup
of tea, to keep the passengers quiet till the decks are
washed. The tea consumed amounts to 1,000 lbs., coffee
500 lbs., cocoa does not amount to much, white sugar
3,500 lbs., and moist sugar 4,5°° lbs., butter 3,000 lbs.,
cheese 1,500 lbs., jam and marmalade a ton of each. Ad
to this 200 hams, 1,400 lbs. of bacon, 50,000 eggs, and a
thousand pounds’ worth of condiments and preserves and


other odds and ends, with the share of 780,000 bottles of
wines and spirits and beer, and half-a-million bottles
of aerated waters consumed annually in the fleet, for which
passengers pay extra, and we have some idea of what it
costs to provision a long-distance ocean liner. The ice
stores alone, in keeping the drinkables pleasant and the
eatables cool, cost the Company about per week for
each vessel afloat.
“ bunkum:'
By Dotty.
On Wednesday last the donkey drivers at Port Said had
a good time while our boat stayed. The donkeys them-
selves had a worse time, but the worst time fell to the
lot of those young ladies who, after having a short ride, had
to sprinkle insectibane in their clothing. The Port Said
fleas are naturally strong.
Pountney thinks the girls in Brindisi are not a patch on
the New Zealand girls, but the wine is good.
While (s)Topping at Brindisi, Tom was greatly struck
with the musicians, and says he would like to join them —
only he can’t play.
Wedderburn expects to stay at either Windsor or
Newgate for three months.
Hodgson and Fraser looked immense to-day astride a
donkey in Malta. A case of “ When shall we three meet
again ? ”,
“ Beware of the dog 1 ” —A fierce-looking mastiff, bought
by Mrs. Exley, has joined the list of “ Himalaya” pets.
Whilst in the Chapel of Bones at Malta, Dowling
tried to bone a sktill for a scarf-pin, so one of the guides
says Perhaps he intends opening a scullery.
Schwarz was nearly prevented from landing at Malta this
morning—he had too much collar-a bout him.


ORIGINAL POETRY .
THE SHOPPER.
He went out in Italy shopping,
He skipped by the light of the moon,
Of course it was not our friend Joppin,
But some,other Lancashire coon.
He came on board looking quite tired,
He told us his tale—full of woe,
His head looked a little bit fired
With such and such, and so and so.
At breakfast he looked a bit ghastly,
No appetite did he possess,
And now, for the first time, and lastly,
His name I will leave you to guess.
BRINDISI.
Our two fair friends, both free and easy,
Had gone ashore at old Brindisi,
And walked among the sunny bowers
That were adorned with fairest flowers !
They walked and walked, and rambled round
This dear old spot, until they found
A noble Palace, which the place supplies,
And came home singing “ Lovely black eyes.”
Oh ! noble land, so full of flowers,
Here we could spend our fairest hours,
And if you want life free and easy
We recommend you to Brindisi.
BAZAAR .
On Wednesday afternoon last Mr. F, J. Whittaker, in a
neat speech, characteristic of the speaker, formally opened
the Children’s Bazaar in aid of the Merchant Seamen s
Orphan Asylum in London. The stalls were nicel)
decorated with ship’s flags, and were waited upon by several
little misses who have worked, with others, most assiduously
to make the Bazaar a success. We are pleased to report


that success crowned their efforts, for on Thursday afternoon
they handed to the Captain the handsome donation of
jQn is., which sum includes small amounts collected from
passengers. We understand this is the first time a Bazaar
has been held on board the “ Himalaya.”
CONCERT.
A capital programme was presented by the performers at
the Concert given in the second saloon on Friday evening,
22nd instant. The opening selection (violin), “La Serenata,”
was given by Mr. J. Rooney, after which Mr. Macdonald
sang “ When the Pilot takes command.” Miss Vivian next
sang, in a foreign tongue, a pretty little song, and Mr.
Schwarz followed with “ Love’s Old Sweet Song,” which he
rendered very feelingly. Mrs. Boan then rendered the song
“ Dear Homeland.” A pianoforte solo by Miss Steele was
Tollowed by Mrs. Young’s rendition of “Sing, Sweet Bird.”
This lady’s vocalization was thoroughly enjoyed by her
hearers, and an encore was imperatively demanded, which
was responded to by her singing of “ Molly Bawn.” Mr.
Hosking closed the first portion of the programme by
singing “Big Ben,” a song descriptive of the great bell in
the Houses of Parliament, Westminster. After a brief
interval, that old, but always fresh, trio “Ye Shepherds, tell
me,” was rendered by Mrs. Young and Messrs. Hosking and
Whittaker. This was followed by Mr. Pountney singing
“My Sweetheart when a Boy.” The next item, “Last
Night,” sung by Mrs. Young, was so well received that
“ Killarney ” had to be rendered as an encore. Mr.
Whittaker so pleased his audience with “ Romany Lass ”
that he had to suffer the penalty of an encore, and sang
in his best style “Vanity.” Mrs. Boan then made her
second appearance in “ Whisper, and I shall hear,” very
sweetly rendered. Mr. Pountney’s “ Home, Boys, Home ! ”
completed the programme, and the National Anthem was
joined in by the whole audience.


to London (sfecond saloon.)
EY.
Lady Renal’s maid,
Longmore, Mr. and Mrs. J.,
and two children.
Martin, Mrs.
Macdonald, Mr. and Mrs.
W. A.
McQuiggen, Miss
Pitchford, Mr.
Pountney, Mr. E.
Mrs. Roberts’ maid.
Rooney, Mr. J.
Schwarz, Mr. R. M.
Smith, Dr. G. E.
Tait, Miss.
Topping, Mr. T.
Vivian, Miss.
Warren, Mr. and Mrs. W .
Whittaker, Mr. F. J.
DANCES .
During the past week dances have been enjoyed almost
every evening on the poop deck.
CONUNDRUMS.
When do the passengers of the “ Himalaya” have break-
fast before leaving their bunks ? When they enjoy a roll
in bed.
Why were the girls on board so interested in the run
through the Suez Canal? Because they had so many
b(u)oys on each side.
What is the difference between Whittaker and a police-
man ? The policeman sometimes acts as a census (senses)
taker, the other is always a wit-taker.
LIST OF
PASSENGERS
Per s.s. “ Himalaya,”
travelling
Babbage, Mr. F. E.
Barker, Mrs. E.
Bentley, Miss M.
Davis, Miss J.
Davies, Mr. B.
Dowsing, Mr. F. J.
SYDNEY
Exley, Mr. and Mrs. A. E.,
and two sons.
Flowers Mr. M. E.
Fraser. Mr. A.
Fyfe, Mrs., and three children.
Griffiths, Mr. J, S.
Guy, Mr. A.
Flamilton, Mr. J.
Har’vie, Mr. A.
Hodgson, Mr. W.
Holman, Miss.
Ilulbert, Mrs., and in r ant.


Anderson, Miss.
Barton, Miss.
Bell, Miss.
Boan, Mrs., and child.
Brackett, Miss C.
Brooksmith, Mr.
Broom, Mr. H.
Coombs, Commissioner, Mrs.,
and four children.
Ditchfield, Miss.
Bobbie, Mr. J.
Dowdle, Colonel and Mrs.
Dowling, Mr. H. V.
Entwisle, Mr. J.
Freame, Mr. and Miss.
Fyfe, Mr. and Mrs. G. G.
Grant, Miss.
Gretton, Mr. G. M,
Channing, Mr. G.
Hosking, Mr. }. H.
Merchent, Mr. W.
Angus, Mr. A.
Angus, Miss
Bennett, Mr. R,
Binks, Mr. J.
Bremner, Inspector and Mrs,
Cockburn, Mr. S.
Coomar, Mr. E. T.
Ellis, Miss.
Gordon, Mr, G.
Harvie, Mr. and Mrs. A.
Hay I or, Mr, and Mrs., and
two children,
MELBOURNE
Gretton, Mr. F. J
Holinger, Miss.
Hollinger, Mrs.
Hosegood, Mr. G.
Maclean, Mrs.
Ogden, Miss.
Ritchie, Mr. W.
Ross, Mr. W.
Ross, Mr. T.
Strang, Mr. Jas.
Van, Mr, S.
Van, Misses (2).
five children.
Stewart, Mr. C.
Stewart, Mr. B.
Hoggan, Mrs., and two
children.
Hylands, Mr. and Mrs.,
and two children.
Young, Mrs. G M., and
child.
Lady Warrender’s maid.
Miles, Miss.
Park, Mr. and Mrs. R.
Selway, Miss.
Spinks, Inspector.
Stevens, Mis., Miss, and


Bland ford, Mr,
Jash, Private.
Clay, St. S.
Dyer, Mr.
Lawrence, Mr.
Ouseley, Miss F,
Evans, Mr. S.
Steele, Mr., Mrs. and Miss.
WhiPaker, Mr. W. H.
Edwards, Mrs. and Miss.
Greatrex, Mr. and Mrs.
Others joined the boat at Israalia, Port Said and other ports, and
Messrs E. T. Hynes (Sydney), and A. McLean (Melbourne) left the
boat at Colombo and Lmalia respectively.
FOREIGN TELEGRAMS .
London, May 21.
The Queen rejoices to know that Sir Geo. Hosegood is
proceeding to England, and will shortly be in double
harness.
Ireland, May 22.
Landlords are getting very scarce. If Whittaker wants
good shooting he should come overland.
Brindisi, May 22.
The collar left by Schwarz is too big for one washing.
Tell him we will forward by special steamer.
London, May 22.
The Prince of Wales regrets that Snowley cannot attend
the celebrations in connection with his mother’s birthday
on Sunday next.
Malta, May 23.
The attempted robbery of a skull from the Chapel of
Bones by a youth named Dowling has caused much alarm
here.
Rome, May 23.
The Pope expects Mr. Rooney to call if possible and
bring his violin.
OUR PROGRESS.
We reached Suez on Monday, 18th inst., just as dinner
was announced (1.30 p.m.), and having taken on a pilot,


and widened the rudder, proceeded through the canal.
Reached Ismailia at 9 p.m. Reached Port Said 7.10 next
morning, and spent just three hours in harbour. Arrived
at Brindisi at 8,10 p.m., Thursday, 21st inst., but owing
to the Italian Health Officer requiring an examination of
all passengers and crew, and fumigation of the ship s soiled
linen, because we had a few passengers from Egyptian ports,
and cholera was raging at Alexandria, we were detained on
board till 11 o’clock p.m. The examination took the form
of a muster in the saloon, and then a tally with the
passenger list. On finding the numbers agreed we were
allowed our freedom to go ashore, and no danger of carrying
the infection either! Left Brindisi 8.30 yesterday morning,
and reached Malta this morning at 8 o clock, staying till
2 p.m.
Owing to slow passage through the Suez Canal our
progress has not been so good as usual.
From noon (16th) to Suez (18th) ... ... knots.
~ Suez (18th) to Port Said (19th) 87 ~
~ Port Said (19th) to Prindisi (215 t)... 931 „
~ Brindisi (22nd) to Malta (23rd) ... 367 »
making a total for the week of 2,468 statute miles, in all about 12,411
statute miles from time of starting.
ANCHORED.
Only four weeks ago to-night we were called upon to
make our literary bow to the general public inhabiting the
good ship “ Himalaya,” and it is now our duty to close our
journalistic career by briefly thanking all those passengers
who have in any way contributed to the success which we
flatter ourselves has attended Thu Himalaya Observer.
We lay down the Editorial pen wdth some degree of regret,
for our work has been a labour of love, and has often helped
to beguile what might otherwise have been many wearisome
hours.
We have endeavoured to present a complete record of
the present voyage, and feel that we have done well in pro-


viding material referring to our present floating home which
will prove instructive and interesting to our readers. It has
been decided to have this Journal printed on arrival in
London, including a supplementary issue for next week,
thus providing in a durable form a reminder of this pleasant
trip.
We are pleased to notice the harmony that has prevailed
in our saloon from start to finish of this voyage. Many
close friendships have sprung up—the results of which are
certainly very problematical —and many desirable acquaint-
ances have been made ; but alas! we are called upon to
separate very soon. How many of us will meet again is
only written in the unknown future. Bowing to the in-
evitable, we conclude by wishing our fellow passengers—one
and all —Farewell !!


THE
Ibimalava ©bserper.
S.S. “Himalaya.”]
[Sat., May 30, 1896.
SUPPLEMENT.
Saturday night last, at 8 o’clock, the Editor
followed his usual custom by reading the
fourth and last issue of The Himalaya
Observer to the passengers, who assembled
in the saloon. The paper was well
received, and the Editor was accorded a
comprehensive and hearty vote of thanks
for his untiring services in conducting such a Journal.
Mr. Hosking, in replying, thanked all passengers who had
in any way helped to contribute to the success of the
undertaking.
DIVINE SERVICE.
The usual Church of England service was conducted in
the first saloon by the Captain on Sunday morning last
(24th May). In the evening, Commissioner Coombs and
Colonel Dowdle held their last service in the second saloon.
Mr. Longmore (Chairman of the Committee) announced
at the close that, in recognition of the Salvation Army
officers’ kindness in conducting these evening services, it
had been decided to made a collection (for the first time)
in aid of the Army’s Rescue Work. This amounted to
is. Bd., and was feelingly acknowledged by Commissioner
Coombs.
At the close of the service, a short programme of sacred
songs was presented to the passengers in honour of the


Potato Race ...
... ... ...
Mr. H. V. Dowling.
Bull
Mr. G. M. Gretton.
Quoits ...
Ladies,
Mr. T. Topping.
Quoits ...
Mrs. A. E. Exley.
Egg and Spoon
Mrs. A. E. Exley.
Needle Race ...
Mrs. Longmore.
Queen’s birthday. Dr. Smith opened with “La Rameaux,”
followed by “La Serenata,” by Mrs. G. M. Young; “The
Holy City,” by Mr. F. J. Whittaker ; “ Nazareth,” by
Mr. J. H. Hosking; and “Calvary, ”by Mr. W. A.
Macdonald.
NO 7 ES.
By Observer,
On Monday evening an impromptu dance was arranged
and passed off most successfully.
On Tuesday morning early we anchored at Gibraltar
for a few hours, thus affording a good opportunity to see
some of the wonderful sights. The same evening a grand
dance was indulged in, the P. & O. Company kindly
providing supper free to all passengers.
On Wednesday evening the first progressive euchre
party of the trip met in the second saloon, when six tables
were kept going. The results are given in the list of prize
winners herein.
On Thursday evening, in the saloon, the chairman (Mr.
Longmore) presented the successful competitors in the
various branches of sport and games with the neatly pre-
pared certificates offered as prizes. The following is the
list:—
OUTDOOR SPORTS.
Gentlemen.


INDOOR GAMES.
IST tournament.
whist Miss Tait and Mr. Broom.
Euchre Mrs. Young and Mr. Wedderburn.
Cribbage’ ... Mr. G - M - Gretton and Mr. A. Boyes,
Draughts Mr. J. S. Griffith,
Chess" ... ••• Mr. F> G - Westmoreland,
2ND TOURNAMENT.
„ n • , Messrs. J. Bobbie and B. Davies,
v' lll3l , „ t- T — a n
W 11 Messrs. F. J. Gretton and G. Hylands.
Euchre ■ A it
Cribbage ••• Messrs. G. Gordon and J. Findley.
Draughts J. Bobbie
Chess Mr.J.H Hosking.
Halma Mr. J. H. Hoskmg.
progressive euchre.
Tst ( T a dv)—Mrs. G. M. Young. 1 Booby (Lady)—Mrs. J. Fyfe.
If. (Gent.)— Mr. J. Debbie. I Booby (Gent.)-Mr. F. J. Gretton.
At the close of the distribution, Commissioner Coombs
rose and proposed a hearty vote of thanks to those members
of the Committee who had exerted themselves to provide
exercise and amusement for the passengers. This was
promptly seconded by Mrs. Exley, and supported by Mr.
G Gordon, Miss Brackett, and Messrs. Freame, R. M.
Schwarz, and J. S. Griffith, all of whom expatiated on the
thoroughly enjoyable passage.
Mr. Whittaker then proposed a vote of thanks to Mr.
Thos. Ross for the trouble and expense he had bestowed
on the production of photographs of groups, &c., which are
to' be available a very low rate on reaching London
Miss Brackett seconded. Regret was expressed that through
a severe cold confining Mr. Ross to his cabin, he was unable
to be present at this meeting.
Commissioner Coombs then proposed a vote of thanks
to Miss Brackett and the other ladies who have conducted


the day and sabbath schools for the children throughout
the voyage. Mr. Freame seconded. Miss Brackett replied.
Mr. F. J. Gretton proposed a vote of thanks to the
Chairman, Mr. J. Longmore, for his valuable help to
the Committee. Mr. Hosking seconded. All these votes j
on being put to the meeting, were carried by acclamation,
and the social gathering dispersed.
At about six o’clock on Friday (yesterday) morning we
dropped anchor outside Plymouth Sound, near Mount
Edgcumbe, and a number of passengers were conveyed by
steam tender to Plymouth. We made our last start at 7-3°>
the “ Himalaya ” passed up the Channel, and at 3.45 on
this Saturday morning, May 30th, 1896, entered the Royal
Albert Docks,' four days in advance of contract time. The
Customs passed, the trains whirled the balance of passen-
gers to Liverpool Street Station, and those who had been
so very pleasantly associated during so many weeks had at
last to say “ Good-bye ! ”
COMING EVENTS .
This Supplement would not be complete without our
expressing our hopes that the close attachments that have
been formed by several onboard may develop into love, and
end in that unspeakable bliss only experienced by those
who have mated rightly.
“ Good luck to you, K , is the wish of a friend,
On the eve of your forthcoming wedding ;
May happiness ever your footsteps attend
In the path you will shortly be treading ! ”
The same lines, somewhat less certain in their applica-
tion, would meet the cases of Mr. G. and Miss S., Mr. F,
and Miss A., and, beyond all doubt, Mr. S. and Miss P.
“ So let the bells ring, let the passengers sing,
For Hymen will soon of two hearts be king ! ”


FINANCES .
The following Balance-sheet has been kindly supplied
by the Hon. Treasurer (Mr. W. A. Macdonald)
Receipts.
Passengers’ Contribu-
tions . lB 3
Proceeds of Sale of Pro-
grammes, Ist Concert 12 3
Entries, Cricket Match 4 3
~ Outdoor Sports 18 o
~ Indoor Games. 156
Expenditure.
Gratuity to Band ■■■ £i to o
Refreshments to do. ... 76
Children’s Prizes ... io o
Gratuity to Plead
Steward ... ... 5 ° °
Gratuity to Ist Waiter . 15 9
~ Gunner ' ... 15 o
For the information of Subscribers, the Editor has to
state that, owing to the cost of printing exceeding his
expectations, the reproduction of photographs is necessarily
smaller than was hoped for. His time has been fully
occupied since the “ Himalaya’s ” arrival in endeavouring
to get the best possible results for the money available, with
the result shewn in this little book.
BOOT EON AND CARPENTER PRINTERS, 24, OLD BAILEY, E.C.




Bieuo
F /Of 37
A/ C£jfUj




{
