

f I r ijl
The Labour Traffic
VERSUS
CHRISTIANITY
IN THE SOUTH SEA ISLANDS.
By REV. D. MACDONALD,
MISSIONARY, NEW HEBRIDES.
iftclbmmte:
M. L. HUTCHINSON, 15 COLLINS STREET WEST.
MDCCCLXXVIII,


THE POLYNESIAN LABOB TKAFFIO.
The secretary read a letter from the private
secretary to his Excellency the Governor, en-
closing a copy of a despatch received froip Lord
Knntsford, the late Secretary of State for the
Colonies, on the Polynesian labor question. In
the despatch Lord Knntsford remarked that he
had laid before the Queen the petition from the
Trades Hall Council of Melbourne, praying
that the act recently passed by the Queensland
Legislature, removing the prohibition im-
posed by a previous act upon the introduc-
tion of Polynesian labor into the colony,
might be disallowed. He was, however, unable
to tender any advice to the Queen in the direc-
tion indicated, as her Majesty had already noti- j
fled her intention not to exercise her iiovyer of
disallowance in respect to the act. {vlCf
The letter was formally received.
A correspondence nas pissed between Dr. John G. Paton, the mis-
sionary, of Melbourne, and Sir Samuel Griffith, the Premier of Queens-
land, in reference to the extension of the period for the employment of
Kanaka labour for a further term of ten years. The missionary
contends that the traffic is demoralising 1 and ruinous to the country,
and causes infinitely more harm than can be counterbalanced by a
cheap labour market. No safeguards or regulations, he thinks, can
put an end to the crime and bloodshed inseparable from
the traffic, a renewal of which for ten years “ will un-
doubtedly be followed by Heaven’s blight, for God cannot
smile on any trade so steeped in human suffering and blood-
shed, nor can He bless those who sanction and encourage it.” Sir
Samuel Griffith, in reply, while admitting the abuses which once pre-
vailed, thinks that in 1890 they had been reduced to a minimum, and
promises that still more stringent provisions will be made in future, if
the matter rests in his hands. He adds that he has nothing to say in
.addition to the published reasons for the change in his opinions, except
this That I could not sit still and look calmly on at the ruin of
hundreds and thousands of our own people from want of labour to
utilise the rich resources of this country when such labour is available,
as I believe, without any moral wrong-doing. This is the pass to which
the insensate action of the so-called Labour party has brought ns.” He
declares that his action is not taken in the interests of the planters
but of the whole people, and concludes with the words, “ I do
what my conscience bids me.” In a second letter Dr. Paton reasserts
his position even more strongly. He concludes “To plead further
is useless seeing you have so made up your mind to ‘do what con-
science bids you !’ So, to free my conscience, using what knowledge of
the traffic I possess, I shall now appeal to the public in Australia”and
Britain, pleading with all to unite and, if possible, secure the complete
suppression of this shocking traffic, at least to every British colony ”
With regard to this argument of the missionary, it is only necessary
to reiterate the Premier’s solemnly-pledged promise, that the most
thorough safeguards should be taken in future to prevent any of the
scenes so sensationnllvnainted bv liim from oorvnrrins*.
■'l . /VUu'|


ft® u • *n
THE LABOUR TRAFFIC
VERSUS CHRISTIANITY
IN THE SOUTH SEA ISLANDS.
By REV. D. MACDONALD, Missionary, New Hebrides.
The u Labour Traffic ” may be considered either as carried on between
the New Hebrides and a land where there is a civilised government,
or as inter-island —that is, between one savage land and another. Under
the first head are the Queensland and Fijian, carried on under British
sanction, and the New Caledonian, carried on under French sanction.
We shall speak mainly of the Queensland labour traffic, which for some
time has been the most extensive, and may be regarded as a fair repre-
sentative of the others coming under the same description. As to ’the
inter-island traffic, we shall chiefly speak of it as known in the New
Hebrides, and in the hands of the British. The “ Polynesian Labourers
Act” of 1868 is a sufficient proof that we are nationally responsible for
the Queensland labour traffic ; but the u Kidnapping Act, 1872, may
also be mentioned, for while it is excellent in so far as it suppresses
kidnapping, it expressly recognises the labour traffic. That we are also
nationally responsible for the inter-island labour traffic carried on by
British subjects, is proved by the fact that it has been carried on in the
presence and under the sanction of British war-vessels. This of course
involves the nation. Are the British people acquainted with the nature
of the traffic in New Hebrides savages, for which they are responsible,
whether Queensland, Fijian, or inter-island ?


CHAPTER I.
Evils of the Labour Traffic.
The law, it is said, allows traders to take away from these islands
any one who is willing 1 to go ; hence they take. away women against
the will of their husbands, children against the will of their parents,
subjects against the will of their chiefs. The chiefs had very little
power before the traffic commenced; they have less now. If they
speak above their breath it is death to their authority, for the rebuked
steps on hoard a labour vessel. Thus chiefs must allow crime to
reign unchecked by discipline, or see their people shipping to the
plantations. These poor creatures, being savages and fatalists, never
think of appealing and arguing against the traffic ; but submit to
its evils, direct and indirect, with dumb fatalism, just as they submit
to disease and death. Sometimes indeed the taking away of their
women inflames them to the highest degree of ungovernable rage, and, as
is well known, is a very frequent cause of the killing of white men by the
savages. To take awav a man’s wife against his will or without his con-
sent is calculated to stir some of the deepest, most destructive passions of
human nature. This is specially true of men semi-civilised, and most of
all true of savages. The Trojan war was caused by this. Most of the
unceasing inter-tribal wars of the New Hebrides savages are caused by
it. Take the case of two tribes, A and B. A person belonging to
A takes a “ willing” woman away against the will of her husoand from
B. By-and-bye one of the A people comes into the power of the
people of B, who kill him. This is according to their customs; it is
with them “ the law of the land.” Supposing now the A people, after
taking the woman, and before such a tragedy as the violent death of
one of them in consequence, should think of trying to convert the B
people to their way of thinking, would they first send a missionary or
first settle about the affair of the woman ? Of course they would first
give B satisfaction as to the woman. The other course would be
madness; yet is it not this very course that we are pursuing ? We
send missionaries, and at the same time allow the “ labour traffic to
go on. Would the Greeks have listened to a Trojan missionary after
the abduction of the wife of Menelaus ? Suppose in these circum-
stances A should persist in saying to B—“ We took this woman away
because she was willing to go; and, having authority, we will take away
all who are willing to go.” This would just be a declaration of a war of
extermination; it would be so understood by both parties. If the
Trojans had said to the Greeks— a We took the wife of Menelaus because
she was willing to go, and we will take away all who are willing to go,
everyone can imagine what the Greeks would have said and done in
reply. We know what they did as it was—they levelled proud
Troy’s walls with the ground for that one woman, and so prevented the


Troians from continuing to take away all who were willing to go, even
if it had been according to Trojan “law.” But now, supposing the
Troians had been so much mightier than the Greeks as the British
are more powerful than the New Hebrides savages, the walls of
Troy would have stood unharmed, and the equivalent ol Trojan gun-
boats might in the name of humanity, and commanded by men with
a supreme contempt and hatred to the Greeks, have cruised along
Grecian coasts protecting the Trojan vessels’ demoralising and depopu-
lating trading in Greeks, and taking away all “ willing to go —subjects,
children, wives against the will of chiefs, parents, and husbands. Now
this is exactly what is being done ; this is how the British nation is
treating the Hebrides savages, who in dumb terror of the “big
musket” submit as only the Eastern fatalist can submit to what is
deemed inevitable, no matter how evil it is. Is it any wonder then that
these New Hebrides savages will not listen to British missionaries of
the gospel ? , . . ...
But it may be said by the traffickers in savages, and their allies —
“The case is different from that of Helen in this respect: the Trojans
had no intention of ever restoring her to her home, but we intend to
take the New Hebrides women to their homes at the end of a certain
number of years.” Now, the facts I have recorded* prove —Ist, that
such women in some cases are not taken home according to such inten-
tion ; and, 2nd, that the not carrying out of such intention is according
to “law”—that is, what is asserted to be law by Government agents
and gunboat officers. According to them, such women are not to be
taken to their homes again unless they are “willing.” Wives are
taken away “ willing” against the will of their husbands, and are kept
away willing or not willing, for a certain number of years, at the en<j of
which time they may be induced to say that they are unwilling to go to
their homes. By-and-bye, should they be willing to go, there is no one
bound either to pay their passage or take them in his vessel. They
are thus left completely at/the mercy of men ruffianly enough to treat
helpless women in the most infamous manner. The gunboats openly
protect these men in this course, and sanction this conduct. -Let the
Christian reader note this trading and gunboat doctrine of willing-
ness”—willing the savages shall go, and willing; they shall remain away
from their homes. This doctrine suits irojans ; but what of the
Greeks ? It suits vultures, birds of prey; but what of the victims /
It may even suit Helen ; but what of Menelaus ? The New Heb-
rides Menelaus can do nothing on peril of having his brains blown out
by a big musket, his place desolated by a gunboat.
The trading and gunboat doctrine of willingness is a two-edged sword,
depopulating those islands, and wielded not only by obscure traders, but
* See Appendix.


by the British nation nationally. It is shown above how it acts as to
those who go “ willing,” yet are unjustly taken away, because against
the will of husbands, parents, or chiefs, as the case may be. But now,
supposing such persons as parents and chiefs should at last consent to
allow them to be taken, either because they are paid for them, or
because they cannot prevent it, and hope to secure their return,
and other promised advantages : in such cases there is an agree-
ment made—l, between the white men and them ; and 2, between
those who go away and them. The white men agree to return them
at a certain time. They agree to look after the property and
plantation of those who go away till they shall return. When that
time comes, it turns out that the “ labourers” are not to be taken back
unless they are “ willing.” Parents have repeatedly come to me asking
me to get the “white man” to bring back their sons, who they said
ought to have been returned years ago. It is easy to make a young
fellow unwilling at the appointed time without his knowing the con-
sequences —viz., that he will not be entitled afterwards to betaken home,
or that no one will be under legal obligation afterwards to take him
home. According to the Queensland regulations natives are to be
returned to their homes at the end of three years; if they do not then
return, they have no claim to be sent back,
I need not say much upon the general subject of recruiting
labourers, as it is called. As Commodore Goodenough wrote, the idea
of mutual agreement as between civilised men is nonsense. They are
bought. Many of them do not know where they are going. They are
often engaged for a short time —say one year—and kept away for many
years. They are often deceived and enticed away by decoy-ducks—
natives who have been with traders for years, and become ten times worse
children of hell than their masters. These are paid high wages for
their horrid work. It is easy thus to entice away simple savages with-
out breaking the doctrine of “ willingness.”
But it will be said, “ If the natives have been deceived, or decoyed,
or bought, will they not complain to the authorities ?” No ; they will
not, because they are heathen savages. This is a point that requires
careful study. It will not do to make laws for these people as laws are
made for men endowed with the highest existing civilisation. If we
were decoyed, &c., we would certainly, on getting to the foreign land,
complain to the authorities ; but it does not follow that these heathen
savages would. The fact is, they do not as a rule. There are many
reasons for this. It is not easy to explain this to people not practically
acquainted with these savages, but every one practically acquainted with
them in their homes, and away from their homes, knows that their
behaviour in these different circumstances is totally different. At home
they are independent—more so than Europeans ; abroad they have not
a particle of independence. At home they are lords, and that with a


vengeance 5 abroad they are naturally the most abject slaves. This is
a fact, I may mention a case in which I knew from the white man’s
own statement that he had ill-treated some of his savages, fhey would
not complain to the gun-boat officer. Why ? Probably because their
owner had threatened them 5 certainly because they felt that they
were completely in his power, and that if they complained he could
punish them either by sending them home without pay, or otherwise.
They also felt that the sympathy of the gun-boat officer was with their
owner, and against them. Had they not seen the Government officer
eating at their owner’s table ? When savages are decoyed away and
deceived they usually are long—at least a year or two before they
begin to understand the true state of things, and to know a little
English. It is then too late to complain. They then are accus-
tomed to things—those of them who are alive—and perceive that
there is no redress. Those who deceived them are beyond their
reach. And who would believe their testimony rather than that of
white men ? They believe the anger of the white men will be roused
against them if they complain. 'They keep quiet therefore. When savages
of one village go to another in these islands they will submit, while
there, to any enormity, in quietness, because they are afraid because
they are then in the power of that village. They wait in quietness till
they get home to their own village, and then complain. And when
people from that other village come to theirs, then they take reveng'e.
And so these natives are disposed to submit in the most slavish
manner to anything on board ship and in the white man s land ; but
when they get home again they take revenge upon any white man
who may come into their power. This is the true occasion of many
murders and massacres, and destroyed vessels, in these islands. It*is
their way of complaining. The fact that they d© not, when brought
before a "European official, make a complaint, is not a proof that they
have not been decoyed on board a vessel, or sold and bought, or even
kidnapped. The idea is monstrous. Take the case of fifty Solomon
Islanders that came under my own notice (vide Appendix). Only the
brought from Fiji by the American skipper, could speak a
little English. One of them was found murdered by violence applied to
the neck. On examining some of them, or trying to do so, through
the decoy-man, I found that he understood the language of only one
of the forty-nine men. Examination of them was therefore impossible.
He may indeed have shammed ignorance to prevent examination. A
few days after two traders in savages interested in keeping this murder
quiet called upon me, and said that one of these forty-nine had just
died from diphtheria or some disease of the throat, insinuating that the
man found in the sea, who had been murdered by choking, might have
died by disease of the throat. They did not seem to consider that he
could not have cast his own dead body into the sea after so dying. I


say take the case of these fifty men; nothing- could he got out of them
hut what their owners pleased. Yet these men would be taken to biji,
and passed before Government officials on to plantations—passed as
having- intelligently entered into an agreement, which the captain would
be able to exhibit in writing.
This kind of thing* goes on wholesale. The tact that g'unboats are
here increases the evil instead of mitigating it. It prevents the people
from complaining in their own way, and they will not complain in ours
until it is too late. This kind of complaint will die out in the wail ot
extermination. But their cry will ascend into the ears of God to bring
down vengeance upon us as a nation. In the meantime one thing- is
pretty certain : they will not listen to missionaries from the nation which
treats them thus, and cows them into the dumb submission of fatalism
by the terror of big muskets. I think I have shown how great a
mistake it is to suppose that so long as these savages can be got to
come away “ willing,” and make no complaints to officials, all is right.
They are like children or idiots as far as regards ability to avail them-
selves for their benefit of civilised laws and customs. See then what
this traffic in savages is; it is like enticing away children too young
to speak and explain matters. How easy it is to do that, even
easier than to take them away against their will; and gunboats
are at hand to prevent parents 'from recovering their children. Big-
musket booms—“No; you must let ’em go—they want to go; y<m
can’t stop ’em.” These parents are not then in a fit state to benefit by
the instructions of missionaries, countrymen of trader and big musket.
Once they are away from the shore, however unwilling they may be to
do anything but return, they pretend, as I have shown, the most
slavish acquiescence in everything. Many of them in the course of
years, like children who have run away from their parents, become so
entangled in their new ways as not to be able to get out of them again.
They "lead an unsettled life, oscillating between civilisation and
savagery ; they .fall between two stools and perish uselessly.
are a kind of guardians of these savages. The Queens-
land Act has a provision for securing the signature or certificate of a
missionary, when practicable, to the effect, among other things, that the
savages shipped have an intelligent understanding of the agreement
which the traders have written. Now it is a damning thing for this
trade that this provision, designed as it is for the protection of helpless
savages, is practically ignored. In a period extending over more than
five years I was twice asked to sign such a certificate, and in both
cases I was obliged to refuse. In the first case the master had no
license ; in the second the native woman was going away against the
will of her husband (vide Appendix). The captain appealed to me; u If,”
said he, “ you were the owner of the vessel, undergoing all the expense,
you would sign for the woman going.” This mariner seems to have fallen


out with the “ owners” when he got to Queensland, for I saw from a
Queensland newspaper that he was suing them for head-money
among other things. I did not see the result, and so cannot say
whether or not he got head-money for the wife he had infamously
taken away against the will of the husband, inflicting an irreparable
iniury not only on the husband, but also on the community, for
which he will have to answer to God. It will he observed that m
that case the missionary was the proper and practically the only
earthly guardian of these people. This is equally true in many cases
that constantly occur. , , . , . .
There are certain other evils which undoubtedly exist m connexion
with the treatment of the savages by the traders —it is difficult to say
to what extent. . , , , , • r. „
Many cases of running away of savages from the plantations have
come under my notice. Now, there must be a cause. It is very
certain that these savages run away from what they think unpleasant
and hard, no matter what their owners may think about it it is no
new thing to see different persons taking different views of the same
thing-. Hence I am not surprised to find white owners vociferously
exclaiming, “These savages have no other reason for running away than
their innate depravity and abhorrence of work; lazy brutes, and
asserting that they have been in fact so spoiled by over-feeding and too
good treatment that they have waxed wanton and run away, like all
ungrateful niggers. “ I say (said one to a missionary), do you think these
people will go to heaven'/ Well, I wouldn’t like to be there with them,
that’s all. They stink too bad for me.” The savage does not see
the good of slaving and toiling for the advantage of a man who
loathes him, and feeds and houses him as a bullock or horse is jed^aud
housed. He very often dislikes or thinks insufficient the food which
the trader thinks too much and too good for him ; and groans as did the
Israelites under Egyptian bondage over work that his owner says is
only play and recreation. Which is right, the owner or the savage t
One thing is very certain, the savage as a rule goes through this only
when forced ; a sufficient proof of which, is that he will not do it on
his own island where he cannot be forced to do it. Another indication
of the same thing is their frequent running away. In many cases
running away has been “getting out of the frymgpan into the fire.
It was notably so in the case of those whose case Commodore
Goodenough inquired into, who ran away from plantations on Etate,
stole a canoe, and went over to Nguna, where they were killed, cooked
in the oven, and eaten. With respect to other runaways it mav be said
that they, poor savages, fly from ills they know “to others that they
know not of,” Such are those who ran away from plantations on
Elate, and got on board Queensland vessels (vide Appendix). One day
in my presence a trader complained to a gun-hoat officer that three of his


men had run away into the bush, and he had seen them taken on hoard a
Queensland vessel whose name he gave to the officer. The three savages
had of course gone “ willingthey had made signals from the shore to
the passing vessel, which on seeing them sent a boat for them. The
gun-boat officer put himself to so much trouble as to say that the
Queensland vessel ought not to have taken them against the trader’s
will. With this sympathy, plus the wages of these poor savages, which
he made a clear gain of by their departure, the trader was perhaps
content. These cases are to be held as typical, not as solitary ones.
There is another class of evils akin to the foregoing, even of a more
serious nature —the deaths of savages on the plantations. It is akin
to the foregoing in this way : that many runaways have been murdered,
as the above proves, and that in either case, w T hether the runaways are
murdered or not, so long as they are effectually prevented from returning,
as by being taken to Queensland, clear gain is made of their wages.
In either case, by the running away of the savage or by his death , the
owner is a 'pecuniary gainer , Now it is undoubtedly a great tempta-
tion to a penniless trader, whose only means of keeping his head above
water is the sacrificing of helpless savages, to allow him practically
absolute power over those savages. But this as a rule is what the gun-
boat or naval authorities have done. For this, therefore, we are nationally
responsible. It seems to me impossible for gunboats to effectually
supervise this traffic, and it ought to he abolished. If it is not
abolished, that is the fault-of the Imperial Government. The gunboats
will always be ready to take up any one for murder when it is proved,
but who can prove that an owner has murdered one of his labourers?
He himself may be the only European on the plantation. Two men,
the owner of the plantation and his overseer, were actually taken as
prisoners to Sydney from here in 1874 by a gunboat. The overseer
was charged with the murder of his concubine and two or three other
savages, and the owner with being accessory. The evidence was as con-
clusive as any evidence of savages could ever possibly be. They were
taken to Sydney and dismissed without even a trial, because the only
possible witnesses in the circumstances were heathen savages, and no
one in Sydney could certify that they understood the nature of an oath.
According to this British-Sydney law a trader can murder his labourers
wholesale on his plantation with impunity so long as he does it in the
presence of heathen savages only. I may here mention a report that
was current in this place that a planter shot one of his labourers who had
run away, and that his dogs partly ate his body. By way of rebutting
the charge implied in this report, a counter-report was set agoing to
the effect that the man who ran away was murdered by the natives of
the island, and then cooked and eaten by them. Certainly either story
is sufficient to account for his disappearance.
There is another class of evils which may now be adverted to as


briefly as possible —the non-payment or insufficient payment of the
labourers. It will be sufficient here to state what lam sorry to say is
not to the credit of the naval authorities, that these inter-island traders
have practically acted as to this matter just as they pleased, just as it
suited them. Now it is well known that some of them got into pecuniary
difficulties here, as was the case in Fiji. The complaint against the
naval authorities is this, that sanctioning the traders working these
savages so many years upon their plantations, they took no adequate
measures to secure that they were either duly paid or duly returned
to their homes. “When is their time up?” said a naval officer in
mv presence to a trader who owned a number of men. “ Next year,
was the reply. “ I have part of their pay ready; would you like to
come and see it ?” “ Oh, no ; so you’ll send them home next year—
-1877?” “Yes.” I heard afterwards that in 1877 this trader put
these savages on board of a British French-flag schooner, whose
captain agreed to land them at their homes if the wiud wets fair } but it
not, to take them on to New Caledonia. What pay they got may be
imagined. I daresay it would be “easier imagined than described.
By that time, however, the gunboat officer was on his way to England.
What did it matter to him ?
CHAPTER 11.
The Antichristian Character of the Traffic.
The Labour Traffic has come into contact with the New Hebrides
Mission in these islands, according to the testimony of missionaries and
traders, as is known to the public generally and to the British Govern-
ment in particular. . . . .
The Christian public does not need to be told that there is a mission
—the New Hebrides Mission—whose chief aim is the propagation of
the D-ospel in these islands. The southernmost island of the group
became a professedly Christian land before the labour traffic commenced.
Since that traffic began the work of the mission has not made muc i
progress ; the field has been, from a missionary point of view, becoming
more and more hopeless. Nevertheless the mission is up to the present
time prosecuting its aim incessantly and vigorously. The traffic is
widely known, its infamy spread throughout the civilised world, and
more especially the British portion ot it. Ihe “ Carl case and the
murder of Bishop Patteson roused the British Government into action
and the result was that an Act was passed suppressing kidnapping and
sanctioning the traffic in savages. “ JParturiunt monies , nascetnr rim-
culus mus.” The Queensland traffic in savages, while all the world
thrilled with horror and indignation at the “ Carl ’ atrocities, pursued
the even tenor of its way with as innocent and whitewashed an aspect


as that with which the “ Carl” deceived H.M.S. “ Rosario.” This war-
ship, it will he remembered, overhauled the “ Carl” almost immediately
after the horrible infamies and murders perpetrated on board of her.
But the bullet marks in the sides of the hold and the blood of the
murdered savages had all been covered over with whitewash, the wounded
savages having' been previously thrown overboard after the dead ; and
so the “ Carl” was allowed to pass on with the “ Rosario’s” benediction.
The Queensland traffic in savages, with a name that looks as well as
the “ Carl’s” whitewash, viz., “ The Labour Traffic,” was legalised by
the Queensland “ Polynesian Labourers Act, 1868,” and the Imperial
“ Kidnapping Act, 1872,” Innocent as this name appears, the fore-
going and following facts show that it serves to cover, like the “ Carl’s”
whitewash, a whole host of infamies. The u Rosario” gave her bene-
diction to the whitewashed “ Carlthe Imperial Kidnapping Act gives
its sanction to the Queensland traffic in savages; and the gunboats
built at a great expense to the nation, and sent into these waters in
consequence of that Act, have actually encouraged and promoted directly
and indirectly the traffic in savages generally. I cannot but think that
there is a great misapprehension somewdiere. If it is the intelligent
aim of the British nation to incur a vast expense for the fostering of this
traffic in savages, lam mistaken. At present Ido not believe that it is,
any more than I believe that it was the intelligent aim of 11.M.5.
u Rosario” to bestow its benediction upon the innocent-looking, because
whitewashed, “ Carl f but I am now to show that this traffic in savages
is anti-Christian.
If this traffic is anti-Christian in nature, the contact with the mission
in the New Hebrides must bring into view its anti-Christianity,
It will not be disputed that the chief aim of this traffic is money-
making. This the traders have freely professed and admitted. Now,
lam not asserting that any system of traffic —in men—whose chief aim
is money-making, is anti-Christian. Whether that may be true or not,
it is not the question to be now considered. But it cannot be denied
that, under certain circumstances, such a system of traffic would be
anti-Christian. The circumstances of this traffic have been already
alluded to. They are such as that two parties from the one nation —
the one whose chief aim is money making, the other whose chief aim is
the propagation of the gospel—meet in the same heathen, savage place
or group of islands, and come necessarily into contact, which must be
hostile if not harmonious, because the one party traffics in the very
same heathen savages that the other seeks to win to Christ. These two
parties come from a nominally Christian nation into a place heathen
and savage, whose people, seeing they are all white men and speak
the same language, regard them as one tribe. If these two parties
are mutually antagonistic, the heathen savages will, of course, be aware
of that antagonism. The war-vessels are the official representatives of


the British Government. If there is a real, irreconcilable antagonism
between the two parties, these war-vessels must either side with the one
party against the other or be neutral. The nation is involved officially
in their action. What lam about to show is that this traffic is anti-
Christian, and that the war-vessels have sided with it.
This traffic proceeds upon the anti-Christian principle of sacrificing
the interests of Christ’s kingdom and of human beings to itself.
Now, the first fact I will call attention to is, that this traffic takes
away the natives from places where there are missionaries for the
purpose of teaching them the doctrines of Christ—“ the truth as it is
in Jesus”—thus depriving them of their teaching; and that it gives them
no such teaching in stead. It would be an un-Christian thing, to say
the least of it, to take these poor heathen savages away from their homes
for the purpose of making money out of them, making no provision
for their instruction in the way of salvation through Jesus Christ.
Traders in savages cannot deny this. But when not only this is done,
but these poor heathen savages are taken away from the place where
Christians, in obedience to Christ’s command and in accordance with
His kingly commission, are at great expense and with great
sacrifice teaching them the doctrines of Jesus, it is plainly anti-
Christian. Just as certain it is that this is anti-Christian as it is certain
that to obey Christ’s great command, and at great expense and with
great sacrifice to teach the heathen savages the doctrines of Jesus, is
Christian, If there is any Christian thing in the world this is Christian;
if there is any anti-Christian thing in the world, this traffic is anti-
Christian. For this is exactly what it has done: it has deprived mul-
titudes of the possibility of learning the way of salvation, who might,
but for it, have learned it. It has taken them away beyond the reach
of the only persons who would have instructed them, and they have
never returned, having died totally uninstructed ; or they have returned
so corrupted by the vices of traders as to be, humanly speaking, no
longer open to receive “ the knowledge of the only true God and of
Jesus Christ, whom He hath sent.” This traffic thus evidently goes
upon the principle that it may sacrifice the poor heathen’s only
possibility of obtaining eternal life, and the interests of Christ’s
kingdom, for the purpose of working some one’s plantation, or
advancing his pecuniary interests. This principle is anti-Christian.
Thus, this traffic is not only responsible for the ruin of men as
far as this world is concerned, but also for the ruin of men’s souls,
their eternal ruin. Was it any wonder then that one of the heroes
of the traffic should, when about to appear before the great tribunal,
solemnly say —“The curse of God is upon it ”?
It is a notorious thing that this traffic has made no provision for the
religious instruction of the poor heathen. I suppose that the only
reason for this is that to do so would not he in accordance with its chief


end, money-making’. I say I suppose this, for I do not suppose that
they think it would be wrong or injurious to the savages to do so.
Now it cannot he denied that the more ignorant the natives are, the
more money the traffic makes out of them. And this is one reason ot
the antagonism of the traffic to Christianity. Its supporters try to
frustrate the propagation of the gospel, because they know that
if the savage receives the gospel he will he no longer as helpless or
as easily imposed upon as a child, or an idiot, or one of the lower
animals. They try this in two ways—by leading and encouraging the
savage in vice, and by speaking ag’ainst the missionaries. A trading
vessel once anchored within a stone’s throw of the mission-house, and
tried to persuade the natives to take women on hoard for an infamous
purpose. At the end of 1876 a Queensland vessel in this traffic anchored
close to the mission station of a village that had given up heathenism
and become professedly Christian, and tried in like manner to get women;
then tried to get men to go to Queensland, hailing; this they S^ 1( I to
a native who happened, unknown to them, to he a decided church
member, You won’t do as we say because you listen to the mission-
ary. If you come with us we will give you calico, &c., but if you stay
with the missionary what will he give you? Bring women and we
will give you plenty of calico, &c. He replied, No, fearing God, he
could not do that. They said, You believe what the missionary tells
you? He said, Don’t you? They replied, No 5 we once believed
the missionaries, hut they took too much of our money, so we don tli e
missionaries any more. Incredible as it may seem, the traders actually
use this argument against the missionaries constantly and commonly.
They say;—Listen to the missionary fie., accept the gospel), and what
will the missionary pay you ? You will he poor, without anything.
But do as we bid you and you will be rich. See, here is calico, toma-
hawks, &c., &c. Choose ye this day whom ye will serve, God or the
money-maker ; this is the real meaning of their speech 5 hut 16 P 0( ?G
ignorant, helpless heathen savage is easily imposed upon. He sees the
calico, &c., as a fish sees the bait held out to it, and when once he quits
his native shore he is hooked and carried to the market. Now even
these traders cannot deny that it is anti-Christian in the circumstances
to endeavour as they do, as the above shows they do, to persuade a
foolish savage to give up listening to the word of God because he will
not be paid by the missionary in calico and tobacco for listening to it,
and take the service of a trader because for it he will he paid. Anti-
Christian as it is, however, it is quite in accordance with the chief end
of the traffic—money-making. .
There being not only in Scripture representation, but in tact, a
peculiarly close connexion between licentiousness and heathenism, this
traffic encourages the natives in that —their heathen customs and their
infamous treatment of women —which renders their acceptance ot
Christianity impossible 5 therefore this traffic is anti-Christian.


This traffic being a traffic in natives who are heathens, the propaga-
tion of the gospel amongst them strikes at the root of the traffic. Let
these natives once become instructed and Christian, and this traffic will
be at an end. The traffic, like every other organised system, clings to
existence, and resists what is inimical to its existence and prosperity.
These savag’es can never become instructed, or educated and Christian,
as long as they cling to their heathenism and vices in which women
are involved. the not saying anything in favour of Christianity
as against heathenism is, in the circumstances, anti-Christian; much
more, therefore, is it anti-Christian to encourage them by precept or
example to continue in these two things. And to do this is not only
in accordance with the traffic, and with the promotion of its prosperity,
but it is actually done to my certain knowledge and great grief. As to
heathenism, a trader, who might with advantage to the traders be called
a representative man, on being' spoken to by a missionary for encoura-
ging the natives in their heathenism, openly, and with applause from his
brethren, said that he did not think there was any harm in it, and that
he had better not oppose it, as it was what they were accustomed to, and
good for them. After this he even took part in the great heathen festival,
the heathen to persevere in their heathenism, saying it was
good. The natives were perfectly aware of the antagonism between
this trader’s doctrine and that of the missionaries. Long after,
when some of them were clothed and in their right mind, they
said they supposed the trader had done so because he wished to
make money out of them. His action at any rate was perfectly in
accord with the labour traffic. The heathen have often replied, on my
exhorting them to abandon heathenism, that the white men like it, and
have used this as an argument against embracing Christianity.
As to their vices in which women are involved, it may be well to
remark by way of preface that this sex, the one-half of mankind, is
degraded wherever it exists under the influence of heathenism ; and
this is in accordance with the spirit of heathenism. With Christianity
it is different j and this is one of the things history indisputably
proves. In a place like the New Hebrides it is anti-Christian for
a civilised or European man to encourage the savages in this class
of vices, for it is encouraging them in that which makes the propaga-
tion of the gospel among them, or the embracing of Christianity by
them, impossible. Now the conduct of British traders, shore and sea-
going, has been so abominable in this respect that the natives think
the “°white men” worse than themselves. They have said so to me, and
I could not but feel it was true. When a white man visits an island
the question he is likely to be asked is one which will make him
aware of the infamous and brutal conduct of some of his country-
men who have been there before him, and will show the training the
traffic gives to the savages who form its material. But not to deal


lono-er in generalities, I will come to a particular case. A trader, who
may be regarded as representing the trading community m this aspect,
freely admitted to me what was only too notorious, that the black
woman living with him was his “ concubine, as he said; in tact it
was a case of open sin. I advised him either to marry her or
send her home. He said he had agreed with her that it she did well
in that relation for four or five years he would then marry her. 1 told
him that our countrymen living in this way was a grievous injury to
the heathen savages, and an obstacle to the propagation of the gospel
among them. He said he did not think so, as it was exactly according
to their own customs, which were the law ot the land. Let the reader
mark this. I told him it was sinful thus to live in a state condemned
in the New Testament, and forbidden by the seventh commandment.
He denied that the seventh commandment forbid it; admitted
that the New Testament condemned it; but said he did not think it a
sin for him to have a concubine as Abraham had. I replied that ms
view was different from that prevailing in Christendom, which he
admitted. This man having thus become the champion ot the pre-
vailing vice, became quite a hero with the traders insavages ; and
I believe that he found it to his pecuniary or worldly interest to
head the trading community in its pro-infamous-treatment-ot-women
aspect. But the unutterably sad fact remains that such conduct is
anti-Christian. There is one very remarkable thing m the New
Hebrides in connexion .with this subject, and that is, that notwith-
standing the enormous prevalence of this vice, tew halt-castes are
seen. There is, perhaps, no place in the earth where infanticide pre-
vails to such an extent. This is also “ the law of the land and their
own custom/’ but that is no sufficient reason why a man who was
baptised as a Christian should conform to so unnatural a crime. Une
white man who had once been a respected Sunday-school teacher got
into relations of this kind with a native woman (a wife, tor all native
women are, as a rule, married). She tried to procure abortion, and in
the attempt killed herself. Her husband and friends came to the man
and demanded payment for the woman. This will show how horribly
degraded these savages are, as well as the whites. I heard lately that
a “concubine” regularly kills her child as soon as it is born; it is
difficult to avoid the conclusion that the man she lives with connives at
this—is accessory to these murders of his own offspring. It so he wi i
find that the just God will not be imposed upon by the plea, should he
prefer it, that this crime was according to “ the law ot tne land.
It is a curious thing, in the light of the foregoing, that as persons
who have been born in Christian countries and baptised cannot treat
women infamously without in so far apostatising from Christianity, so
those who apostatise do generally so treat them; and those who do so
openly in the circumstances under consideration are very highly and


strongly anti-Christian, and worse than the heathen. It is instructive
to remember in reference to this that the name applied to this vice in
the sacred Scriptures is also the usual name for apostasy from the true
came to he, as there said, quite a hero with “ the trade.” Defending this
vice was killing two birds with one stone ; it was securing the con-
tinuance of this class of vice among both traders and savages, and it
was thus keeping the heathen savages from embracing Christianity, by
which the traffic would be destroyed. It is very certain that amongst
the natives this class of vice is allowed by their heathenism as an
essential part of the system, and that so long as it continues Christianity
will not spread among them. Whatever then encourages this class ot
vice is anti-Christian. , . .
But it may be asked, “ Does not this vice prevail at homeland is it not
as anti-Christian there as in the New Hebrides ? ” It prevails, butnot as
the law of the land—not openly. There it is a vice, hut here it is a
virtue, so to speak, the operT defending and practising of which, 1 have
shown, advanced a man’s interests and made him a hero; whereas at
home it would have made him infamous. Then again, it is more anti-
Christian here, because here it is an open and popular enemy or
Christianity, which is weak and small and unpopular, striving to obtain
a footing against a whole world of opposition. It is worse here because
it is more destructive to a greater number, and more effectually antago-
nistic to Christianity. Here we see one of those compensations ot
providence which show that God is no unmoved inactive spectator ot
the ways of men. Many of these traders are most unprincipled men,
who, feeling the restraints of civilised law, or the “law of the land
in civilised countries, to be irksome, have come to these remote savage
lands, where, unrestrained by human law or opinion, they can allow
their passions full play. Missionaries are not armed with any power
co inflict temporal punishment, which is the only thing they fear, and
of which, as wielded by the civil magistrate in civilised lands, they have
the most abject dread. Hence the missionary is to them the object
of the profoundest contempt, and, when he rebukes their wickedness,
of the most fiendish rage. But there is a God in heaven who judget i
upon the earth. It has been appalling to see the shocking deaths of
these men, dying, a large proportion of them, with their hands full o
horrible infamies, and so brought before Him with whom is no respect
of persons, and who shall give to every man according to his deeds,
whether they be good or whether they be evil.
This traffic does not civilise but exterminate these savage commu-
nities, and thus so far from indirectly promoting Christianity by
civilising them, directly tends to frustrate utterly the propagation ot
the gospel amongst them.


There is no instance in the history of mankind of a community of
heathen savages changed into a civilised community without an aban-
donment of their heathenism. The heathenism of these natives of
the New Hebrides, so long as they cling to which they will never
be civilised, is essentially a system involving the infamous treatment
of the one half of mankind by the other—the degradation of women.
It is therefore an inhuman thing for civilised men, brought up in
nominally Christian lands, to encourage them in the most effectual
manner, by example, in the continuance of that system by which women
are infamously treated and hopelessly degraded. Some of these traders
are educated men, and quite wicked enough to try to shut the mouth of
a Christian reprover by saying that they are not childish enough to
believe in Christianity. Let these men consider this, if they will, apart
from Christianity. It is an inhuman thing for them to act as they do ;
it is brutal and disgusting considered per se. But considered in
relation to the work of the propagation of the gospel it is also anti-
Christian. Traders have said that they think these natives never can
be christianised till the traffic in them (though that confessedly is not
its aim) civilises them. There are many thousands of small savage
communities in the New Hebrides: there is not one that this traffic has
civilised. Further, it is morally impossible in the nature of things that
a community of savages become civilised without changing their
heathenism, of which the infamous treatment of women is an essential
part. And it is therefore manifest that to encourage them in the
infamous treatment of women is to encourage them in that which
renders their civilisation impossible. As a matter of fact, as a matter
notorious, the trade has so encouraged them in these islands. Every
settled trader, with what he is pleased to call a concubine ; every sea-
going trader who lands at an island to befoul it with his licen-
tiousness, is a “devil’s missionary” or propagandist (wielding inevit-
ably the influence of the prestige of European civilisation among
childish savages) of that which renders the cessation of the savagism
of these people impossible. And this, let it be observed, though
undeniably inhuman—and in the circumstances anti-Christian—is
yet perfectly in accordance with the spirit of the labour traffic.
It directly tends to keep the people savages, and thus to promote
and perpetuate the trade ; for civilisation even without Christianity
would make this trade impossible, that is, the civilisation which
they mean—the European. It is quite a mistake for any one to
suppose that this traffic tends to civilise the natives of these islands.
On the contrary it tends to make them more hopelessly savage ; to add
the vices of civilisation to the vices of savagery; and thus to make not
only their civilisation impossible, and their christianisation impossible,
but their very existence impossible. In other words, its tendency is
not to civilise but to depopulate these islands, and so to frustrate the
propagation of the gospel in them.


This traffic is. evidently, to those acquainted with the facts,
depopulating the islands. I am not asserting that there is no other
cause of their depopulation, but this is a principal cause. Other
causes, for which we are responsible, are more indirect. Thus it is
now a common doctrine that the savage disappears before the civilised
man as a matter of course. By one party this is stated as a mysterious
fact, and there is a kind of vague uneasy attempt to charge it upon
God, so as to relieve the civilised man from all blame in the matter.
Another party is inclined to think that if civilised men exterminate
helpless savages in the prosecution of selfish interests instead of
benefiting them for the sake of Christ, civilised men will have to
answer for it to that God who is peculiarly the avenger of the helpless.
Now this traffic in savages is, so to speak, un-Christian civilisation in
this aspect organised or brought into a focus. The professed aim is
not to exterminate the savages, but to make money out of them,
regardless of the effect it may have upon them as a people or as
communities. But the effect is depopulation. It takes away the
strength and hope of these communities, the young and strong. It
takes wives from husbands, husbands from wives. It increases
polygamy and polyandry, adultery and murder. It leaves the old
and diseased, having taken away the young and strong who otherwise
would have tended them and succeeded them. A large proportion
never return, owing to death and other causes. Not to speak of those
who die because of civilised vices and diseases previously unknown to
them, and not to speak of those who die from ill-treatment or are
murdered, many die from the change of climate and habit. But even
if all returned it would tend to depopulation, because it separates the
sexes, and that at the time when they are most prolific. The‘poor
male savages are herded together on plantations, and so forced to live
unnaturally and fatally to the interests of their race, in order that a
trader may make money ; and when we remember that they are thus
also, as formerly shown, deprived of the hearing of the gospel, many of
them for ever, this depopulating traffic is seen unmistakably to be anti-
Christian.
This traffic is perceived by the natives to be opposed to the
mission, and is regarded by them as an ally in their anti-Christian
procedure; and the gun-boats of the “Kidnapping Act, 1872,” are
also perceived by them to favour this traffic.
It will be remembered that there is a life-and-death struggle going on
in these islands between Christianity and heathenism. Now a system
of traffic that has so exceedingly influential a bearing on, or contact
with, the parties in this struggle, as the labour traffic has, cannot be
neutral. As a matter of fact it is not; but in the naturb of things it
cannot be. It is carried on from the country from which Christianity
comes to these islands. It is in the hands of the countrymen of the


missionaries of the gospel, A Christian country, a Christian nation,is thus
brought into close relations with a country and a race or people heathen
and savage. What is the result? Let these heathen bear witness,
and they will say that there is an antagonism between the “white men”
and the missionaries. That is their way of expressing it, but we know
that there is no personal antagonism. It is an antagonism of systems.
The trader in savages is antagonistic to the missionary; the missionary
is antagonistic to the trader, in his official capacity, so to speak.
Underlying it all there is a personal friendliness ; do not both parties
speak the same mother-tongue, and inherit the memories of the same
grand national history ? But the Christian must not allow any
partiality to make him traitorous to Christ. Missionaries have no per-
sonal feeling against their countrymen ; their feelings are all the other
way. But to be faithful to Christ they find themselves necessarily in a
position of antagonism to their countrymen in so far as these are
identified with this trade. And the traders are no less loyal to the
principles of this traffic. They do not shrink from openly, in the sight
and to the amazement of bewildered savages, taking up a position of
antagonism to their countrymen —ministers of their country’s religion—
in so far as they are identified with Christianity, in order to promote it.
Neutrality in the circumstances being impossible for them, not to
aid Christianity is to oppose it. It is not necessary in order to its
being really anti-Christian that this traffic should be professedly so.
It is enough in the circumstances if it is professedly neutral—neither
anti-Christian nor Christian, Now this alone is what it can be
according to its own principles. Did it profess to be anti-Christian, that
would be had for its prosperity, just as it would have been bad for the
“ Carl ” if she had honestly stripped off the whitewash and exposed to
the “Rosario’s” gaze the bullet marks and blood in her hold. Did it
profess to be Christian, then it would have to submit to Christian dis-
cipline, but this—seeing that its chief end is not Christ’s glory, but
money-making—would in the circumstances he as bad for it as the
“Rosario’s” discipline would have been for the “Carl.”
“Do the traders and men-of-war come from a different country from
the missionaries ?” This is the question of a representative native
of the New Hebrides. The mind of the heathen not only perceives
the antagonism or anti-Christianity of the traffic, but glories in it.
When exhorted to repent of their sins and believe in the Lord Jesus
Christ, their practical refusal—in many cases an eternal one—is to plunge
into the labour traffic current, which, while it not only allows their own
sins but adds new ones, carries them effectually beyond the reach of
that remedial system which they regard with aversion, because, while
dimly perceiving it to be a salvation, they plainly see it to be “ from
sin.” There cannot be a doubt that this is for the interests of the traffic,
as much as against those of Christianity and of the poor creatures


themselves. It is. not necessary for the trade to do more than tacitly
to accent this to make it anti-Christian. The traffic does accept and
sanction this. It would not he in accordance with its spirit to do
otherwise : and when, in addition to this, the natives see the gunboats
siding with this anti-Christian traffic, they are inclined to regard the
missionaries as probably not from the same country, or at any rate as
not nationally belonging to that country, but a kind of offscourings or
outcasts : whereas the traffic appears so nationally important a thing
that the national gunboats are sent out at the national expense to
protect and foster it. lam not saying that the British Government is
really aware of this, and doing it wittingly and deliberately ; 1 only
say I hope not. If it should be said—“ Apostles were considered as
‘ offscourings and outcasts,’ and why should modern missionaries
complain if they also are so considered ?” I would reply by asking—
“lf the professed religion of the Roman Government in apostolic
times was heathenism, why is Christianity the professed religion of
the British Government in these missionary times?”
CHAPTER 111.
Conclusion—The Labour Traffic ought to be Abolished.
This traffic in savages ought to be abolished by the British Government
and nation. .
I make a distinction between the Government and the nation, the
nation is as truly responsible for the Government as the Government is
for the nation. Doubtless they ougdit to have one aim. The British
Government also is frequently changed, according to the will ot the
nation. Now, there cannot be a doubt that there are two great parties
in the British nation. I do not wish to use party names ; but we
know that in 1876 the Government then in power manifested (what we
know to be held by many persons in the British nation) slave-trade pro-
clivities, by the issue of “ The Slave Circular.” But the strong national
expression of disapproval and reprobation that was immediately drawn
forth by this circular, necessitating its withdrawal by the
showed how thoroughly the nation, or the great majority, approves of
its past anti-slave-trade policy and action, and how utterly opposed it
is to anything it clearly perceives to be inconsistent therewith. Never-
theless there are two parties in the nation, as was manifest also during
the American civil war, which put an end to American slavery, ihere
is this, however, to be noted —that the pro-slave-trade party feel their
cause to be so unpopular that, while holding the strongest opinions, and
ready as ever for the strongest proceedings, they condescend to a great
deal of underhand muttering and chicanery. In short, any one who
will take the trouble to inquire will find that the tactics of this party


have changed since the British Government and nation became com-
mitted for ever to an anti-slave-trade policy by two of the most glorious
national acts ever performed in the history of mankind —viz., first, the
abolition of the slave-trade in 1807, and, second, the abolition of slavery
in 1834.
There is also a distinction to be made between abolition and regula-
tion. To regulate an organised system such as this is to sanction and
promote its continued existence and growth. Now, this system is so
brutal and blasphemous, so destructive to men and so dishonouring to
the Lord Jesus Christ, that it ought not to be regulated or tolerated,
and so become responsible for by a Christian, anti-slave-trade Govern-
ment and nation, but to be utterly and instantly abolished. There has
been a great dispute in the European world for the last year or two, and
especially in Britain, as to whether the Turkish Government should be
regulated or abolished ; and the advocates of abolition argue that the
principles of that system are so bad, as proved by its past history and
present condition, as to preclude further hope of any real benefit from
regulations. Every Christian lover of mankind must see the truth of
this argument. The advocates of continued attempts at reformation and
regulation dwell on the difficulty of abolition, and the sacrifice of pecu-
niary interests which it implies. One most powerful argument of the
former party is that the British Government and nation are responsible
for upholding for worldly ends the anti-Christian, inhuman Turkish
domination. Now, these things, I say, have been agitated lately by
two opposing parties; and* we do not know when or how the Turkish
question may end. One thing is very certain —that this traffic can
never be regulated so as to secure its conformity with either
Christianity or humanity. Its principles, manifested in its past
history and present condition, prove the futility of further hopes
from regulations. “ Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the
leopard his spots ?” Some wild animals cannot be at all, some not per-
manently, tamed. Some wicked men are most dangerous when appa-
rently most harmless. Satan is not less Satan when he assumes the
form of an angel of light. A system whose nature is bad may even
for the moment exult at the expulsion of the fiend ; but that can
only be temporary. He returns to his house with seven other fiends
worse than himself ; and the system preserving its assumed, and
perhaps at first honestly assumed, aspect of innocence, is on that
account all the more dangerous. Thus it is that regulations have
made this traffic in savages worse. How well the regulations
look on the Government paper of Brisbane, 1868, and of London,
1872. They do not look any better, however, than the spotless
whitewash in the “ Carl’s ” hold that met the approving gaze of the
“ Rosario’s” boarding officer. “ Woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! for ye are like unto whited sepulchres, which indeed appear


beautiful outward, but are within full of dead men’s bones and ot all
uncleanness. Even so ye also appear outwardly righteous unto men,
but within ye are full of hypocrisy and iniquity.” .
A dispute has existed for some time as to whether this traffic
may fairly be called a slave-trade, and the traders in savages and
their allies have strenuously asserted the negative, 1 here is a great
deal in a name. The traffic depends for its existence on fighting clear
of this name; hence the wonderful efforts to show how sweet and
beneficial a thing it is. It is not “the slave-trade, but the labour
traffic” and “the introduction of Polynesian emigrants into Queens-
land.’’ Now we know what a fight for existence the most des-
picable creature will make when it comes to the push. * as ®, a
worm into a corner, and it will turn upon you.’ It is undeniable that
the slave-trade is now in a corner (among us), and its solitary chance
of existence is in a false show. If this traffic were really a slave-trade
you could no more expect it to say so than you could expect a success-
ful villain to confess his crimes; and the calling itself the labour
traffic would simply be a blind to deceive the anti-slave-trade Eng-
lish-speaking Christians, who, if they saw the real slave-trade flag
hoisted would shudder with abhorrence and fear, and, taking action
in the name of God and man, would give themselves no rest till
the whole doubly, trebly accursed thing were sunk deeper than
ever plummet sounded.” With fear, I say, as well as abhorrence,
because by the action of the British Government and gun-boats the
whole British nation, every individual British subject, is responsible
for this traffic. The question therefore cannot now be shirked: in
the case supposed inaction would be infamous. Now by way ot
general and indisputable remark it may be said that the name labour
traffic” ought not to be regarded by the public as an accurate name
or definition; it is the name given by those pecuniarily interested in
the traffic. If every party were to be judged by its own account ot
itself if every criminal or accused person were to be judged tor bis
crimes as he names or describes them—but the supposition is use-
less. There are two sides to most things. Such names as labour
traffic and emigration of Polynesians describe the traffic as seen from
one side only. , „ .. ...
It is a cause of grief that there is so much ot dispute and dissension
in the world. With regard, however, to this question and this whole
class of questions, the probability is that truth and righteousness will be
found now, as it was in the beginning of the century, with the party
moved by Christian principle and humanity, rather than with the
party pecuniarily interested or actually engaged in the traffic; and
this even supposing these latter conscientious. Nevertheless as at
once to call it a slave-trade would be to assume what is most strenu-
ously disputed, I refrain from doing so, and of course reject also the


name “labour traffic.” I call it traffic in savages. No man can
show that this is not a proper designation of it, an accurate definition.
This designation shows the absolute inaccurateness of such phrases
applied to it as “labour traffic,” “Polynesian emigration,” &c.; for such
phrases, strictly speaking, denote civilised ideas. The “ labour market”
is a thing that belongs exclusively to the civilised world. “ Emigrants”
and “labourers” are civilised men, capable of availing themselves of the
protection of the laws of civilisation ; savages are as incapable oi doing
so as children. It is as plain then as anything of the kind can be that
to call these poor helpless savages by names which imply that they are
capable of doing so, and that they do so, is both incorrect and deceptive,
Savagery differs toto ccelo from civilisation; New Hebrides and Papuan
savagery is about the lowest; British or anglo-American civilisation
about the highest. High as it is, however, it has not proved beneficial
to aboriginal races or savages; and making fine-sounding civilised laws
for the protection of savages, who must become civilised before they
can avail themselves effectually of their protection, must now be regarded
as a very questionable proceeding. The long-continued bloody tragedy,
that began in modern times with the discovery of America by
Columbus, has proved that as a matter of fact the savages, before they
become capable of availing themselves effectually of the protection of
such laws, become —extinct. The scene is laid first in America, where
we see European and Indian: then it stretches suddenly across the
Atlantic —“the middle passage”—to Africa, and the sea is covered
with ships whose cargo is'savages. There is thus a quickening of the
action, and African is added to Indian and European. This continues
for nearly three centuries. Then takes place the regulation, and
shortly after, the abolition of the slave trade. About the same time
begins act second: the scene is in Australia, where we see European
and aborigine; now at last it stretches across the Southern Ocean,
and again ships whose cargo is savages cover the seas. Again the
action is quickened, and Papuan from beyond sea is added to aborigine
and European.
The similarity or analogy between the Papuan episode or woe and the
African is what I have now to call particular attention to; and this is
so clear, so much a matter of history and fact, that it cannot be honestly
disputed, any more than it can be honestly disputed that the two great
geographical discoveries of modern times were first America and then
Australia, and that there is a certain analogy between the coloni-
sations of these two immense continents. America is larger than
Australia, its aboriginal inhabitants more numerous. But both were
discovered by Europeans, and then colonised by Europeans, and the
aborigines of both “ disappeared” before the Europeans. lam not
now to dwell upon the tragical and shameful history of the contact
between Europeans and aborigines in America and Australia, but upon


the fact that an episode occurs in the former as in the latter. It cannot
he disputed that after some progress had been made in the extinction
of the hunting aborigines by the Europeans in America, aboriginal
agricultural savages were bought, brought in ships from aforeign land
and sold to European planters in America; as little can it be disputed
that after some progress had been made in the extinction of the
hunting aborigines by the Europeans in Australia, aboriginal agri-
cultural savages were bought, brought in ships from a foreio-n land, and
sold to European planters in Australia. The analogy holds good even
in respect to the islands of America and Australia respectively, x 1 iji is
the Australian West Indies. The foreign aboriginal savages in the
former case, it is almost needless to say, were Africans; the foreign
aboriginal savages in the latter case, Papuans, chiefly as yet from the New
Hebrides. The analogy holds good also in this—not ah the American
states or colonies bought the African savages or used them, but
only those wherein tropical productions were cultivated, e.g., sugar
and cotton. So in Australia; not all its colonies buy and use
Papuan savages, but only'those where tropical productions, as sugar
a„T cotton, are cultivated, chiefly Queensland. The very same
arguments that were urged in behalf of the traffic in African savages by
the American and West Indian planters, have been also used by
the Australian and Pijian planters in behalf of the traffic m
Papuan savages. The very same general effect produced by the
first traffic in Africa is produced by the second traffic in Bapua,
viz demoralisation and depopulation. And I say that it cannot
be honestly disputed that all this amounts to a demonstration of
the substantial sameness of the Papuan woe and the African, or the
substantial identity of the Papuan traffic in savages and the
African. And the establishment of this renders its immediate and
utter abolition a binding duty upon the British Government and
nation It is a remarkable thing that just in the decade of the terrible
American civil war (1860-1870), which resulted in the emancipation of
the last of the African slaves, the traffic in Papuan savages arose. It
is as if the hideous fiend expelled reluctant from the American soil in
the throes of a civil war in which 800,000 men perished, and swept out
into the ocean by that overflowing sea of blood, had been cast up upon
the Australian shores, and, an eternal exile from America and the
West Indies, found a cordial welcome and a congenial home in Queens-
land and the Fiiis.
It is thus seen that it is merely quibbling with words to call this traffic
«the labour traffic” and to repudiate the name “ slave trade. Let not
the Christian public be deceived by a verbal quibble into sanctioning and
becoming responsible with others for this brutal and blasphemous business
for anti-Christian is its nature, no matter what its name may be. Let not
the British be gulled into giving a home to the same fiend in a new form,


from the residue of whose unholy working it cost the English-speaking
people of the world in 1833 a mountain of treasure to purge the soil of
the British Empire; and from the residue of whose unholy working it
cost the English-speaking people of the world in 1860-5 an ocean of blood
to purge the constitution and territory of the United States of America.
Do I then say there is no difference between the African and the Papuan
traffic in savages ? Not so; there are differences.
I have already mentioned that the name “ labour traffic” is misleading.
These Papuan savages cannot be regarded as on the same footing with even
coolies, far less with European labourers. The coolie traffic is much
better than this. For the coolies in their homes are under the pro-
tection of a civilised Government; their native land is a civilised land;
they are not savages. European “ emigrants” and “ labourers” are not
only civilised, but nominally Christian ; coolies, though heathen, are civi-
lised ; but the Papuans are heathen savages, just as were the Africans. The
African slave-trade, therefore, and not coolie emigration or the European
labour market, is that which the Papuan traffic resembles; and hence no
competent authority can deny that slave-trade is at least a more truthful
and appropriate name for it than labour traffic or Polynesian emigration.
In a common English dictionary, published “London, 1865,” slave-
trade is defined as “ the barbarous and wicked business of purchasing
men and women, transporting them to a distant country, and selling them
for slaves.” Now no man can fail to be struck with the general and
patent resemblance between what is here described and the “ labour
traffic,” whether Fijian, Queensland, or inter-island. According to this
definition there are three things—purchasing, transporting, and selling
for slaves. First, purchasing :—lt can no longer be honestly disputed by
competent persons that the Papuan savages are purchased by those who
carry on the “ labour traffic.” The savages themselves think and say so ;
and they being one of the parties in the bargain are competent witnesses
on this point. It seems to me that this is entirely conclusive. The
savages think and say they are bought. So far as I know the traders
admit this. I defy any man to disprove it, and to disprove it is
necessary to prove that this traffic is not a slave-trade. If savages think
they are purchased they of course necessarily think they are slaves. They
have sold themselves (for a limited time it may be), and are therefore
slaves. And this is not altered by the fact that the traders call the
purchase-money a “present,” and the savage purchased a “labourer.”
The price of a savage is as well known in the New Hebrides as in Central
Africa. It seems that the Arabs and Portuguese buy a savage there at
present for about two fathoms of calico. The master of a Queensland
schooner told me (October, 1877) that every savage costs him from eight
to twenty shillings. He asserts this was not payment, but a “ present,”
but admitted that he could not get a man or woman without paying it,
and that the natives called it payment or buying. The notion seems to


be that it is not buying if the savage bought is “ willing” to be bought;
but this notion is erroneous. A man may voluntarily sell himself or enter
into slavery for a limited time. A savage may drink strong drink
“ willingly” which yet will cause his ruin, as is known beforehand, not to
him, but to the European. A trader may give or sell it to the savage as
a legitimate proceeding under the name of the “ drink traffic still there
is a world of difference between the drink traffic as among Europeans
and the drink traffic as between Europeans and heathen savages. It is
now admitted by all whose opinion is entitled to respect that it is in the
latter case intolerably wicked ; and to the apparently supposed triumphant
question of the “ labour traffickers” —“ To prevent the savage from going
to the plantations if he is ‘ willing,' would not that be slavery 1” I would
reply by this other question—“ To prevent the savage from drinking strong
drink if he is ‘ willing,’ would not that be slavery T There is, of course,
not a full analogy between the two things, for no savage thirsts for
plantation labour as some do for strong drink.
Let the reader mark the following, for which the cause of humanity is
indebted to the late lamented Commodore Goodenough. He says in his
Journal :—“ We got in between Ambrym and Pentecost, and there,
under the land, was a white schooner with a French flag. Of course it
was the * Leonie,’ late ‘ Mavis,’ and I sent for the master, who was an
Englishman. He told me, and his log substantiated it, that he had left
twenty-seven men at Havannah Harbour, and had now twenty-six on
board. His whole course is irregular. He said that two of his men had
deserted here. I said, ‘ Then I suppose you detain them against their
will V ‘ No,’ he said, ‘but if I wasn’t to force them to stop on board they
would go directly, they change their minds so.’ ‘Then how do you
recruit them V I said. * I pull along shore, lor the mate, and buy sOme
yams or what not, and then I offer them a knife or two knives, or a knife
or a tomahawk to come, and they give it to their friends who come down
with them, and they come with me. The chiefs have nothing to do with
it ; they have very little power in these islands.’ The masters of the
‘May Queen’ and the ‘Sybil’ had repeated the same thing to me
exactly, so that the voluntary recruiting is all rubbish, and engagement is
all nonsense. These people neither understand why they go, nor where,
or what they are to do, or when return. They only care for the knife or
the tomahawk.” It must now be held indisputable that the Papuan
savages are purchased. Such cases as that of the “ Carl ” show how
natural the use of force is to such a trade, and that its occasional use can
only be prevented by force or war-vessels. But although what is called
kidnapping, or the violent seizing of savages, “ Carl ’’-fashion, may be thus
suppressed, that does not prove that the savages are not purchased. On
the contrary, it has led to the more cunning, deceitful, systematic, and
extended purchasing of them. The very notion, indeed, of purchasing
excludes that of “ Carl”-force. Is the trade-in-savages fiend a whit less


wicked when dressed as a hypocrite ? I say this labour traffic is worse
since the gun-boats of 1872 were sent than before. The effect of these
gun-boats is to protect traders in savages, and to countenance them in
every enormity and outrage, in every blasphemous and brutal proceeding,
on condition that these traders refrain from the open use of “ Carl ’’-force.
The gun-boats in fact effectually promote the demoralisation of the
Papuan savages, the depopulation of the Papuan Islands. Thus a great
national sin is committed against God and against the Papuan race, and
that under the pretence of protecting Pacific Islanders ; and done against
the will of the Christian people of the British Empire, the vast majority
of the British nation, who are nevertheless responsible for it.
The second thing in the definition of slave-trade is transporting beyond
sea. I need only remark here that what renders this transporting neces-
sary is that the savages cannot be constrained to work on their own
islands; but they can be on foreign islands or in foreign lands.
The third thing is selling for slaves. It must suffice now to say that
the price of savages—how much a man or woman, according to their
qualities, will fetch—in Queensland, Fiji, New Caledonia, or the Islands,
is as well known to the traders as the price of sugar to sugar traders, or
of cattle to cattle traders.
I hold it proved that this traffic is a slave-trade; and I have now to say
that the assumption of those whom I shall now take the liberty of calling
slave-traders, and their allies, that the Papuan slave-trade is better by so
much as it differs from the African, is by no means so evident as to pre-
clude the necessity of discussion. The real question involved is—ls this
difference of such a kind as renders the Papuan trade better for the
Papuans than the African trade was for the Africans 1 Now if this could be
predicated of any sucli difference it would be of this, that whereas the African
savage was bought for life the Papuan is bought for a limited number of
years; hence, when the Papuan’s term of bondage is over, he is entitled
to be re-transported to his native land, and often is. Admitting this, the
question is—ls it a matter of fact that the Papuans are more benefited by
this trade than the Africans were by that 1 The answer to this must be a
decided negative. It would be better for the Papuans if they were bought
for life than it is at present; it would be better for them as a race, and
better for them as individuals having an eternal destiny. For it would
then be the interest of the planter to preserve them and secure their
increase, and in the course of time they would become christianised as the
African slaves were in America; whereas at present they are being
exterminated, and the work of christianisation is being immensely retarded,
if not utterly frustrated. The African trade was not so directly anti-
Christian ; there were no Christian missionaries on the Slave Coast,
from whose efforts to christianise the natives the slavers snatched
or cozened the heathen savages, as in Papua. It was more pro-
fessedly Christian at least, as the following seems to show : —“ It is a


curious fact that since 169(5 it had been a part of the slave law of Jamaica
that all ‘ the owners and managers and overseers of slaves shall, as much
as in them lies, endeavour the instruction of their slaves in the principles
of the Christian religion, to facilitate their conversion.’ How these men
fulfilled this obligation may be seen by referring to the Anti-Slavery Reporter y
vol. iv., pp. 124,126.” —Brown’s History of Missions , vol. iii., p. 449, note.
The Papuan slave-trade, like the African, has become worse the more it
has been partially prohibited and regulated. I have proved this generally
in the foregoing pages, where it is shown that the effect of the Govern-
ment Acts is simply to sanction and legalise the trade; and that the
gun-boats are simply the allies of the traders against the missionaries,
protecting and furthering (so as to make the nation responsible for it) that
which is destroying a race of men for the sake of the pecuniary interest
of a few traders. I do not wish to impute dishonesty to the better class
of those pecuniarily interested in this traffic; but I suppose that their
repudiation of the idea of a slave-trade implies that if it were proved to
be really a slave-trade they would give it up. Now I will venture to say that
this is proved in these pages.' Neither do I wish to impute dishonesty to
the British Government, when, by the Kidnapping Act and the creation of
gunboats, they professed to seek the Pacific Islanders’ protection, although
at the same time they sanctioned the traffic in savages. But I say there is
sufficient proof in these pages that they have effected the opposite of what
they sought, and, that proof standing, they are bound by their previous
action now to abolish this trade. Let the British nation look to it that its
honour is not tarnished by the blood of an innocent people, that has offered
no provocation but helplessness, through the un-British as well as anti-
Christian conduct of a few politicians and traders. It is certainly strange
—passing strange. What should we think of the British Government at
the beginning of the century if, instead of abolishing the African slave-
trade, it had passed an African Protection Bill and an Act prohibiting
kidnapping, at the same time legalising slave or savage trade, and sending
gun-boats whose principal effect would naturally be to facilitate that trade
to the destruction of the Africans 1 And yet, mutatis mutandis, this is
exactly what has now been done. Kidnapping is not slave-trade. Ido
not say that kidnapping is better than slave-trade ; but it is no more
slave-trade than stealing cattle is cattle-trade. And to pretend, as certain
politicians have done, that the repression of kidnapping is a sufficient
guarantee that this traffic is not slave-trade, and that the Papuan heathen
savages are therefore being efficiently protected, especially by the “gun-boats,”
is a misrepresentation under cover of which is silently taking place a
reversal of the best and worthiest policy of the British nation, and a
trailing of its glory in the vilest, foulest dust.
I have proved that this traffic ought to be abolished, and now conclude
by solemnly appealing to the Christian public, the successors of the men
who rallied round Wilberforce and Clarkson, to secure its abolition.


APPENDIX.
The following are some of the facts which have come under my personal notice in
the New Hebrides since the year 1872, so that I can assure the reader of the accu-
racy of this record of them. The following arrangement explains itself: —
I. Queensland.
1. Captain C. was put in gaol for some outrage committed in carrying on this
trade. He was released before his time was up because, it was said, of the action
of some persons in power in Queensland interested in the trade. He immediately
returned to the Islands, having supreme control of a labour vessel; was wounded
with an arrow, then with a spear. Before he died he solemnly declared to the
writer that if he lived he would denounce the trade, which he said was “ accursed
of God.”
2. A chief’s wife ran away ; the writer, at his request, went on board two Queens-
land vessels to ask that they would not take away this chief’s wife. The Govern-
ment agents said they would take her if she wished, in spite of her husband, as
they had * authority to take away from these Islands all who were willing to go,
this being the law. ”
8; A chief’s wife ran away and was taken to Queensland. Her husband
threatened to massacre the whites on Efate in revenge. A trader therefore wrote
to the immigration agent, Brisbane, who replied that the woman would be returned.
She has never been returned.
4. A woman ran away from her husband and went on board a Queensland
vessel. On being asked by the Government agent to sign the form, I refused, and
gave him my refusal in writing. He then asked the captain to put the woman
ashore, but he refused. He then said he “ would risk it, as according to law he
could take whoever was Willing to go.” I wrote to the immigration agent,
Brisbane, asking that the woman be returned to her husband. I never got an
answer.
11. Fiji.
1. An American Fijian labour vessel was wrecked on the Islands. There were
fifty-one Solomon Islanders on board. One of them was found murdered, and his
body was inspected and buried by the writer. It was found to be impossible to get
any information from the remaining fifty, as they could not speak or understand
English. No matter then how such men are ill-treated, they cannot complain.
111. INTEK-ISLAND.
1. A European seaman on board a labour cutter shot himself by accident. When
dying he told the writer that the people of the cutter were much to blame for
not bringing him help immediately after the accident; instead of which they
had gone on searching for savages for two days, by the end of which time mortifi-
cation had set in.
2. A trader had a number of savages working on his plantation three years. He
then left them in charge of a European, and went to Sydney to buy things to pay
their wages and send them home. The European sent them all away in a ship, I
do not know where to, before their owner returned with their pay, which therefore
they never saw.


3. A trader told the writer he had tried to get one of his savages shipped to
Queensland without paying him for his labour. Failing that he had put him in
“ stocks.”
4. A trader confessed to me that he had chained two of his savages, given to
running away, leg to leg, and kept them working thus for several days. A gun-
boat on being informed took no notice —made no inquiry.
5. Some natives complained that they had been engaged for one year by the
captain who shipped them. But the owner of the plantation, on their arrival, said
it was “ three years in the book.” A war-vessel believed the trader’s version, and
acted upon it.
6. In the writer’s presence some natives told a gun-boat commander they had
been engaged for two years. Their owner said, “It is three years in the book.”
His version was taken.
7. A woman’s three years were up. Her owner sent her husband home, but
kept her. A British trader then took her as his concubine. A gun-boat com-
mander told the writer that he would not have this woman sent home unless she
was willing to go. I had, in compliance with her husband s request, asked him to
have her sent to her home. The woman said she wished to go home in a certain
vessel. The captain of that vessel, when he came, refused to take her.
IV. French and Inter-island.
1. An Efatese woman was living with a white man as his concubine. She ought
to have been returned to her home. Her relatives wished her returned. The white
man ran off with her to Noumea. He was killed there by a shark. Then the
woman was returned.
2. A Mai woman served her three years in Noumea. She was shipped to be re-
turned to her home. She was instead sold to a trader in Efate. He again sold her
to another trader in a small vessel in the beche-de-mer and cocoanut trade. I
informed the commander of a gun-boat, who went away so as not to see this woman
sent home. The man then solemnly promised me to take her home so as to avoid
prosecution for felony. I learned next year (1877) that he had not after all taken her
to her home, but to Tanna. He committed adultery with a Tanna chief’s wife, and
was shot. The same commander of the gun-boat went to Tanna, and hanged a
Tanna man, and was the occasion of the deaths of other ten Tanna men in conse-
quence of this affair.
3. Four Eromangans served three years at Noumea. They were then shipped
for Eromanga, but landed at Efate instead, to work for a British trader there. He
put two of them in irons. They came and complained to me; thus it came to
my knowledge. They were brought in a British (French flag) vessel. .
4. A British (French flag) cutter, extremely small, had 46 natives on board, and
carried them to Noumea to obtain a license for a British trader to work them on
his plantation in the New Hebrides,
V. Queensland and Inter-island.
1. A Nguna woman, after working her allotted time—separate from her husband
in Queensland, was shipped to be returned to Nguna. She was landed on Efate
with her paramour. The Nguna people threatened massacre. The writer pre-
vented bloodshed by having the woman taken to her husband from the island of
Efate to that of Nguna.
2. A Mallicollan savage wrought three years on Efate. He then ran away and
went on board a Queensland vessel without his pay. I advised the Government
agent not to take him. He said he asked his owner if he wished him returned


ashore, who said, “No ; he can go to h 1 if he likes.” “ I can take,” said the
Government agent to me, “ whoever is willing to go ; ” and after my protest he
took him.
3. A British trader complained to me and a brother missionary that eighteen of
his natives had been taken away from his plantation on Efate, in a Queensland
vessel, to Queensland. Of course they got no pay.
VI. War is sometimes waged by Queensland vessels in this trade, and the gun-
boats do not prevent it.
1. In 1875 a Queensland schooner waged war at Mallicollo. I informed the
commander of a gun-boat. The fact was ascertained on board the gun-boat in
Havannah Harbour, 1876. The naval officer expressed his approval of the war,
which was waged for the recovery of the payment of a savage, who after he had
been purchased, stole off and swam ashore at night.
These facts are typical. For further information regarding the traffic vide The
Slave-trade in the New Hebrides, a pamphlet put forth officially by the New
Hebrides Mission, and published in Edinburgh in 1872.
Mason, Firth & M'Cutcheon, General Printers, Melbourne.
