

THE WRECK
OF THE
-A NARRATIVE OF
THE DISASTER, TOGETHER WITH ITS
PRACTICAL LESSONS :
AND ALSO
A LIST OF THE PASSENGERS.
BY THE
REV. J. W. RICHARDSON,
OF TOITENHAM-COEEI CHAPEL, LONDON.
AUTHOR OF “TENDERNESS OF JESUS,” &C.
LONDON:
“ROYAL CHARTER;”
ri ll°i oo
JOHN SNOW, PATERNOSTER ROW.


f 900


H 3335 £ \hfiOa
3i ■ -7-*n
t
THE WRECK;
A NARRATIVE OE
THE LOSS OF THE “ ROYAL
CHARTER.”
—> —
There would have been sufficient in the
melancholy fact of the total wreck of a
noble steam-ship, and the loss of four
hundred and fifty souls, within a few
yards of our coast, to justify me in making
it the occasion of a discourse in the house
of God, on the Lord’s-day; but, as. a
congregation, we have been brought into
more immediate connection with this sad
catastrophe. A family,* forming part of
our fellowship, has been plunged into
deep sorrow by the loss of a beloved son-
in-law, who perished in the wreck.
The “Royal Charter” sailed from
Melbourne, August 26th, having on board
* P. Carstairs, Esq.


three hundred and eighty-eight passen-
gers. Her voyage was most rapid and
prosperous till the arrival off the Irish
coast. On reaching Queenstown, on Mon-
day morning, thirteen of the passengers
landed in a pilot boat. After passing
Queenstown, the wind veered round to
E.N.E., blowing strong. On Tuesday
night it blew a gale, and continued to in-
crease in violence till, on the morning of
the fatal disaster, it blew a perfect hurri-
cane. Arriving off Point Lynas, on the
Welsh coast, at six p.m., on Tuesday even-
ing, signal rockets were for several hours
thrown up in the hope of attracting a
pilot, but none made their appearance.
Captain Taylor, finding that the ship
was making lee-way, and gradually drift-
ing towards the shore, let go both the
anchors, but such was the violence of the
wind and the heavy cross sea prevailing,
that the chains parted. Notwithstanding
that the engines were worked at their
full power, the captain was unable to


work to and the unfortunate
vessel struck the rocks, stern first, in
four fathoms water. The masts and rig-
ging were cut adrift, but caused no relief,
as the ship continued to thump on the
sharp-pointed rocks with fearful rapidity.
Shortly after she struck, the ship was
thrown broadside, perfectly upright, upon
the shelving stony beach, the head and
stern lying due east and west, the former
not more than twenty yards from a pro-
jecting rock. At this juncture, one of
the crew, a Maltese, named Rogers, nobly
volunteered to struggle through the
heavy surf, and convey a rope to the
shore.
Though it Avas not thought that danger
was imminent, the captain gave the order,
and lingers ably fulfilled his duty. A
strong hawser was then passed and se-
cured to the shore, and to this was rigged
a “ boatswain's chair.” At five o’clock
the ship laboured and bumped to such an
extent that the ladies and children exhi-


bited the greatest anxiety and fear. They
crowded together, and the Rev. Mr.
Hodge, a clergyman of New Zealand,
prayed and offered exhortations which
were interrupted by the violent thumping
of the vessel on the rocks, and the heavy
seas that dashed over her. The scene in
the saloon was of the most heart-rending
description. Husbands and wives, pa-
rents and children, were clinging to each
other in affectionate embrace. The cap-
tain endeavoured to allay their fears by
assuring them that there was no imme-
diate danger. Scarcely had his words
been uttered, before a succession of tre-
mendous waves swung the vessel about
on the rocks, and she divided amid-ships,
engulphing all on board. Many were
killed by the breaking up of the ship.
Only thirty-nine persons were saved.
Four hundred and fifty-nine souls were
launched into eternity, and there is
scarcely a vestige of the “ Royal Char-
ter” remaining.


In attempting an improvement of this
most affecting event, let me direct your
attention to the following passage of
Scripture:—
“ Stormy wind fulfilling His word.”
—Psalms cxlviii. 8.
The text brings before us the terrible
agency by which the destruction of the
“ Royal Charter” was effected. It is not
necessary, for the object contemplated in
this discourse, that we should dwell upon
the connection in which these words
occur. This is altogether a Psalm of
praise, in which the sacred writer calls in
the most impassioned manner upon all
nature, heavenly and earthly, rational
and irrational, to concur in praising God,
whose power, wisdom, and providence
are displayed in all his works.
I. Let us consider one or two thoughts
suggested by the text.
1. Stormy winds are God } s servants , —
Science, during the last half century,


has made wonderful progress, and en-
abled us to understand many of the pro-
cesses and operations of nature which had
been almost entirely concealed from us.
Laws have been discovered, and princi-
ples learned, by which secrets of nature
have been revealed, and mysteries of na-
ture have been solved. And while science
has diffused most important information in
many of the departments of nature, it has
imparted knowledge of the most interest-
ing and useful kind on the subject of
storms. Hence we are able to detect
law in those operations which seemed to
be the most lawless, and to observe the
wide and wondrous circle which the
storm describes, and in which it rushes
forward with wild, resistless, and terrible
power. But, alas ! with this advance of
science among us, men have become
proud, self-sufficient, and boastful. Know-
ledge has puffed them up. They utter
“ great swelling words of vanity.” Their
pride has resulted in a “philosophy falsely


so called.” It is enough for them that
they have discovered the principles and
reasons of things. These, they say, are
our gods. Thus, creation is studied, hut
the Creator is ignored ; law is honoured,
hut the Law-giver is denied. God —the
personal Divinity—is banished from his
own universe, and the thing formed re-
pudiates its glorious Former.
Hence, the pantheistic spirit that ob-
tains so widely among the worshippers
of nature. The pantheist denies the
existence of a personal God—an intelli-
gent, active Being, by whom the worlds
were made, and all things are sustained
and controlled —and he accounts for the
existence of what are commonly called
created things, through the operation of
certain processes and laws which are
strictly necessary and eternal. These pro-
cesses and laws being personified, are
called God, and their results are so many
personifications of God. The god of the
pantheist, therefore, is a personification


and not a person, a figure of speech and
not a reality. There is to him no personal
God—there is no God distinct from the
universal substance and its inherent
powers —no God distinct from the pro-
cesses and laws of nature and the things
which through their operation exist. Thus
men “ change the truth of God into a lie,
and worship and serve the creature more
than the Creator who is over all, God
blessed for ever.”
Now, it is no part of my present de-
sign to enter into the argument on this
subject, but to offer observations that
may illustrate the text.
In direct opposition to the views of
the so-called worshippers of nature, to
which reference has been made, are those
of the Bible. It affirms, respecting God,
that “of Him, and through Him, and to
Him, are all things” —that God and na-
ture are distinct, and that the whole crea-
tion is a result of his fiat, and is ceaselessly
dependent upon Him. “He is wonderful


in council and excellent in working.”
“ He worketh all things after the counsel
his own will.”
Yes, the universe is a grand instru-
ment of God—a harp always resounding
to his praise, as his invisible fingers play
on its ten thousand strings. “ There
is not an object of sight, there is not
a wandering sound, nor a floating
fragrance, nor a hidden root, nor a
whispering leaf, nor a blooming flower
in all the world that is not an instrument
of God. And laws of matter, and lives of
plants, and instincts of animals, and
thoughts of men —all are his servants//
But to the infidel, all the aspects and
utterances of nature lack significance.
Trees rustle, and brooks babble, and
suns shine, and rains descend, and winds
blow, but there is no meaning in them.
To the Christian, however, all speak of
God. He is seen in the clouds, heard in
the wind, felt in the seasons, and recog-
nized in all the operations of nature.


But while the elements and laws of the
universe generally are God’s instruments,
stormy winds are here specifically pre-
sented as God’s servants.
2. Stormy winds obey God’s mill. —
God governs everything according to its
nature. He manages the sea and regu-
lates the planets by physical force, and
the various tribes of animals by the laws
of instinct. Necessity is impressed upon
all physical things. Put the seed into a
congenial soil, and nature, by a necessity,
will draw out the particles of vitality,
and elaborate it into flower, or fragrance,
or fruit. The seed has no resisting force,
it is passive in the plastic hand of nature.
And thus the whole physical universe
acts, not by volition, but by necessity.
The laws of motion and of influence are
resistless and unvarying, and ceaselessly
obey the word —the will of God. Stormy
winds also fulfil his word.
There is something appalling in a
storm. How feeble, how utterly power-


less man appears. That wild roar and
desolating sweep of the hurricane over
the land, as it uproots gigantic oaks, and
overthrows huge buildings, and spreads
ruin everywhere, proclaims a terrible
force. But the tempest is more sublime
and fearful at sea, when it lashes the
waves into fury, and upheaves the billows
of the ocean to mountainous heights, and
tosses the noblest vessels as the veriest
atoms, now lifting them up to the
heavens, and now plunging them in the
depths, while the stoutest and the
strongest men “ reel to and fro and
stagger like the intoxicated, and are at
their wits' end.” Here there seems only
wild confusion, and frantic, uncontrollable
rage. But stormy winds obey God’s will.
Winds often subserve the will of man.
Man can use them, but he is utterly un-
able to control them. They serve him,
but they do not obey him. He may em-
ploy them, but he cannot regulate and
govern them. Man’s voice they heed


not; and man’s authority they altogether
disregard; but stormy winds are the
obedient servants of God. Just as a man
says to his servant; gO; and he goeth; or
come, and he cometh, so the winds and
the sea obey God. See that lake of Galilee
tossed by a great tempest —that little
ship in which Jesus and his disciples are
sailing is covered with the waves and
ready to be engulphed. Jesus is asleep.
The disciples are alarmed. They awake
Him and exclaim, “ Lord, save us, or we
perish.” With what calm majesty He rises,
and says to the roaring tempest and the
surging waves, “ Peace, be still,” and all
is hushed and allayed, “ Stormy wind fulfils
his word,” “ and the men marvel, saying,
what manner of man is this, that even
the winds and the sea obey Him.”
Stormy winds are the instruments of
God’s operation. They act not spon-
taneously or capriciously, but ever fulfil
the purpose, and carry out the designs of
the Almighty. Now at his command


they urge forward the vessel with won-
derful velocity in safety “to the desired
haven,” and now at his bidding, with tre-
mendous force they drive the noble ship
on to the rocky shore, dash her to pieces,
and launch the terror-stricken passengers
into eternity. The force, the direction,
the result of stormy winds, is all of God.
There is no blind chance, no fortuity
or accident identified with them. The
tempest roars, devastates and destroys,
to fulfil-God's word. That terrific sound
is God's voice, and that desolation and
death is the expression of God's will.
3. Stormy 'winds praise Ood. —God
must be his own end. His own nature
and glory form the great reason of the
universe. For there was no reason why
it should be, or what it should be, but
what existed in Himself. “For Him are all
things.'' The ultimate purpose is God's
own glory, the manifestation of his ex-
cellence. This is the grand idea of the
Psalmist, in the brilliant ode from which


the text is selected. He calls upon heaven
above., and the earth beneath, animate, and
inanimate, rational, and irrational crea-
tures, to unite in one general anthem of
praise to God. Elements and creatures
that might be supposed the most unlikely
are summoned to take part in this glorious
burst of praise. “Praise the Lord from the
earth, ye dragons, and all deeps, fire and
hail, snow and vapour, mountains and
hills, fruitful trees and all cedars, beasts
and all cattle, creeping things and flying
fowl, stormy wind, fulfilling his word/'’
Earth from all thy depths below,
Ocean’s hallelujahs flow;
Lightning, vapour, wind, and storm,
Hail and snow his will perform.
Stormy winds do praise God. There is
much in their sublime and terrible opera-
tion to awaken deep and reverential awe
of God. His grandeur, majesty, and
power, are most impressively presented
as “He rides forth upon the wings of the
wind/’ How deep and solemn is the con-
sciousness of man's dependence, when


God commands and raises tlie stormy
wind which, lifts up the waves. Then
the proud spirit is humbled, the stout-
hearted quail, and the godless betake
themselves to Him who alone can deliver,
and those who never prayed before, with
intense earnestness, beseech —“ Lord,
save, or we perish.” And, moreover, when
“ God plants his footsteps in the sea,
And rides upon the storm,”
how his peerless wisdom and profound
and far-reaching knowledge flash out be-
fore us, and men exclaim, “ Oh, the depth
of the riches, both of the wisdom and
knowledge of God; his judgments are
unsearchable, and his ways past finding
out.” And thus, while Jehovah says to
all nature, “ Praise ye the Lord,” stormy
winds fulfil his word.
11. Let us look at stormy winds in
connection with that sad catastrophe, to
which our attention is now more immedi-
ately directed.
The fearful loss of life and property


occasioned by the wreck of the “ Royal
Charter,” has rendered it the object of
inquiry and interest, far beyond that of
any other wreck that has taken place for
many years. How many hearts and
homes has it filled with sorrow !
The event may be observed in several
points of view, calculated to minister in-
struction, and to produce impression.
1. It is solemn. —There is something
profoundly solemn in death under any
circumstances. We are awe-struck in
entering into the chamber of death.
How hushed is every sound—how sup-
pressed is every utterance —how gentle
every footfall—silence is most appro-
priate. But if we are solemnized by
the death of one, how would the
feeling be deepened by that of many?
In the case of this wreck four hundred
and fifty-nine of the dead present
themselves before us; and the whole
circumstances are deeply affecting. How
sudden, how shocking was their death.


Husbands and wives, parents and chil-
dren, who had sailed together in safety
and comfort across the mighty ocean,
see the shore for which they had longed,
and calculate upon soon landing and
being welcomed by beloved relatives and
friends, and are horror-struck to find
themselves in imminent peril ; and while
trembling with fear, suddenly the vessel
parts asunder, and these hundreds of
human beings, healthy and strong, sink
down into the seething gulph with a
shriek so terrible that it outvies the
storm itself, and, dashed and mutilated,
are numbered with the dead. This ter-
rible destruction of human life is most
affecting. How precious a thing is life—
how tenaciously we cling to it, “ skin for
skin, all that a man hath will he give for
his life.”
By the pressure of circumstances a
man may resolve upon self-destruction.
He may cast himself into the water,
but if the means of deliverance be thrown


to him, how readily and firmly lie grasps
it. The love of life is strong within him.
But if he dies, and an inquest is held
upon him, the verdict usually is—Tem-
porary insanity. The reason is obvious.
We are convinced that the suicide must
be mentally or morally insane.
It is affecting to witness the destruc-
tion of a beautiful plant, more so that of
a useful animal; but how much more so to
think of four hundred and fifty-nine men,
women, and children, at once andmiserably
destroyed. The event is deeply solemn.
2. Mysterious . —Not mysterious to God
but to us. To God all this is clear and
plain, wise and well, but how dark and in-
comprehensible to us. It is like that cloud
of old, the dark side of which was presented
to the Egyptians. That dark side is pre-
sented to us, but there is light and bright-
nessbeyond. “It is the glory of Godto con-
ceal a thing.” It is difficult oftentimes for
us to conceal a matter from our fellow-
men. How much of thought and plan is


necessary, and after all it frequently fails.
God is the only Being who can effectually
conceal. “Y erily thouart aGodthathidest
thyself.” And were He to present us with
the reasons of many of his dispensations,
they would he far too profound for us to
understand and appreciate, and we could
only exclaim, “ Such knowledge is too
wonderful for us; it is high, we cannot
attain unto it.” “ But He gives no ac •
count of any of his matters, and what-
soever his soul desires, even that He does.
Behold He takes away, who can hinder
Him ?” Who will say unto Him, “ What
doestthou?” “Clouds and darkness are
ronnd about Him,” mystery meets us
everywhere in his operations.
And is there not deep mystery here ?
Think of this noble vessel bringing her
precious cargo in safety thousands of
miles across the ocean, to be destroyed
and lost in sight of land !
And how many of those passengers
had left their native land, and toiled for


years in the hope of gaining a compe-
tency, and some had obtained it, and
were bringing back the reward of their
well-earned labour; and when they were
calculating upon the enjoyment of com-
fort, in years to come, in their native
city, town, or village, they and their trea-
sure were engulphed and lost! Why,
we exclaim, in wondering ignorance, all
this bootless toil, and this utter ruin of
long-cherished hopes? And were the
histories of many of those passengers
spread before us, how would they en-
hance, in our view, the mystery of this
sad event! It is said there was one cap-
tain on board who had been wrecked and
had reached a desolate island, from which
he had looked out upon the sea day after
day, presenting signals to passing ships
to call and take him off. He had used
his utmost efforts in vain until he attracted
the notice of the “ Royal Charter,” and
was received on board to be wrecked
again, and now to be lost. And, more-


over, think what floods of sorrow have
been poured into multitudes of hearts
and homes by this sad catastrophe ! How
many weeping widows, and mourning chil-
dren, and distressed friends, survive !
Why all this calamity? We can only
say, “Even so. Father, for so it seems
good in thy sight.” This event is pro-
foundly mysterious.
3. Merciful. —Judgment and mercy
blend in the Divine dispensations. On
board the “ Royal Charter” there was a
faithful minister of truth, who was not
ashamed of the Gospel of Christ. He
seems to have so diligently and faithfully
preached the Gospel among the passen-
gers, as to have commended himself to
the consciences of many. And while a
testimonial was presented to the captain
when the vessel reached the Irish coast,
a purse was made up for the Rev. Mr,
Hodge for his earnest and devoted labours
during the voyage. We know not but
some souls who listened to the statements


and appeals of truth, addressed by this
man of God, were impressed, converted,
and saved, through his instrumentality;
those who on shore had turned a deaf ear
to counsel and reproof, may on board
have been led to repentance and faith.
When the storm became a perfect
hurricane, and danger was most immi-
nent, and “ men’s hearts failed them for
fear,” and every one became alarmed for
their safety, this devoted minister of
Christ gathered many around him, and
prayed and offered earnest exhortation.
Oh, brethren, these were circumstances
eminently calculated to produce deep im-
pression.
It might be—may we not hope it was
—the time of salvation to many. Per-
haps many who had been regardless of
Christ and salvation, now beheld “ the
Lamb of God,” and embraced the over-
tures of his grace. Perhaps many a
prayerless one, urged by the terribleness
of the scene, breathed the intense desire,


“ God, be merciful to me a sinner/-’ and
realized the subduing and comforting in-
fluence of forgiving love.
Oh, what thoughts may have been
suggested, what feelings awakened, what
transformations effected, in connection
with the prayers and exhortations of that
solemn moment! Blessed transition, for
the subjects of saving grace to pass
away from storm, and terror, and an-
guish, at once to the paradise of God!
Surely there was mercy in this event.
4. It is suggestive. —How suggestive it
is of God's resources and independence.
He called these hundreds of beings into'
existence, and He could afford to destroy
them. How independent is He of all his
creatures ! “None can let or hinder Him"
in his operations. “He speaks, and it is
done. He commands, and it stands fast."
But “ the lot is cast into the lap, and the
whole disposal thereof is of the Lord."
“He fixes the bounds of our habitation, and
the number of our months is determined."


Divine counsel and purpose are clearly
presented here. “ One is taken, and the
other is left.” Those who escaped to tell
the tale of this fearful wreck, say they
scarcely know how they reached the
shore. It seems almost miraculous that
they should have been preserved.
And then some would have been pas-
sengers in the “ Royal Charter” who did
not come with her. Our beloved and
honoured friend, the Rev. Thomas Binney,
who was on a visit to Australia, much
wished to take his passage in her, but
was prevented by a previous arrange-
ment. He has thus been mercifully
spared.
But the sudden destruction of so
many precious lives suggests to us the
vanity of man as mortal. “ What is your
life ? It is but as a vapour that appear-
eth for a little time, and then vanisheth
and passeth away.” “Behold, Thou hast
made my days as an handbreadth, and
mine age is as nothing before Thee.”


“ Verily, every man at his best estate is
altogether vanity. Surely every man
walketh in a vain show. Surely they are
disquieted in vain. He heapeth up riches,
and knoweth not who shall gather them.”
How soon the purposes and efforts
of a lifetime are utterly frustrated and
broken off! The place that once knew
the thoughtful, active, successful man,
knows him no more for ever.
Again, this event suggests to us that
death is the birth of another life. We
seem to carry about with us a conscious-
ness of immortality. Who can reason
himself into the belief, that in death
man perishes like the grass of the field.
It is an inwrought impression of our
moral nature, a kind of instinctive assu-
rance, that having begun to live, we must
live on. And the Bible sets its seal of
certainty to the impression of nature.
This life is but the preliminary, the in-
fancy of the life to come. An eternity
of existence lies beyond us. But that


eternity will be an eternity of bliss or an
eternity of woe, according to tlie life we
live in tbis world. The preciousness of
this life, therefore, is enhanced by the
fact that the life to come, in relation to
each, will take its form and character
from the life that now is. Here we are
training for what we shall be hereafter.
“As the tree falls, so it lies.” As the man
is when he dies, so will he be throughout
eternity. “He that is unjust will be un-
just still, and he that is filthy will be
filthy still, and he that is righteous will
be righteous still, and he that is holy
will be holy still.” “ What an interest,
then, attaches to the last moment of
every man’s earthly life —to the parting
breath on which the soul passes away
from its mortal tenement. As death at
that solemn moment finds him —believ-
ing or not believing in the only Saviour
—reconciled to God or still alienated
from Him—pardoned or unpardoned —
renewed or unrenewed —so must judg-


ment, so must eternity, find him, ac-
cepted and saved, or cast away and lost.”
The hundreds, then, who perished in this
fearful wreck, and are dead to us, yet
live. They have passed into a bound-
less, changeless eternity.
5. There is a last point of view in
which this sad event may be regarded by
us—as Admonitory . It admonishes us to
be submissive. God is here. This is the
expression of his will. Let us not mur-
mur or rebelliously rise up against the
Holy One. “ I was dumb,” says the
Psalmist; “ I opened not my mouth, be-
cause Thou didst it.” God does all
things well. The reasons of given dis-
pensations are not given to us now. They
are too profound and far-reaching for us
to understand. “What I do,” He says,
“thou knowest not now, but thou shalt
know hereafter.” Bow down, then, before
Him with profound humility, and say,
though with a trembling utterance and a
bleeding heart, “ Thy will be done.”


But tliis event admonishes us to pre-
pare for death. The voice,, loud and
impressive, here is, “Be ye also ready,
for in such an hour as ye think not the
Son of Man cometh.”
It is not necessary that you should be
sailing on the mighty deep to be sud-
denly arrested by death. Oh, how
many die in a moment at your right
hand !
True, in this case, there was danger
apparent, and therefore it might be that
each would feel the importance of seek-
ing mercy. But even there the hope of
deliverance might lead some to defer an
immediate surrender to Christ. They
were told, once and again, that there was
not immediate danger, and that there was
hope of escape, but the minister of Christ
prayed and exhorted them to betake
themselves at once to Jesus; and well it
was that he thus urged, for it would seem
that while he continued his supplications
to God, then the vessel parted asunder,


and the terrible shriek that outvied the
roar of the wind and the waves burst
from these perishing hundreds as they
sunk down into the seething abyss. Now,
it may be that many of you, while listen-
ing to the appeals of the minister of
truth, have said, “ Go away for this time;
when I have a convenient season I will
call for thee.” Are you certain of the
future ? Will a more convenient season
ever come ? Can you enter into a cove-
nant with death ? How terrible is the
language of God ! “Your covenant with
death shall be disannulled, and your
agreement with hell shall not stand-;
when the overflowing scourge shall pass
through, then shall ye be trodden down
by it.”
Brethren, it matters not whether our
dissolution be sudden or protracted, if
we be in Christ. If we betake ourselves
to the cross, and be hallowed by the
Spirit of the living God, then death,
under any circumstances, will be eternal


gain. To many, we trust, wlio perislied
in tliis wreck, death was gain. What
gain to pass away from anxiety and terror
and distress, to the home and rest, felicity
and glory of everlasting kingdom.
But how terrible is the thought of any
passing from that fearful scene of anguish
to the deeper distress, the unending
misery of the lost.
Of what avail was it to the many who
have been removed from us by this cala-
mity, that they had succeeded in their
enterprises and amassed wealth? The
treasure of earth how mean, how worth-
less would it appear. They would will-
ingly have given it all for life. And
what would it profit you if you should
gain the whole world, and lose your own
soul. How fearful the loss ! He is poor in-
deed who is “not rich toward God.” “Lay
up for yourselves treasure in heaven,”
that when death shall come, you may not
depart to poverty and ruin, but then have
treasure as enduring as your immortal


souls. No object can claim your atten-
tion so momentous as tliis; give to it,
then, tlie thought and effort which it
legitimately demands; and everything
in connection with the rapid flight of
time, the hardening and alienating pro-
cess of sin, and the multitudes that are
every hour passing into eternity, says,
delay not, but at once “ prepare to meet
your God.”
“Awake, thou that sleepest, and arise
from the dead, and Christ shall give thee
light.” Tarry not any longer at a distance
from Christ and from safety. He cries,
“ Come, 0 come unto Me ; I will be to
you a hiding-place from the wind, and a
covert from the tempest, and the shadow
of a great rock in a weary land. Eepent
now ! Believe now !”
In conclusion: Our sympathies should
be awakened for the relatives of the de-
ceased. What sorrow oppresses many
hearts. Dearest objects have been
smitten down. “ Lover and friend has


been removed, and acquaintances have
been put into darkness.” Our prayers are
demanded for bruised and broken spirits,
tbat “God who comforteth those who are
cast down,” may minister to them the
consolation and the grace which He only
can impart.
But specially, brethren, we need to
pray for ourselves; that the solemnity of
our present gathering may be sanctified
to us all, and'that quickening and prompt-
ing grace may be identified with this
fearful wreck in the experience of all.
Well will it be for us if life comes
forth from this sudden and terrible de-
struction. Let us all here and now cry,
“Lord, make me to know mine end,
and the measure of my days, what it is,
that I may know how frail I am.” Let
each pray with an earnestness unknown
before, “ So teach me to number my days,
as to apply my heart unto wisdom.” That
everywhere, and in all things, we may
recognize God, believing that all things


are in his hands, and that even stormy
winds, wild and resistless and terrible as
they may be, fulfil his word.
Gracious life-giving and hallowing
Spirit, shed thy richest and most blessed
influence on us, that this sad event which
has brought us together may result in
life eternal to many. Amen.
By the arrival of the Overland Mail, Messrs, Gibbs, Bright,
and Co. have received a full list of the saloon, cabin, and
steerage passengers who embarked on board this unfortunate
vessel at Melbourne. The following is the melancholy record
Saloon' — Hugh Bethune, Mr, and Mrs. Bruce, infant and
servant; W. Beamer, jun., Mr. and Mrs. Davis, two daughters
and two sons ; Mr., Mrs., and two Misses Fowler and servant :
Mrs. Fenwick, and four children; Mrs. Foster, Mr. J. and
Mrs. Grove, Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner (Mr. Gardiner landed at
Cork)' Mr. Gundry (saved); F. T. Hutton, Rev. Charles
Hodge Dr. Hatch, J. S. Henry, Mr. and Mrs. Jenkins, and
five sons; Walter Lafargue, Mr. J. 8., Mrs., Miss, and Master
Murray; Joseph M‘Evoy(landed at Cork) ; Mr. Mellor, Mr.
Molineaux, W. H. Morse (saved); R. P. Macgeorge, Mrs.
Nahmer and child (landed at Cork) ; Mr. W. H. and Mrs.
Pitcher two children and servant; Mr. Rutford, Mrs. Twee-
dale Mr. Henry E. Taylor, child, and servant ; Mr. Taylor
(saved); Mr. Welsh, Captain Withers, Mrs. Woodruff, and
child; Mr. G. Watson. „ , , ,
Second Class— Mr. Allen and two children (landed at
Cork) • Captain Adams, Mr, Barratt and child (son) 5; Charles
Cams. Mr. and Mrs. Dodd and two children; Miss P. Davis,
Mr. Eddowes, Bird, Edward Gates, T. E. Capper (saved);
Mrs Glover, John Griffiths, William Harlden, Mr. Henderson,
John Loone (saved) ; - Lethlaine, L E. Mention (saved) ;
John Maule, Mr. M‘Nab, T. Macready, Nicholas, Mrs.
Norman and two children ; Mr. Portnay, Mr. Perry, Edmund
Pearce, Mrs. R. Rose, Mr. and Mrs. Russell and two children
(Mr. Russell saved); Mr. and Mrs. Smith and three children;
Solomon Samuel, Mr. Lansan, Julius Stirko (landed at Cork).
Miss Elizabeth Ward, Miss Mary Ellen Wnghley, Edward
Watson, John Wilks, Mr. Watson.


wp I* ~, -
l 0 JAh ' 993
f I+^oo
kf COM
I ■ Steerage asd Thieb Class— John Bradbury (saved) ;
Mr. Lyons and family (wife and three children)—two sons aged
10 and 12; J. Trusteman and family (two children) ; Henry
Burns and child; Nathaniel Nathan, Alice Newton, Joseph
Churton, John and Catherine Drygan, John Judge (saved) ;
Maurice Boyle, James Dean (saved) ; Wright Lockwood, Jos.
Moss, Mr. Faulkener and child; Robert Jeffrey, P. De La
Landa, David Thompson, Mrs. Kennedy and family (two chil-
dren) ; Thomas Willis, J. Wickett and party; C. Jackeman,
Messrs. Jones and Eice, C. Kisterman, Messrs. Culina, Sturt,
and Lyon; Charles Conw’ay, Mr. Kirkbride and two sons; Mr.
Kennedy and family (wife and three children); William Banks,
David Thomas, C. R- Ross, W. S. Denis (saved); J. M‘Cappin
(saved); T. Taylor, Robert Hagarth, Henry Enghans, William
and John Row, Messrs. Tripit and Lowe, William Makepiece,
Thomas Fawcett, William Bowden (saved); James King, Denis
Collins, William and T. Murray, John Buchanan, Coll. M'Phuil
(saved); Jos. Robinson, Alexander Pottinger, E. Oliver and
party; P. Hogarth and family (one child); William Ford, C.
Shanahan, David Bell, Mm. Wilson, George Smith, Michael
Frawley, Messrs. Derose and Kenny, John Famby, R. Laystaff,
Frank Webber, Geo. Watson, Mr. Holland and family (three
children); Isaac Stephenson, Mrs. Athey and child, T. Newton,
Agett Richards, Jas. Stanard (saved); Edmister and Ellis,
Mr. Terril, Jessie Thomden, Baptiste Philippine, Bates and
Rosely, James Johnston, James Pardy, Jos. Spyaglio, George
Chesney, Thos. Byrne, John Grice, Matthew Scott, Houghton
and Thomson, T. Wood, Thomson and Milliken, Noah Lyons,
Win. Green, Robert Tuck, Joseph Gibson, John Wotherspoon,
John Lynch, Chas. Anderson, P. Thompson, B. Fowler, H.
Ivey, L. Porut, M. Kavanagh, Antonio Alhergath, Drifllonand
Rolla, Morelli and Cavagna, John and P. Martin, George Leitu,
Henry Lawton, George Taylor, Samuel Grenfell (saved) ; E.
Allen, John Anderson, S. Dalton. William Storey, W. Crowley,
Mrs. Ross and family (two children, one an infant) ; D. Travers,
T. Wyatt, James Sullivan, James Turner, Mr. Carthy and family
(three children); B. Bladier, Mr. Padaritto, William Bishop,
Mrs. Willis and family (two children); John Gillespie, Thomas
Kelly, Mr. Mitchell and wife; William Fleming, John Scott,
John Muhlmann, Charles Parkinson, John Parkinson (or Ran-
son) ; James Pamplin, Miss Davidson, Henry Sims, John
Manion, Samuel Mosely Wade, Nicolai Le Page, Mrs. M‘Leod
and family (two children); William Tany, John Ingles,
Richard Davis, Joseph Potts, Frank Hoyland, E. Wiilray,
Miss Susannah Morton, John Mason, T. Bakewell, James
Black, Beratti Yingenga,




rpHE TENDERNESS OE JESUS. By
J_ Rev. J. W. Richardson. Second Thousand.
18mo, 6d.
Fourth Edition, in small Bvo, cloth elegant, Bs. 6d,
I)ROCRASTINATION; or, the YICAR’S
1 DAUGHTER.
WEDDING PRESENT.
Twenty-third Thousand, cloth, Is. 6d., or in white
silk, 2s. 6d.,
COUNSELS TO A NEWLY-WEDDED
\J PAIR ; or, Friendly Suggestions to Husbands
and Wives ; a Companion to the Honeymoon, and a
Remembrancer for Life. By the Rev. John Morison,
D.D.
GENERAL HAVELOCK.
Fourth Edition, in cloth elegant, gilt edges, price Is.,
HAVELOCK; the Broad Stone of Honour.
A Tribute of the Tongue and the Pen. By the
Rev. E. P. Hood.
Second Thousand, in 18mo, cloth lettered, 2s. 6d..
Memoirs of A HUNDRED EMI-
NENT SUNDAY-SCHOOL TEACHERS. With
Two Essays—lst. On the Importance of Sunday-
schools. 2nd. On the Office of Sunday-school Teach-
ing. By the Rev. Thomas Timpson.
Eighth Thousand, 18mo, sewed. Is. ; cloth, Is. 6d.
rpHE YOUTH’S KEY TO THE BIBLE.
JL Including the Evidences and History of the
Sacred Books, and a Dictionary of every important
Word in the Old and New Testaments. Adapted for
the Use of Families and Schools, and Bible Classes.
By the Rev. Thomas Timpson.
LONDON : JOHN SNOW, PATERNOSTER ROW.
