

THE TASMANIAN
ABORIGINES.
BY
JAMES BACKHOUSE WALKER, F.R.G.S.
Gasman ta:
JOHN VAIL. GOVERNMENT PRINTER. HOBART.
1 9 0 0.




THE TASMANIAN ABORIGINES.
BY
JAMBS BACKHOUSE WALKER, F.R.G.S.
To anthropologists the aborigines of Tasmania pre-
sented an exceedingly interesting object of study. Pro-
fessor Tylor had remarked that in the tribes of Tasmania,
only just extinct, we had men whose condition had
changed but little since the early Stone Age, and whose
life gave us some idea of the earliest prehistoric tribes of
the old world, the Drift and Cave men of Europe. It
is therefore much to be regretted that so little informa-
tion remains respecting the Tasmanians in their wild
state. The early voyagers, especially the French, did
their best with the opportunities they had in casual
meeting with the aborigines, and have left us exceedingly
interesting and valuable accounts of their observations.
But their visits were too short and their acquaintance
with the natives too superficial to allow them to gain
any intimate knowledge of native customs, or ways of
life and thought. They could at most note down a few
noticeable external characteristics.
During the early years of the Colony, when the blacks
were, on the whole, friendly, no one thought it worth
while to take the trouble of studying their ways, or of
making any attempt to investigate their tribal customs.
If they had been as picturesque as the Red Indian or
the Maori, we should probably have known a great deal
more about them. But the scientific study of anthropo-
logy had not then begun, and the blacks were so low in
the scale of civilization that they were deemed unworthy
of attention. For no one then recognised that it was
the very fact of their being at the bottom of the scale
that would have made a thorough knowledge of their
ideas of such interest and importance.


Even after tlie aborigines were imprisoned on Flinders,
when such opportunities lay close to the hand of Dr.
Milligan and others, it is sad to reflect how little was
done. A vocabulary by Milligan, a paper by Davies,
and some observations collected by Backhouse and others,
are almost the sum total.
G. A. Robinson was probably the only man who
thoroughly understood the aborigines. He could have
supplied valuable information as to their tribal usages
and ways of thinking, yet, so far as I know, he has not
left behind him even the briefest account of the people
for whom he ran such risks, though there are still pre-
served in the Chief Secretary’s office very voluminous
reports of his expeditions. Robinson told my father
many years ago that he had a large quantity of MS.
respecting the aborigines, which he intended to publish.
I have in my possession a letter dated from Prahran,
Widcombe Hill, Bath, England, March 19, 1864, written
by Robinson to the late Mr. Witcomb, in which he
says : —“ lam now arranging mv papers (the vocab-
ulary included) for publication.” The papers were
never published. Robinson died at Bath, somewhere
before 1870, I think; and there is, I suppose, not the
least hope of recovering a MS., which would be highly
interesting.
The information which has been preserved respecting
our native tribes is scattered through scores of books
and articles, including casual references in voyages,
histories, public documents, and transactions of scientific
societies. Many of these works are scarce, some of them
almost impossible to obtain. The time and labour re-
quired to explore these various sources would be greater
than any one but an enthusiast could afford. It is true
that West has given an excellent condensed account of
the natives in his “ History of Tasmania,” but it is im-
perfect, and he cites no authorities. Mr. Bonwick’s two
books “The Last of the Tasmanians” and “The Daily
life of the Tasmanians,” deserve more than a passing
mention. In these two works the author has collected a
great mass of information respecting the history and
customs of the aborigines. Every one must recognise
the immense service he has done in preserving so much
that would otherwise have been irretrievably lost. But


excellent and valuable as is the “Daily Life as a popu-
lar and readable account of our native tribes in their
original state, it cites no authorites, and does not pretend
to strict scientific precision. Brough Smyth’s account
is more critical, but it is meagre. - ,
When, therefore, in 1890, Mr. H. Ling Roth published
his work, “ The Aborigines of Tasmania,” he did no
inconsiderable service to anthropology. Mr. Roth
devoted infinite pains to ransacking in every likely corner,
so as to gather together every scrap of first-hand mfoi-
mation, no matter how fragmentary, about the aborigines.
At the end of his book he gives a list of some 114 works,
from which he has made extracts. These extracts he
has carefully digested and arranged according to subject,
with references to the original authorities, in all cases.
The result is that the student has before him, in a care-
fully systematised form, everything that is known about
the Tasmanian Tribes, and one s first feeling is one of
surprise that so much information could have been got
together. The first edition was rapidly exhausted,
and soon commanded a greatly enhanced price.
For the last nine years Mr. Roth has been engaged
in making farther inquiries and searches, and has
during that time been able to amass a consideiable
amount of new matter, and to correct a number of defects
in the book. He has now issued a new edition, hand-
somely illustrated, and in it we have at last a complete
scientific account of our native tribes derived from the
original first-hand sources. The work is faithfully and
conscientiously done, and the book is in every respect an
admirable one. It throws a new light on the aboiigines
and adds largely to our knowledge of them, enabling us
to fix more accurately than has hitherto been possible,
their place in the scale of humanity.
Mr. Roth’s method of bringing together into a
focus all the various statements with respect to any one
subject is of great value, since it enables us to . weigh
these statements against each other, and, in so doing, to
reject not a little which is either plainly erroneous or not
supported by adequate evidence. This process ox
elimination has an interesting result. It tends to
strengthen our idea of the extraordinarily low state of
development which our Tasmanian natives had leached.


We find that in popular accounts they have been credited
with a skill and knowledge in various matters, which it
is now well-nigh certain they derived from contact with
other races, and of which, in their original condition,
they were ignorant. Some instances may be given of
imported arts which Bonwick, West, and others, even
including such a cautious writer as Brough Smyth, have
accepted as originally known to the Tasmanians. I may
mention the reputed manufacture of ground stone imple-
ments, the use of handled implements, of the womera or
throwing-stick, and of bone-pointed or jagged spears,
the making of different patterns of baskets, the alleged
use of the firedrill, and the drawings attributed to them.
In all these matters the evidence collated by Mr. Both
goes to show that any knowledge they may have had of
these things was acquired after they bad come into con-
tact with Australians or Europeans.
Several of these errors in attributing to the Tasmanians
implements which they did not know in their native state
have arisen from the carelessness or ignorance of
observers, some of whom might have been expected to
know better, notably G. A. Bobinson and Dr. Milligan.
Groun-d Stone Implements. —This is a typical instance,
and will suffice to cover the whole ground of implements
distinctively Australian which have been attributed to
1 asmanians. In Dr. Barnard Davis’s collection are three
ground stone implements labelled “Tasmania. (G. A.
Bobinson). ’ They w r ere presented by Bobinson to Mil-
ligan, and by Milligan to Dr. Davis. These are pre-
cisely of the kind used by the Australian blacks, and Dr.
dylor has shown conclusively, in a paper read before
the British Association, that they were made either by
Australians, or by Tasmanians who had learnt the craft
from them. The bringing over about 1819 of the Syd-
ney black “ Mosquito” (who acted such a mischievous
part in leading our natives in their attacks on the settlers),
and also the introduction of a “ tame mob ” of Sydney
blacks in 1822, sufficiently account, says Dr. Tylor, for
this influence from the mainland. The same influence
accounts for handled stone implements, bone-pointed and
jagged spears, womera, and various other Australian
weapons which have been attributed to the Tasmanians.
It may be taken as conclusively proved that the


Tasmanians originally knew nothing of ground stone
implements belonging to the Neolithic Australians. As
Tylor remarks : —“ The Tasmanians were undoubtedly
at a low palaeolithic stage, inferior to that of the Drift
and Cave men of Europe.”-
Baskets.— In his first edition Mr. Roth figures three
patterns of baskets as made by the Tasmanians. One of
these, presented by Dr. Milligan to the British Museum,
is of the ordinary pattern of very simple construction, of
which there are several examples in our Museum, and
which are undoubtedly Tasmanian. The other two were
presented by G. A. Robinson to Dr. Davis. They are
of different and more complicated patterns, and of forms
very common in Australia. Whereupon Mr. Roth
remarks that these baskets are doubtless Australian :
that Robinson was for some time protector of the abori-
gines in Victoria, and was so unobservant that he did not
distinguish between baskets of Tasmanian and Victorian
workmanship.
Mode of Obtaining Fire. —A more interesting question,
and one which must be considered as still open, is— How
did the Tasmanians obtain fire P The early voyagers,
seeing rough stone implements resembling flint at the
camping places, jumped to the conclusion that the natives
obtained fire by percussion of flints. This supposed
method may be dismissed from consideration, and the
question resolves itself into an inquiry as to how they
obtained fire by the usual savage method of the friction of
two pieces of wood. Mr. Roth, in his first edition, figures
afiredrili (p. xi.) from a specimen labelled as Tasmanian,
and presented by Dr. Milligan to Dr. Davis. In the
second edition he figures two firedrills, viz., the one above-
mentioned and another presented by G. A. Robinson to
Sir John Lubbock. Now, R. H. Davis, who wrote a
valuable paper on the Blacks, whom he knew after their
captivity on Flinders, states that he was informed that
they used a drill for obtaining fire. The drill method,
in which a drill is rapidly revolved betAveen the hands,
is in use among some Australian tribes, as it is or was
among the South African Bushman tribes, but there is
no direct evidence that it was knoAvn to the Tasmanians.
There is evidence, however, derived from the statements
of early settlers, that our blacks obtained fire by the


friction of a stick rubbed rapidly up and down a groove
in another piece of wood, in the fashion commonly prac-
tised in Polynesia. Mr. Roth discusses the subject in an
appendix, and inclines to the opinion that probably the
groove method was practised by the Tasmanians, and
that if the drill method was ever employed by them at
all, it was learnt from the Australians.
Drawings. —Peron, in the French expedition of 1802,
saw at Maria Island pieces of bark with marks like the
gashes which the blacks made on their bodiQS. Dr.
Ross says that at the Ouse he saw squares and circles
cut on bark, which he, with some probability, attributed
to the blacks. Robinson told Bon wick that on the W est
Coast, in 1831, he saw drawings of men and women and
curious hieroglyphics. West speaks of drawings on bark
representing a bullock team and cart, made by natives
in the North-West. This is apparently copied from
Bunce, who states that one of the. V.D.L. Co.’s servants
reported having seen such a drawing on a bark hut or
shelter of the natives. C alder, who is a .most reliable
authority for anything which he says he himself saw, in
his account of a journey between Lake St. Clair and Mac-
quarie Harbour, in November, 1840, states that on
Painter’s Plain, near the Surprise River, he found two
native huts recently abandoned, on the bark of which
were some extraordinary drawings in charcoal of men,
kangaroo, dogs, and other figures. Also a battle-piece
—a native fight. (J.A.1., p. 21.) At first sight this
seems conclusive evidence, but, on turning back to the
previous day, we learn that he had then found several
articles which indicated that a runaway party of con-
victs from Macquarie Harbour had passed that way.
In any case these drawings were found 40 years after
the advent of Europeans. That the aborigines in their
wild state had any skill in drawing seems therefore to
hang on a very slender thread of evidence.
v Canoes.— The native canoes were formed of bundles of
bark lashed together with grass or vegetable fibre.
Several models of such canoes are preserved in our
Museum. It is generally stated in popular accounts (and
is quoted by Brough Smyth) that they had also catama-
rans or rafts, formed of logs 30 feet long, and fastened
by cross-pieces tied with bark. The only authority for


this statement is Jeffreys, who says that, with the aid of
paddles, they made these rafts skim over the water with
amazing rapidity. No one else mentions either paddles
or rafts.
Fish. —Another point somewhat doubtful is whether
the blacks ever ate scaled fish. It is known, of course,
that shell-fish formed a considerable portion of their
food at some seasons, and that they had no hooks or nets,
or other method of catching fish, except spearing them.
Lloyd says that they used to spear stingrays for sport.
Cook (i. 100) relates that when fish, raw or cooked, was
offered to them, they rejected it. No remains of fish
have been found about their camps or in their shell
heaps. It seems more than probable that they never
ate fish, but any information on the point would be
valuable.
Clothing. —The chapter on aboriginal clothing is very
like the celebrated chapter on snakes in Iceland. The
early voyagers describe the aborigines as absolutely un-
clothed. It is true that some of the women carried a
kangaroo-skin slung across their backs, but Cook (i. 101)
thought that this was not for clothing, but simply as a
means of carrying an infant more conveniently. After
intercourse with Europeans they used, at times, to wear
skins as a covering. It is certainly strange that in a
climate at times so severe as that of Tasmania, with a
plentiful supply of skins at hand, they had not learnt to
use them as a protection from the weather. That they
never learnt to sew skins together for clothing is one of
the strongest proofs of their low intelligence, and that they
were on a lower plane than the paleolithic Drift and
Cave men of Europe, who had bone needles. _ Yet,
though apparently so absolutely wanting in originative
or inventive faculty, they showed in their captivity no
want of intelligence or capacity to acquire such com-
paratively difficult accomplishments as reading and
writing.
Implements. —There is probably still something to be
learned respecting the chipped stone implements of the
aborigines. It has usually been assumed that they were
of one general form, but I understand that Mr. J. P.
Moir, of the Shot Tower, has a, number of concave
scrapers, and also of gravers, to which he gives the


descriptive name of “duck bills.” As these are
apparently of forms hitherto unrecognised, it would
be interesting to have them examined. A few
weeks since I accompanied Mr. R. M. Johnston and
Mr. Morton on their examination of a native quarry,
which was discovered by Mr. Harold Bisdee on the
Hutton-park estate, near Melton Mowbray. W e found
about an acre of ground covered with chippings of chert,
showing that it must have been for a very long period a
place resorted to by the aborigines for procuring their
stone iriiplements. An interesting circumstance was that
we found a number of rounded nodules of greenstone
(mostly broken) which had evidently been used by the
natives for splitting off the flakes of chert, that were
afterwards, by careful chipping, shaped into stone axes.
That the natives had stone implements other than those
commonly recognised as such, appears to be highly pro-
bable. Mr. Norton Smith has described to me large
stones, discovered by him on the North-West Coast,
which, in his opinion, bore evidence of human handiwork,
but for what purpose they were shaped was doubtful.
On our trip to Hutton-park Mr. Bisdee showed us an
interesting relic of the aborigines still standing near
Tedworth, Constitution Hill. This is a dead tree -which
still bears the marks of the notches which the black
women were accustomed to make to assist them in
climbing for opossums. I believe Mr. Morton intends
to have this tree removed to the Museum.
Origin. —The question of the origin of the Tasmanians
is still an open one. They appeared to belong to the
most primeval races of mankind, and to be derived from
the same original stock as the Papuans and Melanesians.
Indeed, it has been suggested that from this primitive
stock (perhaps resembling the Mincopis of the Andaman
Islands), both the Melanesians on the one hand and the
African negroes on the other, took their origin. It is
surmised that they reached Tasmania by way of Aus-
tralia, and that this paheolithic, woolly-haired negritic
stock once peopled the whole Australian Continent,
until dispossessed, and probably annihilated, by the
present neolithic Australians, characterised by their
straight hair and the possession of ground stone imple-
ments, the boomerang, throwing-stick, and shield. But


on this subject my friend, Mr. R. M. Johnston, may
probably have something to say.
Languages. —In concluding these notes, I may mention
that .an interesting feature in Mr. Ling Roth’s book is
a full vocabulary of native words, reduced to a scientific
method of spelling, in place of the anomalous and absurd
fashion of spelling at present in vogue. It is to be hoped
that Mr. Roth’s method will secure acceptance. I com-
mend it to the notice of the Lands Office.
Tribal Map. — The book also contains a map, in which
the native names of places are shown in red, and an
attempt has been made to indicate the main tribal divi-
sions. This is, of course, to a certain extent, conjectural,
but it is useful.
The main object I have had in view in writing these
Notes is to get the members of the section to interest
themselves in obtaining from old settlers and others
information respecting the points referred to. That
such an attempt is not hopeless, even at the present
time, I have reason to know. I recently obtained from
two old settlers some most interesting particulars respect-
ing the native method of obtaining fire, which go a long
way towards solving the question, and it is quite possible
that further inquiry in different parts of the Island would
elicit more information. I should like to see the section
form a collection of all the portraits of the Aborigines
which are in existence. Such a collection would be
valuable and interesting, more especially in years to
come.






