

THE PYMS AT
YARRAMBEAT
ROSALIND MILLER




4




The Pyms
at Yarrambeat






The two horses, Nelson and Duke, took the load easily, and plodded
on, surefooted and steady, to \ arrambeat


The Pyms
at Yarrambeat
‘Rosalind Miller
Illustrations and wrapper
by Kiddell Monroe
HUTCHINSON & CO. (Publishers) LTD.
PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON; AND MELBOURNE


MADE AND PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN,
AT GAINSBOROUGH PRESS, ST. ALBANS.
BY FISHER. KNIGHT AND CO., LTD


3 I jy l
PAGE
9
24
. 38
56
75
92
107
. 119
. 131
f iOo
CONTENTS
CHAPTER
I. A PEPPERY CUSTOMER ... 9
11. MR. PYM HAS NEWS ... 24
111. ON THE STOCK-ROUTE . . .38
IV. YARRAMBEAT HOMESTEAD . . 56
V. BAD NEWS . . . -75
VI. AN UNFORTUNATE GIFT . . 92
VII. ABEL HARDIMAN . . . . lOJ
VIII. ANOTHER MISHAP . . . 119
IX. SOME SOUND ADVICE . . 1 3 1
X. CAMELS AND CATTLE-STEALERS . 142
XI. A WOMAN PIONEER . . 1 5 7
XII. TRAVELLING TO BUNG-BUNG . 170
XIII. COUNT DU BOIS . . . 18 3
XIV, A CHANGE OF PLAN . . .201
XV. BLACK CHARLIE . . . . 214
XVI. CHIEF OF THE BURRAWONGS . 226
XVII, WILFRED SOLVES A PUZZLE . , 237
XVIII. FRIENDS AT LAST . . . 250




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
The two horses, Nelson and Duke, took the load
easily, and plodded on, surefooted and steady,
to Yarrambeat .... Frontispiece
Timidly, she knocked at Mrs. Stevens’s door . 96
The bush around them seemed suddenly to have
become alive with brandished spears . . 224




THE PYMS AT YARRAMBEAT
CHAPTER I
A PEPPERY CUSTOMER
Mrs. Taggerty of Taggerty’s Store was having a
busy afternoon. Customers had come into the shop
in a steady stream ever since lunch-time.
“It certainly doesn’t do to complain too soon,”
she said to herself as she bustled cheerfully about.
“Only this morning there I was saying things were so
quiet, it was getting just like old times before the
colony struck gold. And now here lam so busy that
I hardly know which way to turn. Bless me, and I
do believe here come another two !”
The new arrivals, much to her relief, seemed in no
hurry. Both were boys. One tall, slim, and about
fifteen. The other a fat, good-natured youth some
two years younger. Mrs. Taggerty recognized the
fat boy at once. He was Wilfred, son of Major
Jellibrand who was noted for explorations in Queens-
land. He had been into her store twice before, but
on both occasions had come with Mrs. Taggerty’s
very good customers, Mrs. Pym and her daughter
Margery. Taking another look at the elder lad, Mrs.
now placed him too. Of course, yes, he
would be Miss Margery’s brother David. In his grey


eyes lurked the same half-hidden twinkle ; he had
the sanre firm, obstinate chin and high cheekbones.
Although his sister and mother had been residing m
Melbourne for a year, it was only a month since David
had come from the Ballarat goldfields with his father
and uncle. It was said that the party had made a tidy
fortune from a claim struck by chance at Beehive Hill.
Mrs. Taggerty thought the boys might have heard
something of her own husband who was still trying
out his luck at the diggings without success. As the
good lady measured out rashers of bacon, weighed
out nails and parcelled up other supplies for waiting
customers, she sighed wistfully. It was nearly a
year now since Mr. Taggerty had trekked ofl to the
diggings, leaving her and his old father to manage
the store as best they could.
“1854 is going to be a lucky year for me. Keep
going somehow, Emma,” he had assured her. “Keep
going, then for the rest of your life you may never
have to do a tap of work again.”
But, so far, he had hardly been able to dig out
enough gold to pay his food bills. She sniffed hard,
and with an effort brought her thoughts back to her
present task. ,
“And —er —let me see —what else was it ? she
politely asked the customer she now was serving.
He was a gaunt, stern-faced fellow with a fierce
expression and long sandy moustaches. She saw at
once he had noticed she had been day-dreaming, and


that her absent-mindedness was irritating him con-
siderably.
“A pound of pepper was what I said,” the man
answered shortly. “And I asked, too, if I could see
the tin plates you have.”
“A pound of pepper ? Why, sir, pepper is a fair
price these days. It’s an ounce you mean, surely.”
“I means nothin’ o’ the sort. I thinks before
speakin’. When I says a pound, I means it.”
Mrs. Taggerty flushed.
“Yes, very well, sir. But it’s uncommon for folks
to ask for such a quantity with pepper so expensive.”
She hesitated, not knowing whether it would be wise
or not to say he did not look exactly prosperous.
Then, deciding the less said the better, and having
recalled that the pepper was stored on the top shelf,
she glanced round for the ladder. She found Wilfred
perched comfortably on the second rung.
Seeing she wished to use the ladder, the fat lad
jumped up and politely asked if he could carry it
over for her. W r ith a grateful smile, Mrs. Taggerty
explained she wished to fetch down the pepper bin
from the top shelf.
“Oh, it is way up there ? Allow me, Mrs. Tag-
gerty, to get it for you. You are busy as it is.”
“Indeed, thank you kindly. You’ll find it in the
green bin by the beeswax, Master Wilfred. For old
bones like mine, the climb up that ladder does take
a bit of doing.”


Like most other fittings at the store, the ladder
was old, and needed a carpenter’s attention. It
shook precariously as the fat boy mounted from rung
to rung. He had misjudged the distance when
setting it against the shelves, and found it was farther
from the green bin than he had anticipated.
The fun-loving twinkle flashed up in David’s grey
eyes.
“Better come down, Jellybeans. You 11 fall, he
warned with a chuckle.
“Don’t worry. I’ll manage,” muttered the over-
confident Wilfred. But, even as he spoke, there was
a disastrous wobble, he clutched out to steady him-
self, and to his horror, the bin overbalanced with a
crash. A cloud of brown pepper rained down on the
impatient customer standing below. Over his hair,
eyebrows, and sandy moustache it streamed. It
went down his collar, over his coat.
Turning quickly, he strode forward to give the
clumsy Wilfred a piece of his mind. But directly
he opened his mouth, the pepper, as is its habit,
set up a curious tickling in the back of his throat and
nostrils. His angry words were muffled in a thun
derous sneeze, and before he had time to tug his red
handkerchief from his breeches pocket, another
followed it. As if in sympathy, Mrs, Taggerty joined
in with a series of quicker, shriller sneezes, and
Wilfred had barely time to clamber from the ladder
before he, too, was adding his contributions to the


uproar. David alone escaped. Shaking with laugh-
ter, he had thought it wiser to retire behind a conve-
nient pile of boxes until it was safe to emerge.
“Please, sir—l am extremely sorry. It was an
accident,” apologized Wilfred between sneezes.
‘ And —atishoo—so you should be, you young
puppy. Ought to be horse-whipped,” was the ill-
tempered rejoinder.
“You can cancel that order for pepper, ma’am.
I’ve got quite enough o’ it for one day. Atishoo !
The sooner I’m out o’ this bear-garden the better.”
Snatching up his cabbage-tree hat, he stumbled to
the door, not even seeing the astonished girl who
was coming into the store from the road and had to
spring nimbly back in order to avoid an awkward
collision.
“David. That poor man—whatever is wrong with
him,” gasped the new-comer. The elder lad, con-
sidering at last it was safe to emerge from his place
of refuge, joined her at the door. They both stood
on the threshold watching the unlucky stranger
climb into his dray, and send the horse clattering
off down the uneven road.
“What was wrong with him ! Oh, help—it was
too funny for words,” weakly gasped the boy. He
collapsed on a soap-box, and began shaking with
renewed laughter.
With her crinoline skirts held high to avoid the
dust, his sister, Miss Margery Pym, stepped into the


store to survey the scene. Like her brother, she had
grown taller, and the heat of three Australian summers
had added another dusting of freckles to her cheeks
and tilting nose. But her brown curls still refused
to remain prim and demure under her poke bonnet.
Her eyes still reflected the reckless twinkle that Mrs.
Taggerty had recognized in David’s, and her impul-
sive whirlwind entrance still would have evoked a
stern reproof from her dignity-loving English grand-
mama. .
“Wilfred, what is the matter. You re crying, but
surely it isn’t bad news. David wouldn’t be laughing
like that.” . ,
“Oh, n-n-not bad news. Just p-p-pepper . Atishoo.
Oh, there I go again !” wheezed Wilfred.
“Pepper !”
The little girl retreated a step. With head slight y
to one side, she looked from one to the other. First
at the still shaking but otherwise normal-looking
David. Then at Wilfred, whose fat face was brilliant
red, and eyes streaming. Then on past him to a very
flustered, flushed Mrs. Taggerty. With her hand-
kerchief to her mouth, she was still trying to stifle
back her short, shrill series of sneezes. From that
lady, Margery’s gaze travelled on to the upturned tin,
and the trails of brown powder lying like a thick dust
over the floor.
A dimple appeared, and the gay twinkle in her eyes
deepened.


“More of your work, Jellybeans ?”
By this time, the two lads were recovered enough
to furnish a complete explanation.
“No—not altogether my work. It was old Cab-
bage-tree’s own fault. Who might he be, Mrs.
Taggerty ?”
“That I couldn’t say. He has never called here
before. After these doings it do not be likely he shall
do so again.”
“A very ill-tempered person. You see, Margery,
Mrs. Taggerty had a sudden rush of customers.
There were six people here when we came into the
store. Mr. Cabbage-tree had to wait his turn. That
did not improve his temper. He was so ill-mannered
when Mrs. Taggerty spoke to him, I decided to give
him a lesson in manners. He asked for pepper. As
it was on the top shelf, I offered to climb up and get
it. The ladder was rickety.”
“Don’t blame the ladder. It was your weight,
Jellybeans,” interposed David.
Wilfred ignored that,
“The ladder was rickety. Somehow I dropped the
bin, and all the pepper came down on old Cabbage-
tree. Then we all had a sneezing party. By the
time I had my eyes open again, he had stalked out
of the shop.”
Margery smiled.
Let us hope it has given him a lesson in manners.”
Mrs. Taggerty looked distressed.


“Even so, he has the best part of the bargain. I
am left without my supply of pepper. The tin was
just out by the Sophia Kate. She came into port only
last week.”
With her line lawn kerchief held cautiously before
her nose, Margery peered at the overturned tin.
“Oh, no, Mrs. Taggerty, plenty of pepper is still
left here.”
“You must allow me to pay for the amount I spilt
—it was my clumsiness,” Wilfred added.
At first the storekeeper demurred, but the others
insisted.
“And after all,” Margery shyly added, “Luck has
been rather on our side this last year. We can afford
to make up the loss better than you can.
“I agree,” seconded David. Suddenly he broke off
and stared at his sister curiously.
“But one moment, Margery. I think you also
owe us an explanation. I thought you said you
intended to spend the afternoon at home, working at
your patchwork quilt. What made you come down
to the store ?”
“Thank you for the reminder. The fuss about the
pepper put everything right out of my mind.”
“Put what out of your mind ? Did you hear that
Miss Jemima Stevens was calling in for afternoon
tea, and come this drive to escape her ?”
Margery laughed softly.
“No —something far more pleasant. At least I


hope so. It’s a letter for Wilfred. I’ve got it here.”
Her hand slipped into a roomy pocket set deep in her
flowered crinoline skirt.
“A letter for Jellybeans. That’s nothing to be
excited about. Probably a note from the saddler
who is making the new saddle for Ajax.” Ajax was
Wilfred’s new horse.
Margery held the letter out.
“No—it’s not from the saddler. Look at the
stamp.”
Wilfred gave a sudden gasp, and snatched the
letter from her. The stamps used in Melbourne at
the time showed half-length pictures of Queen Vic-
toria. This stamp showed an entirely different por-
trait of the Queen, It was from New South Wales.
As the others watched in silence, he slit the thick
envelope with his penknife, and hastily unfolded the
paper. The note was a short one. He sat down
heavily on a bag of onions, quickly read the letter,
then passed it over to his two companions.
“It is very good news. It is about my father. He
is on his way back to Melbourne.”
Wilfred’s father, Major Jellibrand, was a noted
explorer who had spent the past two years dis-
covering and mapping out the plains and ranges of
Queensland and Northern Australia. He had left
his son in Mrs. Pym’s charge before going on the
trip, and the good-natured fat boy had been with the
Pyms throughout the eventful months of their
B 1 7


journey to the Ballarat gold diggings, subsequent
misfortunes, then sudden change of luck. In fact,
it was Wilfred who, when lost in the bush, had by
sheer accident been responsible for the discovery of
the rich Beehive Hill goldfield through which the
Pyms had become very well-off people. A generous
section of the gold yields had been set aside in Wilfred
Jellibrand’s name. Letters telling this news had
been sent to Sydney in the hope that they eventually
would reach Wilfred’s father. They had been waiting
in Sydney for him for months. He received them
immediately he returned from his explorations. The
two Pyms hastily scanned the thin, spider-like
writing of his reply.
My dear Wilfred ,
Am amazed to hear of miraculous luck bestowed
on the Pym family and yourself on the goldfields. I
intend returning to Melbourne by the Hortense, sailing
March Jth. I shall look forward to meeting you on the
wharf after the ship weighs anchor. Kind regards to
the Pym family.
Tour affectionate father ,
Henry Jellibrand.
Margery handed the letter back with a smile.
“Didn’t I tell you I thought it would be good news.
But all the same,” she added, sobering suddenly, “I
hope this does not mean that we soon shall be saying


good-bye to you, Wilfred. You always said that
when your Papa came back, you thought he would
take you across to England and get you an appoint-
ment as trainee in the Queen’s Navy. Oh, dear, I
hope this does not mean you will leave Melbourne
straight away.”
David jumped up, and began restlessly pacing the
floor.
“Trust a girl to say something like that. People
have got to have partings sooner or later. We can’t
all stay here in the colony of Melbourne all our lives
just because we are good friends. If I had the
chance to get into the navy, I’d jump at it. Yes,
even if it meant leaving all of you this very
day.”
Margery stared at her brother in dismay.
“Oh, David—surely you won’t want to go with
them. What about your bridge-building plans ?”
Her brother made a face.
“And how much bridge-building have I done
lately ? Not a minute of it, and neither has anyone
else. Everyone here is too busy looking for gold to
worry about building bridges. Wilfred and I haven’t
had a thing to do ever since we came down from
Beehive Hill. Plans have got to be made sooner or
later.”
“Anyway, I still hope Major Jellibrand won’t take
Wilfred away directly he reaches here,” asserted
Margery bravely. “I’ll speak to him myself.”


But Wilfred was not listening. He was working
out mental arithmetic.
“If it’s March 4th now,” he said slowly . . . “and
Papa’s ship leaves on March 7th .. . why, he’ll be
here within a fortnight. Oh, hurray!” Catching
hold of Margery and David’s hands he danced his
two friends around from sheer joy.
“Here, stop that,” cried David in mock alarm.
“We don’t want to be knocking more things down,”
“Indeed no,” interposed a cheerful voice. It was
Mrs. Taggerty. Shortly after they had insisted on
paying for the spilt pepper, she had disappeared into
the room behind the store, and now was emerging
with four steaming cups of tea, and a plateful of tasty
rock-buns.
“Mrs. Taggerty, after this we shall recommend
your store to all our friends, and never patronize any
other shop,” declared Wilfred, as some minutes later
he gravely helped himself to a third rock-bun,
“Since you insist on paying top price for the
pepper, and I would never have sold that much in a
month of Sundays, I call it the least I could do,’ was
the smiling reply.
“It’s a queer thing,” remarked Wilfred thought-
fully, “but busy people always seem able to do still
more things when they w r ant to. But the people who
never do a day’s tap like Mrs. Stevens, always make
out that they are overworked and can’t do a thing
you ask them.”


Mrs. Taggerty briskly gathered up the dishes.
“They can’t get much pleasure from life, that’s all
I can say. Now off you young people go, and tell the
good news to Mrs. Pym. You’ve got the horse and
trap outside, I presume ?”
“We came in that—but how did you get here,
Marj ? Surely you didn’t walk ?”
Miss Margery shook out her brown curls
“No. I rode behind the postman who brings the
letters. And as it happens,” she added mischievously,
“I did see Jemima and Mrs. Stevens. They passed
me in their new carriage. You should have seen
how they stared when they saw me riding behind the
postman.”
But David was re-reading Major Jellibrand’s
letter.
“Your father doesn’t say very much. I wonder if
he really has definite plans for you, Jellybeans ?”
Wilfred looked thoughtful.
“Ever since I was so high”—and his hand measured
twenty-four inches from the ground—“ Papa has
always said he intended to make a sailor of me. He
has always wanted me to get my training on a cadet
ship in the navy.”
“But in those days he never dreamt that you would
be sharing the fortunes from a gold claim like Beehive
Hill.”
“Maybe not. But nevertheless, one can’t just go
on making money. Gold is only good because it


helps you get other things. Mr. Pym said my share
is enough to fit me for any career I want. I think I
still want to go to sea.”
“One day you may even be able to buy merchant
ships of your own. Go in for the latest style of sailing
clippers, ones that would win the wool race from
Melbourne to London,” suggested David. The boys
were on one of their favourite topics now. They were
likely to continue for hours.
“Never mind talking about ships. You can do
that when we get back home,” Margery interrupted
impatiently. “Let us go back so we can tell the news
to Papa and Mama.”
“I suppose that would be a good idea. Anyway,
here come more customers, it’s time we were moving
on,” replied her brother. “Good-bye, Mrs. Taggerty.
I hope we won’t cause such a disturbance next time
we come to buy things from your store.”
“Why, a good laugh like that is medicine to an old
soul like me. Come again soon as you like. I only
wish I knew the name of that old crosspatch.”
“Probably some prospector off to the diggings.
There are thousands of them around now.”
“I’d like to know what a man making for the
diggings wanted a pound of pepper for. But good-
bye, and I hope your Pa arrives safely, Master
Jellibrand.”
With a cheery good-bye, they trooped out across
the store verandah and over to the horse and trap.


On the way Margery stooped and picked up what she
thought was a silver coin.
“Look, David. What sort of a coin is this ?”
“It is not a coin at all. It is a medal. It belonged
to the gentleman in the cabbage-tree hat. I noticed
it on his watch-chain.”
“Not much use taking it back to that store, then,”
observed Margery. “He is not likely to visit there
again.”
She slipped the token into her pocket, reached for
her brother’s helping hand, and with her crinoline
skirts billowing in the freshening wind, climbed into
the smartly painted trap. One smart crack of the
whip, and their horse pricked up his pointed ears,
setting off at a brisk pace for the Pym’s cottage bv
Jolimont Hill.


CHAPTER 11
MR. PYM HAS NEWS
When Mrs, Pym and Margery arrived back in Mel-
bourne after their adventurous trip to the gold
diggings, they had moved into a wooden house near
the Governor’s old home in Jolimont. The previous
occupants, Jem Tucker and his wife, were at that
time just starting out for the goldfields themselves,
and were glad to hand their cottage over to respon-
sible people whom they knew would look after it.
News of the astounding luck which men had chanced
on in the little British colony south of the Equator
had now travelled the complete circle of the world.
Each week ships were sailing up the blue length of
Port Phillip bringing boatloads of new-comers eager
to try their luck in this strange land of gum-trees and
vast plains. They flooded in from all parts of the
earth. Cool-headed, calculating Scotsmen. Reckless
fellows from California and Alaska. Unsuccessful
business men from England. Chinese, excitable
hopeful Frenchmen, and carefree sailors who were
hoping for the best, but merely regarded the venture
as a brief holiday from their hard life of swarming
up riggings, and changing sails in the teeth of biting
gales.


While David, Wilfred and Uncle James Everett
continued working the Beehive Hill claim, Mrs. Pym
and Margery again settled down to life in the Mel-
bourne colony. They found that even in their brief
absence of six months the town had grown like a
mushroom. Because it was not possible to find
houses for the steady streams of new arrivals, the
rising ground south of the River Yarra Yarra now
was covered with the white tents of families forced
to take up their residence in this makeshift canvas
town. Margery always enjoyed a drive down to the
wharves to watch the colourful throngs of new
immigrants. But at first there were not many
opportunities for such outings. Mrs. Pym had suf-
fered a relapse of the wasting fever which had made
her so ill at Buninyong (it was due to tainted water
again), and for months the little girl had been kept
busy nursing her back to health.
Then one grey winter’s day a sailing ship, with the
name Edelweiss still showing in faded paint on
her shabby hull, dropped anchor by the Melbourne
Port, and Mr. Pym arrived back in the colony from
his visit to London. He had made the journey when
news was received that his Uncle Richard had died
leaving part of his estate to him. The trip had
proved a disappointment. On arriving in London he
had discovered his uncle’s estates were mortgaged
heavily, and when all expenses were paid the amount
left for himself was very little. When news of the


Victorian gold discovery reached England he had
booked a return passage at once. Thus he did not
hear about his family’s good fortune until he reached
Melbourne again. He at once went north to join his
brother-in-law and the bovs. The luck of the Pyms
• /
still held, and the claim he pegged out also yielded
rich veins of gold. Within a few months he was a
wealthy man. But when the riches of Beehive Hill
were exhausted, and Wilfred and David were sent
back to Melbourne, he felt a strong disinclination to
continue in the wild rush for still more gold. He had
not won a huge fortune from the clay and gravel of
those age-old river beds, but he had gained enough
gold to enable him to invest in a property, and make
a lasting home for his wife and family. His Cornish
friend, Pengally, already was losing his wealth as
quickly as it had been acquired, and there were many
like him. When the Beehive claim was exhausted,
James Everett made plans to try for further fortune
at Bendigo. But Mr. Pym turned his back on the
diggings.
“Luck cannot last for ever,” was his observation.
“I’ve had my full share of it.”
Returning to Melbourne, he rejoined his family at
the Jolimont house and began inspecting properties
in the vicinity of Port Phillip.
Margery and David knew their father’s plans, but
the search had now dragged on for so many months
that they had began to think he would never find a


property to satisfy him. Except for that brief period
when they all had helped on the Prahran farm when
first arriving in Melbourne, the Pyms had practically
no experience at farming. Mr. Pym, therefore, was
anxious to acquire a place which was well established.
The task was harder than he had anticipated. At
that time most of the Victorian squatters still were
leasing holdings from the Government. There were
now many complications for any new-comer wishing
to purchase from them, the Stations being most on
Crown land. The properties nearer to Melbourne
were a much better proposition, as most of them now
had been bought and paid for by the owners, and
could be transferred by direct sale. But most pioneers
who had come to the colony in the 1840’s and built
up their stations long before gold ever was sighted,
were unwilling to sell. Their flocks of sheep and
cattle were bringing good prices. The influx of
population due to the gold rush had made the demand
for primary products rise with a jump. It was not
an easy time for any new-comer to acquire a well-
established property, and Mr. Pym knew it would be
almost impossible to find men willing to work clearing
new land and building a homestead. They were all
heading for the gold diggings. He decided to wait
until a suitable opportunity came his way.
Life in Melbourne was dull for Wilfred and David
after the excitements of Beehive Hill. Both boys
had begged to be allowed to join prospecting parties


bound for fresh fields, but Mr, Pym would not con-
sent. Now Wilfred had received news of his own
father’s return, he kept speculating about his chances
of returning to England and being able to train for a
sea-captain on one of the Queen’s ships. The three
children were still discussing possibilities when their
trap turned into the St. Kilda Road, and over the new
bridge which Mr. Lennox had built across the Yarra.
“If you go, Jellybeans,” David at last observed,
“I’ve half a mind to ask Papa if I can accompany
you.”
As they mounted to the crest of the slope approach-
ing the bridge, Wilfred, the driver, pulled at the reins,
slowing Ajax down sharply. The horse was a recent
purchase, and still young enough to shy nervously
at the rickety covered wagons and tip-carts which
went clattering by.
“This is the first time, David, I’ve heard about you
wanting to be a sailor,” Wilfred remarked. “As
Margery mentioned, I thought you wanted to build
bridges.”
Secretly, David still did want to build bridges. But
in his present unsettled state of mind he could see
little hope of that ambition being realized, and to be
the captain of one of those long-nosed perfectly
balanced clippers which cut through the water at
incredible speed suddenly seemed the ideal career.
“I have to do something with my life, Jellybeans.
Of course Papa has mentioned buying a sheep-station.


But lately the scheme hasn’t been spoken of for
months. I think he must have given the plan up.
Perhaps he is going back to that old scheme of having
a warehouse.”
Margery, who till now had been fully occupied
clutching at her bonnet to save it being whirled off
by the keen wind, turned suddenly.
“Oh, no, David. I think you are wrong there.
In fact, I am sure of it.”
“Indeed, Miss Know-all, what do you know about
it ?”
“I know this.” Margery had to shout to make her
voice heard against the clitter-clat of the horses’ hoofs
and the blowing wind. “Before I came out to bring
Wilfred the letter, Papa was telling Mama he intended
to take us all a journey to see a property called
Yarrambeat.”
“What’s this ?” exclaimed both lads together.
An impish grin darted across Margery’s face.
“I didn’t like to tell you before. I thought the
shock of still more news might be bad for you.”
“I like that,” exclaimed David indignantly. “Wil-
fred, please slow Ajax down for a while. I want to
know all about this. With your old horse clattering
along so heavily I can’t hear a thing.”
“No insulting remarks about my new horse,
please,” came the indignant rejoinder. “It is only
because of his new shoes. Anyway, the noise is
mostly from the wheels of your silly cart. I can’t


stop here on the bridge. You will have to wait till
we’ve turned round into Flinders Street.”
Shrugging his shoulders, David tried to get Margery
to explain this further piece of news as they threaded
their way through the varied assortment of vehicles
and people scattered across the bridge and along to
the corner of the next two streets. A newly arrived
sailing-ship had brought a fresh batch of fortune
seekers to the colony the previous day. The town
seemed filled with them. The wind which had so
troubled Margery along St. Kilda road swooped down
on them at double strength as they crossed the river.
The little girl was kept too busy holding her bonnet
down to make further explanations.
After reaching Flinders Street, Wilfred reined his
horse up by the side of the road. While Ajax
cropped happily at a patch of grass, Margery con-
tinued her story.
“I don’t know if Papa intends to buy this property
or not. I didn’t inquire—you know how he dislikes
being questioned ?”
Her brother gave a grimace and nodded.
“But there must be some definite plan in his mind.
Just after you came in and said you were going to
take the new horse for a trial run to Taggerty’s, he
came and asked which horse you were using. I told
him. He said he was glad it was Ajax. He didn’t
want us to take his two horses out, as he would need
them for a long trip in a few days. Of course I asked


where to, and he said he intended visiting a property
called Yarrambeat, and that it was about a forty-mile
journey.”
“It sounds a jolly trip. Wonder if we’ll be allowed
to go with him ?”
Margery looked thoughtful.
“I don’t know. He didn’t mention about that,
and somehow I didn’t think it seemed the right time
to ask. But we should know to-night. I hardly
think Mama will go, though. Oh, David, Ido hate
the way that fever seems to return to her. Do you
think she will ever shake it off ?”
“It is hard to say. But about this Yarram place ?
Papa must have some idea of buying it. Otherwise
why should he make the journey ?”
“Don’t be too hopeful. He’s inspected many other
places. There’s sure to be something wrong with
this too, cautioned Wilfred. “They’re always either
too big or too small. So dry that they’re in the
drought area, or too wet underfoot, and the sheep
would get foot-rot.”
Well, now that your father is coming back from
Sydney, Wilfred, it won’t affect you one way or the
other, remarked Margery. “I do hope, all the same,
Papa does decide on this one. I am tired of being
m that poky wooden cottage. You can start Ajax
np again. There’s no more news. But please don’t
tell Papa I’ve mentioned this to you. Let him tell
you himself.”


And very shortly after their return to the Jolimont
house, Mr. Pym did tell them. When the children
reached the slip-railed gate, Margery clambered down
from the cart and was left behind to shut it. Cows
and goats had an annoying habit of wandering along
the road, and always enjoyed ambling through any
gate which happened to have been left open. But
David and Wilfred drove Ajax straight to the stables.
The stalls for Mr. Pym’s two splendid horses were
next to the coach-shed. When Wilfred had wanted
to purchase a horse for himself, Mr. Pym had agreed
only on the condition that the boys built an extra
stable for him. They had spent many weeks con-
structing it, and had built it on the far side of the
other stable. They had put the trap under cover, and
were busy putting more oats in Ajax’s very smart
feed-box, when Mr. Pym strolled across to them, and
patted the glossy damp neck of the black horse.
“Have any trouble with him, lads ?”
“No, sir—no trouble. But coming back the traffic
on the bridge made him a bit nervous,” replied
Wilfred as he shook the empty chaff sack, and folded
it neatly.
“H’mm . . . that is only to be expected. Mel-
bourne streets are busy these days. By the way,
boys, have you any plans for Wednesday ?”
“None whatever,” was the emphatic answer.
“Perhaps you would care to accompany me on a
trip up country ?”


Wilfred grinned across at David.
“My word, we would, sir. How far would it be ?
A day’s trip or longer ?”
Mr. Pym kept gently rubbing the back of his palm
along the horse’s glossy neck.
“It’s about forty miles, Wilfred. I want to have a
good look at the country, so I propose making it a
two days’ journey and camping out for the
night.”
“Are we all to go ?” spoke up David. “Or just we
three ?”
“I had intended that the whole family made the
trip. But I doubt if your mother will be well enough.
I want you all to see this place. lam considering
buying it for our home. It is a place called Yarram-
beat, a property run by a Mr. Fairbridge. If we
arrive about midday on Thursday we will stay all
Friday, returning on Saturday.”
David leaned forward eagerly.
“I do hope the weather stays fine. And do you
honestly think, Papa, you will buy this place ?”
I may be able to tell you that on Friday night,”
smiled his father.
Trust everything to happen at once. Wilfred has
news too, Papa. Major Jellibrand is back in Sydney.
He is sailing for Melbourne by the Hortense. He is
expected within a fortnight.”
“I am extremely pleased to hear it. Everyone in
elbourne will be pleased to welcome so famous an


explorer —though none more than his young son
Wilfred, eh, my lad ?”
Wilfred nodded, and began whistling an old song
the sailors used to sing. Carefully he hung Ajax’s
harness and collar up on their hooks. As David said,
everything seemed to happen at once. All the same,
he noticed both he and David had refrained from
mentioning the episode of the pepper and the stranger
in the cabbage-tree hat. Just as well, perhaps.
That evening, after their evening meal was finished,
and the crockery and saucepans were returned clean
and shining to their hooks and shelves, the family
gathered round the table to hear more about Yarram-
beat. Mrs. Pym, white cheeked and frail again, sat
by the big lamp sewing flower sprigs on a strip of
dark silk. Opposite her, Margery bent industriously
over the squares of her patchwork quilt. The two
boys sat one each side of Mr. Pym staring hard at a
map spread before them on the table.
“Yarrambeat property is here —nearly forty miles
east of Melbourne,” Mr. Pym was explaining. “You
can see it here on this rough map which I had sketched
for me as a guide. It is out beyond the Corhan-
warrabul cattle run,”
“How big is it ?”
“Two thousand five hundred acres. All this land
here from the hill country to the boundary down here
on the river. Good land too.”
“Then why does Mr. Fairbridge want to sell ?


asked David. “I thought you said all the squatters
were holding on to their land now ? Has he had bad
luck through the seasons ?”
His father nodded, as though he had been expecting
such a question.
“Fairbridge has had bad luck—but not because of
poor seasons.”
“Weren’t the Fairbridges among the very early
pioneers, Papa ?” interposed Margery. “I am sure
I have heard that name before ?”
“Very likely. Yes, William Fairbridge was one of
the first squatters to settle in that district. He took
his wife and all his belongings, and settled on the
stretch of country he owns now. He lived in a bark
shanty for a while, then later built a wooden cottage
with slab walls and shingle roof. Gradually he
cleared the land, fenced paddocks in, and struggled
on against hardships of all sorts. His land pulled
him through. The pastures up there are splendid, the
water courses are good, his herds of cattle increased
and brought good results. In 1850 he had a stone
house built alongside his old cottage. He had two
boys who were growing up, and began to look forward
to an easier, happier time. But those early pioneer-
ing hardships had left their mark on his wife. Mrs.
Fairbridge contracted pneumonia, and after a short
illness, died.”
“Oh,” breathed Margery. “After all that struggle.
What a shame.”


“But that wasn’t all. Two years after her death
there were big floods. The water courses rose up,
and the two sons, Peter and Edward, were carried
away while trying to ford the river. Yarrambeat is
a beautiful property now, but it has nothing but sad
memories for Fairbridge.”
The soft lamplight showed the glimmer of a tear
in Mrs. Pym’s eyes, and the children stared hard at
the table.
“It is not a pleasant history,” continued Mr. Pym,
“but I considered that you children should learn the
true facts now, rather than hear exaggerated stories
from others later.”
“Many members of pioneering families have lost
their lives making things easier for those who follow,”
observed Mrs. Pym softly. “It is our task to carry
on their work as best as we are able to show that
their sacrifice has not beeg in vain.
“Quite right, Emily. All the same, my dear, we
must remember that those people came to the land
to make fortunes. They regarded the risking of
their lives as part of the gamble. But if you boys
intend making the journey with me, you 11 have to
see things are ready by to-morrow evening. We will
start at daybreak.”
David noticed the wistful look on his sister s face.
“What about Margery ? Will she come with
us ?”
Margery shook her head.


“Oh, no. I shall have to stay home and take care
of Mama.”
Mrs. Pym leant across the table and stroked her
daughter’s silky brown curls thoughtfully.
“No, my dear. I want you to see Yarrambeat as
well as the boys. I have been up to that part of the
country some months ago. Mrs. Marchant has been
invited to stay with me. I would like you to go.”
“Yes, of course Margery will come,” declared Mr.
Pym. “She shall cook our breakfast when we camp
out. When we were at Pengally’s hut, the bacon she
fried was the best that’s ever come from a frying-pan.”
Margery’s eyes sparkled merrily.
“And we’ve still got the same old frying-pan, Papa.
I kept it for luck.”


CHAPTER 111
ON THE STOCK-ROUTE
The pink clouds of the dawn were edged with gold,
and the sun just showing above the horizon, when
Mr. Pym came and wakened Margery on the Wednes-
day morning.
“Yes, very well, Papa, I’m coming !”
But all the same she stayed curled up in bed a
while longer, listening for another few stolen minutes
to the first songs of the birds in the wattles and
gumtrees by her window. She now could pick out
every voice of the feathered orchestra. The mag-
pies’ song that sounded like water trickling down
rocky tracks after a sudden downpour of rain. A
distant whipbird. The dainty honey-eaters. The
confident triumphant chuckles of the kookaburras,
and then the sweet trilling of her mother s caged
blackbirds. And competing with the songs of the
birds was the familiar creak-squeak of already moving
bullock wagons, and the barking of the teamsters
dogs. Times were busy, and men eager to make each
day stretch out long as possible. The dust from the
bullock wagons appeared on the roads before the sun
itself.
‘Oh, dear. This will never do. If I don’t hurry,


I’ll be so late,’ thought Margery as she lay there,
listening to wheels creaking and chains straining.
Giving one last yawn, she slipped out of bed. Ten
minutes later she was dressed and hurrying down to
the kitchen. She wore a full-skirted frock of dark-
brown material finished with shiny buttons that ran
in a straight row down the bodice. Her mass of
brown curls was damped and screwed down smooth
and sleek with bright taffeta ribbons. She had put
on the strong button-up boots that had been made
to order for her by the Irish shoe-maker, Mr. O’Flam-
erty, who had opened a shop in Flinders Street near
the new St. Paul’s. Reaching the kitchen, she w r ent
at once to the back door, peeped through, and saw
to her relief that her father and David were still busy
with the horses. The black iron kettle was making
soft bubbling, boiling noises. Going over to the fire,
Margery could see by the way the red coals were
crumbling up that it had been lit some time. She
busied herself preparing the breakfast, having on the
previous evening made her mother promise not to
think of getting up on account of the party bound for
Yarrambeat.
Suddenly, with a sigh, she realized that she had
not made the porridge. Then she sniffed, paused,
sniffed again, and went across to the stove. She
lifted the lid from an iron pot, and yes, there was the
porridge already boiling and simmering splendidly.
A subdued chuckle sounded behind her.


“No, Miss Margery, you didn’t walk out here in
your sleep and cook it —the good fairy was my humble
self,” and she wheeled round to see Wilfred Jellibrand
execute an exaggerated bow.
“Jellybeans, you’ve saved me from a terrible scold-
ing,” said Margery gratefully. “It’s well over twenty
minutes since Papa called me. I quite forgot I was
supposed to put the porridge on the fire. Papa would
have been furious.”
The fat boy began trying to balance a salt spoon on
his nose.
“Never forget about food, Margery,” was his solemn
advice. “I never do. That’s why I put the porridge
on. Still there’s no need to let the others know of
this little matter.” He gave the suspicion of a wink.
“Mum’s the word.”
Margery smiled her thanks. The fat boy was about
her own age, and they were the best of friends. She
thought, rather wistfully, that she and her brother
would miss him a great deal if his father decided to
take him away from the colony and back to England.
Wilfred had shared adventures with David and her-
self for two years now. Unlike the impulsively
minded young Pyms, the sleepy-faced Wilfred could
keep calm and level-headed no matter what the
danger. They had come to rely on his advice in
any emergency. She was still thinking about how
much he would be missed when David and her father
came hurrying in, demanding their breakfast.


The steaming porridge was poured into the bowls,
and soon they were all sitting round, blowing hard
at each spoonful, in order to cool it down.
“00-er, it’s like fire !” gasped David, who had
swallowed down the first mouthful before testing it.
“Try some cold milk—that will cool you down,”
suggested Wilfred.
“One can always make hot porridge cooler —but
never cold porridge hotter,” quoted Mr. Pym. “Now
what about the supplies for the trip ? Are they
ready ?”
“Yes, Papa. We packed them last night, and we
will call at the bakery on the way for bread. There’s
cheese, butter, wheat cakes and tea, and some pickled
beef, and a jar of mother’s famous preserve. Should
that be enough ?”
Mr. Pym got up and looked over the supplies that
stood ready packed in a soap box.
“Yes, I think that should do.”
“It doesn’t seem much to me,” Wilfred anxiously
put in.
David backed him up.
“Here, here ! I thought you said that we’d be on
the track for two days. Wilfred has an appetite
like a hippopotamus, don’t forget.”
Mr. Pym nodded.
“That’s all right, boys. We will stop the night at
one of the homesteads. I have letters of introduc-
tion to two or three cattle owners who have runs in


the Dandenong district. We needn’t worry about
tea or breakfast.”
“Oh, if that’s the case, it’s rather different,”
admitted the mollified Wilfred. “All the same,
Marj, you might put a bag of flour in. I’m handy
at making dampers, and they taste good.”
“Yes, put in some flour —but, apart from that, I
think we have quite enough,” Mr. Pym directed.
“But never mind, I’ll see to the flour. You run off
and say good-bye to your mother, Margery. We’re
late in starting already.”
Margery said good-bye to her mother rather
solemnly. Farewells were always something of a
ceremony to the Pyms, because journeys into the
Victorian bush still had many dangers. There was
always the chance that another meeting might never
take place.
Though the sun now shone cheerfully, the tang of
early autumn was already in the air, and Duke and
Nelson, the two horses, were impatient to start.
When all supplies, including the firearms, were safely
stowed in the wagon, they all climbed in, Mr. Pym
took the reins, and they jogged off through rows of
wooden cottages and plain stone houses, to the stock-
route which would take them the first stages of their
journey to Yarrambeat. They were unable to take
a direct route because the Yarra had to be crossed by
Mr. Lennox’s bridge at the foot of Swanston Street.
All the main traffic crossed by this bridge, and since


its opening the buildings had gone up like mush-
rooms on the south side of the river. The new road
to St. Kilda also was being constructed rapidly, and
already steps were being taken to do away with
Canvas town —a conglomeration of bell tents, huts,
lean-tos and tin sheds which had been erected, since
the start of the gold rush, by new migrants unable
to obtain shelters elsewhere. The route the Pyms
followed veered off to the left, following the south
bank of the Yarra Yarra, until the cottages were
left behind, and they were approaching the station
that had been founded in the very early days of the
colony by Mr. Gardiner,
» 4
“My word, Papa, things look rather different from
how they did when we came round this way in 1851,”
ruminated David. He recalled how they had stood
on a rising by the river, and watched the fires of a
blackfellows’ corroboree which had taken place near
the creek they were approaching now. The land was
now cleared, and the bush country had been pushed
many miles back.
“There’s a colonist living near here who hasn’t
found one speck of gold, and yet says the rush did
him the best turn of his life,” Mr. Pym told the
children.
“In what way ? Do you mean because he has been
able to sell sheep and cattle for much better prices ?”
queried David.
Not only that, but also because the new-comers


to Melbourne have needed fuel and timber. This
man gave them leave to cut down the trees on his
holdings. He has had his land cleared without it
costing him a penny piece.”
The boys laughed.
“If you take over Yarrambeat, Papa, we’ll have
to see some of the gold-diggers come out that way.”
Mr. Pym shook his head.
“There’s little chance of that, my boy. We’re not
heading for the gold country, but south-east to the
cattle runs. There are only a handful or so of
squatters there as yet —no other settlers at all.”
The children then wanted to know what sort of a
road they could expect. Would it be clearly defined,
or would they be likely to lose their way ? Mr. Pym
explained that they would have a clearly defined
bullock track till they reached the Dandenong Creek,
There was a small settlement at Dandenong, and also
Governor Lonsdale had started a cattle run there
many years ago.
But once they had passed Dandenong, the way to
Yarrambeat would not be so easy. Their only guide
would be the twisting stock tracks which skirted the
hilly country and wound through flat lands to the
outlying cattle runs of the Western Port district.
“But no doubt,” Mr. Pym assured them, “Mr.
Dawson at Corhanwarrabul will give me directions.”
“At where ?” echoed Margery.
“It’s one of the stations. Papa showed it to us


the other night—it’s on the map.” David spoke
with the ready scorn boys always reserve for any
lapses of memory on the part of younger sisters.
Margery nodded good-humouredly. She was enjoy-
ing the trip so much that the scornful remark passed
completely over her head. The sun was above the
line of gum-trees now, climbing steadily in a sky
which was hazy blue and broken by packs of far-away
wispy clouds, little shreds of white like scattered
handfuls of teazed wool-clippings. The warm air
was heavy with the smell of the dried grasses and a
thick white flower from a native shrub. Margery
did not know its name. The wagon jolted along the
dusty, deeply rutted track. The two horses, Nelson
and Duke, took the load easily, and plodded on, sure-
footed and steady. The track twisted on, soon
leading them through open grazing lands, where the
trees were mostly cleared. Only a few giants, sur-
vivors of former bush forests, spread patterns of shade
on the fields, though many trees still remained each
side of the track. A fortnight previously there had
been a welcome fall of rain, and the quickly respond-
ing grass had already shown its thanks by sending
up fresh shoots of brighter green. The stock was
mostly cattle. Great red-and-white and brown-and-
black big-boned beasts with wide curving horns. But
there were sheep, too, and in good condition. They
carried a good type of wool and plenty of it.
Wilfred and David studied the sheep, the cattle,


the pastures, the waterways, any occasional hut or
building, and anything else that came into sight.
They saw a kookaburra swoop down from a gum-tree
and seize a black snake, alive and writhing, in its
sharp-pointed bill. They saw rabbits and wallabies
and bronze-black lizards sunning themselves on logs.
They saw a party of blackfellows straggling among
the trees. First the men in hopelessly-out-of-place
white men’s clothing, but still carrying their boome-
rangs, spears, and stone axes which simply were
stones sharpened with great patience to a keen edge,
and bound to handles with thongs of green hide.
Then the sharp-eyed and painfully thin black women.
Some carrying babies, others swinging dilly-bags of
supplies. Behind them came the elder children,
fossicking and grubbing among the logs for grubs
and roots, and finally the pack of the half-starved
fang-toothed dogs which seemed to trail behind every
band of blackfellows in Victoria.
“Are there many blacks at this Yarrambeat place ?”
asked Wilfred.
“Quite a few tribes, but friendly and no trouble,
if what I’m led to believe is true,” returned Mr.
Pym.
The track dipped down into a hollow, and the black
tribe was soon out of sight. For a while the horses
followed the length of the rise, and Margery caught
her breath as the new scene spread out before them.
To the north were the mountains, the first range


massive and browny green. Behind these rose the
second range, and a third. Great folds of mountain
merging into a blue-grey. They were not purple on
this early autumn morning, but this lovely blue-grey
colour, almost slate. From them, the foothills
stretched down right to the track along which they
were travelling, and then away for miles on the other
side till they disappeared in plains and lowlands
ending in the distant blue waters of Port Phillip bay.
There were now not many fully cleared paddocks to
be seen. But in many places the scrub had been
eaten and broken down by cattle, and here trees
which had received the fatal ring-bark treatment,
stood out clearly.
Wilfred screwed up his small blue eyes, and peered
down the track.
“We’re coming to different trees now. Blackwood
and dogwood, I think. That means a creek must be
in the offing. Mr. Pym, my suggestion is that we
stop there to boil the billy, and have morning tea.
That sun is getting high in the sky. I’m getting
hungry.”
Mr. Pym chuckled.
“I’ve been half expecting a suggestion of that type
for some time. To tell the truth, Wilfred, I quite
a gree. A cup of tea would go down well. What do
you other two feel about it ?”
Margery and David both thought it an excellent
idea. The horses, who were getting hot, became aware


of the approach of water, and quickened their pace.
The wagon rumbled on towards the little creek. It
was a broad shallow stream running with a cool
gurgling sound among flattish red-brown rocks.
Plenty of shade was provided by bushy wattles, and
while David led the horses to the water for a drink,
Wilfred and Margery busied themselves lighting a
fire. Piles of brushwood soon sent the flames licking
round the dry wood.
“We’ll put these branches on now, they’ll make the
billy boil,” asserted Wilfred, staggering forward with
another armful. “And we’ll put a green twig across
the billy. It will stop the water from getting
smoked.”
Margery sniffed the tang of the smoke with pleasure.
“In a letter to grandmama in England I once tried
to describe how lovely a fire of gum-leaves smells,”
she remarked thoughtfully. “It wasn’t much of a
success though. Don’t you think, Jellybeans, it is
very difficult to describe a smell ?”
Wilfred sat on a log and watched the orange flames
coiling round the blackened base of the billy.
“You can talk about an unpleasant smell —or a
pleasant one. Or a strong smell —and a sharp one
like these gum-leaves, but as for going any further,
the only thing seems to be to compare them with
something else.” He gave a sly grin. “For instance,
saying it was a smell like rotten eggs.”
“It is easy to describe things you see, and things


you hear,” nodded Margery. “But describing tastes
and smells is much harder. Hooray—the billy is
boiling.”
Wilfred lifted it off the fire with a green stick, the
point of which ended in a strong prong. Margery
dropped in the tea, then spread out the mugs while she
waited for it to brew.
“We might as well eat those oatmeal cakes for
morning tea. Think what a waste it would be if we
kept them too long, and they went stale,” the fat boy
suggested anxiously.
Margery laughed, and Mr. Pym and David who
had overheard the remark while strolling up from
the water, could not help joining in.
“No, Jellybeans. That excuse won’t do. You’ll
have to admit that you want to eat them simply
because you like doing it.”
Margery, with a smile, produced the cakes from the
tuckerbox.
Tea, Papa f And what about you, David ? Is
this too strong ?”
“No, just right, thank you,” was the grateful
response. “Mind out, Wilfred. Blow on yours before
you drink it. Otherwise you’ll get your tongue
scorched.”
The fat boy thoughtfully regarded his mug of
steaming tea, then set it down on the ground.
I think 111 start on the cakes. I’ll leave the tea
till it’s cooler.”


David had perched himself on the lowest branch of
a big gnarled tree growing to the left of the picnic
party.
“Come and sit up here by me, Jellybeans.”
Wilfred shook his head.
“No, thank you. Too far from the oatmeal cakes.
* /
I’d have to climb down each time I wanted one.
Think of the wear and tear on the breeches. I’ll
stay here, thank you,” and sitting down somewhat
heavily on a log, he beamed at his fellow travellers,
and began happily munching his cake.
They all enjoyed their morning tea tremendously.
Tea never seems to taste quite so good as when it
is made in a billy over an outdoor camp fire, and
swallowed down under the spreading shade of the
trees, where the drying grasses are quivering with
the stir and movement of thousands of insects, and
the silence broken by the calls of darting bushbirds.
That is what Wilfred thought as he handed Mar-
gery his mug for a third replenishment of tea.
“I shouldn’t give it to you. You will burst one of
these days,” murmured the very unladylike Miss Pym.
Just as she made the remark, Wilfred unexpectedly
leapt into the air with a loud yell of anguish.
“Ow, quickly ! It’s a snake. I’ve been bitten by
a snake. I’m sure of it.”
He performed a war-dance of pain before the
astonished spectators.
Rising hastily, Mr. Pym examined the spot where


Wilfred had been sitting, then burst out laughing.
“No snake, Wilfred. Just bull-ants, my boy,”
Margery’s brown eyes twinkled, the corners of her
mouth twitched into a smile, and soon she joined in
the laughter. Up in the tree David, too, was shouting
with mirth.
In spite of the fact that the bull-ant bite really was
giving him severe pain, Wilfred could not help
laughing, too.
“It’s no joke, you should have it happen to you,”
he exclaimed ruefully. “And David, I would be
much obliged if you would stop cackling like that.
You frighten the birds. They probably take you for
a new species of Australian hyena.”
When everyone had calmed down, Mr. Pym
remembered an old bushman’s advice, and instructed
Wilfred to apply bracken to the bites. David went
with him to help, while Margery washed the dishes
in creek water, and Mr. Pym attended to the horses.
When they were ready to continue on their jour-
ney, David and Mr. Pym took off their boots and
socks, tucked their trousers above their knees and,
wading into the water, carefully guided the two
horses across the loose slippery stones. The autumn
break in the weather had not yet come to Southern
Victoria, so the river was at a comparatively low
level. Stones which normally were well covered with
water were now at the surface, and the crossing was
easy. Wilfred, who now was trying hard to forget the


stinging pain of the bull-ant s bite, had temporary
control of the reins. After the horses had pulled the
wagon safely up the far bank, the two guides put
boots and socks on again, and climbed back to their
seats.
The sun was hotter now. The little clouds that
had flecked the sky at sunrise now were vanishing
over the ridges of the hazy purple-blue mountains
that still ran the length of the northern horizon. It
seemed certain that the good weather would last
another day at least.
The horses plodded on, and some hours later,
David, who was lookout man, pointed to a cloud of
dust in the distance.
“Look, Papa —what’s that ?”
Mr. Pym took off his hat and shaded his eyes with
one brown sinewy hand.
“Cattle. A mob of them. They’re being driven to
Melbourne.”
David heaved a sigh of relief.
“I thought so, but wasn’t sure.”
The wagon jolted on over the rough track, and as
they approached the oncoming mob, the crack of
stock-whips, shouts of the riders, and yapping of the
dogs could be heard plainly. They could make out
two men astride big raw-boned horses, a team of
tireless dogs, and the sea of curving horns and great
lumbering backs and legs of the cattle.
Mr. Pym decided to draw his horses and wagon to


one side under the trees while the mob went past.
In silence the two boys and Margery watched the
stockmen cracking their whips, and shouting at the
dogs as the cattle were guided round a bank of trees
and on to the open stock-route again. The drovers
were both experienced men. One a broad stockily
built young fellow. The other was an older man.
His hair was grey, and his face tanned and lined,
but he still sat firm and upright in his saddle, and
could crack his stock-whip with a lashing sting,
Margery noticed, however, he used the whip less
frequently than the younger man.
Wilfred was staring at the brands on the cattle’s
shoulders.
“M.B. with the letters joined,” he pondered.
“Know who it is who brands his beasts like that ?”
“M.8.,” replied Mr. Pym. “Why, I dare say that
will be old Mortimer Brown. Perhaps this gentle-
man here will be the man himself.”
As the mob now was moving forward easily and in
good formation, the rider whom Mr. Pym thought
might be Mortimor Brown cantered across to them,
and took off his broad-brimmed hat.
“Good day, friends.” His keen eyes swept over
Margery’s trim frock and bonnet, and the boys’ neat
suits. “Up from town, I take it ?”
“Yes, we’re visiting one of the stations beyond
Dandenong. Yarrambeat. Do you happen to be
Mr. Mortimor Brown ?”


The other nodded.
“Yes, I’m Brown. So you’re going out to Yarram-
beat, eh ? Then I guess you’re the fellow who’s con-
sidering taking over from old Fairbridge.
Mr. Pym nodded.
“Quite right, Mr. Brown. Now, candidly, what is
your opinion of the place ? Do you consider it to be
a good property ?”
Mortimor Brown gave a slow, broad smile.
“Yes, there’s fine country on Yarrambeat. Among
the best out here to the East. They’ve got a fair bit
of it cleared. It’s good grazing. You can’t go far
wrong if you get Yarrambeat.
Mr. Pym puffed thoughtfully at his pipe.
“It’s good to hear that. If what I see myself
agrees with your report, we may be seeing each other
again. Where’s your place, Brown ?”
“Me ? I own Mount Jarra-Jung. The run out
there to the North.”
“What name did you say,” asked the astounded
Margery.
“Mount Jarra-Jung. No, you needn’t look so sur-
prised, little miss. There are many properties with
queerer names than that down this part of the world.
How about Gin Gin Bean and Panty Gurn Gum.
Those are good native names. You will find them
on the Government’s official maps. Next time you
are at the Lands Department, step into the office and
ask to be shown where they are.”


Wilfred had taken out a notebook, and was busily
copying the names into it.
“Thank you for the suggestion. We will do that.”
Mr. Pym drew the squatter to one side and asked
further questions in a low, serious undertone. Mar-
gery could tell that he was seeking more advice about
Yarrambeat. He seemed pleased with the answers
given, for after a while he warmly shook hands with
Mr. Brown, and thanked him earnestly.
“Only too pleased to be able to help you, Pym. One
is never too busy to do a good turn. Should you take
Yarrambeat over, we may meet again some time.
Perhaps you may drop in at my place now and then.”
Wilfred grimaced.
“A good way to drop. A mere twenty miles, I
suppose.”
But Margery was not listening. She was staring
again at those blue lines of mountains still crouching
like hunched-up giants on the horizon to the north.
She began to realize that despite its loneliness, this
neck of country between the hills and the flats had
a fascination which grew on one. And she liked the
good-natured owner of Mount Jarra-Jung.
T hope Papa does take Yarrambeat over,’ she
thought, as they waved a friendly good-bye to the
departing squatter.


CHAPTER IV
YARRAMBEAT HOMESTEAD
Except for refreshments at the ‘No Good Damper 5
Inn, and two encounters with friendly, inquisitive
natives, the rest of that day’s journey passed with-
out further adventure. The faithful horses patiently
pulled the light wagon on, on, along the dusty stock-
route, between half-cleared paddocks and great
stretches of towering gum tree and low scrub. Their
direction was still ‘East-south-east,’ as Wilfred, who
had a compass to consult, professionally termed it.
Blue-grey mountain ranges still reared up against
the horizon to the left, and to their right were always
the flatlands. Occasionally Margery thought she
glimpsed patches of blue sea fringing the flat, but
because of the haze it was difficult to be sure. Late
that afternoon they arrived at Angus McMillan’s
homestead, Bushy Park, where they were warmly
welcomed, had a good meal, and stayed the night.
The three children were tired out and were sent to
their improvised beds early. But Mr. Pym sat up
late with the men of the homestead. He told them
the latest news from Melbourne, news of the new
steam-engine railway which was being planned to
run from Melbourne to the port. It was the first


Yarramheat Homestead
railway to be constructed in Australia, and a matter
for much discussion. The colonists, in turn, told
their visitor about their difficulties and many experi-
ences as squatters on early Port Phillip cattle runs.
By tactful questioning, Mr. Pym was able to find out
much helpful information regarding Yarrambeat, its
owner, Mr. Fairbridge, and the overseer, Abel Hardi-
man. The men told him that Hardiman was one of
the best cattlemen in the colony, but had a gloomy,
surly nature, and was difficult to get on with.
“Here’s my advice,” McMillan said. “As you’re
new to this game, don’t take on Yarrambeat unless
you get a written agreement that Hardiman stays,
too. His manner may be on the sullen side, but
believe me, he is a first-class bushman. It will pay
you to put up with his queer ways.”
Bushy Park had its own fowls and pigs, and the
young Pyms had a large breakfast of porridge, eggs
and bacon. Mr. McMillan, who knew and appre-
ciated good horses when he saw them, made sure that
Duke and Nelson were well fed. Before harnessing
them up, David borrowed the Bushy Park curry-
comb, and he and Wilfred gave the horses a good
brush down. The animals twitched their ears and
looked pleased as they felt their skins tingle under
the brisk rubbings.
Do you think it’s going to rain,” Margery ques-
tioned as she took her father’s helping hand, and
climbed up into the wagon beside him.


Mr. Pym glanced up at the banks of dark clouds
which were massing behind the mountains.
“I hardly think that storm will break before the
evening. We should be safely at Yarrambeat before
then. We have only twenty-five miles to go. But
I hope it does rain. We don’t want a dry season
during our first year at Yarrambeat.”
The travellers waved a last good-bye to the people
at Bushy Park. When the horses were again pulling
the wagon along the bumpy track, David, who had
been exceptionally quiet, suddenly asked :
“Papa, did your remark to Margery mean that you
have definitely made up your mind to buy Yarram-
beat ?”
Mr. Pym bit his lip, realizing that he had said more
than was wise.
“What remark was that ?”
The boy turned so that his grey eyes looked straight
at his father.
“You said that you hoped our first season at
Yarrambeat would not be a dry one. It did sound
as though you have decided already we are to go there.”
Looking thoughtful, Mr. Pym flicked the end of
the whip across Nelson’s back.
“Well, Davey, everything I’ve heard about Yarram-
beat confirms my own good opinion of it,” he at last
admitted. “If it is as good as Mortimer Brown and
McMillan say, I most certainly shall buy it. So far,
there seems only one drawback.”


Yarrambeat Homestead
David glanced at Wilfred, who sat with his shoul-
ders hunched, taking in every word of the con-
versation.
“You mean that we won’t have Jellybeans to
help us ?”
Mr. Pym shook his head.
“No, David—it’s about the overseer. He’s a fellow
named Hardiman. It is McMillan’s opinion that it
would be hard for we new chums to make a success
of Yarrambeat unless we retain Hardiman. But he
tells me the man is a hard type to get on with ?”
“Bad tempered, you mean,” put in Margery,
immediately conjuring up the picture of a great
black-bearded fellow stamping round the homestead,
flourishing an enormous stock-whip.
“Oh, no. Not bad tempered. Just hard to get on
with. An abrupt, surly kind of fellow, who is good
at his work and knows it, yet resents anyone else
giving orders or interfering.”
Margery looked relieved.
“Oh, is that all. Well, I shan’t interfere with him.
David and you usually both make friends with people
easily, and Wilfred won’t be there. I don’t think we
should have much trouble with Mr. Abel Hardi-
man.”
“What do you mean by saying it will be all right
if I am not there ?” interjected Wilfred. “Do you
mean that I have the habit of rubbing people up the
wrong way ?”


Margery demurely smoothed back her brown curls,
and re-tied the strings of her bonnet.
“Well, Jellybeans, you have got rather a habit of
making out you know all there is to know. People
who are not well acquainted with you are apt some-
times to take exception to it.”
The fat boy reddened slightly.
“But when I give my opinion, I usually do it to
find out what the other person is thinking. It is
often the only way to find things out.”
“Oh, I see,” answered Margery thoughtfully. She
said no more, but as the cart jolted along the rough
bush track, she thought the matter out for herself.
She came to the conclusion that a great deal of the
world’s troubles and quarrels were caused by people
not stopping to think out the other person’s point of
view, but instead jumping to immediate and often
very wrong conclusions. She knew that many people
did think Wilfred was boastful. If only, instead of
taking exception to his remarks, they paused and
realized that he stated his opinion merely in order to
make them state theirs, much trouble could be
avoided. In the past years when she was still in
England, before those days when her family had
sailed down past the African coast, round the Cape
of Good Hope and over the ocean in the sailing-ship
Dolphin , each week she had gone to her Grand-
mama’s home for lessons in deportment and manners.
Old Mrs. Pym had once been a lady-in-waiting at the


Y arramheat Homestead
Palace. She taught her granddaughter this important
rule. Before entering any room, stop outside the
door for one minute, and carefully consider whom
you will be meeting when you cross the threshold.
Margery decided that if people only thought about
Wilfred’s peculiarities for a while, they would learn
to understand him better, and not resent some of
his remarks so much.
The stock-route wound on among the gums and
scrub of the flatlands with marshes stretching away
to the right, and on the left a stretch of splendid
cattle country rising up to curving foothills, and
beyond them the sturdy shoulders of the mountain
ranges. Sometimes there was a river or creek they
had to cross, now and again a kangaroo, wallaby or
emu was sighted, or they saw a herd of big-boned
red-and-brown cattle fossicking among the trees. In
order to break the monotony of the journey, and
also to lighten the load for the horses, sometimes the
travellers would climb down from the wagon and
trudge by its side. Once David nearly trod on a
snake which lay across the side of the track like a
brown stick. The lad felt a cold shudder sweep over
him as he watched the lithe glossy-backed reptile
glide into the scrub, head slightly raised and forked
tongue extended.
They saw very few sheep that day.
“Isn’t this good country for sheep, Papa,” asked a
slightly puzzled David. He knew it was one of his


father’s ambitions to possess a fine flock of sheep.
Mr. Pym smiled.
“It may be in the future, my boy. At present the
squatters concentrate on cattle because the land is
not yet properly cleared. The cattle eat the scrub
and the long, rank grass and undergrowth. They are
the best animals to run when the land is newly
opened up. I have great hopes for sheep in the
future.”
The weary horses trudged up to the Yarrarabeat
homestead late that afternoon. To everyone’s dis-
appointment, the storm which had seemed so
threatening earlier in the day had blown over, and
now the sun was streaming down on the sloping hills,
and the rain still seemed far away. The Yarrambeat
home stood on a rising hillock among cleared pad-
docks. Behind it were ploughed fields ready for the
sowing of next season’s grain crops. Behind them
the backbone of blue mountains seemed to send out
a side branch which sent its shadow across the
Yarrambeat paddocks like a protective outstretched
hand. The house itself was better than the children
had expected. Many of the homes they had seen on
the road to Ballarat were mere huts of bark and
wattle daub, with shingle roofs. But Yarrambeat
was a stone building with a wide verandah and long
windows which opened out on to it, in the French
style. After they had passed through two sliprail
gates, the horses, sensing the end of the journey was


Yarramheat Homestead
near, pulled valiantly up the last slope leading to the
house itself.
Already some attempt had been made to form a
garden in front of Yarrambeat. Although because of
the dry season all were now parched and wilting,
there were shrubs and trees, and a straggling bed of
hardy flowers. To the side of the house was a vege-
table garden and fruit trees.
“Help—another gate !” groaned Wilfred as the
cart drew up in front of the third row of sliprails.
“Your turn to open it this time, David.”
Giving a mock salute of agreement, David jumped
from his seat and went across to the gate. It was
well made, with posts that had once been trunks of
sturdy gum-trees. Evidently Mr. Fairbridge built
well.
David lifted the rails from their sockets, and was
sliding them back, when a deep growl sounded behind
him.
“Look out, Davey. Look out!” warned Wilfred
in alarm.
Wheeling round, David found himself facing a
savage black dog, which was making straight for him,
his yellowy-green eyes angry and suspicious, and his
white teeth bared threateningly. The boy stooped
to pick up a stick, hoping to ward the animal off,
but as he did so, the sharp fangs sank deep into his
leg.
Mr. Pym jumped from the cart, and came towards


the animal, whirling and cracking his whip. As the
the biting lash descended on him, the dog dodged
cleverly, and, still snarling, slunk round to the side
of the house.
David was kneeling on the ground, his injured calf
clasped between two hands. His face was white, and
his lower lip drawn in. It was plain that he was
frightened badly.
“Never show a dog you’re frightened, son,” coun-
selled Mr. Pym. “He takes advantage of it every
time. Where did he get you ?”
David showed the ripped trouser leg and the torn
skin where marks of the dog’s fangs showed plainly.
The gash was bleeding freely.
“H’mm ... it looks nasty. Seems only a surface
wound, though. We must get it cleaned and bound
directly we reach the house. Our first welcome to
Yarrambeat has hardly been a civil one.”
Margery, who had joined them by this time, offered
a clean linen handkerchief, and it was hastily bound
round the ugly gash. Wilfred, meanwhile, was
thoughtfully leading the two horses through the
sliprails and alongside his unfortunate friend.
“Thank you, Wilfred,” acknowledged Mr. Pym.
“And since we have learnt in this drastic fashion that
there are savage dogs about, I think we’ll leave the
horses here on the track. They can be taken to the
stables later.”
The shouting and barking had brought two of the


Yarrambeat Homestead
homestead’s occupants out on to the verandah.
They were both middle-aged ladies dressed in dark
crinoline skirts and high-necked blouses. To Mar-
gery’s amazement, one of them walked swiftly to the
side of the house, issued a sharp command to the ill-
tempered dog, and ordered him to follow. A few
seconds later, to the little girl’s relief, the rattling of
a heavy chain was heard. The savage beast was
safely tied up.
The second lady advanced hurriedly towards the
visitors, a troubled, anxious expression on her face.
“What has happened ? Surely that dog has not
attacked someone ?” she asked in dismayed tones.
Mr. Pym stepped forward.
“Yes, Ma’am. The savage brute has bitten my
son on the leg. My name is Pym. I presume you
were expecting us.”
She nodded.
“Yes, Mr. Pym. We have been expecting you for
some weeks. How unlucky that Nero should have
given such an unfriendly welcome. The boy must
come inside at once. The wound must be bandaged
properly.”
She led the way to the verandah with its floor of
hardened mud, then opened one of the french
windows. The party stepped into a cool high-
ceilinged room with a large fireplace. It was sparsely
furnished, but a number of pictures hung from the
walls. Leaving the boys and Mr. Pym in this room,
E 65


the lady asked Margery to follow her, and took her
down a passage into the kitchen. She took a basin
from a shelf, and handed it to the little girl.
“The water in that kettle is boiling —pour some into
the basin.”
As Margery did so, her companion left the room,
and in a few seconds came hurrying back with some
torn pieces of sheeting. They then both hurried back
to the sitting-room, where they were met at the door
by an anxious-faced Mr. Pym.
“Madam, I am sorry to say the wound is swelling
rapidly. We shall have to free the poison. Have
you anything with which we can probe the wound ?”
The elderly woman stood for a moment thinking
rapidly. Having lived in the pioneering colony for
many years, she was used to emergencies of all types.
Suddenly a quick smile flashed across her face, she
nodded her head, and crossed to the other side of the
room, where her work-basket lay open on the table.
She picked out her silver crochet-hook.
“The end of this crochet-hook’s handle is smooth
and round. It should be suitable.”
“It is just the thing. Now bring the basin.”
Mr. Pym plunged the end of the handle into the
hot water, then without hesitation firmly inserted it
deep into the swollen wound. Margery could not
look. She had to turn towards the wall. When at
last she gained courage to turn again, David’s face
was white and she saw his lips were pressed together


Yarrambeat Homestead
in a hard straight line. But already the swelling had
gone down, and the wound was being deftly bandaged
with the strips of old soft linen.
“Don’t look so worried, Margery. Everything’s
all right now,” the plucky lad managed to say when
he saw the worried sympathetic expression on his
younger sister’s face.
Mr. Fairbridge’s second sister now entered the
room. It was she who had chained up the dog.
She was very perturbed when she was told of the
damage done.
“I cannot think how Nero came to be roaming
about loose in such a fashion,” she apologized. “He
is our overseer’s dog, and is usually kept securely on
his chain. He is used to us, but flies at strangers
immediately. We have often asked the overseer to
get rid of him, but he says he is a good protection
against any blacks or bushrangers, though,” she
added with a smile, “we are scarcely likely to be
troubled by the latter in this remote part of the
colony. These days they stay near to the gold
diggings.”
The Pyms received this news in silence. Having
already heard many unfavourable reports about Abel
Hardiman, they felt they should have known them-
selves that he would be the owner of the ferocious
black dog with the gleaming yellow-green eyes.
The two ladies explained that they were sisters of
Mr. Fairbridge. They were now both named Moore,


for they had married two brothers, both of whom
were now trying their luck at the gold diggings.
The one who had tied the dog up was Mrs. Amy, the
other was Mrs. Emily. They were both friendly
people with pleasant, though faded, faces, and keen
bright eyes. They had migrated to the colony long
before the advent of the gold rush, and had lived with
their brother, Mr. Fairbridge, since the tragic season
when his two sons had been drowned in the flood.
While Mrs. Emily went to the kitchen to make tea
for the travellers, Mrs. Amy told Mr. Pym that her
brother, the owner of Yarrambeat, was now a very
sick man.
“You have heard, no doubt,” she continued, “that
life has been extremely sad for my brother these past
few years. Yarrambeat is now a large, wealthy
station, but success has come too late for him to
enjoy it. First, Mrs. Fairbridge died. The many
years of hard pioneering life of those early days had
sapped her vitality. Then later, his two sons, our
dear nephews, were drowned while trying to save a
mob of cattle from flood waters. They had tried to
ford a flooded river, and got swept away. Victoria
now only holds sad memories for our brother. Also
several months ago he contracted pneumonia. We
have had hard work nursing him through.”
Mr. Pym looked grave.
“I am sorry to hear that. And I can quite under-
stand, too, why he is anxious to sell the station.”


Yarramheat Homestead
Mrs. Amy gazed at him earnestly.
“Indeed, Mr. Pym, there is no other reason why
anyone would want to sell Yarramheat. Most other
homesteads round this part of the colony are still
wooden shacks. My brother spent many hundreds
of pounds having this house built here. He hoped
to spend the rest of his days in it. It is more com-
fortable than the majority of houses in Melbourne.”
Margery, who had already made a journey to the
kitchen, in her mind agreed heartily, though she said
nothing.
“Once my brother has recovered from his illness,”
continued Mrs. Amy, “he intends to travel by one of
the new sailing-clippers back to England. He hopes
to spend the rest of his life in his home county of
Devon. We are sure that will be best for him.”
The rattle of teacups now was heard. Wilfred
sprang to his feet and held the door open wide as
Mrs. Emily arrived with a large pot of steaming tea,
and a plate loaded with freshly baked scones. After
this pleasant meal everyone felt much better. While
Mrs. Amy took Mr. Pym to see the sick squatter, the
three children were shown something of the property
by Mrs. Emily.
Yarramheat stood on a rising piece of ground, and
from it the young visitors obtained a splendid view
of the surrounding country. Behind the house were
the stables, sheds and outbuildings. Beyond these
were the horse paddocks which, except for a few


giant gums, were completely cleared. These pad-
docks sloped down to the bed of a fair-sized creek,
from which came the main bulk of the water supply,
although for household purposes a deep well had been
sunk behind the house. Beyond this creek, and
stretching in every direction from the rise where the
house was built, were great stretches of cattle country.
They were well cleared near the homestead, but
became more and more timbered and scrub-covered
farther out. The children were shown the cattle
yards, the mustering pens and the farm animals,
cows, fowls, ducks and pigs. Rounding a corner
they confronted Nero, the dog, eyeing them from a
kennel made from an old barrel. It was situated
near a peculiar hut made of wattle and daub.
The dog can t hurt you now \ he is securely
chained,” Mrs. Emily assured the children. But
remembering David’s experience, they all preferred
to keep a very discreet distance from the bad-tem-
pered animal.
That is Mr. Hardiman’s hut,” they were told.
He has his meals with us, but prefers to live by
himself here in this hut. A room in the house does
not appeal to him.”
The children were curious to hear more details
about the overseer. Mrs. Emily told them very
much what they had heard before from the squatters
near Dandenong. She said that he was the best
bushman and cattle drover for a hundred miles


Yarramheat Homestead
around, but was a surly, moody type of man, and one
always had to be very tactful when dealing with him.
“But if you refuse to show him that you are
annoyed by his abrupt way of speaking, and if you try
not to interfere with him more than is necessary, he
will respect you for it, and finally become quite
friendly,” was Mrs. Emily’s advice. It was not
difficult for the children to gather that she herself
had found it a hard task to win the overseer’s con-
fidence.
“Are there many blacks in the district ?” inquired
David.
“Quite a number. But they seldom come near
the homestead. They live in the ranges to the north.
They are not hostile, although the Gippsland tribes
farther east often give trouble. The truth is that
the natives have a superstitious objection about
camping in the flatlands south of Yarrambeat.
They imagine that it is the home of the bunyip. Of
course we are all quite sure that no such creature as
the bunyip even exists these days. One native told
me the bunyip was an animal of immense size that
looks like a kangaroo, with a head like an elephant’s,
and that it roars like a bull.”
The boys laughed heartily at this, and Mrs. Emily
told them other stories about the natives as they
strolled back towards the house.
Mr. Pym, in the meantime, had been in to see Mr.
Fairbridge, and had accepted an invitation to stay


some days at Yarrambeat inspecting the property,
examining the stock, etc. He was partly relieved,
and partly disappointed, to hear that Mr. Abel
Hardiman the previous week had gone to Melbourne
to negotiate a cattle sale, and had not yet returned
to the station. The second hand, a red-haired Irish
fellow who was blind in one eye, was detailed to
accompany the prospective purchaser around the
property. Mr. Pym very quickly decided that the
Yarrambeat cattle station was the exact type of place
he was wanting. The boys sometimes accompanied
the two men on their tours of inspection. As Wil-
fred’s sure-footed horse took him across the paddocks
and under the spreading boughs of the great sugar
gums and box-trees, he often felt sorry that he and
his father would so soon be travelling back to England,
and that he would never be sharing the thrills of this
new outdoor life with his friend David, and the other
Pyms.
Margery stayed at the homestead with Mrs. Emily
and Mrs. Amy. She spent many hours helping them
in the garden, and also sat for a picture, as Mrs.
Emily was excellent at sketching and painting.
Among other things, she was shown a drawing of Mr.
Abel Hardiman, the overseer. It depicted a gaunt-
faced fellow with high cheekbones, bushy eyebrows,
and a mouth hidden by a large moustache.
“Is he as you expected ?” asked Mrs, Emily with a
smile.


Yarramheat Homestead
“No—not a bit. All the same, he reminds me of
someone. I can’t think whom. Someone I’ve seen
at the gold diggings, I suppose.”
That same evening Mr, Pym discussed matters
with Mr. Fairbridge for several hours. The old
pioneer sat propped up in bed. Though only fifty-
two, he looked almost seventy. It was clear that
the tragedies of the last few years had inflicted shocks
from which he would never properly recover. He
told Mr. Pym that he had come to Australia in 1840.
He told how for the first hard years he and his wife
and two small sons had lived in a tiny wooden
cottage, managing as best they could. He had cleared
the land, fenced his paddocks, struggled on against
wet season and dry, and the dreadful fires of 1851.
But his soil was a rich red brown, his watercourses
were good, and his stock gradually increased and
prospered. The outcome of the interview was that
Mr. Fairbridge put a definite price on Yarrambeat,
and that the offer was accepted. A document was
to be drawn up in Melbourne, but in the meantime a
temporary contract was made out for both parties to
sign. Taking up the quill pen offered by Mrs. Emily,
Mr. Pym signed his name to the contract, then passed
the paper over to the old squatter.
The pioneer was watching him with that bright,
keen gaze which sick people so often have. A
curious half-smile came over his sallow face as he,
too, added his signature.


“It is yours, Pym. After all these years, I am
giving up. The best years of my life have gone into
Yarrambeat. We built it up, my wife and I. First
the home block was cleared. Then gradually we got
fences, the new hut, and good stock. Then more
clearing, and the new house. And then she went.
And the boys, they went too. I dare say —” again
that curious smile flitted across the worn face —“I
dare say I, too, will go soon. But the land, it will
stay. It will treat you well, Pym, if you treat it
well. It is good land, good country. What you
put into it, you will get back threefold. It plays fair,
Yarrambeat does.”
A red flush was mounting from his neck and creep-
ing up his cheeks. Mrs. Emily gave Mr. Pym a
warning look, and signalled for him to come away.
A lump rose in Mr. Pym’s throat.
“I give you my word of honour, Fairbridge, that
I shall not let Yarrambeat down. You have made me
feel that if we work hard, and can carry on the spirit
of the pioneers, we can look forward to even greater
things from the land here. We will not fail you.”


CHAPTER V
BAD NEWS
The Pyms started their journey back to Melbourne
the next morning, shortly after sunrise. Even then,
the air was hot and oppressive, and everywhere the
bush was so still and dry that Mr. Pym feared fires
might break out. But in spite of the heat and the
dust, time passed quickly, for the children were wildly
excited when they heard the news of their father’s
purchase. The uncomfortable seats and joltings of
the wagon were forgotten, and they spent hours dis-
cussing plans and prospects for the busy months
ahead. David specially was impressed by the idea of
a moonlight cattle muster, but Mr. Pym had laughed
and said such an event only took place when cattle
were unusually difficult to handle.
Mr. Pym held the reins, and Margery was in the
front of the wagon next to him, while David and
Wilfred sat behind on a cornsack stuffed with straw.
The stuffed sack was one of Wilfred’s ideas. The
fat boy loved comfort, and the hard plank which did
duty as a seat inside the wagon did not suit him at
all. The boys were able to bring the sack close up
behind the other two and so join in their conversation.
Margery had taken off her straw bonnet, but the air


was so still that not one breath of wind ruffled the
glossy smoothness of her brown curls. As the wagon
rumbled dustily over the winding twisting stock-
route, they caught glimpses of many cattle, but the
animals seemed lazy and listless, and hardly turned
their heads towards the travellers.
Mr. Pym studied the cattle with a worried frown.
“Everything seems very dry. Ido hope I have not
made a bad mistake, and bought into Yarrambeat
before a drought,” he anxiously remarked.
David laughed.
“It is rather early to say that. It is only autumn,
and the weather in Australia is always dry at this time
of the year.”
“Rather,” interposed Wilfred, who had taken up
David’s cue and was trying to be as cheerful as
possible. “In a few months’ time you people at
Yarrambeat will probably be up to your ankles in
mud. You may even have to put boots on all the
sheep to stop foot-rot. But now I come to think of
it, there are not many sheep on the property, are
there ?”
“Very few, though I hope to have more in years to
come,” Mr. Pym replied. “Of course, when the
station was first opened up, the land had to be cleared.
But it is better even now. The cattle have eaten
much of the undergrowth and trampled down much
of the short scrub, and, of course, the home paddocks
have been cleared altogether. I shall have to consult


our foreman, Abel Hardiman. If he thinks it prac-
tical, later I hope to see a good flock of sheep at
Yarrambeat.”
The mention of Abel Hardiman reminded Margery
of the incident about the drawing. She immediately
told the others about it.
“Trust a girl to invent a mystery,” remarked David,
rather unkindly. “So you think you have seen him
before ? Now where would that be, I wonder ?”
Wilfred, who was enjoying himself tickling the
back of Margery’s neck with a feather, paused for a
moment.
“Would it be up at the Ballarat gold diggings?”
Margery shook her head.
“Oh, no, that is one place it wouldn’t be. Mrs.
Emily says that Abel Hardiman is one of the few
people who has never been to the diggings. She
tells me he considers he is always unlucky in his own
affairs. He thinks he only gets on well when working
for others.”
“He sounds a very peculiar character. I wish we
could have met him,” regretted David. “Still there
are such crowds of people in the colony these days
there might be quite a number who have his type of
face. The other stockman, the Irishman who is
blind in one eye, seemed a good-natured sort.”
The party of travellers kept on chatting gaily about
Yarrambeat and its inmates, and despite the heat and
the uncomfortable jolting, the hours sped by quickly.


The track had taken a wide turn southward to
avoid a stretch of rough country and a deep ravine.
When it turned towards the mountains again, the
children saw to their surprise that black clouds were
massing up swiftly behind the grey mountain ridges.
Margery pointed to the gathering blackness in
amazement.
“Why, Papa, look how dark the sky is. Only a
minute ago it seemed blue and clear.”
“Yes, but that was when the wagon was facing the
south. It is still clear in that part of the sky. Wil-
fred, in the pocket of my greatcoat you will find a
map. Could you hand it over, please ?”
The coat was rolled up on the floor of the wagon,
and as Wilfred fossicked for it, Margery studied the
sky curiously. The air seemed heavier and more
oppressive than ever, and now the clouds were spread-
ing over the entire sky like giant mushrooms. The
wagon passed some cattle. They also seemed worried
by the weather conditions, and were crowded together,
tossing their heads, and lashing their tails uneasily.
Wilfred smoothed the map out, and handed it to
Mr. Pym.
“While you look at it, shall I take the reins, sir ?”
Mr. Pym nodded, and the fat boy climbed nimbly
over to the front seat.
“Hurry the horses up, Wilfred. I have a fair idea
that a violent storm is on the way. I want to see
how far we are from the next place of shelter.”


Scanning the map, he was able to deduct quickly
how far they had already travelled. The detour to
the south-west was plainly seen, and so was the
rough stretch of country which they had just come
through.
“We are lucky,” he told the children. “Only
another three miles to go and we should reach Goon-
Gary Station.”
“Three miles ! Do you think we will get there
before the storm breaks ?” asked Margery.
“With a bit of luck we will. David, I think you
and Wilfred had better get out and follow on foot
while we go up this hill. It is a stiff pull, and will
save the horses.”
The boys jumped down at once. Margery would
have followed them, but her father told her to stay
where she was. The horses, like the cattle they had
passed, were becoming uneasy now, and despite the
uphill climb, travelled briskly. The wagon bumped
on over roots, boulders and ruts, and the boys had to
run at a trot to keep up with it. The clouds now
covered the entire sky. There was a faint stirring
m the grasses, an uneasy sighing among the gum-
leaves, branches creaked, and then the wind came,
stirring the still, oppressive air to sudden movement.
Mr. Pym urged the horses on faster, and at the top
of the hill the boys jumped on board again. The
wagon clattered along the rough track at a reckless
speed. A low rumble of thunder came from the


distant north. It was followed by others, each roll
becoming louder and nearer. Then lightning. Mar-
gery’s hands went to her eyes as the bright streak
zipped down the sky. But still no rain. More
thunder, then another streak of lightning that lit up
the whole sky. Springing to his feet, Mr. Pym tugged
at the reins, pulling the plunging horses back with all
the strength he could muster. There was a loud
crash, and fifty yards ahead an old ringbarked gum-
tree fell to the ground with terrific noise. It had
been struck by lightning, and lay right across the
track, blocking it completely.
With faces white and strained, the four travellers
stared at the stricken giant. All were thinking the
same thing, thinking of the blow fate would have
dealt them had their wagon been that distance
farther forward in its journey.
Now the rain was starting to come down in great
drops. They fell on the covering of the wagon hard
as pellets of lead. The dusty brown hides of the
horses were spattered with its wet shiny dots, and
the dull-green leaves were being washed to a glossy
freshness. And despite the danger which they had
escaped so narrowly, and the barrier which had to be
crossed somehow, the Pyms’ strained features relaxed
to smiles of relief. For they now were watching the
start of the autumn weather break. This downpour
marked the beginning of a new season, when the
dried-up earth would greedily soak up the falling rain,


the grass spring up green from the dried root stumps,
and the hills and flats breathe easily and sweetly again.
Mr. Pym asked Wilfred to hand over his coat, and
as he tugged it on he looked again at the large tree
which had fallen across their track. David’s gaze
followed in the same direction.
“Pheww —it is a giant of a tree, Papa. Must have
been strong lightning to make it crash like that.”
“No, David. lam inclined to think we will find
this tree has been ring-barked, and was already half-
dead when it was struck. Ido not think there is any
further danger. The rain seems set in. Come on,
Duke . . . come on, Nelson,” and he endeavoured to
coax the horses farther along the track.
But the frightened animals were still quivering
from head to foot, and would not move.
“Come on, David. Seems to me this is where we
will have to get busy. We will have to lead the
horses ourselves,” said Wilfred, and made to jump
from the wagon.
Margery stopped him.
“Oh, no, Wilfred. You will get soaking wet. First
put some cover over you.”
“Yes, boys, take one of these cornsacks each,” Mr.
Pym told them. “Wait, I’ll slit them down one side
for you,” and taking a sharp knife from its sheath on
his belt, he ripped through the double threads of the
bags. Wilfred and David put the sacks over their
heads and shoulders, They were like capes.
f 81


“Splendid. That, at least, will save the water
from trickling down your necks,” praised Margery.
The boys walked quietly up to the horses, speaking
to them in reassuring, coaxing voices, and stroking
their now rain-drenched shoulders and sides. Gradu-
ally the quivering muscles slackened, and they allowed
the lads to lead them on towards the fallen tree.
Unluckily, the track was narrower along this stretch
than it had been during the earlier part of the journey.
On both sides it was hemmed in by growths of young
gums and scrub. The trunk of the fallen tree lay
the full length of the clearing.
Mr. Pym pulled up the collar of his greatcoat.
“I must get out too. There may be some place
where we can get the wagon across. Margery, I will
hand the reins to you. But there, child, sit farther
back in the wagon. There is no reason why you, too,
should get drenched through.”
Jumping down from the step, he went to join the
two lads, who were viewing the formidable barricade
with some dismay.
“ ’Fraid we will never get the horses to pull the
waeon over this trunk. Even near the top it is feet
high”
“Do you think, Mr. Pym, that we could take the
horses out of the shafts, and lift the wagon over our-
selves,” suggested Wilfred, as he peered in comical
fashion from under the peaked point of his cornsack
cape.


“No, lad, it’s too heavy for that. But as your
explorer-father would say, Wilfred, ‘lf one cannot
make a straight path, one must go round.’ Our best
plan is to take the horses and wagon through the
timber to the right there.”
“But, gee willikins, there are all those young trees.
How will we break through them ?”
“We shall have to cut our way through with the
axe. David, go back to the wagon, and get the axe
for me. It is under the back seat.”
David nodded, and a few seconds later handed the
sharp-bladed axe to his father.
Mr. Pym was powerfully built with broad shoulders,
and could swing an axe with great strength and
precision. Soon the ring of the steel and crashing of
the young trees was heard above the wind and
beating rain, and a detour for the wagon gradually
was carved from the obstructing bush.
David and Wilfred followed behind, lifting the
hewn trees clear from the path. Forty minutes later
the horses pulled the wagon jokingly over the new-
made path, and then went forward at a brisk pace
towards the Goon-Gary Station now roughly about
one mile farther on.
The boys and Mr. Pym were wet through. The
water trickled from their hair, their boots, their arms,
and Wilfred complained bitterly that cold wet drops
kept rolling down the back of his neck.
“It’s like having tiny slithering fish sliding down


your back,” he explained. “My word, I hope they
can dig up changes of clothing for us at this Goon-
Gary place. If not I will have to spend the rest of
the day draped in a blanket like a Red Indian
chief.”
“Big Chief Owl-Face would be the name for you in
that case,” chuckled David. “But Margery, unless
you want to get soaked through too, you had better
move farther back into the wagon.
“Thank you, I think I had,” she replied, for already
large puddles of water were forming round the two
boys. She retired to the back of the wagon, and for
the rest of the journey sat watching the teeming rain
with wide wondering eyes.
The wind blew in great gusts from the north-east,
driving the slanting rain against the back of the
wagon, which was now fastened down with a thick
canvas cover. As they were travelling in a westerly
direction it did not beat directly on to the driver’s
seat where Mr. Pym and the boys sat. They were
ascending another hill now, and Margery could hear
the water trickling away in the opposite direction.
She knew that down every other little gutter and
valley the water was racing and gurgling downhill in
the same fashion, racing down to join the tiny rivulets
which in their turn joined the creeks, and then sped
on to become part of winding, rushing rivers which
would no longer be shallow and mud-caked, but
would run deeply and steadily.


Despite being wet through, Mr. Pym was in the
best of humours. The timely downpour had done
much to allay his fears of a dry season at Yarrambeat.
He explained to David that, if Mr. Hardiman thought
it practical, he intended to plant many rows of trees
round the homestead. He promised, too, to buy a
new horse for the lad so that he could help with the
cattle mustering.
Wilfred was now frankly envious, and seemed to
have lost all wish to return to England and join the
navy.
“When I meet my father again, I think I will have
to suggest he goes into partnership with you, Mr.
Pym,” he remarked, half jokingly, half serious. “Pd
give a lot to be able to spend the next few years with
you people at Yarrambeat.”
“Your father will have other views, I fancy.
Though, of course, you are both welcome to stay at
Yarrambeat any time. But don’t imagine, lads, the
station life will be easy. If we want to make a success
of the run, there will be hard work and disappoint-
ments as well as excitement. We have had luck on
the goldfields, certainly. But lam paying a high
price for Yarrambeat ; it will have to be run on a
business basis.”
As Margery sat behind them watching the rain
splashing on the shining gum-leaves and the darker
green of the blackwoods, she decided that the course
of events at Yarrambeat would depend largely on


the behaviour of the mysterious overseer, Abel
Hardiman. She tried to recall to mind the sketch of
him which had been shown to her by Mrs. Emily.
Then tried to think why the face had seemed so
familiar to her. Had she seen him during one of
those exciting adventures which had come the way
of David, Wilfred and herself, before gold had been
discovered at Beehive Hill near Ballarat ? Or had
he been a fellow passenger on the sailing-ship Dolphin
which had brought her family across the ocean to
Melbourne town back in 1851. There were a hundred
and one possibilities, but none of them seemed to
offer the solution to the mystery. She felt as though
the news was hidden from her as though it were in
some secret drawer. It seemed she was never to
know it, until by accident the secret spring was
touched and the hiding-place suddenly revealed.
The secret drawer was a hidden corner of her mind,
and the spring was some forgotten memory which
she knew probably would flash back to her at some
unexpected moment.
David’s exalting voice broke through her reverie.
“Loud cheers. Look, Marj. There’s the Goon-
Gary homestead.”
He was pointing to a break among some trees which
crested a slight rise. There it was at last, the roughly
built but friendly house that meant shelter, dry
clothes and warm drinks to the travellers. The
smoke from the chimney was being curled and blown


backwards and forwards by the driving rain. Mar-
gery looked at it happily.
“See, Wilfred, the smoke looks like a large finger
bidding us welcome, and telling us to hurry in to the
fire.”
Within half an hour the bedraggled party was sitting
round the smoking, crackling fire while Mr. Pym
related their frightening adventures to Mr. McGregor,
owner of the Goon-Gary Station.
The McGregor’s house was small. It contained only
one bedroom, the living-room and a kitchen with a
store-room built on. But the good-hearted man and
his wife insisted that the Pyms sheltered there that
night. It was an offer which was accepted gratefully.
The storm eased off after sunset, but the next day
the rain poured down again, and McGregor told the
Pyms that they would be foolish to continue their
journey.
“Why, mon, it would be sheer madness to go out
in this. The track will be a foot deep in mud after
the dust we have had. You would be bogged within
half an hour. You and the lads and lass are welcome
to stay on here. You must stay till the track has
dried out somewhat.”
Mr. Pym was pleased to stay. McGregor was a
shrewd man, and able to give much sound advice
about the running of cattle stations. David was
pleased to stay because the men were taking advantage
of the forced stay indoors to mend saddles and


harnesses, and he wanted to gain practice at this work.
And Margery was pleased to stay because Mrs. Mc-
Gregor was a happy person who spoke with a catchy
Scotch brogue, and her baby was very huggable,
and just at the age when he loved having someone to
play with him.
The only person who chafed under the delay was
Wilfred. His father was due to arrive by ship in
Melbourne the next day. He had hoped to be at the
wharf to meet him, and now would not be able to
keep the appointment.
“Never mind, Jellybeans. Accidents will happen
in the best of families. Directly your father learns
about this downpour of rain, he will understand at
once why you have been delayed.”
“I know that. But it rather spoils things. I
wanted to meet him when he came off the ship,”
answered Wilfred as he stared moodily from the little
window of the cottage out to the grey-green rain-
drenched countryside.
His disappointment was even keener when he
learnt that it would not be possible for them to resume
their journey even on the following day. McGregor
told them that in wet weather the tracks in the
valleys would be so deep in mud that even bullock
teams could not be taken across them. When,
finally, the Pyms did resume their journey, their pace
was considerably slower, for the horses found it hard
work pulling the wagon along the mud-clogged track.


When the Pyms finally arrived back in Melbourne
they were four days behind schedule.
Wilfred persuaded Mr. Pym to drive at once to the
general post office before returning to the house in
Jolimont.
“The post office people will be sure to know where
my father is staying. It is my quickest way to find
out,” he told the others.
“Don’t be too sure, Wilfred. There are thousands
of other people in Melbourne,” David warned.
Wilfred did not bother to reply. He merely
looked. The look plainly meant : “But, old chap, my
father is Major Jellibrand, the explorer. There is a
difference.”
The mud-spattered wagon rattled up to the post
office late that afternoon. The weather was clearing
now, and the sun doing its best to break through and
shine cheerfully. The people of Melbourne were in
winter clothes. The men in great thick coats, and
loud checked mufflers, the women warmly wrapped
in capes and shawls.
Mr. Pym wished to make inquiries regarding over-
seas mail for himself, and left Margery and David to
help Wilfred find out news regarding his father.
A thin-faced clerk with modishly trimmed side
whiskers and well-oiled hair was sorting letters at a
counter as the children came in through the door.
Wilfred tapped loudly on the desk.
“Excuse me, my man. Has Major Jellibrand left


his address here. Could you tell me where he is
staying ?”
The man looked up quickly. Something in that
glance gave Margery a horrible feeling all was not
well.
“Major Jellibrand,” the clerk broke off, hesitating.
“Why do you ask, lad ? Did you know the Major
personally ?”
Margery thought with a sudden cold fear, ‘Why
does he say “Did” know ?’
But Wilfred had not noticed the man’s agitation.
He bestowed his most beaming smile on the clerk.
“Know him, I should think so. You see, I am
Wilfred Jellibrand —the Major’s son.”
The man’s face whitened.
“Excuse me one minute.”
He disappeared into another room. The three
children waited. David and Margery were becoming
more and more uneasy, but somehow were unable to
speak about their fears to Wilfred. The fat lad
seemed to have noticed nothing.
The door of the other room opened, and at the
threshold stood an older man, Mr. Monkton, whom
the children knew. He laid a hand on Wilfred’s
shoulder.
“My lad, you must be prepared for bad news. In
fact, the worst news possible.”
The fat boy whitened. He realized at last what his
companions had guessed minutes before.


“You mean that something has happened to
father ?”
“There has been a terrific gale at sea, my boy.
Your father’s ship was wrecked two days ago off the
Gippsland coast.”
Wilfred’s throat went dry. At first he seemed
unable to speak.
“And—those on board?” he at last managed to
force out.
“Some have survived. But as far as we know
your father was not among them. It is a sad time
for many in Melbourne. You must try to bear this
sorrow as bravely as so many others have.”
Taking the fat boy’s arm, he led him to his own
office. Wilfred walked as if in his sleep. The tragic
news had come as such a shock that his brain was
temporarily numbed.
“Oh, it’s not real. I’m in a dream. It’s a dream.
I’ll wake up some time. I must.”
But Margery and David knew it was no dream.
They knew sad days loomed ahead for their erstwhile
carefree jolly companion.


CHAPTER VI
AN UNFORTUNATE GIFT
News of the tragic shipwreck of the Hortens e had
reached Melbourne the day before the Pyms arrived
back from Yarrambeat. The severe storm which the
Pyms had encountered near Goon-Gary Station had
raged along the coast with dreadful violence. The
little sailing-ship had run into the teeth of it along
the East Coast. The captain, an able navigator,
desperately had tried to steer his ship to the open
sea, but the buffeting winds and terrific seas had
driven her on to a reef where she became wedged
between clefts of rock. Some members of the crew
and three passengers who were in the stern of the ship
escaped being swept overboard, and had spent a
terrible night crouched under an awning, listening to
the huge seas breaking against the battered frame-
work of the boat. They had expected to hear the
straining timbers collapse under the pressure any
moment, but by a miracle they had remained firm.
The next day, when the storm calmed down, they
had managed to secure the one dingy left on the high
side of the ship, had floated it, and rowed seventy
miles to safety.
The remainder of the passengers and the crew had


all either been drowned or were reported missing,
Wilfred’s father being among the latter. The shock
of the tragedy left the lad half stunned for several
days. The Pyms helped all they could. Wilfred
stayed on with them at the house in Jolimont, and all
plans for his return to England were cancelled. His
mother had died some years previously, and except
for an uncle, aunt and some cousins in England, whom
he had not seen for years, Wilfred had no relations.
It seemed natural for him to remain with the Pyms.
“And I can’t help remembering,” said Margery,
with tears in her eyes, “how only a few days ago,
Wilfred had said in a joke, he’d give almost anything
to be with us at Yarrambeat during the next few
years. Do you remember, David ? It was when we
were riding along the stock-route.”
“Yes, of course I remember. I thought of it the
minute Mr. Monkton broke the news. Poor old
Jellybeans. His wish has been granted, but no one
would dream it would have come about in this way.”
A service in memorium for those lost at sea from the
Hortense was held at the new St. Paul’s Church in
Flinders Street. All the Pyms attended, and that
afternoon Mr. Pym told Margery and David that in
order to help their young friend through these sad
days, he had decided that they must leave Melbourne
and start their new life at Yarrambeat as soon as
«
possible.
“I had very much wanted to leave you children


here in Melbourne till the winter was over,” he had
explained. “But I think new’ interests, and the
excitement of life on a cattle station, may do Wilfred
good.”
“Oh, it will, I’m sure,” was Margery’s eager reply.
“And if it’s to help Wilfred, we won’t mind the cold
and the wet.”
However, Mrs. Pym, who was in delicate health,
decided to stay in Melbourne until the end of August.
It was decided that David, Margery, Wilfred and Mr.
Pym would set out for their new home in the middle
of the month of May. The children spent the next
few weeks packing and arranging their belongings.
“I can’t understand how we’ve managed to acquire
such a weird collection of things,” observed David
one day, as he stood in the shed behind the Pym’s
house. He was surveying the huge pile of tools,
boxes, harnessing, etc., which had to be put in pack-
ing-cases ready for removal by bullock wagon.
“It’s those tools from the old mining outfits which
take up the room. They were dumped here after we
came down from the Beehive Hill diggings.” Wilfred
looked in a friendly way at a well-worn pickaxe with a
smooth short handle. He had wielded it for many
tiring hours on the gold claim where the Pyms’ luck
at last had turned good.
“And, hullo—look at this. Remember this old
thing, David ?” With a smile such as the other two
had not seen for many a day he fished out a battered


shallow tin dish. Up in the hills they had used that
dish week after weary week washing for the colour of
gold.
As he stooped to pick it up, a loud squawk was heard,
and from under a pile of rubbish emerged an indignant
hen, wings spread, feathers ruffling and clucking
angrily.
Margery raced forward eagerly.
“So this is where Biddy has been laying her eggs.
Let me see.” She went forward gingerly, and peered
under the sacking.
“David, Jellybeans, come and look. There’s a
great pile of eggs here. About twenty of them.
Could you bring a basket, Wilfred ?”
The fat boy went over to the feed-box.
“I’ll put some straw in this tin dish. That will
do.”
At least three or four fowls have been laying here.
Isn’t it splendid ? Twenty eggs. Won’t Mama be
pleased ?”
“Why should she be pleased ? We’ve got plenty
of eggs already. I saw a basin full of them a while
ago, replied David with usual brotherly candour.
Margery looked thoughtful.
Oh, yes. I forgot about that. Maybe we could
give them to someone else, then. Food supplies are
scarce in Melbourne now. Lots of people would be
glad to have them.”
Mama is out at present. She could have told us


of someone,” said David as he went back to the pack-
ing-case and continued with his work.
Margery suddenly jumped to her feet, making her
full crinoline skirt swing from side to side.
“I know. I shall take them to Mrs. Stevens.”
David stared at her in amazement.
“You mean, to Jemima’s mother ?”
“Yes. She has done her best to be pleasant to us
lately. I think that perhaps she and other members
of her family are sorry for the underhand way they
behaved during the search for gold. And, anyway,
it is really not their fault that Captain Stevens is so
disliked. We will be leaving Melbourne soon. I
should like to show Mrs. Stevens that we are parting
on good terms.”
As usual, the little girl got her way. Shortly
afterwards, the three children had harnessed Ajax
to the spring cart, and were making their way towards
Captain Stevens’s home in Richmond. Many new
houses now had been built in this part of the town.
Gradually the trees were being cleared, old humpies
were being pulled down, definite roads were being
formed, and the region altogether looked far more
settled.
Margery had wrapped her favourite plaid shawl
round her shoulders. Though the day was sunny, a
keen breeze was blowing. She knew that should the
sun happen to slide behind one of the white cloud-
banks, she would be definitely cold. She also had


if * ' ~ mi
Timidly, she knocked at Mrs. Steven’s door




tied her brown bonnet over her curls. This was very
much to David’s disgust, for she was sitting between
him and Wilfred, and the ends of the ribbons which
held it in place would keep flapping in his face.
Ajax was a powerful horse, and he took them over
the rutted, bumpy road at a smart pace. As they
rounded the corner into the broader highway, they
had to swerve in order to avoid another horse which
was plodding up the hill pulling the water-cart behind
it. Water-carts were common in Melbourne. They
were large barrels fitted on a framework and attached
to four wheels. Enterprising fellows did a brisk
business by filling such barrels with water from the
river, and measuring it out to occupiers of the cottages,
huts and houses. The children watched the driver
baling water into a bucket brought out to him by a
housewife.
“Our old friend, Pengally, told me he used to be a
water carter once,” observed David.
Margery laughed.
He will be one again if he goes on spending his
money as he is doing at present. The gold he got
from the Beehive Hill claim can’t last for ever. You
just should have seen him yesterday, David. We
were at the post office. All of a sudden up came a
carriage drawn by four most beautiful horses. The
driver cracked his whip, turned them right round in
the road, and drew up with a flourish outside the
steps. It was Pengally. He w r as all dressed up in
c 97


yellow moleskin trousers and a bottle-green coat and
top-hat. Papa says if he keeps on like that he won’t
have a penny left to call his own soon.”
“But he does good with his money, too,” inter-
posed Wilfred. “He heard about the wife of a sea-
man lost in the shipwreck who was having a hard
time. He has paid for a passage for her on the next
sailing-ship back to England so she can go back to
her relations.”
“Good old Pengally. Yes, he’s got a heart of gold
all right —even though it does beat under a coat of
bright bottle-green,” David chuckled. “Now, Mar-
gery, could you tell me, please, which is the Stevens’s
house ?”
“It is one of the new houses down this track here,”
directed Margery.
She turned to Wilfred, sensing that the mention of
the shipwreck had revived sad memories for him.
“My word, Jellybeans, they’ve improved this part
of Melbourne, haven’t they ? Do you remember
how lonely it was before we went up to the gold-
fields ? It seemed just a stretch of gum-trees with a
few wooden shacks scattered about.”
The fat lad nodded.
“You’d hardly know it for the same place. But the
whole of Melbourne seems to have made a move for-
ward lately. New buildings are going up everywhere.
The new university building is splendid.”
“I haven’t seen it yet. But I hope we shall before


we go up to Yarrambeat. Maybe, David,” she added,
turning to her elder brother, “you will go to that
university one day to study bridge building.”
David shook his head.
“No, Margery, now that we’ve taken over a cattle
station, I will have my work cut out helping Papa to
make a success of the venture. We will have to work
hard if we want to make a success of Yarrambeat.”
His sister nodded.
“Yes, of course. And there will be plenty for me
to do too. Have I told you boys how, I think, I can
help best at Yarrambeat?”
“Trying to teach the fowls to lay scrambled eggs,
I suppose,” retorted Wilfred, with a flash of his old
teasing.
Margery shook her head.
No. I’m going to make a garden round that
house. The sort of garden which will remind us of
the old home back in England. Hollyhocks and
honeysuckle, and perhaps wallflowers and lavender.”
David was matter-of-fact.
You will find it hard to keep plants alive in the
summer.”
I will manage somehow. The gardener at the
Governor’s residence has promised me several bags of
seeds. I will make my garden grow. If you start
teasing me about it, I shan’t let you have any of the
flowers when they come out —so be warned.”
“Wilfred has got a scheme, too,” declared David


with a grin. “He says he is going to keep bees. You
will have to draw up a trade treaty with him, per-
mitting his bees to take honey from your flowers.
But, Margery, you’re forgetting to give directions.
Aren’t we nearly at the house ?”
“I’m sorry. We’ve almost driven past it. I’ve
been talking so hard about my garden I forgot to tell
you to stop.” Margery pointed to a trim stone build-
ing on the other side of the road. “That is the house.
David stopped Ajax abruptly.
“Very well. Here are your eggs. You can give
them to her.”
“Aren’t you coming with me ?”
David shook his head. He did not like Mrs. Stevens
or her daughter Jemima.
Margery turned to Wilfred, but he, too, declined to
accompany her on the visit. She climbed down from
the spring cart with her crinoline skirt held high.
Then, taking the box of eggs from her brother, she
rather dubiously went forward to the door
alone.
At first the idea of taking the gift of a box of eggs
to Jemima’s mother had seemed an excellent scheme.
It was to be a parting gift from her before leaving
for Yarrambeat. She had thought it would show
Mrs. Stevens and Jemima that she was quite willing
to forget about any past quarrels and differences that
had occurred between them. Margery still did not
forgive Captain Stevens, Jemima’s father, for the


bullying way he had carried out his duties among the
gold-miners at Ballarat. But she felt it was unfair
to keep up ill-feeling between Jemima and herself
because of Captain Stevens’s shortcomings. But as
she opened the white picket gate, and advanced
towards the front door, her confidence in the plan
began to wane. She began to think perhaps she
should have waited till some time when her own
mother was home, and then made the visit with her.
She also felt she should have put on her best brown
cloak, instead of arriving in her old shawl and bonnet.
She almost turned round and went back. But with
Wilfred and David watching from the cart, she knew
that if she did that she would be teased for days.
Timidly, she knocked at the door.
It was Mrs. Stevens who answered. Margery
heard the rustle of her heavy silk gown as she came
to the door, then recognized the familiar finicky little
cough. The lady’s eyebrows rose a fraction when she
saw her visitor.
“Good afternoon, Mrs. Stevens,” said Margery
curtseying. “Our family will be leaving Melbourne
for our new home at Yarrambeat in a few days’ time.
I brought you this box of eggs.”
“A box of eggs. Thank you, Miss Margery. A
kind thought. I wish you and your family every
success. They tell me that Yarrambeat is not far
from the Bung-Bung Run.”
Ido not know about that. I only know the names


of one or two of the runs adjoining ours. But the
homestead is out beyond Dandenong.”
“Aha, yes —then it will be quite near to Bung-Bung.
It is quite possible you may meet Jemima and me
some time when we go there for a holiday. We have
been invited many times.”
Margery made no reply. She did not look forward
to the thought of Jemima and her mother staying at
a cattle run near to Yarramheat. She said good-bye
to Mrs. Stevens, who seemed delighted to receive the
eggs. Then she went down the garden path and up
into the spring cart, to tell Wilfred and David what
she had heard.
The news was not well received.
“If Jemima comes to pay us a visit at Yarrambeat,
declared Wilfred, “I will get on my horse, go out into
the bush, and camp there till she has gone. Every
time I meet that girl, she causes trouble.”
“Well, by taking the eggs I’ve shown I am willing
to sign a truce of peace,” said Margery. “I’m glad
I’ve done it. I should not like to leave Melbourne
without having made some attempt to settle our
differences.”
The afternoon was nearly over now, and the sun
was dipping quickly to the reddening skyline in the
west. The sharper wind and colder air whipped the
children’s cheeks to a rosy red. Ajax, sensing that
feeding time was near, took them back to the house at
a brisk pace.


The outing gave the children a hearty appetite for
their tea. After the dishes had been cleared away,
the lamp was taken down to the shed, and the boys
and Mr. Pym went on packing belongings in boxes.
Margery and Mrs, Pym continued sewing at a service-
able brown serge frock which the little girl was having
made to wear at the Yarrambeat cattle station.
Suddenly a loud knocking on the front door was
heard.
“Run and tell Papa to answer the door, dear,”
directed Mrs. Pym. Owing to the number of unruly
characters in Melbourne at the time, Mr. Pym had
said that neither she nor Margery were ever to open
the door to strangers.
Margery called to her father, who brought the
lantern. He tramped up to the front door and pulled
back the heavy bolt. The caller was a man whom
he did not know. He had a box in his hands.
“Returned to Miss Pym from Mrs. Stevens,” he
remarked. He handed over the box, touched his cap,
and walked briskly off. The astonished Mr. Pym
examined the box carefully, rebolted the door, then
went back to the sitting-room to his wife and daughter.
“Here is a box for you, Margery. It is from Mrs.
Stevens.”
Margery’s eyes shone.
From Mrs. Stevens ! It must be in return for the
eggs which I took her.”
Mrs. Pym looked up.


“You took eggs to Mrs. Stevens, Margery ! When
was that ?”
As Margery undid the tightly knotted string, she
explained to her mother how she and her brother had
discovered the eggs in the shed. Then how she had
decided to take them to Mrs. Stevens to show she
wished to forget about past differences.
“I am glad my daughter has learnt it does no good
to continue harbourin 0 ill-feeling against others,”
approved Mrs. Pym. Then she paused, sniffing at
the air in surprise. “But what can be the reason for
this sudden and distressing smell ?”
Margery stood staring at the box with some
doubt.
“There seems to be a certain something about that
box,” she cautiously remarked.
David and Wilfred, who had come up from the
shed to learn the reason for Mr. Pym’s delay, were
now at the door. They also sniffed, and then con-
firmed Margery’s suspicions with characteristic blunt-
ness.
“I should say there was something about it,”
gasped Wilfred.
“Rotten eggs,” gasped David, in the same breath.
“R-r-rotten eggs,” repeated Margery in dazed
tones. Mrs. Pym, with her handkerchief to her nose,
hastily left the room.
“There is a note tied to the other side of the box.
It may explain,” chuckled Wilfred. He was now used


to the penetrating odour, and it did not seem to
trouble him.
Margery opened the folded piece of paper gingerly.
She cleared her throat, swallowed hard, and then
read :
“Mrs. Stevens returns the eggs sent to her by Miss
Pym. She does not regard such an unladylike action as
humorous. Unless an instant apology is forwarded , the
matter will he reported to the local paper for general
publication,”
There was a horrified silence. Then Wilfred
started to laugh. He could not help it. He sat on the
couch, wheezing and rocking with mirth till the tears
rolled down his fat cheeks, and the whole room
seemed to shake and chuckle with him. David joined
m. And Margery, dismayed as she was to think that
her good intentions had taken such an unexpected
turn, also soon saw the funny side of the situation.
Ha, ha! Can’t you imagine Mrs. Stevens’s
expression when she started to crack the eggs,”
gurgled Wilfred.
She s evidently quite sure that the whole incident
was carefully planned,” added David. “You’ll be in
her black books more than ever now, Margery.”
It s dreadful,” agreed the little girl, sobering up.
One of us should have realized it was likely that
the whole nest of eggs belonged to the one hen. I


don’t suppose Mrs. Stevens would ever believe this
was all an accident.”
“She never will. Still, you will have to write the
apology.”
“I will write it out first thing to-morrow morning.”
Wilfred took up the box.
“Allow me to take the—er —remains, and place
them outside in the garden,” he suggested. He went
down the passage, his lat shoulders still shaking.
Still leaning against the door, David looked after
his friend affectionately.
“Do you know,” he told his sister, “this is the
first time I have heard Jellybeans laugh properly
since the shipwreck.”
Margery nodded.
“I was thinking the very same thing.”


CHAPTER VII
ABEL HARDIMAN
The Pyms’ two wagons drawn by the long teams of
great horned bullocks caused little comment as they
squeaked and rumbled their way from Jolimont into
Melbourne town and along Flinders Street. The
people were used to such sights. Vehicles of all types
took people and supplies to the many goldfields
daily, and other loads came to and from the great
sailed ships that anchored in the river below the fine
stone bridge Mr. Lennox had built. The townsfolk
too, were used to the many changes and moves caused
by the sudden rise and fall of people’s fortunes.
Nothing astounded the Melbourne people of the
1850’s. The appearance of the Pyms’ two great
wagons loaded high with furniture, baggage, and
supplies merely formed one unit in the continual
procession which passed their doors.
The average pace of the bullocks was two miles per
hour. Contrary to the usual custom, their drivers
did not turn them to the right in the direction of the
road leading to Bendigo, Ballarat, and the other gold
diggings. They were piloted along Flinders Street
until Swanston Street was reached. Then, with much
whip-lashing and shouting, were guided across Princess


Bridge. They then followed St. Kilda Road for a
short distance, turning off on to a stock-route which
led to the open country.
Sometimes the people they passed paused in their
work to wave to them, or to shout friendly wishes
for good luck in their new venture. New settlers
often passed along the roads. Sometimes in a few
months the people saw the same travellers returning
to the town again, unable to stand up to the loneliness
and hardship of a settler’s life. Some of the new-
comers prospered, and their families grew up there in
that Australian bush country till they seemed rooted
to it like the trees. There were always new settlers
coming. The two wagons with their loads and bullocks
were not an uncommon sight.
That night the travellers pitched camp before
reaching the Dandenong station. The bullocks were
watered, a roaring fire was built to cook the meal
and to counteract the chilling effect of the keen
evening wind. All were up early next morning, and
shortly after sunrise, when the dew was still heavy
on the grass, the bullocks began plodding their way
along to the next stretch of the stock-route. The
farm holdings increased in size till they gave way to
great stretches of uncleared country broken only by
a few acres of home paddock, and patches of cultiva-
tion round small slab houses.
Wilfred and a stockman named Joe Huntswood
were in charge of one wagon. Mr, Pym drove the


other bullock team, and Margery and David sat with
him. The loads had been built up high in the front
in order to provide a breakwind for the travellers.
David and Mr. Pym wore their greatcoats and
mufflers, and Margery was warmly dressed in a warm
cloak of her favourite brown, and a brown cloth
bonnet trimmed with blue ribbons. Her hands were
encased in warm woollen gloves, and her feet were
kept warm with woollen stockings knitted by Mrs,
Pym. Being snugly wrapped up in this fashion, little
Miss Pym enjoyed the journey. She never tired of
watching the changing colours of the rugged blue-
grey mountains that followed on their left through
the whole of the trek. The changing mists of the late
autumn weather made them even more beautiful.
“Have people ever settled up in those mountains,”
she asked her father.
Mr. Pym shook his head.
No, Margery very few. The mountains are still
the haunts of the Dandenong aboriginal tribes. A
few gold prospectors have been through the country,
but much of it is still unexplored.”
It is heavily timbered, I suppose,” remarked
David.
Oh, yes though much of it was burnt in the
great fire of 1851. They tell me that very beautiful
fern gullies are to be found in those mountains. Also
t at a wonderful bird with a magnificent coloured
tail lives there.”


“And they told me that on the flats to our right
the terrible bunyip lives,” interposed David. He
waved his hand towards the country to the south of
the stock-route. This land sloped away to flat plains
and then to a huge swamp.
Margery looked thoughtful. She had often heard
stories about the bunyip, the terrible creature which
the Victorian blacks declared roamed the swamps,
and sometimes on dark nights filled the countryside
with fearsome bellows. People in Melbourne said no
such creature existed. But when Margery had lived
in England she had heard people declare that no
animal peculiar as a kangaroo could ever exist except
in the imagination of travellers. And when she had
come to Victoria she had found kangaroos did exist.
She had often seen the long-tailed creatures with their
great back legs and weak, diminutive front paws go
bounding across the bush country with baby kangas
peering out from the snug pouches their mothers
provided for them. Since kangaroos were real, why
should not bunyips be real also ? She reserved her
opinion till later.
The bullocks plodded on, pulling the cumbersome
wagons across creeks, up steep slopes and along the
rutted, uneven stock-route. After a long, uncomfort-
able journey, the bullocks at last pulled up at the
slope on which the Yarrambeat homestead was built.
It was late afternoon when they arrived. The mild
sun was sliding lower and lower towards the western


horizon. Pink sunset clouds were already appearing.
The house stood out sharply against the bluish back-
ground of the ranges. They, in their turn, were
boldly outlined against the glowing sky. The travel-
weary Pyms gazed at the scene in silence.
T am coming to my new home,’ thought Margery
to herself. ‘My life from now on will be bound up
with all that happens on Yarrambeat. It is going to
be all very different. But I think, somehow, I shall
like it.’
Mr. Pym was thinking much the same thing. So
was David, until suddenly the deep-throated barks
of a dog started up. The lad paled slightly, but
strove to keep calm.
“Listen—there is that brute of a dog, Nero !”
Nero was the fierce dog who had savagely attacked
David on their previous visit to Yarrambeat. He
was a great woolly-haired retriever. Margery, too,
was frankly terrified of him.
Mr. Pym reflectively flicked the stock-whip.
Now that you two children are coming to live on
a cattle station you must remember this. You must
learn that you must, on no account, ever show
animals you are in any way afraid of them.”
But you can’t help being afraid if they rush at
you and mean to bite,” Margery objected.
Perhaps. But never show it. You must face up
to the creature without flinching. Once you draw
back or show signs of fright a dog senses the weakness


immediately. A stout heart will make you master
of any dog.”
Margery looked doubtful.
“When the dog is savage, I’m sure it wouldn’t do
any harm to have a stout stick, too, she ventured.
David, recalling his unfortunate experience with
Nero, gave her a sympathetic glance.
The tired bullocks stopped before the first gate.
“Out you get, David, my boy,” directed Mr. Pym.
“Jump down and take down the sliprails.
Though Nero’s angry barking could still be heard,
no sign of him was to be seen, so David concluded
that the dog must be on his chain. Glad to stretch
his cramped legs, the boy jumped to the ground.
When he had got the sliprails down, Mr. Pym had
to shout vigorously and crack his stock-whip in order
to force the weary bullocks into motion once more.
At last, with heads bent forward, and great backs
straining, they went on up the hill. The second
wagon followed. When they had both passed through
the gate, Wilfred and David slid the rails back into
position and followed the wagons up the hill. The
sunset clouds now stretched half-way across the sky,
and the entire countryside was bathed in a soft
glow.
Wilfred stamped along, clapping his hands and
making sudden jumps in order to stretch his cramped
limbs. The stone walls of the Yarrambeat house
looked solid and warm. Smoke blew up into the sky


from two chimneys. An occasional spark, too, darted
up from the chimneys, whirled gaily round in an
upward dance, then disappeared.
“Aha. Methinks someone must be cooking,”
approved the fat boy. He immediately sank into a
pleasant day-dream trying to work out what they
might expect for dinner.
As was the usual custom, Mr. Fairbridge and his
sisters were not moving out of Yarrambeat until the
Pyms were properly settled. This meant that Mr.
Pym would have time to gain much valuable advice,
and also would learn how to deal with the native
tribes, the marketing of the cattle, and other points.
It also meant that the new-comers would receive a
warm welcome on their arrival. The time taken for
the trip from Melbourne by bullock wagon varied a
great deal, so no exact day had been fixed for the
Pyms s arrival. But the Moore sisters were pre-
pared for their arrival, and expecting them any
time. They came out of the front door, as the
bullocks brought the wagons to a standstill before
the second set of sliprails.
“Come on, Jellybeans,” shouted David to the fat
lad. Wilfred was so busy speculating on what type
of he would be given that he had dropped
behind. “Come on, we should have had these slip-
rails down minutes ago. Oh—l beg your pardon, sir.”
He pulled up sharply. Owing to the shadows from
near by gum-tree, and the fading light, he had not
H 113


seen the tall gaunt figure leaning against the gatepost.
“Mind out there, lad. You’ll have to keep your
eyes open now you’ve come to live on a cattle run,” a
gruff voice barked at him.
David murmured an apology, then stepped back
as he saw the stranger was now letting the sliprails
down for him.
“Tell me, sir,” he asked, “are you Mr. Hardiman,
Mr. Fairbridge’s overseer ?”
“Aye. I be Hardiman. No need for any sir,
though. There be no need to ask your names. I
suppose both you boys be sons of Mister Pym
Yarrambeat’s new owner,”
David glanced up curiously. The fading light
made it hard to gain a clear view of the man’s face.
Except for the drooping sandy moustache and bushy
eyebrows, it was hidden by the shadow from the large
cabbage-tree hat. He wore a thick jacket, well-
worn leather breeches, and great high gum-boots. He
walked with the slightly rolling gait of a man spending
many hours on horseback.
“You’ll both be sons of Mr. Pym,” repeated Hardi-
man, his voice taking on a surlier tone. David had
a vague feeling he had heard that voice before.
“Er—no. That is—l am. But my companion is
a friend. Master Wilfred Jellibrand.”
“H’mm. Jellibrand, eh ? Any relation to that
Major Jellibrand, the explorer, that they said went
down in the Hortense shipwreck.”


“Yes. Son,” replied Wilfred shortly.
‘H’mm,’ thought the indignant David to himself.
‘I can see, Mr. Abel Hardiman, that you don’t worry
much how you hurt the feelings of others. I should
think anyone would have more sense than to fire out
a question of that typed
But Mr. Hardiman did not seem at all concerned.
“Well, lads, if you’ve come here to live at Yarram-
beat, I hope you’re used to hard work. It be not all
beer and skittles on a cattle run, you know.”
Trying not to appear annoyed, David replied, “Yes,
we know that, Mr. Hardiman. But we’re not afraid
of hard work. We’re used to it. We did a good bit
of it, you know, when we were up working on our gold
claim at Beehive Hill, Ballarat.”
“Gold claim ! Bah !” Mr. Hardiman’s voice took
an even surlier note. “You be all alike, you gold
grubbers. Come out here, and think you can lord it
over the whole colony, and all because you’ve been
lucky enough to scratch a bit of gold out of the rocks.
You think just because you’ve got a bit of gold you
can buy up the land, and be lording it like kings over
those who came out here in the ’thirties and ’forties
and did the dirty work.”
David stared at him.
“Mr. Hardiman, we don’t think anything of the
sort. On the contrary . . .” But here the more
tactful Wilfred interrupted his remarks by giving a
vicious poke in the ribs.


“No use arguing with anyone in a temper,” was his
whispered advice.
Realizing the sense of this counsel, the other lad
bit his lip, and kept his other angry thoughts to
himself.
“Aye, you be all alike,” continued the surly Abel
Hardiman. “Think you can come out here and be
lording it like kings over those who cleared the land
in the first place. And just because you have had
the good luck to scratch up a bit of gold. Well, Mr.
Fairbridge has made the agreement for me to stay
on here at Yarrambeat long as I like. You can’t lord
it over me.”
He spat vigorously to show his contempt.
“You can leave your wagons along here. I can’t
stop now. Have to be seeing to the horses,” and
without waiting to say anything to Mr. Pym, the
strange stockman stumped off to the stables.
The two lads stared after him in amazement.
“Help ! Mortimor Brown and the other squatters
were right. We certainly can expect trouble from
that fellow,” observed David in dismay.
“I wouldn’t worry about it. When chaps like him
feel grumpy they often say more than they really
mean to. When, to-morrow, he realizes how rude
he’s been, he’ll probably want to eat his hat.”
“No—not one of that cabbage-tree type,” returned
David more cheerily. “Anyway, I hope he doesn’t
keep up that sort of attitude for long. If he’s deter-


mined to start a feud with us, it’s going to be un-
pleasant all round. But, Jellybeans, maybe it would
be best if we didn’t tell Margery and Papa about all
this. No use in upsetting them too.”
“No use at all,” agreed the fat boy. “Might spoil
their tea for them.”
David chuckled.
“Five minutes with Mr. Abel Hardiman in that
type of mood is enough to spoil anyone’s tea. But
do you know, Jellybeans, I’m beginning to agree
with Margery. I’m certain I have met Abel Hardi-
man before.”
“Can’t say I do. But then, I didn’t get as close a
view as you did. Maybe when his temper is a bit
better, we can ask him some questions.”
“Coo-ee!” Margery’s clear voice came ringing
across the now almost dark paddock.
“Gee Willikins. They’re down from the wagons
and are going over to the house. We’ve been talking
longer than w r e thought.” Breaking into a run,
David went quickly to join his father and sister,
followed by a puffing Wilfred.
The two sisters of Mr. Fairbridge had come out to
meet the new-comers. Their friendly welcome was a
striking contrast to the surly mutterings of Mr.
Hardiman. Ushering the Pyms and Wilfred inside,
they led them straight to the living-room, where a
great fire was roaring up the stone chimney.
Margery clapped her hands and ran towards it,


holding out both upturned palms towards the friendly
warmth. The two lads followed her, when suddenly
David, with a muffled sound of dismay, drew Wilfred
back into the passage.
“What’s the matter, Davey Jones ? Swallowed a
fly, have you ? Or was it you bit your tongue ?”
asked his friend quizzically.
“No, Wilfred. This is serious. Listen. I’ve
remembered where it was we’ve met Abel Hardiman
before.”
Wilfred raised an inquiring eyebrow.
“He was that man in the store. The man you
upset the pepper over.”
It was the fat lad’s turn to gasp.
“What ! the fellow who got the showerbath of
pepper ? Yes, I believe you’re right. Phewww !
This is going to be pleasant. Think he’ll remember,
too ?”
“Men of Abel Hardiman’s type seldom forget an
injury, even when it occurred by accident, was the
slow "rejoinder. “I feel there’ll be some sparks flying
between we three and the Yarrambeat overseer.
Wilfred shot him a quick look.
“More than sparks, Davey ! It will be a complete
fireworks display !”


CHAPTER VIII
ANOTHER MISHAP
It was not until the next day that Margery heard
about David’s unfortunate discovery. The long
journey in the jolting bullock wagon had made her
very tired. Mr, Fairbridge’s sister, Mrs. Amy Moore,
had seen that she could hardly keep awake, and had
whisked her off to bed directly she had finished her
meal of hot soup and beef stew. The two boys were
given no time to pass the important news on to her.
She was taken to a small room at the side of the house.
By the light of the flickering candle, its stone walls
looked cold and cheerless, but the trundle bed was
heaped with rugs and a thick patchwork quilt. She
discovered, too, that the thoughtful Mrs. Moore had
slipped a warming-pan in between the sheets.
“Come, my dear, the sooner we get you into bed
the better,” the kindly lady remarked. She sat the
little girl down on a chair and began unlacing her
dusty boots.
Margery looked guilty.
“But, Mrs. Moore, I must help you and your sister
to wash the dishes. lam not really sleepy.” With
an effort she raised her head and opened her sleepy
eyes.


“No, Miss Margery, you may start helping to-mor-
row. Bed is the place for you to-night.”
She began unhooking the bodice of Margery’s frock.
The little girl smiled gratefully and, once in bed, sank
into the heavy dreamless sleep of one thoroughly
tired out.
Mr. Abel Hardiman had chosen to have his dinner
in the kitchen by himself, and then had gone straight
to his own hut. He made no attempt to meet the
new owner of Yarrambeat that night. Mr. Pym,
also tired and travel-worn, did not comment on this.
The next morning, of course, the dour overseer had
eaten his breakfast and was starting his day’s work
before the new-comers had even left their beds.
Margery was woken at half-past eight. A can of
warm water was brought in to her, and she washed in
a large ironstone-china basin placed on a stand in
the corner of the room. When purchasing the house
and the cattle run, Mr. Pym also had bought most of
the furniture, so Margery looked round at her new
room with great interest. There was only a small
amount of furniture in it, and it was all very plain.
The truckle bed in which she had slept was in one
corner, the washstand in the opposite one. By the
window was a small bureau with a round mirror
hanging over it, and next to it was a wardrobe cup-
board in which frocks and coats could be kept. The
cupboard had curtains of faded chintz, and the
curtains were of the same material. Two sheepskin


Another Mishap
rugs were on the floor. While Marger\ was combing
out her tangled curls, she peeped out of her window.
To her delight, she discovered that her room faced
the north, thus giving her a good view of the blue-grey
mountains which she liked so well. The previous
evening, the sunset light had deepened the colour of
the mountains, making them a misty violet. In this
crisp morning air they seemed more massive and
much closer. They seemed to form a protective
barrier guarding the cattle station from danger.
Margery was glad that her room was not on the other
side of the house. There her only view would have
been one of paddocks and bush timber merging in the
distance into the drab brown of the swamplands.
Margery had a thick red-flannel petticoat to wear
under her brown frock, and was glad of it too. There
had been a slight frost the previous night, and though
the sun now shone down cheerily, there was little
warmth in it. She came from her room, closing the
door softly behind her. At first the house seemed
cold and empty. Then suddenly she heard the dis-
tant sound of someone singing. Following the tuneful
sound, she came to the Yarrambeat kitchen. She
opened the door, and saw Mrs. Emily busily working.
Her black frock with its full crinoline skirt had a large
check apron tied over it.
Good morning, Mrs. Emily. That is a pretty song
you’re singing.”
The singer turned round, smiling cheerily.


“Yes, Margery. It is a cradle song by a composer
called Mozart. When my sister and I were your age,
we both learned singing and pianoforte from an old
German music teacher. He loved the simple beau-
tiful melodies of Mozart. We were taught many of
them.”
“Before we left England, I learnt singing too,”
replied Margery thoughtfully. “But I have had no
lessons since we came to the colony.”
“Try to continue your studies if you can, my dear.
When you are older you will never regret it. Here in
the bush country, my sister and I have made many a
lonely hour pass quickly by, because of music.”
Margery looked at the elder woman admiringly.
Her smooth coiled hair was grey, and her outdoor
life had made her skin faded and wrinkled. But her
eyes had a calm, serene look, and her smile was kind.
“It’s wonderful to think you and your sister have
managed Yarrambeat so well during Mr. Fairbridge’s
illness,” the little girl said earnestly.
Mrs. Emily took up a bowl, and going to the fire,
served up some porridge from a black pot.
“Why, child, the work of the last few years has
been easy compared with the trials we went through
when we landed in Melbourne in 1841. We did have
a great deal to put up with in those days. We never
knew when we might be held up and speared by
tribes of hostile blacks. I shall never forget the first
journey here by bullock wagon. It took many


Another Mishap
weeks. We were nearly thrown out time and time
again.”
“Yes, it must have improved a great deal from
those days.”
“Yarrambeat then was a tiny wattle-and-daub
hut, not the strong stone house it is now.”
“It is a splendid house now. Much better than my
brother and I had expected, and much better than
most other houses we passed on the way here.”
Mrs. Emily watched Margery eating the porridge.
“My brother had this strong house built because
he thought he and his family would live here for many
years. But that wasn’t to be.”
Margery nodded sympathetically.
“However, our loss is your gain,” continued the
elder woman. “You couldn’t get a house like this
built these days. Everyone is at the goldfields. You
couldn’t for the love of money hire builders to come
out on a cattle-run these days.”
Margery nodded. She had heard many people
complaining of this. The hope of striking it rich at
Ballarat, Sandhurst, had caused practically all the
workmen in Melbourne to rush to the fields, and in
most trades there were no workmen available, no
matter what wages were offered.
“But now I must go and see how Mr. Fairbridge is
this morning,” said Mrs. Emily. “Here is your warm
milk, my dear. I shall leave you to finish your
breakfast alone.”


“Have all the others had theirs ?”
“Yes, they have all gone outside. Mr. Pym is
being shown around by Abel Hardiman. The two
lads are exploring for themselves.”
Margery finished her breakfast, washed up the
plates, then went out of doors to join Wilfred and
David. The kitchen door faced west, and she found
herself looking at a stretch of ground sheltered, on
one side, by four great red box gums, while sheds, a
barn, stables, and cow yards shut in the opposite
side.
Deep growls from the direction of the woodheap
suddenly reminded Margery of the existence of Nero,
Mr. Hardiman’s savage black dog.
‘Oh, dear, I do hope Wilfred and David aren’t over
there near that brute,’ she thought. Then, to her
relief, she heard her brother calling to her from the
opposite direction.
“Hullo, David. Isn’t it a lovely morning ? And
doesn’t Yarrambeat look splendid this morning ?”
David grinned down on her.
“Do you remember how dry and parched everything
looked when we came here before ? The rain has
made a wonderful difference. You would hardly
think it was the same place.”
Margery rubbed her hands and stamped her feet,
for the air was crisp and cold.
“Where is everyone else ?”
“Wilfred has gone to fetch some feed for his horse,


Another Mishap
Ajax. Papa is being shown round the place by Mr.
Abel Hardiman.”
“Why didn’t you go with them ?”
David glanced round quickly. He wanted to make
sure no one else was within earshot.
“Both Jellybeans and I thought it wiser to keep
away. Margery, last night we made a discovery that
is going to make things fairly awkward for us
three !”
“How ?”
“Remember how both of us have said we thought
we’d met Abel Hardiman somewhere before ?”
Margery nodded. “I thought that directly I saw
his picture. But I still can’t recall just where it
was.”
“I can. I met Abel face to face last night. I
knew at once.”
Was it as we thought ? Is he some man we’ve
met on the goldfields ?”
“No. Be prepared for a shock. Abel Hardiman
is the man whom Jellybeans tipped pepper over in
Mrs. Taggerty’s store that time.”
Margery’s brown eyes opened wide. She opened
her mouth to reply, but no sound came.
Oh, David, how dreadful!” she at last managed to
gasp out. “Yes, I believe it is. How terrible.
Whatever will we do ?”
“I really don’t know what to do. When Wilfred
comes back, we three had better have a conference.


Take my advice, and walk over this side, Marj. The
yard gets muddy farther on.”
Clutching at the thick folds of her skirt, Margery
drew back quickly. David’s news had so agitated her
that she had scarcely noticed the mud.
“David, do you think we ought to say anything
about this to Mr. Hardiman, or just hope he has for-
gotten us. Did he seem to recognize you or Wilfred ?”
“I don’t think so. But directly we discovered
who he was, we both took good care to keep in the
background. This morning, when we heard he was
coming into the kitchen to meet Papa, we both made
a quick exit.”
“I don’t blame you.”
“And you see, to make matters worse, he wasn’t
over-polite to us last night. He told us very plainly
that he doesn’t think very highly of the folk who have
come to the colony in the last few years and struck
gold. He thinks that the old pioneers of the ’forties
did all the hard work, and now the gold-diggers of
the ’fifties are getting all the benefits. In fact,”
added the lad ruefully, “we got the impression that
he didn’t seem pleased to have us here at all.”
“But that’s all so foolish, Mr. Fairbridge was only
too pleased to sell out to Papa. He is ill and old.
He doesn’t want to stay here.”
“Abel Hardiman isn’t the sort of person you can
argue with. Once a man of his type gets an idea into
his head, nothing will change his mind.”


Another Mishap
“I hope he doesn’t make remarks like that to
Papa.”
I don t think so. He may have been sorry he said
so much to us. But Papa has had very little
experience with cattle. Mr. Abel Hardiman won’t
make things easy.”
“We will just have to be on our very politest beha-
viour and take no notice of pinpricks. We must just
refuse to get annoyed.”
Ajax and the other horses had been brought to
Yarrambeat some weeks before. Wilfred naturally
had been anxious to see his horse again, and had gone
straight to his stable.
“Jellybeans told me that he was going off to look for
some hay for Ajax. I wonder where he has got to.
Surely it can’t have taken him all this time to
find it.”
“Here he is now,” cried Margery, suddenly catching
sight of Wilfred’s plump figure rounding a shed. He
was carrying a large bundle of grass hay.
“Why ever did you come back that roundabout
way ? asked David with some surprise.
Wilfred began feeding the long-stemmed grass hay
to his very appreciative horse.
“It’s aff very well for your father to talk about
looking dogs straight in the eye,” he told his two
friends, “but I am taking no chances for a day or
two. Mrs. Emily told me there was grass hay in that
am there. I found it all right. But just as I was


coming out of the door I saw Nero’s big greeny-yellow
eyes glaring at me from round a corner.”
“Isn’t he on his chain ?”
“I didn’t stop to find out. I made off for my life
round the other side of the barn. Then I climbed
through a fence, and came across behind that shed.”
“All your efforts were wasted, Jellybeans,” chuckled
the other lad. “Nero is on his chain. Mrs. Emily
made sure of that for us.”
“Well, I didn’t know. And I wasn’t taking any
risks. But, Davey, did you tell Margery the news ?”
David nodded. While the fat lad stood feeding
the sweet grass hay to the horse, the three children
discussed the situation. They decided that their
safest course was to say nothing for the present, and
wait to see if Abel Hardiman mentioned the incident
himself.
“Here he comes now. Look, he and Papa are going
to the barn. He is a very funny-looking person,”
observed Margery.
“Yes,” agreed Wilfred. “His legs are so bow-
legged they look like the curved front legs of an
arm-chair that used to belong to my grandma. And
I don’t think much of that cabbage-tree hat old
Wire -Whiskers is wearing.”
“Wilfred, you must not call him names like that,”
scolded Margery. “Think how annoyed he would be if
he got to hear about it,”
The two men had crossed the yard, stopped for a


Another Mishap
moment to inspect some fowls, tlien crossed over
towards the barn. The next moment an angry shout
was heard.
“Out of here, you villain ! Out ! Get out ! Out
of here this minute.”
The astonished children then saw a large cow being
hustled from the barn to the accompaniment of angry
shouts and oaths. Next moment Mr. Hardiman, his
cheeks a dull, angry red, rushed out, shaking his fist
threateningly.
“Who left the door of the barn open like that.
Come on now, own up ! Who did it ?”
Wilfred’s cheeks went scarlet. With quaking heart,
he stepped forward.
“It—it was me.”
Huh. It be you, eh ? Well, a pretty kettle of
fish this be. Let me tell you, you young ignoramus,
that there was a sack of special seed maize in that
barn there. Polly went straight for it. She has just
on eaten the lot of it.”
“Sp-sp-special seed maize,” stuttered the horror-
struck Wilfred. “Oh—how t-t-terrible. I can only
say I’m very sorry about it.”
I can see I be in for a fine time with you three young
scatter-brains here at Yarrambeat. Them that" don’t
know the A B C of station ways should stay in Mel-
bourne till they have learnt a few things.” He
turned angrily towards Mr. Pym, who had hurried


along to join him. “You can take it from me, Mr.
Pym, ’t won’t be my fault if the feed crop be not
up to normal this year.”
“It was extremely careless of you, Wilfred,”
reproved Mr. Pym in stern tones. “The shutting of
all doors and gates is one of the strictest rules when
stock is about. Mr. Hardiman went to much trouble
to get that seed maize. It was a special improved
type.”
Wilfred knew it would be useless to explain that
he had been frightened by the sight of Nero. He
took his scolding meekly, then, in shocked silence, he,
Margery and David tiptoed away from the angry
overseer directly the chance came.


CHAPTER IX
SOME SOUND ADVICE
“Gee willikins ! I promise I’ll never leave another
door or gate on Yarrambeat open again as long as I
live,” declared Wilfred ruefully, some time later.
three children were in the kitchen. The
Fairbridges had left the station that morning. The
bullock driver who had brought the Pyms’ belongings
to Yarrambeat, had been commissioned to take away
the Fairbridges’ goods on the return journey. Mrs.
Amy and Mrs. Emily had left with Mr. Fairbridge at
the same time. They were travelling in a cart
drawn by two horses. Mrs. Emily was to drive part
of the way, then would hand the reins over to Mrs.
Amy. Both ladies were well equipped with pistols
and ammunition, and had declared that they had
no fear of either bushrangers or blacks.
“A cool head and a steady aim are safe passports
in the bush,” Mrs. Emily had declared, as Margery
helped her hook up the bodice of her black serge
travelling-dress. Mr. Fairbridge, looking frail and old,
had shaken hands with all of them. He had wished
them every success, and told Mr. Pym to be sure and
let him know how things were going on at Yarrambeat
from time to time. The Pyms did not linger over the


farewells, for they knew that the parting must be a
very sad one for him. Mrs. Emily was grateful to
them for this. As soon as possible she and her
sister helped the old pioneer into his seat, cracked
the whip and started off.
The bullock wagon had left before sunrise, and was
some miles on ahead. Margery, David and Wilfred
stood on the Yarrambeat front verandah watching
the cart clatter on down the twisting track, till it
disappeared among the gums and scrub.
Abel Hardiman also watched the departure. He
leant against a post, arms crossed, and face set and
grim. Margery could see how sad and lonely he was
feeling as he watched his former master leave Yarram-
beat. Although she knew that usually he had
breakfast at the hut with the two stockmen, this
morning she went up to him, shyly asking .
“Mr. Hardiman, this morning, won’t you come
and have a mug of tea with us in the warm
kitchen ?”
“Eh ? What’s this ?” The man started up as
though just woken from a dream.
“It’s cold this morning. I thought you might like
another cup of hot tea,” faltered Margery in a less
confident tone.
Abel Hardiman snorted.
“No thanks, miss. Morning tea parties are not in
my line. We’ve got a bit of mustering to get done
this morning. No time to waste, and replacing his


pipe, he stumped off down the slope and across to
the stockyards.
Margery stared after him in angry astonishment,
then went back to join the boys. They already were
in the kitchen pouring out their tea.
“Gee willikins,” declared Wilfred again, after
having heard her story. “I’d given anything not to
have fallen foul of old Wire-Whiskers like that.”
“Wilfred please don’t speak of Mr. Hardiman by
that name,” begged Margery. “If he hears you he
will be even more offended. Do you think he
remembers having met us before or not ?”
“He hasn’t said anything about it. Of course it
would be silly to ask him. The best idea is to let
sleeping dogs lie. To-day he’s taking your father
to inspect part of the cattle run near a place called
Dark Rock Creek. I gave a hint or two, Davey, that
you and I would enjoy the outing, too. But I don’t
think it did very much good.”
David grinned.
“I asked about that myself to tell the truth.
Papa said that Hardiman is still very hard to deal
with. He thought it better for us to keep out of his
way until he’s forgotten about the accident with the
seed-maize. But don’t you worry about that, Jelly-
beans. Mr. Hardiman made up his mind to be surly
with us long before that door was left open.”
To be sure he did. Indeed, yes, his mind was
made up directly Mr. Fairbridge told him that the


run had been sold,” declared a quick cheerful voice
from near the door.
It was Mrs. Evans, the housekeeper who had
been engaged to look after the children and do the
cooking. She had been employed by the Fairbridge
family for many years, but when the Pyms took
over she had been visiting another cattle run, and
helping the squatter’s wife who was ill. She was a
good-natured energetic woman, and her friendly ways
were a happy relief from the truculence of the
overseer.
“To be sure yes,” she continued kindly. “Don’t
allow what old Abel says or does to worry you. He’s
like his dog Nero, Abel is. His bark is w r orse than
his bite. Just you make up your mind not to let
yourselves be worried by his queer ways. He’ll come
round sooner or later.”
“Mostly later I should say,” interposed Wilfred
gloomily. “In fact, I would give him a good six
months.”
“Indeed, no, lad. There’s no need for you to be
worried. Not the slightest need. Don’t imagine you
are in any way to blame for Abel’s surly ways. He’s
had nothing but trouble these past three years. It’s
not to be wondered that his temper is a bit on the
raw side now and again.”
David sipped at his mug of tea thoughtfully.
“Yes, I suppose he has had a lot of worry since
Mr. Fairbridge became ill. I suppose the responsibility


for the whole cattle run has been on his shoulders.”
Mrs. Evans had been in the Dandenong district for
many years, and loved nothing better than a chat
about old times. She lowered herself into a chair
by the kitchen fire, tucked some stray wisps of greying
hair under her mob cap, and stretched out her toil-
worn hands towards the glowing coals.
“Indeed, yes, Master Davey, I’ll grant you Abel has
had a fair share of responsibility. But that’s not the
only reason for his sour temper. To be sure no, it’s
the grudge he has against the gold miners !”
“Grudge against the gold miners !” The three
children bent forward to learn more.
Mrs. Evans beamed. She loved talking about
earlier days on the cattle runs, but life on Yarrambeat
was lonely, and it was only once in a long while that
she got the opportunity.
“To be sure yes,” she continued. “And there’s
ample cause for the grudge, I will say that. Though
I’ve never heard the whole story, in some way Mr.
Fairbridge once was given the chance to do a rare
good turn for Abel Hardiman. Some say that he
came out to Australia as a convict, and Mr. Fairbridge
gave him his chance to make good again. But I
can t be sure about it. Anyway Abel never forgot
that good turn, and he’s worked here as overseer
ever since.”
xMargery brushed back the rebellious curls which
kept falling across her cheek.


“And is Mr. Hardiman really so very good at his
work, Mrs. Evans ?”
“He’s first class. Indeed, there’s not another
stock-rider in the colony like him. Give him a good
horse, and he’ll do more with the cattle in half an
hour, than many others would do in half a day.
There are those that say he can cut-out and drive
off one bullock from the herd with less fuss and
more speed than any other man this side of the
ranges. Aha yes, Abel’s a wizard with the cattle.
How we’d get on without him I just don’t know, I
don’t.”
David sighed.
“I’d like to see him on the job. I wish Papa had
said we could ride out with him to-day.”
Mrs. Evans shook her head.
“It would not do at all, lad. Indeed, no, you’ll
want a fair bit of practise on the stock-horses before
you can go out among the cattle. Many of them are
half wild. It can be dangerous for those who do not
know the tricks of the trade. You’ll be wanting to
learn the use of a stock-whip before you go out with
Abel.”
Wilfred put his empty mug down on the table,
folded his arms and leaned forward.
“But, Mrs. Evans, you haven’t explained yet why
Mr. Hardiman has this grudge against gold-
diggers.”
The housekeeper smoothed down her apron.


“It’s a long story, my boy. Twas mainly for this
reason. Just when the cattle run was getting on well,
and Mr. Fairbridge had finished the building of this
fine house, someone in another part of the colony
discovered the gold. Of course, we thought it was
just idle talk. We had heard rumours of that sort
before. Indeed, yes, it’s often we’d heard of men losing
their lives searching for the gold among the ranges
up there. But as time went on, there was more talk
about it. Talk of men making fortunes in a few
months. Then we found that the stockmen and the
shepherds were giving up their work, shouldering
their bundles and setting off for the diggings them-
selves. Indeed, yes, some of them risked every
penny piece they had.”
The children nodded. They understood this,
remembering how their own uncle once had sold his
farm in Prahran merely to purchase equipment for
his first venture to Ballarat.
‘lt was about then,” continued Mrs, Evans, “that
Mrs. Fairbridge, poor soul, took ill of a fever and
sunk into a sort of decline that she never got over.
Till she came out here to the colonies, she had never
been used to hard work. But during the first years
at Yarrambeat it was work from dawn to night.
Indeed, yes, a wattle-and-daub hut was all she had
to live in for many years. The struggle wore her
out, as it did many another brave lady. Well, her
death was the first shock. Then after that the


stockmen all left and went off to try their luck at
the diggings.”
“All except Abel Hardiman that is ?”
“Oh, to be sure, yes. He stayed on. He and
Mr. Fairbridge and the two young lads were left
with the whole work of the run to carry on by their
own selves.”
“Yes, when we were at Brown’s hill, we met a
party of men from the Gippsland district,” declared
David. “The men from here might have been with
them.”
“That’s quite likely. What would be their names
now ?”
“I couldn’t remember that. I’ll try and think
about it. But what happened here after that,
Mrs. Evans ?”
“They carried on best as they could for a couple
of years. Then the year after that, that was when
we had the terrible floods. The two lads, they got
trapped when trying to rescue some of the best stock.
Both were drowned there and then. Abel said to
me at the time, none of the troubles would have
happened at all, at all, if it hadn’t been for that
gold rush.”
“But that’s hardly fair reasoning,” objected David.
“Mrs. Fairbridge’s death couldn’t in any way be
connected with the gold rush. It could hardly be
blamed for those floods either.”
“That’s true, to be sure. But if the stockmen


hadn’t gone off to the gold rush, those lads certainly
wouldn’t have been out rescuing the stock. It was
a job for grown men with more experience. They
would have foreseen the danger of getting trapped.
Abel is right there. Indirectly, the gold rush could
be blamed for the death of those two brave lads,”
“Yes, I understand that,” replied the honest-
minded David. “I am beginning to see Abel Hardi-
raan’s point of view. If he thinks like that about
things, it must have been galling for him to learn that
the station was to be taken over by a family whose
whole fortune had been won from those very gold-
fields.”
Yes, it was a bitter pill for him to swallow. But
he’ll get over it. You must all make up your minds
not to be annoyed by his peculiar ways.” She rose
to her feet, the folds of her ample skirts and apron
billowing about her like sails of a ship. “But you
must take care, look you, not to do foolish things
that will get Abel’s wild up. If you do that, there’ll
be trouble in plenty for you in the Amen corner.
Mark my words there will.”
Margery began clearing away the cups and plates.
“Yes, I can see we’ll have to be very careful. I’m
glad you have explained all this to us, Mrs. Evans.”
Yes, it s helped me understand things much
better, echoed Wilfred. He stopped suddenly, and
went across to the window. “Hullo, there go Mr.
Pym and Abel now.”


David and Margery raced over, and watched as the
men cantered off down the track.
“Who is the other rider with them,” asked Margery.
“Is it that stockman who has the nice Irish voice ?”
“Indeed, yes. It’s Rory O’Connor to be sure.”
“I thought it was. But we don’t see much of him
nor that other stockman. The one they call Ted I
mean.”
“That’s because they have their own hut. They
prefer it that way. They cook their own meals, and
do just as they like. Of course, though, they always
share our big Sunday meals. Look you boys, if you
are keen to help in the next cattle muster, you’d do
well to get hold of Rory or Ted, and ask them to
give you a few hints about things.”
“Do you think they’ll do that for us ?”
“Indeed, yes, they’ll be glad of the extra help.
They tell me that the cattle are a wild lot this year.
Maybe it’s a moonlight muster they’ll be having.
You shall have to learn a lot if you wish to help them.”
“A moonlight mustering of the cattle,” gasped
Wilfred. “Do they often do things like that ?”
“Oh, no, very seldom. But the cattle are wild this
year. When they can’t be mustered in daytime,
sometimes they find the cattle are better managed by
night. But there now, I’ve talked enough. There’s
work to be done. Miss Margery, I’ll set you to work
churning the butter in the dairy there. Perhaps you
boys could get some wood cut for me.


“Yes, certainly we can.”
“But look you children, you must promise not to
tell a soul about what you’ve learnt this morning. I
thought it best that you should know how matters
stood. But I know for sure, Abel would be most
angry if he knew I’d been telling all this to you.”
The children promised solemnly to keep the matter
to themselves. They spent a busy morning helping
Mrs. Evans, and thinking over the many things she
had told them.


CHAPTER X
CAMELS AND CATTLE-STEALERS
“Boys, I want you to undertake a special job for me
this week,” remarked Mr. Pym at dinner some
evenings later. “Mr. Hardiman says that we now
need an extra horse-paddock. To-morrow I want
you to begin clearing and cutting scrub on the stretch
between the present paddock and the creek. It will
be hard going, but at present I’m afraid we can’t
spare one of the men for that work.”
David nodded gravely.
“Oh, no. Anyway, it would be foolish to do that
when Wilfred and I can do the job. We’ll be pleased
to do it, won’t we, Jellybeans ?”
Wilfred, who was just about to bite into a large
slice of home-made bread and jam, carefully put the
slice back on his plate.
“Not having cleared much scrub in my day, I can’t
say as yet. How long will the job take, Mr. Pym ?”
“Part of the work has already been done. But I
would say it will take from three weeks to a month.
It all depends on how much wet weather we get.”
“Do we just have to cut the scrub down and burn
it ?” asked David.
“That is all. There are not many trees left on that


paddock, and those which are there all have been
ring-barked. There’s no need to worry about them.”
Margery turned toward her father quickly.
“When the clearing is finished, Papa, do you think
we could have those ring-barked trees cut down ?
I do hate seeing all those great dead gum-trees around
everywhere. At night-time they look like enormous
g osts with long arms, waiting to pounce on people.”
Her vivid description made everyone laugh. The
home paddocks in front of Yarrambeat had all been
c eared so had the first horse-paddock, and the strip
of fire-break which ran in an unbroken circle round
the entire homestead. But the land north of the
horse-paddock was still rough, though much of the
scrub had been eaten down by cattle. Several years
previously the trees here had been ring-barked, that
is, a twelve-inch length of bark had been chopped oft
round their girth about three feet from the ground.
his prevented the sap rising through the bark to the
higher part of the tree, and gradually made it wither
, le ' The trees on the slopes along the far side
the creek were so numerous that it had been a long
task to ring-bark all of them. Many already had fallen
dowm, or had been burnt off. But many were still
anding, and every now and then the crash of some
dead branch could be heard, while occasionally a noise
fantr h !?‘ d * hat “ erstwhUe forest g ian t had
Men at last. Trees of this type had networks of
enormous roots which sucked large quantities of


precious moisture from the land. When such trees
were cleared it was said to improve the land one
hundred per cent. But, as Margery said, it was a
gruesome sight to see the dried skeletons of the old
trees standing like ghosts in the clearings.
Mr. Pym was giving Margery’s remark some thought.
“When the boys have cut the scrub we may burn
off any trees which are still standing. In fact, I
think Mr. Hardiman intends doing that. I will see
what he says.”
Turning his face slightly to one side, David made
a grimace at Wilfred. Since they had arrived at
Yarrambeat, Mr. Pym seemed to be getting more and
more under the influence of Abel Hardiman. Every
time the boys asked him a question or made a sugges-
tion he refused to answer it himself, but told them he
would see what Mr. Hardiman had to say.
By nature Mr. Hardiman was obstinate and short-
tempered, but it was not for nothing that he had
earned the reputation of being the best cattleman in
that part of Gippsland. The man’s knowledge of
bush conditions and his long experience working with
cattle, made Mr. Pym feel his own inexperience
keenly. He realized that it was to his own advantage
to humour his surly overseer, and learn all he could
from him. So when Hardiman told him he suspected
that many of the cattle were missing, and that a
general muster should be arranged for the early spring,
he agreed at once. He also had agreed that the boys


should clear the new horse-paddock, thus enabling
Rory and Ted to be free for cattle work.
After dinner was over, and the dishes had been
cleared away and washed, Margery sat by the blazing
fire mending her father’s socks. As her mother was
still in Melbourne, and Mrs. Evans seemed fully occu-
pied with the cooking and general housework, the
little girl had become chief patcher and darner for
everyone. On the other side of the table Mr, Pym
was instructing David and Wilfred how to patch a
saddle. The soft glow of the lamp threw a pale circle
of light round the four workers, but neither it nor the
flickering flames of the wood fire managed to penetrate
to the shadows which completely hid the other side
of the room. The magic ring of light reached only
to the table. The glow of the flames lit up the bur-
nished coppery brown of Margery’s curls, and dark
frock, and it made the eyes of Fincher, the big dog,
gleam strangely. Fincher soon, however, snuggled
his head between his paws and went to sleep. Some-
times, while sleeping, his great tail thumped on the
floor, and he uttered doggy snores. He was a new
dog from a neighbouring cattle run, and far more
good-natured than Mr. Hardiman’s bad-tempered
Nero.
When the saddle finally was mended, Wilfred, too,
began to yawn.
“If you’ll excuse me, friends, I think I’ll turn in
early to-night. I can see I’ll need a good supply


of sleep if I’m to see this scrub-cutting through.”
“A good idea, Jellybeans. I’ll come too.” David
got up and reached for a lantern. The night was
pitch black, and a thick mist was rising. The two
boys were glad to snuggle down into their warm,
cosy beds.
The next morning everything was dark-grey and
cold. There was a thick fog, and the whole of
Yarrambeat seemed to be surrounded by a great grey
blanket. However, despite the fog, Wilfred and
David were up punctually. Mr. Pym had told them
that they were to report to Mr. Hardiman early, and
they were anxious not to keep him waiting.
The boys had their breakfast in the kitchen. They
did not see the overseer, who had his morning meal
with the other two stockmen over at the hut. The
three of them received rations and did their own
cooking. Rory was an excellent cook, and the other
two also could lend a hand.
Half-way through his breakfast, Wilfred suddenly
jumped up, gulped down the rest of his hot tea, and
hastily began buttoning up the collar of his serge
coat. David stared at him in surprise.
“What’s the idea, Jellybeans ? We’ve plenty of
time.”
The fat lad shook his head.
“I haven’t. Yesterday, Margery had me digging
holes for some trees she wanted to plant. It was
right round the other side of the house. I’ve just


remembered I left the axe and spade there. Pd better
get them before anyone asks for ’em.”
David gave a grin and nodded. Since Wilfred’s
mishap regarding the door of the barn, he had been
painstakingly careful to do the correct thing whenever
possible. He had learnt that all bushmen took strict
care to obey the rule ‘Put things back where you
first found them.’ He knew Mr. Hardiman would
be most scathing if he knew this rule had been broken,
and that the tools had been left all night on the other
side of the house. He determined that he would go
and fetch them at once. Outside the air was damp
and full of fog, but Wilfred was a sturdy, cheerful lad.
He merely buttoned up his coat collar still more
tightly, and hurried on.
To his delight he found the axe and spade just where
he had left them the previous afternoon. Putting
them over his shoulder, he turned back towards the
house, and tried to work out if time would permit
that extra cup of tea after all. The sun was trying
its utmost to come out, and now was gleaming
strangely through the mists of drifting fog.
Suddenly cold shivers began coursing up and down
Wilfred’s backbone. His teeth started chattering.
Straight in front of him he could see two enormous
animals walking towards him out of the fog. They
were not bullocks nor cows, nor horses. They were
more like great camels, but how could such animals
be here on the Yarrambeat cattle run. Another


wave of terror overwhelmed him. What if these
were bunyips, those strange creatures whom the
natives had told them about in frightened whispers.
Suddenly one of the huge creatures opened its mouth
and uttered a prolonged bleating cry. With a yell
of terror, Wilfred took to his heels, and at top-speed
fled back towards the safe warm kitchen. His hands
were shaking so he could hardly open the door.
“Quick, David. Open the door. Let me in. Open
the door.”
The two other children rushed to obey, and were
shocked when they saw how pale and frightened he
looked.
“Jellybeans, you’re pale as a ghost. What has
happened ?”
Wilfred shivered.
“It’s the b-b-bunyip !”
David shouted with laughter.
“The bunyip ? Oh, Wilfred, there’s no such animal.
It’s just an old legend the natives have.”
Wilfred grew red.
“Talking like that is all very well,” he returned
sulkily. “But it was something very like the bunyip,
anyway. Not any of the farm animals. It kind of
loomed at me through the fog.”
“A wallaby, perhaps, or a kangaroo.”
“No, no.” Wilfred was losing his temper. “It
was nothing like a kangaroo. I tell you it was an
animal about eight feet high with a long neck and
148


a sort of hump. More like a camel than anything else.”
“An animal like a camel! You’re dreaming,
Jellybeans. You aren’t properly awake.”
“All right, if you don’t believe me, go and see for
\ ourselves.”
The other two laughingly agreed to do this. Mar-
gery ran to put on her thick cloak, for the fog was
still cold and damp, though the sun gradually was
melting it away. Wilfred was persuaded to come
with the others, but to his chagrin no sign of the
mysterious ‘bunyip’ could be seen.
“That proves it. He just dreamt it. Poor Wilfred,
you had better watch him carefully to-day,” teased
Margery.
“Pardon me, but I did not dream it,” contradicted
the now thoroughly angry Wilfred. “I saw it some-
where about here large as life.”
Margery and David shrugged their shoulders.
Then suddenly they saw one of the stockmen coming
towards them.
“Here is Rory,” cried Margery. “Let us ask him
if he has seen this strange animal.”
They ran over to meet the stockman, stamping
their feet and rubbing their hands as they went.
The red-haired sinewy Irishman listened to Wil-
fred’s story with twinkling eyes.
Let us get to the bottom of this. Now just what
was it, lad, that you thought you saw coming towards
you across that paddock ?” he inquired softly.


“I tell you it was a great big thing like a camel,”
repeated Wilfred crossly. The gusts of fog were
driving against his face, making his nose and ears feel
frost-bitten and look very red. He pulled the woollen
cap farther down over his temples.
“It was like a camel. It came walking towards
me through the fog from over that direction. It was
the weirdest-looking thing you ever saw. When the
fog lifts we’ll see its tracks.”
The twinkle in Rory’s blue eyes deepened.
“To be sure we will. Sheep tracks.”
Wilfred stamped his foot impatiently.
“I tell you, Rory, that this animal was ten times
as big as a sheep.”
“Maybe it was, my boy. Ten times as big as a
sheep, and looking like a camel into the bargain.
But a sheep it was, and that’s all about it. It was
all the fault of the fog. When the morning sun
starts to shine through fog in a certain fashion it is
likely to make any animal appear many, many times
its normal size, and all out o’ proportion into the
bargain. It’s meself that more than once has had
much the same experience.”
“Oh, when was that ? Please do tell us about it,”
asked Margery.
“It happened first way out by a lonely shepherd’s
hut, and me the only white man about for many a
mile. I was walking along just as the lad here was.
Then all of a sudden I saw this huge creature looming


out through the fog. Me legs started to tremble at
the knees, but I said to meself, ‘Rory, my boy, this is
no time for afraidness.’ Gathering me courage, I ran
into the hut for me musket, and when I came back I
saw that the fog had lifted, and there was nothing
there but a silly sheep standing by the fence staring
at me in astonishment.”
David and the others laughed heartily.
“That really is true, is it, Rory. You are not
making up this story just to stop us from being
frightened ?”
“ ’Tis true as I am here, Master David. One of
these days, it’s yourself and Miss Margery shall be
seeing the strange sight for yourselves. But, of
course, you both will be prepared for the sight.
You’ll not have the need to get the cold shiver as
meself and this other lad did.”
Wilfred was greatly relieved, and astounded, by
Rory’s explanation.
“Well, if that doesn’t beat everything,” he remarked
at last. “Fancy me allowing a silly sheep to scare
the life out of me like that. But honestly, Davey,
you have no idea how weird it looked when it came
stalking towards me through that fog.”
David chuckled.
“How lucky for you, Jellybeans, that it wasn’t a
cow you met. If a sheep looked the size of a camel,
a cow would look an outsize in elephants. . . . Hey,
Rory !” he shouted as the stockman went briskly off


towards the sheds. “Ever seen a cow through the
fog ?”
Rory O’Connor turned towards them again.
“No, it’s meself has not had that pleasure yet,
Master David. But if you don’t mind a piece of
advice, if you two lads are going to cut scrub for Abel
this morning, I fancy it would be as well to be ready
waiting for him sharp on the hour.”
David’s eyebrows shot up.
“Now don’t tell us he’s in a temper again ?”
Rory looked round cautiously, then came back
towards the three children. After a few thoughtful
puffs at his bush pipe, he remarked guardedly :
“Last night we had Ted Moore from the Bung-Bung
run down at the hut.”
“A visitor ?” interrupted David, “We didn’t
know.”
“Your pa shall hear about it this morning. Last
night Abel thought it too late to be bothering you
about meeting a stockman who was a stranger to you,”
was the slightly uncomfortable answer.
David realized that Hardiman had deliberately
prevented Ted Moore being introduced to his father.
But he knew this was no fault of Rory’s, so let the
matter pass.
“Bung-Bung run is east of here many miles on,”
continued Rory. “We don’t get news from Bung-
Bung often. Ted Moore is the first we’ve seen since
thev were all over for the last muster.”


“But why should this man’s visit put Mr. Hardiman
in a bad temper ? Did they quarrel ?”
“No, not they. It takes two to make a quarrel,
and there’s not a better tempered man than Ted
Moore in the whole colony. No, it was because of the
news he brought. He said what Abel and meself
have been suspecting for some time ?”
“Oh! What’s that ?”
“That out this side of Dandenong the cattle thieves
be up to their tricks again. At our last muster many
good beasts were missing. We suspected underhand
work then. Ted’s news confirms it.”
“Cattle thieves !” breathed David. “But surely
you’d find them out, wouldn’t you ? I thought all
the cattle were branded. Wouldn’t they be dis-
covered when they were taking the herds along the
stock-routes through Dandenong, and then to Mel-
bourne ?”
Rory laughed contemptuously. Quickly as pos-
sible, he explained to the children why it was so
difficult to prove cattle were being stolen. At the
time, large quantities of cattle were slaughtered and
boiled down for tallow, which brought a good price.
It was comparatively easy for a dishonest man to
take cattle from his neighbours’ run, kill them, and
boil them down with some of his own beasts. The
parts of the hides with the brands on them could be
burnt, thus destroying all proof of guilt. For some
time, squatters in the south-east part of the colony


had known numbers of their cattle were disappearing
in this fashion, but they had neither the means nor
time to track down the culprits.
“But there, mind that you don’t be saying a word
to Abel or to your pa that I’ve told you about this,”
added Rory, suddenly realizing that, in his Irish
fashion, he had been talking too much, as usual. “I
meant just to tell you an inkling of the news, just so
you’d be warned that this morning Abel may be a
trifle short as to temper.”
“We will respect your confidence,” David reassured
him, “We won’t tell anyone. Thank you for the
warning, Rory. And now come on, Wilfred. We
must hurry, or we will be late starting our scrub-
cutting after all.”
The two lads ran off to report to the overseer,
Rory went to the cowsheds, and Margery went back
to the house alone. The fog had almost disappeared
now, and the little girl knew it was going to be a
beautiful sunny day. When she returned to the
kitchen she found Mrs. Evans in great distress. She
had been training a native girl named Sally to help
with the housekeeping, and now she had disappeared.
She had taken no clothes with her, but flour and sugar
were missing from the stock cupboard, and a cork-
screw which the black girl had admired had dis-
appeared.
“Perhaps she’s just gone for a few days. She’ll
come back,” comforted Margery doubtfully.


“Indeed, no. When they go off like this, they go
for good,” replied the tearful housekeeper. “Here
I’ve spent two long years training Sally to be a good
kitchen-maid, and directly the mood takes her, or an
old man of her tribe points a bit of bone at her, she
just goes off without so much as a good-bye.”
Poor Mrs. Evans wiped away a tear with the corner
of her print apron. Sally had been very ill when she
had found her. She had been kind to her, and had
become very fond of the girl. She was very hurt to
think that the black girl had disappeared without
telling her. Many other natives had behaved in a
similar way. For years they would endeavour to
live as white people did. Then the call of their old
bush life would come back to them, they would leave
all comforts and resume the meagre but free life of
their forefathers.
Margery stroked the housekeeper’s shoulder.
“Never mind, Mrs. Evans. I will help with the
work. What would you like me to do this morning ?”
“There’s the butter to be churned. Here’s a big
apron for you. Put it right over your frock, Miss
Margery. Butter milk is apt to splash so.”
“Very well; I will come back and churn the butter
later. First I will tidy the bedrooms and the living-
room.”
By half-past nine the fog had completely lifted.
The sun was shining on the glossy tips of the gum-
trees, and drying the moisture from the Yarrambeat


roof, making it rise into the clear fresh air like a faint
steam. Dozens of spiders had been busy during the
night, and between the posts and blades of grass
their webs glittered in the sunlight like wonderful
silver embroideries. From the new horse-paddock
came crashing, slashing sounds of David and Wilfred
busy cutting and clearing scrub, and from the dairy
issued the steady chug-chug of butter being churned
out by a pink-cheeked girl almost hidden in a check
apron many sizes too large. And though they worked
silently, the minds of all three young people were
concentrated on the one problem . . . the possible
whereabouts of the cattle-stealers.


CHAPTER XI
A WOMAN PIONEER
Wilfred Jellibrand was not a shirker, but when
he could think up a means by which work could be
avoided, he always believed in putting his theory into
practice. Mr. Hardiman had insisted that all tools
and implements used for clearing the scrub must be
brought back into the harness-room every night.
The billy and lunch basket, ropes, the spy-glass, sacks
and other oddments also had to be brought back.
This meant that the lads had to make two trips. Mr.
Hardiman’s care was understandable, for the blacks
who occasionally visited the station delighted in
collecting and carrying off any oddments of this type
which were left about. But this did not make the
task of carrying the things any easier for the two
boys. As the two lads trudged up the hill after a
particularly heavy day’s work, Wilfred had a bright
idea.
“If we had a wheelbarrow it would help a lot. All
these tools and other things could be packed on the
barrow. We could take it in turns to wheel it. It
would save us making two trips. It would be a much
better idea.”
“It would really,” admitted David. “But what


barrow could we use. I have only seen one, and that
is almost falling to bits.”
“Then I’ll make one. The iron wheel is quite
good ; the other part won’t be hard. Give me some
good wood, and I’ll knock up a barrow in no time.”
Clouds had been massing low in the sky all that
afternoon. When the boys woke the next morning,
rain was coming down steadily. To their great relief,
Mr. Pym told them it was much too wet for any
scrub-clearing, and that they could have the morning
to themselves.
“Hooray,” cheered the incorrigible Wilfred. “Then
do you mind, sir, if we spend the first two hours of
it in bed ?”
Mr. Pym hid a smile. He knew that the work of
clearing and cutting the scrub had been heavy going
for the two lads.
“Oh, yes, I think that might be allowed. You
both may stay in bed till nine o’clock.”
David and Wilfred snuggled back under the
blankets. Their beds were warm and cosy, and it
was fine lying there curled up, listening to the rain
beating down and bouncing off the roof, and hearing
the wind rattling against the window pane.
“Thank goodness for the rain,” remarked David.
“I wasn’t looking forward to work to-day. It’s been
hard going lately. I’m stiff and sore all over, and
scratched into the bargain.”
Wilfred’s only answer was a grunt. David thought


he must have dropped off to sleep, but a few minutes
later was startled to hear his companion suddenly
state :
“I must make the wheelbarrow.”
“To-day ?”
“Yes, I’ll make it in the shed. It will be quite dry
there. Then it will be ready for to-morrow. A
wheelbarrow will save you and me quite a lot of hard
work.”
“My word it will. It is a very good idea. I’ll be
only too pleased to help. But let’s leave the plans
till later. I want to go to sleep again.”
But Wilfred’s agile mind was now working busily,
and he had no wish to sleep. He spent a pleasant
hour working out in his head just how he would go
about building the barrow, and trying to reckon out
how long the job would take. He smiled triumph-
antly when he thought how impressed Mr. Pym and
the stockmen would be when they saw the finished
article.
Wilfred had an excellent set of tools. It was a
present given to him by his father before the Major
had started on his explorations in Queensland. The
lad had taken great care of the set, for in those days
good carpentering tools were scarce in the colony.
Wilfred reasoned out that if all went according to plan,
the barrow would be finished that day. He had
already taken the precaution to find suitable supplies
of wood, and had them stored away in the back of


the shed. He got up before David, but before leaving
the room, went over and shook his friend’s hunched-up
shoulder.
“Remember, Davey, I don’t want a w r ord about the
barrow breathed to the others before the job is done !
Is that clear ?”
David nodded sleepily and rolled over again.
Wilfred went down the passage to the kitchen, blowing
and whistling on his cold fingers. By the time
David got up, he was already busily at work in the
shed. When the second lad arrived in the kitchen
for his breakfast, he found only a very sulk)' Margery
washing up dishes, and in the background Mrs.
Evans, the housekeeper, busily preparing to make
fresh supplies of soap.
“Good morning, Margery,” greeted her brother.
“Why the sad expression ? Is it the wet day, or
have you been breaking more porridge plates ?”
Margery slammed down a pile of plates. Her
brown eyes had lost their twinkle. She looked cross
and felt it.
“It’s that Mr. Abel Hardiman. He is the rudest
man I’ve ever met !”
Taking a clean bowl, David went over to the black
pot which still simmered on the fire. He helped
himself to some porridge, then returned to the table.
“What is the complaint this time ?”
Margery put the rest of the plates away, then pulled
stool forward and sat down, facing her brother.


She was wearing her shabby but warm house dress
of brown serge, and its full skirt fell to the ground in
thick folds.
“He has no manners at all. I only asked—” She
broke off, her voice choking with angry sobs.
“Don’t give way like that, Marj. Pull yourself
together,” advised her somewhat bewildered brother.
“You mustn’t give that old bandicoot the satisfaction
of knowing he has upset you. Come along, tell Uncle
David what the trouble is.”
Mrs. Evans turned round from the bench bv the
window.
“It’s all a lot of fuss about nothing at all, it is.
Indeed, yes, not worth taking any notice of. Now
look you, Miss Margery, don’t give way like that.
Take your brother’s advice, and don’t allow yourself
to be upset by such matters. Abel is always grumpy
on mornings like this.”
By now David had finished his porridge and tvas
helping himself to a wheaten cake and some hot milk.
“I do wish,” he observed plaintively, “someone
would tell me just what Mr. Hardiman has been
saying.”
Margery dried her eyes on the corner of her apron,
and smoothed back her brown curls.
“It was about my room. I told Papa that I
thought the walls should be whitened again. Mr.
Hardiman was with him at the time. Directly he
heard me say that, his face went dark like a thunder-


cloud. He scolded me like a baby. Said I must
remember I was in the bush now and couldn’t expect
luxuries. I didn’t want them to do the cleaning of
my walls. I will do that myself. All I want is the
whitewash. I don’t see what Ido is his business.”
Mrs. Evans stroked the girl’s glossy hair.
“Indeed, no. But you all take a deal too much
notice of what Abel says. Try to remember that he’s
worried because of the cattle-thieving.”
“He may be worried,” returned David as he helped
himself to another wheaten cake. “All the same,
that’s no reason for barking at poor Margery just
because she asks for some whitewash.”
“Oh, yes, he did have certain reason for his temper,”
came back the unexpected reply. “You see, the walls
are not whitened with whitewash but with a certain
type of pipe-clay. Now, none of this clay is found
here on the Yarrambeat run. It has to be fetched
from near-by Platypus Hill on the Bung-Bung run.
Indeed, yes, and this means that if Rory were sent to
fetch it, it would take a good two days of his time.
And with the next muster so close, and the cattle
thieves and all, it’s doubtful if he could be spared.”
Margery was looking slightly ashamed of herself.
“I wish he had explained about that instead of
flying into a temper. If he had told me the reason I
would not have objected at all.”
But Mrs. Evans was not listening. She seemed to
be working something out in her own mind. Her


dark eyes had a far-away look, and her mouth had
set into a straight determined line.
“I’ve a mind to go for the clay myself,” she sud-
denly said.
“What! Y-y-you’ll take us ?” gasped the amazed
David. “But would it be safe for you ?”
“To be sure, yes, just as safe as it is for anyone
else,” was the Welsh lady’s spirited reply. “And I
might add that if any of you children come with me,
you’ll be a deal safer than you would if that wild
Irishman, Rory O’Connor, were driving the wagon.
Didn’t they ever tell you how once, years ago, alone
and unaided, I protected the whole of this place from
a band of blacks ?”
Margery, who had now quite recovered, looked up
astonished.
“No, we have never heard that story. Do tell us
about it.”
“I shouldn’t be wasting the time, but still it shall
take only a few short minutes,” replied the house-
keeper, looking pleased. She always enjoyed talking
about early days on the Yarrambeat run.
“Indeed, yes, it all happened during that sad time
when Mrs. Fairbridge first became poorly. That was
when they first got me and my hubby to come up to
Yarrambeat to help. But he and the other man
went off to the diggings. Abel was the only one who
stuck to the place. But he was out rounding up the
cattle with Mr. Fairbridge, and Mrs. Fairbridge she


was lying in bed so still and white you almost would
have thought her dead. I was down in the shed
milking, when suddenly I saw something move in the
hollow by the new horse-paddock. Then I saw two
dozen or more blacks coming up to the house. I’ve
always believed in being kind to the natives. In my
time I had given them good supplies of beef, flour and
sugar. But meeting two dozen of them and me alone
in the house with a sick woman, was a different matter.
There was not the time for me to go back to the house
for the pistols. I w r ent straight to the stable, saddled
the big brown horse, Comet, picked up the stock-whip,
and galloped dowm to those blacks like a thunderbolt.
I’d learnt to crack a stock-whip good as any man.
I raced down towards the blacks, brandishing the
whip, and letting it whistle through the air like a
striking snake. I rounded up the blacks like a mob
of cattle. Drove them right off across the valley.”
“How brave of you! But didn’t they come
back ?”
“No, though I half expected it. I went straight
back to the house, got the gun, and sat with it ready
in my hand until the men came back late that after-
noon. But the blacks had a good scare. Indeed, yes,
we didn’t see them again for many a week.”
Both children looked most impressed.
“It was very brave of you. Wasn’t your heart in
your boots ?” asked the little girl.
“It was that. To be sure, yes. But my old Welsh


father, he always used to say to us children, when
you’re in a tight corner that’s the time to attack.
One ounce of surprise is worth a ton of defence.
Many’s the time that I’ve been left here on my own
since. But I’ve always managed the natives.”
“I suppose if you let the gun go off, and kill a few
now and again, that keeps them quiet,” said David
cold-bloodedly.
“Indeed, no. Unless it’s a matter of life and death,
one never should fire at the poor creatures. They
were the first owners of this country. Their laws and
ways are different from ours. We cannot exactly
blame them for attacking us, though, of course, we
needs must defend ourselves. Often a good fright
will do as much as a gun-shot. I never believed in
shooting unless it was my life or theirs.”
“But you have done it ?”
“Oh, yes. In the early days often it was a matter
of life or death. There are few jobs on Yarrambeat
I’ve not done in my time.”
“Cleared paddocks and put up fences ?” inquired
David with a grin.
“To be sure, yes. When the men left for the dig-
gings I could not see Mr. Fairbridge stranded. I
have put up fences, stripped bark, driven a team,
and even killed beasts. Yes, my dears, I’m quite
capable of driving you across to Bung-Bung for the
pipe-clay. You’ll be a deal safer with me than you’d
be with Rory. I know the bush and how to handle


the natives, but Rory has not a quarter of my
experience.”
Margery was staring at Mrs. Evans in amazement.
It seemed impossible that this thin, dark-eyed woman
could have done all these things. She always had
thought of Mrs. Evans only as a housekeeper, never
realizing the bravery and courage of the woman in
those early pioneer days. Now she realized what a
tremendous help she must have been to the Yarram-
beat people in those critical times, and realized, too,
how women of all types must have bent their backs
and fought determinedly to save the work of years
crumbling to nothing by the men’s exodus to the gold-
fields. Without their help, stock would have died,
buildings been left to fall to ruins or to be plundered
by natives, and the work of ten years or more been
sacrificed. The pioneer women were older now.
Their hands were wrinkled and worn, their faces
weather-beaten, their tongues sharp. But their
unconquerable spirit still shone through the outer
masks of their faces, lighting a fresh torch of progress
in the hearts of all who met them. Mrs, Evans’s story
did this to David and Margery. They were dis-
couraged by Mr. Hardiman’s antagonism, and their
father’s preoccupation with affairs of the cattle-run.
Mrs. Evans’s simple story of courage and determination
fired them with new zeal.
“And now I must be continuing with the soap-
making,” Mrs. Evans was saying. “Keep the plan


about the journey to Bung-Bung to yourselves. I
shall speak to Mr, Pym about it later in the day.”
“Very well, we won’t say a word about it till wc
hear from you,” promised Margery.
“No, I won’t say a word, except to Jellybeans, that
is,” affirmed David. “I’ll go and tell him about it
now.”
He went over to the shed, where he found a very
red and perspiring Wilfred busily working on the
barrow. He had measured and sawed out the base
and sides, and now was starting on the legs.
“My word, Jellybeans, you have been working
hard,” admired David. “What can I do to
help ?”
The fat lad straightened his back, and mopped his
perspiring forehead with a red-spotted kerchief.
“What can you do to help ? Well, let me see. It
would be a help if you sawed off these pieces for the
legs. Then I’ll be free to nail up the sides to the
base.”
David took off his jacket, rolled up his sleeves, and
picked up the saw. Soon sawdust was flying in all
directions. Meanwhile Wilfred began fitting the
sides of the barrow to the base. When the first side
had been nailed into place, David gazed at the work
doubtfully.
“It’s going to be an extra large sort of barrow,
isn’t it ?”
“Of course it’s going to be large. That’s the idea.


It’s no use having a barrow unless you build it large
enough for big loads.”
“But won’t it be hard pushing it along ?”
“That will be all right. We can take it in turns,”
was the airy answer. “Now have you finished those
legs ? What’s this ? Only done one of them. You
are a slow-coach.”
David grinned good-naturedly, and took up the
saw again. The two lads worked hard, and by the
time Margery called them for the midday meal, the
barrow was more than tw-o-thirds done. After lunch
David was asked to do some work for his father, so
Wilfred continued the carpentry by himself. By
half-past three the barrow was completed. The
wheel was fitted in place, the legs stood straight and
firm, and everything was finished except the shaping
of the handles. Wilfred stood back and studied his
handiwork with the greatest satisfaction.
“That’s just what we want,” he said to himself.
“The rain has stopped now. I’ll wheel the barrow
out and show it to the others.”
He grasped the handles, and went to wheel the
barrow through the door. He trundled it along a
few paces, then stopped short. His barrow was
so wide that he could not get it through the door.
“Hullo, Jellybeans, you don’t mean to say you’ve
got the job finished already ?” cried David as he came
across towards the shed. “But why, what’s the
matter ? What are you looking so annoved about ?”


Then he looked towards the barrow, looked at the door,
and understood. In his effort to build a barrow large
enough to carry big loads, Wilfred had built one
which would not go through the door of the shed.
He burst out laughing.
“Poor old Wilfred. I told you I thought you were
building it on the large side.”
In spite of his annoyance, Wilfred, too, could not
help seeing the funny side of the situation.
“Well, Pm not going to let that beat me,” he vowed.
“I’ll take it to bits and build it all over again.”
He kept to his word. All the nails and bolts were
wrenched out, and the barrow altered to correct pro-
portions. When at last it was completed, the boys
found it helped their scrub-clearing work considerably.
Rut the joke about Wilfred’s wheelbarrow was one
that, for years afterwards, always caused great merri-
ment among the three children. Meanwhile, Mrs.
Evans had told Mr. Pym about the proposed journey
to Bung-Bung cattle run, and had obtained his per-
mission to take Wilfred, Margery and David on the
trip directly the scrub-clearing and other work was
completed.


CHAPTER Xll
TRAVELLING TO BUNG-BUNG
The journey to obtain the pipe-clay did not take
place for some weeks. Drizzling rain came down
from the sky nearly every day. There were few
violent storms, merely the continuous soft falling of
rain so fine that it was almost a mist. When Margery
got up in the morning and drew the curtains back to
look out from her bedroom window it was always
there like a grey veil, blurring the usually distinct
outlines of red box gums and farmsheds, and shroud-
ing the mountain ranges in slate-grey dullness.
Everywhere the grass was growing and shooting
up in fresh green blades. At each step the ground
slid back from under one’s foot with a soft squelch.
There was mud everywhere. Mud and slush and
puddles. The fowls stayed hunched up in their
sheds, feathers drooping dejectedly, but the ducks
enjoyed every minute of it. They were out in the
open all day, flipping their tails and quacking gleefully.
The shortest day of the year came and went. It
cheered Margery up to know it had passed. Each
morning when she woke she would say to herself :
“This day is one fraction longer than yesterday.
Spring is one fraction nearer.”


But July proved colder and wetter than June. The
children were thankful that Yarrambeat station had a
strong, well-built home, giving them a dry roof and
warm beds. Several of the settlers whom they had passed
on the route from Melbourne had homes built of logs
and bark, or wattle and daub, and many bush-made
roofs would be leaking in a dozen places.
When the days were too wet for the boys to con-
tinue clearing the new horse-paddock, they were
taken down to the harness-room to help mend and
oil the harnesses. Margery, after helping Mrs.
Evans with the household duties, was left on her
honour to continue with her studies. She found it
cosy to sit on the low stool by the kitchen fire, reading
her history and geography books, and drawing maps
and diagrams. But she did not like sums. David,
who was exceptionally good at mathematics, and had
studied some principles of bridge-building under Mr.
Lennox, teased her about this, and also he teased
Wilfred, who was equally dull at figures. The lad set
his sister a sum to work out daily, she had verses to
learn, and questions to answer, and so, despite the
absence of a proper tutor, her schooling continued,
Mr. Pym had promised to bring a piano to Yarram-
beat some time, but it could not be brought the long
journey until the next summer. The roads from
Melbourne were practically impassable in winter. No
wagon could master them, though supplies occasion-
ally were brought on pack bullocks. But as the days
171


grew longer, the intervals between the showers of rain
and drifting fogs increased. At last came that happy-
morning when Mrs. Evans, on her way to gather eggs,
stood in a patch of hesitating sunshine and announced:
“To goodness, yes, I can smell the wattle again.
Indeed, yes, smell it plain as pie.”
David, who was chopping wood near by, paused for
a minute, and straightened his aching back.
“Yes, I think I smell it too. When do you think
we shall be able to take that trip to Bung-Bung for
the pipe-clay ? If we don’t go soon, they’ll be
planning the cattle muster, and Wilfred and I will be
told we have to stop behind and help here.”
Mrs, Evans stopped to gather another egg into her
folded apron before replying.
“Indeed, Davey, and now that the weather is
clearing and the days getting longer, I think we
should be able to go any time at all, at all. And
the sooner the better, for the walls on that bedroom
of Miss Margery’s certainly are very dingy. There
are many other parts of the house that also would
be the better for a whitening.”
David picked up the bundle of wood, and began
walking back to the kitchen with the housekeeper.
“You think we could do the journey in one day,
do you ?”
“To be sure I do. If we got up early enough and
had everything packed the night before, we would
get to Bung-Bung well before sundown. The track


over that way is quite cleared now. We could go in
the spring cart.”
“But here’s another point. Mr. Hardiman does
not think the trip necessary. Would he allow us to
take two horses ?”
“He could not prevent me from taking Bessie.
She is my own property is Bessie. Mr. Fairbridge
gave her to me with his own hand. But as for the
other one, I could not say. What say that Master
Wilfred lends Ajax for the trip ? He is a good
strong hack. It would not hurt him.”
“Mrs. Evans, you can think of a way out of every
difficulty.”
“And so I should, for I have had a life-long practice.
In the early days here at Yarrambeat there were
difficulties all the time. Our motto was: ‘Where
there’s a will there’s a way.’ ”
Mrs. Evans looked pleased. “And to tell the truth,
Davey,” she confided, “the trip to Bung-Bung will
be a pleasure for me.”
Abel Hardiman made little comment when he
heard that the trip was definitely to take place in
the near future. But Margery felt that his silence
was more disapproving than a spoken reproach. How-
ever, the stockman knew that the children were safe
with Mrs. Evans, She had journeyed throughthe lonely
bush many times, she could shoot better than many men
and she knew exactly how hostile blacks should be
treated. His disapproval was merely on principle.


It was arranged that the travellers should leave at
dawn the following morning. They proposed staying
several days at Bung-Bung. Mrs. Evans knew that
the owners, the Bartmans, would be delighted to have
the monotony of their daily routine broken b)- the
presence of the young visitors, and that they most
certainly would be urged to prolong their stay.
Margery, David and Wilfred made full preparations
for the journey that afternoon. They were told to
travel lightly as they could, so they made their
bundles small as they could. However, ample food
supplies were included. Bread, salted meat, cheese,
and of course flour for the inevitable damper.
Mrs. Evans also brought out a mysterious cardboard
box. The children learned that it contained beads,
pieces of bright cloth, string and other articles which
might help win the friendship of hesitating aboriginals
in a time of emergency. The Welsh lady also brought
out the pistol which she usually kept in a box under
her bed. David and Wilfred also took their guns.
The children were in their beds by 7 o’clock that
evening, and the next morning were up at 5.30.
They had an ample breakfast, and by the time it was
thoroughly light, the two lads had the horses out of their
stalls and harnessed into the spring cart. Mr. Pym was
there to see them off, and Rory, too, came down to let
the sliprails out, and to wish them a good journey.
“I can’t see Mr. Hardiman anywhere. Evidently
he doesn’t think we deserve to be wished a good


journey,” remarked Margery as the horses swung off
down the hill at a good trot.
“He probably thinks David and I are wasting our
time, that we ought to be finishing up that horse-
paddock we’ve been clearing.”
“Indeed, yes,” answered Mrs. Evans with a twinkle
in her eyes. “And I dare say, on that point, he may
be right. You lads should have had the paddock
cleared and finished days ago now.”
“It’s not fair to say that, Mrs. Evans,” defended
David. “Don’t forget that this is the first hard
clearing work Wilfred and I have done. Besides
there was the rain. It held us up for a long time.”
“Oh, go along with you,” was the teasing response.
“I could get through the work quicker meself. Indeed,
yes, many’s the bit of clearing work and setting up
of rails and posts I’ve done in me day.”
“Did you do fencing and clearing ? Is there
anything you didn’t do in those early days ?” inquired
Margery, her brown eyes wide with astonishment.
As usual Mrs. Evans needed no further encourage-
ment. The children spent the next three hours
listening to colourful stories of the hardships and
dangers of life on the cattle runs in the 1840’s.
The Bung-Bung cattle station was north-east of
Yarrambeat. It was one of the earliest stations, and
its run was almost twice as big as that recently
acquired by the Pyms. A definite stock-route marked
the way. It sloped away from the blue mountains


Margery loved so much, and zig-zagged through the
gums and bush of the flatland between higher
country and the vast swamp which stretched away
towards the sea. The bush looked green and fresh
after the recent rains. The great white gum-trees
had discarded the dried shabby bark that had been
their covering the previous autumn and summer, and
were newly clad in smooth, white, new season’s bark
which seemed fine and glossy as silk. Wild flowers
already were blooming, and purple sarsparilla was
greedily sucking the moisture from the ground, and
transforming it into delicate twisting stems, and
clusters of deep, glowing purple.
Wilfred had insisted on bringing Cheddar the dog
with him. Cheddar was Master Jellibrand’s own pet.
The other children had thought at first he had been
given the name because cheddar cheese was mild,
and so was this dog’s temper. But no, it was because
the Jellibrands had come from the Cheddar district
before they sailed to Australia. Cheddar was a
nondescript brown dog with short legs and a queer
pointed nose that did not seem to fit in with the
rest of his appearance. Margery had thought he
should be left at the homestead, but when Wilfred
had asked if the dog could accompany them, he had
received unexpected support from Mrs. Evans.
“To be sure, yes. Bring him b)- all means. Cheddar
will be most useful on the trip. He will give good
warning if blacks should come near,”


When Cheddar actually did give the alarm, and
set up a warning bark, they all were completely
surprised. It was at lunchtime, or perhaps the meal
could better be described as morning tea. The party
made one stop at 8.30, but three hours later, Wilfred
began thinking of the midday meal. The stock-route
by now had left the flat country, and was taking
them across thickly timbered slopes. While passing
beside a valley they saw droves of great horned
cattle basking in the sun on low ground near a creek.
They then climbed another rise to a cleared hillside
from which they obtained an excellent view on three
sides. The fourth was blocked by the mountains.
“What a splendid place for us to stop for lunch,”
Wilfred had said. “Let us stop now Mrs. Evans,
we’ll never find another place good as this.”
Laughingly the others agreed that this hillside
certainly was an ideal place for lunch. The horses,
too, were tiring and needed the spell. The cart was
stopped, and David took the horses to the creek,
while the others made a fire. They had just started
their meal, when Cheddar, who was busy with a bone,
suddenly stiffened up, and with ears pricked, began
his warning bark.
Instinctively the boys snatched up their guns.
David s face was set and serious, his eyes watchful.
“If it’s blacks, we’re ready for ’em.”
Mrs. Evans, too, had her hand on her pistol, but
she kept calm and steady.


“Now, look you, lads, if it is blacks, you must not
let them think you’re anything else but friendly.
It’s a hundred to one that the poor creatures will not
harm you. The Bung-Bung natives are a quiet lot.
To be sure, yes, they know a gun when they see it.
Let them see you have the guns, but don’t you make
use of them unless you have word from me.”
The lads nodded and relaxed from their tense
defensive attitudes.
Cheddar was still barking furiously, but no sign
nor sound of blacks could be seen anywhere.
‘Oh, it must be an ambush. They must be creeping
on us according to a plan,’ thought Margery fearfully.
She wished she, too, had a gun and could use it.
They waited watchfully. Five minutes passed, then
ten, and still no sign of approaching blacks was given.
“I’m beginning to think we’re mistaken. Cheddar
must have got wind of a kangaroo or wallaby,” said
Wilfred at last.
“No, we would have heard the beast crashing
through the trees,” decided Mrs. Evans. “But there
must be some cause for the upset. Cheddar is not the
dog to leave his bone and start all this barking for
no cause. Indeed, no, there must be a reason.”
“It seems fairly safe for us to investigate anyway,”
reasoned David. “It can’t hurt for us to go along
the hill a little way. The sooner this mystery is
solved the better.”
The party advanced cautiously. Mrs. Evans held


Margery’s hand in a firm reassuring grasp. She was
cool and watchful, ready for any emergency.
Cheddar was still barking.
“Stop ! Listen! What’s that ?” cried David
suddenly. They all stopped dead. A rustling
crashing sound came from the bush in front of them.
“Why, how foolish of us. I do believe it’s only a
bullock or two which have got away from the rest of the
herd,” cried Mrs. Evans in almost disappointed tones.
David went suddenly forward.
“No, it isn’t. It’s a horse. Well, I’m blessed.
Look! A big brown mare. Where on earth can she
have come from ?”
“Never mind about that. Our first duty is to catch
her,” directed the practical Mrs. Evans. “Here,
Davey, you go to the left. Wilfred to the right.
Margery and I will stay here.”
The big mare was easily caught. A halter was round
her head, but she was not saddled. The loose straps
of a broken hobble chain flapped between her forelegs.
“H’mm . . . hobbled and broken loose,” observed
David. “Wonder how far she has come. Just
imagine how her owner feels now. I suppose he
thinks she is lost for ever.”
Wilfred was examining the brand on the horse’s
left shoulder.
Don t know the brand. It’s a small 0 with a bar
over it. Does anyone near here have a brand like
that, Mrs. Evans ?”


The Welsh lady emphatically shook her head.
“Indeed, no ; that’s not a brand from these parts.
It must be a stranger. I dare say, poor man, he is
very sorry for himself by this time.”
“Do horses travel far when they break loose like
this, or would the owner be likely to be quite near ?”
asked Margery.
“It’s hard to say. Sometimes they travel many
miles, other times only a few hundred yards. All
depends on the temper of the horse, and the food and
drink that he’s had. But as the stock-route in these
parts is plainly marked, we need not fear for the
owner’s safety. He will reach either Bung-Bung or
Yarrambeat sooner or later. But look you, the lunch
is getting all spoilt. Sit down it right away.”
Margery marvelled that anyone could pass such a
serious matter off with so little concern. The hard-
ships of the bush had been part of the Welsh woman’s
life for so many years that incidents of this type did
not affect her. As she once had remarked :
“Indeed, it would take an attack from Satan him-
self, and he brandishing a red-hot pitchfork, to make
me sit up and take notice.”
The horse was tied up to a near-by tree. Then the
children and Mrs. Evans sat down to eat their lunch.
They decided that the most sensible thing to do was
to proceed straight to Bung-Bung, and take the horse
with them. To try and search for the owner would
not only be hopeless, but also dangerous. Mrs.


Evans knew that once they deviated from the stock-
route, they very quickly might lose their own bearings.
David and Wilfred were just reharnessing their own
horses to the spring cart, when Margery, who was
standing on a log and looking down the hill, saw
horses moving in a strip of clear country to her right.
“David, Mrs. Evans, come here. I’ve seen more
horses,” she shouted to them.
The others hurried over to where she stood. Mrs,
Evans, too, jumped up on the log.
“Where, child—where ? I can’t see them. I can’t
see one.”
“They’ve gone behind trees now. But there were
two other horses. Both with riders. They were
travelling slowly.”
“Are you sure you’re not imagining this ? Surely
we could hear sounds of the hoofs by now,” cross-
questioned David.
“And why might that be ?” intercepted Mrs,
Evans, “If they are walking slowly we would not
hear from them then,”
David coloured slightly. He had been thinking of
horses coming forward at a gallop or canter.
“We will just have to wait here till they come closer.
Tome it all seems very strange,” Mrs. Evans continued.
Wilfred suddenly had an idea.
“Maybe it’s the cattle thieves. We may strike
trouble yet.”
For a moment the others all were silent. What if


these strangers should turn out to be the cattle stealers
of whom so much had been heard lately. Would they
be desperate men ? Escaped convicts or ticket-of-
leave men who might give a more hostile reception than
would even the blacks ? They were in a quandary,
not knowing whether to go on and leave the horse
tied to the tree, or to stay their ground. They decided
to stay where they were, reasoning that even if they
did go on, the horsemen, if they wished, could quickly
overtake their cart.
By now, the plodding of horses’ feet climbing the
stock-route could be heard distinctly. They all
waited, with their eyes watching the bend of the track
round which the strangers would appear. To Margery
every minute seemed a century of waiting. She now
could hear voices, then saw the horses slowly come
into view. It was plain to see why the pace had been
so slow. There were two men. One was mounted,
but the other walked by his side leading a heavily
loaded pack-horse. The rider was a middle-aged man
with a trim pointed beard. The other was a much
younger man, and much sturdier in appearance.
Guns were slung over their shoulders. They looked
just as every other colonist looked when riding through
the bush. As yet it was impossible to tell whom they
might be. But to the young Pyms and Wilfred it
seemed quite evident that the horse they had captured
must certainly belong to the man who was mountless
and was now wearily trudging towards them on foot.


CHAPTER XIII
COUNT DU BOIS
The two travellers saw the smoke curling up from the
picnic fire, and hurried towards it. They hoped that
the people there might have seen something of their
missing horse, or that the man on foot might be given
a lift to the nearest homestead, where another mount
might be obtained for him. They expected to find a
party of stockmen or shepherds, and could hardly
believe their eyes when they saw the unusual quartette
now confronting them. The keen, wiry-looking
woman grasping a pistol, a slim, serious-faced lad
standing with a gun nonchalantly tucked under his
arm. Then a shorter, much plumper lad also grasp-
ing a gun, and slightly behind them, standing on tiptoe
in order not to miss anything, an eager-faced brown-
eyed miss in a thick crinoline skirt, bright plaid shawl,
and blue bonnet.
“What an extraordinary thing. Just look at this,
will you, Phillip. Two lads of not more than sixteen
if they’re a day. A woman with the look of a lioness
protecting her cubs, and that slip of a girl in the blue
bonnet. Really, this surprises me more than if I’d
come face to face with a bunyip.”
The man spoke quickly and excitably, and had a


marked foreign accent. The younger man, whom he
had addressed as Phillip, seemed more matter of
fact.
“Look, they have our horse with them here, Count
Du Bois. We are fortunate.”
The count nodded excitedly.
“Yes, yes, so I see. This has saved us much
trouble.”
“We are lucky to catch up to them before they had
resumed their journey,” observed Phillip. “They
must be people from one station visiting friends
belonging to another.”
“A most excellent idea. Life must become lonely
for these colonists. But we soon shall see.”
Ceremoniously he advanced towards the waiting
group. Taking his broad-brimmed felt hat from his
head, he bent forward and gave a sweeping bow.
“Your pardon, friends, but I have pleasure in
informing you that the animal you so cleverly have
ambushed, is the property of myself.”
“You are the owner ? Splendid !”
David and Mrs. Evans came forward, eager to gain
a closer view of the new-comers. They saw that the
speaker was a short but powerfully built man of about
fifty. His hair was iron-grey, but his bright eyes and
sharp alert features showed a keen brain and deter-
mined character. David noticed that his hands,
though brown and calloused, were not the hands of
a manual worker. They were thin-fingered and long.


His companion was a fellow some twenty years
younger. He was a thick-set good-natured young
man with a shock of tow-coloured hair, large, irregular
features and reddish complexion. The pack-horse
was loaded with packages and bundles. David won-
dered what they could contain. Surely blankets and
food would not be packed in that fashion.
However, both he and Mrs. Evans suddenly realized
that it was hardly polite to stand there staring at the
strangers.
“Oh, yes,” stammered David, “we heard the horse
crashing about in the scrub. To tell the truth, it
gave us a great fright at first. We thought it might
be a band of hostile natives. When did he get away
from you, sir ?”
“About two hours ago. We had almost given up
the search. Then we saw the smoke from your fire
here. It has proved a lucky signal. Somehow I
always have luck when the wind blows from the east.”
Mrs. Evans smiled. She had heard remarks like
that before.
“Perhaps you would both like a mug of billy tea ?”
she invited.
“Thank you. That is most kind of you. But
first, tell me, are you strangers in these parts ? Surely
it is unusual for three such young people and you,
madam, to travel alone through this bush country ?”
“Indeed, sir,” replied Mrs. Evans with some spirit,
“I may tell you that I have lived here in Gippsland


eight years or more. I can answer for the safety
of these young people better than many men could;
yes, indeed, I can.”
“You say you have lived here more than eight years ?”
“Surely I have. I am Mrs. Evans, housekeeper
for the folks on the Yarrambeat run. These two
children are Miss Margery and Master David Pym—
both children of the new owner. Their friend here is
Master Wilfred Jellibrand.”
The grey-haired man strode forward excitedly.
“Jellibrand ! Not, surely, the son of my dear
friend, the late Major Jellibrand ?”
Wilfred was so taken by surprise he could only nod
dumbfoundedly.
The next moment he found himself being shaken
violently by both hands.
“But what pleasure ! Your lamented parent and
myself were great friends. Perhaps you have heard
him mention me. Paul Du Bois is my name. Your
father and I were greatest friends.”
Wilfred looked impressed.
“Surely, sir, you are not Count Paul Du Bois, the
famous botanist ? The one who went so many
exploration trips with my father up the uncharted
rivers of Queensland ?”
“I had that honour. And now I meet the son of
that brave man. How shocked we were when we
read of the shipwreck of the Hortense. The colony
has lost one of its bravest pioneers.”


Beaming with pleasure because of this praise,
Wilfred shook hands with the Count with great cor-
diality. Introductions all round followed. The name
of the Count’s young assistant was Phillip Moore.
Three years ago the Count had come to Australia to
study Australian fauna and flora. His discoveries
and writings now were widely known. He was abso-
lutely fearless, and had travelled through dangerous
unexplored country in order to collect material for
reports on the many new botanical specimens found in
the great southern continent. The two men wore
moleskin coats, cord trousers, and broad cloth caps.
They both carried guns. The Count told the children
that on this trip he was doing research work for the
Governor, and at the same time trying to gain further
knowledge of the types of Australian timber in the
district. Also to study the bird and animal life.
“And do you consider, sir, that your journey has
been successful ?” asked Mrs. Evans as she handed
the botanist a mug of steaming billy tea.
The Count took the mug with a grateful smile.
“Well, it has not been an easy journey. Twice, or
shall we say three times” —here he turned to Phillip
Moore with a half- smile—“our lives were very much
in danger. But, yes, I have gained much material
of great interest to botanists and naturalists. But
whether my work for the Governor will be considered
worth while I cannot say. We shall have to wait
until my report is completed and submitted.”


Wilfred leant forward on the stump he had chosen
for his seat.
“And how was it you nearly lost your lives,
Count ?”
The two men laughed. They had been expecting
this question.
“Once it was blacks. They are a warlike lot in
Eastern Gippsland. A canoeful of them came down
on us when we were on one of the wide lakes near the
mouth of a big river. We had our backs to them.
One of the settlers had taken us by boat to a spot
where he said I might see a new and very handsome
variety of wild duck. We waited by a small island,
hoping to sight these birds any time. The blacks
sighted us when they came down to the lakes to
spear game and catch eels and fish. We did not see
them paddling towards us. The first warning we had
was when a spear came whizzing across the boat a
mere three inches from Phillip’s head, I picked up
my gun and fired a volley of shot straight at them.
Phillip did the same. The natives went for their
lives when we fired the guns, don’t know if they’d
ever felt gun fire before. Poor Dick Green, who
owned the boat, was speared badly. It was a narrow
escape.”
The children were following the story intently.
“And this Dick Green—he didn’t die, did he ?”
breathed Margery.
“Oh, no, he didn’t die. He recovered, in time.


But it was a nasty wound. The spear caught him
on the shoulder here.” He touched his arm near the
shoulder blade at the back.
“And did you get him safely back to his camp
without further mishap ?”
“Oh, yes. We bandaged the wound up and got
him back to the hut. Phillip rowed the boat, and I
kept a look-out for any further trouble. We stayed
at that camp fourteen days, but after that first adven-
ture didn’t see another sign of the blacks. To tell
the truth I haven’t seen many of them round these
parts either. Are they a warlike lot round here ?”
“Not to be compared with those ones you met,”
declared Mrs. Evans. “On the whole the blacks
round the Yarrambeat run are a quiet and peaceful
lot. Honest too. Once our overseer gave one of
them a box of biscuits to take to a friend on another
cattle run. When he got to the place, bless me if
the man hadn’t left on a journey to Melbourne.
What must the boy do but go after him. He travelled
for several days, got little food on the way, yet
delivered that box of biscuits without sampling one
of them.”
“I have heard several stories of that type,” remarked
Count Paul Du Bois. “As could only be expected,
white men are having trouble with numbers of native
tribes. They are warlike and naturally resent the
white man’s invasion of their land. But it must not
be forgotten that many other tribes are peaceful and


have helped the colonists. One must remember both
sides. Many blacks have been of the greatest help
to us on our trips of exploration.”
Wilfred wriggled impatiently.
“And what was that other time when your lives
were in danger ? Was that due to blacks too ?”
“Oh, no. That was more through our own fault.
We got bushed for five days in the mountains. We
exhausted our food supplies, and had to live on any
native game we could find. It was hard to find.
For a time up there we could get nothing to eat
except some native bears I managed to shoot.”
Margery recalled to mind a picture of the awkwardly
made but thick-furred koalas she had seen clinging
to trunks of gum-trees during her travels through the
bush.
“Oh—and what did they taste like ? Like rabbit ?”
The two men laughed grimly.
“Rabbit is food for princes, alongside native bear.
The bear eats nothing but gum-leaves, and its flesh is
very rank. I can eat possum and enjoy it, but I
shall have to be desperately hungry before I tackle
native bear again. But time is passing by. We
cannot waste more of this sunny day seated here.
Perhaps if our ways are in the same direction, we
could proceed together ?”
Mrs. Evans explained that her party was travelling
toward Bung-Bung cattle run. The Count and his
companion had intended to make for Yarrambeat,


but on hearing that the track to Bung-Bung led
through much picturesque country, they decided to
alter their plans and go along with the others. The
men’s horses were tired, and their riders were quite
content to jog forward at the slow pace of the cart
containing the Yarrambeat people. Shortly after
they started out, the wind swung round towards the
west, and clouds began banking up round the horizon.
“It looks as though we’re in for a storm,” remarked
David, eyeing the sky with some dismay.
“Maybe it will be wet to-morrow. But do not
worry ; we shall reach Bung-Bung many hours before
that storm breaks,” was Mrs. Evans’s immediatereply.
She spoke with such conviction everyone felt she must
be right.
The land belonging to the Bung-Bung run cut
farther into the hills than Yarrambeat. The route
became more uneven, with several hard climbs for
the horses. Occasionally mobs of cattle were seen
grazing in feeding-grounds near creeks or water-holes,
and kangaroos and wallabies often went crashing
through between the lofty multi-coloured trunks of
the old iron-bark gums. Several times Count Du
Bois called a hall so that he could make notes and
sketch drawings of various trees and plants. He and
his assistant collected several specimens which were
carefully pressed and stowed away in the bags carried
by the pack-horse.
In this leisurely fashion the party from Yarrambeat


and the new-comers proceeded along the stock-route,
confident that they would reach the Bung-Bung
station well before sundown. The days were now
getting a trifle longer, and the sun shone with slightly
more warmth. They were now travelling through
definitely hilly country, the route winding round
gullies and steep inclines. Patches of this country
were half cleared like the Yarrambeat land, but most
of it was thickly timbered with giant gums, though
the cattle had eaten and broken down the smaller
scrub.
“Have you noticed, Jellybeans,” remarked David
suddenly, “that we haven’t seen any cattle about for
over an hour now ?”
The fat lad nodded.
“I was thinking exactly the same thing. Perhaps
the people at Bung-Bung try to keep their cattle
away from these hills. It would be hard work
mustering them up in these parts. Mrs. Evans, how
much farther is it to the homestead, please ?”
The Welsh lady opened her eyes with a start. The
pleasant warmth of the sun, coupled with the regular
plod-plod of the horses, had almost lulled her to
sleep.
“Oh, yes, Wilfred. What was that you were
saying ?”
“I wanted to know how much farther it is to
Bung-Bung ?”
Mrs. Evans peered from the cart, and took a quick


survey of the countryside. To the right, the heavily
timbered foothill country sloped away to distant flat-
lands and then the Koowerup swamp. To the left
the giant gums stopped any immediate view. Mrs.
Evans waited till they reached the next stretch of
clearer land before making her reply. She was
waiting to catch a glimpse of the blue ranges, which
were her constant guide on these journeys. When
they were sighted once more she gave a pleased nod,
and remarked ;
“To be sure, yes, it is as I thought. Through there,
look you, can be seen the mountain like an upturned
bucket. The Bung-Bung homestead is on flatlands
now hidden from us by the next hill. We shall be
there within the hour.”
Margery heaved a sigh of relief.
“Within an hour. That means we will be there
while it is still light. lam glad. I thought that extra
delay we had at lunchtime might mean we would be
travelling in the dark. After all those stories about
the blacks, I m afraid I would have been rather
frightened.”
Mrs. Evans gave the little girl’s knee a comforting pat.
Just you forget that, my dear. Those adventures
the Count had took place many, many miles east of
Bung-Bung. When I said the journey took the full
day, I was allowing for a delay of some sort or other.
When travelling in the bush, it is always a wise pre-
caution to do that.”


She turned to see if the two boys had taken in this
piece of advice. But they were not listening. Like
the two men on horseback, they were straining their
ears to try and recatch a significant sound that had
just rung through the air. It was the sharp crack
of a stock-whip !
“Listen —I’m sure it was a stock-whip. Yes, hear
that ? There it goes again !”
David turned excitedly towards Mrs. Evans.
“Did you hear that ?”
“Indeed I did. It’s the answer to your remarks about
not seeing any cattle for so long. The stockmen
must have a muster under way.”
Margery, who had not yet seen cattle being mus-
tered, felt strangely thrilled.
“They’re mustering the cattle ? Oh, how splendid.
Shall we see them at it. Mrs. Evans ?”
“See them for longer than we’ll be wanting, I dare
say. By the look of the track, it seems the cattle
have been brought along the ridge, and join this
stock-route at the clearing here. It is never wise for
vehicles to travel ahead of cattle in these parts.
When we get near the herd, we shall have to slow
down, and follow slowly behind them till they reach
the yards.”
“I should think so. I, for one, would much prefer
to be behind half-wild cattle than in front of them,”
said Wilfred. “Oh, look, there they are ahead of us
now.”


They had rounded the next hill at last. In the
distance they could see the untidy-looking house and
outbuildings of the Bung-Bung homestead. And
between it and them, almost hidden by dust which
hung round them like a fog, was a mob of tossing,
rocking cattle, moving slowly forward under the
direction of three or four horsemen and a pack of
dogs. The cattle evidently were being driven for-
ward towards enclosures where they would be kept
for the night. Probably they would be remustered
and tailed out the next day.
Ahead of the children, Phillip Moore and the Count
also were watching the herd of moving beasts. The
two men had drawn their horses close together and
were making comments to each other about this
unexpected encounter.
“Mustering the cattle, evidently, Count,” Phillip
was saying. “Hullo —oh, bad luck. There’s one
beast got off,” he pointed to the side of the herd.
They could see an animal who had broken loose from
the general mob, and was making at full gallop for the
nearest block of trees. A rider darted forward. His
sturdy intelligent stock-horse seemed to know exactly
what was expected of him. At first the bullock,
trusting wholly to his speed, made for the bush in a
straight line. But the stock-horse, galloping round
him, continually stopped his retreat. With lowered
head and tossing tail, the beast stopped short and
doubled back, hoping to charge his pursuer from the


rear. But the gallant horse sensed the trick by
instinct, wheeled round at the same moment, and
still kept on the inside of the beast without losing an
inch of ground. Galloping forward again, the trucu-
lent beast endeavoured to repeat the trick, wheeling,
turning and doubling. Again the stock-horse turned
at full speed. The retreat was still cut off. The
watchers from the distance saw the bullock attempt
similar tricks many times. But at each effort it was
checkmated by the horse and stockman. The man,
at every chance, slashed at the animal with his whip.
At last, with its back scored and bleeding, with its
temper at boiling point, the beast admitted defeat,
gave up the fight, and permitted them to turn it
back into the main herd.
“A very pretty bit of work. Very pretty indeed.
That stockman is a clever man,” praised the Count.
“Yes, but that stock-horse deserves just as much
praise, if not more,” Phillip Moore retorted. “Did
you see the way she turned ? Wheeled round at
full speed. I would almost guarantee that horse
could turn on a cabbage leaf.”
The herd was moving forward again, but travelling
so slowly that the two men and the children in the
cart were gaining on it every minute.
“This mount of mine is a good cattle-horse,” con-
tinued Phillip Moore. “Been in many a muster,
according to the previous owner. If these men are
hard-pressed maybe I could lend a hand now.”


“Yes, tempers will be short and heads aching if
the muster has been going on all day. No doubt, Phillip,
they will accept any offer of help most willingly.”
The heavy tramping sound of the moving beasts
now could be heard plainly. Dogs were barking,
men shouting, and stock-whips cracking through the
air like pistol shots.
Phillip Moore and the Count curbed their horses,
and waited for the wagon to catch them up. They
thought that the children and Mrs. Evans might be
nervous and might think that any moment they
might be charged by escaping cattle. And Margery,
though she tried to appear calm, really was very
frightened. She kept a tight hold of Mrs. Evans’s
hand, and her cheeks, usually so rosy red, were now
white. The lads, too, looked watchful, but Mrs.
Evans had seen too many musters to be perturbed
in any way.
“Now look you, Miss Margery lass, there’s no reason
for alarm,” she was saying. “We are not going to
try and pass the mob. We shall just follow at this
slow pace a safe distance behind. For these past
three months you have been saying you’d like to see
a cattle muster. This surely is just the chance you’ve
been waiting for.”
“The trouble is,” interposed Wilfred with a sympa-
thetic glance at the frightened Margery, “wishes
have a strange way of being granted when you least
expect it.”


“Yes, that’s just it,” was the little girl’s shaky
answer.
David was worried in case the stockmen should
think that they hindered their work. When the wagon
drew alongside the horses, he asked Count Du Bois
about it.
“I do not fancy we will worry them,” was the
Count’s answer. “As the good lady here has said, it
would be wise for the wagon to follow at some distance.
And I shall stay at a safe distance too. Frankly, I
have no wish to tussle with these ferocious-looking
beasts. But my young friend Phillip seems anxious
to help. His horse is used to mustering. I think she
will lead into the thick of this tussle whether he likes
it or not.”
He was right. Phillip Moore’s horse, like most
animals used to stock work, seemed possessed with
new life despite the many miles she had travelled
that day. The animals in the wagon, too, seemed
to be getting restless. David had to take a firm grip
on the reins in order to keep his control over them.
Ahead the stockmen were getting into fresh diffi-
culties. The mob which they were endeavouring to
drive into the Bung-Bung enclosures included many
half-wild cattle. These kept breaking off from the
main body, and making for the gully to the right of
the stock-route. Again and again the men, with
shouting and cracking of whips, cut off the line of
retreat, and forced the sulking beasts back to the


main herd. The only greeting which the party in
the wagon received was a warning shout to keep well
behind. But when the men saw that Phillip Moore’s
mount was used to stock work, they were only too
pleased to accept his help. He was directed to stop
a gap on the right side of the mob. A troublesome
bullock was causing much trouble by breaking through
the line of defence between two of the stockmen. He
kept making for the gully, taking other beasts with
him. When Phillip galloped forward, the other two
men closed in slightly, leaving their new assistant to
guard the rear.
Wild bullocks have cunning brains. Whether the
animal sensed that the new-comer had not the skill
of the other stockmen, whether it had a desire to try
its luck with someone new, or whether it was just
fate, is hard to say. But at all events, when the
beast decided to make another attempt at breaking
away, it chose Phillip’s territory. Cattle can attain
a high speed of travel, often running a horse to a
standstill, and with a last desperate effort the bullock
made a dart for a belt of timber descending down into
a steep gully. Phillip spurred his mount into pur-
suit, but could not turn her quickly enough. Also he
had no stock-whip. With a triumphant toss of the
tail, the beast made for the bush at top speed.
“You fool! It’s got through ! After it !” yelled
the other men, forgetting that Phillip had not their
skill.


“You beast. You shan’t get away from me as
easily as this,” gritted Phillip, annoyed that he
should have so disgraced himself. “Come on, Jane,
old girl. We’ll get him yet.”
Straight into the trees and bushes plunged the
plucky little mare. Ahead, the bullock crashed
forward at top speed.
“If only I could get hold of a stock-whip,” Phillip
muttered, as he gamely tried to corner the beast
between two trees, and so cause it to change its course.
But the bullock got away, and charged on. The
horse, still travelling fast, side-stepped to avoid a
log, crashed through a rotten stump, lurched forward,
flinging the new chum through the air in a complete
somersault. A breaking and crashing sound was
heard, then silence. The rider lay crumpled up
against the stump in an unconscious heap, and there
he remained till the others found him.


CHAPTER XIV
A CHANGE OF PLAN
Phillip Moore lay by the tree with the dark blood
oozing from a cut in his head, and his body in a
strange huddled heap. Count Du Bois and one of
the stockmen knelt by him, while David and Wilfred,
who felt they must do something useful went after the
frightened horse, who had gone on towards the gully.
Margery had taken off her full-skirted petticoat, and
she and Mrs. Evans were hastily tearing it into wide
bandage strips.
“Two ribs seem broken, and there is bad concussion
of the head. My poor Phillip, he will suffer much for
many weeks,” murmured the Count sadly.
What s that you say, sir ? Got two ribs broken,
and his head hurt into the bargain ? That doesn’t
mean he’s in danger, does it ?”
Count Du Bois shook his head.
“Though not of the medical profession, I have had
much experience. I do not think there is danger,
though there will be much pain. But see, he loses
much blood ! Where are those bandages ?”
Mrs. Evans came bustling forward.
Here they are, Count. Yes, to be sure, we have
them here, all ready and waiting. Oh, the poor man.
Look you, Miss Margery, he’s white as a corpse.”


In silence the Count took the bandages, and bound
up the bleeding gash with quick, efficient fingers.
While he was tending the patient, David and
Wilfred came back leading the horse.
“Come here, lads, I have work for you,” the Count
called to them. “Take the hatchet, and please go
off and cut down two straight saplings, then trim
them, I shall want them for stretcher poles.”
The boys nodded and ran briskly off. They were
back with two neatly trimmed saplings in remarkably
quick time.
“Excellent work,” approved their task-master.
“Now you must all lend your jackets, and we shall be
able to make quite a good stretcher.”
They all quickly stripped off their coats, which
were buttoned round the saplings, forming an impro-
vised stretcher. The unconscious man was lifted on
to it, and carried up the uneven hillside to the wagon.
After the patient had been lifted up and laid inside
on the floor, the stockman said regretfully to the
Count:
“ ’Fraid, sir, you’ll have to keep the cart behind
the mob until we get the cattle into the enclosures.
I know it’ll be slow, but some of these beasts are half
wild. Wouldn’t do for you to try and pass ’em with
this patient on board.”
“We quite understand that,” was the Count’s
brisk reply. “In any case, I think it will be better
for us to go slowly. But tell me, where is Mr. Bart-


A Change of Plan
man, the owner of Bung-Bung ? He surely must be
taking part in this muster ?”
“Why, yes, sir, Jim Bartman’s taking part all
right. That’s him over on the far side. The man on
the roan there. As usual, he’s given himself the
hardest job of the day. He’s got to keep the cattle
from breaking into the scrub on the left there. Doing
a great job too. He’s an old hand at this game.”
The children and the Count stared with interest at
the slight figure on the dapple-grey horse. But they
were too far away to gain a clear impression. The
stockman who had helped them with Phillip Moore
now got back on to his own horse.
Well, I’ll have to be getting on with the job now,
I can see Bartman needs my help. Now there’s
nothing more I can do for you here, is there ?”
Count Du Bois assured him no more could be done
for the patient till he reached the house. So the wiry
fellow gave a wave of his broad-brimmed hat, then
galloped off.
Wilfred drove the wagon for the rest of the journey,
and David took charge of Phillip Moore’s horse. Red
and orange-tinted clouds now filled the western sky
behind them, and the timbered country was bathed
in a warm glow of light. The birds, too, were striking
up an evensong. Margery heard their shrill sweet
notes through the muffled noise of the cattle’s great
hoofs, the shouts of the men, and barking of the
dogs. Phillip Moore had not yet opened his eyes


again, and Margery sat near him, keeping watch.
When she peeped out of the wagon again, she saw
that they were now passing through paddocks almost
completely cleared. Split post-and-rail fences also
came into view.
“How much farther to Bung-Bung is it, Wilfred ?”
she called.
“Shouldn’t think it could be very far now,” replied
the fat lad. “Though just where they’ve put the
homestead is something I fail to see.”
Mrs. Evans gave a jolly chuckle.
“That has tricked many a person. You’ll find the
homestead snug and cosy behind the rise to the left
there. Yes, look you, cannot you see the smoke from
its chimney ?”
“Oh, yes, now I see. Well, that means the journey’s
nearly over, thank goodness.” It was no w r onder he
felt relieved, for the track had been deeply rutted,
and it had been a hard task to avoid jolting the cart.
“How is the patient now, Mrs, Evans ?” he asked
after a while.
“Still lying there white and still. It’s as though
he were dead already. I trust to goodness that the
Count knows as much about doctoring as he tells
us.”
“He didn’t claim to know everything,” defended
Wilfred. “He just meant that he had a bushman’s
knowledge of what should be done in emergencies.
But hullo, hooray ! They seem to be heading the


A Change of Plan
cattle off to some stockyards over by the wattle trees
there. Yes, and here’s that stockman chap riding
back to us. I dare say this is where we are allowed
to turn off and go across to the homestead.”
But Wilfred was wrong. The rider was not the
stockman who had been with them before. He was
Jim Bartman, owner of the Bung-Bung run. He
had come to tell them how very upset he had been to
hear of the accident, and to apologize for being unable
to come and speak to them earlier. He was very
surprised when he saw Mrs. Evans.
“Why, Mrs. Evans, they didn’t tell me you were
with the party. They just said it was the young
Pyms from Yarrambeat and the Count’s party.
Surely the injured man isn’t from Yarrambeat too ?
Don’t tell me it’s Abel Hardiman or that Irish fellow
Rory ?”
The Welsh woman smiled broadly.
“Now look you, Jim Bartman, did anyone ever hear
of Abel Hardiman getting thrown from a horse when
going after cattle ? No, it’s no one from our run.
It s the young helper who’s been travelling with
Count Du Bois, He’s the explorer, you know. No
doubt you have heard of him before.”
Jim Bartman shook his head.
Can t say that I have, to tell the truth. What
with the cattle thieves and the dry autumn, we’ve
been too busy here at Bung-Bung to know what’s
been going on in other parts of the colony.”


“I suppose you do know, Jim, that gold has been
discovered ?” flashed Mrs. Evans with a smile.
The cattle owner acknowledged this with a grim
laugh.
“Oh, yes, we know that all right. Didn’t three of
the men clear off for Ballarat in ’53 ? They’d heard,
so they told me, about some old Cornish shepherd
who’d struck it rich at Beehive Hill and made his
fortune. Plough chains wouldn’t have stopped
Margery leaned forward eagerly.
“Oh, Mr. Bartman, did that Cornish man you
spoke of happen to be called Pengally ? Was
he a short gruff sort of a person with a dark curly
beard ?”
“Can’t say that I ever heard anything about his
whiskers, miss. But Ido fancy his name was Pen-
gally. Well, I must be getting back to the yards.
It will take us all our time to get through this round-up
before dark comes. You people just go straight on
to the house. The sooner that poor chap is made
comfortable the better.”
He did not stop to be introduced to Count Du Bois,
but at once galloped back towards the mob of cattle.
Wilfred drove the Pyms’ cart on towards the home-
stead, which proved to be a roughly made building
possessing very few of the comforts which the children
enjoyed at Yarrambeat. Its walls were of split
timber hewn out in huge thick slabs, and the roof was


A Change of Plan
of split shingles. There was a verandah around two
sides of the house, and between it and the creek the
children saw signs of a vegetable garden. Mr. Hart-
man’s wife and two children came to the door directly
they heard the creaking of the cart. Mrs. Bartman
was very distressed when she was told about the
accident, and the injured man was taken into the best
bedroom and given every attention. Count Du Bois
altered his bandages, and attended to the broken
ribs. Phillip Moore was in great agony, but he lay
quite still, only groaning when he was turned and
felt added pain.
A large and strangely assorted party sat down to
dinner at Bung-Bung station that night. The dis-
tinguished French explorer, with his high sloping
forehead, keen eyes and neatly trimmed beard.
Wilfred and David, two eager-faced lads keen to hear
and absorb every piece of information offered. The
Welsh woman, Mrs. Evans, with her blunt manners,
faded hair and wrinkled face. The thirteen-year-old
Margery in her fashionable crinoline frock, and brown
curling hair that would keep escaping from the blue
ribbons in a fashion far from ladylike. Then Mr. and
Mrs. Bartman, two plucky hard-working folk with
the kindly hospitable manners for which early
squatters were famous.
The light from the lamp that swung from the rafters
gave out a soft, pleasant light. It shone on a meal
of boiled meat, potatoes and carrots, followed by


pancakes and large quantities of hot strong tea.
Everyone was hungry, and they all thought it a meal
which could not be bettered.
Mrs. Evans helped her hostess to clear away and
wash the dishes, while Margery sang lullabies to the
two baby boys in order to try and coax them to sleep.
Donald was three and Arthur was five. Margery
sang them a song about 80-peep. They liked this
song. Being squatters’ children, they understood the
plight of the little girl who had
‘Lost her sheep
And didn’t know where to find them.’
The elder one, Donald, knew that his father had
lost cattle lately. But he had never heard of their
tails being found pegged out on branches of trees.
Mr. Bartman would have said that the tails were more
likely to be in the boiling-down pot used by the cattle
thieves.
In the living-room, Count Du Bois and the two
boys were seated round the roaring fire. They were
asking Mr. Bartman questions, and listening to his
stories about the district. He had been settled at
Bung-Bung for six years, and predicted great things
for the future of Gippsland. As he talked he worked
away at a new saddle he was making.
The Count asked many general questions about the
district. He wanted to know what animals and birds
were to be seen, what type of trees were there, facts
about the natives, details of the average rainfall, and


A Change of Plan
many other things. He wrote all the answers down
in a bulky notebook.
Jim Bartman told him many interesting facts about
the country to the north. This was the country of
the blue-grey ranges which Margery loved watching
from her bedroom window. Jim told the Count
about the many varieties of orchids and other wild
flowers which bloomed there in the early spring. The
explorer was very interested in wild flowers, and was
also collecting various types of wattle. He was a
competent sketcher and water-colour painter, and
showed his companion a book filled with this type of
work. He seemed keen to travel on from Bung-Bung
into the mountain country.
“It is most unfortunate that poor Phillip should
have had this accident just now,” he told them. “If
only he were able to accompany me I would
set out to those ranges in search of specimens at
once. Perhaps, Mr. Bartman, you could come with
me ?”
The cattleman shook his head.
No, Count, he answered as he bent over to cut
and shape some of the saddle leather. “It would be
quite out of the question. I am too taken up with
the cattle mustering to spare time for a trip of that
type. But tell me this. How long do you mean this
trip to take ?”
Oh, from three to five days. No longer, for
within a week I must be making back for Melbourne.
o 209


My report to the Governor must be made out as soon
as possible.”
“From three to five days, eh ? H’mm. I heard
my wife asking Mrs. Evans if she could stay here a
week with her. And I think she’ll need to stay for
that time if the patient is to get proper attention.
Why shouldn’t the two lads go with you ? Their
work on the goldfields has given them sense and
experience. What do you say, lads ? Does the idea
appeal to you ?”
The two boys both enthusiastically replied that the
idea appealed to them very much. They both had
their own guns, and were used to roughing it and
sleeping out. They were quite confident that they
could help Count Du Bois a great deal. Before the
lights burnt low, and preparations for bed began, it
was practically decided that Wilfred and David would
go with Count Du Bois on this trip, while Margery
stayed at Bung-Bung to help the two ladies with the
housework, and to help nurse Phillip Moore.
The two lads were so excited that they hardly went
to sleep for the whole night. There were no spare
beds for them, so they were given sacks of straw, and
lay curled up on these near the sitting-room fire.
Heaped over them was the strangest collection of
coverings one could imagine. Rugs, coats, blankets,
and to top these Wilfred had a heavy old dark-green
tablecloth, while David had the strip carpet that
usually went in front of the bookcase. The night was


cold and frosty, and the lads were glad to have as
much covering as they were offered.
When the lamp had been blown out, the two lads
lay curled up in their improvised beds, watching the
dancing shadows from the flickering fire, and thinking
about the many adventures that lay ahead for them.
“Davey, do you know the exact direction we’ll be
taking on this trip ?” Wilfred asked.
No, I don’t really. But it must be a northerly
direction if we are going towards the ranges. Poor
Mr. Moore, he’ll be terribly disappointed when he
hears these plans. We are very lucky, Jellybeans, to
get this chance of going a trip with a famous botanist
like Count Du Bois.”
Wilfred gave a grunt that might have meant
anything.
“Mrs. Evans says there are several tribes of blacks
up in these ranges. She says that they’re not peaceful
like the ones who camp on Yarrambeat, but a much
fiercer type. We will have to persuade Count Du
Bois not to venture too far into the mountain country.”
David laughed.
“Why, Count Du Bois has travelled and explored all
over Australia. His judgment will be better than
ours. But, Jellybeans, there’s one thing that puzzles
me. Mr. Bartman said he couldn’t go with the Count
because they’re remustering here. Don’t you think
that is queer ?”
‘I can’t say that I do. Everybody has to muster


some time. Yarrambeat is starting this week too.”
David sat up and wagged an earnest finger at his
friend.
“Yes, Wilfred, that’s just it. Why are both
stations having their muster at the same time ?
From what I’ve heard, stations usually plan to have
their musters at different times so that the men can
help each other. It is very seldom two adjoining
stations muster at the same time.”
“Well, we know why the Yarrambeat muster has
been pushed forward to this week. It’s because Mr,
Hardiman suspects someone is stealing the cattle.’
“Yes,” replied David thoughtfully. “And I wonder
if Mr. Bartman suspects the same thing. Perhaps
they suspect each other.”
“Oh, I shouldn’t think that,” returned the fat lad.
“Anyone can see Mr. Bartman is honest as the day.
All the same,” he added thoughtfully, “I have rather
a suspicion that one or two of the men working here
at Bung-Bung may not be over-trustworthy. Yes,
I wouldn’t be surprised if one or two of them do know
more about this cattle stealing than they’d care to
admit.”
Wilfred’s remark was just a guess in the dark. He
hardly knew what caused him to make the statement,
but he was a good judge of character, and new-comers
can often read faces more correctly than those who
have grown used to them.
Outside in the passage, Ned Bleazby, who was on


his way into the sitting-room to see if any tobacco
had been left there, drew back with a snarl. When
he pushed the door open he had seen the two figures on
the straw mattresses, had hesitated, and as a result
had overheard the whole of the conversation. Like
most guilty people, it did not occur to him that
Wilfred’s remark was pure guesswork ; he thought it
must be founded on definite proof.
‘H’mm ... so that fat whelp thinks he’s going
to trap the cattle stealers, does he ?’ he thought to
himself as he quietly made his way back through the
darkness to his own hut. An evil smile spread over
his swarthy face. ‘Yes, he’s making a mighty big
mistake. I could tell the Count and his young friends
that this is a dangerous time of the year for white
men to meet the blacks. On the other hand, I could
keep it to myself. A little bit of careful planning is
what is needed here. Dead men tell no tales. If
that Count happens to meet a hostile tribe of natives
when he s out burrowing for orchids, there’s none can
say it s Ned Bleazby’s fault. No, if I work me
cards properly, none will suspect that in a thousand
years.’


CHAPTER XV
BLACK CHARLIE
David, Wilfred and Count Du Bois sat round a camp
fire making a hearty meal of damper, cold beef, and
large mugs of tea. Charlie, their blackfellow guide,
had stated that he wanted to build a fire of his own.
He had done so forty yards from the main camp, and
now was crouched beside it greedily eating a huge
damper he had cooked himself. Charlie was not a
handsome blackfellow. He had a broad flattened-in
nose with huge distended nostrils, high cheekbones,
dark deep-set eyes, and an off-hand manner which was
somehow most disquieting. David watched him
curiously. The light from the fire lit up one side of the
native’s face, and one sinewy arm.
“I do wish we could have got a more likeable sort
of guide than Black Charlie,” he remarked uneasily
to his two companions. “What do you make of him,
Count ? And why wouldn’t he make his damper at
our fire ?”
Count Du Bois cut himself another hunk of meat,
laughing unconcernedly.
“Just one of his peculiar ways, I suppose. I
wouldn’t worry about it. That man of Bartman’s,
Ned Bleazby, gave Charlie an excellent recommenda-


Black Charlie
tion. Yes, said he was completely trustworthy, and
the best guide that we could have. Looks don’t
count much with these natives. Some of the meekest-
looking of them have turned out to be bloodthirsty
villains of the worst type. Others who seem to have
marks of deepest villainy stamped all over them,
prove to be the most trustworthy fellows you could
have. I admit I don’t fancy Charlie’s appearance
myself. Still, since that stockman gave him such a
good report, I felt I should not let that influence me.”
David made no answer. He still did not feel sure
about their black guide, and he remembered how
Wilfred said he did not trust Bleazby. The boys had
not known he was the man who had recommended
Black Charlie.
‘But surely,’ thought David to himself, ‘he could
not have had any reason for recommending an
untrustworthy guide. No, I’m just moody because
I’m tired, and because it is getting dark.’
He looked around. The sun had set now. The
light was fading rapidly. All around the campers the
outlines of the gum-trees and scrub were merging into
dark fantastic shadows. Magpies and galahs that
had been chattering so loudly only an hour ago, now
were silent. Only the light wind, which had sprung
up at sundown, sifted through the leaves with eerie
sigh, and occasionally the distant hoot of a frogmouth
owl re-echoed through the forest. The lonely bush
is always frightening at nightfall. David decided it


was this which had caused his nervousness. He
glanced at Wilfred. The fat lad was kneeling by the
fire, carefully extracting another damper from the
glowing coals. No uneasy feelings ruffled his care-
free spirits.
“And here is another point,” Count Du Bois was
continuing. “We white people always must remem-
ber, David, that it is not fair for us to judge aborigines
by our own standards. It is unfortunate for us that
they spear our cattle, and roast our sheep. But we
must remember that to them the hunting of animals
is the usual custom. They have no laws of property
regarding such matters. Although for our own
comfort and enrichment we must try to stop them
doing such things, we must remember not to judge
them over-harshly. As for their appearance, we must
bear in mind that if we, too, spent every summer
going barefoot and bareheaded under the scorching
sun, we also would not be such handsome objects.”
The lads laughed at this remark, but the Count was
serious.
“One of the great evils of the world,” he told them,
“is that sections of the people are not tolerant con-
cerning the ways of others. One must remember the
circumstances, before pronouncing a verdict.”
“Well, Count Du Bois,” suddenly remarked Wilfred,
“do you think white people have any right to come
and take the land away from these natives in the first
place ?”


Black Charlie
The Frenchman was silent for a while. The corners
of his fine intelligent eyes contracted thoughtfully.
“There must always be progress,” he at last stated.
“But it is our duty to see that this progress causes as
little needless harm as possible. And now enough of
serious talk. I see you two are tired out. We will
pack up the mugs and plates, and prepare for our
night’s rest.”
The Count was well satisfied with the activities of
the past day. It was the second day of the expedi-
tion. Led by Black Charlie, they had proceeded on
horseback towards the uncleared ranges to the north
of Bung-Bung station. At first the country had been
dull and uninteresting, merely straggling stretches of
gum forest and myrtle scrub stretching for miles in
each direction. But after some hours they began to
climb to higher ground. The trees became thicker,
more luxuriant. The Count noticed new species of
wattle, and many other varieties of Australian trees
which were of great interest to him. Black Charlie
with the unerring instinct of a blackfellow, took them
straight to a sloping hill where they found two kinds
of orchids which Count Du Bois had not seen before.
Several specimens of each species were collected, and
neatly pressed between the pages of a book brought
for that purpose. While the Count made notes, drew
sketches and collected specimens, the two boys
watched for interesting birds or animals. They saw
wallabies, galahs, parraquets, bronze-wing pigeons,


paddy melons and kangaroos, but made no new dis-
coveries. The early spring sunshine had been warm
and pleasant, and the air filled with the heavy perfume
of early wattle.
The Count was very pleased with his two young
companions. Naturally, he missed the expert bush-
manship of Phillip Moore, but Black Charlie was an
excellent guide, and there was no fear of getting lost.
The Count had his compass, and was noting all land-
marks. They were all well equipped with guns, and
Charlie had assured them that they were not likely
to encounter hostile natives at that time of the year.
In fact, so far, the expedition was proving a great
success.
David and Wilfred were arranging their sleeping
places. They both had bags, which they stuffed
with leaves and they were using their saddles for
pillows. They each had saddle rugs and canvas
sheeting to cover them, and knew that they would be
warm and snug.
Before turning in, they went to look at the horses.
“When travelling as we travel,” Count Du Bois
had told the lads, “one must take greatest care that
no horse can break loose during the night. They take
fright more easily here in the bush ; they must be
tied most securely.”
Every halter was inspected, the hobble chains were
made fast, then they tramped back to their sleeping
quarters. Black Charlie was already curled up by


Black Charlie
his fire, wrapped in his most prized possession, a
thick but now filthy blanket presented to him by
Mrs. Bartman.
“I do not think it is necessary for us to keep a set
watch over the camp,” directed the Count. “Black
Charlie tells me that he has seen no signs of native
tribes. He also told me that he is a light sleeper and
always wakes at the slightest sound.”
Both boys were pleased to hear that they would not
need to take turns as night watch. They were both
very tired, and knew that it would be difficult for
them to stay awake.
“We will have our guns by our sides ; that will be a
precaution,” Wilfred stated. “Good night, Count.”
“Good night. May your sleep be sound,” responded
the Count, lapsing into a French phrase often said to
him in his youth.
The two lads crawled in under their coverings, and
in a few short minutes had both fallen into a deep,
heavy sleep. Count Du Bois’s brain was more active.
For a long while he lay staring up through the crossing
gum branches at the myriads of stars which shone
out so brightly against the soft darkness of the sky.
He was delighted with his new botanical discoveries,
and kept wondering if the next two days of the expe-
dition would prove equally successful. At last he,
too, fell asleep, not waking till the next morning.
David was the first to waken the next day. He
woke long before dawn, but strips of pink and gold


were already showing in the east. A slight frost had
gathered, and the air was cold and sharp. The fire,
of course, had gone out. He sat up, rubbing his
eyes sleepily, and congratulating himself on being the
first to \vake. Glancing across the grass to where
Black Charlie had been camped, he noticed that the
black’s fire also had gone out, and that their guide
was nowhere to be seen. The lad shivered, lay down
again, and waited some while. Still Black Charlie
did not appear.
‘Wonder if he’s gone to catch a fish for our break-
fast,’ he sleepily thought, for the previous evening,
when they had crossed the creek near their camp, the
black had murmured :
“Big fellah fish him bin in that yallock.”
David felt sure that Black Charlie had gone after
that big fellah fish. It was not likely that he would
go looking for other food when he knew the supply
bags were filled with flour and cold meat. Also they
still had a heap of firewood which they had not used
on the previous night.
“Now I come to think of it, I do believe hearing the
Count saying how much he liked fish. Maybe I’ve
been wrong about Black Charlie. Maybe he’s got
up early for the special purpose of giving the Count
a surprise,” speculated David. He thought he would
like to see how fish could be caught without the aid
of spear or net, so crawled out from his rug, tugged
on his coat, and went tramping down the hill towards


Black Charlie
the creek. The scrub and young wattles grew thicker
alongside the water. It seemed that all the birds
for miles around were perching in the branches there
or else taking their morning bath in that creek.
Magpies, galahs, gang-gangs, cockatoos, kookaburras,
and hosts of smaller birds darted in and out of the
water, then sensing the stranger’s approach, flew
quickly to the safety of taller trees.
But Black Charlie was nowhere to be seen. David
thought perhaps he had gone to the next bend in the
creek, which would be an easier place for fishing, but,
no, he was not there either.
“Oh, well, he’s gone to some other spot. No use
me trying to follow, just get myself bushed,” he
decided. He had a brisk wash in the clear water, then
strolled back to the camp. His fellow travellers were
just waking, but not yet out of their beds.
“Good morning, David,” smiled the Count. “You
beat both of us. And beat the sun too. It is just
rising now.” He looked towards the east, where the
sun had just lifted itself from behind the barrier of
clouds.
“I we nt to find Black Charlie. Had an idea he
might be catching fish for our breakfast. Can’t see
him anywhere, though.”
Count Du Bois chuckled.
“It will be a pleasing change if he does bring fish
home. Blacks seldom worry to hunt for more foods
when they know flour and tea are provided. But he


will be back very soon, I dare say. He is not the
type to be late when breakfast is in the offing. Now,
Wilfred, please help David take the horses down to
the creek. I shall attend to the fire.”
“The horses !” David stared across towards the
trees by which the horses had been left the previous
evening. “Why, they’re —they’re not there !”
“Not there ? That explains the mystery about
Black Charlie, then,” observed Wilfred easily. “He
had taken them for a drink already. Hooray, that
means I can have another five minutes in bed.”
“But I’ve been down to the creek. I didn’t see him
with them there, and didn’t hear anything either.”
David was beginning to get uneasy. “Besides, he
wouldn’t be likely to take all the horses at once,
would he ?”
“No, I should not think so,” returned the Count in
a new sharp clipped tone of voice. “Surely the
animals could not have got away. They were well
roped. We all saw to that. Come on, Wilfred. This
is no time for sleeping.”
But the fat lad had already realized that. He was
out of bed and tugging on his boots in a moment.
When the occasion demanded it, lazy joking Wilfred
Jellibrand could be on the alert immediately.
“It looks to me as though they must have got away,
and Black Charlie has gone after them,” he observed
as the three raced across towards the trees where the
horses had been tethered the previous evening.


Black Charlie
“No, look at this !” David stooped suddenly and
picked something up. He held it out for the other
two to examine. It was a piece of rope halter.
Count Du Bois examined it quickly.
“This has not broken away ! It has been cut !”
All David’s feelings of mistrust against Black
Charlie came welling back again.
“Yes, it’s been cut right enough—cut with a knife.
It looks mighty suspicious, Count. Black Charlie has
disappeared. His rug is gone too. All the horses
have gone, and we find this end of rope, deliberately
slashed through.”
The other two stood staring at the rope in dazed
silence.
“But why ? Why should he do a thing like this ?”
burst out Wilfred. “We were on good terms with
him. And what use could the horses be to him ?
Perhaps we’re jumping to conclusions too quickly.
If we wait a while, he may bring the horses back yet.”
The Count’s face was hard and set.
Let us examine the stores. They should give the
answer. Aha, yes, it is as I thought. The bag of
flour gone, the meat gone. No, Wilfred, I do not
think Black Charlie will return.”
The boys, as yet too dazed to think clearly, sat
down on a log to consider the position.
‘Flour gone, meat gone, horses gone,” repeated
David mechanically. “It is a pretty thin outlook
for us, Count.”


A smile showed at the corners of the Count’s mouth.
“Proceed, my boy —I am prepared for it.”
David glanced up.
“Prepared! Whatfor? What do you mean, Count ?”
“I have not forgotten, David, that all along you
have felt a distrust for Black Charlie. It is my fault
for having been so blind. lam the one who has led
you two boys into this situation.”
“No, Count, you must not say that. It is not your
fault at all. If it is anyone’s fault, it is the fault of
that stockman who recommended him.”
Wilfred nodded.
“Ned Bleazby, you mean. Yes, I’d suspect that
chap of anything. All the same, Count, how could
Charlie have got away without any of us waking ?”
“Blacks are clever. They train themselves to move
without the slightest noise. It would be an easy
matter for Charlie to take the stores without being
heard. Besides, we were very tired and must have
slept deeply. Easy for him to take the horses, too.
It was he who offered to guard them.”
“That’s right ; he told us he’d wake at the slightest
sound. I remember,” muttered Wilfred ruefully.
“But why would he want to do this, that’s what I
can’t make out ?”
“It is hard to say. It may be to revenge some old
grudge he has against we white men. It may be he
merely had the urge to go bush, and has freed the
horses so that we cannot catch up to him. It is quite




CHAPTER XVI
CHIEF OF THE BURRAWONGS
David grasped a branch over his head and wearily
raised himself to the highest part of the tree that would
safely hold his weight. The lad’s eyes were strained
and bloodshot. His shirt was in tatters, his hair
matted and dusty. Seating himself astride the
branch he gazed down at the country below him.
Suddenly he was overcome with a strange dizziness.
He felt himself sway, all but fell, then with both arms
he clutched at the trunk of the tree, steadying himself
just in time. The dizziness and ringing inside his
head gradually faded away like an outgoing tide.
He opened his eyes again, and drew in a deep breath.
“Pheww, that was a close shave,” he muttered to
himself. “I nearly fell then. The height must have
made me dizzy.”
Not for a moment would he admit to the other
reason. The fact that four days of weary tramping
through endless bush country had so weakened his
nerve and strength that the task of climbing the
enormous tree had almost proved beyond him. With
the help of the sun and Count Du Bois’s precious
compass the three companions had trudged on
towards the south, knowing that sooner or later this


must bring them to more cleared country and so to
the Bung-Bung station or one of the other cattle runs.
But the going had been hard. Without the expert
help of Black Charlie, they lost the open timber
country through which he had brought them, and
had been forced to make their way through thick
scrub, and patches of reed-like grass, the leaves of
which cut like sharp knives. They had strictly
rationed their small supply of flour and other eatables,
living mainly on wild pigeon and galah. But the
country in which they now found themselves seemed
deserted even by these birds. They knew that they
were heading in the right direction, for they kept the
ranges behind them, and were going south all the
while. Each did his best to keep the others’ spirits
up, and this was why David had suggested that he
climb this giant tree to see if the view from it would
give new hope.
He now sat perched at the top of it, and shading his
eyes, surveyed the uninspiring scene stretching before
him. An endless sea of waving tree tops sloped away
on every side. They seemed to go far as the eye could
see. Just this undulating expanse of grey-green
gum-trees. No paddocks nor cleared places in sight
anywhere. The disappointed boy did not descend
immediately. He continued sitting there in the top
of the tree, quite still, till the colour came back to
his cheeks, and he became more like his old calm self
again.


“We can’t expect to sight cleared country yet.
We’ve only come fifteen miles at the most. The
journey on horseback must have been twice that
distance. No need to get panicky yet,” he told
himself fiercely. At all costs they must keep calm.
They must press doggedly on, despite sword-grass and
scrub and gullies. If they did that and Kept south
they must strike cleared country sooner or later.
There were cattle runs along the foothills from Dande-
nong onwards. They surely would reach cleared
country eventually. Carefully he slid down the
slippery white bark. The stretch from the ground
to the first branch had meant a hard struggle when
climbing the tree, but now he slithered down it in
two seconds. At the foot of the great gum Count
Du Bois and Wilfred waited eagerly for his news.
“Well, what have you to report, David ? You
were up there a long while. We know it is good
news.”
David looked into the faces of his two friends.
Count Du Bois’s eyes were red-rimmed and watery,
his mouth w r as twitching nervously. Wilfred’s plump
countenance, too, was showing signs of the strain. He
caught his breath, then turned away. He could not
let them experience the hopelessness he had felt.
“The land to the south seemed clearer of trees to
me, Count,” he lied bravely. “I saw patches that
might be half-cleared paddocks.”
“Aha,” cried the Count, his face flaming with new


hope. “You say the trees seemed to thin out.
Courage shall triumph. We must press on. Within
two days, then, we should come to the Bung-Bung
boundaries, or if not Bung-Bung, perhaps those of
some other run. Your own Yarrambeat, perhaps.”
“It may be more than a two days’ journey. It is
hard to judge distance when there are so many
gullies,” David cried in some alarm. The Count’s
spirits had soared so quickly, it seemed to make his
mis-statement of the true facts into a double lie.
They pushed on again. After the first mile they
came to clearer country again. The tangled under-
growth and knifelike grass gave way to thickets of
young gum-trees and wattles, and many stretches of
stony country where hardly any trees grew at all.
That afternoon Count Du Bois began limping badly.
His feet had become sore and swollen.
“Look here, I think we shall have to stop soon,”
Wilfred wdiispered to David. “The Count can’t go
much farther with his feet swollen like that. Besides,
look at the sky.” The other lad nodded.
“I know. There’s a storm coming. It’s not far
off now. We shall have to find shelter.” He glanced
round despairingly. How were they to find adequate
shelter in such country.
“Once the rain starts we may not be able to light
a fire for some hours,” continued the practical Wilfred.
“We have that other galah the Count shot this
morning. Don’t you think it would be a good plan


for us to light a fire and roast it now ? When the
storm breaks we may not get the fire to burn. There
is very little else to eat.”
After a hasty consultation, it was agreed that this
was the best plan. Shortly afterwards they found
a tree, one side of which had been hollowed out by
blacks for a shelter.
“We shall have to make use of this shelter. It is
hardly big enough for three, but it at least will help
to keep us partly dry,” observed the Count as he
wearily sank to the ground. “But, David, you and
Wilfred will have to get the fire lighted. My feet are
very sore.”
“Yes, you rest, Count. We will attend to every-
thing,” the boys urged. Wilfred gathered wood and
lit the fire, while David prepared a shelter against
the coming storm. He broke down several saplings,
dragged them over against the old tree-trunk and
stood them up against it. Undoing the pack from
his back, he took out his canvas sheet and draped it
over the framework. He added more saplings, weaving
leafy branches between them. The sharp leaves of a
prickly shrub he was forced to use scratched his hands
till they bled, but he worked on.
“That is excellent, my boy. You show great
enterprise,” praised the Count.
Wilfred also was very busy. He had lit the fire.
Its thrusting flames spurted and crackled, and the lad
was now roasting pieces of the galah on the end of


sticks. The storm still looked menacing, but there
seemed no sign of immediate rain.
“This weather may last for hours before rain
actually falls,” observed the Count. He put his hand
over his red-rimmed eyes and studied the sky anxi-
ously. He seemed very thin and weak. Both lads
felt that it was doubtful if they would ever get him
back to Bung-Bung alive. The galah was cooking
quickly, and the stimulating smell of the roasting
flesh cheered them all considerably.
“Now who is ready for roast poultry ?” began
Wilfred cheerily, when a sudden stifled exclamation
from David caused him to look up sharply. His heart
sank to his boots. The bush around them seemed
suddenly to have become alive with brandished spears.
“Blacks !” stuttered Wilfred. “Look, blacks,
Count ! Hundreds of them !”
“Not hundreds, but near enough to it,” muttered
the white-faced David. “Hostile, too. This is the end!”
“No, no, boys, do not flinch. These blacks may
prove to be our salvation,” urged Count Du Bois.
With a superhuman effort he seemed to have become
his old self again.
“Lack of fear is one’s best protection against these
blacks. They are only children.”
Getting to his feet, he deliberately walked towards
the half-ring of encircling spears. The lads watched
spell-bound. The weapons quivered and shook as
though those who held them were merelv onlv
/ 4


waiting for the command to attack. Then occurred
an event which afterwards David could describe only
as a miracle. A short, sharp command rang out,
and through the trees came striding a most fantastic
figure. A wild-looking creature, dressed in dangling
kangaroo skins. His grey-white beard was ten inches
long, his hair thick and tangled, and in his hand he
grasped something which looked to David like a
ship’s belaying pin. His skin, though deeply tanned
and weather-worn, was lighter than that of the
natives. He came nearer.
“Lady Mary be praised,” gasped Count Paul Du
Bois, almost fainting away. “It is a white man —a
wild white man.”
In utter bewilderment he raised a shaking hand to
his perspiring brow. Who was this man ? How did
he come to be living here with this obviously savage
hostile tribe of blacks.
The white chief rapped out another sharp command.
The blacks put down their spears at once. The
uncouth stranger came still nearer. The Count could
see his face was trembling with emotion.
“It is another dream come to haunt me,” the Count
heard him mutter in stilted, almost unrecognizable
English. He went up to Wilfred, and laid his tanned
weather-beaten hand on the lad’s shoulder.
“My son !”
Wilfred gave a great start, looked up into the bright-
grey eyes, and went dead white.


“Father ! It’s you. You’re alive !” he cried, and
stumbled forward, clutching blindly at the figure in
the kangaroo skins.
The others watched in amazement.
“Count Du Bois. It is a miracle. This is Wilfred’s
father. It is Major Jellibrand who was supposed to
have been drowned off the Gippsland coast.”
There was no answer from the Count. The strain
and exposure of the last four days had made him
unequal for the shock. He staggered, and fell to the
ground in a dead faint.
The natives, taking this for some new sign of their
white chief’s supernatural powers, uttered wild yells
of triumph. David shivered. It was not difficult to
imagine what their fate would have been, had not the
white chief been present.
Again Wilfred’s father gave a curt command. The
natives cowered and withdrew some distance.
“It is my old friend, old Paul Du Bois. What has
happened? Why is he like this ? He is almost dying?”
“We have had no water since morning,” was David’s
simple reply. “We have been bushed for four days.”
Water is close. We shall carry him to it.”
The shelter hut which David had built with such
care was partly taken down, and the canvas sheet
extracted. It was bound round two branches and
the Count lifted on to it. The Chief gave orders and
four blacks carried the improvised stretcher to a
near-by spring among the rocks.


On the way, the lads learnt the outlines of Major
Jellibrand’s amazing story. He alone of all the
passengers from the Hortense who had been swept
overboard had escaped drowning. He had been
washed up on a deserted stretch of lonely ocean beach.
He did not know how long he had lain there, but when
he regained consciousness the seas were calm again.
He had walked along the beach for traces of the
wreck. His only discoveries were some pieces of
wood, a belaying-pin, some biscuit tins, a sailor’s
cap, and a leather case. The case contained a
telescopic spy-glass which, most fortunately, had not
been broken.
Later, when the Major was sitting on a sand-dune
surveying the desolate coast through this spy-glass,
some natives had approached. The Major had had
much previous experience with natives during his
several exploration trips. Like the Count, he knew
that surprise tactics often won them over. He could
speak a dialect which they partly understood, and
invited them to look through the spy-glass. At last
curiosity overcame their fear. One of them looked
through the glass, and to his utter bewilderment saw,
at close quarters, one of his companions whom he
knew was some distance away. Anything which
blacks cannot understand they put down to magic.
The Major’s reputation was established. This surely
was a very great magic. The white man who had
such powers must surely have been sent to bring luck


to them. His life was no longer in danger. He
accompanied the tribe, and was given food.
“Strangely enough,” continued Major Jellibrand
“the old chief of the Burrawong tribe had just died.
I was elected the new chief.”
The amazing story left Wilfred speechless. His
father, whom he had thought was drowned at sea,
was alive again, and had saved their lives. It was
David who asked the questions.
“And had you given up all hope of reaching the
colony again ? Did you think you would be spending
your life as Chief of the Burrawongs ?”
The grey-haired man shook his head.
“No. I knew that if I could only keep the tribe
wandering about, that I must strike cleared country
somewhere. But it has been hard. These natives
will not go near certain parts of the country. They
have feuds with the natives farther south and west.
They will not go near them.” Then he turned to the
lads in some surprise as a new thought came to him.
“But how is it you boys are in this part of the
world ? lam not in new gold country surely ?”
David had been expecting this question. He
explained how his father had purchased the Yarram-
beat cattle run, and how the two lads had come on
this botanical expedition with Count Du Bois, and
told of Black Charlie’s treachery.
Wilfred’s newly found father looked puzzled.
“Most natives of tribes in this district regard the


given word as sacred. Black Charlie must have been
acting under the directions of someone else who had
a grudge against you.”
“He was recommended to the Count by a stockman
whom we two boys didn’t trust. But we hardly
knew him. He had no reason for having a grudge
against us.”
“Then perhaps you deeply offended Black Charlie
without knowing it, and he made up his mind to be
revenged. That has happened many times. But here
is the spring.”
They had come to a cleft between two rocks. A
thin trickle of clear water bubbled out from it down
into a water-hole. The water from the spring soon
revived the Count, and both the two boys also took
deep draughts from it.
Low rumbles of thunder now were heard, and the
sky grew even darker.
“There is a cave near here. We shall take shelter
in it,” the chief of the Burrawong tribe directed.
They stayed there till the next morning. David
felt that he would never, all his life, forget that eerie
experience. He, Wilfred and the Count were at one
end of the cave. Next to them was Wilfred’s father,
still in his kangaroo skins. And beyond him were the
groups of curious grinning natives. But sleep soon
came to the exhausted boy. When he woke again it
w r as morning, and the storm had passed.


CHAPTER XVII
WILFRED SOLVES A PUZZLE
The weary travellers had to push on another three
days before they came to cleared country. David
never could quite understand how Major Jellibrand
had managed to persuade the blacks that it was better
for him to go on alone with the other white people
than to stay with them. He said he had told them a
fantastic story about unseen spirits and debil-debils,
and explained to them that evil would come to them
if he did not do as he knew was right, and go with the
other white people.
“I had to infer that I might come back to them
later,” he told the other three in a somewhat shame-
faced fashion. “If I had not done that I doubt if we
would have got away alive, despite my explanations.”
The Major had been with the blacks for so long a
time that he now spoke the English language with a
queer clicking accent, and had an uncanny habit of
finishing a perfectly serious sentence with a half-
chuckle. He also had acquired a remarkable bush
sense. With this expert knowledge, combined with
the aid of the compass, they should have reached
cleared country well within two days. But Count
Du Bois’s feet were so pitifully swollen that when


they started their first day’s journey, he was obliged
to call a halt after the first mile.
“I will cause trouble for all of you. You had best
go on and leave me here to die.”
“Leave you here and go on ? Don’t be absurd,
Count,” David had replied. “This isn’t the heart of
the jungle. We will be back on cleared country any
time now. You must never mention such a sugges-
tion again.”
“But I cannot go on. My feet will not carry me.”
“Then we shall carry you.”
They had kept their word. The canvas sheet
proved its value again. Another rough stretcher was
made. Whenever the Count’s feet gave way, the
others put him on the stretcher, and took it in turns
to carry him. Although he was bumped and jolted
about at every step, he did not utter one word of
protest. They all lived on wild birds and game, and
also ate certain roots which Wilfred’s father had
become skilled in finding. Luckily for them, they
did not have to resort to eating koala, or native bear,
the flesh of which is so rank that it can only be eaten
by anyone desperately hungry. On the third day
they sighted patches of cleared country in the foot-
hills ahead, and later saw cattle, though the Count
thought the herd probably was a wild one. On the
fourth day they at last reached cleared land, and
later saw smoke rising from a clump of trees on a piece
of rising ground.


“Hooray ! Hooray !” cheered Wilfred with all the
strength he could summon up. “It’s a hut of some
sort, and there’s someone living in it. David, we’re
saved. We’ll live to be a venerable old age yet.”
David had sat down wearily.
“Thank heavens all this is nearly over. I can’t go
much farther, Jellybeans. I haven’t an ounce of
strength left in my whole body.”
“Now, please, don’t give in when we’re nearly
there,” counselled Wilfred. Then he added wistfully,
“But perhaps now we’ve seen that there is a hut on
ahead, it would be a good idea for us to have a short
rest.”
One of the things peculiar to human nature is that
when anyone sees a fellow-being giving way under any
strain, he himself seems able to summon a hitherto
unknown reserve of strength to help him through.
Wilfred was almost as exhausted as his friend. His
eyes were bloodshot, his skin dry and scaly, and his
squarely built figure had long since lost its plump,
well-fed look. Had he been able to glance in a
mirror he hardly would have recognized himself.
Yet when he saw David snap under the strain, his
own mind steadied and calmed instantly.
“Don’t give way now, Davey,” he encouraged.
“Not wdien we’ve only another mile to go.”
He crossed over to his father who, still clad in his
kangaroo skins, stood leaning against a tree staring
at the distant hut.


“David says he can’t go a step farther. I suggest
we have a short rest before going on to that hut.”
Major Jellibrand turned and shook his head. Some
of the old army spirit sounded again in his voice.
“No, Wilfred, that would not do. You are all very
weak. If I call a halt you may never get started
again. We will have to push on at once. Another
mile is not far.”
A quiet voice behind them stated ;
“Do not worry that you shall have to carry me any
more. The smoke from that fire gives me new hope,
I shall manage to walk this last mile—by myself.”
The Count’s brave resolve brought David to his
feet again. If Du Bois with his swollen, almost
unbearably blistered heels and toes could manage
the rest of the journey, he must show he could do so
too. Slowly the party proceeded on its way. Chain
by chain the distance between the weary travellers
and the hut on the rise was lessened. Then through
the stillness of the drowsy afternoon the neigh of a
horse was heard. It was the most welcome sound
the boys had heard for many days. It seemed to
tell them that they would find rest, food and draughts
of strong hot tea at that hut. It seemed to say that
very soon now their hardships would be over, and
that they would be travelling back to the comfort and
security of Yarrambeat.
They were all so utterly exhausted that it took a
long while for them to climb that last rise. They now


could see the hut plainly. It was a roughly built
affair made of bark and slabs of log, and was sur-
rounded by a fence of roughly hewn bush palings.
“I wonder if anyone has seen us coming. We look
a bedraggled lot. People might take us for a raiding
party of blacks,” observed Wilfred with a grimace.
The others glanced at each other, and for the first
time realized what a fantastic looking quartette they
formed. Major Jellibrand, with his grey beard, long
matted hair, and dressed in the uneven cloak of
kangaroo skins. Count Du Bois, looking almost a
ghost of a man, nothing but skin and bone and a pair
of great gaunt eyes ; and the two lads, tousled,
scratched, dirty, and clad in garments tom and
ragged beyond description.
“We are enough to give anyone a fright,” continued
Wilfred. “Hullo, here’s someone now. Yes, and it’s
as I expected. He’s got his gun.”
They looked up and saw a man, with raised gun,
standing in the doorway of the hut.
“He takes us for bushrangers, I suppose,” muttered
David. His throat was dry and burning. Each word
had to be forced from it with a gasp.
“Who are you ? What is it you’re wanting here ?”
boomed out a gruff, suspicious voice.
Count Du Bois raised his hand over his head.
Do not worry, friend. We are peaceful men. We
have in the ranges for over a week. Let us
rest. Give us food.”
9 241


The hut-keeper came nearer.
“Lost in the bush, eh ? Then I reckon you’ve
found my hut just in time. You’re nothing but a
lot of walking skeletons. It’s lucky you found me
home. Come in and sit down.” He pushed open
the door of the rough hut. Wilfred, David and
Count du Bois staggered inside. Major Jellibrand
followed more slowly. He was not exhausted like the
other three, and after his seven months spent with
the blacks, this moment was a significant one for
him. By stepping over this rough threshold he was
stepping back into the civilized life of the white men.
The hut-keeper, Jack Murton by name, was on his
knees pulling out a small cask of rum from under the bed.
“Just as well I happen to have this here,” he
remarked cheerily. “I’ll give you each a tot of rum
in some water. Yes, and a biscuit or two with it.
But mind, don’t you eat too much at first. You’ll
only upset your stomach if you do. It’ll do you
more harm than good.”
The new-comers accepted their rations gratefully. As
they ate and drank, Jack Murton again cautioned
them to chew each biscuit slowly and carefully.
“Now that you’ve got this far, you don’t want to
be dying of the stomach-sickness at the last lap,” he
cautioned them with gruff kindness.
A fire was lit, and Jim Murton began heating a
kettle of water so that they could bathe the Count’s
swollen feet. He heard the story of their misfortunes


in bits and pieces, and gaped in surprise when he
heard about the strange adventures of Major
Jellibrand.
“It sounds like the tales me old grand-dad used to
tell me back in our old cottage at Nottingham.
Lawks, sir, if some of the folks in London were to
hear about this, they’d never believe it. They’d say
you were daft.”
“I shouldn’t blame them. I often used to wonder
about that myself. But now I’m back among white
people, Jack, maybe you have a few old clothes you
could lend me.”
The good-natured Jack scratched his head. His
own wardrobe was not extensive. Then he dived
down under the table and dragged out a deal box.
Opening it, he pulled out a pair of canvas breeches
and a checked flannel shirt.
“You’re welcome to a loan of these, if you like.
But I must get them back some time later on. They
are the only change I’ve got.”
“Certainly you shall have them back. Maybe you
could do with these kangaroo skins for a mat. You
could do with something soft for your feet,” The floor
of the hut had no covering. It was just hardened earth.
“It’s the dogs. They seem to chew up everything
like that I get,” responded Murton with a chuckle.
“Still these skins may come in handy all the same.”
The boys learned from Jack Murton that they must
have traversed a tremendous range of country during


their wanderings. They were now over thirty miles
from Bung-Bung. Jack was the hut-keeper for Mr.
Merryweather, a new squatter who was going in for
sheep, and employed several shepherds. He was filled
with admiration when he learnt how they had pushed
their way through such dense mountain country before
the encounter with the Chief of the Burrawongs.
“As far as I know, no one has ever done such a
thing before in these parts. The range must be named
after you,” he told them.
He could not think why Black Charlie had disap-
peared with their horses.
“The boys of his tribe are fairly trustworthy. They
don’t usually do things like that. You must have
offended him in some way.”
“That is what I told them,” Major Jellibrand had
interposed. He had now changed into the borrowed
clothes and was trimming his beard before a small
mirror. Wilfred thought to himself that the Major
was already looking much more like his old father.
The next morning, Jack Murton told them he would
yoke up his bullock team to the dray and drive them
ten miles to Chenton Park station, and there they
would be able to borrow horses and a cart and so
return to Yarrambeat, which was many miles nearer
than Bung-Bung.
“But that is a long trip for you,” Wilfred said.
“Couldn’t you take us to your neighbour’s place. I
thought you said he had horses.”


“Maybe be has, but all the same Pm not taking
you there. Tim Shay’s gone a bit queer-like these
days. Wouldn’t be surprised if there were shady
doings going on there at his place. I never asks any
questions, though. Doesn’t pay. Gets a man into
too much trouble. Pm a ticket-of-leave man meself.
I don’t believe in prying into the affairs of others.
It’s better to keep well away.
He would not say any more about his queer neigh-
bour, but when later the bullocks were pulling the
dray along the rough track that led to Chenton Park
station he let slip a remark which gave Wilfred and
David a lot to think about. They were sitting with
Jack in the front. Major Jellibrand was in the back
part of the dray with Count Du Bois, who was now
ill and feverish.
“Your pa is that new chap that’s taken over
Yarrambeat from Fairbridge, isn’t he ?” Mutton
asked David suddenly.
David replied, “Yes, that was right.”
“And what’s that cattle brand of yours ? Would
it be a letter Y with a B to it ?”
David again replied, “Yes.” He could not think
why Jack Murton should ask him this.
“H’mm. Then you tell this to your pa. He
should get his overseer to muster up the cattle a bit
more regular like. Why, I’ve seen the Y.B. brand
right over as far as here nearly.”
“What ! You’ve seen Y.B. cattle on this run ?”


cried David in astonishment. Knowing how careful
Abel Hardiman was, he could not imagine him allow-
ing things of this sort to go on for long.
“Well, not exactly on this run. But round these
parts. Fve seen the Y.B. cattle on Tim Shay’s run.
That’s a fair step for cattle to stray by themselves.
Tell your pa his stockmen should keep a sharp eye
open for that sort of thing.”
David was just going to ask further questions,
when suddenly Wilfred gave him a vicious nudge,
urging him not to press the issue further.
“Will we pass Tim Shay’s place on the way to
Chenton Park ?” the fat lad asked, as though trying
to get the conversation back to general matters again.
“No. I’m keeping well away from it. Tim’s been
very queer-like lately. I let him go his own way.”
Wilfred looked thoughtful, and decided that Jack
Murton was hinting that he did not want to discuss
the matter further.
They were now travelling through rich grazing
country. The spring rains had been followed by
three days of glorious sunshine, and the grass was
thick and high. The mountain ranges in which the
boys had suffered such terrible hardships were now
merging back into a misty blue-grey barrier that
seemed to guard and shelter all the foothill country.
The dray creaked and droned on. An occasional
bird flapped across the track, and sometimes circling
masses of cockatoos screamed above them. In the


back of the dray Major Jellibrand and the Count sat
half asleep with the warm sun streaming in on them.
David, too, soon lapsed into a dreamy silence, but
Wilfred’s brain was working busily.
The quick-minded lad had sensed that Jack Mut-
ton’s remarks about the Y.B. cattle and Tim Shay
were meant as a direct hint, but that the man did
not wish to make any direct accusation. Jack
Mutton’s implication seemed quite clear. Abel Hardi-
man had stated he suspected that someone was
stealing the Yarrambeat cattle. And now Jack
Murton said he had seen cattle bearing the Y.B.
brand running with Tim Shay’s mob. He longed to
ask bluntly if Murton knew if these cattle had been
stolen deliberately. But he knew he would get no
answer. The man would merely look at him in his
blank stonewall fashion and mutter :
“Ask him yourself. He’s queer-like. Other peo-
ple’s business is no affair of mine. Being a Paul Pry
don’t pay in these parts.”
Wilfred frowned thoughtfully. If only he had
more proof. He knew Shay would not dare keep
cattle bearing a strange brand among his own mob
for long. He would take them out, slaughter them,
and boil them down for their tallow. If Jack Murton
would not talk, how could they get their proof ?
The bullocks trudged on. They forded a rocky,
shallow creek, and climbed another rise. The land
became clearer again. Fences were seen, then a


horse-paddock, and beyond them the boys could
make out the untidy low-lying outbuildings of Chenton
Park. David shouted to the two men behind to
wake up.
The kindly Chenton Park people were greatly con-
cerned when they heard about the ordeal of the
exploration party, and could hardly believe their ears
when they heard about Major Jellibrand’s adven-
tures. They were plain-speaking, sincere people who
immediately did all they could to make the travellers
feel at home. They at once offered to lend horses
and a cart for the next stage of the journey.
Major Jellibrand asked if they would not mind also
lending him a change of clothing. He knew Jack
Mutton could ill spare the breeches and shirt he had
on now. A suit was soon found for him, and after
Jack Murton had been served with a hearty meal he
set off back for his own hut, well loaded with an
extra supply of wheaten cake and cold meat from
Mrs. Chenton’s store-house. As Count Du Bois was
still feverish, the other travellers stayed at Chenton
Park that night; and it was planned that they would
start out for Yarrambeat early next morning.
That night, as they were sitting round the fire, by
merest chance Mr. Chenton happened to supply the
key-piece to the mental jigsaw puzzle which Wilfred
had been trying to solve all the afternoon.
“One of the men from Bung-Bung station comes
over this way sometimes,” he casually remarked.


“Fellow by the name of Bleazby. Couldn’t say I
liked the look of him much. He goes over to see
Tim Shay. Birds of a feather get together. Tim
Shay isn’t exactly a trustworthy sort. An old con-
vict. Of o arse, not all the ticket-of-leave men are
like that. There’s Jack Murton, for instance. He’s
made good properly. Never did like Shay, though.
Ought to change his name from Tim Shay to Tim
Shady.”
His joke made everybody laugh, but Wilfred had
to clench his teeth so that he would not shout
‘Hooray!’ there and then. Mr. Chenton’s chance
remark supplied the very clue for which he had been
searching.
He remembered how, back on the Bung-Bung
station, he had felt an instinctive suspicion of Ned
Bleazby. And now he had been told Bleazby had
been seen visiting the hut of Tim Shay, the ex-convict
whom Murton had seen with cattle bearing the Y.B.
brand of Yarrambeat. Wilfred felt that if an inves-
tigation were made probably many cattle bearing the
Bung-Bung brand had also found their way to Shay’s
enclosures.
‘When Foreman Abel Hardiman hears this story
maybe he 11 have more respect for we new arrivals
at Yarrambeat, gloated Wilfred. He resolved to
keep his suspicions absolutely to himself until they all
got back to Yarrambeat.


CHAPTER XVIII
FRIENDS AT LAST
Margery Pym was making butter. The buttermilk
was working free at last, and. inside the churn the
butter was making a squelching chugging sound each
time she turned it round. It had not rained for
days, and the spring sunshine was warm and pleasant.
Margery wished some of it could shine down into the
dairy where she worked. She and Mrs. Evans had
come back from Bung-Bung station with the pipe-clay
the previous day, and were now trying to catch up
with the neglected housework. She had spent a
happy four days with the Bartmans helping to amuse
the two young children, and being assistant nurse to
unfortunate Phillip Moore. When, on the fifth day,
Wilfred, David and Count Du Bois did not return,
she had beome worried, but the others laughed at
“Surely to goodness, child, you should know that
two or three days are neither here nor there,” Mrs.
Evans had good-naturedly told her. The Count, I
suppose, has discovered more new plants and trees
than he bargained for. Indeed, yes, they’ll be back
soon enough.”
But when, two days later, the boys had still not


come back, Mrs. Evans also became alarmed. But
Mr. Bartman was still confident no harm could come
to the party.
“They went away with plenty of food, guns, horses,
and a good black guide, lam positive no harm could
come to them.”
Mrs, Evans, who had a very high opinion of Mr,
Bartman, decided to take his advice and not to worry.
“Well, I hope you’re right, Mr. Bartman. And as
you say, I suppose it is much too early to be worrying
and fretting about the matter. Still, there’s a deal of
work waiting for me at Yarrambeat. Old Abel will
have a blue fit if I stay away much longer. As the
boys haven’t returned, I fancy Miss Margery and
myself had better go home without them. We shall
take the horse and cart and go back this morning.
Didn’t you say you were wanting to pay a visit on
Mr. Pym and Abel, Mr. Bartman ? Why not come
along with us, then ?”
The owner of Bung-Bung accepted the offer. He
left instructions that when Wilfred and David came
back, they could ride two of his horses, and he would
bring back two belonging to the Pyms. The cattle
stations always had horses they could exchange in
this manner. It saved much trouble.
Now, as Margery struggled on with the butter, she
could hear Mr. Bartman talking to Abel Hardiman
on the verandah. Mr. Bartman was saying that his
recent muster had revealed that an unusually large


number of beasts were missing. He asked Abel if
this were also so at Yarrambeat.
“Oh, yes, the stock here is short too,” Margery
heard Abel reply in his hard, abrupt voice. “It’s
hard, though, for a man to put his finger on the right
reason. Maybe it’s due to so many new-comers being
on the place. Things weren’t this way when Mr.
Fairbridge ran Yarrambeat.”
Margery flushed red out of sympathy for her father.
Abel Hardiman’s resentment about the change of
ownership at Yarrambeat seemed to deepen as the
months went by. He made references to ‘green-
horns,’ and ‘those who’d made their way in the world
by luck,’ time and time again.
“Silly old bear ! As if it’s our fault that the cattle
are missing,” muttered Margery angrily. “If I could
have a magic wish I’d wish that David and Jellybeans
were here now, and could solve this mystery on the
spot. That would teach Mr. Grumpy Hardiman to
eat his words.”
She attacked the butter with added fury. The
buttermilk whirled round in the churn, and splashed
up towards Margery, spotting her apron and the
sleeves of her check gingham dress.
“Oh, dear, what a mess lam in. Serves me right
for getting into a temper,” she told herself. Then,
with her full skirts bobbing around her, she ran
indoors to wipe off the greasy white spots. As she
crossed the verandah, she suddenly thought she could


hear the sound of a cart and horses approaching.
She glanced over to see if the two men had heard
the sound too. But they were still deep in conver-
sation. She did not like to interrupt them, so decided
to wait a while. The rattle of the wheels became more
distinct. Yes, they had heard it now.
“Cart coming this way,” Abel remarked with a
jerk of his head. “It be those two boys back again,
I dare say. About time, too.”
“Oh, no, it would not be the boys. I left instruc-
tions that they were to come on horseback. There
was no cart for them at Bung-Bung. It must be
someone else. I trust it’s not bad news.”
Margery was thinking the same thing. She ran
inside to get Mrs. Evans,
“Oh, Mrs. Evans, come quickly. There’s a cart
coming up the track.”
“A cart ? Now who would that be ? Surely to
goodness it’s not that some accident has happened
to Master David or Wilfred,” worried the kindly
housekeeper.
“I know,” cried Margery. “Perhaps they’re bring-
ing Mr. Moore with them. Count Du Bois may not
have wanted to leave him at Bung-Bung. He did
say several times that it was not fair for Mrs. Bartman
to have all the extra work.”
“Aha, yes, that will be it ; they’re bringing poor
Mr. Moore. Though where they got the cart from is
more than I can understand.”


As the horses pulled the cart up towards the home-
stead they were welcomed by a united chorus of
barking dogs and startled, cackling farmyard fowls.
Margery looked disappointed.
“Oh, I don’t think it’s our boys at all. They look
more like a party of out-of-luck miners.”
“Now don’t be telling me it’s gold-diggers. Abel
will have a fit,” chuckled Mrs. Evans.
Two torn, tattered figures jumped down from the
front of the cart. One was a tall youth who might
have been David, only he was thinner, and there was
someone short and square who seemed remarkably
like Wilfred. But yes, it was Wilfred and David.
But what had happened to them ? Why were they
in this torn, tattered state ? Forgetting her good
manners, Margery rushed bare-headed out to meet
them, and was followed by an equally excited and
perturbed Mrs. Evans.
“Would you believe it ! Look at the state they’re
in. Clothes torn to rags. And look you, this is the
cart belonging to the folks way across at Chenton
Park. Indeed, yes, here is their name on the side
here. How has it all happened ?” Mrs. Evans was
positively bubbling over with excitement.
Mr. Pym was already being told the outline of the
amazing story. He came across to the others, his
face grave and serious.
“Margery, Count Du Bois, Wilfred and David have
experienced what seems almost a miracle. They


found Major Jellibrand, Wilfred’s father, living as a
wild white chief in the mountains. They have
brought him back with them.”
Margery stood perfectly still. The world seemed
to swim round her. Had she really heard this, or was
it her imagination ?
“They’ve found Wilfred’s father,” she repeated in
a dazed fashion.
“Yes, it must have been providence that prompted
Count Du Bois to organize that expedition. This is
a solemn moment for all of us.” Involuntarily he
removed his wide-brimmed hat. “It is as though the
dead has come to life.”
Margery looked tremulously over towards the cart.
A broad, square-shouldered man with grey hair, and
an unevenly trimmed grey-white beard, was helping
lift the Count from the back of the cart. She noticed
that the Count could hardly walk. David and
Wilfred, too, had a strained, drawn look. The people
watching suddenly realized that the travellers had
been through some terrible experience.
Later, when they were all seated in the Yarrambeat
living-room, Count Du Bois, in a quiet, precise manner,
related the amazing adventures which had befallen him
and his two young companions during the past week.
“We had decided our last moments were at hand.
There were native spears directed towards us every
way we looked. Then the figure of a wild white man
broke through the ranks. We were saved.”


There was a moment’s utter silence as he paused in
his narrative.
“And I, too, was saved,” interposed Major Jelli-
brand in halting tones. “After all those months it
was wonderful to see people of my own race once more.
Then later to find that one of them was my own son
was almost too much to believe.”
“Now look you, there’s one thing that hasn’t been
explained yet,” interrupted Mrs. Evans in her straight-
forward manner. “Why was it that Black Charlie
went off with your horses like he did. You had
promised to give him good reward for being your
guide. Icanremember hearing the Count telling him.”
“Yes, I had promised him a blanket, tobacco, flour,
everything a black considers most precious. And he
was not to receive them till we returned to Bung-Bung.
We can only think that we unwittingly offended
him, and he harboured some grudge against us.”
“It is very queer. That Ned Bleazby thought the
world of Black Charlie. Why, even before we left it
was Ned who said to me not to be worried, that Black
Charlie would be sure to come back with you sooner
or later.”
No one noticed the thoughtful look that had come
into the blue eyes of Wilfred Jellibrand.
‘That’s yet another black mark against Ned
Bleazby,’ he thought. ‘Very soon that same Ned is
going to have a lot to answer for.’
He still made no mention of his suspicions, but


listened quietly while his father continued relating
his experiences of life among the Burrawong blacks.
Tea, scones, cream and jam were being brought in.
Wilfred had not tasted such dainties for many a day.
He was now enjoying himself thoroughly.
While Major Jellibrand continued to answer the
other men’s questions, Margery Pym and Mrs. Evans
went out to the kitchen to start preparations for a
sumptuous dinner for all.
“It’s not much meat they’ll be wanting, but a good
milk pudding. Their stomachs must be in a bilious
state after such hardships,” declared Mrs. Evans.
“Yes, we shall make them a good milk pudding, and
they shall have cinnamon on it. Indeed, yes, I still
have some in a tin here, and what better occasion
could it ever be used for ?”
Cinnamon, nutmeg and other spices were luxuries
at Yarrambeat. The cost of importing them into the
colony was high, and the general menu of the cattle
station did not allow for such extras. The advent of
a milk cinnamon pudding marked the importance of
the occasion as nothing else could. The good-hearted
Welsh lady also baked another large batch of scones,
and began heating up a large iron pot of nourishing
soup. The appetising aroma of the soup at last per-
meated to the living-room. Wilfred and David
sniffed at it. A sidelong glance passed from one to
the other, then they, too, left the men talking, and
quietly stole away to the kitchen.


Now that they were back in the cool unhurried
atmosphere of the Yarrambeat house, their hardships
in the bush scarcely seemed real. As they came into
the kitchen, gay sunbeams were dancing around
Margery’s curly head. They came filtering through
a lopped bushy gum-tree outside the window, and
made freckles of brightness on the little girl’s head,
arms and stiffly starched gingham dress.
“Aha, I thought this would happen. Look you,
yes, here are the two lads coming in to see if they
can have a taste of another scone, or to try some of
the soup,” chuckled Mrs. Evans. They both looked
so pale and worn that she was only too pleased to give
them everything they asked for.
“It is rather a long time since we’ve smelt anything
half so good as that soup,” remarked Wilfred wist-
fully. “There are carrots in it, aren’t there ? And
barley, and meat bones too. Dear Mrs. Evans,
couldn’t we have just a very small bowl now ?”
“Indeed, yes, and it’s quite a large bowl you can
have if you want it. Sit up here now. You both
shall have some right away.”
As Wilfred contentedly stirred the soup round and
round in the firestone china bowl, he asked in as
casual a tone as he could assume :
“Tell me, Margery, how has Mr. Abel Hardiman
been these past few days ?”
Margery sighed.
“Still as grumpy and ill-natured as ever.”


“Don’t you take any notice of him,” declared Mrs.
Evans, banging saucepans and lids about as she spoke.
“Haven’t I told you a thousand times that it’s just
his way. You can’t turn bears into kangaroos.
Nothing will give Abel good manners.”
“But he does hate us being here,” replied Margery.
“He shows it with every word he says. He seems to think
making money from gold is almost like being dishonest.
He says we have no right to Yarrambeat because we
aren’t pioneers, and didn’t come out here in 1840.”
“It’s foolish talk,” frowned Mrs. Evans. “Old Mr.
Fairbridge was only too thankful to sell the run to
your Pa. It has only brought him unhappiness.”
“But according to Mr. Hardiman the gold rush was
to blame for all that unhappiness. He thinks only
of the land. He says that the mining has been its
ruination.”
“That’s absurd, and he must know it’s absurd,”
interposed David quietly. “The gold rush has made
things topsy-turvy for the time being. But think
how the population has increased. Think of the
tremendous wealth the colony has got from it.”
“Arguments like that don’t mean anything to
Abel Hardiman. He knows he has a far greater
knowledge of cattle-rearing than Papa has, and never
lets him forget it. If only there were some way for
us to get the better of him !”
Wilfred Jellibrand finished off the last spoonful of
his soup with a sigh of satisfaction.


“I think I know that way,” he announced dramatic-
ally.
David smiled indulgently.
“Jellybeans must be feeling better. He has started
plotting new schemes.”
The fat lad looked so hurt that Margery signalled
for her brother to be silent. “Don’t mind him,
Wilfred, All suggestions are most welcome.”
Wilfred looked from one to another. He seemed
so serious that even Mrs. Evans put down the sauce-
pan and came over to hear his news.
“Yes,” continued Wilfred, “I think I have news
that should impress Mr. Hardiman. It’s about
something which has been worrying him for months.
I think I can give reliable information about the
cattle stealing.”
A gasp of surprise came from the others.
“About the cattle stealing,” repeated Mrs. Evans.
“Whatever is this you have stumbled on, Wilfred ?”
“I didn’t stumble on it. I worked it out point by
point. And to an admiring audience Wilfred ex-
plained his theory. He told them of the hints
dropped by Jack Murton. “He wouldn’t say any-
thing straight out,” he told them. “But his hint was
broad enough.”
“Yes, I can quite understand his caution,” remarked
Mrs. Evans. “When a man has neighbours of that
type, it’s often not safe to say too much about
them.”


Wilfred went on to tell them how he had learnt
Ned Bleazby had been seen visiting Tim Shay, and
how from the first he had instinctively felt Bleazby
was not to be trusted.
“It seems to me that he may have known all the
time Black Charlie was not to be trusted,” he
finished up.
“Do you remember that night at Bung-Bung when
you first told me you didn’t think he was to be
trusted ?” said David thoughtfully. “I wonder if
he could have possibly overheard us talking ?”
“That’s something I suppose we’ll never find out.
Anyway, we’ve enough proof to warrant further
investigations into the doings of both Mr. Shay and
Mr, Bleazby.”
“That you certainly have. You’re a smart lad,
Master Wilfred,” declared Mrs. Evans warmly. “Off
you go now, and tell the whole story to Mr. Pym at
once. Mr. Bartman must hear about this before he
goes back to Bung-Bung.”
“Yes, come on, Wilfred ; let’s go and tell Papa.”
The two lads went off and soon were re-telling the
whole story to Mr. Pym.
“I think you have stumbled on very important
evidence, Wilfred,” said Mr. Pym. “Tim Shay is
probably boiling our cattle down, and making a fat
profit from selling the tallow. Bleazby is probably
working in with him, and every now and then drives
small mobs off towards his yards. We must get


Hardiman to see into this. Find him and ask him to
come here at once, will you, David ?”
David went back to the living-room w r here Major
Jellibrand was still yarning with the other men. He
tapped Mr. Hardiman on the shoulder.
“We have some very important news for you, Mr.
Hardiman.”
The dour-faced overseer looked surprised, then
followed the boy from the room.
“No more new-fangled ideas, I hope. As I’ve said
time and time again, you’re living on a cattle run now,
not in Melbourne town. Hard work and plain living
is what we’re used to here.”
David only smiled. He could afford to.
“Well, Abel,” greeted Mr. Pym as the stockman
entered the other room. “This amazing expedition
seems to have accomplished many things. Count
Du Bois obtained much valuable information. Major
Jellibrand was brought back to civilization, and now
it seems valuable information regarding the cattle-
stealing has come to hand.”
For the first time since their arrival, the Pyms saw
the stockman looking genuinely interested and
excited.
“News of the cattle-stealers ? Who w'ould it be,
Mr. Pym ? If I could but get my hands on the
scoundrels, I should make short work of them. Para-
sites, that’s what they be. Parasites waxing fat on
the of other men.”


“Wilfred, here, made the discovery. He had better
explain the story himself.”
For the third time Wilfred related his discoveries.
Hardiman listened to the narrative in silence. He
kept staring down at the floor and puffing at his pipe.
“Huh. I never had any time for that Bleazby
meself, to tell the truth,” he burst out at last. “As
for this Tim Shay, I’ve never met him. But I know
Jack Murton, and we can believe Jack. Yes, and he
be just the sort who would not want to give outright
evidence against another. He’d give a hint or two,
then expect you to find the rest of the proof for your-
self. I’ll soon get that all right, never you fear.”
He suddenly stood up, and started to go from the
room. Then, just before reaching the door, he
wheeled round and faced the others squarely.
“I never was one to beat around the bush. When
the Fairbridges sold this run to a man who had got
his money from the diggings, it cut me up badly.
When you came here, everything you did rubbed me
up the wrong way. And as for the boys, some time
ago they spilt pepper over me in a store down in
Melbourne. Ibe not the sort who can forget things
like that easily. I thought you had all come down
here to swank about your precious gold. And you
had just fluked that. It wasn’t hard work that won
it for you. But Ibe seeing now you are a smarter
lot than I thought. You have tracked down
the cattle-thieves. That’s more than I’ve been


able to do and I have been trying a long while.”
The Pyms and Wilfred were silent. They knew it
must have cost Abel a great deal to make that speech.
It meant that the barriers which he had built up
between them were broken down for ever. The first
pioneers would no longer have to fear for the future
of the undulating plains and foothills which formed
the great cattle run of Yarrambeat. Overseer and
owner now would work in perfect harmony for its
future development.
Wilfred turned to Hardiman with a smile.
“Of course all this may be wrong. It may be only
guess work on my part. You’ll have to find out about
Tim Shay for yourself.”
“I’ll do that, never fear.”
He did. Wilfred’s calculations proved quite cor-
rect. Tim Shay was arrested and punished, but,
unluckily, the wily Ned Bleazby escaped and was
never seen in that part of Gippsland again. They
were not troubled by cattle-stealers again for many
years, and under the joint direction of Mr. Pym and
Abel Hardiman, Yarrambeat became one of the most
famous stations in the colony.
Wilfred and his father went back to England. The
young Pyms wrote to him regularly, and his grand-
children still possess the old faded letters describing
the events and adventures of life on that early'
Gippsland cattle run.
THE END




■ir
IT [T il ■ Bl Tl T
NATIONAL
USRART Of AUSTRALIA
Date Due
17 JAM Tins
K 3 -55 z 31/


f\ni
fAii
3 1508 01830177 5


