

[To be read on the occasion of Presentation of Peace Souvenir Medals.]
THE GREAT WAR, 1914-19.
By Mr. C. E. W. BEAN
Official War Correspondent with the Australian Imperial Force.
(Written at the request of the Commonwealth Peace Celebrations Committee.)
IT is over. The enormous effort of the men- —yes, and women and children—of every decent nation
is finished. • The last gun has sounded. The last troop-train winds homewards. The last big
transports, turned homeward, are punching white foam out of the southern rollers. The vast
ammunition factories will presently settle down to enrich the world with peaceful goods. The trains
will carry busy passengers and commerce ; the big steamers will move about the world with teeming
holds; the little trawlers will unship their guns and go forth to their fishing ; the earth will become
itself again and Australia will settle down to carve out her new and splendid future. For the
submarines which scattered murder across the seas are now safely chained in a British port. And
the Army which almost forced a wicked religion upon the world is beaten and harmless through the
heroism of the world’s good men. We are free to be happy again. Sixty thousand Australians bought
us this happiness with their lives.
Some of you may remember how, five years ago, when war fell upon the world,* there
marched past our windows men in every sort of civilian dress, with their white shirt sleeves rolled up
and carrying wooden rifles. They drilled, they practised, they exercised. Some people even laughed
at them. Nobody laughs at them to-day.
For they were Australians who rushed forward to prevent a dreadful thing from happening in
the world. The rulers of Germany determined that, because Germany was a mighty power, therefore
she should have her way whether right or wrong. A small sister nation had offended her and she
determined to try upon the world her wicked rule that whoever stood in the way of a strong nation,
right or wrong, should be crushed. She knew that she was strong—and that was all she cared for.
She had practised soldiering with all her people and had prepared huge cannon and immense factories
of ammunition. In that fateful week in August, 1914, when France and Russia were deeply occupied
with other things, she fell on them swiftly at full strength. She had small chance with the French
forts and mountain barriers. But because the little Belgian nation, which lay near by, possessed a
flat country to march through, and was too weak to keep their great armies out of it, the Germans
suddenly marched into its land which they had promised to protect, and struck at France a vile blow
in the back. And when the Belgian nation, small though it was, struck back a*t them, they burned
the villages and killed the people in order to cow them into quietness.
Britain hated war and was hesitating to fight. But, on the moment when they heard of what
happened in Belgium, the British people flung themselves straight in beside the French across the
path of the Germans. In Australia and in New Zealand, 12,000 miles away, men said : “So long as
we are alive in the world we shall give all we have so that this sort of thing shall not happen in it.”
They left their offices, their tools and farms, and hurried to offer themselves to cross the sea. They
drilled in their shirt sleeves. In two months they were formed into regiments and the first splendid
force of them sailed from the West.
So it was that this small army from the barely known lands of the South ranged itself by the
side of every good and great nation of the world. Beside the splendid army of France the slender
British line, barely one man deep in its early water-filled trenches, amongst the sodden ditches and
hedgerows, with scarcely ammunition even for its few guns, was holding the Germans who looked down
C. 10536.


with their monstrous artillery behind the opposing hills. Behind the Germans the valleys and woods
were stacked with their huge shell dumps ; the explosives, the bombs, the machine guns had for years
been pouring out of their whirring workshops as a river runs info the sea. They had fleets of aeroplanes,
huge zeppelins; military railways crossed their country like a gridiron ; troop-train crept after troop-
train in constant procession ; endless motor lorries streamed down their roads. They had prepared
for generations. They were vastly strong. But all their strength could not crush the spirit of Belgium.
Blow after blow was driven into France, burning the farmhouses, turning towns into ruins, splintering
the forests, ploughing and shattering whole miles of land; yet the French people only set their teeth
the more firmly. The Germans battered the British infantry with their huge guns, and the British
guns had scarcely a shell to reply; weeks, months, years British soldiers had to suffer the crash of
day-long bombardments and hear their own guns bark scarcely once or twice in return. Yet, with
cannon against mere rifles, that colossal artillery could not tame their spirit. On to the weaker side,
thank God, beside the great and generous and unprepared nations of the world, the small army of
Australia and of New Zealand went.
They were only eight divisions amongst over two hundred in the great armies of Britain and
France. But they played their part to the uttermost. They fought with consummate loyalty to
their friends beside them. Sunken in the Somme mud till the frost bit the flesh from their bones, or
sweltering kneedeep in the dust of the Jordan valley, they shared their best with the others, heart
and soul. Beside their friends and their Allies, in Gallipoli, in France, in Palestine, in Mesopotamia,
in Russia, and on the seas, everything that was asked of them they gave. From the first hour to the
last, in every turn of fortune, together they stood. Strained by suffering such as the world has never
known, holding fast long after all hope had died, struggling in unbelievable efforts, the great armies
of the Allies at last turned back the tide. They broke the Germans in west and east. The sailors
of Germany refused to sail. Her people and army gave up the fight. And the long struggle came
suddenly to its close.
And what is the end ? The nation which attempted to force on the world the rule that only
the strong had rights, that small and weak things must go to the wall, that treaties were useless and any
powerful people could break its given word'—that nation itself has been broken because the best men
of all countries determined by their lives or their deaths to prevent it. A great fear has been lifted
from the world. Treaties are become binding again. The world has ruled that not even the strongest
nation shall dare to break her given word; that be a nation never so small, if she has right upon her
side a scrap of paper may protect her. The world has exacted from the great breaker of treaties a terrible
punishment.
And our own young country—what does the peace mean to her ? Australia rides safely in
harbor to-day, a new nation. Five years ago the world barely knew her. To-day, the men who went
to fight for her have placed her high in the world's regard. During four long years, in good fortune
and ill, they so bore themselves that when the tide changed, the great and free nations beside whom
they fought and with whom they emerged counted Australia amongst them. She has been given a
place in the conference of nations; the great world has recognised her right to mould her future as
she pleases. That is what the Australian force not only in France, Gallipoli, and Palestine, but in
Mesopotamia, in Persia, in Russia, and on the seas, has done for Australia.
And while we offer thanks on their return to those who have won for us this right to make our
country one of the greatest and our nation the happiest upon earth, while the flags flutter and hands
are waving, let us not ever forget that, to many of those to whom we owe the most, our thanks can
never be given. They who raised Australia to the very height of the world’s regard-—the gay welcome
in our streets is not for them. For others the cheers, the smiles. The rejoicings which they so often
longed for, they will never see. Twelve thousand miles from home they sleep for ever on the bleak
moorlands where by their lives the place of Australia in the world was won. Yet, could they speak,
they would not call us to weep. Their lives they gave cheerfully, grandly, knowing the cause; and
they have won for their country more than they ever hoped to win. Only by one means can we work
out our thanks to them—by continuing the task which they were forced to drop when the bullet took
them, and devoting our lives to make this country the happy, great, and generous land whose future
with their death they gave into our hands.
Authority: Alder! J. Mullett, Government Printer, Melbourne.
