

(( ~) BY THE
O
| REV. JAMES BEOTHERSTON LAUGHTON, 8.A..
h
cl
ON THE OCCASION OF HTS LEAVING BATHURST FOR
PARRAMATTA. A<




//u farri ,-Lyz**.
THE LORD’S NEED.
% lepton,
PREACHED IN
ST. STEPHEN’S CHURCH, BATHURST,
SABBATH EVENING, DEOEMBEE 31, 1865,
BY THE
REV. JAMES BEOTHERSTON LAUGHTON, 8.A.,
ON THE OCCASION OF HIS LEAVING BATHURST FOR
PARRAMATTA.
LUKE XIX., 31.
BATHURST s—.A. B. RAE,
SYDNEY -S HERRIFF AND DOWNING.


TO THE
ELDERS, MEMBERS, AND ADHERENTS
ST. STEPHEN’S CHURCH, BATHURST,
@1)18 sfatrottU IPisamm,
TERMINATING A PASTORATE OF ELEVEN YEARS,
IS AFFECTIONATELY INSCRIBED BY
THEIB FAITHFUL SERVANT
for Christ’s sake,
JAMES B. LAUGHTON.


FAREWELL SERMON
AT BATHUEST,
SABBATH EVENING, DECEMBER 31, 1865.
Luke xix. 31.
“ Ana if any man ask you, why do ye loose him ? thus shall ye say unto him. Because the
Lord hath need of him.”
These words occur in tlie narrative of our blessed Lord’s tri-
umphant entry into Jerusalem. He had often entered Jerusalem
before. He had been taken thither as an infant in His virgin
mother’s arms, and had been presented in the Temple in ful-
filment of the law, which required that all the first-born of Israel
should be dedicated to the Lord. He had gone thither with his
parents when they went up periodically to the sacred feasts.
And after the commencement of His public ministry, He regularly
went up with His disciples, in all things observing the ordinances
of the Ceremonial Law, though they were but shadows, whereof
He Himself was the substance. On all these occasions He had
entered the Holy City without any attempt to attract attention,
bearing the humble appearance of an ordinary worshipper,
having no outward form or comeliness such as usually finds
favour in the eyes of men. It was by the mighty works that He
wrought, and by the gracious words that proceeded out of His
mouth, that He gave evidence of His Divine character and com-
mission, and vindicated His claims to bo received as the Son of
God, the Messiah, the Anointed Prince and Saviour, foretold by
the prophets of Israel.
On the present occasion He was about to enter Jerusalem for


the last time; for the hour was at hand when He must be
delivered into the hands of sinners, and by His death finish
transgression ana make an end of sin. Though an ignominious
death was to be the sad climax of His sorrows for our sakes, He
held not back, but “ steadfastly set His face to go to Jerusalem,”
that He might fulfil all that was written of Him. And now,
when He knew that He was about to be put to death as a
malefactor, He chose to enter the city of which He was the Great
King, with some outward semblance of royalty. Even as the
prophet of old had sung, “ Rejoice greatly, 0 daughter of Zion;
shout, 0 daughter of Jerusalem; behold, thy King cometh unto
thee: He is just, and having salvation ; lowly, and riding
upon an ass, and upon a colt the foal of an ass;” so now, that
this Scripture might be fulfilled, Jesus would approach the Hill
of Zion, not as the kings and conquerors of this world, riding on
horses or in chariots of war, with a train of captives following,
and emblems of death and desolation surrounding them, but in
meek and lowly guise, riding on the humble beast of burden,
which was used by peaceful traders and travellers, the branches
of palm trees forming His only banners, and the Hosannas of
the multitude supplying the lack of trumpets and cymbals. Bye-
and-bye, when the Gospel of His kingdom shall have been
preached in all the nations of the earth, and the time for judg-
ment shall have come, He shall appear in the clouds of Heaven,
riding on a white horse, His eyes like a flame of fire, and on His
head many crowns ; clothed with a vesture dipped in blood; a
sharp sword issuing from His mouth; a sceptre of iron in His
hand, wherewith to rule the ungodly nations; and having on His
vesture and on His thigh a name written, King of kings, and
Lord of lords. But now He comes as the Prince of Peace ; a
king indeed, above all earthly kings, but whose kingdom is not
of this world, and is not to be achieved or maintained by the
weapons of earthly warfare or carnal policy. He comes, not to
destroy men’s lives but to save them ; not to be ministered unto,
but to minister, and to give His life a ransom for many. He
comes, that by His voluntary death He may destroy him that
had the power of death; that in His cross Truth may meet
with Mercy, and Righteousness and Peace kiss each other.
And accordingly, we shall find that all the circumstances
attending the Saviour’s last entrance into Jerusalem were calcu-
lated to illustrate His personal character, and the character of
His ministry, and of the Kingdom of Grace which he was about
to inaugurate.
It was necessary, for example, that He should make a public
and somewhat demonstrative entry, in order that by the exact


fulfilling of tli© prophecies, He might prove Himself to be the
predicted King of the Jews. But how studiously he avoids every
thing like worldly ostentation ! How careful that it should be
manifest to all that it was not honor from men that He sought,
and that even while He asserted Himself a king, He was touched
with a feeling for human infirmity, and loved us as a friend and
brother!
The means of making this public entry He did not Himself
possess. Though He was Lord of all power and property in
heaven and in earth, yet in His estate of humiliation He
possessed nothing. In his childhood and youth He wrought with
His hands, and thus gave dignity to human toil, and consecrated
the humblest implements of human labour. As He “went
about doing good” during the years of His ministry, He
depended for His daily bread on the generosity of friends ; and
certain women are mentioned with honor as having ministered
to Him of their substance. He had not where to lay His head;
often, often, His head was wet with the deAvs of night that fell
on the shady slopes of Olivet, or in the lonely wilderness, where
He passed the long hours of darkness in prayer to Hod. If He
required help in His necessity, or the temporary use of any thing,
He had to borrow it. So, it has been observed, His very birth-
chamber was borroAved: He was bom in a house of public
accommodation for travellers; He sailed in a borrowed boat; He
ate the passover with His disciples in a borrowed room ; He was
buried in a borrowed sepulchre. And so, now when He hath
need of a beast whereon to ride, He borrows an ass. He might
have wrought a miracle to obtain what he needed ; but though
He often wrought miracles to supply the wants of others, He
never once did so for Himself. He commanded, and bread came
into existence enough for the feeding of five thousand men, but
when He was Himself a-hungered, He Avould not command the
stones to bo made bread. The chariots of Hod are twenty
thousand, even thousands of angels: He might have had them
all, with all the flying pursuivants of the heavenly courts, to
attend Him to the Holy Place of the Most High ; but no ! He
will have none of these at this time. He must go, even as it was
written of Him, meek and lowly, riding upon an ass’s colt,
borrowed for the occasion. There is no discredit in borrowing, if
our necessities require it, more especially from our brethren of
the household of faith. The law of Christ does not indeed
establish a community of goods, or abolish distinctions of position
and property; such an abolition would be impossible while
human nature is what it is. But Christianity enjoins us to love
one another as Christ loved us, and to give freely, as we have


freely received. No Christian, therefore, need feel ashamed to
ask help of another, when he is really in need: begging and
borrowing are disgraceful only when they are the resources of
idleness and fraud.
In sending His disciples for the colt, our Lord not only gave
evidence of His Divine Omniscience, and of His sovereign power
in controlling the hearts of men, but also asserted His right of
dominion over the creatures. He is Grod’s first-born, and has the
right of the first-born, or the heir, over every creature. He had
a Divine right to use the colt, and He knew precisely whore to
find one, and the precise circumstances in which it would be
found. He told the disciples whom He sent that on entering the
village, at the junction of two roads, they would find a colt tied
with His mother. He bade them loose the colt, and bring him
with them, without asking permission of any man. And if the
owner or any other person should ask them, why they did so,
they were to give no other reply than this, —The Lord hath need
of him, —and this should be sufficient; the owners would imme-
diately acknowledge the claim, and suffer the beast to be
removed.
Now, fancy two strangers, unaccustomed to the handling of
horses, as fishermen for example, going up to an unbroken or
partially-broken colt tied to a fence at a farm-house, and loosing
him, and attempting to lead him away. Asses, in the East, are
not the dull passive drudges with which we are familiar: they
are as spirited as our horses, and are said to be more difficult to
break. An attempt of this kind, therefore, would very probably
be defeated by the indocility of the animal. But even were it
not so, the owners would be sure to prevent the unlawful appro-
priation if they witnessed it. They would demand, and with no
very choice language, what was the meaning of so barefaced an
attempt? And if they were told in reply, that “ the Lord had
need of him,” they would laugh the speakers to scorn, or treat
them as insane or intoxicated, or at least as mischievous persons,
if not actually as thieves.
None of these results happened in the case before us. The wild
ass’s colt submitted to be loosed by the inexperienced hands of the
two strange grooms, who probably knew as little of horse-gear
as David did of the arms of Saul; and the owners, yielding to the
secret energy of the Divine impulse, readily accepted the singular
explanation offered them, and allowed the animal to be led away.
The disciples accordingly, without let or hindrance, brought him
to Jesus, and as they had no proper equipments, they covered the
colt with their garments, and set Jesus thereon. Here was
another miracle. The colt had never before been mounted; and


most probably Jesus had never before been upon the back of an
animal. Yet the beast makes no resistance: the royal rider
exhibits neither timidity nor inaptitude ; for in this, as in other
things, He needed not that any should teach Him. The colt is
at once thoroughly subdued, so as not only to bear Jesus quietly,
but to be unmoved by the shoutings of the multitude, and the
waving branches, which few well-trained beasts could have
endured.
In this strange fashion the King of Zion approached His own
royal city, not then to sit, as one day He shall sit, on the throne
of His father David, but to suffer, that He might afterwards
enter into glory: to die, the just for the unjust, that He might
bring us to God. The multitude with one voice began to rejoice
and praise God for all the mighty works they had seen, cutting
down branches from the trees that lined the road, and spreading
their garments in the way, according to the usual modes of testi-
fying joy which then prevailed. There were some Pharisees,
indeed, among the multitude, as there are in every multitude,
who looked upon these demonstrations as irregular and fan-
atical, and inconsistent with the proximity of the holy city
and of the feast of unleavened bread. But He answered and
said, “I tell you that if these should hold their peace, the
stones would immediately cry out.” It was meet that they
should make merry and be glad, and cry with a loud voice,
“Blessed be the King that cometh in the name of the Lord;
peace in Heaven, and glory in the highest.”
The object I have in view does not require that we should
follow the narrative further. In what follows I shall confine
your attention to the verse which I read as my text. We know
not who the owners of the colt were; but the fact is recorded to
their honor, that when they were told that the Lord had need of
their colt, they immediately, and without demur, let bim go.
From this we may deduce the following Docteine : “ All we have
belongs to Christ; when He hath need of any thing, therefore,
it is our duty to yield it with cheerful resignation.”
My brethren, we are not our own: we are bought with a price.
Not only are we, like every other creature, the absolute property
of Christ, by whom God created all things; but we are His, in a
still more emphatic and exclusive manner, by virtue of the price
wherewith he hath purchased our redemption. He gave himself
for us, and hath redeemed us unto Himself to be His own peculiar
people, that we should live to the praise of His glory. Every
professing Christian, therefore—every one who calls himself a
Christian—by the very profession he makes denudes himself of


all right to dispose of himself or of anything he has. He out-
wardly acknowledges that he is not his own, but that he is
Christ’s servant, responsible to Christ for all his actions and for
the employment of all his possessions. Whether we eat, or
drink, or whatsoever wo do, we are commanded to do all to the
glory of God. Whatsoever we do, in word or deed, we are
commanded to do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving
thanks to Cod and the Father by Him. And if the service of
Christ, or of the Church, which is His body, and service done in
or for which He regards as done to Himself—if the service of
Christ, or of one of the least of those whom He is not ashamed
to call brethren, require us to do anything, or to give anything,
or to sacrifice anything, no other argument ought to be necessary
to move us to compliance, than this, “The Lord hath need of it.”
Let me endeavour to illustrate this doctrine a little.
1. Hath the Lord need of our time ? Our times are in His hand.
God, who filleth all time and all space, hath put all things into
Christ’s hand, that in all things He might have the pre-eminence.
Our time, therefore, is at Christ’s disposal. If He requires us to
devote a portion of time to this or that service, it is not for ns to
say, “ We have no time.” We should not so reply to the summons
of an earthly sovereign. If the Queen commanded our attend-
ance at a certain time and place, we should not dream of object-
ing : we should feel honored by the command —glad that we
could prove our loyalty, even at some sacrifice of time. Even
those summonses which we sometimes receive, requiring our
attendance in the courts of justice, we readily obey, not unfre-
quently at much expense and loss of time, because we feel we
owe a duty to the Queen as the representative of the public weal,
and also because non-compliance would render us liable to a
penalty.
Now, our duty to Christ is far higher than that we owe to any
earthly sovereign or representative of royalty. But there is, un-
happily, a vast difference between the readiness with which pro-
fessing Christians obey the calls of human authority or worldly
obligation, and that exhibited when our time is required for the
service of Christ, or his Church, or in the cause of religion or
charity. Instead of regarding the claims of the King of kings
as paramount, too many ignore them altogether, and a con-
siderable number give even a small portion of their time very
grudgingly. Ido not by any means forget that professing
Christians have worldly business to attend to ; nor do I forget the
words of an inspired Apostle, “If any provideth not for his own,
and specially for those of his own house, he hath denied the


faith and is worse than an infidel.” To provide things honest,
that is, things right and suitable, according to our station, in the
sight of all men, is a Christain duty, and in doing this we serve
the Lord Christ. But this is not all we have to do. Wo are to
guide our affairs with discretion, and while not slothful in our
worldly business, must strive to be fervent in spirit, serving the
Lord. And if the question arise between the devoting of an hour
to a business which is to further the cause of Christ or His Gospel,
and one which is simply to put money into our own pockets,
surely a Christian can have no hesitation in giving precedence to
the Lord’s work, always supposing that no positive engagement
or contract is broken thereby. The owners of the colt appear to
have recognized this principle. They did not reply to the Lord’s
message, unusual though it was, by saying, “The time is inconve-
nient ; we had just got up the beast from his pasture for another
purpose : we are about breaking him in, and the trainer is ready
to give him his exercise; if we let him go the time will be lost.”
No ! their feeling seems rather to have been, “ If the Lord hath
need of him now , we can wait.” And this, my brethren, is pre-
cisely the spirit in which we ought to receive all demands upon
our time for the Lord’s service.
2. Again : Hath the Lord need of our talents —our services—our
skill —the labour of our heads or of our hands ? It is not for us
to say, “We have no talents : we cannot do this thing that is
required of us.” If God, by His providence, places us in a posi-
tion where it becomes our duty to do such and such things, it is
not for us to shrink, but to gird up our loins like men, and run
in the way of His commandments. Men sometimes pre-
sumptuously rush forward, in their own strength, and without
asking counsel of God, to do what they imagine is a good work ;
and, as might be expected, they meet with repulses and failures,
which discourage and disgust them. Moses thus erred when he
thought the time had arrived when the Lord would deliver Israel
by his hand, and he presumptuously smote an Egyptian. God
sent him into the wilderness of Midian for forty years to learn
humility ; and so, from having been the most impetuous, he
became meek, above all men that were on the face of the earth.
And when at length the Lord really did command him to speak
to the children of Israel in His name, he erred in the opposite
extreme, by being too diffident. “ Who am I,” said he, “ that
I should go unto Pharaoh ?” “I am slow of speech, and of a slow
tongue.” And in like manner Jeremiah, when the Lord ordained
him to be a prophet unto the nation, demurred, saying, “Ah,
Lord God, behold, I cannot speak, for lam a child.” But the
Lord gently admonished them and encouraged them, and they


became His zealous and faithful servants, even as Isaiah, chief
among the prophets, who, when the seraph had touched his lips
with a live coal from the altar, and the voice of the Lord cried,
Whom shall I send? at once responded, “Here am I; send me.”
The majority of men are unhappily not like Moses and Jeremiah,
for they will not hear the voice of remonstrance, and will none
of God’s reproofs. “We cannot,” is their convenient reply
to every call of duty. We cannot sing the praises of God ; we
cannot pray with our families; we cannot come to church; wo
cannot teach in a Sabbath school; we cannot give a word of
brotherly counsel to convert a sinner or a backslider from the
error of his ways; and so forth. Or they will say, We have onhj
one talent, and what use can we make of it ? If we had received
five, or even two, we might have done something; but what are
we to do with one ? It is fit only to be laid up in a napkin, or hid
in the earth. Alas! beloved, how many of these unprofitable
servants are to be found in the visible Church ! How often must
we repeat, that if a man has only received one talent, he will not
be condemned because he has not done as much as if he had
received five, or two : his condemnation is that he has done nothing.
The goats that are now mingled with the sheep in the visible
kingdom of God, shall hereafter be separated by the all discern-
ing eye of the Chief Shepherd, and shall be condemned to ever-
lasting punishment with the devil and his angels, not because
they have been gross sinners, not because they have not done
great things, like the holy apostles and prophets and martyrs, but
because they have done nothing—because, though it was but
little they were ever called to do, they would not do even that
little.
I may add, that not only are we not at liberty to withhold our
hand from Christ’s service because we are only able to do
little, but we may not hold back because the service required
from us is not the sort of service we might prefer, or because the
scene of it is not altogether to our mind. The owners of the
colt might have alleged, “ This colt is not fit to be mounted: ho
has never had a man on his back; and even if so, he is much too
humble a beast for the Lord’s use: why not go to some of the
rich and noble, and obtain a royally caparisoned steed, more
worthy of so illustrious a rider? ” They did not argue thus : it
was enough that it was for their colt that the Lord had sent; and
if it was His pleasure to ride upon him, they felt it was not for
them to remonstrate or object. The disciples, in like manner,
when they were sent for the colt, might have objected to the
nature of the service. They were the Apostles of Christ: were
they to make grooms of themselves ? They knew not the art of


handling animals; why might not some one of the rustics that
had joined the procession, and who was a great deal better
qualified for such a duty than they, be employed? These Apostles
cherished no such disobedient thoughts. The Lord sent them , and
so they went, without question or murmur, and found even as
He had said unto them. Oh, brethren, it is a great thing to be
able to say, with full understanding of the meaning of the words,
“Not my will, but Thine be done.” “Not as I will, but as Thou
wilt.”
3, Once more: Hath the Lord need of our money ? It is not
for us to say “We cannot afford to give;” for the silver is
His, and the gold is His, and not ours. No principle of
Christian duty is more clearly established than this, “ Give as
God hath prospered you.” It was the law of the Church under
the Mosaic econony, (Deut. xvi., 16-17.) “ Three times in ayear
shall all thy males appear before the Lord thy God in the place
which he shall choose and they shall not appear
before the Lord empty; every man shall give as he is able,
according to the blessing of the Lord thy God which He hath
given thee.” The same principle is prescribed by divine
authority for the regulation of the liberality of the church under
the Gospel, (I. Cor., xvi., 2.) “ Upon the first day of the week
let every one of you lay by him in store, as God hath prospered
him, that there be no gatherings when I come.” If this simple
Apostolic regulation were observed conscientiously, our Sabbath
collections ought to be the only fund to be managed in our con-
gregations. If we could get Christians trained in the habit of
giving a certain portion of their income for religious purposes,
and of setting this apart every week, there would be no need for
any other collections—no need for spasmodic efforts—bazaars—
tea-meetings—still less for theatrical entertainments, to wheedle
men out of money which Christian principle does not prompt them
to give. Yet to this it has almost come. The Lord hath need of
money ; but He cannot get it, unless His servants have recourse
to a variety of expedients, which, if not all alike objectionable,
are all removed from the simplicity of Christ, and from that true
liberality of soul which deviseth liberal things, and does not wait
to be prompted or solicited.
“I speak as to wise men: judge ye what I say! ” Is the
principle of giving, when the Lord hath need of our money—of
giving as God hath prospered us—sufficiently recognised ? Is it
not rather a just cause of complaint, that while many professing
Christians—l speak not of others: them that are without God
judgeth: we of His household are commanded to judge ourselves
—is it not a just cause of complaint, that while many professed


disciples of Christ give willingly when the gift brings some credit
or eclat to themselves, they do not give so willingly or so largely
when their gifts are unknown ? Do we not all know that secret
charity is comparatively rare, and that the most effectual method
of raising money is to do it with blare of trumpet and tuck of
drum ? Is it not true that men will give, if the money is for the
benefit of their own district or neighbourhood, but hesitate when
the Lord hath need of it for another part of the colony, or of the
world ? I do not wish to occupy your time this evening by talk-
ing of money ; but I am constrained to leave my testimony with
you, that the whole system of raising money in our modern
congregations is unsound and unscriptural, savouring far too
strongly of a policy which is altogether of this world ; and that
we shall never be really vigorous and efficient, until “ the Lord
hath need ” is recognized as a sufficient argument for giving, and
“ as God hath prospered us ” is made the only measure of our
gifts. The owners of the colt might have alleged, “We cannot
afford this : we are poor people : our whole stock consists of this
ass and her colt: if any accident happen, it will be a ruinous loss
to us : surely it is hardly fair to come upon us poor bush farmers to
provide a beast for your master: go to our landlord, or some other
wealthy proprietor!” But these peasants of Bethany knew
better. “The Lord hath need of him” was enough; and
immediately they let him go.
4. Lastly: Hath the Lord need of aught else that we have ?
Sometimes he calls upon us to surrender what is far more
precious than either time, or talents, or money. Believers are
God’s children and heirs, but their inheritance is beyond the
grave. While they are in the bod}’, they have nothing of their
own ; and when they forget this, and begin to set their affections
on earthly things,—wives, children, houses, lands, ships, mer-
chandise, arts, sciences, ranks, or dignities,—God deals with them
as a tender father deals with the child whom he loves too well to
spoil, and takes away the dainty morsel, or the pretty ornament,
or the glittering toy that has engrossed his affections too much,
and made him forget the task his father has assigned him. Such,
beloved, are the uses of affliction. If God really regards us as sons,
then, when we wander from Him, He brings us back by the rod.
To one He says, ‘ ‘ Lie thou on a bed of pain and sickness: I
have need of thee to do a work in the church, or in the world,
and this salutary discipline will prepare thee for it;” or, “I have
need that thou shouldst glorify me by suffering patiently and
exhibiting the power of faith.” To a parent He says, “The
child that is born unto thee must die: thou art making an idol of
him: thou art forgetting that life is passing away: I have


need of him—need that thou shouldst be profited and made more
meet for my service by being cast into the furnace and purified
by the fires of affliction.” That which is for the good of His
people is the Lord’s need: for Himself He needeth nothing. And
thus at last the believer is brought to the brink of the Jordan,
and the messenger of death comes, saying, “The Lord hath need
of thee ! thy warfare is accomplished : thou hast fought the good
fight: thou hast finished thy course : thou hast kept the faith:
come up higher ! well done, good and faithful servant, thou hast
been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many
things, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.” He that testifieth
these things saith to every one of us, “ Surely I come quickly! ”
Oh, that each of us may be able to reply with the beloved disciple,
“ Amen: even so, come, Lord Jesus ! ”
I shall have signally failed in my illustration of this gospel
incident, which I have chosen for my subject this evening, if I
have not led you to perceive the application of it to the special
occasion of my addressing you at this time. After labouring
eleven years among you, I am now called, in the service of Him
who is both my master and yours, to labour in another, though
not a very distant, sphere. The servants of Christ have come
together for the purpose of loosing me from this charge; and
some of you asked, as you had every right to ask, why do ye
loose him ? And the only answer given you—the only answer
which could be given you—was, “The Lord hath need of him.”
This is really the explanation of the whole case. Every question
which it was possible to connect, however remotely, with the pro-
posed translation, was rightly considered to be merged in this
one, “ Does the fjord's service require it, or not? ” The answer
was sought from the Lord Himself with earnest prayer, and the
decision which has been arrived at is, we believe, the answer
to our prayers, and according to His will. I go, therefore, my
beloved brethren, not for any personal profit or gratification of
my own, not because it is pleasant to me to go, but simply
because “ The Lord hath need of me.” It is gratifying to me to
find that my humble labours as Christ’s minister in this place
have been so far acceptable to you, that you have said, in no
ambiguous language, that you would willingly have retained me
among you. I can say, with equal sincerity and affection, I
would very gladly spend and be spent even to the end of my life
for you! When I returned from Europe four years ago, after
twelve months’ absence, I saw no other future before me but to walk
with you while I lived in this world, and to lay my bones among
you when the Lord had no longer need of me above ground.
But Cod’s ways are not our ways. He has wrought great things


for our Zion, long torn asunder, and bleeding from internal
wounds. For the present the work is urgent, and we are
hindered for lack of labourers. Under such circumstances,
much advantage may be gained by some changes in the
distribution of our available force ; each man, as far as possible,
and as opportunity is afforded in the Providence of God, being
placed where his peculiar talents can be most serviceable for the
edification of the whole body. Some time must necessarily elapse
before a thorough re-adjustment can be accomplished; but in the
meantime we are sending for re-inforcements, and every addi-
tional sound-hearted man that we settle in the colony will be a
new pledge of God’s favour to us, a token for good, and an
assurance that a brilliant future is before our Church in this land,
if her sons are only true to her, true to their Great King and
Head, and true to one another. These are not times for either
ministers, or congregations, or individual Christians, to cherish
mere private feelings or preferences; let us rather remember
that “we are one body in Christ, and every one members one of
another.” Let not one congregation, or one district, be
envious against another: let there be no feeling of rivalry or
antagonism whatever, for any cause; let us rather stir each other
up to love and to good works, our only strife being, which shall
most readily and cheerfully minister to the Lord’s need.
I go, my beloved brethren, from you who know me, and whom
I know, to dwell among those who know me not, and who are to
me unkown. Igo from familiar scenes to a strange city; from
a tried sphere, to one of which I have had no experience. All
this is a cause of anxiety and perplexity to flesh and blood ; but
since this matter has been before my mind, I have besought the
Lord that He would teach me to confer, not with flesh and blood,
but with His Spirit; that is, that he would enable me to look at
the circumstances, not from any carnal or worldly point of view,
but from the point whence I should see only the promotion of His
glory in the general edification of the church which is His
body. I have therefore now to bid you farewell. As your
pastor you will see my face no more; but I shall still hope often to
see you as a friend and brother, and your servant for Christ’s sake,
when the Lord’s need may hereafter require me to come among
you; and I trust that lam not exceeding the bounds of Christian
modesty, when I say with the great Apostle, “I am sure that
when I come unto you, I shall come in the fulness of the blessing
of the Gospel of Christ.” The Gospel does not, like the ceremo-
nial law, decay, or wax old, but is ever fresh and fair, its beauty
undiminished, its song ever new and sweet,; and therefore lam
sure, that, should Ibe spared at any future time to preach the


Word of life again in this place, though I shall have no new
truth to tell you, the old will not have lost its savour.
I have already taken leave, officially, of the Kirk Session, and
of the Committee of Management; but Christian courtesy and
affection move me on this occasion publicly to express the obliga-
tions under which both you as a congregation, and myself as
your minister, have been placed with respect to both those bodies.
Few of the congregations of the Church have a more efficient staff
of elders: I need not say, they have at all times been ready to
co-operate in every thing that concerned your spiritual welfare.
With respect also to the Managing Committee, a considerable
number of its members have been conscientiously desirous of
fulfilling the responsibility they incurred in accepting office.
Without the intelligent and active assistance of these gentlemen
it would have been quite impossible to maintain Divine ordinan-
ces among you; and you will pardon my reminding you, that the
future prosperity of the congregation will very much depend upon
the zeal and aptitude of the gentlemen whom you may elect to
serve on the Committee, and on the fidelity and punctuality with
which they may discharge their honorable and important
functions.
“ Finally,” then, my beloved brethren, “ farewell. Be perfect;
be of good comfort; be of one mind; live in peace; and the God
of love and peace shall be with you.” (2 Cor., xiii., 11.)
Kemember the words that I have spoken unto you, warning every
man and persuading every man, as the Lord enabled me. God is
my witness, whom I serve with my spirit in the Gospel of His
Son, that in all good conscience and fidelity, according to the
light that God has given me in answer to my prayers, I have
declared unto you the truth of the living God, as it is in Jesus.
Conscious, as I must be, of many shortcomings and imperfections ;
well knowing what it is to live, from an overwhelming sense of
responsibility, in weakness, and fear, and much trembling;
nevertheless, I humbly thank’my God, that He enables me to say
in this parting hour, “I have not beguiled or defrauded your
souls: I have not given you shadows for substance, or stones for
bread; I have not spoken unto you smooth things, or prophesied
deceit. I have not healed your spiritual hurts slightly or
treacherously, saying, “ Peace, Peace, when there was no peace.”
X have told you, that by nature you are all alienated from the life
of God through the ignorance that is in you because of the blindness
of your hearts, and that even those who make the fairest shew in
the flesh are dead in trespasses and sins. I have told you, that
by the deeds of the law no flesh can be justified in God’s sight,
whose pure eyes can look with complacency on nothing that is


not perfect. And I have told you of Jesus Christ, the only hope
and refuge of the sinner; of His perfect righteousness, which
satisfies the most rigorous demands of God’s law; of his un-
speakable and infinitely meritorious sufferings, which God accepts
as an expiation for human guilt. I have set before you both life
and death ; blessing and cursing ; beseeching you by the mercies
of God, and by the certainty of Death and Judgment, to flee from
the wrath to come, and to lay hold on the blessed hope of Eternal
Life set before'us in the Gospel. And I have urged you, with all
earnestness, to search the Scriptures daily, that you might know
whether what I taught you was according to the mind of the
Spirit. Wherefore I take you to record this day that lam pure
from your blood, for X have not shunned to declare unto you all
the counsel of God. I have at least sounded tlm trumpet; and
if ye take not warning, ye shall die in your iniquity ; but I have
delivered my soul,
“ And now, brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word
of His Grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an
inheritance among all them which are sanctified.” (Actsxx, 32.)
Eor all the loving kindness you have shown to me and mine, I
thank you from my heart of hearts, and pray that my God may
supply all your temporal and spiritual needs, and reward you a
thousandfold into your own bosoms. If I have, through infirmity
of the flesh, come short of my duty to any of you, I beseech you to
forgive me, even as God for Christ’s sake hath freely forgiven you.
“ Be ye, therefore, followers of God, as dear children ; and walk
in love, as Christ also hath loved us, and given Himself for us,
an offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweet-smelling savour”
(Eph. v. 1,2), Walk as strangers and pilgrims upon the earth,
seeking a better country, that is a heavenly, looking for a city
which hath foundations, whose builder and maker is God. Thus
will our earthly partings be softened by the blessed assurance
that we shall meet again: that we shall meet again in that holy
and happy land, where there shall be no more sin, no more
sorrow, no more separation, no more death; but where “ the
Lamb that is in the midst of the throne shall feed us, and lead
us unto living fountains of waters, and God shall wipe away all
tears from our eyes.”
That such may be the happy lot of you that are here present,
and of all among whom in this district I have gone preaching
the kingdom of God, may the Lord of His infinite mercy grant,
for Jesus Christ’s sake, Amen.
Let tjs pkay.




