



The
SECRET REVEALED !!
and the
Mystic Beauties of
Free masonry
Developed !!
By
AN ANCIENT BROTHER.
London.
Printed for G & W. R Whittaties
13, Ave Maria Lane.
1820.
Price 2/6.


THE
BEAUTIES
OF
FREE MASONRY.
HIEROGLYPHICS.
From the first formation of society, man-
kind have endeavoured to find out methods of
preserving the memory of such events and dis-
coveries as they imagined would be interesting
to posterity. In primitive times, it was cus-
tomary to plant a grove, to raise an altar, or
heap of stones; to institute games and festivals;
and to compose a kind of songs, to perpetuate
memorable events. Tradition then supplied
c


the place of writing; fathers explained to their
children the motives of such practices and
institutions, and informed them of the events
which had occasioned them.
Nations were not then populous : they had
few necessities, few arts, and little commerce;
consequently, their ideas and languages could
not be very copious. As mankind grew more
numerous, their knowledge and their business
increased; and it became necessary to invent
more precise and commodious methods of
attesting facts.
The first attempt towards writing, if we
may be allowed to use that term, was the re-
presentation of material objects. After this,
some ingenious nations invented more artifi-
cial methods; the most celebrated of these was
that of hieroglyphics, of which the Egyptians
are esteemed the inventors.
Learned men have frequently been found
in an error about the first use of hieroglyphics.
They imagined that the Egyptian priests in-
vented them, to conceal their knowledge from


the vulgar. But this mistake has arisen from
not attending to the change of circumstances.
It is easy to prove, that the Egyptians only
used hieroglyphics at first to transmit the
knowledge of their laws, their customs, and
their history to posterity. It was nature and
necessity, not art and choice, that produced
the several kinds of hieroglyphic writing.
They were an imperfect, defective invention,
suited to the ignorance of the first ages. The
Egyptians used them because they knew not
letters. If this people had first invented al-
phabetic writing, they would have been too
sensible of its excellence to use any other.
This error about the use of hieroglyphics
came from the Greeks. It was late before
they had any intercourse with the Egyptians,
and none before alphabetic characters were
in use. The hieroglyphic writing, at that
time, was abandoned by the bulk of the nation.
It was then that the Egyptian priests, whose
examples have been strictly adhered to by the
learned of antiquity, invented a peculiar kind


of hieroglyphics, in order to conceal the tenets
of certain institutions from those who had not
been admitted into the order. Nor would
they on any account whatever draw the veil
that enveloped their mystic symbols to any
initiate, until pledges of fidelity had been given
never to divulge their secrets to an uninitiate.
Those examples have been wisely adopted,
and implicitly retained by our fraternity, for
the purpose of concealing their mysteries.
The hieroglyphics, like the Sibylls leaves, con-
taining the secrets of the Masonic order, ap-
pear to the world as indistinct and scattered
fragments; they, however, convey to Masons
an uniform and well-connected system of
morality.


THE ORIGIN OF MASONRY.
We trace the footsteps of Masonry in the
most distant, the most remote ages and nations
of the world. We find it amongst the first
and most celebrated citizens of the East: we
deduce it regularly from the first astronomers
on the plains of Chaldre, to the wise and
mystic kings and priests of Egypt, the sages
of Greece, the philosophers of Rome, and
even to the rude and Gothic builders of a dark
and degenerate age, whose vast temples still
remain amongst us, as monuments of their
attachment to the order. In no civilized age
or country hath Masonry been neglected : the
most illustrious characters —kings, princes,
and nobles ; sages and legislators; authors
and artists, have thought it their glory to
protect and honour it. And we are happy to
find, that, for the dignity and promotion of
b 2


the science, lodges are opened in every quar-
ter of the globe. For it has been remarked,
that in whatsoever else men may dispute and
disagree, yet they are all unanimous to respect
and to support a singularly amiable institution,
which annihilates all parties, conciliates all
private opinions, and renders those, who by
their Almighty Father were made one flesh,
to be also of one heart and one mind; bound,
firmly bound together by that indissoluble tie,
*' The love of their God, and the love of their
kind,”


THREE GRAND OFFERINGS, OR SACRIFICES.
I. The history of Abraham’s proceeding to
sacrifice his only son at the command of God,
is affecting in the highest degree, and sets
forth a pattern of unlimited resignation, that
every one ought to imitate in those trials of
obedience, under temptation, or of acquies-
cence under afflicting dispensations which fall
to our lot. Of this vve may be assured, that
our trials will be always proportioned to the
powers afforded us : if we have not Abraham’s
strength of mind, neither shall we be called
upon to lift the fatal knife against the bosom
of an only child. But if the Almighty arm
should be stretched forth against him, we
must be ready to resign him, and all we hold
dear, to the Divine will. This action of Abra-
ham’s has been censured by some, who do not
attend to the distinction between obedience to


a special command, and the detestably cruel
sacrifices of the heathens, who sometimes
voluntarily, and without any divine injunc-
tion, offered up their children, under the no-
tion of appeasing the anger of their gods. An
absolute command from God himself, as in
the case of Abraham, entirely alters the moral
nature of the action; since He, and He only,
has a perfect right over the lives of his crea-
tures, and may appoint whom he will, either
angel or man, to be the instrument of destruc-
tion. That.it really was the voice of God
which pronounced the command, and not a
delusion, might be made certain to Abraham’s
mind by means we do not comprehend, but
which we know to be within the power of
Him who made our souls as well as our bodies,
and who can controul and direct every faculty
of the human mind : and we may be assured,
that if he was pleased to reveal himself so
miraculously, he would not have 1 a possibility
of doubting whether it was a real or imaginary
revelation; Thus the sacrifice of Abraham


appears to be clear of all superstition, and re-
mains the noblest instance of religious faith
and submission that was ever given by a mere
man; which proved so satisfactory to God,
that he appointed a ram, which he discovered
to Abraham, caught by his horns in a thicket,
as a sacrifice to be offered up instead of his
son Isaac, and which the father of the faithful
most gratefully offered up as a burnt offering
to his benevolent Creator.
11. Tire mediatorial sacrifice offered up by
King David upon the threshing-floor of Arau-
nah the Jebusite, which proved so acceptable
to the wise disposer of human events, that He,
of his unbounded wisdom and goodness, put
an end to the plague, which at that time had
destroyed, from Dan to Beersheba, seventy
thousand men, occasioned by David’s im-
prudence in having the people of Israel num-
bered, contrary to the command of the Most
High. For when the angel stretched out his
hand upon Jerusalem to destroy it, the Lord


repented him of the evil, and said to the
angel that destroyed the people, “ It is enough:
stay now thine hand.” And the angel of the
Lord then stood by the threshing-floor of
Araunah the Jebusite. And David spake
unto the Lord, when he saw the angel that
smote the people, and said, “ Lo, I have
sinned, and I have done wickedly ; but these
sheep, what have they done ? Let thine hand,
I pray thee, be against me, and against my
father’s house.” And Gad, David’s seer, came
that day to David, and said unto him, “ Go
up, rear an altar unto the Lord, in the thresh-
ing-floor of Araunah, the Jebusite.” And
David, according to the saying of Gad, went
up, as the Lord commanded, and he purchased
the threshing-floor and the oxen for fifty
shekels of silver. And David built there an
altar unto the Lord, and offered burnt of-
ferings and peace offerings. So the Lord was
intreated for the land, and the plague was
stayed from Israel. And David saw that his
sacrifice was acceptable unto the Lordhis God,


wherefore he exclaimed, " This is the house
of the Lord God, and this is the altar of the
burnt offering for Israel. 1 '
111. The dedication of Israel’s holy temple.
At the solemnization of this grand and sacred
fabric. King Solomon assembled the elders of
Israel, and all the heads of the tribes, the chief
of the fathers of the children of Israel, and a
mighty congregation of all nations, from the
entering in of Hamath unto the river of
Egypt: and Solomon hallowed the middle of
the court that was before the house of the
Lord; for there he offered burnt-offerings,
and the fat of the peace-offerings, because the
brazen altar would have proved insufficient to
contain the multitudes of the intended of-
ferings.
The elders of Israel being assembled, they
attended the king at Mount Zion, where the
ark of God’s covenant was then kept, which
the priests took up upon their shoulders: the
Levites, according to their several designed


ranks, carried the tabernacle, with all the holy
vessels of Moses. When the ark was brought
up to the sacred mountain, the king, and all
the congregation, sacrificed before it sheep
and oxen, which could not be told nor num-
bered for multitude.
Then the priests conveyed the ark of the
covenant of the Lord unto its place, to the
oracle of the house, into the most holy place,
even under the wings of the cherubims ;
which being done, the priests returned from
that mysterious place, one hundred and twenty
of them with silver trumpets; and they blew
their trumpets in the court, accompanied with
cymbals, psalteries, harps, and instruments of
music, whilst the singers, who stood at the
east end of the altar, lifted up their voices,
and sung, “ For he is good: for his mercy
endureth for ever!” Then the house was
filled with a cloud, even the house of the Lord;
so that the priests could not stand to minister
by reason of the cloud, for the glory of the
Lord had filled the house of God.


Then the king, standing upon his brazen
scaffold before the altar, and looking towards
the cloud of glory, said, “ The Lord hath said
that he would dwell in thick darkness ; but I
have built an house of habitation for thee, and
a place for thy dwelling for ever." And the
king turned his face to all the people as they
stood, and blessed the whole congregation of
Israel: then, turning from the congregation,
he said, “ O Lord God of Israel! there is no
god like thee in heaven nor in earth, contin-
ually shewing mercy to thy servants that walk
before thee with all their hearts: therefore,
O Lord God of Israel! hearken unto the sup-
plications of thy servant, and of thy people,
when they pray towards this place ; hear thou
them from thy dwelling place, even from
heaven; and when thou hearest, forgive.”


THE ANCIENT MODE OF WORSHIP.
When the Almighty had finished the glo-
rious work of the creation, man being in a
state of innocency, communed with his God—
and received from him those sacred precepts,
which, after his fall, he communicated to his
children, who handed them down to posterity
by oral tradition. Enoch exceeded his bre-
thren in piety and virtue, and was, as an ex-
ample to mankind, translated; whereby he did
not see death. Noah found grace in the eyes
of the Lord, for he was a just man, and so
perfect in his generation, that through him
the race of mankind were saved from the
general deluge; who handed down to the
post-deluvians the laws of his Creator, as he
had received them from his predecessors.
Abraham, renowned for his piety and faith,
obtained such favour in the sight of God, that


he vouchsafed to stile him “ ms friend j”
and promised to make of his posterity a great
nation; and that in his seed, (that is, in one
of his descendants,) all the kingdoms of the
earth should be blessed. This refers to the
Messiah, who was to be the blessing and deli-
verance of all nations. In the course of years,
Moses excelled them all, on account of the
series of wonders wrought by the Almighty,
through him, to rescue the oppressed Israelites
from the cruel tyranny of the Egyptians, who
having first received them as guests, by degrees
reduced them to a state of slavery. By the
jnost peculiar mercies and exertions in their
favour, God prepared his chosen people to re-
ceive, with reverent and obedient hearts, the
solemn restitution of those primitive laws,
which probably he had revealed to Adam, and
his immediate descendants; or which, at least,
he had made known by the dictates of con-
science ; but which lime, and the degeneracy
of mankind, had much obscured.
This important revelation was made to them


in the wilderness of Sinai; there assembled
before the burning mountain, surrounded
" with blackness, and darkness, and tempest,”
they heard the voice of God pronounce the
eternal law, impressing it on their hearts with
circumstances of terror; but without those
encouragements, and those excellent promises,
which were afterwards offered to mankind by
Jesus Christ. Thus were the great laws of
morality restored to the Jews, and through
them transmitted to other nations; and by
that means a great restraint was opposed to
the torrent of vice and impiety, which began
to prevail over the world.
To those moral precepts, above stated,
which are of perpetual and universal obliga-
tion, were superadded, by the ministration of
Moses, many peculiar institutions, wisely
adapted to different ends; either to fix the
memory of those past deliverances, which were
figurative, of a future and far greater salva-
tion—to place inviolable barriers between the
Jews and the idolatrous nations, by whom


they were surrounded, or to the civil law by
which the community were to be governed.
To conduct this series of events, and to
establish these laws with this people, God
raised up that great prophet, Moses, to whom
he delivered the tables of the law penned by
his own immediate finger; and directed him
to build a tabernacle, or moveable temple, in
the wilderness, as a receptacle for the tables of
the Law, the Ark of the Covenant, and for
offering up their sacrifice and oblations to the
great I AM ; which tabernacle he was com-
manded to place due east and west, as a type
of that more-excellent temple, built by king
Solomon, on mount Moriah in Jerusalem,
whose beauty and proportion astonished all
beholders!
Prior to that time, all offered up their
prayers and sacrifices to the Deity according
to the dictates of their hearts, and the custom
of the country where they lived, which was
generally east and west. The rising and
setting of the sun first led our ancient philo-
c 3


sophers to the study of Astronomy, who wor-
shipped the sun as one of their deities, as being
the giver of vegetable and vital heal—offered
their oblations to the east towards the rising
sun, and supplications to the west or setting
sun.


THE THREE PILLARS—WISDOM, STRENGTH,
AND BEAUTY.
The universe is the temple of the Deity
whom we serve; wisdom, strength, and beauty
are about his throne as pillars of his works—
for his wisdom is infinite, his strength is in
omnipotence, and beauty stands forth through
all his creation in symmetry and order. He
hath stretched forth the heavens as a canopy,
the earth he hath planted as his footstool: he
crowneth the temple with stars as with a
diadem, and in his hand he extendeth the
power and the glory; the sun and moon are
messengers of his will, and all his laws are
concord. Thfe pillars supporting a mason’s
lodge are said to be emblems of these divine
powers.


JACOB’S LADDER.
The covering of the lodge is the celestial
hemisphere, and free and accepted Masons
hope to arrive at the dominions of bliss, by
the allegorical assistance of Jacob’s ladder, one
part of which rested on the earth, and the
other extended to heaven, on which angels
were ascending and descending: those ascend-
ing carried the oblations of gratitude to the
throne of grace; those descending dispensed
the mercies of providence to the whole crea-
tion. This ladder, symbolical of the nature of
man, his body earthly, but his soul heavenly
and divine, was shewn to Jacob in a vision, to
remind him that he could never attain its sum-
mit but by a strict adherence to the laws and
commands of the Almighty, which would not
only prove a source of earthly blessings, but
enable him to return to his father’s house in


peace and plenty— which, in process of time,
was fully verified. In an emblematic sense,
this ladder may be considered as resting upon
the Holy Bible; for, by paying implicit obe-
dience to the doctrine contained in that sacred
volume, we are convinced by promises incon-
trovertible, more solid than the earth, more
permanent than the heavens, that, by a sted-
fast faith in well doing, a continual hope, and
a heart replete with charity and benevolence,
we shall finally attain the summit of that lad-
der, metaphorically speaking, the dominions
of bliss, and mansion of pure delight.


FAITH, HOPE, AND CHARITY.
Faith is that blessed tree, which, by our
assiduous cultivation, and theinfluenceof God’s
holy spirit, bringeth forth good fruit, and
leads to everlasting life. By faith we are in-
structed in the true condition of our situation
here, and the laws of our nature and our duty
are laid before us in the fullest and clearest
manner: our understanding is led forth into
a future state —all eternity is unveiled before
us, and we see the great doctrines of life and
immortality in the clearest light.
Hope is the anchor of prudence, on which
we may confidently rest our dependance for
safety in every honourable pursuit. She en-
lightens every breast with her refulgent rays;
cultivates the ingenuous mind; fosters their
virtuous endeavours ; gives birth to an infinite
variety of plans; and invigorates the comple


tion of every laudable design with promptitude
and perseverance. It is a star of the first mag-
nitude, by which we are enabled to guide our
earthly vessel through the boisterous sea, and
tempestuous passions of life: but the port
once gained, she will enable us to ride with
safety at her placid moorings, and to weather
out the voyage of life with pleasure, with
happiness, and with comfort.
The chief foundation of our institution is
charity ; it warms our heart with that phi-
lanthropy, which directs us never to permit
a fellow creature in distress to pass us by until
we have presented the cup of consolation, and
bade them drink copious draughts of the heart-
reviving: milk of human kindness.
Can any person, absorbed in pleasure, roll
their chariot wheels beyond the scene of sor-
row without compassion ?—or without pity
see the last convulsion, and the deadly gaze,
which paints affliction upon the countenance
of an expiring saint?—certainly not!—for
charity, as well as mercy, droppeth like the


gentle rains from heaven upon the place
beneath ; it is twice blessed; it blesseth those
who give, and those who receive.
Happy the man who hath sown in his breast
the seeds of benevolence; the produce thereof
shall be charity and love; from the foundation
of his heart shall rise rivers of goodness; and
the streams shall overflow for the benefit of
mankind. He assisteth the poor in their
trouble; he rejoiceth in furthering the pros-
perity of all men; he censureth not his neigh-
bour; he believeth not the tales of envy and
malevolence, neither repeateth he their slan-
ders ; he forgiveth the injuries of men, and
wipeth them from his remembrance; revenge
and malice have no place in his heart: for evil
he retumeth not evil; he hateth not even his
enemies, but requitelh their injustice with
friendly admonition; he promoteth in his
neighbourhood peace and good-will, and his
name is repeated with praise and benediction.
The eyes of cherubims view with delight
the exercise of such benevolence as forms the


character of the good Samaritan.—Saints
touch their golden lyres to hymn humanity’s
fair history in realms of bliss, and approbation
shines upon the countenance of the Father of
Mercies, when a man is found in the exercise
of this sacred virtue.


THE ORNAMENTS.
Masonry being the most prevalent society
in the world, and their precepts not only
acknowledged, but practised by every nation
on the earth, the ground-floor of the lodge is
consequently furnished with mosaic work,
intimating to us the beautiful manner in which
the grand architect of the universe has diver-
sified the face of this terraqueous globe. The
variety of scenes manifested through the whole,
the fluctuations and changes which daily
occur, and the perpetual flux and reflux of
natural productions, declare the uncertainty of
human events; admonishing us as Masons,
not to set our hearts on the things of this world,
but to lay up our treasure where the rust can-
not deface their polish and lustre.
The blazing star bears testimony of that star
which conducted the wise men to the East,


in search of true knowledge: it is placed in the
centre of the lodge, to remind us of the care
and supremacy of an all-wise being, whose
watchful eye ever surrounds us; and, whilst
we tread within the square of right rectitude,
and circumscribe our actions within the com-
pass of morality and justice, will most gra-
ciously overshadow us by the influence of his
providential rays, and cheerfully protect us
in this probationary state.
The indented border demonstrates that the
Almighty, in order to add greater beauty to
the scene of life wherein he hath placed us, his
highly-favoured creatures, hath bordered the
earth with the ocean, similar to the border
which surrounds the lodge, not only for the
salubrity which should be derived from the
agitation of the waters, but also, that to the
genius of man a communication should be
opened to the four quarters of the world,
Europe, Asia, Africa, and America, so that,
by mutual intercourse, we might unite in mu-
tual good works, and all become members of
one society.


As the steps of man are trod in the various
and uncertain incidents of human life; as our
days are chequered with a strange contrariety
of events, and our passage through this exis-
tence, though sometimes attended with pros-
perous circumstances, is frequently beset with
a multitude of evils; hence is the lodge fur-
nished with Mosaic work, to remind us of the
precariousness of our state on earth: to-day
our feet may tread in prosperity, to-morrow
totter on the uneven paths of weakness, temp-
tation, and adversity. Whilst this emblem is
before us, we are taught to boast of nothing—
to have compassion, and give aid to those who
are in affliction; to walk uprightly and with
humility; for such is our existence in this
mortal life, that there is no station in which
pride can be stably founded; all men in birth,
and in the grave are on a level. Therefore,
while our feet tread on this Mosaic work, let
our ideas return to the original which it
copies; and let every Mason act agreeable to
the true principles of piety and virtue.


THE FURNITURE.
As the more immediate guide for Free
Masons, the Lodge is furnished with unerring
rules, whereby we are to regulate our conduct.
The book of the law, (the Holy Bible,) is laid
open to our view, that We may not say,
through ignorance, vve erred; whatever the
great Creator of the universe hath dictated
to us as the mode in which he would be served,
and the path in which to'walk to obtain his
approbation; whatever precepts he hath ad-
ministered, and with whatever laws he hath
inspired the sages of old, the same are faith-
fully recorded in the book containing the laws
of Masonry. That sacred book, which is
never closed in the Lodge, reveals the duties
which the great Author of All exacts from us;
open to every eye, comprehensible to every
d 2


mind; then who can say, that they know not
the acceptable service ?
As the frailty of human nature wageth war
with truth, and our infirmities struggle with
our virtues to aid the conduct of every Mason,
the grand master of the order holdeth the
compasses limiting the distance, progress, and
circumference of the work: he dictateth the
manner, he giveth the direction of the design,
and delineateth each portion, and part of the
labour, assigning to each his province and his
order.
To try the works of Masons, the square is
presented as the probation of their lives—prov-
ing, whether their actions are regular and
uniform; for Masons should be of one prin-
ciple, and one rank, without the distinction
of pride and pageantry; intimating, that from
high to low the minds of Masons should be
inclined to good works, above which no one
stands exalted by fortune.


THE JEWELS.
The square is worn by the person who
governs the lodge, intimating that he should
found his government within the square of
concord and universal love; for, as nature’s
All-powerful Architect moveth the system
with his fingers, and toucheth the spheres with
harmony, that the morning stars together
sing the songs of gratitude, and the floods
clap their hands amidst the invariable beauties
of order; so should Masons, rejoicing under
the mild directions of their governor, be of one
mind, and one law; in unanimity, in charity,
and inalfection; moving by one unchanging
system, and actuated by one principle in rec-
titude of conduct.
In a moral sense. Masons are taught by the
jewels to try their affections by justice, and
their actions by truth, as the square tries the


workmanship of the mechanic : and to regard
their mortal state —whether it be opulent or
indigent; as being of one nature in the be-
ginning, and of one rank in its close. In sen-
sations, passions, and pleasures —in infirmities,
maladies, and wants, all mankind are on a
parallel: nature hath given us no superiorities.
It is wisdom and virtue that constitute supe-
riority. Yet, merely to act with justice and
truth, is not all that we should attempt; for
even that excellence would be selfishness: that
duty is not relative, but merely proper :it is
only touching our own character, and doing
nothing for our neighbour; for justice is an
indispensible duty in each individual. We
were not born for ourselves alone, only to
shape our course through life in the tracks of
tranquillity, and solely to study that which
should afford peace to the conscience at home,
but we were made as mutual aids to each
other. No one amongst us, be he ever so
opulent, can subsist without the assistance of
his fellow-creatures. Nature’s wants are nu


merous, and our hands are filled with very
little of the warfare of necessity. Our naked-
ness must be clothed, our hunger satisfied, our
infirmities visited. Where shall the proud
man toil for sustenance if he stands unaided
by his neighbour ? When we look through
the varied scenes of life, vve see our fellow-
creatures attacked with innumerable calamities;
and were we without compassion, we should-
exist without one of the finest feelings of the
human heart. To love, and to approve, are
movements in the soul which yield us pleasure ;
but to pity, gives heavenly sensations ; and to
relieve, is divine. Charity thus has her exis-
tence; her rise is from the consciousness of
our similarity in nature; the level on which
mortality was created in the beginning: its
progress in sympathetic feelings, from the
affections of the heart-breathing love towards
our brother coupled with the touch of original
estimation in our minds, which proves all our
species to be brethren of one existence. Its
conclusion is, from comparison producing


judgment, we weigh the necessities of our
suffering fellow-creatures by our natural
equality, by compassion, our sympathy, and
our abilities, and dispense our gifts from af-
fection-
To be an upright man, is our unbounden
duty : to do justice, and to have charity, are
excellent steps in human life; but to act up-
right, gives a superlative degree of excellence;
for in that station we shall become examples
in religious, in civil, and in moral conduct.
It is not enough that we are neither enthusiasts
nor persecutors in religion, neither bending
towards innovation or infidelity, not to be in
the passive only ; but we should appear in the
active character; we should be zealous prac-
tises, observers of, and stedfast members in
religious duties. In civil matters, we should
not only submit to, but execute the laws of
our country ; obey their ordinances, and per-
form all their precepts; be faithful to the
constitution of the realm, and loyal to our
king; true soldiers in the defence of our


liberty, and of his crown and dignity. In
morality, it requires of us, not only that we
should not err, by injuring, betraying, or de-
ceiving, but that we should do good in every
capacity in that station of life wherein the
Almighty Providence has been pleased to
place us.


THE JEWELS MORALIZED.
As the tracing-board is for the governor to
lay down his lines, and draw his designs on;
to enable those under his direction to carry
on the intended structure with symmetry and
order, so may the Bible be justly deemed the
tracing-board of the Grand Architect of the
universe, wherein are laid down the most
divine laws and moral plans for the regulation
of our lives and conduct; in it we trace all
truths necessary to be believed, and plain and
easy directions for the practice of every duty.
Therefore we should make that blessed volume
of instructive wisdom the never erring square
to regulate our conduct j the compass, within
whose circle we may walk with safety and
peace—the infallible plumb-line and criterion
of rectitude and truth. We should read it
with a sincere and ardent desire of instruction.


with that delight in God’s word, which is the
natural consequence of loving him and virtue.
The rough astler, as taken from the quarry,
is an emblem of infancy; for as that stone is
wrought into due form by the hands of the
skilful artist, so by a liberal education the fa-
culties of youth are nurtured and cultivated,
their judgments enlarged, and their genius,
conducted by the rudiments of science, is led
to the knowledge of the polite arts; by which
they are taught, that the will and the under-
standing arc the two ennobling faculties of the
soul, and therefore they never consider them-
selves educated until their minds are beauti-
fied with the invaluable furniture of true know-
ledge, and enriched with every endearing vir-
tue, which cannot fail to render them worthy
members of society.
The perfect astler is formed by the rules of
geometry into a true die or square; and as it is
wrought, so only can it be tried by the
square and compass. This represents, or is
emblematic of adults, who, having regulated
E


their lives by the square of right rectitude,
and circumscribed their actions within the
compass of morality and justice, are to be tried
only by the square of God’s holy word, and
the compass of their own approving conscience.
On the tracing-board is delineated, among
other matter, the 47th proposition of the first
book of Euclid ; proving, that the square, sub-
tending a right angle, is equal to the squares on
the sides that form the right angle. From the
construction of the figure it is evident, that
the triangles within the squares are recipro-
cally equal; and also, that the squares on the
sides forming the right angle are equal to the
square subtending the right angle. Pythago-
ras, the inventor of this proposition, which is
the foundation of geometry, in grateful testir
mony for the happy discovery, sacrificed an
hecatomb to the muses.
But Free Masons consider geometry as a
natural logic; for as truth is ever consistent,
invariable, and uniform,, all truths may, and
ought to be investigated in the same man


tier. Moral and religious definitions, axioms,
and proportions, have as regular and certain a
dependance upon each other as any in physics
or the mathematics.
As the figure there delineated depends on
the connection of the several lines, angles, and
triangles which form the whole, so Free Ma-
sonry depends on the unanimity and integrity
of its members, the inflexibility of their chari-
table pursuits, and the immutability of the
principles upon which thesociety is established.
The position is clear; and, therefore, in a
synthetical sense we demonstrate, that some
of our fraternity, from their exalted situation
in life, rolling in their chariots at ease, and
enjoying every luxury, pleasure, and comfort,
may, with strict propriety, be considered as
standing on the basis of earthly bliss; em-
blematic of the greater square, which subtends
the right angle. Others, whom Providence
hath blessed with means to tread on the flowery
meads of affluence, are descriptive of the
squares which stand on the sides which form


the right angle. The several triangles in-
scribed within the squares, are applicable to
those happy beings, who enjoy every social
comfort, and never exceed the bounds of me-
diocrity. Those who, by application to pecu-
liar arts, manufactures, and commerce, from
their several productions, not only add to the
wealth of the nation, and to the happiness of
the exalted, but have the heartfelt satisfaction
of administering to the wants of the indigent
and industrious, may, with strict justice, be
compared to the angles which surround and
support the figure; whilst the lines which
form it remind us of those unfortunate breth-
ren, who, by a series of inevitable events, are
incapable of providing the common necessaries
of life, until aided by our cheerful and ever
ready assistance.
Hence from the corollary we draw an axiom
in Masonry, for by connecting the several
lines together, and bringing the unfortunate
and industrious into compact with the affluent
and exalted, we form a figure descriptive of


the true basis on which our ancient brethren
raised the superstructure of Free Masonry; a
basis which no mortal power can shake —
*' The bosom of all gentle Chabity that
heaven-born virtue is the attribute divine of
GOD Omnipotent; a sublime emotion that
fully demonstrates the existence of our spi-
ritual being, and animates us to the glorious
certainty of immortality.
E 2


POINT AND PARALLELS.
In these hieroglyphic emblems we have a
point in the centre of a circle, which circle is
supported on the north and south sides by two
lines, which are perpendicular and parallel;
the one represents Saint John the Baptist, and
the other Saint John the Evangelist; there-
fore we conceive, the Mason who walks within
the circumference of this circle cannot err.
For when he considers the conduct of those
eminent characters, not merely as patrons of
the order, but also as promulgators of Chris-
tianity, he will certainly be led to contem-
plate on the divine and moral laws contained
in that sacred book, which rests on the upper
or eastern part of the circle, protected on each
side by those amiable supporters. On that
book stands Jacob’s ladder, which reacheth
up to heaven ; therefore, if, as we tread the


circuitous paths of human life, we consider
ourselves within the periphery of that circle,
taking the maxims of those zealous supporters
for our guide, and the precepts contained in
that holy Book for the regulation of our con*
duct and government of our affairs under the
various dispensations of Providence, there is
no doubt but we shall ultimately arrive at the
summit of that ladder, and be made partakers
of eternal glory in the lodge of everlasting
peace and happiness, where God, the Grand
Architect of the universe, presides over all his
works.


PRINCIPLES.
The principles by which Masons are united
are, Brptherly Love, Relief, and Truth.
I. Brotherly Love, the first grand prin-
ciple, embraceth the general communion of
human nature, the universal chain of society,
and cement to every moral and social virtue.
By its exercise, which is an injunctive duty,
we learn our mutual dependance on each
other, expand our hearts to the various con-
ditions of men, and acknowledge an original
or parent-stock, which our conduct fully veri-
fies through life; for, as the mansion of our
fathers recede from the view, though our
hearts may linger on the threshold, we em-
brace at a distance/ with the inmate of our
paternal dwelling, the inhabitant of the city
or province of our birth: so when desolate or


wretched, in climes where the vast expanse of
waters roll between us and our homes, we
claim affinity with the first being we meet,
without regarding the variation of colour, and
by that affinity implore him to administer
relief.
11. Relief is the second grand principle of
our profession, given to the exercise of man
by that Almighty Providence who with un-
sparing hand deals to the whole Creation Re-
lief and Protection, as an example to imitate
his goodness, and approach his throne by acts
of beneficence. ’Tis a plant of celestial seed,
sown in brotherly love, cultivated by benevo-
lence, and watered with the tear of sympa-
thy ; yielding that balm of comfort which
effectually eradicates the corroding cankers of
the mind, and gives an undiminished lustre to
the soul: happy the man willing and capable
of dispensing it, whose drops can deck the
widow’s face with smiles, cherish and sustain
the orphan, illumine the dungeon of the cap


the, soothe the pillow of sickness, and give
confidence in the hour of death.
111. Truth is the foundation of virtue, and
basis on which our principles are founded,
emanating from the throne of grace, in pure
essence, to guide and direct our reason through
life ; reflecting, as a mirror of refined lustre,
the virtues and frailties of our hearts, to im-
press a strict observance of the one, and re-
strain the pursuits of the other; clothing its
possessor in a robe of spotless purity which
no calumny or reproach can sully: it Awakens
our faith, cherishes our hope, and extends our
Charity : it guards the passions by the restric-
tive virtues, and promotes brotherly love and
relief. There is nothing can render a man
more respectable in this world, or more ac-
ceptable in the eyes of God, than a strict
adherence to truth, and an unalienable regard
for sincerity; for of all the qualities that
adorn the mind, truth is the most respectable;
it is a rich, though a simple ornament, and he


who is not possessed of it, let his rank and
other qualities be whatever they may, will for
ever be despicable in the sight of every wise,
virtuous, and good man.


THE CARDINAL VIRTUES.
1. Temperance directs us in the govern-
ment of our appetites and affections, and so to
use the good things of this life as not to abuse
them, either by an ungrateful and sordid par-
simony on the one hand, or by a prodigal and
profuse indulgence on the other. This virtue
is nearly allied to prudence, and has a close
connexion with justice; it calms revenge, and
quickens the fire of unjust resentment; it
checks the epicure, and stops the riotous hand
of the bacchanalian ; it extinguishes or abates
the flame of carnal desires, and banishes every
lawless action ; it silences the flippant detract-
ing tongue, and gives in its stead a pleasing
moderation of speech; it shuts the door against
avarice, and proves, experimentally, that hap-
piness does not consist in the eager pursuit or
acquisition of riches, but in a contented mind.


This virtue can never be too highly prized by
Masons, particularly in hours of festivity,
seasons of relaxation, and every enjoyment ;
lest through intemperance a false key should
be found to unlock and discover their secrets.
11. Fortitude haughtily struggles with
despair, and will neither yield to, nor make
terms with misfortune ; in every situation it
reposeth a noble confidence in itself, and from
its immoveable views to future glory and ho-
nour, astonisheth the world with admiration
and delight. We lean forward, as it were,
with surprise and trembling joy, to behold
the human soul collecting its strength, and
asserting its right to superior fates. The man
of true fortitude raiseth his head like a tower
on a hill; as a rock on the sea-shore, he
standeth firm, and the dashing of the waves
disturbeth him not. The steady purport of
his soul ever supporteth him, and the arrows
of fortune drop at his feet; he meeteth the
evils of life as a man that goeth forth to battle,
r


and returned! with victory in his hand; un-
der the pressure of misfortunes, his calmness
alleviates their weight, and his constancy
shall surmount every difficulty.
111. Prudence is the noblest and the most
valuable of all the qualifications we have to
boast of; it gives testimony of our having
exerted the faculties of our souls in the wisest
manner, and conducts us through life with
that ease and tranquillity, that all the boasted
offices of other accomplishments can never
give us; the rule and ornament of all our
actions, the just estimation and trial of all
things; it is the eye that sees all, that ought
to direct all, and ordain all. By the assistance
of this virtue we correct the worldly passions,
fortify the heart with virtuous principles, and
enlighten the mind with useful knowledge.
It is our duty, therefore, to govern all our
actions by prudence, in whose girdle fortitude,
temperance, and justice are enfolded. We
should keep the heart with all diligence, for


out of it are the issues of life. We should
account the regulation of our conduct the
most important trust which is committed to
our care, and propose for our object, riot
worldly success, but that upright and faithful
discharge of our duty, which, through the
assistance of the Great Master of all, is always
within our power.
IV. Justice, though the last in recital, is
the most important of all the social virtues,
containing the positive command of our ever
blessed and adoreable Redeemer, who hath
not only directed us " to do unto all men as
we would they should do unto us,” but also
commanded us “ to do justice, love mercy, and
walk humbly before God;” .thereby dictating
to us to do that which is just, lawful, and
right unto all, and to yield unto every man
that which belongeth to him. The peace of
society dependeth on justice, and the happi-
ness of individuals on the safe enjoyment of
all their property. We should, therefore, be


faithful to our trust, and deceive not the man
who relieth upon the performance of our pro-
mise. Oppress not the poor, nor defraud the
labouring man of his hire. When we traffic
for gain, we should listen to the admonitions
of conscience, and be satisfied with modera-
tion ; nor, from the ignorance of the buyer,
make any advantage. We should keep the
desires of our hearts within the limits of pru-
dence, and let the hand of justice conduct us
through life.


THE LEWIS.
The Lewis directs Masons to gain a general
knowledge of the science, its antiquity, princi-
ples, maxims, laws, and universal language,
which forcibly impresses on our minds the dig-
nity, and high importance of Masonry; admo-
nishing us to practise out of the lodge, those
duties which we are taught in it; and thereby
convince the world of the amiableness of the
institution; so that, when any person is known
to be a member of our society, they may also
know him to be one, to whom the burdened
heart may pour forth her sorrowful com-
plaint without being betrayed; to whom dis-
tress may prefer her suit, and not be rejected;
whom bigotry has never prevented from be-
ing the friend of virtuous men of all profes-
sions, whose hand is guided by justice, and
heart expanded by benevolence; who listens
f 2


to the admonitions of temperance, and the
modest voice of humility: in a word, whose
whole life demonstrates him to be the servant
of that Being, in whose hands all creation ex-
isted; and a promoter of those principles
which are pleasing in the sight of Him from
whom all goodness springs.


THE CHARACTERISTICS.
I. Virtue is the foundation of honour and
esteem, the source of all the beauty, order, and
happiness in nature, and comprehends the
whole of moral goodness: the exercise of virtue
is not local or temporary, hut coeval with the
Divinity: it impressed! on the mind the love
of humanity, and a strict observance of all the
moral and divine laws. The man of virtue
endeavours to make others like himself: he
possesseth a sphere of pre-eminence: we can-
not know him, without fostering a desire to
imitate him; for virtue is wholly internal, and
possessed only by those who feel it: happi-
ness and content are in her possession; for
where the heart is good, the countenance will
be cheerful. In the usual course of human
affairs, it will be found, that a plain under-
standing, joined with acknowledged worth,


contributes more to prosperity than the
brightest parts without probity and honour.
Whether science, or business, or public life,
be our aim; virtue still enters for a principal
share into all those great departments of
society: it is connected with eminence in
every liberal art; with reputation in every
fair and useful business; with distinction in
every public station. The vigour which it
gives the mind, and the weight which it adds
to character; the generous sentiments which
it breathes; the undaunted spirit which it
inspires; the ardour of diligence which it
quickens; the freedom which it produces
from pernicious and dishonourable avocations,
are the foundations of all that is high in fame,
or great in success amongst men. The enjoy-
ments of the good are exquisite and lasting;
they are damped with no inward checks, and
are always attended with dignity and self-
approbation. They are seated within, and
out of the reach of the caprice of mankind;
force cannot rob us, nor fortune cheat us, of


them; they do not change with circumstances,
nor grow old with time; they extend in pros-
pect to an endless futurity—are heightened by
the delightful hopes of the divine approbation,
and the everlasting joys that flow from the
favour of the beneficent author of every good.
11. Of all the ornaments in virtue’s chain,
honour is the most manly and elevated link
that is capable of adorning the human frame;
the primeval standard of every moral, religious,
or obligatory act; the faith of mutual credit,
by which business is transacted between man
and man; the laws of kings; the noble minds
distinguishing perfection, and grand criterion
of all our actions. True honour, though it be
a different principle from religion, is that
which embraced! the same effect; the lines of
action, though drawn from different parts, like
the radii of a circle, terminate in the same
point. Religion embraceth virtue, as it is
enjoined by the laws of God; honour, as it is.
graceful and ornamental to human nature.


The religious man fears, the man of honour
scorns, to do an ill action; the latter con-
siders vice as something beneath him—the
other, as something that is offensive to the
Divine Being; the one as what is unbecoming,
the other,as what is forbidden. What some
men are prompted to by conscience, duty, or
religion, which are only different names for
the same thing, others are prompted to by
honour: the man of honour gives, when he
may, with propriety, refuse; and forgives,
when he may, with strict justice, resent; but
ever deems it more honourable to forgive,
than resent an injury. Whatever wealth we
may possess, or however dignified by birth or
titles, we are fully assured, that W’e never can
arrive at the temple of honour through any
other path than that of virtue: therefore, as
Masons, it bchoveth us to persevere in the
exercise of virtue and honour. We should
remember, that we have been invested with
a badge of pure innocence; a badge more
ancient and honourable than any other society


ever could boast of, which ought to distinguish
and set us above the rank of others, in point
of moral and virtuous conduct, to convince
them that we are actually brought from dark-
ness to light. Let us exemplify to the world
deeds the most honourable and virtuous, that
through our light shining unto men they may
be enabled to glorify the great Master of the
universe, and be thereby taught to do justice,
love mercy, and walk humbly with their God.
111. Mercy is an exalted virtue; possessed
by the monarch, it adds a lustre to every gem
that adorns his crown ; by the soldier, it gives
an unceasing freshness to the wreath that
shades his brow; the companion of true ho-
nour, and meliorator of justice, on whose bench
when enthroned, she opposeth a shield of de-
fence in behalf of the victim, impenetrable to
her sword. As the vernal showers, descending
on the earth, invigorate the whole vegetable
world, so mercy, resting on the heart, when the
vital fluid is condensed by rancour or revenge.


by its exhilarating warmth, returns it to its
original source in purer streams.
The chief attribute of the Deity is mercy,
on whom the best and wisest of us must rest
our hopes and dependance; for we are com-
manded to pray for mercy, and that same
prayer doth teach us to render the deeds of
mercy—for thus we find it recorded, " Blessed-
are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy,
saith the Loan and which we most ardently
hope to receive, not only during our abode in
this probationary state, but more immediately
at the great and awful day of retribution, when
summoned to the bar of our God and our
Judge, our Creator and our Redeemer, and
the actions of our mortal life are unfolded to
his view. Though his justice may demand
the fiat, we hope and trust his mercy will ar-
rest the doom.


THE SIX PERIODS, OR SIX DAYS.
I. Before this world was under the hands
of nature’s universal architect, old chaos
reigned ; darkness profound clothed the deep
abyss, and the etherial spirits hovered over its
mass. The Omnific fiat was no sooner sent
from the Great Eternal’s bright abode, " Let
there he light /” when forthwith light, first of
things, quintessence pure, sprung from the
deep, and from her native east, to journey
through the airy gloom, began. Light, day ;
and darkness, night, He named.
11. In order to keep new-framed, matter
within due bounds, on the second period, God
said, " Let there be a firmament in the midst of
the waters, and let it divide the waters from
the waters and heaven he named the firma-
ment.
G


111. On the third period God said, “ Let
the waters under the heaven be gathered to-
gether into one place, and let the dry land ap-
pear. The dry land, earth, and the gathering
together of the waters, called He seas.” The
earth being uncultivated, God spoke the word,
and nature clad her universal face with plea-
sant green—the herb of every leaf, that sudden
flowered, opening their various colours, and
made gay her bosom, smelling sweet. Forth
flourished thick the clustering vine, the hum-
ble shrub, the lofty tree, to adorn the forest
and beautify the plain, and every herb before
it grew on the green stem.
IV. On the fourth period, the Omnipotent
said, “ Let there be lights in the firmament of
heaven, to divide the day from the night; and
let them be for signs, and for seasons, and for
days, and years.” First in the east the glori-
ous, sun was seen regent of day : less bright
the moon revolved on heaven’s great axle, and
her reign with thousand lesser lights dividual


holds, with thousand thousand stars that then
appeared, bespangling the hemisphere.
V. On the fifth period, the great Creator
said, “ Let the waters bring forth abundantly
the moving creature that hath life, and fowl
that may fly above the earth, in the open firma-
ment of heaven and he commanded them
“to be fruitful, and to multiply.” Forthwith,
birds, through extensive fields of liquid air,
by quick transition, sported on the wing, and
sung in various notes their Maker’s praise.
The streams prolific poured the finny race,
while mighty ocean with new iponsters teemed;
the whale, of bulk enormous to behold, behe-
moth, and the great leviathan, with every
species of the rolling deep.
VI. The sixth, and of creation last, God
said, “ Let the earth bring forth the living
creatures after his kind, cuttle and creeping
thing, and beast of the earth after his kind.”
The earth obeyed, and straight opening her


fertile womb, innumerable living creatures,
perfect formed, limbed, and full grown, out
of the ground up rose, as from their lair. At
once came forth whatever creeps the ground,
insect or worm ; those wave their limber fans
for wings, and smallerlineaments exact, decked
in all the liveries of summer’s pride; in spots
of blue and purple, scarlet and gold.
Now heaven in all her glory shone, and
rolled her motions, as the first great mover’s
hand first wheeled their course. Earth, in
her rich attire consummate lovely, smiled;
air, water, earth, by fowl, fish, beast, was
swam, was walked frequent. Of the sixth
period that remained, there wanted the mas-
ter-work, the end of all yet done, a creature,
who, not prone and brute, as other creatures,
but endued with sanctity of reason, might
erect his stature, and upright, with front
serene, govern the rest; self-knowing, and
from thence magnanimous, to correspond with
heaven ; but grateful to acknowledge whence
his good descends; thither, with heart, and


voice, and eyes, directed in devotion pure, to
worship, and adore God supreme, who made
man chief of all his works : therefore, the
Omnipotent Eternal Father thus audibly
spoke, “ Let us notv make man in our image,
after our likeness, and let him have dominion
over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of
the air, and over all the earth, and over every
creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth.”
This said, he formed him out of the dust of
the ground ; into his nostrils he breathed the
breath of life, and man became a living soul.
Here the Father of Mercies accomplished
the sixth period: yet not till he, from his
work desisting, to the heaven of heavens, his
high abode, returned, thence to behold this
new-created world. “ Creation and the
six periods” heaven sung, great are thy
works, JEHOVAH ; infinite thy power : to
create, is greater than, created, to destroy.
Witness this new-made world—another hea-
ven, from heaven’s gate not far. Thrice happy
man, and sons of men, whom God hath thus
c 2


advanced—created in his image to worship
him, and to multiply a race of worshipers,
holy and just: thrice happy, if we knew our
happiness and persevered upright.
The further we inquire into the works of
our great Creator, the more evident marks we
shall discover of His infinite wisdom, power,
perfection, and glory; and, perhaps, in none
more remarkable than in that wonderful chain
of beings with which this terrestrial globe is
furnished. The earth is filled with innumer-
able orders of beings, superior to each other,
in proportion to the qualities and faculties
which God has thought proper to bestow upon
them : for instance, in plants we find all the
qualities of mere matter, the only order below
them, solidity, and gravity, with
the addition of vegetation ; in animals, all the
properties of matter, together with the vege-
tation to which is added, life and
instinct; and in man we find all the properties
of matter, the vegetation of plants, the life and
instinct of animals, to which is superadded


mason, to remind us of the unerring law by
which we are to regulate our lives and govern
our actions whilst on earth. From the num-
ber of days which the Creator was pleased to
take to bring this world from chaos to per-
fection, which be might have commanded by
a single fiat, we are taught this great and im-
portant lesson; namely, to be industriously
employed in our several vocations “ six days,”
for the attainment of those comforts which
our families may require, and on the seventh
to enter his holy temple, and there to offer up
the sacrifice—praise and oblation of a true
and contrite heart—and with unfeigned gra-
titude to worship and adore the benevolent
author of every good.


ARCHITECTURE.
In the history of mankind there is nothing
more remarkable than that Masonry and ci-
vilization, like twin sisters, have gone hand in
hand together*. The orders of architecture
mark their growth and progress: dark, dreary,
and comfortless were those times when Ma-
sonry had not laid her line, nor extended her
* A free and easy proportion, united with simplicity,
seem to constitute the elegance of form in building. A
subordination of parts to one evident design, forms sim-
plicity; when the members thus evidently related are
great, the union is always very great. In the propor-
tions of a noble edifice you see the image of a creating
mind result from the whole ; the evident uniformity of
the rotunda, and its unparalleled simplicity, are probably
the sources of its superior beauty. When we look up to
a vaulted roof, that seems to rest upon our horizon, we
are astonished at the magnificence, more than at the
visible extent.


compass. The race of man, in full possession
of wild and savage liberty, sullen and solitary,
mutually offending and afraid of each other,
hid themselves in thickets of the woods, or
dens and caves of the earth. In these murky
recesses, these sombrous solitudes, the Almighty
Architect directed Masonry to find them outj
and pitying their forlorn and destitute condi-
tion, instructed them to build houses for con-
venience, defence, and comfort*. The habi-
* The natural progress of the works of men is from
rudeness to convenience, from convenience to elegance,
and from elegance to nicety.
The first labour is enforced by necessity. The savage
finds himself incommoded by heat and cold, by rain
and wind ; he shelters himself in the hollow of a rock,
and learns to dig a cave where there was none before.
He finds the sun and the wind excluded by the thicket,
and when the accidents of the chase, or the convenience
of pasturage, lead him into more open places, he forms a.
thicket for himself, by planting stakes at proper distances*
and laying branches from one to another.
The next gradation of skill and industry produces a
house, closed with doors, and divided by partitions* and.


tations they then built were of the rustic, or
Tuscan order; which, as a prototype of their
manners, was an artless, imitation of coarse
and simple nature. Yet rude and inelegant
as they were, they had this happy effect, that
by aggregating mankind they prepared the
way for improvement. The hardest bodies
will polish by collision, and the roughest
apartments are multiplied and disposed according to the
various degrees of power or invention ; improvement
succeeds improvement, as he that is freed from a greater
evil grows impatient of a less, till case, in time, is ad-
vanced to pleasure.
The mind, set free from the importunities of natural
want, gains leisure to go in search of superfluous grati-
fications, and adds to the rise of habitation the delights
of prospect. Then begins the reign of symmetry; or-
ders of architecture are invented, and one part of the
edifice is conformed to another, without any other reason
than that the eye may not be offended.
The passage is very short from elegance to luxury.
lonic and Corinthian columns are soon succeeded by gilt
cornices, inlaid floors, and petty ornaments, which shew
rather the wealth than the taste of the possessor.


manners by communion and intercourse:
thus by degreees they lost their asperity and
ruggedness, and became insensibly mild and
gentle. Masonry beheld and gloried in the
change; and, as their minds softened and
expanded, she shewed them new lights, and
conducted them to new improvements.
The Tuscan mansions please no more; in
the Doric order they aimed at something more
high and noble, and, taking their idea of sym-
metry from the human form divine, adopted
that as their model. At that era their build-
ings, though simple and natural, were pro-
portioned in the exactest manner, and admi-
rably calculated for strength and convenience.
It can be no matter of astonishment, that
men, who had formed their original plan
from nature, should resort to nature for their
lessons of ornament and proportion, to com-
plete their labours. The eye that was charmed
with the fair sex, the heart that was conscious
of woman’s elegance and beauty, wouldvin-
stantly catch the idea from thence, and trans


pose tbe lovely form in perfect symmetry, to
complete the column lie was then studying.
Accordingly the lonic order was formed after,
the model of a beautiful young woman, with
loose dishevelled hair, of an easy, elegant,
flowing shape.
Thus human genius, which we have seen
in the bud, the leaf, the flower, ripened to
perfection, and produced the fairest, richest
fruit; every ingenuous art, every liberal
science, every moral and social virtue, that
could delight, exalt, refine, adorn, edify, or
improve mankind*.
* If the God of Israel inspired JiczaUcl and Aholiah
with wisdom and knowledge in all manner of workman-
ship, the God of Nature has not been wanting in his
Instructions to tbe fowls of the air; the skill with which
they erect their houses andadjust their apartments is inimi-
table ; the caution with which they hide their abodes from
tbe searching eye, or intruding band, is admirable. No
general, though fruitful in expedients, could build so com-
modious a lodgement. Give the most celebrated artificer
the same materials which these weak and unexperienced
creatures use : let a Jones, or a Wren, or a Demoivre,


Now it was that Masonry put on her richest
robes, her most gorgeous apparel; and in the
Corinthian order displayed a profusion of orna-
ments, the principal parts of which were emi-
nently conspicuous in Israel’s holy temple. She
displayed the torch, and enlightened the whole
circle of arts and sciences. Commerce flew
to her on canvas wings, fraught with the
have only some rude stones or uncouth sticks, a few bits
of dirt or scraps of hair, a lock of wool, or a coarse sprig
of moss; and what work would they produce? We extol
the commander, who knows how to take advantage of the
ground; who, by every circumstance, embarrasses the
forces of his enemy, and advances the success of his own.
Does not this praise belong to the feathered leaders, who
fix their pensile camp on the dangerous branches that
wave aloft m the air, or dance over the stream ? By this
means the vernal gales rock their cradle, and the mur-
muring waters lull the young, while both concur to ter-
rify their enemies, and keep them at a distance. Some
hide their little household from view amidst the shelter
of entangled furze ; others remove it from discovery, in
the centre of a thorny thicket; and, by one stratagem or
another, they are generally as secure as if tfaey intrenched
tbcmselvet in tbe earth.
H


treasures and produce of the universe. Paint-
ing and sculpture exerted every nerve to
decorate the building she had raised ; and the
curious hand of design contrived the furniture
and tapestry. Geometry, Music, Astronomy —
Virtue, Honour, Mercy —with an infinite variety
of Masonic emblems, were wrought thereon j
but none shone more conspicuous than mora-
lity, CHARITY, and BROTHERLY LOVE.


THE LIBERAL ARTS AND SCIENCES.
I. Grammar is the key by which alone a
door can be opened to the understanding of
speech. It is grammar which reveals the
admirable art of language, and unfolds various
constituent parts, its names, definitions, and
respective offices: it unravels, as it were, the
thread of which the webof speech is composed.
These reflections seldom occur to any one
before their acquaintance with the art; yet it
is most certain, that, without a knowledge of
grammar, it is very difficult to speak with
propriety, precision, and purity.
11. It is by rhetoric that the art of speak-
ing eloquently is acquired. To be an elegant
speaker, in the proper sense of the word, is
far from being either a common, or an easy
attainment; it is the art of being persuasive


and commanding; the art, not only of pleasing
the fancy, but of speaking both to the under-
standing and to the heart.
111. Logic is that science which directs us
how to form clear and distinct ideas of things,
and thereby prevents us from being misled by
their similitude or resemblance. Of all the
human sciences, that concerning man is cer-
tainly most worthy of man. The precise
business of logic is to explain the nature of
the human mind, and the proper manner of
conducting its several powers in the attain-
ment of truth and knowledge. This science
ought to be cultivated as the foundation or
ground-work of our enquiries; particularly
in the pursuit of those sublime virtues, and
celebrated arts, which claim our attention as
Masons.
IV. Arithmetic is the art of numbering,
or that part of the mathematics which consi-
ders the properties of numbers in general.


We have but a very imperfect idea of things
without quantity, and as imperfect of quantity
itself, without the help of arithmetic. All the
works of the Almighty are made in number,
weight, and measure; therefore, to under-
stand them rightly, we ought to understand
arithmetical calculations; and the greater
advancement we make in the mathematical
sciences, the more capable we shall be of con-
sidering such things as are the ordinary
objects of our conceptions, and be thereby
led to a more comprehensive knowledge of our
great Creator, and the works of the creation.
V. In all ages and countries where learning
hath prevailed, geometry has been deemed
the “ mistress of art;” and is very properly
defined to be that science from’ whence the
mighty works of God are revealed and demon-
strated to man. It considers magnitude in
general, comprehending the doctrine and
relations of whatever is susceptible of aug-
mentation or diminution. We ought to re-
h 2


vere and study the science of geometry, which
discloses an inexhausted fund of information
and knowledge, of improvement and advan-
tage to its studious votaries, happy votaries,
adepts in true science; who, by the assistance
of this sublime art, are enabled to discover,
and, in a small degree, to explain the wonder-
ful w'orks of the great Geometrician of the
universe, to prove the equity of ms laws, and
the wisdom of ms decrees, by which they are
instructed in those important duties, which
are due from a creature to his benevolent
Creator.
VI. Music is that elevated science which
affects the passions by sound. There are fewr
who have not felt its charms, and acknow-
ledged its expressions to be intelligible to the
heart: it is a language of delightful sensations,
far more elegant than words ; it breathes to
the ear the clearest intimations; it touches,
and gently agitates the agreeable and sublime
passions; it wraps us in melancholy, and ele*


vatcs us in joy ; it dissolves and enflames ; it
melts us in tenderness, and excites us to war.
This science is truly congenial to the nature
of man; for by its powerful charms, the
most discordant passions may be harmonized
and brought into perfect unison: but it never
sounds with such seraphic harmony as when
employed in singing hymns of gratitude to
the Creator of the universe.
VII. Astronomy is that sublime science
which inspires the contemplative vein to soar
aloft, and read the wisdom, strength, and
beauty of the great Creator in the heavens.
How nobly elegant of the Deity is the celes-
tial hemisphere!—the most magnificent
heralds of his infinite glory! They speak
to the whole universe; for there is neither
speech so barbarous, but their language is
understood; nor nation so distant, but their
voices are heard amongst them
* The heavens proclaim the glory of God;
The firmament declaretb the works of bis bands.


Assisted by astronomy, we ascertain the
jaws which govern the heavenly bodies, and
by which their motions are directed; investi-
gate the power by which they circulate in their
orbs, discover their size, determine their dis-
tance, explain their various phenomena, and
correct the fallacy of the senses by the light of
truth.
Can any thing be more wonderful than
these observations?—Yes; there are truths far
more stupendous; there are scenes far more ex-
tensive. As there is no end of the almighty
Maker’s greatness, so no imagination can
set limits to his All-Creating hand. Could
you soar beyond the moon, and pass through'
all the planetary choir; could you wing your
Day unto day abundantly uttereth this;
And night unto night makcth known Jehovah.
There is no speech, neither is there language.
But that their voice is heard;
Throughout tho whole earth their voice spreadeth.
And to the utmost limits of the universe their words.
Psalm xix. Street’s Lit. Vers.


way to the highest apparent star, and' take
your stand on one of the loftiest pinnacles of
heaven, you would there see other skies ex-
panded ; another sun distributing his inex-
haustible beams by day ; other stars that gild
the horrors of the alternate night; and other,
perhaps nobler systems established; esta-
blished in unknown profusion through the
boundless dimensions of space : nor does the
dominion of the universal Sovereign terminate
there. Even at the end of the vast tower you
would find yourself advanced no farther than
the suburbs of creation; arrived only at the
frontiers of the great JEHOVAH’S kingdom.
What an august idea of the Creator’s power
astronomy affords its votaries! They figura-
tively discover thousands of thousands of suns
at immense distances from each other, ranged
in the most beauteous order, accompanied
with ten thousand times ten thousand worlds
in rapid motion, yet calm and smooth, regu-
lar and harmonious; invariably keeping those
paths which the great lawgiver first prescribed;


and these worlds peopled by myriads of intel-
ligent beings, candidates for the dominions of
bliss, and like ourselves capable of an endless
progression in perfection and felicity. Then,
since so much power, wisdom, and magnifi-
cence, are displayed in the material parts of
the creation, how great! how good! how
wise! and worthy of admiration, must HE
be, who made, and guides the whole!
The planets of each system represent kind
neighbours; mutual amity prevails; sweet
interchange of rays, received, returned; en-
lightening, and enlightened! all, at once, at-
tracting, and attracted! Free Mason-like—
none sins against the welfare of the whole;
but their reciprocal, unselfish aid, affords an
emblem of millennial love. Nothing in nature,
much less conscious being, was ever created
solely for itself. Thus, man his sovereign
duty learns in this material picture of benevo-
lence. If weighed aright, it is nature’s sys-
tem of divinity, and every student of the night
inspires ! ’Tis elder scripture, writ by God’s


own hand; scripture authentic! uncorrupt
by man. Divine instructor! thy first volume
this, for man’s perusal: all in capitals! in moon
and stars, heaven’s golden alphabet, emblazed
to size and sight; who runs may read, who
reads can understand. ’Tis unconfined to
Christian land or Jewry; fairly writ in language
universal to mankind! a language lofty to
the learned, yet plain to those that feed the
flock, or guide the plough, or from the husk
strike out the bounding grain; a language
worthy the great mind, that speaks preface
and comment to the sacred page, which oft
refers its readers to the skies, as pre-supposing
his first lesson there.


JEPHTHAH’S BATTLES.
In holy writ it is recorded, that the children
of Israel*, not keeping in remembrance the
providential care of the Father of universal
nature, particularly their happy deliverance
from the Egyptians, and the astonishing mi-
racles wrought for them both in Egypt and
in the wilderness, withdrew from Him, and
served Baalim and Ashtaroth, andotherstrange
gods, and forsook the Lord, and served him
not. For this breach of duty, they were
severely punished by the neighbouring
princes: whereupon they put away their
strange gods, and, returning to the Loan their
God, most humbly confessed their sins, and
implored his merciful protection from the
hands of their enemies, saying, " We hare
• Judges, Chap. x. xi. xii.


sinned; do unto us whatever seemeth good unto
thee; deliver us only, we pray thee, this day.”
At that time the children of Ammon were
come up against them, and encamped in
Gilead: and the people and princes of Gilead
said one to another, “ What man is he that will
begin to fight against the children of Ammon ?
He shall be head over the inhabitants of Gilead.”
Now Jephthah, the Gileadite, was a mighty
man of valour, and he was the son of a harlot:
Gilead’s wife also bare him sons; and his
wife’s sons grew up; and after the death of
their father they turned out Jephthah, saying
unto him, “ Thou shall not inherit in our
father’s house; for thou art the son of a strange
woman.” Then Jephthah left his brethren, and
went to dwell in the land of Tob. Wherefore
the elders of Gilead went to fetch Jephthah
out of the land of Tob, saying unto him,
“ Come and be our captain, that ye may head
our army to fight with the children of Ammon
and Jephthah said unto the elders of Gilead,
" Did ye not hate me, and expel me out of my
i


father’s house but as yesterday ? and why are
ye come to me now when ye are in distress ?”
And the elders of Gilead answered him, saying,
“ Therefore we turn again unto thee now, that
thou mayest go with us, and fight against the
children of Ammon, and be our head over all
the inhabitantsofGilead.” And Jephthahsaid,
" If you bring me home with you to fight against
the children of Ammon, and the Lord deliver
them unto me, shall Ibe your head?” And
the elders of Gilead answered, saying, “ The
Lord be witness between us, if we do not ac-
cording to thy words.” Whereupon Jephthah
returned with the elders of Gilead j and the
princes and elders,and all the people, appointed
him their chief and captain over them.
Then Jephthah sent messengers unto the
king of the children of Ammon, to know the
cause why he came against them to fight in
the land of Gilead. And the king of the
children of Ammon answered the messengers
of Jephthah, saying, “ Because Israel took away
my land when they came out of Egypt, from


Arnon even unto Jabbok, and unto Jordan;
therefore, restore those lands unto us again
peaceably, and we will not fight against ye.”
And Jephthah sent messengers unto them
once more, and informed the king, that Israel
took not the land from the Ammonites, but
from the Amorites; for, when the children of
Israel came up from Egypt, and pitched their
tents on the other side' of Arnon, they sent
messengers unto Sihon, king of the Amorites,
saying unto him, " Let us pass, we pray thee,
through thy land but Sihon permitted not
Israel to pass: he therefore gathered all his
people together, and pitched in Jahaz, and
fought against Israel: and the Lord God of
O O
Israel delivered Sihon and all his people into
the hands of Israel; so Israel possessed all
the land of the Amorites; and vvouldest thou,
who art an Ammonite, presume to reclaim it
from us ? The Lord, the judge, be judge this
day, between the children of Israel, and the
children of Ammon.
And the spirit of the Lord came upon


Jephthah, and he passed over unto the
children of Ammon, and fought against them;
and the Lord delivered them into the hands of
Jephthah. and he smote them with a very
great slaughter; after which, he returned
unto his house at Mizpeth in Gilead, where
he did not remain long in peace; for the men
of Ephraim gathered themselves together, and
came unto Jephthah, saying, “ Wherefore didst
thou pass over to fight against the children
of Ammon, and didst not call us to go with
thee?” ' And Jephthah spake unto them, and
said," I and my people were at great strife with
the children of Ammon; and, when I called
you, ye delivered me not out of their hands :
and, when I saw ye delivered me not, I put
my life in my hands, and passed over against
the children of Ammon, and the Lord deli-
vered them into my hand; wherefore then are
ye come up unto me this day to fight against
me?”
The Ephraimites, instead of expressing their
gratitude to him, for having exposed himself


to danger in the deliverance of his people, and
for the victory obtained, haughtily exclaimed,
“ We will burn thine house upon thee with
firebecause, as they asserted, he had not called
them to the battle; signifying thereby, that
the palm of victory belonged to them, and to
them only. Jephthab, therefore, made a pro-
per experiment on them, by ordering them
who were very proud and imperious to pro-
nounce the word shibboleth, which was done,
because there is no letter in the alphabet in
which the tongue is so much lowered and
humble as in uttering the Hebrew letter sheen;
and the reason why he chose that word in pre-
ference to other words which have the same
letter, and some of them even double, is on
account of its allusion to the sheaf, the symbol
of plenty, mentioned in Joseph’s dream; and
to give them some, hint of the kingdom of
David, the chosen of the Lord, But they
would not admit of any argument which
Jephthab made, neither would they accustom
their tongue to speak in that manner, but
i 2


persisted in saying sibboleth; signifying
thereby, that the right of ruling belonged to
them, arrogating to themselves the burthen of
the government.
Jephthah, however, retributed on them
measure for measure; and, in order to prevent
further disturbance, he sent his chosen guards
to secure the passes of the Jordan, through
which the Ephraimites must pass to regain
their native country, and commanded them
to slay such Ephraimites as might escape the
battle: and when those who had escaped
came to pass over, the men of Gilead said
unto each of them, “ Art thou an Ephramite ?”
If they said, “ Nay,” they ordered them to pro-
nounce the word shibboleth; but they answered
and said, “Sibboleth;” then they took them and
slew them at the passes of the Jordan; and
there fell at that time of the Ephraimites forty
and two thousand.


A MATHEMATICAL FRAGMENT.
A point mathematically considered, is that
which hath no parts. A line is length without
breadth: a superfice, or surface, is a quantity
to which is attributed length and breadth,
without the consideration of any thickness:
a solid is length and breadth with a given
thickness. A due consideration of these parts
will lead the inquisitive mind to reason on the
principles of geometry, in analogy to the
beautiful works of the creation, and, by a
purity of reasoning, to conclude, that, before
the sacred fiat which commanded this world
from chaos to perfection, was sent from the
great Eternal’s bright abode, the terrestrial
Mobe, which we inhabit, was a mere point in
the vast abyss of immense space. When the
almighty Architect had fixed the axis, and
drawn the line on which the earth revolves;
limited the plane superfice of the spheriod
within the sweep of his divine will, and cir-
cumscribed the extent of the solid, this massy
ball arose, replete with all the regularity of


order, the exactness of proportion, the glow of
colouring, and strength of design. Thus the
All-powerful Architect of the universe raised,
on Masonic principles, this beauteous globe,
and commanded that all-informing science,
geometry, to lay the rule to the planetary
world, and to regulate by its laws the whole
stupendous system, in just unerring propor-
tion rolling round the central sun.
These sublime laws, and the works of na-
ture’s adoreable geometrician, will naturally
prompt Masons to make that blesssed volume
of his instructive wisdom, which contains the
law of Masonry, the unerring square to regu-
late their conduct, the compass, within whose
circle we may walk with peace and safety, the
infallible plumb-line and criterion of rectitude
and truth ; by the assistance of which we
shall be enabled to fill every sphere of duty
with;exactness and honour; and, by uniting,
in the faithful discharge of all the sweet and
endearing offices of social life, we shall be
ever,anxious to distinguish and exalt the pro-
fession of which we are members.


GEOMETRY.
Geometry is the most dignified, exalted,
and enlightened science that was ever given
to the exercise of human nature, to improve
the faculties of reason, and cultivate the un-
derstanding. Assisted by geometry, we
examine the works of nature’s universal archi-
tect, and progressively trace the beauties of
the Creation.
Could we take an understanding survey of
whatever is formed by the great JEHOVAH,
throughout the whole extent of material
things, our minds would be transported with
their excellencies. Could we wing our way
sublime to the celestial orbs, and view the
countless multitude of globes, consider their
amazing magnitude, regard them as the so-
vereigns of so many systems, and each system
accompanied with his planetary equipage, we


should be struck with wonder and admiration
at the Almighty skill, which poised the stars
with inexpressible nicety, and meted out the
heavens with a span! Where all is prodi-
giously vast, immensely various, and yet more
than mathematically exact. Surely the wis-
dom of JEHOVAH manifests itself in the
skies, and shines in those lucid orbs; shines
on the contemplative mind with a lustre in-
comparably brighter than that which their
united splendours transmit to the eye.
Spacious indeed are the heavens 1 Where
do they begin ? Where do they end ? What
is their extent ? Can angels answer the ques-
tion ? Have angels travelled the vast circuit ?
Can angels measure the bounds of space ? No;
J tis boundless, ’tis unknown, ’tis amazing all!
How delightful then to reflect, that the mercv
of JEHOVAH is greater than the heavens, is
more extensive than the dimensions of the
sky.
If we descend from the ground-floor of our
habitation into the subterraneous lodgments.


we shall find there the most exquisite con-
trivance acting in concert with the most pro-
fuse goodness. Here are various minerals of
sovereign efficacy; beds fraught with metals
of the richest value, and mines, which yield a
metal of a meaner aspect, but superior useful-
ness. Without the assistance of iron, what
would become of our mechanic skill ? With-
out this we could scarce either fix the mast,
or drop the faithful anchor; we should scarce
have any ornament for polite, or utensil for
common life.
Here is an inexhaustible fund of combus-
tible materials. These mollify the most stub-
born bars, they melt even the most obdurate
flints, and make it more ductible than the
softest clay. By this means we are furnished
with the most curious and serviceable manu-
facture in the world, which admits into our
houses the cheering light, yet excludes the
wind and rain; which gives new eyes to de-
crepit age, and more enlarged views to phi-
losophy, bringing near what is immensely


remote, and making visible what is infinitely
small.
Here are quarries stocked with stones which
do not sparkle.like gems, but are more emi-
nently useful. These form houses for peace,
fortifications for war; these constitute the
arches of the bridge, the arms of the mole or
quay, which screen our ships from the most
tempestuous seas.
Here are various assortments and beds of
clay, which, however contemptible in its ap-
pearance, is abundantly more beneficial than
rocks of diamonds or veins of gold: this is
moulded into vessels of any shape or size;
some so delicately fine as to suit the table of
a princess; others so remarkably cheap, that
they minister to the convenience of the poorest
peasant; all so perfectly neat as to give no
disgust even to the nicest palate.
A multiplicity of other valuable stores are
locked up in these ample vaults. But the
key of all is given to industry, in order to
produce each as necessity demands.


How amiable is the goodness, how amazing
the power, of the world’s adoreable Maker!
How amiable his goodness in distributing so
largely what is so extensively beneficial! That
water, without which we can scarce perform
any business, or enjoy any comfort, should
stream by our houses,start up from the ground,
drop from the clouds; should come from the
ends of the earth to serve us, from the ex-
tremity of the ocean! how amazing his
power ! how adoreable his goodness !
If we turn our thoughts to the atmosphere,
we find the most curious and exquisite appa-
ratus of air. This is a source of innumerable
advantages; all which are fetched from the very
jaws of ruin. To explain this: the pressure
of the air on a person of a moderate size is
equal to the weight of twenty thousand pounds.
Tremendous consideration! Should a house
fall upon us with half that force, it would
break every bone of our bodies. Yet so ad-
mirably has the divine wisdom contrived the
air, and so nicely counterpoised its dreadful
K


power, that we suffer no manner of incon-
venience ; wc even enjoy the load. Instead
ofbeingasa mountain on our loins, it is as
wings to our feet, or sinews to our limbs. Is
not this common ordination of Providence
somewhat like the miracle of the burning
budi ? Well may we say unto Goo, “ O how
terrible, yet how beneficent, art thou in thy
works!”
Every where indeed, and in every element
we can discern the footsteps of the Creator’s
Wisdom. The spacious canopy over our heads
is painted with blue, and the carpet under our
feet is tinged with green. These colours, by
their soft and cheering qualities, yield a per-
petual refreshment to the eye. Eut we can
never hope to come to the bottom and first
principle of things, although we every where
see plain signatures of the hand of a divine
architect.
No part of nature is destitute of inhabitants.
The wood.-, the waters, the depths of the earth,
have their respective tenants, while the yield


ing air, and those tracts where man can never
but with much art and danger ascend, are also
passed through by multitudes of the most
beautiful beings of the creation.
Herein we read the character of his power,
which is invariably obeyed ; of his wisdom,
which has abundantly provided for every
thing; and of his tender kindness toward man,
for whom he has provided services equally
various and infallible. It is an additional
proof of his continual care of his creatures,
that, though every thing be composed of sim-
ple elements, all placed within our reach, yet
no power is able to destroy the least particle of
them. Nothing but the same cause which
was able to give them birth, can annihilate
them, or change their nature. In truth, the
design and will of the Creator is the only phy-
sical cause of every organized body, every’
germin that flourishes in it; tire only physical
cause of every minute elementary particle,
which enters into the composition of all.
We must not then expect ever to have a


clear and full conception of effects, natures,
and causes; for where is the thing which
we can fully conceive ? We can no more
comprehend either what body, in general, is,
or any particular body, suppose a mass of
clay, or a ball of lead, than what a spirit, or
what God is.
Every thing is calculated by divine wisdom
to make us wiser and better; and this is the
substance of true philosophy. We cannot
know much; in vain does our shallow reason
attempt to fathom the mysteries of nature,
and pry into the secrets of the Almighty.
When we contemplate those ample and
magnificentstructures, erected over all ethereal
plains; when we look upon them as so many
splendidrepositories of light, or fruitful abodes
of life; when we remember that there may
be other orbs, vastly more remote than those
which appear to our unaided sight—orbs,
whose effulgence, though travelling ever since
the creation, is not arrived upon our coasts;
when we stretch our thoughts to the innu


merable orders of being, which inhabit all
those spacious systems, from the loftiest seraph
to the lowest reptile, from the armies of an-
gels, which surround the throne of Jehovah,
to the puny nations which tinge with blue
the surface of the plum, or mantle the stand-
ing pool with green, how various appear the
links, in this immense chain ! how vast the
gradations in this universal scale of existence!
Yet all these, though ever so vast and various,
are the work of God’s hand, and are full of
his presence.
Let this teach us a more lively sense of the
Divine Presence. All the rolling worlds,above,
all the living atoms below, together with all
the beings that intervene betwixt these wide
extremes, are vouchers for an ever-present
Deity. God has not left himself without wit-
ness : the marks of his footsteps are evident
in every place, and the touches of his finger
distinguishable in every creature. “ Thy
name is so nigh, O thou all-supporting, all-
informing Lord; and that do thy wondrous
k 2


■works declare. Thy goodness warms in the
morning sun, and refreshes in the evening
breeze. Thy glory shines in the lamp of
midnight, and smiles in the blossoms of spring.
We see a trace of thy incomprehensible gran-
deur in the boundless extent of things, and a
sketch of thy exquisite skill in those almost
evanescent sparks of life, the insect race.”
How stupid must that heart be, that, amidst
such a multitude of remembrancers, throng-
ing on every side, should forget God for a
single moment! Grant us, O thou great I
AM! thou source and support of universal
existence! O grant us an enlightened eye to
discern thee in every object, and a devout
heart to adore thee on every occasion.


MYSTIC POINTS.
I. From the friendship manifested towards
each other in these mystic points. Masons are
naturally led to a faithful discharge of those
duties which charity and brotherly-love de-
lighteth in j and should at all times, and on all
occasions, be ready to manifest the sincerity of
our hearts by cheerfully administering to the
wants of every fellow-creature in distress : to
strew flowers in the paths of misery, and
sprinkle compassion over the rugged thorns of
adversity, is not only gratifying to every en-
lightened mind, but pleasing in the sight of
him from whom all goodness springs.
11. Therefore, forgetting injuries and selfish
feelings, we should be ever anxious to press
forward in well-doing, always having in re-
membrance, that we are sent into this world


to aid, support, protect, and mutually assist
each other. It behoveth us as men, as Masons,
and brethren, to be swift in the exercise of
mercy and benevolence; to save, to strengthen,
support, and assist a fellow-creature. To be
the friend of indigent merit, to wipe the tear
from affliction’s cheek, to soothe the miseries
of a deserted, helpless human being, is mag-
nanimous indeed! but it is obsolete, and little
known in modern practice.
111. As the good things of this life are parr
lially dispensed, and some are opulent, while
others are in distress, we should testify our
zeal for the welfare of every individual: to
advise the ignorant, relieve the needy, and
comfort the afflicted, arc duties that fall in
our way almost every day of our lives. Riches
alone do not allow the means of doing good ;
virtue and benevolence are not confined to the
walks of opulence. The rich man, from his
many talents, is required to make extensive
works under the principles of virtue; yet,


poverty is no excuse for an omission of that
duty, for as the cry of innocence ascendeth
up to heaven, as the voice of babes and suck-
lings reach the throne of God, and as the
breathings of a contrite heart are heard in the
regions of immeasurable dominion, so our
prayers are mutually required for the welfare
of each other.
IV. Let us seriously reflect on the real dan-
ger which await those who deviate from the
paths of right rectitude, which admonishes us
to be true to our trust, and never, through
malevolence or wantonness, betray that confi-
dence which a fellow-creature may have re-
posed in us, by betraying his secrets; for
that, perhaps, were to rob him of the guard
which protects his property, or his life. Ele-
gant speculations are sometimes found to float
on the surface of the mind, while bad passions
possess the interior of the heart. But the
tongue of a Mason should be void of offence,
and without dissimulation; speaking truth


with discretion, censuring with mbderation,
and never exceed the bounds of right reason;
maintaining a heart free from vice, locking up
secrets, an advocate in the cause of virtue, and
communing in charity and brotherly-love.
To defame a brother, or sutler him to be de-
famed without interesting ourselves for the
preservation of his name and character, there
is scarce a shadow of an excuse to be formed.
Defamation is always wicked. Slander and
evil-speaking are the pests of civil society, are
the disgrace of every degree of moral or re-
religious profession, are the poisonous bane of
all brotherly-love. Remember, ye are breth-
ren ; value therefore the reputation of your
brother as you would your own ; his disgrace,
especially in the relation of it, will always be
a part of your own, and if he deserves not
your esteem and friendship, he has at least a
demand upon your pity and commiseration.
Speak not evil one of another: he who speaketh
evil of his brother, judgeth his brother ; and
judgment is not the prerogative of man.


V. The principles of Masonry, in conjunc-
tion with those points, most forcibly enjoin us
to be anxious in supporting and administer-
ing to the happiness and comfort of every in-
dividual. Like a fruitful olive-tree, planted
by the side of a fountain, whose boughs over-
shoot the wall, so is a Mason’s charity; it
spreadeth abroad its arms from the strength
and opulence of its station, and lendeth its
shade for the repose, protection, and comfort
of all those who come under its branches. Let
us then to the cottage of affliction,
where misery reigns with her iron rod, and
lay the arm of affection beneath the neck of
a distressed fellow-creature. Whilst they
live, support their drooping head, and cheer
their afflicted hearts ; cover them with the
garment of kindness and of friendship; ad-
minister to them the cordial cup of brotherly
affection; and, however great or small our
abilities may be, we should always remember
that a cup of wine, or even a drop of water,-
given in the name, and with the heart of a


brother, shall in no wise be forgotten.
Wherever we go, let the orphan cease to weep,
and in the sound of our voice let the widow
forget her sorrow. Let our presence at home
be the constant felicity of our families. Let
the integrity and affability of our conduct in
the world be the subject of conversation to all
those with whom we travel through life; and
let charity and benevolence be the armorial
bearings of our Masonic honours.
THE END.
W. Wilson, Printer, 4, Greville-Street, London.
