

9.45 a.m.
FIRST
SPECIAL
EDITION
"NTo A. a \A. 1 at the General Poat-offlee, Melbourne, 1
( for tranemiMlon by post at a new?paper. j
PRICE ONE PENNY
AUSTRALIANS IN ACTION
THE DARDANELLES FIGHTING
<4
NAMES OF WOUNDED OFFICERS
THE OFFICIAL LIST.
The Minister for Defence has issued the following list of
Australian Officers who have been wounded in the fighting
against the Turks ;n the land engagement on the shores of the
Dardanelles. No List of Privates has yet been received. Practically
the whole of these officers were associated with the brigade of
Colonel McCay, of Melbourne (the First Expeditionary Force).
No information is available as to whether any Australians
have been killed.
The list of wounded is as follows :
NEW SOUTH WALES.
Major DAWSON, E. C., Ist Battalion, slightly wounded.
Lieutenant KERSHAW, R., Ist Battalion, slightly wounded.
VICTORIA.
Lient.-Colonel ELLIOTT, H. E., 7th Battalion, slightly wounded.
Major BLEZAED, 1., 7th Battalion, severely wounded.
Lieutenant PHILLIPS, A. J., sth Battalion, slightly wounded.
Lieutenant GDuMOUE, S. G., sth Battalion, slightly wounded.
Lieutenant SPABGO, E. 8., 6th Battalion, severely wounded.
Lieutenant HEIGHWAY, A. E., 7th Battalion, severely wounded.
QUEENSLAND.
Major ROBERTSON. J. C., 9th Battalion, slightly wounded.
Captain FISHER, J. L., 9th Battalion, severely wounded.
Captain MILNE, J. A., 9th Battalion, severely wounded.
Captain JACKSON, 1., 9th Battalion, severely wounded.
Lieutenant CHAMBERS, E. W, L„ 9th Battalion, slightly wounded.
Lieutenant JONES, L, A., 9th Battalion, slightly wounded,
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
Lieutenant WALKER, H. H., 11th Battalion, severely wounded.
Lieutenant MACDONALD, D. H„ 11th Battalion, slightly wounded
Captain PECK, J. H., 11th Battalion, slightly wounded.
Lieut. EVANS, J. A., 12th Battalion, severely wounded.
TASMANIA.
Major HAWLEY, S. (Hon. Lieut.- Colonel), 12th Battalion, danger-
ously wounded.
Major ELLIOTT, C. H., 12th Battalion, severely wounded.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Lieut. HOLLAp, T., 12th Battalion, slightly wounded.
Lieut JORGENSON, W. R., 12th Battalion, slightly wounded.
This is the only list of casualties received by the Defence department last
night. As soon as further casualties are notified next of kin will be informed.
Major R. C. Dawson is one of the best rifle shots of Australia. He has
been to Bisley with several Australian teams, and won a King s Prize. He i«
under 30 years of age, and commanded No. 1 company of the >iew bouth W ales
Infantry Battalion.
Lieut.-Colonel Elliott is one of the best known yictorian citizen sol-
diers. He went, when a student at th e University to South Africa a* a pri-
vate, and came away with non-commissioned rank. He now commands the
7th Victorian Battalion of Colonel McCay’s 2nd -Infantry Brigade. He was
in charge of the Essendon battaliou. He got the distinguished conduct medal
in South Africa for the smart capture of a party of Boers.
Second-Lieutenant R. Kershaw is platoon commander in the Ist Battalion
of the New South Wales Infantry Brigade.
Second-Lieutenant. A. J. Phillips is attached to the second platoon of No. 3
company in Lieut.-Colonel Wanliss’s sth Victorian Battalion. In the citizen
forces lie is attached to the 51st (Albert Park) Infantry, of which Lieut.-
Colonel R. E. Courtney is the commanding officer.
Second-Lieutenant S. G. Gilmore is also attached to the sth Victorian
Battalion, being a platoon commander. He is attached to the 52nd Hobson 6
• Bay Infantry jn Victoria, which is commanded by Lieut.-Colonel Wanliss,
under whom he is serving at the front.
TJeutenant E. B. Spargo is attached to No. 2 company of the 6th Victorian
Battalion, which until recently was commanded by Lieut.-Colonel Serumens,
who has been invalided home. In the Victorian forces he is a lieutenant in
the 63rd East Melbourne Battalion.
Second-Lieutenant A. R. TTeighway is associated with Lieut .-Colonel
Elliott's 7th Victorian battalion in the capacity of a platoon commander. In
Australia he is also associated' with Colonel Elliott, being connected with thO
58th (Esaendon) Rifles.
Major I. Blezard commands No. 1 company of the 7th Victorian Bat-
talion. 'He saw service in South Africa, and went to Egypt a* a captain but
was given a step in rank on the field as the result of the reorganisation of the
force. He commanded in Victoria the E company of the 67th (Bendigo)
Infantry.
Captain J. L. Fisher, who is connected with the 9th Queensland Bat-
talion, went to the war as a lieutenant, but has since been made A company
commander in Colonel Sinclair-Maclagan s 3rd Infantry Brigade, which wa s
the first to leave Egypt.
SPECIAL WAR EDITION.
MELBOURNE, SATURDAY, MAY 1, 1915.
GERMAN WARSHIPS L
SEEN OFF BELGIAN COAST. [
Shells Fall on Dunkirk.
LONDON, April 30, 3.55 p.mr •
TRe French Embassy stages that 19 shells
have fallen at Dunkirk, 20 persons being
killed and 45 wounded. German warships
were seen off the Belgian coast.
ITALY’S INTERVENTION «
w
<l
POURPARLERS WITH
AUSTRIA. rl
ol
Breaking Point Reached. *
fc
ROME, April 30. p
The Italian Government has com-
mandeered all the available supplies of ,
petrol. • b
It is admitted by the “Stampa.” the
leading newspaper favouring neutrality on c
the part of Italy, that the Austro-Italian '
pourparlers have reached the breaking
point, and that only a radical alteration
of the Austrian viewpoint will ameliorate
the situation.
I
SURRENDERING GERMANS. 1
a
t
Mowed Down by Own Guns. «
8
LONDON, April 30, 3.30 p.m. t
A Paris newspaper reports that during
the recent fight 4,000 Germans crossed the v
River Yser, near Sterstraate. Their re- v
treat was cut off, as the bridge was de- ®
stroyed by Belgian artillery.
On a heavy fire of shrapnel being matte
on them by the Allies’ field guns the Ger-
mans hoisted handkerchiefs on their
rifles, and surrendered, whereupon German
machine guns from the opposite bank of the .
Yser mowed most of them down. The
survivors were taken prisoner by the Bel-
gians.
ZEPPELIN RAID.
EXCITING RACE WITH TRAIN t|
— ir
P
Hall Set On Fire.
tl
It was foggy on Friday morning when the! it
raid by a Zeppelin was made on Suffolk. The
airship was first seen al the seaside resort tl
of Felixstowe, when it was at a great It<
height. Ten bombs altogether were dropped
on Bury St. Edmunds, one setting fire to ir
St. Andrew s Hall, which was gutted. The d
Zeppelin then sailed away in an easterly tl
direction. tl
A particularly exciting incident of the k:
raid was a fruitless attempt by the Zeppc- ir
lin to bombard a train at Bury St. Ed- n
munds. The train, a fast one, put on all
speed when the Zeppelin was seen. For g;
some time the train and the flying machine oi
ran a neck-and-neck race. During this time di
the Zeppelin bnrled five bombs at the train. Y
but, happily, all missed the mark. tl
tc
8€
GERMAN LINER CAPTURED. »
ac
tc
OI
SLIPPED OUT OF PORT.
The interned Hamburg-Amprika liner
Macedonia (4.347 tons) recently slipped
out from the inner harbour at Las Palmas
(Canary Islands) during the temporary ab-
sence of the Spanish guardship. It was be-
lieved that she was using her wireless to th
attract German commerce destroyers in b«
order to deliver war stores that she had pi
on board. do
Tbe British Admiralty now report offi- of
cially that she has been recaptured by a gr
British cruiser. fo
pc
15
KING EDWARD'S HORSE. "
I Pr
£
Vacancies for 100 Recruits.! s "
lurI ur
It is announced that in King Edward's 1
Horse (The King's Oversea Dominions |ln
Regiment) there are vacancies for 100 re-j pr
emits. |
(This corps, which forms part of the Spe-; ta
rial Reserve, is administered by a commit- an
tee. of which Lord Stamfordham, Lord xv .
Northcliffe, Sir R. Lucas Tooth, Sir George
Reid, Captain Collins, and Captain Wal-
lington are members. A letter from Mr. N'
Donald Mackinnon. M.L.A.. appeared in ah
“The Argtra” of Friday stating that lie I
would give particulars concerning the regi- \ h 0
ment to those who may desire to join.]
sa
Trawler Sunk.
A fishing trawler has been sunk by a ta
German submarine, 75 miles off the month pa
of the Tyne. The members of the crew
were given time to leave. A patrol ves- «e<
sel afterwards chased the submarine, and ag
NEW XBa& SO MKUS3AMI. “
a wrw II 'I m
” m pa
PUBLIC* IBOOTBX IEEECKED.
IYEL LTN < 7TOIT A st
patriotic demorr- f front
of Parliament builuingu'in-day Tipcru the re- 1
ceipt of the following cable message from <>r
the Secretary of Stwfcr-for the Colonies:— to
“His Majesty's Government desire me m
to offer to you their warmest congratula-
tions on the splendid gallantry and magni- in
ficent achievement of your contingent in a- u
the successful progress of operations in tc
the Dardanelles.” , sa
A Government holiday was declared in
honour of the occasion. „
Mr. Massey, in congratulating New Zea- A
land on the work done bv our hoys, said P 1
that the expenditure to March 31 on ac- R
count, of war expenditure was £2,151.835. c<
to which the public had contributed £159,137
* Sir Joseph Ward (leader of the Opposi- Br
tion) said that when peace was declared tl
the Allies shonld insist <m the German navy
being handed over or destroyed. They j
should never again allow the existence of (
the curse which had been hanging over
Europe for the past 15 or '2O yours. P
BAY EXCURSIONS.
4
Ootmn«t>Hnic to-morrow, the hay rteamer Frtina
will make excursion* to Portarlington smri Geelong
every Sunday, leaving No. 1 Queen's Wharf at 11
u. Cornier wifi leave Qneeu's Wharf to- /■
morrow at 11 sum. for Portarlingtoo said Geelong, '
arriving en return about 7 p.m. I
y, ' ]i
DRINK AND THE WAR ;
t
- i
- 4 . '%■ 1
BRITISH PROPOSALS,
1 1
l
\
INCREASED DUTIES AND |
RESTRICTED AREAS . it
'LONDON, April 30.
The nature of/ ih 1 scheme under which
the Asquith < proposes to deal '
with the drink rin the United King-
dom in its re! ijon to interference with
" - •• / «• ol 'fiijunitions of war was ex-
plained by. the (*iancellor of the Ex-
chequer (Mr. Lloyd'George) in the House
of Commons on Thursday.
Mr. Llovd George explained at the out-
set that he was not suggesting a tem-
perance reform, but- an act of discipline
for the nation dining the war, for the <
purpose of the war. Hence he proposed :
to restrict as much as possible the sale
of spirits and of the majority of alcoholic
beers. The Cabinet proposed to deal with
the excessive drinking among a section «
only of those engaged in the output of I
war munitions.
The nation should exert its whole
strength and subordinate everything to
the present struggle. Every obstacle
should be removed in order to win the
war, the outlook being one of life to the
Empire. So serious was the drink evil
that nothing but strong action would en-
able them to cope with it. Consideration
of the question was forced upon them by
the officials responsible for the output of
warlike stores, and the slackness in some
shipyards was causing serious anxiety to
the commanders of the Fleet.
The Chancellor emphasised the fact that
while the men at the Royal dockyards were
working splendidly, the work done in the
shipyards on the Tyne and at Barrow-in-
Furness (Lancashire) was much less than
might reasonably be expected. The loss 1
was less in the armament works, but it
was sufficiently serious.
He quoted instances where some of the j 1
men were working 70 and 80 hours a week 1
in shell and explosives factories, but their
work was hampered by those wfio were 1
working only from 25 to 40 hours a week. 1
Lazy Workmen. ;
l
<
Remarkable Figures. *
<
At Portsmouth all honour was due to (
the men. 78 per cent, of whom were work- t
ing 60 hours and upwards weekly, com-
pared with the normal of 48 hours. The ]
men in some other places were doing less J j
than an ordinary week's work under nor- j'
mal conditions.
Out of 8.000 employed by one firm, after | s
three days’ holiday Easter, 1,800 failed r
to return on the Tuesday.
Every report declared that the slackness j
in the shipyards was due to excessive '
drinking among a section of the men, and j
the excess was ascrihable to the fact that t
they were earning more money than they <
knew what to do with. Despite warn- *
ings, reports to the end of March showed *
no perceptible improvement. a
Of 114 men employed by one firm en- a
gaged in submarine work, 58 were off dufy 1
on one day, and 55 the next. This was 8
fine almost, entirely to excessive drinking, j
With regard to armaments, letters from f
the firms concerned ascribed the slackness c
to the same cause. I
The director of transport stated that the c
service was conducted with serious diffi-
culty, owing to the excessive drinking. He
idded that the delay was a real danger |
to the success of the naval and military
iperations.
Double Duty on Spirits. '
r
b
Surtax on Beer.
V
However unpleasant the (ask. continued 0
/he Chancellor, the Government would be o
oetraying its trust to the country unless it j d
imposed to remedy all this evil by a J
louble duty on spirits, a surtax on beer n
>f 12/ a barrel of from 43 to 48 specific ) ].
travity, 24/ between 49 and 53» and 36/ j p
or all above that quality. The duty pro- < !
>osed to be placed on sparkling wines was I 5
5/ a gallon. The duty on other wines L
vould be quadrupled. j.
The duties on beer were estimated to | o
iroduce £1,600,000, and those on wines I c
£1,500,000. The maximum dilution of j P
pirit would be extended from 25 per cent. [
inder proof to 35 per cent. r
The Government must have more con- h
rol over the sale of liquor in the areas (
iroducing war material and in some of 1
he camping areas. Powers would be __
aken for the period of the war to close “
ny house in those areas if its presence r
ras prejudicial to the interests of the *■
lation, and power would be taken to use
lie premises for the supply of a reason-
.ble refreshment.
A central board would control these
louses, and fair compensation would be
iven to the licensees, and the compen-
ation to the breweries would be propor-
ionate to the temporary loss of custom c
ustained. A commission would ascer- gc
ain the amount of compensation to be
•aid. n
The Customs and Excise resolutions con- p
equent upon the Cabinet’s proposals were a
greed to.
The leader of tbe Irish Nationalists
Mr. John Redmond) declared that Mr.
Joyd George's proposals were cruel and
incalled for. and as far as Ireland was
oncemed, would be resented by every
>arty in that portion of the Kingdom. |
The Independent Nationalist leader (Mr.
Yilliam O'Brien) said that the proposals
itruck an unjust and possibly fatal blow o
it the only manufacture of considerable im- j ti
>ortance that was left to the three south-1 (
*rn provinces of Ireland. Ireland ought J
;o be excluded from the operation of the '
Measure. "If Mr. Lloyd George succeeded I v
n passing his new taxes,” Mr. O’Brien A
laser ted, “the results would be as horrible Y
to Cork as if Gork were bombarded and ' t
marked bv the Germans." j t
Mr. Healy (Nationalist member for j r
S'orth-East Cork) said that if the bill were I t
passed it would be good-bye to the Home
Rule Act, as far as its efficacy was con-
cerned.
Mr. Lloyd George, in reply to questions,
said that the bill dealt entirely with con-
trol in the munitions area. |
The leader of the Opposition (Mr. Bonar t
Law) advised the House to await Mr.
Lloyd George's bill and the reports accom-
panying it before expressing an opinion.
OLD AND NEW DUTIES.
COMPARISON WTTH AUSTRALIA.
In his budget in November. Mr. Llovd
George increased the excise rate on beej
from 7/9 to 13/3 per barrel of 36 gallons, but
] the stipulation was made that the full in-
crease should not become operative imme-
I diately. Until March 31. 1916, the rate was
Jto have been 15/3, for the ensuing year
16 3, <uid thereafter 17/3. With the sur-
taxes proposed, the light beer will be 27/3
per barrel now and 29/3 two years hence,
medium beer 39/3 now and 41/3 two years
hence, and heavy 51/3. with the additional ,
2 later on. Expressed in terms per gallon. f
the rates for the first year will be approxi- |
mutely 9d., 1/1. and 1 5. The rates of excise
proposed by the Commonwealth Ministry
last year were sd. to 6d. per gallon. The ; y
new rate will, therefore, be 29/6, as com-
pared vith the range up to 17/ iu the pre-
sent Australian proposals.
Sparkling wines at 15/ per gallon are six
times greater than the previous rate. The
Australian tariff is 20/.
j
; OPINIONS IN THE LOBBIES j
o
1 k
“Duties will be Dropped.”
• *
Labour Resents Slight. n
. In the lobby there are doubts as to the
. driving force behind Mr. Lloyd George’s J
[ proposed duties. It is believed that they 1
. will be dropped, while the restrictions in £
■ munition areas will be carried,
i Licensed victuallers regard the proposals *
i . as impracticable and impossible,
if I Labour members resent the. slight that
Mr. Lloyd George has put on the work- j
e ing classes on insufficient evidence. *
o The heavy tax on wine is condemned, as
e it will restrict the imports from France s
e and Australia.
i Belgian Refugees Help. j
3 Of the 180.000 Belgian refugees in Eng- u
land, many are employed in munition
j factories.
e - ■ . ■ .
German Professor. J
1 i
e i
Feelings Hurt in America. I
Dr. Kimo E. Meyer, professor of Celtic f
s at the Berlin University, and formerly
t lecturer in Teutonic languages at Liver- t
pool University, who holds an exchange '
a professorship at Harvard (U.S.A.) Univer-
-5 sity, has resigned his position because the
t prize in a recent poem competition had a
e been awarded to an effort in which Ger-, a
many was denounced. j s
The president of the University (Profes- a
sor Abbott Lawrence Lowell) asserts that
neither professors nor students of any Ame- 8
rican university can be limited in freedom _
of speech. This is the only course con-
sistent with the principle of academic free-
dom, and he expresses the hope that all
* German professors some day will recognise!
' this.
[The sentiments expressed in the winning j
* poem must have been galling indeed to |
j Professor Kuno Mover, although he lived
.jin England and Ireland for 30 years, and j
was there befriended by many of their most
distinguished scholars. The war, however,
" I showed that he had been an enemy in dis-
l guise in the Country whose hospitality fie
had enjoyed for so long. Early in Deeem-
, ber bust, following on a visit to Germany,
, he delivered an address to the Clan-na-Gael
' of Long Island, in the State of New York,
1 in which lie declared that he looked forward
; to the happy day when there would be a
- German invasion of Ireland. "Meanwhile.”
. ho concluded, “it is not promises, words,
, and scraps of paper, but deeds, that will
count and carry the day, and the less said
at this juncture the better. If there are
- among you any who remember the ancient
* language of Ireland, rise to your feet and j
, say with me:—A Dhia saor Eirinn agusl
Almain (God save Ireland and Germany)!
' Dr. Meyer has received the honorary degree
1 of doctor of letters from the universities
1 of Oxford, Wales, and St. Andrews, and
he is an honorary freeman and burgess
, of the cities of Duplin and Cork.]
Iron Cross for Englishman.
An Amsterdam telegram states that the
Kaiser has decorated Mr. Houston Stewart
Chamberlain, author of “The Foundations
of the Nineteenth Century,” and for long a
resident of Germany, with a non-com-
batant's Iron Crofts.
[Mr. Houston Stewart Chamberlain pro-
vides one of the most remarkable instances
of a man being regarded with great honour j
out of his own country. He belongs to a
[distinguished English family, his father
having been a rear-admiral and his mother
j the daughter of a captain in the British
I navy, and he was bom and educated in Eng- __
j land. However, he has lived the greater
! portion of his life in Germany, and his wife
is a daughter of Wagner, the poet and com-
! poser. As a young man Chamberlain was
I actually intended for the British army, but ei
the English climate proving too severe for
his delicate constitution, be went to live q
lon the Continent. His sympathies have be- : O
; come violently pro-Germau. and he
! preaches the gospel of the Teuton so com-
i pletely-and convincingly that it is stated j tl
that the Kaiser spent £5OO out of-his own j q
pocket in buying copies of that amazing : .
book, “The Foundations of the Nineteenth n
Century,” and distributing them in the >r
Fatherland. He writes his books in Ger- Si
man.]
DRINK AND THE WAR.*
w
b
ti
Mr. Lloyd George's Bill, [j-
LONDON, April 30, 1.30 p.m.
The Asquith Government’s Liquor Bill «
consists of two clauses. Broad powers are h
sought to enable the Government to acquire \ tl
temporarily or permanently licensed pre- I f»
mises in any area, and to open unlicensed |
refreshment homes, with tbe right to sell w
alcohol to the public.
|S
GERMAN ADMIRAL.
lK'
i nr
I Declines to Respond to Toast.lb.
Mr. W. L. AUardyce, formerly Governor
of the Falkland Islands, relates that after h
I the naval battle off Chili the German w
l colony at Valparaiso entertained Admiral o
j von Spee at a banquet- The final toast jC
i was “Damnation to the British Navy,” but °
! Admiral von Spee rose and said that neither 1
he nor his officers would respond, and he
therefore withdrew. Observing at the door
i that flowers were strewn on the path, Ad-
jmiral von Spec remarked ,“Better keep 11
-1 these for my grave. They may be wanted.” a
, - ; 8
: c
Aviator Killed.
* e
Moorhouse. a well-known British aviator, h
has died from wounds received when drop-
’ ping bombs at Courtrai. p
v
British Steamer Sunk. r
Lloyds’s correspondent at Stornoway re- *
ports that a British steamer has been sunk f
by a submarine off Lewis Island, in the o
north of Scotland. The members of the I 1
crew were landed safely.
* [The above messages appeared In fhe x
«• late editions of "The Argus” this mom-/
t ing.] **
j!
THE DARDANELLES
a
8,000 TURKS CAPTURED.
WARSHIPS SMASHING FORTS
t
j
Progress Up the Straits.
According to a report which has reached '
Athens from Volos. a Greek seaport town. *
portion of the Australian troops taking part J
in the Dardanelles operations disembarked 1
on Tuesday, and immediately installed their
batteries on the coast. * (
The British forces are operating on the z
European, and the French forces on the I
Asiatic side of the Straits. t
Presumably capital progress has been j
made by the warships, seeing that Tuesday's t
bombardment, which lasted for 12 hours, t
was directed mainly against the Kilid Bahr
fort, on the European side of “The Nar-
, rows.” Advices from Tenedos, the Allies’
ba.se in the .Kgean Sea, are that a strong
, British force is established across the nar- ,
rowest part of the Gallipoli Peninsula, and t
t has cut off the Turkish garrisons between ,
. Kilid Bahr at “The Narrows” and Gape
Helles. at the entrance.
5 Allies’ airmen are rendering valuable as- (
, sistance in locating the Turkish positions.
They destroyed the bridge over the
Scamander, one of the three rivers run- ‘
ning through the Plain of Troy, south of
Kum Kaleh, near Ezine; and a large am-
• munition depot at Aros.
i '
Deceiving Waiting Enemy, j
A Tenedos telegram despatched on Thurs-
day states that a demonstration of a false (
landing on the Plain of Troy, south of K.uui j
Kaleh, enabled tbe French to capture B.ol*o ;
Turks, including German officers. ]
I Not a few of the Turks were suffering
» from revolver wounds sustained at the
, hands of Gennan officers when driving them
. to the attack, or when desperately endea-
, vouring to prevent a retreat.
. ■ One landing was effected by a comic ruse.
. Covered by the vigorous fire of battle-ships.
I a thousands donkeys, with dummy baggage
. ( and mounted airguns, landed at a certain
spot. The Germans immediately diverted *
.! a sfrong force towards that spot.
Meanwhile the real landing was effected <
. some distance up the coast, the donkeys, i
i
which had been purchased for a song, being
i left to be annihilated by the deceived
enemy.
Scene Described by Spectator.
1
| A vivid description of the part played by
the Allies’ warships is told by a “Daily
; I Chronicle” correspondent, who. on the
I first day. was on Mitylene. the Greek island
I in the .iEgean, north of the Gulf of
Smyrna.
1 “The most powerful fleet engaged in war- I
I like operations,” be says, "commenced to
hammer the Hellespont defences at dawn on
1 Sunday, and there was no cessation even
I when night fell. The darkness was lit up
Iby the flashing of searchlights, and the
thunder of the guns could be heard at Mity-
j lene, the nearest pont of which is more than
j 40 miles away."
I On the Monday, the "Daily Chronicle"
ebrrespondent managed to reach Rabbit
»j Island, which is opposite to the mouth of
the Dardanelles, and about eight miles
I from the Asiatic shore.
1 I From this vantage point he was able to
I watch the actual bombardment.
| Shells Fall on “The Narrows.”
“A tremendous column of smoke,” he tele-
graphs, “poured out of Knm Kaleh fort at
i midday, and then the village of Yenieher
, became ablaze.
i “Tall columns of smoke. 11 miles farther
r up the Straits, showed that effective fire was
! being directed upon ‘The Narrows’ forts,
1 where small warships were directing the fire
J of the battle-ships upon the Kilid Bahr and
; ; Chanak forts. The largest battle-ships lay
t on the European side of the entrance, often
pouring out 20 discharges to the minute.
s ' “To the left of the entrance was a line of
r transports.
"The bombardment became more intense
j in the afternoon, ami new fires broke out
at several points on the Asiatic shore. One
shell took a bnge mass of masonry from the
cliff side at Kum Kaleh.
“It was evident that all resistance had
ended, for the battle-ships lifted their fire
% higher up the Strait.
>- “The fort at Seddul Bahr. on the Euro-
pean side of the entrance, was utterly
knocked to pieces.
“Then two French warships took up the
game, and by 4 o'clock in the. afternoon the
P . firing was at the maximum, particularly
k from the battle-ships opposite Erenkeui Bay,
( on the Asiatic side, and beyond Knm
ie Kaleh.
“The. Turkish guns did not reply seriowly
until the middle of the afternoon. The
_ AHuvr’artiTlary bad landed at Cape Hr lies,
-mt»4hm maAmaammtaaumm --and vu drnang
i back a Turkish battery, when a battle-ship
'found the enemy’s range.
Huge Guns Open.
“The Turks bravely stood to their guns
and fired three shots at the warship, which
replied with seven shots.
! “When the smoke had cleared off there
' was no sign of life near the battery.
“Tbe Turks were much more active with
their artillery under cover of night.
I “Another Turkish battery was dißrovered
lon the road leading from Kum Kaleh to
Erenkeni. The warships found the range,
whereupon the Turks limbered up and re-
treated to Erengeui, followed by shells, and
leaving dead men and fragments of the guns
in the roadway.
“The super-Dreadnought Queen Elizabeth
(10 15in. guns), standing well off sliore,
assisted in silencing the batteries at the
Eski Hissarlik, on the European shore, and
the Allies by Monday evening were in com-
plete possession of the extreme tongue of
the Gallipoli Peninsula and the flat shores
to Suvla Bav. on the/Egean.”
Gallantry of Australians.
“The Times,” in a leading article com-
menting upon the British Government’s con-
gratulations to the Commonwealth, states
that the Australians' gallantry was very
grateful news to the British people. Nothing
moved the mother country more than the
devotion of the daughter nations. She
sees in it the best auguries for lofty ideals
and spiritual aspirations traditional of the
race.
"British people, however,” “The Times”
continues, “want to know why the news
was available in Melbourne and Wellington
(New Zealand), but was not announced in
London.”
The “Daily Mail” also complains that
Great Britain has not yet been allowed to
hear anything of the Australians' and New
Zealanders' “magnificent services” in the
Dardanelles.”
MESSACE FROM THE KING.
CONGRATULATIONS ON BRAVERY.
When the House of Representatives met
yesterday morning the Prime Minister
(Mr. Fisher) announced that he had re-
ceived the following message from His
Majesty the King:
i “I heartily congratulate you on C
1 the splendid conduct and bravery *
displayed by the Australian troops h
t
■ in the operations in the Darda- (
nelles. who have indeed proved t
r j
themselves worthy sons of the j,
1 Empire.” *
f a
The announcement was received with t
_ great cheering. (
5 The following cable message, in reply,
i was despatched to His Majesty yesterday v
' by the Governor-General (Sir Ronald t
|i Munro Ferguson):—
“ 1
“The Governor-General, with 1 j
humble duty to your Majesty, and i
on behalf of the Government and '
people of the Commonwealth, offers j
I hanks for gracious message of con-
’ gra tulation. (
“Australia is proud to know that j
her troops have earned such high
# commendation from their King. f
The people of the Commonwealth <
continue steadfast in the resolve to *
f place all their resources at yonr J
Majesty’s disposal to maintain the
unity and safeguard the welfare of
»- the Empire.”
.t
T '
German “Blockade.” ‘
> r 1
The British Admiralty has announced ]
18 that German submarines sank nine vessels <
s ’ during April, representing a total tonnage I
"T of 17,124 tons, and ten trawlers, aggragat-
‘ ing 1,755 tons.
y
n
Votes for Soldiers.
>f i
The Canadian Government has forwarded
v a large number of ballot-boxes to the High
X l Commissioner in fvondon (Mr. G. H. Pe.r- .
IP lev), for the use of Canadian soldiers at the '
le front in the event of a general election i
taking place in the Dominion during the (
d ** r
o- Code Cable Messages.
Iv i
3 In the House of Commons on Thursday, ,
; Mr. .1 oynatm-Hicks (Unionist) urged that ;
1,5 the Government should allow the use of
more codes for cabling purposes, especially
with the overseas dominions and India.
>’* The present limitations were crippling
m trade.
The Postmaster-General (Mr. Hobhouse) 1
ly rwphed that it was impossible at present to :
ie consider the question of increasing the
s, nirmber of codes. The protection of the ,
realm waa the paramount cowed erst ion.
FIGHT FOR ST. JULIEH
LOST AND WON
STORY BY “EYEWITNESS.”
The manner in which the village of St.
JuKen was lost and won is told in the fol-
lowing thrilling report by “Eye-Witness,”
the official reporter attaclied to the British
headquarters’ staff:—
"Before the battle of Ypres began the
British line ran from the cross-roads at
Broodseinde, east of Zonnebeke (five miles
north-east of Ypres), to the cross-roads half
a mile north of St. Julien, following the
crest of the Grafenstafcl Ridge. The
French prolonged the line north of Lange-
marck to Steenstraate (seven miles north
of Ypres).
“The movements of the German troops
and transport were detected some days be-
fore the attack opened, and the surprise,
which, despite this knowledge, they were
able to spring on us, was entirely due to
their asphyxiating apparatus. The attack
had been originally fixed for April 20, but
was postponed owing to the unfavourable
wind.
“On April 22 a cloud of poisonous vapour
rolled softly towards the trenches occupied
by the Zouaves to the west of Langemarck.
The gases were so effective that the Ger-
man charge was practically not resisted.
, The enemy, by a sudden irruption, were
, able to surprise and overrun a large pro-
portion of French troops billeted in this
, area, and to bring some British and French
guns under a hot rifle fire at close range.
1 “When the British flank became exposed
through the French falling back, our troops
were ordered to retire upon St. Julien
with their left west of the high road. Here
their splendid resistance saved tbe situa-
tion.
“Meanwhile the Germans bombarded the
i northern portion of the town of Ypres,
the shells including projectiles containing
asphyxiating gas.
“British reserves were watching these
shells bursting, when a staff officer rode up,
shouting, ‘Stand to arms!' A few minutes
later reserves were quietly marching north-
ward, amid a wild confusion of panic-
stricken refugees from Ypres, who were
swarming along the roads. The officers
mustered other reserves without waiting for
orders, and marched them towards St.
Julien.
“During this time a confused fight was in
progress north and north-east of Ypres, the
Germans advancing behind a wall of poisoir-
ous vapour released by them, which swept
across the fields and through the woods and
hedgerows. The enemy were free to move,
because they had their noses protected by
pads soaked in bicarbonate of soda.' A bat-
tery of 4.7 in. guns on the left of the
British line was surprised and overwhelmed
in a moment. Farther to the rear several
field batteries were unable to come into
action until the Germans were within a few
a hundred yards, yet not one gun was lost.
One battery taken in flank swung round
| and tired pointblank into the Germans,
’• whose rush was checked. Another batter) - ,
v with its guns pointing in the opposite direc-
i tion. had the enemy on three sides.
"Our infantry, facing vastly superior
forces, were fighting every step. Without
i the slightest confusion they slowly retired
from t>t. Julicn, and the reserves uo>. %
coming up attacked the Germans with i.
bayonet. A melee ensued during which we
held our own, both sides losing heavily.
■‘Fighting continued by moonlight, and
our troops drove back the enemy with re-
peated bayonet charges, dunng which our
heavy guns were recaptured.
"The jxisitioii north of Ypres was now
somewhat restored. The Germans, how-
ever, forced a way to the Yser Canal,
and occupied Steenstraate and some
points on the western bank, but the British
repulsed two heavy night attacks at Brood-
seule, east of Zonnebeke. Part of Ypres
was now in flames.
"Karly on Friday we made a strong eoun-
le.r-attack northwards, with the co-opera-
tion of the French penetrating to the St.
Goulien wood, where the Germans suffered
heavily in a bayonet charge, after we had
lost heavily in a dash across the open. One
d nian's rifle was smashed by a bullet, but he
Is continued to tight with his entrenching t
;e tool.
fc . “We dug ourselves in at II o’clock in the
morning, and held a hne west from St.
J alien, curving north near Boesinghe, four
miles north of Ypres. During Uie after-
noon we made progress south of Pi Ik cm
(five miles north of Ypres), still further
straightening onr line.
d "Meanwhile there was fierce- fighting along
. the canal. The Germans captured Luzerne
(six miles north-east of Ypces) at night,
r ' and threw several bridges across the canal.
p They'continued to gain ground, on the west,
n and made another night attack under -cover
te of poutonous gases east of St. J alien. They
effected little at this point until midday on
April 24. when large bodies of the enemy
were snen advancing along-the Ypnea-Poel-
canrile road, which passes through Saint
Jimeo. These forced the British troops to
fall back from f*t» Julicn, contesting every
inch of the ground, and making repeated
G counter-attacks. A gallant handfnTV 200 or
it 300 strong, however, held out at-St-Julien
»f until nightfall.
I v “We modes strong counter-attadc-onSniv
day morning, but were checked before St.
:v Julien. The Germans in the afternoon re-
prated their assaults in great strength near -~
Broodsrinde, backed by a tremendous bom-
►) bardment of asphyxiating bombs. AD the
M attacks wore beaten off with slaughter, and
the enemy's offensive stopped.
1,1 “Our troops 'are tilled now with an even
Ie creaier-deternri nation to wry the enemy ten-
told for every act- of ‘frightfulness.’ *


FORCING THE DARDANELLES.
p 4 —*
U' SHIPS AGAINST FORTS.
A DESPERATE ENTERPRISE.
By DONALD MACDONALD.
Though the great aswniit upon the Tur-
kish fort* of the Dardanelles—first by naval
attack alone; latterly by the only method
that has ever proved effective, viz., com-
bined assault from sea and land—has for
the moment been obscured by vital events
in Flanders, tins particular phase of the
great war is, for more than one reason,
of special interest to Australians. When
naval bombardment was first commenced,
those who had given any attention
to past experience in the duel be-
tween ships and forts must have rea-
lised that it was rather a desperate
undertaking, and assumed that behind it lay
some hidden strategic purpose. Admit-
tedly, the original bombardment was less an
attempt to absolutely subdue and capture
coastal -forts than to force a passage to a
point where, dominating Constantinople,
the Allied fleet might have been in a posi-
tion to enforce a surrender, and so secure
its own line of retreat. Indeed, the suc-
cess of the movement might conceivably
have brought the faltering Turkish resist-
ance to an end. and so profoundly affected
the fortunes of the whole campaign. In
that case it was worth a great risk. Yet,
unless the 15in. guns of the-Queen Elizabeth
were expected to do something with the
many batteries which 12in. and 13in. naval
guns in the recent past were quite unable to
accomplish-against coastal batteries often
obsolete in character, poorly gunned, and
worse manned—the whole history of war
pointed to this undertaking as bold in de-
sign, but doubtful in effect. The fact that
the newest of the super-Dreadnoughts—an
invaluable unit in the North Sea—was de-
tached for the undertaking, shows that
something quite out of the ordinary was
expected from her battery. The actual
effect is as yet unknown.
Instances by the hundred might be cited
in the long period between Syracuse and
Port Arthur showing the difficulty which
ships alone have always experienced in sub-
duing coastal batteries, even where the gun
power was overwhelmingly in favour of the
ship. Indeed, contradictory as it may ap-
pear, forts were more easily silenced by a
sheer smother of fire from unarmoured
ships in old days than they are now, be-
cause a greater number of shells fired from
much lighter guns—a hundred or so in a
single ship of the line —beat down the re-
sistance of battery gunners who had then j
no overhead protection. A notable in-
stance is the bombardment of Fort Fisher j
in the American war. In two successive 1
cannonades the United States fleet poured
45,000 rounds of shot and shell into the bat-
tery-firing sometimes as many as 115
rounds a minute. Of course, the land guns
were temporarily silenced by sheer smother
of iron, but the works were not periously
damaged. Nelson, who never shirked a risk,
realised the folly of laying wood close up
against walls in 1794 when, in reply to the
request that he should bombard Calvi. he ,
suggested to Hood that the powder and shot j
might be more effectively employed from
shore batteries.
AMERICA V. SPAIN.
Without going outside events of the pre-
sent generation, there are many instances 1
showing how little ships were able to ac-
complish against forts, even when armed
with the heaviest guns then in use. The re- 1
suits are to some extent comforting, because :
they at least enable us to better grasp the j _
magnitude of the task recently undertaken
by the Allied fleets in the Dardanelles, j(
There is, perhaps, a disposition to under- !
rate the Turk, whose fine fighting capacity
has been abundantly proved often under j'
most discouraging conditions. We may, in ■
the same way—since German engineers 1
have been some time in control—have 1
under-estimated his means of resistance. |
though some knowledge on that point must ,
have been gained from aerial observation, i
The gunnery of the American navy, be- J
lieved now to rank even at any rate with ‘
the best afloat was not impressive when j j
they fought against Spain. One of the ,
senior captains who came here with the t
American fleet, told me that the wasteful J <
inefficiency of their fire, both on forts and j
ships, was only equalled by the more j J
pitiable incompetency of their enemy. This j ]
was especially notable with their heavier i 1
ordnance. In the fight off Santiago, where j'•
Cervera’s ships offered a fine target, Ameri- j
can ships fired 86 rounds from their 12 and ! j
13 inch guns alone, and scored two hits. I (
Here, indeed, as in the later naval battle j i
of Tushima. it was the lighter guns that |'
really did the mischief. At Tushima the j ’
Suvaroff, one of the Russian battle ships-. |
was put out of action merely in having her ; (
funnels shot away. In attacking the old |;
Spanish coastal forts, the Americans had J
even less success. When Admiral Samp- j j
son's squadron bombarded the forts of San j .
Juan at Porta Rico they fired 2,000 rounds ;
from batteries in which the calibre of the 1
guns ranged up to 13 inches. The reply of
the Spaniards was about as bad as it could
be, and the whole result of the bombard-
ment is best indicated in the fact that after
the suri'ender the estimate for repairing the
fort was £450. At Santiago Heads there
were but two modern guns in Spanish bat- a
teries, hastily improvised. These poor <■
works were shelled by the American ships \
on ten different occasions—the whole result l
was one gun disabled, another put out of 1,
action, and ten artillerymen killed. g
PORT ARTHUR. I
The Japanese never risked a fight with 1
the land guns of Port Arthur, excepting at Jj
Jong range, because they could not spare j|
ships for a risky experiment. In all, they d
fired about 350 rounds from their 12in. guns
at ranges of from 13.000 to 20.000 yards, with j 1*
admittedly no damage,except to themselves, j
for the wear and tear on the larger guns ,j
was seriously felt afterwards at the naval o
fight off Round Island. There an observer, •
on the Russian ships described the Japanese - a
shells coming at them head over heels, “like I n
portmanteaus,” showing that the guns were;
time served, that the rifling was no longer b
able to keep the shell point on to the target, h
Port Arthur ultimately fell to land assault, j ;
as coastal forts have almost invariably „.
fallen when determinedly attacked. But-the p:
surrender was not secured until the Japa-
nese had suffered 60,000 casualties, and until
their batteries, which included finally 18in.
howitzers, far outnumbered the Russian ar-
mament. Even then, after a long and costly
siege, conducted on one side with reckless
impetuosity in storming, Russian guns fairly j,
well hidden were never discovered or (;
nileneed, while those on exposed peaks were t,
invariably destroyed. b.
ALEXANDRIA.
Of all the modern fights in which ships and w
forts have engaged, that of Alexandria in h
1882 affords the most, complete data, because u
the British gunners were afterwards able s «
to examine and tabulate the results of their u
own fire. Indeed, many eminent strategists. t«
amongst them Lord Sydenham, formerly ,s,
Governor of Victoria, consider that had the CI
Egyptians been able to handle their rifled w
guns at all effectively there might have been i,;
another story to tell—at least the bombard- 11
ing ships would have sustained more seribus Pj
damage. It would, first of all, appear that
bombarding ships circling for their own se-
curity were unable to seriously damage the “1
batteries, and that it was necessary to fire hi
either when stationary or to steam to a ' v
buoyed point and an ascertained range.
With many advantages on the side of the w
bombarding ships at Alexandria, only one
shot out of every nineteen fired found the tl
wider target, and quite a serious proportion
nf these were up6n outer slopes where they f c
did absolutely no damage. The batteries in a <
this ease were silenced, and the chances are «'
that a majority of the successful shots were H
fired when the ships were able to come in
tafely to a short range. To cite a single in- m
stance amongst many, Meks fort, which has m
been described as a pro-historic work, and Fi
rather overcrowded with 20 old-fashioned U 1
pms, took the combined fire of the Mon- 8e
arch, Penelope, Invincible, Inflexible, and pj,
Temeraire for three and a half hours at be
, ranges of from 3.800 to 1,100 yards. Yet nol
j. one of the battery guns was dismounted oi
disabled, though two of them were lightlj
grazed. Nearly a thousand projectiles, tin
majority of them heavy shell, were fired at
one fort, a low-level barbette battery with
nothing commanding in its position, anti
whose ill-trained and morally unimpressive
gunners were able to exchange fire with the
attacking ships for three hours, and to hull
the Invincible 15 times and the Penelope
eight times during the action.
Illustrations from Napoleonic times are,
r- > n many instances, even more remarkable.
J They appear as instances to he out of date
d and pointless, but strategically the condi-
i- tions as between forts and ships have been
,r altered in a hundred years largely in favour
of the land battery. At Cape Licosa a
c single gun successfully resisted an attack
i, by a British 80-gun ship and two frigates,
n which practically exhausted their maga-
1, zincs. A Corsican redoubt, armed with two
n eighteen-pounders and one nine-pounder,
;- fought off with loss three line of battle-
i- ships. The original Martello tower—after-
e wards adopted for British coastal defence
y —drove off the Fortitude and Juno—the for-
- mer on fire and with a loss of 60 of her
i crew. In the Crimean War the Wasp and
e Telegraph batteries of Sebastopol put six
a assaulting ships out of action. The whole
history of war points in a hundred instances
- to the fact that coastal forts at all capably
e equipped and handled have so rarely fallen
- to naval assault alone that the exceptions
y may be cited as proving the rule. And in
- a great many of these instances the as-
-1 saulting Power was the British navy, admit-
r tedly the most powerful, as well as the most
, enterprising, afloat.
1 DARDANELLES DIFFICULTIES.
2 In a matter such as this toe personal
1 opinions of a civilian are of little value.
) but because of the decn interest with which
t Australians must watch and regard this
l great and perilous naval undertaking I have
r summarised the opinions of leading naval
- and military strategists upon the subject,
t Because of the early progress of the Allied
1 fleets at the Dardanelles, much more was
- expected than could reasonably be realised.
' It may lessen the sense of disappointment,
* the deepened anriety as to events ahead,
l and explain incidents which seem mysteri-
ous if it be shown that even in undertak-
l ing the task allotted them the naval com-
-1 manders must fully have realised both its
1 magnitude and its perils. To emphasise
' that point, it should be made clear that
1 while gunnery conditions have changed in
3 late years, the change has been rather in
• favour of the battery than the ship, assum-
-1 ing always that the coastal defence is even
! fairly efficient. But because coastal bat-
teries are rarely used, and ships’ batteries
1 frequently, we have exaggerated the effect
1 and value of naval artillery by comparison.
There is a difference in the respective tar-
-1 | get to begin with. It is much easier for
' j a well-armed battery to hit a ship at
' ! anchor or under steam than for a ship to
1 hit the pinnacle of a hill, because every
1 shot just over or under the actual mark —
the gun itself—is wasted. The higher the
1 batteries are placed the greater
1 the risk, to the attacking ship. |
because a shot from plunging
fire may not only pierce its hull, but in !
striking downward disable it by internal .
damage. The effect of the land gun has j
I been improved by the use of auto sights, j
j with telescope attachment. Forts have also |
the advantage of high-angle fire from j
| howitzers, which ships cannot command. J
j Their auxiliary aids, too, have greatly in-,
I creased. There is no need to dwell now j
| upon the menace of the mine—not the con- 1
| trolled minefield fired by observation, and ;
in waters where they may be presumed to !
exist, but a hidden and ever-present danger ;
contact, with which may in any waters at
any moment mean destruction. This effect j
j was first realised in the Russo-Japanese
j War, when Japan, having obtained absolute
' naval control of the situation, lost two
I battle-ships and three cruisers by mine ex- |
1 plosions where their presence was neither I
| expected nor feared. In his recent work of i
I fortification Lord Sydenham presupposes a ,
'position identical with the Dardanelles i
i when he says:—“lf a channel is long, nar- |
row, tortuous, and tidal ships clearly will j
not attempt to enter it.” Yet this is |
exactly what the allied ships attempted in (
the Dardanelles, where, in addition to many
forts admittedly well placed, and presum- j
ably of average fighting capacity, the nar- j
j rowness of the waters at some points per- [
initted the use of torpedoes fired from fixed !
! stations. When all the difficulty of exact
ship fire by magnetic bearings at ranges
I of 10,000 yards and over are realised it will
' be seen that the allied fleet faced a big and j
j daring enterprise. Their fire was apparently ;
effective, though upon that point we have 1
i no exact detail. Yet unless that fire ob-;
tained results which have never yet, been
achieved by ships against forts the Turkish ’
I gunners were able to reoccupy their forts ]
| and reman many of their guns as soon as I
i the bombardment ceased. It was, in short, i
an undertaking that unless carried through 1
continuously would need to be repeated r
over and over again. That a task of such
'magnitude lias meant naval loss is not at,
all a matter for surprise, especially as the i
j enemy's success has been achieved ap-
parentlv by the auxiliaries of coastal defence
i rather than actual gun lire Hope for the
immediate future lies in repetition of the
| axiom which naval history establishes, viz.,
that while forts have rarely fallen to an!
attack by ships, they have'almost invari- ;
ably fallen to joint assault from pea and !
laud.
“MORE THAN USUAL.”
♦
ONTARIO FOOD CROPS.
Under the joint direction of the Federal j
and Ontario Departments of Agriculture a
campaign of “patriotism and production" 1 '
with the slogan "More Than Usual” haul
been inaugurated for the purpose of stimii-
laling the agriculturists of the province to '
greater activity during the coming year ,
| During February S 4 meetings were arranged i
to be held at various points in the Province j
to emphasise the importance of food supply :
during the war and to point out the almost j
illimitable capacity of the Province for pro- , I
duction. ],
Classes in agriculture conducted by re- |
preseutatives of the Ontario Department I ,
of Agriculture are being conducted at 43!
points in the Province. The pupils art-
farmers’ sons, ranging from IS to 25 years
of age, and the instruction is given free, [i
The courses last from four to six weeks, , I
and the average attendance is 25.
Sixty-eight fanners’ sons who were win <
tiers in their counties in the aero profit :
ami hog feeding competitions conducted i
by the Ontario Department of Agriculture j«
have been sent to the Ontario Agricultural !
College ti> take the two weeks’ course in j *
live stock and seed judging, their tuition )1
and living expenses being paid by the tie- •
partmenl.
___
t
FRENCH WAR RUSE.
4 f
Germans led astray. i
The Paris “Correspondant” publishes an 1 *
interesting account of the way in which the j v
German Intelligence Department was s
tricked at the time when the 75 gun was s
being constructed. il
It was in 1893 and 1894 that Major Deport <■
was perfecting at Puteaux the 75 gun which 1
lie had invented, and General Deloye, direc- j v
tor of Ordnance at the Ministry of War, ,
set to work to nut the Germans on the j
wrong track. The head of the German In- t ,
telligence Department. Colonel von u
•Schwarzkoppen, succeeded after great'diffi- "
culty in bribing a foreman at the Puteaux j’
works, who provided him with a series of t
tdans of the gun which was being prepared,
lie was convinced of the value of these t
plans when he found that they were en- n
tirely confirmed by information purchased h
from other sources. n
As a matter of fact, the foreman was s 1
“betraying” his country under orders, and fi
had provided Germany with documents
which were perfectly authentic, but which -
had nothing to do with the 75 gun. They t
were simply the plans of the Ducros gun, t
which had been rejected. e
General Deloye set to work to confirm s
the impression thus produced, and lie ar- 2
ranged that the German military attache h
should learn from a variety of sources in- o
formation which suggested that France had f
adopted the Ducros pattern. The German r
authorities were entirely hoodwinked, and J ii
they at once set to work to make their 77 [ il
gun. which was superior to the Ducros pat- c
tern, and In the end of 1896 the greater o
number of their active regiments had been ii
provided with it. ft was then that the d
French army was suddenly provided with ) a
the far superior 75 gun designed by Major i t
Deport, which had been constructed no I
secretly that even the reporter of the War t
Estimates believed that the Ducros gun had 1 it
been adopted. 1
‘ FEDERAL PARLIAMENT.
y
e - ♦
THU SENATE.
Amendments made by House of Repreaen-
e tatives in War Precautions Bill a (freed to.
p | Bills to amend the Judiciary Act and the
, ] High Court Procedure Act passed through
1 all stages. BiU relating to insurance read
e first time.
Very little time was spent on the pr
’ liminarv business, and the Minister for D
• fence was afforded an early opportunity <
• moving that the Standing Orders be su
pended to consider the amendments mac
1 i by the House of Representatives in the Wa
r J Precautions Bill.
1 This having been agreed to, he move
: that the amendment made in clause 4, t
• I the effect that no person other than an alic
- enemy or a person subject to the Nava
) Discipline Act or to military la-
. would be tried by court-martial, be a*
- cepted. Whilst F-enator Keating (T.) e:
- pressed approval, Senator McDouga
i (N.S.W.) contended that in no eircun
- stances were such courts-martial justifiabli
• Militarism had grown to a greater exten
I than it should have done, and experienc
: showed that our trainees had given a goo
■ account of themselves. We wanted n
» standing army; the citizen forces suffice
-1 for all our purposes.
II Senator Newland (S.A.) asked how thes
i (senators who objected to courts-martia
i would deal with a spy. This was war legish
I tion, and the Government should be give
. the power that it asked for. It was a powe
I that the Government ought to possess. II
I preferred the original provision, and hope
that the Senate would reject the araenc
I ment.
The Minister stated that an importan
court-martial would be held shortly, am
1 it would be well for those senators who ot
j jeefced to such form of trial to attend th
[court and see for themselves the fairnes
of the trial. Complaint had been made b;
I Senator McDougalt of a sergeant being trie<
jby court-martial. The man who was ii
cnarge of men was drunk. This was
time of war, and sergeants in charge o
I men who were found to be drunk meritei
| punishment. ’An officer had, according t
Senator McDougall, been found drunk n
a mess-tent, and had not been tried I>.
I court-martial. He knew nothing of thi
| matter.
I The amendment was then agreed to, a
also were two other amendments.
A bill relacing to insurance was read ;
first time, and the second reading was fixei
for the next day of sitting,
j A bill to amend the Judiciary Act in th
direction of giving additional powers to th
j High Court was received from the House o
Representatives, and seemingly the \ ice
President of the Executive Council (Senato
l Gardiner), who took charge qf it, though
; that it would be passed very quickly. H
j was. however, reckoning without his host
i as strong opposition came from Senator
Guthrie (S.A.), De Largie (W.A.L Need
ham (W.A.), and McDougall (N.S.W.)
j They saw something in the measure whicl
both Senator Gardiner and Senator Keat
j ing (T) explained did not exist. Senato
Guthrie wanted the Admiralty and Mari
; time jurisdiction to be confined to matter
; arising out of the war, and finally an amend
1 ment in this sense was negatived by 12 t<
4. The bill was then quickly passed througl
j all stages. A bill to amend the High Cour
Procedure Act was passed through all stage:
without debate.
‘ On the motion of Senator Pearce, that tin
! Senate adjourned till next Thursday,Senato:
j De Largie raised strong objection to busi
{ness being brought on hurriedly and rushet
! through. At five minutes to 5 the Senati
! adjourned till Thursday next at 3 p.m.
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
MINOR BILLS PASSED.
I Judiciary Bill and High Court Procedure
Rill passed through all stages, with proviso
added that they operate only until six
i months after the war. Defence Bill car-
! ried through all stages.
When the House of Representatives mel
yesterday morning questions concerning
many things occupied the attention of Min-
; inters for well over an hour,
i Mr. O’Malley (X.) alleged that the allow
| ances‘ to country postmasters and post
j mistresses had been reduced, and that the
country post-offices had been reduced to the
level of "London sweat-sliops.” The Post-
; master-General (Mr. Spence) denied that
. there had been any reductions.
Mr. Fenton asked Mr. Fisher whether,
[ in view of the fact that some of the most
important works in connection with the es-
j tablishment of the Federal Capital were now
nearing completion, lie was able to say when
the Federal Parliament would be removed
to the capital.
"I have not the slightest idea,” replied
Mr. Fisher, “but the sooner it is removed
the better I shall like it.” (Hear, hear.)
Mr. Parker Moloney addressed the follow-
ing question to the Minister for Trade and
Customs (Mr. Tudor):—"ln view of the fact
that this Ministry was returned with a man-
date to carry out a policy of protection,
*wi}l it intimate to the gentlemen of the In-
terstate Commission that this House expects
a statement somewhat in accord with the
real nature of the evidence that was taken
by that commission, and not a report that
is tainted with their own frectrade procli-
vities?” (Opposition dissent.)
Mr. Fowler (W.A.) (to Mr. Parker Mo-
loney.)—That's unfair.
Mr. Tudor.---I have every confidence in
the Interstate Commission so far. They
have furnished a preliminary report which
is in accordance with their views, although
it may not be in accordance with the views
of some of the members of this House.
Mr. Parker Moloney.—lt is not in accord-
ance with the evidence.
Mr. Tudor.--Only part of the evidence was
published. Some of the evidence was confi-
dential. and the report may be based on
that. It would he advisable to wait and
see sojne of the detailed reports.
Mr. Darker Moloney. How lung have we
to wait?
Mr. Tudor.—l cannot say.
Mr. Tudor, replying to Mr. Laird Smith
iTas.), said that the British Government
had requisitioned all the insulated space on
ships trading between Australia ami Great
Britain. The British Government had asked
that preference should be given to beef in
tilling that space, and that was being done.
If there was any chance of getting fruit
away he (Mr. Tudor) would see to it that
fruit expoiters in every part of the Com-
monwealth were given an equal chance in
obtaining the space available.
Mr. Tudor informed Mr. Burchell (W.A.)
that, he was not aware that the slackening
of the passenger trade between England and
America had resulted in any surplus of ton
nage suitable for the Australian trade. Re-
garding the present difficulty in shipping
Australian perishable products to England.
It was probable that the operation of the
Imperial Order in Council requisitioning
the whole of the refrigerated space in
fteamship lines running between Australia
mid Great Britain, widen space would be al
located here by the Commonwealth Govern-
ment, would considerably relieve the situa-
tion.
Mr. Brennan asked the Prime Minister
when he might expect a reply to his repre-
sentations to the effect that the commis-
sioner for old-age pensions set himself up
is a court of public inorals, and in assessing
(he claims of pensioners refused their
•laims on the ground that their past life
had not been of that high moral standard
which appealed to the commissioner?
Mr. Fisher replied that he did not remem-
ber the question to have been submitted
before. The act specifically stated that
under certain conditions, which Mr. Bren-
;ian might consider immoral, pensions might
iot be granted. 11 was the duty of the offi-
•ers to carry out the act. If any injustice
had arisen he would be glad to receive par-
fieulars.
Mr. Fisher informed Mr. Pigot (N.S.W.)
hat an amendment of the Land Tax Act
nade last year conferred upon the eommis- j
doner of taxes discretionary powers to re-
mit portion of the taxes in special circum-
itances, such as when localities had suffered
rom drought.
Sir John Forrest was informed by the
Minister for Home Affairs (Mr. Archibald)
that, although in a report submitted by
the chief electoral officer on the general
Section held on September 4. 1914, it was
shown that 3.405 names in a total of
2,042.336 electors to whom ballot-papers
hail been issued were marked more than
>nce at the polling, it could not be in-
ferred that the persons concerned voted
more than once, or that they had been
mpersonated. Experience had shown that
t was impracticable to avoid a small per-
centage of clerical errors in the marking
if the rolls. Four breaches of the law
n connection with the elections had been
letected and brought before the Courts,
red in three cases convictions were ob-
ained.
The Prime Minister (Mr. Fisher) moved
hat the scheme for the extension of build-
ngs and plant at the Small Arms Factory,
Lithgow, he referred to the Parliamentary
AJ-LXJ ZAIUI
| Standing Committee on Public Work
The debate was adjourned.
JUDICIARY BILLS.
The Attorney-General (Mr. Hughet
moved the second reading of the Judicial
Bill, which soughC to confer original juri
diction in matters arising out of offenci
against the laws of the Commonweait
upon the High Court, empowering it t
deal with such matters directly, and witl
out any preliminary commitment,
re- The leader of the Opposition (Mr. Cook
Je- said that if this measure was needed bi
of cause of the war. its operation, and tlis
us- of similar measures, should be limited t
idc the duration of the war. Mr. Hughes pn
ar tested that these powers should be hel
by the High Court in any case. Howevei
■ e( j lie agreed to insert a provision limitin
■ 0 the operation of the measure to the perio
of the war and six months thereafter. I
cr * this form the bill was carried through a
•'al stages. A complementary machiner
iw measure to amend the High Court Pn
ac . cedure Act was also taken through a
?s . stages.
DEFENCE BILL.
In a thin House of only about a doze
e ‘ members, the Assistant Minister for D<
n fence (Mr. Jensen) moved the secon
reading of the Defence Act Amendmen
° Bill, sent down from the Senate. Th
measure, which has already been fully ex
plained, consists mostly of minor ma
chinery provisions. One of its most ir
teresting clauses is that which empower
. the Defence department to allocate compul
sorily a certain proportion of. a soldier’
er pay to his wife or other dependant, wher
le a just claim to an allowance is considerei
ed to he proved. Another section authorise
id- the department to pay to a citizen soldie
discharged from his employment for hav
nt ing attended his military duties the whol
nd or portion of any fine imposed upon sue!
'b- an employer.
he The Opposition raised no objection to th
,ss speedy passage of the ~ measure, ‘ thougl
t>y Mr. Cook put forward the suggestion tha
ed the allocation of any portion of a tine t
in a citizen soldier should be dealt with Ir
a the Court trying the ease, and not let
of to the Minister.
ed The second reading was agreed to. Ii
to committee, a new clause was inserted b;
m Mr. Jensen, the effect of which was t<
by permit of persons passing the prescribe!
‘• s military examination being gazetted a
lieutenants, instead of second lieutenants
38 The bill was then reported, and the thin
reading agreed to.
3 Mr. Hughes formally moved the secon<
reading of the Patents and Trade Mark:
Bill, and obtained leave to continue hii
speech.
After waiting for two hours to receivi
°* notification that the Senate had dealt witl
e ‘ the Judiciary and High Court hills, tin
p r House reassembled at half-past. 4 o'elocl
fi'' and immediately adjourned until 3 o’elocl
*, e on Wednesdav. when the business to b«
’C dealt with will be the Patents and Track
™ Marks Bill, and a bill relating to con
y tracts.
?h
ar MISSING BANK NOTES.
£ ♦
to TRIAL OF SOLLY BURVILL.
;h
rt
es THE JURY DISAGREES.
J® In the Criminal Court yesterday, before
jj. Mr. Justice Hodges, sitting in the Seconc
3 d Civil Court, the trial oi' Solly Burvill, wh<
le was presented on a count of having or
December 4. 1914, at Melbourne, while ar
officer in the New South Wales branch ol
the Pensions Office, stolen two packets o:
Commonwealth notes, valued at £2,000, the
property of the Commonwealth, was con
eluded.
Mr. Morley (instructed by the Common
wealth Crown solicitor) conducted the cast
for the prosecution; and Mr. Bryant anc
Mr. Burgess (instructed by Mr. Ridgeway)
appeared for Burvill, who pleaded nol
guilty.
e t Mr. Justice Hodges, in summing up, said
,g that the chief points that had to be proved
3 . by the Crown were that the notes were
stolen about December 4; that they were
r . stolen in or around Melbourne: that they
j. were stolen by a Commonwealth officer;
ie that the accused had aided and abetted, or
ie in some way mixed himself up in this crime;
t _ and that he got the paper in the dummy
lt packets of notes, so that they could be sub-
stituted for the real ones. From the evi-
r> dence it might be taken that the notes left
the Treasury and were taken to the Post-
s- office. It might, be that they were stolen
iv on the road, and that substitution might
n have taken place there. Substitution at
, that period would be easier, but whether,
Q in such a case. d rmmy notes would pass
muster at the Post-office was another thing
d altogether. The notes lay in the Post-
d office from 20 minutes to 1 o'clock until
they were despatched by the Perth mail
about 20 minutes to 3 o clock. What was
'■ put into the sealed bag for Perth? When it
d was opened in Perth the two dummies were
:t found. lt seemed to him (Mr. Justice
Hodges) that if the notes were stolen at
Melbourne the robbery took place during
’ the period they lay in the office there. If
the jury believed that the notes were stolen
s in Melbourne, then the next question was
e whether the accused was connected with
n the transaction in any way. If the accused
t had obtained the paper for the dummy
. packets, not knowing what it was to be
'■ used for, he would be perfectly innocent of
intentionally helping the thief; but if he
»- supplied them knowing that a crime was
going to be committed, then he was aiding
and abetting, even if he did not see the
D act committed. Another question was
y whether the paper in the “dummy” notes
h was that supplied by Batho to Burvill. Ex-
h pert evidence had been called to show that
8 the dummy packets contained two different
kinds of paper, while Batho said that they-
had all been cut from the one ream. Ex-
l- pert evidence might give most valuable evi-
dence when the witnesses were honest and
s impartial and the reasons were given for
their opinions. The expert witnesses in
the present case had no doubt honestly ex-
-1 pressed their views, and the jury must
I make the best of the expert evidence that
had been given.
e The jury, after a retirement of 24 hours,
returned to court, and the foreman an-
nounced that they were unable to agree
upon a verdict.
1 The accused was remanded to the next
t sittings of the Criminal Court on bail in
i one surety of £l,OOO, and his own recog-
t nisances of £l,OOO.
1
! ROBBERY UNDER ARMS.
t —*-—« —
t
EXTENDED SENTENCES.
In the Criminal Court yesterday, Leslie
) Cook, 19 years of age. Hirold O'Connor, 17
» years of age, and Leslie James Hoare, 18.
years of age, who had pleaded guilty to a
charge of robbery under arms at South Mel-
r bourne on December 11, came before lJr.
’ Justice Hood for sentence.
• In passing sentence, Air. Justice Hood
; said that it the prisoners had not been
I youths he might have awarded the maxi-
, mum penalty for the offence. AH three
youths knew the habits of their victim,
■ having carefully watched his movements,
ami when they committed the act had cur-
ried revolvers ami were masked. He (Mr.
• Justice Hood) would sentence Cook and
O’Connor to four years’ imprisonment each.
Hoare. against whom there was a prior
i conviction, would be sentenced to five years’
: imprisonment.
THE DENTAL FACULTY.
♦
TO TITK EDITOR OK THE A RODS.
Sir.—“Solus.” in his letter of Thursday,
infers that eleven members of the faculty
lof dentistry are dominated by the Dental I
College. Such a statement is opposed to 1
fact, and unworthy of serious consideration.!
Air. A.L. Elvins, Dr. Hewlett,and Dr. Nihill
are in no way connected with the college:
I ])r. Bull, Dr. J. M. Lewis, and Dr. E. B. I
Nicholls are lecturers appointed by the!
I council of the University to lecture on bac-
teriology, dental surgery, and dental ana-
tomy respectively. It lias always been the
custom of the University to appoint lec-
turers to the various faculties. Dr. W. L.
Aitken represents the college on the faculty,
and Mr. \V. J. Tuck field represents the
teaching staff of the Dental Hospital. I
have not mentioned Dr. Springthorpe. as
he is at present at the seat of war. The'
college is incorporated under section 181 j
of the Companies Act IS9O, by special license
of the Attorney-General, as an association
formed for the purpose of promoting art*i
and science. As such it may only apply its 1 ,
income for the purpose of promoting llicj
objects of the association, and no private |
profits or dividends are permissible. The
council of the college give their services in |
an honorary capacity. The college is now j
part, and carried on as part, of the Mel-
bourne University, its official title being
“The Australian College of Dentistry, of
and within the University of Melbourne.”
-Yours. &e., T. F. \Y. HALL.
Acting dean of the faculty of dentistry,
Melbourne University.
April 30.
ks.
RAILWAY UNIONS.
«
esl RECOGNITION OF SECRETARIES
»ry
ris- For the past 15 years there has been an
ces estrangement between the secretaries ol
ith railway unions and the Railways Coramis
to sinners, owing to the refusal of the lattei
officially to recognise secretaries unless
they were employees _pf the Railways de-
I partment. The matter was referred to al
>k) the recent conference of the Victorian
be- Railways Union, and as a result the com-
,at niissiouers yesterday made a statement
. that in the future sesvetaries of railway
unions who were not also employees would
ro- h e recognised by the commissioners in a
•Id limited degree in edlffftrd’iori with matters
er, involving a general principle,
ing i Prior to 1900, the commissioners stated,
iod it was the custom to recognise non-em-
In ployees who acted as secretaries of rail-
all way organisations, but in 1900 or 1901 so
:ry much difficulty was .experienced hv the
ro- administration in consequence of the atti-
all tude adopted by the individuals concerned,
that it was then determined that the de-
partment would only recognise employees,
and that all communications on be lalf of
en the different organisations would have to
) e _ be signed by an employee as representative
, thereof.
nrt Since then the number of employees in
■nt the Railways department has increased
he from approximately 11,600 to approxi-
,x _ mately 20.000, and the organisations have
increased accordingly, and it has been felt
) a ' for some time that it was beyond the
In_ power of any railway employee to perform
'rs his official duties and also undertake the
ul- work and functions attached to the posi-
r-s tion of secretary of certain organisations
of railway employees. As a matter of fact.
‘ v< - it was found necessary some years ago to
ed direct, the Victorian , Railways Mutual
;es Benefit Society to elect a non-employee as
icr secretary, because the performance of the
iv- work attached to tlic organisation was im-
>le posing too great a on the officer
ch who- at that time was carrying out the
work.
he It has now. been determined to accord
gh official recognition in a (limited degree to
at the secretary of the Railways
to | Union and the secretary of the Locomo-
by ! five Engine-drivers, Firemen, and Cle.aners’
?ft Association, who arc non-employees, be-
cause of the magnitude of some of the
In | organisations, which means that the coin-
in' missioners will in future be prepared to
to | accept letters bearing the signature of the
ed respective secretaries, who will also be re-
as J ceived by the commissioners in connection
ts. with matters involving a general prin-
rd eiple.
I The representatives of the organisations
ad ; concerned have been specifically notified
ks that the .continuance of this limited reeog-
ris nition will entirely depend upon the atti-
tude of the organisations and upon the
ve manner in which correspondence and ne-
th gotiations are carried on with the depart-
he ment, as well as the general conduct of
ck their business as affecting public interests.
ck 1 "- 1
be
de LIQUID FIRE IN TRENCHES.
n- 4
GERMANS’ PUMP PETROL.
In view of the'dastardly use of asphyxi-
ating gases by the Germans in the fight-
ing about Hill “60” a message from Paris
by the special correspondent of the Lon-
don “Daily Chronicle” (Mr. Philip Gibbs),
dated March 5, is of interest. Air. Gibbs
| says:
| A stretcher-bearer, working with a
French ambulance unit at the front, in
| the Argonne, confirms the fact that the
r 0 enemy has adopted the new and horrible
id method of attacking trenches by drench-
no ing them with an inflammatory liquid. The
in first news of this new departure on the
part of the enemy was given in the French
official report last Saturday, wherein was
°* stated:— In Mai incourt Wood, between
of the Aygonne and the Meuse, the enemy
ie sprayed one of our trenches with burning
n . liquid, so that it Had to be abandoned.
The occupants were badly burnt.”
This official account does not convey in
n " any little way the horror which over-
se whelmed eye-witnesses of the sufferings of
ul those brave French soldiers who were
severely burnt by this new invention of
War>
A detailed narrative of the firfet attack
by liquid fire was, given by one of the less
id seriously burnt soldiers. “It was yester-
'd
re
ft
t- day evening,” he said, “just as night fell,
that it happened. The day had been fairly
calm, and nothing forewarned us, as is
usual, of a German attack.
, “Suddenly one of our comrades shouted.
J’ ‘Hullo, what is this coming down on us?
" s Anyone would think it was petroleum.’
"At that time we were incredulous of
• j the truth, but the liquid which reached in
J. two jets, cleverly directed, was undoubtedly
some kind of petroleum. The Germans
-, pumped it on us by means of a hose, per-
' I naps specially made for the purpose.
e PUT OUT THEIR PIPES.
j “The sub-lieutenant who commanded us
,g i made us put out out pipes. But it was a
[C ; useless precaution, for a few seconds later
n incendiary bombs began to rain down upon
IS us. The whole trench immediately burst
I, ! into flame, and in order complete their
j J barbarous work those bandits took ad-
y vantage of our disturbance by advancing
,' e on the trench, and throwing burning
>f torches in it.
, e “None of us escaped this torrent of fire.
lH Our clothes were soaked with petroleum,
g and we were soon enveloped in flames, and
e forced to abandon our position. But we
1S waited, nevertheless, until our comrades in
. s the second line of trenches were ready to
c- defend themselves from the German attack
X which developed a few minutes later.”
,t The throwers of the deadly inflamma-
y. tory liquid expiated their crime quickly
and thoroughly, the Feneh soldiers’ ardour
j- being increased tenfold by the desire for
t l revenge, and their counter with bayonets,
i- j made with positive frenzy, caused terrible
u havoc in the enemy’s ranks.
1 After that the Germans did not perse-
t I vere in their efforts, realising that they
t, I would be in vain. They returned to.their
I subterranean refuges, abandoning 150 dead
j ! and as many wounded, while 60 others were
’ made prisoners.
e LIEUTENANT’S TRIBI TE TO MEN.
The brave men who related the
j, foregoing facts modestly refrained from
tl reference to the heroism of their own
gallant resistance, but their lieutenant,
whose hands and legs were grievously
burned, expressed, however, his admira-
tion of his men’s unflinching courage.
"In spite of their terrible burns,” lie
said, “they retained the strength and
courage to withstand the enemy’s first
onset, and did not fall back until they
were certain that their comrades in the
second line ready to continue the
resistance.
t “These poor fellows, who had become
‘ human torches, kept on firing until they
S could no longer hold their rifles, and I
x am indeed proud of having commanded
such men.”
In 1908 a German named Richard
• Fielder took ont patents in Paris for an
. invention by which liquid tire could he
' pumped out for "the production of great
1 masses of flame.” The inventor stated
' that the apparatus could lie used for mili-
tary and other purposes. The patents
• were renewed in 1911. and the designs ex-
> hibiting tbe details of the invention show
‘ a German soldier with a pointed helmet
• pumping the burning liquid into a trench.
I “What must one most admire,” asks a
French writer who has made this curious
,' discovery, “their cynicism or our sim- j !
plicity?” _______________________
WOMEN MAKE MUNITIONS I
♦
Tn Birmingham women are looking after',
automatic machines and turning out the!'
lighter parts of machine-guns, rifles, ami the: 1
Cuing gear even of big guns (says the Lon-1 ’
II don “Daily Telegraph”). They make ex-| 1
I’cellent packers of cartridges. It will sur-j '
, (prise many people to barn that women are 1
[ capable of manufacturing shrapnel shells!'
of all kinds, from the cold steel to the com-) '
, pleted missile, and in fact any shell from'
■! a three-pounder tout welvo-pounder. They j \
• turn the outer shell, make the time and) 1
percussion fuses, till in the bullets, and com-! 1
■ plete the shell ready to place in the gun.; 1
For this class of v.ork women are peculiarlyi *
well fitted, their touch being more sensitive' 1
than that of men, while, owing to the feinall-1 f
' | ness of their liands, they arc -Hole to maniiot-: s
late small articles.
1 The operations in which women are en-.'. 1
gaged in ammunition manufacture involve | ‘
I no danger, and the physical labour is small, ', ‘
as they have not to work the machines
which are'-"uiomatic—hut only to watch IJ
''them. When fuse-filling ;ind assembling!'
(parts they arc able to -it down at the r
oench. The hours are from Bto 5, with an!
| hour for meals. The wages are good,
i Many machines are lying idle owing to .
I want of labour to work them. Skilled
j labour has all been used up, and, owing to '
the action of the trade unions, the pm- ,
plovers have nol in all cases been allowed ' (
to supplement their staffs with women.
_ . .
Stockmen’s Carnival, in aid of the Belgian Re- }
lief Fund, held at Ascot Racecourse. Sec illua- * J
trationa in "The Australasian,” Saturday, May 1.
ASPHYXIATING SHELLS.
«
!. By J.M.H.
„ During the past few days the world ha
,f been shocked at the conduct of the Ger
5 . mans resorting to the use of asphyxiatin
r shells—a method absolutely dishonotirabl
s ' n the warfare of civilised nations. Fron
;- the meagre particulars to hand, it is ver
t difficult to state with certainty wha
[j chemical is employed for charging thesi
shells. 'lhe number of substances whicl
y <iin be used is considerable, and in sorm
d cases large quantities are easily nianufac
a tured at a small cost. “Greek fire” wai
s in ancient times employed by both Greek)
I, an( t Romans, and it was also largely use<
i- during the wars of the Christians anc
- Saracens. It was composed of sulphur
> nitre, pitch, afid asphalt. When burned i
e is attended with a thick, suffocatinf
i- smoke, fierce flame on which water hac
, little or no effect in subduing, and it wai
- employed with equal effect on sea anc
, land. A so-called "Greek fire”—probablj
f a solution of phosphorus in bi-sulphide o
o carbon was used in the siege of Charleston
e l -S.A; in the year 1863.
“Stink-pots” were largely used by the
i Chinese in early times, and even up tc
1 the present day are occasionally employee
• h.v Chinese pirates. The designatioi
really covers the vessel oi
t bomb and its contents: the latter may be
p chemical substances, mainly sulphur, nitre
i and resin, which yield, when burned, of
p tensive and suffocating gases, or earther
- vessels containing organic matter rich U
• sulphuretted hydrogen, and frequently
. made more abominable by the addition o
j decaying fish offal. In comparatively
1 recent times chemicals of definite compos!
? tion have been employed for like purposes
3 an( * these preparations may be classifiec
- under three heads:—
r U) Volatile substances- which, whet
3 liberated from, say, an exploded shell oi
vessel, emit inconceivably disgusting
1 o< rt! , -, r *U£ nd .P ro P er tiPB noxious to health.
1 Chemical compounds extremely vola
s tile, the vapours partly asphyxiating, with
; odours penetrating, absolutely insufferable
and deadly poisonous.
" a j C ) Chemical compounds readily gasi
3 "ed, which, in the presence of air an<
- moisture, yield fumes intensely irritating
> to the mucous membrane, and producing
3 rapid asphyxiation.
Class (a) generally consists of com
i pounds built up from sulphur, methyl, i.e. ;
wood spirit, and sulphuretted hydrogen
and possess the properties described above,
i r n WI J 5 ® noted that modern chemistry
1 follows the ancient method in preparins
chemicals of definite composition in which
- sulphur is an important element. Phos
3 phorus, selenium, and tellurium act in
like manner to sulphur, and compound?
: can be formed whose qualities are sr
t abominable and destructive as to be in-
describable in words.
In class (b) arsenic and cyanogen, to-
gether with sulphur and wood spirit, are
the constituents. They unite to form
chemical compounds called cacodyls (or
kakodyles), mostly very volatile, with in-
sufferable odours and deadly poisonous.
- Vine compound of arsenic, sulphur, and
wood spirit is described by Johnston “as
i a volatile substance, which, when exposed
to the air, takes fire. As it burns, the
arsenic contained in it combines with the
• oxygen (in the air) and forms white
: arsenic; this diffuses through the air, and
M 'hon inhaled acts as a deadly poison.”
i Another compound known as liquor of
! ca dot prepared by distilling acetate of
, potash and arsenic, is volatile, with a power-
. ' garlic-like odour, and its vapours are
When cyanides are combined with these
chemicals even still more lethal compounds
result. These substances when exposed to
the air rise in the form of vapour forming
poisonous arsenical fumes, and at the same
tune the cyanogen is converted into prussic
acid. Thus, through the air are diffused at
the same instant two of the most deadly
poisons with which we are acquainted. On
account of their abominable smells and dan-
gerous poisonous qualities, this class of
chemical has been comparatively little
studied. Tn 1854 “the Committee'of Ord-
nance, London, had their attention drawn
to a new projectile. It was a shell charged
with a liquid, which, when released by the
concussion of the ball, becomes a sheet of
fire, consuming all within its influence, the
fumes emitted also destroying human life.”
Class (c) contains numerous chemicals
which could be employed in charging “as-
phyxiating shells.” e.g.. chlorine, sulphurous
acid gas, carbonic acid gas, several nitrous
compounds, bromine, and many others. The
first three, under normal conditions, are
gases, but are easily converted into liquids
under pressure, and ran be stored in the
well-known steel bottles or cylinders made
specially for the purpose. These three
chemicals—chlorine, sulphurouS acid, and
carbonic acid—can be prepared in large
quantities from crude materials which exist
in abundance, and the cost of manufacture
is low; in fact, they are every-day articles
of commerce. When the pressure is re-
moved by opening the valves on the cylin-
der or upon the bursting of a shell charged
with these liquids, they immediately as-
sume the gaseous condition. The other
substances named would be quite as effec-
tive for the purpose, but they are not so
abundant and much more expensive to
make. It will thus be recognised that if the
Germans have made up their minds to resort
to the use of “asphyxiating shells” there
will be no scarcity of chemicals for charg-
ing same.
Measures can be taken to lessen the toxic
character of the gases evolved when above
ground, although the density of the fumes
is heavier than air; hut in trenches, min-
ing operations, and confined places it will
be a much more difficult matter to reduce
the poisonous qualities of the gases, par-
ticularly in a damp atmosphere. Fortu-
nately there is great risk in the employ-
ment of the majority of these chemicals,
and it is quite possible that the users may
“be hoisted with their own petards.”
In 1853 James F. W. Johnston, an emi-
nent chemist, in an article on “asphyxiat-
ing shells.” wrote:—“These kakodyles and
their compounds might certainly be em-
ployed still ipore efficiently in warfare; but
how far the use of vulgar poisons in honour-
able warfare is consistent with the refine-
ments of modern civilisation is open to
much doubt. There may not be much real
difference between causing death by a bul-
let or by the fumes of a deadly poison, yet
to condemn a man ‘to die like a dog’ does
array death to him in more fearful
colours.” As the Germanic Huns have dis-
regarded practically all the rules of honour-
able and civilised warfare, it would seem to
be necessary on the part of the Allies to
lie prepared to meet a return of the bar-
barous warfare of arieient times.
HOW TO DETECT SUBMARINES
♦
FRENCH SCIENTIST’S THEORY.
Writing in "Le Afatin.” Dr. Jousset-de-
Bellesme, a distinguished French scientist,
makes an interesting contribution to the
question, which lias great importance at
present, as to how an enemy submarine
can be discovered and destroyed. The scien-
tist declares it is possible to detect the
presence of a submarine by the sound it
makes under water.
It has been well known for n long time,
he says, that water is a liquid which is a ;
perfect conductor of sound. More than a J
century ago a Geneva physician. Colladon,
conducted a series of experiments in the
Lake of Geneva to determine the rapidity i
with which sound cun travel in water. It (
was discovered that water transmitted j
vibrations which were impressed on it with 1
a quickness and an intensity superior to :
the air in the proportion of 1 to 4. Sound
travels in the air with a rapidity of 340
metres the second, while in water it attains j
to 1,435 metres.
It will then be admitted that, if the sound ,
of a bell is perceptible in 'the air at a dis-
tance of one kilometre, it follows that an
intense vibration in the water can be re-
cognised within a "circle of several kilo-
metres Tf at Dio same time we have an ear
to hear it. Xov this ear exists. A screw j
which turns in the water at a rapid rate (
certainly produces in the water vibrations
sufficiently intense to lie heard at consider-
able distances. One knows how far away
the noise of the motor of an aeroplane can
be heard. With even stronger reason one
ought to hear in the water even farther
away the noise caused by the screw of the
submarine. If we arrive by this means to
discover its neighbourhood at several kilo-
metres of distance, it should be easy to
evade it, and even to find out the direction
in which it is sailing, so as to give it chase
and destroy it. As experiments have been
made before this time to perceive how-
sound travelled in water, there should exist
an instrument for its ascertainment, and if
such does not exist the resources of physical
science should be able to create one.
The English Channel appears to be a
favourite hunting ground for submarines,
because they need seldom be far from land,
and can thus easily determine their posi-
tion. This portion of the sea having cnly
a limited breadth, the acoustic research of
these parasites of the seas could be made
more easily in it than elsewhere.
British Columbia lumbermen have beon
asked to submit bids on a contract for
500.000.000 board feet of lumber to be used
in building 100,000 two-roomed houses in
France. Tbe houses are to bp built at the
expense of the Government, for the u.*r
of people who have lost their houses and
other property in the war. The order
would, if secured, keep the largest mills
in the Province occupied for some time in
cutting the lumber.
THE GREATEST MILITARY
SURGEON.
«
I
By L.
; The present war has been classed in- many
. aspects as the greatest struggle the world
i has ever witnessed, and it is at least cer-
tain t hat no other war in history was con-
: ducted with such a complete organisation
: for dealing with the wounded. Whenever
the rare of wounded soldiers is considered
. Hie name of Florence Nightingale occurs
. to British people, but there is another name
: that ought to have a niche in tli« temple
of world fame. Dominique Jean Larrey
I was born in 1766 at Beaudeau. His parents
) Were humble in station and poor in worldly
belongings, and the young child owed his
education to the interest of a kindly abbe.
Ho was barely in his teens when he was
sent to live with an uncle who was a
surgeon. Larrey subsequently qualified as
i a medical man, and at the age of 21 mi-
grated to Paris, where he obtained an ap-
pointment in the navy. He went to sea as
surgeon of the Vigilante, ana after spend-
ing six months in cruising exchanged to
the army and joined the army of the
Rhine. Two years later he was nominated
chief surgeon of the expedition to Corsica.
The place of assembly was Toulon, and
here he met a certain young General Bona-
parte for the first time. Bonaparte was
in command of the artillery division. The
expedition being delayed. Larrey went to
Spain as surgeon-In-cnief to the army of
the Pyrenees. He was next appointed as
surgeon-in-chief to the army of Italy, where
he again encountered Bonaparte, who was
in his first yiosition of supreme command.
On the formation of the Egyptian expedi-
tion Larrey was sent to Toulon to organ-
ise its surgical equipment, and he accom-
panied it subsequently as chief surgeon.
He was wounded at Acre, and during the
same fighting was presented by Napoleon
with a sword of honour for operating on a
wounded officer under fire. Larrey re-
mained with the expedition through all its
trials and reverses, and returned to Paris
ill 1801. and was covered with honour in
despatches and presented with fifteen thou-
sand francs. Bonaparte had meantime be-
come First Consul, and greeted his
former officer with great affection
when they again met in Italy,
Larrey being appointed surgeon
to the Consular Guard. He subsequently
accompanied Napoleon, now Emperor of
the French, through the campaign with
Austria and Russia, and was present at
Austerlitz. He was next occupied in the
struggle against Prussia, and was present
at Tilsit when peace was concluded. He
was with the army all through the dis-
astrous Russian campaign of 1812. and wit-
nessed the burning of Moscow, and endured
the perils and hardships of the hideous re-
treat. On the return of Napoleon from
Elba. Larrey was among the first to rally
to the old standard. They were long in j
conversation together on the eve of Water-
loo. In the rout after the battle Larrey
was wounded and taken prisoner, and was
only saved from being snot on being re-
cognised by a Russian surgeon, who brought
him to the notice of Bluoher. He was at
once liberated and forwarded to France.
Under the new regime Larrey fell upon evil
times, but soon after Napoleon’s death was
reappointed to the army as surgeon-in-chief.
Tn 1826 he visited England, and was received
with every mark of honour. He continued
at his post until 1842, in which year he died
while returning from an inspection of the
army in Algiers.
Larrey was the first to institute the prac-
tice of treating the wounded on the field.
Before his time, the wounded were left
till the fighting was over. He also devised
the first system of light ambulance to ac-
company an army into action. He was the
first surgeon to insist on avoiding meddle-
some surgery in the field, a doctrine fol-
lowed with success by the Japanese,!
and now adopted by European surgeons.
He also introduced many surgical
axioms, which are still regarded as sound,
and a special amputation still bears his
name. Napoleon mentioned Larrey in his
will, and snoke of him as “the most vir-
tuous man he had ever known.”
Probably no single human being in the
world’s history has ever had. or ever will
have, such experience of the horror of war
under all climates and conditions as this
simple-hearted Frenchman, who is laid to
rest in the cemetery of Pere-la-Chaise.
APPEAL FOR SERVANTS*
SAVINGS.
; «
An extraordinary appeal is made by the
“North German Gazette” to masters and
mistresses to induce their servants to in-
vest their small savings in the new war
loan. As subscriptions of as little as £5
are accepted, servants can easily “do their
duty to the State,” and it is also “a duty”
of their masters to advise them not to be
content with a paltry 3J per cent., but to
get 5 per cent, from the war loan. The
Government organ solemnly writes:— I “Let
nobody say to himself, ‘Among the untold
millions of money our Anna's 100 marks
do not count.’ Rather let everybody con-
sider how many Annas there are in the
German Empire with a hundred or several
hundred marks. All these hundred marks
together make many millions. If every
hausfrau were to think ‘Our Anna’s 100
marks do not matter,’ all these millions
would lie unused.” The article goes on to
explain that the sen-ant girls need not be
afraid of losing their coupons, as there
are special arrangements for the savings
banks to deal with them, and also that
it is being made specially easy for them
to withdraw money from the savings banks
for the purpose of subscribing to the war
loan. The appeal concludes:—“Let no-
body who reads these lines delay. Let him
help his servants with advice, 'and see to
it that they do not delay too long out of
laziness. Nobody should wait till the last
moment. If anybody cannot arrange mat-
ters for himself, let him cut out this
article and send his servant girl with it
to the savings bank, where advice and
help will readily be given. Of course she
must not forget her savings bank book.
The time for subscription ends on March
19, so it is high time to act.
IRELAND’S RECORD
MR. REDMOND PROUD.
Afr. John Redmond, in a great recruiting
speech in the Freetrade Hall, Afan’chester,
said that every Irish soldier who gave his j
life on the battle-fields of Flanders died for j
Ireland as truly as did any of the heroes
of the race in (he past. Up to last month
nearly 100,000 Irishmen from Ireland were I
with the army. and. taking Great Britain J
and the colonies, the Irish race had at least !
a quarter of a million sons with the (
colours.
“I make no claim for Ireland, except that j
Ireland is doing its duty,” added Mr. Red- !
mond. “Our record is one of which we ,
can be proud. If we turn for a moment
to the record of performances at the front:
1 think we Irishmen can''Void up OKr beads, j
Sir John French is an irishman; lie springs |
from good old Irish stock. Admiral Beatty
is an Irishman from County Wexford; !
Admiral Carden, who is bombarding the
Dardanelles, is an Irishman from Tipperary, j
The lieutenant-commander of the destroyer,
that sank the 1 12 the other day is a Creagh !
from County Clare. And if we leave tne ,
high in rank and go down to the rank and i
file I think the name of Michael Leary will j 1
be for ever associated with the history of j -
this war. (j
"If you look at the performances at the , i
front from another point of view, and look :,
at the casualty-lists, and see how whole j
regiments of Irish troops have been almost ‘ 1
wiped out. I do not think any man will be , ■
found in tins country to deny that Ireland !
is doing her duty." j (
Recruiting in Ireland is 4.000 a month. |
and it is said that 40.000 Irishmen in Lan-
cashire have also enlisted. | (
RURAL DEPOPULATION ,1
4
SIK 11. RIDKIt HAC.fiARDS VIFAV.
The inhabitants of cities come from the *
land, and must be refreshed from the land, a
writes Sir H. Rider Haggard in “The \
Times.” If. as experts tell iis. this l>e true 1 „•
our country at the last depends upon its !
land-dwellers. And there is more behind.
Most of our colonies sadly lack white in- (
habitants, and rely as much on immigra- 11
lion as they do on their own natural in- 1 1
jrease, which is not excessive. All of them 1
desire what they call “the best," by which j '
they mean women of between 18 and 30 I J-
rears of age, who are prepared to work until j *
they marry, and young men reared upon j
the land of Britain.
As our researches on the Dominions Royal j a
?ommis.sion have shown us, however, these ) p
'lasses are almost worked out: few of them ( p
remain available as emigrants. Therefore I
this fact is a grave menace to an empire of [
which the people no longer reproduce them- 1
selves as freely as they did naif a century j
igo. We are trying to hold nearly a quar-
rr of the earth with about 60.000,000 of e
Anglo-Saxon population, ot whom some ]
10,000,000 dwell in these little islands. This [ a
s quite as mtieh i as we can do, and if the | .
lumber shrinks it will soon be more than U
ve can do. Meanwhile, the villages of Bn- 1 3
;ain can grow emptier year by year. £
DEFENCE ADMINISTRATION
4
FURTHER EXPERT CRITICISM.
i
y\
d j IMPORTANT SUGGESTIONS.
!_ ( The second portion of the report made
n by Air. Robert AIcC. Anderson upon the
r | business branches of the Department of De-
j fence, which was laid upon the table of the
s Mouse of Representatives yesterday, was
e even more pointed than the first.
e No branch of the departmental activities,
v Air. Andersoji points out, had been more cri-
s ticised than that dealing with the purchase
V of horses, but the most patient investigation
, 8 had failed to disclose anything improper or
s ' even foolish in this connection. It had to
i be remembered that when war broke out
s and horses were wanted urgently, the same
'■ care and discrimination as was observed
” j now was not possible. The assistance of
. j private firms was invoked, and there were
o j mistakes made, but the net result showed
e j that they were not very many. The aver-
Ijage price per head paid for horses up till
I February 15. 1915, was £lB/12/1, and the
L . percentage of the total purchased horses
s rejected or under consideration for rejec-
e tion was only 1.14 per cent. It had been
® asked, Afr. Anderson reports, whether the
8 speculators are storing forage against a
p further rise, and he adds that if this can
s reasonably be surmised section 67 of the
. Defence Act, which enables the requisition-
' ing of supplies at current rates, should be
' enforced. The custom of sending a military
- purchaser into the country he regards as in-
• advisable, because in one instance his ap-
-3 pearanco in a forage district caused prices
1 to rise 10/ to 20/ per ton.
1 Much corresjjonaenee and even innuendo
• had been received, Mr. Anderson discov-
s cred, regarding the method of acquiring
s Military motors. Two gentlemen, both in-
-1 tereated in motor distributing agencies, a»-
' sisted the maior purchasing as an advisory
' board, and the suggestion had been con-
-8 veyed that these gentlemen secured good
orders for their own firms. How much
> there was in this contention, Mr. Ander-
-1 son points out, would be judged from the
r e fact that the amounts spent in all on motor
f lorries, cars, and cycles was £140,000, out
1 of which one of the firms referred to re-
t ceived orders aggregating £2,850, and the
8 other an order for two cars of a total value
t of £1,250.
8 Mr. Anderson goes on to say that an in-
- spection of the campa at Broadmeadows and
- Liverpool showed that the business
1 branches were for the most part admirably
- conducted. Some soldiers were still short of
3 clothing and equipment, but the trouble
< \ was being overcome. The task had been a
i [great one, and nothing could be done in ad-
- dition to the present endeavours, for every
f available source of supply seemed to have
3 been tapped, and tbe providers were re-
- sponding up to the expectations of the de-
t partment.
TRADING CONCERNS.
1 According to Afr. Anderson, the? balance-
-3 sheets published by the various Common-
j wealth factories had been critically ex-
-1 amined by him, and it had been found that
1 full depreciation and other allowances, and
3 all necessary charges had been debited
against each enterprise. It seemed not only
' unsound, but impossible, to run the fac-
t tories without showing profit or loss. End-
I less trouble was caused to the managers in
- estimating costsrirom time to time, to en-
-3 able them to finish “on the dead level,
■ and it would be wiser, in his opinion, if
' payment could be allowed to factories on
. current rates charged by similar firms for
• the same articles. The factories seemed to
1 be faithfully managed, and to possess ideal
• conditions for the employees. It was un-
» fortunate that the balance-sheets were not
’ published until some seven or eight months
■ after the close of the financial vear. This
could easily be done earlier. The harness and
i clothing factories had two good things to
I their credit. One was that they had sup-
• plied large quantities of goods to pattern
• and time required, and the other was that
> they had set a standard for many of the
other manufacturers to work up to.
COMMANDANTS’ POWERS-
Air. Anderson, in the course of his in-
quiries, found that the military authorities
Avere strongly and unanimously insistent
» about the necessity for the extension of the
| State commandants’ powers, and pointed
out that the present restrictions made it
■ most difficult for them to administer their
i commands. It seemed common sense
• to Mr. Anderson to allow the
' commandants, after estimates were
, passed under the guidance and con-
trol of their district paymasters, to spend
' the amount allotted to them for the vari-
‘ ous items as enumerated in, say, half-yearly
; portions. One of the commandants assured
[ Air. Anderson that he could not employ a
man to sweep the yard without financial
’ authority being obtained.
PENSIONS ON RETIREMENT.
Air. Anderson goes on to say that
i only men in the full vigour of
' life could be regarded as thoroughly
i effective, and military officers should
i be called upon to retire at a
much earlier age than individuals in any
other knoAvn walk of life. They had there-
fore a much shorter money-earning time
in which to make provision for an early
old age.
An infantry division in the Imperial
Army consisted of about 20,000, and H
cavalry division, roughly, 10,000. There-
fore the commandants of the tAVO larger
military districts of the Commonwealth
(New South Wales, with approximately
56,000 troops; and Victoria, with approxi-
mately 49,000) might reasonably, in Air.
Anderson’s opinion, be regarded as being
each in command of an army corps of three
divisions. Both these officers were prac-
tically doing the work of four British
generals (one at £2,500 and three at
£1,500 each), with at least nine brigadiers
under them (all drawing larger emolu-
ments than an Australian commandant),
and a numerous and highly trained and
paid staff for administration and instruc-
tion. Soldiers of the Commonwealth were
also required to work harder, deal faith
greater difficulties in administration ancl
instruction, and were more frequently
[ called upon to act on their oAvn initiative
j than were officers of the Imperial Army.
| The question submitted for considera-
tion, therefore. Mr. Anderson indicates,
j was—Would it not be cheaper and better
| business in the long run to provide a pen-
sion scheme for military officers? Afany
of them were frankly in terror of the ap-
| preaching period of their, retirement, and
I a scheme might easily be arranged Avhereby
military officers might pay a yearly pre-
-1 iniuin 'sufficient to provide for their own
| pension. To place a pension fund on a <
. sound footing, the Government would have
I to provide yearly sufficient to allow for
those arrived at or approaching retiring.
age- but on a diminishing scale—so that
: in a few years this contribution would!
[cease automatically and Hie fund would
(sustain itself. The question then might
! arise as to whether present salaries were
! sufficient to allow of this deduction, and
j on that he was not qualified to advise.
BORROWING OFFICERS.
i Referring to the borrowing of men from
(the Royal Navy and the British Army. Mr.
J Anderson says it is advisable to import men
| to give instruction in matters of which Aus-
i tralians had no knowledge, and in which
they are finding their way; but, while such
, men are here it is advisable to have capable
■ Australians acting as second in command,
so that they may he able to assume the
i duties competently when the instructors
■ leave to rejoin their own services.
"Would it not even he better nowadays
| to send abroad every year a number of
rising young men. both from the tigh’ting
: itnd civil hran.-l.es? ’ Mr. A.ule.son asks. ;
j In Ins opinion they would in a year or two ,
I learn sufficient to repay the expense over
land over again every year afterwards. In
the meantime imported men naturally made
! the best bargain they could for themselves,
and their salaries usually lar exceeded those
[paid to Australians, which gave ground for
the grumble. "Australian billets are lor
i Australians provided they are dune at halt
As to the cost of Commonwealth defence.
| Mr. Anderson sa\s that a comparison with |
[other countries could not safely be chal-
lenged. for Australian troops were probably
the best paid and provisioned in the world.
That was the poliev of the country, jfhd it
] was satisfied to pay for it; but this dictum
carried with it the necessity to most care-! ;
fully scrutinise all expenditure and business I
administration, so that there should be no 1 ,
question about full value being obtained for I
the large amount of money spent, and he j *
advises: "Above all things avoid mean I i
economies." They were too extravagant ! {
even for this rich country.
SUGGESTED NEW SYSTEM.
Mr. Anderson states that no Minister or
Assistant Minister should be an 1
executive member of any board.
He should abide in a serener 1
atmosphere, to enable him to ultimately de- \ •
eide things judicially. “The Minister or his j
assistant would, of course,” the report sug- ( 1
gaetB, "be ex-officio president of each and
every council or board which he might for
I any reason desire to attend."
A scheme to divide the Defence depart-
ment into three separate organisations -
civil, naval, and military—is proposed. The
civil administration should, Mr. Anderson
considers, consist of the secretary, two as-
sistant secretaries, and tbe chief accountant
or financial secretary. The secretary would
control the department generally, and aet
as secretary to the Councaj of Defence. The
e nrst assistant secretary would assist the
secretary in the general administration of
tbe department, and co-ordinate the purely
; - naval and military mat hers. The second as-
e sistant secretary ivould be the civil member
g of both the naval and military boards, act-
ing as the eyes and ears of the Minister.
He would supervise Gowrnmcnt factories,
•’ ? nd , Bt JPPli ps an( l tender Jioards, embracing
>■ Polk naval and the military branches,
e The chief accountant, or financial secre-
n tary- according to Mr. Anderson's scheme,
would be the one overruling financial
authority for the Avhole department—naval
o and military—and would have charge of all
t financial matters of the eivil administration.
e To ensure co-ordination, he Avould be
, finance member of both the navul and mili-
tary boards, to advise, but not control. The
1 internal audit work also would be under
e Mra.
i “No eivil memberof the board should." Air.
.. Anderson Avrites in conclusion, “make any
I representations to the Minister on any
naval or military matter in the absence of
e the member of the board concerned; and,
s conversely, no naval nor military member
:- should make any representations to the
Ajimster on any civil matter in the absence
of the member concerned. Through these
channels would, filter the uninterrupted
*• stream to the Minister through his chief
i advisers, and, from the Minister, sitting
e above but in touch with them all, would
. radiate all orders and authority.”
e
- GENERAL NEWS.
3 —*—+
y The of the ('itv
. Council Avail'recommend to the council at
l its meeting on Monday that tenders be
- called for the construction of storm-
water barrel drain in Brombv street, from
. Domain street to the St. Kilda road. The
1 estimated cost of the drain, in brick and
i reinforced concrete, is £l,OOO.
The first step towards making arrange-
' ments for the wood-blocking of St. Kilda
t road, which will be commenced by the City
- Council within the next feAV weeks, will he
8 taken by the City Council at its meeting
3 on Monday, when a tender wilf be accepted
for the erection of fencing around an allot-
} ment of land off St. Kilda road, adjacent
3 to the Alilitary Barracks. The land will
T be used as a depot for the storage of the
[ wood blocks. A recommendation has been
' made by the public xvorks committee that
. the tender of Air. N. Smith for £244/17/6
r be accepted. The wood-blocking scheme
3 has been delayed, oAring to the City Council
not being able to secure a sufficient supply
■ of cement, but the Lord Mayor (Sir David
Hennessy) states that tins difficulty has noAV
been overcome.
Further evidence was taken yesterday in
' the inquiry concerning the raining ship
John Murray. It concerned a boy named
[ Albiston, who had been a trainee on the
I ship, and whose father and mother AA’ere
examined. The inquiry will be resumed on
; Monday.
The annual meeting of the Arts and
Crafts-Society was held at the Town Hall
t yesterday afternoon. Professor BaldAvin
Spencer presided. In the report for the
1 past year it was stated that, owing to the
: drought and the war, the society had not
i expanded as it might have done. It had
| been possible, however* for the society to
[ meet current expenses without having to
. draw on the reserve fund of £221. It was
; expected that the bi-annual exhibition
, would be held during the present year. NeAV
. rooms Avould shortly be taken on the top
[ floor of Elizabeth House. The library had
, proved a useful adjunct to the society.
. Regret Avas expressed at the death in De-
, eember last of Mrs. G. Purchas, who was
• treasurer of the society. The report was
. adopted, on ;he motion of Lady Creswell.
The election of officers resulted:—President,
Professor Baldwin Spencer; vice-presidents,
Lady Creswell and Professor Osborne; trea-
surer, Miss A. Currie; secretary, Miss
McGeorge: council, Miss Cpapman. Miss
i Merfield, Miss Syme, Miss Pyc, and Mr.
W. R. Dean.
The control of the Newport timber-sea*
■ soning kilns was yesterday taken over by
; the Public Works department from thq
Forests department. It is intended to
1 instal tAvo planing-machines at the works at
1 once, Avhich Avill enable the product of the
kilns to be increased to nearly three times
their present capacity. If necessary, the de-
. partment will erect an additional kiln, in
order to ensure the whole of the plant being
■ fully employed. Under the new manage-
ment the blaekwood logs which lave been
, lying unused at the kilns for from tAvo to
three years, and jvhich are of considerable
value, will be immediately prepared for use.
Should the output of the kilns be about
equal to the demands for public works, it
will be confined to Government purposes,
! except in the case of contractors for public
Avorka who may require supplies of seasoned
timber. In the event of any timber being
available after these requirements are met,
it will be disposed of to contractors Avho
! may need it for general purposes.
Her Excellency Lady Helen Alunro Fen
guson will preside at a demonstration to be
given by members of the Young Women's
Christian Association on Thursday, May 6,
at 8 o’clock. A feature of the entertain-
ment will be a pageant descriptive of the
history of the Avar, and in addition the
various clubs and social branches of the as-
sociation will be represented. A musical
programme will be given by .Madame E.
Rogers, Air. J. Danks, Air. Price, and Air.
Zelman’s orchestra.
The autumnal sessions of the Baptist
Union will open on Monday with a foreign
mission demonstration in the Collins street
Church, when addresses will be given by the
missionaries on furlough, Miss A. Doery
and the Rev. P. C. Nall. The business ses-
sions aaull be held in the Armadale church
on Tuesday and Wednesday, beginning each
day at 2 p.m.
Portions of the toAvn of Brighton were
AArithout water for several hours yesterday
and od Thursday, owing to the bursting of
street mains. The opening of St. Kilda
street for the duplication of the electric
tramway caused a breakage of the main
near Cole street on Thursday afternoon,
Avhiich was not repaired till a late hour.
The felling of pine trees in Black street
resulted in a burst in that locality, owing
to the roots having spread under the mains.
The supply Avas cut off for about five hours.
(Early on Friday morning the main in Bay
| street at the railway crossing burst, and the
water, breaking through the metal roadway,
| spouted to a height of 50ft. The street Avas
i flooded with water. The cause of the break
| was attributed to a weakness in the
main.
The Old Lesley Collegians in Alelbourna
will celebrate their founders’ day on Mon-
day, May 3. by a dinner in the Adamson
Hall, Wesley College. Simultaneous dinners
will be held in each of the other States,
and. making time allowance for differences
of longitude, in India, South Africa, and
London.
GENERAL CABLE NEWS.
4 .
HOUSE OF COMMONS ELECTION.
LONDON, April 30.
Air. Galbraith (Labour) has been re-
turned unopposed to the House of Com-
mons for the Mid-Durham division, for-
merly represented by Mr. John Wilson
(Labour).
ROYAL ACADEMY.
»
Record Overseas Exhibitors.
' LONDON. April 30.
There are no fewer than 23 Australian
and four New Zealand exhibitors at the
Royal Academy art exhibition this year.
These numbera are a record. In addition
to the names of exhibitors already an-
nounced. the following will bo repre-
sented: Wiil .Ashton, three paintings:
Lafie Taylor, two: Bess Norris, Wheel-
wright, Bessie Gibson. Ritchie, Oswald
Birley, and Miss Hodgkins, one each.
fn sculpture. Miss Henson, of Western
Australia, will have one piece, and Web.
Gilbert, of Melbourne, two pieces.
Printed and Published by George Bell, at “The
Arem" other, Collins street, Melbourne, for
Wilson and Mackinnon, proprietors.
