

\ The
With some thoughts on
ITS AFTERMATH IN AUSTRALIA
A Lecture delivered in the Public Library,
Melbourne, 7th June, 1916
Henry Gyles Turner
Fellow of the Institute of Bankers, London
Fellow -o£.-the Royal Geographical Society. London
PUBLISHED BY REQUEST
George Robertson and Company
Propy. Ltd., /
Melbourne, Sydney, and Brisbane


J'erguson Coixectio>l\Y?
f({ Katioxai. Library" ||j
\A Canbe:rra JJj


The War
With some thoughts on
Its Aftermath in Australia.
Some 65 years ago, Sir Edward Creasy, Professor
of History at the London University, published a
book entitled “The Fifteen Decisive Battles of the
World,” beginning with Marathon, 500 years before
the Christian era, and winding up with Waterloo, a
hundred years ago.
The book ran through several editions —the critics
were generous in their praise, and some prominent
army authorities expressed surprise that a lawyer
with no military training could have so mastered
the technical details of battle manoeuvres and
strategy, as to present a picture sufficiently im-
pressive and readily understandable by the ordinary
reader. That may be true, but there are plenty
of successful instances in our literature where men
have written most illuminating accounts of battles,
who have never seen a gun fired in action. They
clothe a prosaic official record with a garment of
brilliant rhetoric. Creasy’s book, however, had a
higher aim than the mere technical description of a
fight. Thousands of battles were fought during the
20 centuries covered by his book. Historians find
its value in the results which he deduced, rather
than in the details he described. The duration of
a battle, or the number of killed and wounded has
no relation to its general historical importance.


It is the practical influence which the result of the
battle has in winning, or losing some forward move-
ment, National, Social, even Political, which may
affect for weal or woe succeeding generations.
Without going to remote antiquity it will suffice
to mention the Spanish Armada, and the battle of
Waterloo, as instances where a defeat might have
materially altered our own history.
I am not going to tax your patience with any
digression upon these fifteen battles, but to call
attention to an interesting fact connected with the
publication of the book. It was issued in 1851,
during the holding of the great Peace Exhibition
of all Nations in Hyde Park. Probably there are
not many here who can remember the positive de-
lirium of false expectations which possessed the
British public in that year. The Press, the Pulpit,
and the Political arena indulged in the most
fantastic prophecies, based upon one of the promi-
nent texts blazoned in the great Crystal Hall, “Be-
hold how good and how pleasant it is for brethren
to dwell together in unity.”
A file of the leading English newspapers for 1851
would to-day fill you with amazement at the im-
petuosity with which a whole people seized upon
what was really a very ingenious commercial ven-
ture, translated it into a spiritual uplift-
ing, and refused to listen to any dissent-
ing voice. Leading articles were headed
“No more War,” Clerics proclaimed from
scores of pulpits that the era of universal
peace had dawned upon suffering humanity, and it


only required us to be true to ourselves to ensure
its perpetuity. Even in the House of Commons a
few politicians, nurtured in the economic theories of
Joseph Hume, rejoiced with exceeding gladness at
the prospective reduction in the cost of the Army
and Navy, and the hoped for reduction in taxation
as a result. So widespread was this feeling that one
may reasonably suppose that Creasy had in view the
possibility that he was saying the last word on a
subject which was going to be banished from the
purview of civilized society. Such an idea is sup-
ported by the fact that in his preface he says
apologetically, “For a writer of the present day to
choose battles for his favorite topic merely because
they were battles, etc., would argue strange weak-
ness or depravity of mind.”
But, alas for the instability of public opinion, the
evanescence of spiritual enthusiasm, and the ignor-
ing of commonplace human nature. Within two
years of the closing of that Exhibition, the flower of
the British Army was being slowly done to death
in the icy rigors of a Crimean winter. Ignorance,
neglect, muddle, and incapacity marked every stage
of the last war which England waged with a
European power. The British death roll in that
resultless conflict, spread over a period of two
years, was under 25,000 men. Of course there
were episodes of heroism, such as Tennyson cele-
brated in the Charge of the Light Brigade. But the
damning fact remains that barely one-fifth of these
men fell in battle, and nearly 20,000 perished of
cholera, dysentery, and insufficient food, clothing
and shelter. The initial feebleness, and the ultimate


failure of all commissariat arrangements was so
notorious and so disgraceful, that a storm of indig-
nation swept over England, and, as usual, was
visited alike on the just and the unjust. It came too
late to mend matters then, but the memory of its
horrors brings into high relief the superb organisa-
tion of the medical, surgical, and nursing staffs of
to-day.
This preliminary reference to the mortality re-
sults of the last European war in which Britain
was engaged leads to some consideration of the
stupendous character of the conflict which is now
devastating the greater part of Europe and large
sections of Asia and Africa. Even after two years
of terrible carnage, involving the deaths or serious
mutilation of quite five millions of our fellow-crea-
tures, we have to confess that we are unable to
mentally grasp the infinitely awful character of the
visitation.
Remote as we are from the scene of strife, and
safe as our homes appear to be from the ravages
of the foe, our hearts throb with tense anxiety as
we scan, day by day, the cabled news of progress
or disaster. At the beginning of last year it was a
matter of aroused interest in the strategy and the
bravery of contending armies, of which we had little
personal knowledge. To-day those cables strike a
keen individual note of weal or woe into a thousand
Australian homes.
The vastness of the issues benumb our mental
capacity. Figures have that hazy vagueness, such
as we feel when trying to realise the astronomer’s


story of the infinite distances of the stellar space.
For we have no standard of comparison. All pre-
vious wars are dwarfed to the aspect of tribal dis-
putes. Even our sense of the horror of it is blunted
by its unrealisable magnitude. We speak of millions
with an easy fluency, in conditions wherein formerly
such dread tidings of thousands would have appalled
the stoutest heart.
Twenty millions of our fellow-men in the fighting
line, in hospitals, in galling captivity, and millions
more clinging in bereavement and anguish about
ruined villages and devastated homes. Think of it.
More than four times the population of Australia
living in deadly peril by day and night, and
thousands of them passing by day and night into
unmarked graves, or lifelong disablement.
I need hardly say that in the most active period
of the Napoleonic wars there was never anything
approaching the number of men under arms at one
time that there is to-day. Taking Waterloo as the
last type of the old conditions under which England
waged war, the mixed troops under Wellington were,
like the French, armed with flint-lock muskets,
which had to be reloaded after each discharge, and
were seldom effective at more than 200 yards. The
artillery was on a par with the muzzle-loading
muskets, cumbrous, slow, and of limited effect be-
yond a range of some 800 yards. After every dis-
charge the gun had to be sponged and allowed to
cool before reloading. The cavalry then mattered
much. It was the brilliant arm of both combatants,
and represented the fighting spirit which makes the


heroism of war. The trench warfare of to-day has
given the skilful engineer the pride of place over
the most accomplished cavalry officer.
Before considering the results of the elaborately
perfected plans of present-day warfare, let us see
what led to the terrific expansion of its destructive-
ness. It is surely depressing to note the fact that
for the last 30 or 40 years a number of the most
highly-trained scientific minds have concentrated
their skill on devising more, and still more, deadly
weapons and materials for the wholesale destruction
of human life. The origin of this war is by no
means a matter of recent or sudden growth. It has
been incubating with predetermined and relentless
insistence for many years. There is no doubt that
the ball was set rolling by the £200,000,000 in-
demnity exacted by Germany in 1871. The military
authorities of that country would have scorned the
idea, afterward broached by Norman Angell, that
war could never under any circumstances be profit-
able, even to the victor. Up to the time of the
Franco-Prussian war, Prussia was one of a congerie
of loosely-federated States, poor, proud, and am-
bitious. The unexpectedly easy conquest of France,
and the agreeable inflow of what in those days was
a vast sum of actual money, opened up vistas of
supremacy that seemed world-wide. The King of
Prussia, raking in his subordinate kinglets, became
the Emperor of Germany. The indemnity did not
do the people much good. A large proportion of
it went straight into the Imperial War Chest at
Spandau. It is a significant, and rather encourag-
ing fact to-day to know that many thousands of


English sovereigns reposed in that chest for 40
years and only began to trickle back to the land
of their birth through the medium of the Dutch
bullion market in 1915. A large portion of the
indemnity was devoted by the Kaiser to perfecting
the organisation of the Army, increasing the Navy,
building strategic railways on the frontiers, and, by
dominating educational methods, instilling into the
minds of the people a firm belief that in the
hegemony of the nations Germany was to be
supreme.
It is not suggested that the French indemnity
went very far in carrying out these vast proposals.
But it was the initiation of a stupendous expendi-
ture which the growing population and wealth of the
country was enabled to supplement by huge taxa-
tion.
We see to-day the result of that 30 years of in-
tense devotion to the perfection of military power.
Britain, for long past complacently busying herself
in peaceful commercial pursuits, is suddenly plunged
into a war conducted upon principles such as she
had never known before, and where she has literally
had to gain her experience under fire.
War is no longer a brilliant panoply of the clash
of arms—of the inspiring bravery of spirit—of the
heroics of physical prowess. These attributes are
shown still, as indeed we have sad cause to re-
member. But the wholesale destruction that our
men are facing so gallantly has no concentred point.
It comes from the heavens above and the earth be-
neath and the waters under the earth. In hundreds


of miles of trenches, as well as on the precipitous
mountain side, the messengers of death fall unceas-
ingly. Thousands of tons of deadly explosives
hurtle through the air from points practically be-
yond the range of vision. Curtains of fire from guns
that pour forth a leaden hail for hours without
pause. Rolling billows of poisonous gases crawl
along the ground and sink into the trenches. The
scientific ingenuity of our enemies has appeared to
triumph over nature’s laws, and ghastly jets of
liquid fire, against which no human being could live,
and no accoutrement defend, screen the approaching
foe. Anyone reading the details of some of these
conflicts, which the übiquitous war correspondent
so luridly presents, may well exclaim with Mac-
beth —
“I have supp’d full with horrors—
Direness, familiar to my slaughterous thoughts
Cannot once start me.”
And it is to these new terrors, largely due to the un-
tiring efforts of scientific minds, that this awful
hecatomb of human beings so enormously exceeds
that of any war the world has ever known. It will
be long before we can know what toll of human life
the war has taken and will yet take. But as illus-
trating the magnitude as compared with what has
gone before, it is fairly certain that in only three
out of the many conflicts on the western front—
Mons, the Aisne, and Verdun—the total casualties
on both sides were probably over a million. It is
not my intention to deal with the question of the


ITS AFTEKMATII IN AUSTRALIA. 9
causes of this war. Some of my colleagues who
follow will certainly do that subject full justice.
But I should be ashamed to stand before this
audience if I did not say that after a most careful
study of its genesis, in white, green, yellow, and blue
books, in official documents, in private letters, and
public papers, I am convinced that Britain never
entered into a war with more righteous justification
or with a more entire absence of national aggran-
disement. Every effort was made up to the last
moment to avert the outbreak, even to the very verge
of entreaty, such as it is almost humiliating to look
back upon, now that we know how fixed was the
determination of the chief provocateur to seize what
he believed to be an exceptionally favorable oppor-
tunity. Hence I say that if the British Government
had allowed itself to be cajoled into standing aside,
by the infamous bribe offered by Germany, and had
submitted with shameless subservience to the threat
of brute force, no Englishman—nay, no English-
speaking man —could retain a shred of self-respect,
but would cower under the merited contumely which
his nation has earned. Mr. Asquith was expressing
the preponderating opinion of his countrymen when
he said in the House of Commons:—
“I do not believe any nation ever entered into
a great controversy—and this is one of the
greatest history will ever know—with a clearer
conscience and stronger conviction that it is
fighting, not for aggression, not for the main-
tenance of its own selfish interests, but that it
is fighting in defence of principles, the main-


tenance of which is vital to the civilization of the
world.
“It was only when we were confronted with
the choice between keeping and breaking
solemn obligations—between the discharge of a
binding trust, and of shameless subservience to
naked force—that we threw away the scabbard.
“The issue was one which no great and self-
respecting nation, certainly none bred and nur-
tured like ourselves, in this ancient home of
liberty, could, without undying shame, have de-
clined.” -'if worr .no an
So far, then, for the war. We are in it inescap-
ably, but we are there in the cause of righteous jus-
tice. From East and West and South, the world
over, the daughter dominions have rallied to the
flag. Here, perhaps, the response to the call has not
been so generous as we hoped. Relatively to popula-
tion the Dominion of New Zealand has far surpassed
us. But those who have gone have done grand work,
and I believe they are going to continue to do it till
an assured and honorable peace can be won.
And now I want to say something about the
conditions which are likely to prevail in Australia
after the war—if, by the grace of God, we are en-
abled to retain our hold of this great continent with
the free outlook to which we have been so long ac-
customed.
I limit myself to Australia because a consideration
of the condition of the European world during the
next few years is altogether too stupendous a task


to be lightly entered upon.. Indeed, it would be
simple impertinence on my part to speak oracularly
on a subject as to which the most experienced states-
men and diplomatists in the world are unable to
offer a definite opinion. One thing is certain, that
this war will not end war. It is pleasant for Lenten
preachers and other amiable non-combatants to
dwell lovingly on those halcyon days when swords
shall be beaten into ploughshares and spears into
pruning-hooks. But we are not appreciably nearer
to the realisation of that fantasy than when the old
Hebrew proclaimed it 3,000 years ago.
The human mind has never yet conceived a solu-
tion of the problem of unifying the races, and
Rendering them content to submit to the control of
any one system, civil, religious, or military.
We have only to ask what would happen in Aus-
tralia if our Government was to adopt the theory
of the brotherhood of man, and to offer a few
millions of our fellow-subjects under the British
Crown in India—admittedly law abiding and indus-
trious people—the privilege of earning their living
in our desolate Northern Territory, even under our
most exigeant labour legislation. Without doubt, a
racial hatred, even more intolerant than class hatred,
would plunge us into the horrors of the saddest form
of strife, Civil War. No, it is plain that the most
active proposals which are stirring the minds of men
to-day are not seriously directed towards the idea
of permanent and universal disarmament. Without
doubt such an aspiration, however laudable, would
be doomed to failure. It is surely a sign of grave


import that America, free from any prospect of in-
vasion, and deeply conscious of the horrors which
are devastating Europe, is cheerfully voting millions
to build Dreadnoughts, and to double the strength
of her army.
Limiting our vision to Australia, what do we see?
A widespread clamour on platform and in press that
we must be consulted as to the conditions on which
the victorious Allies would declare the terms of
peace. It is a natural outcome of a sense of our
growing importance, and a not ill-founded belief
that in years to come we may expect to take our
place in the comity of nations. But is this desire
inspired by an anxiety to ensure retributive justice
being meted out to the disturbers of the world's
peace? Do we want to make sure that the last
shilling of recompense is enacted for the ruined
cities of Belgium, for the wrecked homes of France,
and the homeless thousands of Poland. Not at all.
We have every reason to believe that the honor of
Great Britain, jointly with our Allies, will see to
that, as far as it is practicable. What we are seek-
ing has nothing to do with sentiment.
Apparently we want to be sure that tariff con-
ditions are secured that will benefit our future trade.
From the Prime Minister downwards a crusade,
more political than economic, is being proclaimed
upon lines which present almost insurmountable
difficulties, and which, if persisted in, may create
grievous friction among the Allies.
It has been promised that we shall be taken into
the confidence of the Allies, when the longed-for day


comes that the terms of peace may be considered.
Let us hope that no consideration of trade profits
will lead our representatives at that auspicious
gathering to seek any advantages that may even
appear to be detrimental to those other powers who
have sided with us in the conflict. We can afford to
be generous. We are not a small country, encircled
by enemies, industrial and otherwise, but a spacious
land, teeming with natural riches, largely unde-
veloped, and sufficiently self-contained to be, if we
so elect, almost indifferent to outside industrial com-
petition.
Let us in a spirit of optimism, which I admit is
not fully justified, assume that the war will be
brought to an issue by the end of this year. Based
on that hope, we may consider the conditions likely
to prevail in Australia during the next few years.
These may be best dealt with under the headings of
Finance, Population, and Production.
FINANCE.
The finances of the war as a whole are of such a
magnitude that the citing of figures fails to give any
real information. The most experienced bankers
and financiers in the world would have unhesitat-
ingly declared two years ago that the present ex-
pansion of the credit system was an absolute im-
possibility. Yet it has, so far, been successful. It
is the greatest wonder of the war, greater even than
the marvellous celerity with which Great Britain


has put over three millions of trained men in the
field. It would take too long to outline it intelli-
gently. We must be content to look at the Austra-
lian aspect of it. That is serious enough for us.
.i*. t
I may surely judge the feeling of the community
by the prompt and generous response it has given to
the many appeals for aid, not only to the starving
civilian victims of outrage, but also for the comfort
and satisfactory upkeep of the troops, in addition
to the normal maintenance which is properly the
duty of the Government. Looking at these Volun-
teered Millions, I feel confidence in saying that none
of Us grudge the necessary expenditure which is
forced upon us by the war. We are loud in denounc-
ing Government expenditure in other directions,
where it could be wisely deferred, and rightly so. A
few people keep alive a feeble remonstrance against
the extravagant ideas, and profuse expenditure of
the Defence Department. There is waste undeni-
able, possibly unavoidable waste, but they forget
that war is the culminating expression of waste, in
its most pronounced form, and that a frugality
laudable in times of peace, might spell disaster in
warfare.
Therefore we resolutely take up the burden of an
accumulating national debt, and range ourselves
with Canada, New Zealand, and South Africa, who
were all bearing the burden of war debts, while we
were free. Perhaps we should do it more cheer-
fully if it was not accompanied by simultaneous and
rather reckless increases in all the State debts in-
curred for other purposes. This is only a passing


protest, because I want to avoid politics, but it is
necessary to point out that increasing State taxation
necessarily weakens our ability to carry the grievous
load of debt which the war involves.
To avoid burdening your memory, I will only deal
with round figures. In June, 1914, prior to the out-
break of war, the public debt of the Australian
States was £318,000,000. On that date the Common-
wealth debt was practically unimportant, being only
41 millions for stock actually issued. The balance
shown was made up of obligations assumed in taking
over the Northern Territory, and the amounts owing
to the States for properties transferred. The total
taxation imposed by Commonwealth and States for
the year then ended was £23,000,000, equal to £4
14s. per head of the estimated population.
On the 31st December last the Public
Debt of the Commonwealth was .. £62,000,000
Since then War Loan Bonds have been
issued 22,000,000
To this must be added balance of autho-
rised loan not yet issued 3,000,000
Further loan proposed by Treasurer on
20th ulto 50,000,000
And the Bankers’ gratuitous Loan to be
paid in gold at the end of the War 10,000,000
Which gives an inspiring total of .. .. £147,000,000
I am not including in this amount the £9,000,000
borrowed by the Commonwealth from the Imperial


Government to finance the States, because I wish to
limit my remarks to war expenditure.
Now even supposing that the war comes to an
end this year, it will be childish to take it for granted
that these figures are final. With the reticence
which surrounds the Defence Department, it is im-
possible to make an accurate forecast.
It is a moderate estimate that before the close of
the next financial year, the Commonwealth debt
will be 150 millions, and it may be much more.
There is another large item which has not yet de-
veloped into actual expenditure, and the weight of
which cannot at present be even estimated. That is
the amount which will be required to provide pen-
sions for disabled soldiers, and the dependents of
those who have given their lives for us.
It does not follow that this expenditure will in-
crease our national debt. Indeed, it would be inde-
fensible to borrow money to pay pensions. But it
certainly will increase our taxation. Last year we
paid £2,750,000 out of taxation to people whose only
claim to it was that they had grown old in the
country and were in a condition of indigence. If we
were ready to submit to this levy, on purely benevo-
lent grounds, how much more readily should we be
prepared to provide the recompense for those sur-
vivors who have shed their blood, or ruined their
health for us, and for the dependents of those who
have paid the last and greatest tribute. But dealing
only with the figures we know, it follows that if the
Commonwealth is able to continue borrowing at 4£
per cent.—which is very doubtful, seeing that Great


Britain is paying over 5 per cent.—the amount to be
raised by taxation to meet the interest and sinking
fund will be nearly £7,000,000 a year in addition to
our anti-war burdens.
It is easy to say that it is only an extra 28s. or so
a year per head of the population, but the man with
a wife and three or four children cannot lay that
flattering unction to his soul. Indeed the system of
counting taxation per head is particularly fallacious,
because it is known that there are land owners, pro-
fessional, and business men who pay from £3,000 to
£5,000 a year in taxes, which would certainly bring
a very large number below the per capita rate.
According to a statement of the Treasurer on
introducing the Budget, the income tax falls on
about 280,000 people, and as the population of the
tax-paying age is about a million and a quarter, it
follows that nearly a million of our fellow citizens
contribute only by indirect taxation through the
Customs.
Therefore, unless some special war tax is levied
to embrace all adult males and independent or wage-
earning females, the bulk of this increase will fall
upon those enjoying an income of, say, over £2OO a
year. Probably the Labour journals will say that is
as it should be. lam not now going to argue the
point. But as showing that the whole force of the
Labour Party is not against such a step, it is worth
noting that the Australian Labour Federation of
Western Australia has recently passed the following
resolution: —


“That this Executive is of opinion that the
present system of obtaining money for various
war and other patriotic funds is economically
unsound; that all district councils be asked to
circularise their members, asking them to cease
from contributing after the end of May, and
that the Government be asked to introduce taxa-
tion measures so that all classes will be taxed
equitably.”
The impost will have to be met, and subject to
conditions to which I will presently refer, it should
be met without crushing us altogether. We have
deliberately, and not without prolonged discussion,
inside and outside of Parliament, decided to be a
military country. The conscription and training of
our youth from 14 to 25 was so popular that Liberals
and Labourites are even now squabbling as to which
of them is entitled to the credit of so bold a step.
As the outcome of our military aspirations it may
be noted that for the three years before the war our
Defence Department cost, on the average, £4,400,000
per annum. For the year ended in June, 1915, it
had sprung up to £19,400,0000. For this year the
Treasurer’s estimate is £49,800,000. What it will be
next year, if weighted with the interest on its bor-
rowings and a liberal interpretation of the country’s
duty in the matter of pensions, it is extremely diffi-
cult to anticipate.
But whatever it is, we have got to meet it. We
have got to imitate those men who have made the
supreme sacrifice —whose cheerful determination to
“see it through,” as they phrased it, evinced a spirit


compared with which our poor monetary sacrifices
are but a dim reflection. Our ability to make these
sacrifices will depend upon the public spirit shown.
The generous rivalry which has so far been a feature
in responding to appeals for help must be encour-
aged as far as practicable to inspire the whole com-
munity. The strain and sorrows of the last two
years have emphasised the fact that there are
greater things in the world than riches and self-in-
dulgence. It will materially assist the return to
national prosperity if we realise, not only the duty,
but the happiness of subordinating for a time, at
least, our personal ease to active work in a great and
just cause.
Industry, economy, patience, and common-sense
have brought Australia triumphantly out of three
financial crises within my recollection, which seemed
to threaten ruin. The same simple remedies still
hold good even in this, the severest of all crises.
POPULATION.
In regard to population we are differently situated
to any of the Old World powers involved. In Aus-
tralia, with unbounded space and unlimited demand
for labour to turn it to account, population is our
most urgent need. It is a primal factor in assuring
our national recovery from the effects of the war,
and unhappily it is our weakest spot. Since the
census of 1911 to the present day, our gain by ar-
rivals over departures has been under 100,000. We


know that of these departures we may hope to wel-
come some 200,000 back again next year, but even
if we count in all our gallant volunteers as still
potentially with us, the fact remains that in the five
years indicated the Dominion of Canada has ab-
sorbed quite four times as many immigrants as we
have attracted to Australia. And the latest advices
show that she is clamouring for more.
As a set-off against" the shorter and cheaper
passage to Canada, we can offer a much more genial
climate, a scale of wages for the artisan and the
labourer higher on the average than any country in
the world, and the most liberal legislation in the
interest of labour that can be found in any statute-
book. It cannot, however, be denied that the Aus-
tralian working man has never been friendly to any
Government proposals for assisted immigration.
The hostility of organised labour to it, always much
in evidence, has been growing steadily since Federa-
tion. Session after session Governors-General have
gravely repeated the formula that their advisers
have been “keenly sensible of the urgent necessity
for encouraging an influx of suitable immigrants,
and proposed to submit a bill for that purpose.”
But so far all the legislation accomplished has been
in the form of restriction of undesirables, and
neglect of the stalwarts the country needs.
There is not time to review the merits of the
various repatriation schemes which have been put
before the public by the Government, by Mr. Rogers,
by Mr. Fink, and others. They aim at providing
for the well being and useful maintenance of the


men who will come back to us after noble patriotic
service. We have a duty towards those men, and
we should see to it that the Government, as our re-
presentative, does provide employment for them
where they do not return to their former occupa-
tions, in reproductive public works, in manufactur-
ing industries, or on the land. We must take it for
granted that this will be done.
But even if every returned soldier was placed in
a position to earn his living, equal to that which he
gave up when volunteering for service, the position
from a national point of view would not be equal to
what it was before the war. There are awful gaps
in the virile force of the country. Many thousands
of our most vigorous manhood, who in normal times
would doubtless have reared families to strengthen
our hold upon this continent, are lost to us for ever.
It is not only that wives have lost husbands, and
mothers have lost sons, but that as a necessary con-
sequence, the birth rate in Australia, which occupied
a leading position in the world’s statistics, must in-
evitably decline. And, as was recently pointed out
by Professor Berry, the result of the loss of so much
virile power is the certain decline of physique in the
manhood of the community.
It may seem callous to talk in this materialistic
way on an issue that involves so much personal grief.
But while sincerely respecting that, we ought not to
allow any paltry considerations of wage competition,
or trades union exclusiveness to hinder our doing
all in our power to attract to our shores some of
those thousands for whom Sir Rider Haggard made


recently such a stirring appeal. If such a spirit
of exclusion is allowed to prevail, our recovery to
the ante helium prosperity of 1913 will be retarded
for a generation. Every industrious immigrant we
can secure—nay, every infant life which knowledge
or care can save, is an addition to fufcujfe producing
power, on which, and on which alone, the; greatness
so often prophesied for Australia can be safely built.
And every new-comer, suitably employed, is a con-
sumer, as well as a producer, and will help us to
carry the burden of our taxation.
PRODUCTION.
It is an axiomatic truth that, in peace or war, a
nation lives on wdiat it produces from day to day.
In Australia we import mhch that we want and can-
not produce, but it has to be paid for out of our own
local production. The more labour we can command
to ensure that production, the sooner shall we re-
sume the march of progress which the war so sud-
denly checked. In the year before the war, ending
in June, 1914, after providing for our own require-
ments, we exported produce to the value of about
75 millions, and imported goods to about an equal
amount. This might appear satisfactory, but for
the fact that we had also to pay interest on State
loans to the amount of £12,000,000, the bulk of which
was due in England, and the position has certainly
not improved since.
Here, then, is a gap of some £10,000,000 which
cannot now be met by loans, for the English money


market is unresponsive. We must pay the interest
on money we have borrowed or acknowledge our-
selves insolvent. Hence we must increase our pro-
duction immensely, and must simultaneously de-
crease our imports by despising luxury and checking
extravagance. We must for a few years return to a
more simple life than that we have been leading
during recent years of peace and prosperity. It is a
painful fact that the community as a whole has
not realised the extreme gravity, even the peril, of
the position. It has continued, under the influence
of abundant employment and high wages, to spend
freely in the pursuit of temporary pleasures and un-
necessary luxuries, unheeding the dark days which
must follow the cessation of so much work—work
that is necessitated by the struggle for our national
existence, but otherwise absolutely unproductive.
When that cessation comes—let us hope it will be
within this year—there will for a time be a great
disruption in the industrial world. But the fore-
most question of every right-minded man, whether
he works with his brain or his hands, will be “on
what direction can I best apply my labour towards
restoring the prosperity of my country,” which
freely translated, means the well-being of us all.
Australia, under these conditions, is much more
favourably situated than the Old World centres of
strife. Here is no devastated country to be re-
claimed, no ruined towns to be rebuilt. Instead, we
have within the zones of settlement a soil, only
scratched here and there, that with judicious in-
dustry would support a population of ten or twelve
millions of people; while another million or so


could win substantial incomes, and add to the world’s
wealth by the pioneering energy of the pastoralist,
further out.
Great Britain has to look for recuperation by the
productivity of her manufactories, and the im-
poverished condition of many of her former buyers
will necessarily for a time limit her output. Here
we are without stocks for our own requirements.
The woollen factories, of which there are too few,
have been confined to making material for soldiers
uniforms, and there are long arrears of normal work
to be brought up. Our engineering shops and har-
vester works have been devoting their energies to
munitions of war, and we are short of their invalu-
able aid in the works of peace. It is true that our
gold mines are failing, largely from want of more
vigorous prospecting, and the coal mining industry
has been seriously retarded, and has lost most of its
export trade by incessant petulant strikes. We have,
however, rescued from the grip of Germany the
enormous value which lies in the other metals which
have made Broken Hill world-famous, and we are
establishing on a firm foundation the important
manufacture of steel on our shores. In the expan-
sion of such industries, as soon as order is restored
out of our temporary disorganisation, there will be
room for far more skilled and unskilled labour than
we can at present command.
But the great staple products of Australia, those
upon which her prosperity has been built, represent
the feeding and the raw material for the clothing
of mankind. There can be no pretence of the evils


of over-production, in our wheat, our meat, our wool,
or even our sugar. The world is hungering for
them, and if we could but command the hearty co-
operation of labour with our efforts, we could more
than double our exports within a few years, with
the certainty of eager buyers.
It is true that the masses of our population do not
take kindly to agricultural life. I have had 40 years’
experience in dealing with the farming class, and
I know that it is a hard life. The wages it can pay
are poor, and the housing which the labourer secures
is sometimes indefensible. But it has its compensa-
tions. It is healthful, manly, and with diligence and
sobriety it more often leads to independence than
can ever be hoped for in factory life. Within my
knowledge, a large proportion of the farmers in this
State, who are now able to “sit under their own vine
and fig tree,” began as labourers, and very few of
them had any capital beyond what they saved out of
their wages.
A large increase in the number of farms, spread
over the State, a countryside dotted with modest
homesteads, would materially lessen one of the ob-
jections to rural life, its isolation and monotony.
Instead of that pleasant prospect, we have nearly
one-half of the population of Victoria gathered into
an area of ten miles round the Melbourne Post
Office. A large proportion of them represent motion
without progress, tumbling over one another in
desperate efforts to snatch a precarious living at the
expense of someone else. And when they fail they
demand threateningly, “What is the Government


going to do tor us?” Further, this congestion, with
its attendant squalor, contains the seeds of racial
decay, as is shown by the larger number of rejected
town recruits in comparison with those offering
from the country. I know it will be said that such
an expansion of industry as I have indicated is in-
compatible with our diminished resources of capital.
1 hat having lent the Government a hundred millions
for war purposes, we are unable at present to offer
financial aid to a process which we honestly believe
would be beneficial to the community. This is a
counsel of despair. The Wealth Census of last year
gave the private wealth of Australia at a thousand
millions sterling. I firmly believe that owing to
the depression of the drought it was under-stated.
In no other country which publishes statistics is the
wealth so equitably distributed. We have hardly
a dozen men in Australia who would be called
wealthy in England or America. On the other
hand, we have in the Savings Banks nearly a
hundred millions of what the late Chairman used
to call “the Poor’s money.” It is not so much capital
we want at present, but credit. Capital is the crys-
tallisation of labour which is productively employed.
It has had something of a set-back, yet it will begin
to grow again with the first harvest after the war.
But credit is the offspring of confidence. With the
confidence engendered by so substantial a backing
of wealth, there should be no difficulty in financing
any sound and properly organised scheme for largely
increased production. But it will involve thought-
ful work, and some self-denial on all of us. It must
be organised and carried out by capable business


men, not by Government officials—for so far all
bureaucratic administration has spelt failure. The
Governments of the States can, of course, assist by
placing Crown lands at the disposal of committees,
even gratuitously, and they can also be of great
service in bringing pressure to bear on private land-
holdings that are not being profitably utilised. The
work, to be effectively done, requires much gratuit-
ous service of able men, in associated effort, which,
judging by the past, we may readily count upon.
And it also demands earnest co-operation between
all classes, especially between employer and em-.
ployed, and the abolition of interference by political
associations, masquerading as Trades Unions, with
every man’s right to do the best for himself. We
must try and revive that healthy spirit of self-re-
liance which inspired the independent men who
made Australia in the fifties. Their creed was that
success in life was their own affair, not that of any
legislature, and that the road to it meant labour and
self-denial repeated over and over again in learning
and doing. And verily most of them had their re-
ward.
CONCLUSION.
And now let us hear the conclusion of the whole
matter.
If the awakening influences of this deplorable war
—and the sense of the peril we have passed through
—can give an impulse to national unity, can ob-
literate the inequitable and unbrotherly demand for
the predominance of class interests, can compel


labour and capital to realise their mutual interde-
pendence, can prove that the rights of labour are as
sacred as those of property—in short, can make us
all assist in reviving that glorious time—
“When none was for a party,
And all were for the State.”
Then, indeed, we shall see the beginning of a form
of co-operation, capable, if honestly worked, of re-
volutionising the whole fabric not only of our trade
and commerce, but our social civilization. It is an
established fact in England that the war has brought
employer and employed in many instances closer
together than they ever were before. Master and
man have fought side by side in the trenches with
one undivided aim. Classes hitherto widely
sundered by competitive methods and apparently
conflicting interests, have been thrown together in
the great turmoil, and have learned to understand
one another’s opinions and prejudices.
It was lately pointed out by a writer in “The
Round Table” that—
We must revise our conception, both of liberty
and of the State, and must restore responsibility
and service to their proper places in the national
life. We must recognise that responsible and
orderly obedience to laws of our own choosing,
and to a Government elected for its high sense
of public responsibility rather than for its pro-
mises, is the primary condition of internal
harmony and progress.
Do we realise the imminent danger of failure to
reach such a high standard of duty ? Dare we ignore


ITS AFTERMATH IN AUSTRALIA. 29
its clamant demands, lest a worse thing befall us?
Is it not true that a large section of the community
do deny obedience to the laws of their own choosing?
Some of the most important of the Labour organisa-
tions of Australia openly flout the decisions of the
Courts and tribunals ivhich have been established
for their special benefit by the Governments which
they have put in office and which they control.
Are there not, within the last few weeks, thou-
sands of workers walking the streets in idleness
utterly indifferent to the stigma which rests upon
those who foment industrial strife, when we are all
struggling to bear up under heavy burdens? Men
who are capable of work, but are not ashamed to
live on the charitable doles wrung out of the wages
of their fellow-workers in the form of strike pay.
Can they be oblivious to the degradation of their
conduct in throwing every household into loss and
discomfort by their greed for more money when
they compare it with the generous spirit which ani-
mated 200,000 of their fellow-men to freely volun-
teer for the defence of our liberties.
What is the baneful influence under which they
have fallen ? There are half a dozen so-called Labour
papers in Australia which, week after week, pour
out the most bitter tirades against capital in the
abstract, and with greater fury against the capi-
talist. To quote from one of them—
“If the workers -were organised as they should
be, they could control society, trample the Capi-
talist class beneath their feet, and treat the poli-
tician as he treats them.”


Again—
“When this war is ended the workers will
link up for the overthrow of Capitalists,
Kaisers, Kings, and autocratic or oligarchic
rulers everywhere.”
Another declares it will continue to wage relentless
war on clericalism and capitalism.
Inane and mischievous as these proclamations are,
selected at random from scores of others during the
past week, there is another aspect that is equally de-
plorable. It is amazing how the capable artizans
in Australia, quite equal to those of any other
country, can allow themselves to be constantly
sneered at by this type of journalist as “Wage
Slaves,” as “cringing under the heel of the capi-
talist,” as being “unworthy of their manhood” unless
they join this or that conspiracy to overthrow the
whole machinery of industrial production. Surely
some must hotly resent such insulting references to
their manhood, but a large number take it meekly
and purchase the journals which are goading them
on to their destruction. Now, if this unwholesome
phase of our social condition is not killed by the war,
then indeed our sacrifices will have been in vain.
The war on the other side of the globe may be
brought to a happy close, but we, who have been
spared the desolation of a blood-stained land, will
have much of its horrors brought home to us by
internecine strife.
We are on the eve of a great transition. We
must meet it in a spirit of sympathetic forbearance,
of mutual good will, and a stern subordination of


all personal interest to our national well-being. If
such sentiments command universal support we shall
in two or three years have overcome our commercial,
industrial, and financial difficulties, and be entering
the road which will lead to a renewal of Peace, Pro-
gress, and Prosperity.
But if not, if a ruling majority of us are found
to follow the lead of the journals I have quoted
from, if men, even amongst our legislators, continue
threatening to make the life of their fellow-men,
from whose opinions they differ, “a hell upon earth,”
if the Strike Mania, recently described by a daily
paper as “a poisoned dagger thrust into the very
vitals of our national life,” is to prolong its cancer-
ous growth, and if force, revolutionary force, is to
be regarded as the only weapon to destroy capital,
then the outlook is indeed deplorable and hopeless.
Such a condition comprises within its orbit closed
factories, empty warehouses, untilled fields, ruined
homes, enforced idleness, and general poverty. The
£100,000,000 of the “Poor’s Money” will, in the ab-
sence of wages, be soon swallowed up in providing
the daily bread of the workers.
We may hope to retain the protection of the
British flag, but under such conditions of chaotic
helplessness the British emigrant, who will be much
in evidence after the war, will prefer Canada, or the
United States, or Argentina, who are all calling for
him, and Australia will be doomed to 30 years of
struggle and stagnation, if not of retrogression. We
are at the parting of the ways. Most of us, lam
sure, love the country of our birth or adoption, and


desire to see Australia fulfil the high destiny that
has been predicted for her. It rests with the people
to decide whether they prefer the orderly law-
abiding path of peace, or the devious road that will
certainly end in anarchic confusion, probably in
military and bureaucratic domination, and possibly
to the overwhelming disgrace of having to admit
that we are incapable of sustaining the privilege of
self-government which the mother country conferred
upon us eighty years ago.
May I, in wishing you good night and thanking
you for your patient hearing, say in the words of
the Apostle— |
“Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever
things are just, whatsoever things are of good
report, if there be any virtue and if there be
any praise, think of these things.”
Ingleson & Fullwood, Printers, Melbourne.


//• Sf
fJgUflDALoHH,
Klf\EET,
g’V^.
s£ a . ■
J S* ~* * ■'j/T '
>5c~ -
/f~
S&- ~
—
