

f(ETV\
/lv�c ' B>
THE
SIDEREAL AND SOLAR
SYSTEMS.
C. C. CLARKE, B. A.
MELBOURNE:
STILLWELL AND KNIGHT, PRINTERS, COLLINS STREET EAST.
The Right of Translation awl Reproduction is Renamed.




Important as is a knowledge of the true structure of the
Sidereal and Solar Systems, still more important are the
results with which that knowledge must be attended?
the removal for ever of all grounds of atheism and
infidelity.
Convinced of the correctness of his views, and that
these results must follow from them, the author has
endeavoured to compress those views in as small bounds,
and express them in as clear language as his slight
experience would enable him, for as he resides, and has
resided, in the bush for upwards of twenty years, he can
have no pretensions whatever to authorship.
Beaxjmeu, Ceanbouene,
Melbourne, February 1872.


.
-
.
?
\


SIDEKEAL AND SOLAR SYSTEMS.
Two questions of great importance have been decided
?one by Mr. Proctor, who has clearly shown that the
greater portion of the nebula} belongs to and forms an
integral part of the sidereal system ; the other by
Professor Kirkwood, who appears to have proved the
truth of the nebular hypothesis.
The ultimate conclusion deducible from the
nebular hypothesis is virtually the same as that of
Sir Wm. Herschel as to the genesis of stars, so that
the confirmation of the one is that of the other. Laplace
has shown that all stars once existed in a nebulous
state. Sir Wm. Herschel that the nebulae of the sidereal
system are in different gradations of a stage of a process
that will result in stars.
Hence, all the nebulae of the sidereal system are
solar systems in different gradations of a stage of that
process through which our solar system has passed;
for ? the passed and future of the sun are the passed and
future of every star in the firmament of heaven.?*
We see, then, in the nebulae the passed of our sun in
progressive development from the irresolvable nebulae to
nebulous clusters of stars, but it is evident that a stage
must here intervene between that and the present stage
of the solar system, inasmuch as small bodies cool down
sooner than large ones, but undergo similar changes, and
consequently the planets, before they cooled down to their
* Lockyer.


present state, shone with a brightness free from nebulosity
similar to that with which the sun now shines.
? All the planets were once white hot, and gave out
light as the sun does now.?*
? Geology furnishes conclusive evidence that formerly
the condition of the earth as to light and heat resembled
the present condition of the sun.? -j*
This stage we may term the solar stage of planets.
If we assume that the Milky Way is composed of
systems whose planets are in the solar stage, we shall find
that Mr. Proctor?s New Theory of the Universe, besides
proving old theories untenable, affords strong presumptive
evidence of the truth of this hypothesis, and that this
evidence will accumulate with the number and variety of
the descriptions of the phenomena of the Milky Way, a
few of which I beg leave to quote :
? Nearly in every direction the richest portions of the
Milky Way are resolved into discrete stars perfectly free
from nebulosity.?
? The very minute stars appear actually intermingled
with the larger stars that appear in the same field.?
?The smallest visible stars appear as such not by
reason of excessive distance, but of a real inferiority in
size and brightness.?
?We cannot but contemplate with amazement the
singular correspondence which may be traced between
the configuration of the Milky Way and the arrangement
of the brilliant fixed stars in its neighbourhood. There is
scarcely a part of the Milky Way in which there is not
some evidence, more or less marked, of an intimate asso-
ciation between the fixed stars and the clustering orbs
which constitute the Galaxy.?
? But, in the southern hemisphere, there is a much more
marked agreement between the vid laded and the lucid
stars. The numerous turnings and windings of the Milky
Way from Arcturus to Sirius should seem in every case to
be the result of attractive influences exerted by the lead-
* Lockyer. f Professor Challis.


ing stars in its neighbourhood, insomuch that there is not
a single star of the first four magnitudes on any of the
numerous lacuna which appear in this portion of the
Milky Way,?
? If we accept the evidence afforded by this peculiarity,
we must suppose the streams of stars composing the Milky
Way are very much nearer to us than they have been
assumed to be, and therefore that they are composed of
stars far inferior in brightness, and also much more closely
compacted than in the neighbourhood of the solar
system.?
? In several instances the Milky Way is observed to
commence quite suddenly, so that one-half of the teles-
copic field of view will be occupied with nebulous light
or with closely aggregated stars, while the other will be
perfectly black?the line of demarcation between the two
portions being well defined. In some instances there is
seen in the field of view a sharply defined projection from
the Milky Way?the apex of the projection being occupied
by a lucid star.?
We must conclude that the lucid stars of the Milky
Way, like other stars, have planets, and that those
luminous stars encircling them must be those planets in
the solar stage, as they occupy relatively to those lucid
stars positions analogous to those of the planets of the
solar system relatively to the sun, and that all the
peculiarities of the Milky Way?its turnings, windings,
and projections arise from the attraction of those lucid
stars.?
?The irregular nebulas are associated in the most
singular manner with the fixed stars in the same field of
view. In many of these nebulae there are streams of faint
nebulosity extending towards lucid stars, and acquir-
ing a sudden brightness around them. If the bright stars
t and l Orionis were wholly disconnected with the great
nebula in Orion, how enormous would be the antecedent
improbability that these stars should appear, as they do,
involved in strong nebulosity connected by streams of
taint nebulosity with the great nebula.?


? Similar phenomena are observed in the other irregular
nebuhe, and notably in that mysterious object which
surrounds rj Argus, the most remarkable nebula in the
heavens.?
? All the irregular nebulm fall on that very zone, which
is freest from ordinary nebulae, and the gaseous masses
revealed by the telescope show a marked tendency to
aggregate along the galactic zone.?
We see irresolvable nebulae pass by insensible gradations
to nebulae a little resolvable, thence to clusters more and
more easily resolvable, and therefore less and less nebulous,
and thus to the Milky Way composed of similar systems
perfectly free from nebulosity.
We must conclude then that the nebulae are in gradual
transition into the solar stage or Milky Way, their
members becoming larger and larger and less and less
nebulous till in the solar stage or Milky Way they are
perfectly free from nebulosity.
Hence the aggregation along the galactic zone of Orion,
V Argus, and the irregular nebulae, as they are farther
advanced towards the solar stage than ordinary nebulae
which are more remote.
?And as the nebulae of the sidereal system are solar
systems e and t Orionis, and the similar phenomena of i?
Argus and of the irregular nebulae must be respectively the
Jupiters and Saturns of those systems, being moreover still
connected with the principal nebula in each system by a
faint stream of nebulosity.
In fact, all the phenomena of the Milky Way point so
directly to and are so clearly explained and comprehended
on this hypothesis, and so impossible does it appear to
explain them in any other way, that we may confidently
conclude that the Milky Way is composed of systems
whose planets are in the solar stage intermediate in the
order of development, as in position between the nebulous
stage and the systems similar to the solar system, which
we may distinguish by the terra opaque-stage of planets.
In confirmation of the preceding conclusions as to the
nebulae and Milky Way, we may adduce the corroborative


evidence which they mutually bear to each other. They
are each a distinct stage of one process ?an integral part of
one system constituting with the opaque stage, the whole
visible heavens in three distinct zones, each occupied by
one stage to the exclusion of the other two ?a sidereal
system composed of solar systems in these three stages
of development.
"As we see in our forests at one time the same kind of
tree in all stages of growth, and receive from this co-
existence the impression of progressive development; so
in the great garden of the universe we seem to see stars
in different stages of progressive formation.'/
Hence, we see three stages of the passed of the sun?
the nebulous, the solar, and a large portion of the present
opaque stage ; and as the sidereal system forms a species
of disc - we see the solar and similar systems in the
opaque stage occupy the space between its centre and the
Milky Way, the Milky Way composed of systems in
the solar stage, and towards the boundaries of the system
the nebulous stage, wherein ? the nebuke pass by in-
sensible gradations from clusters less and less easily
resolvable to nebulae, properly so called, but still resolvable,
and so to irresolvable nebulae.? *
As an instance of a system in the solar stage, and there-
fore of a member of the Milky Way, we have the Globular
Cluster in Hercules, of which the Kev. J. W. Webb gives
the following description :
?The outliers are chiefly of the larger stars, and I could
not help suspecting that in this, as in m. 3 referred to, a
central fglobe of smaller stars may be viewed through an
external shell of larger and much more thinly-scattered
ones.?
?The supposition then made; that the greater stars may
be sprinkled through as well as around the smaller mass
is perhaps unnecessary, but the point requires closer
attention than I have yet given it, and probably superior
optical means.?
* Mr. Proctor.


It is obvious the large outliers correspond to our large
planets, and the central globe of smaller stars to our
smaller planets viewed through the larger and more thinly
scattered ones, and that the supposition that the greater
stars may be sprinkled through as well as around the
smaller mass correct.
In fact, the Globular Cluster in Hercules is a perfect
representation of the solar system in the solar stage viewed
externally. Hence, as the Globular Cluster is simul-
taneously in the solar stage it must have been simul-
taneously in the nebulous, and therefore the preceding
stage of the Milky Way was the nebulous.
Since then the Milky Way consists of similar systems,
its irregularity can only be apparent, and may result
from the distance at which, and the position in which,
we, at nearly the centre of the sidereal disc, view it; for
we must suppose the present arrangement of its members
to be similar to that in its previous position, of which
arrangement we may form an idea from the present opaque
stage of the sidereal system, the members of which still
retain the same relative positions which they held when
in the solar stage, constituting that previous Milky Way
of which a member the present solar system was the
exact counterpart of the Globular Cluster, a member of
the present Milky Way.
For it has been clearly shown that the previous state
of the planets of the solar system, and therefore of the
planets of the systems composing the opaque stage of the
sidereal system was white hot, and as it has just been
shown that the Milky Way consists of similar systems
with their planets white hot, it follows that the previous
state of the present opaque stage was the solar stage or
Milky Way ; and as the preceding stage of the Milky Way
was the nebulous, we thus have an instance of the nebulous
stage and Milky Way commencing in succession at the
centre and advancing to their present position followed by
the present opaque stage.
And as we see systems from irresolvable nebulae on the
boundaries of the sidereal system in progressive develop-


ment through the nebulous to the solar and opaque stages,
we may conclude that the present Milky Way will
advance in like manner, followed by the opaque stage, by
which advance it will occupy the boundaries of the
system, and thus the nebulous, solar, and opaque stages
of the sidereal system commence in succession at the
centre and gradually advance to the boundaries.
Hence, the present position of the Milky Way is
analogous to its position when comprising the members of
the present opaque stage, in which, since it has been
followed by the present opaque stage, we may conclude
that in its present position it will also be followed by the
opaque stage, and that the nebulae will in like manner
become a Milky Way and opaque.
How much too must systems like the Globular Cluster,
Orion, &c., with planets such as e and i Orionis respectively
of the second and third magnitudes with their moons and
their asteroids?all in the solar stage ?all visible, as there
is no extinction of light within the Galaxy, augment the
apparent irregularity of the Milky Way.
For we must conclude that all its members resemble th e
Globular Cluster, as all systems in the solar stage, th e
arrangement of whose planets can be clearly ascertained
have large planets.
The nebuke must become similarly constituted, as Orion,
77 Argus, the irregular nebulae, in or close upon the borders
of the Milky Way, and all nebulae so far advanced to the
solar stage as to afford a view of their planets, have large
planets.
Since all the members of the nebulous and solar stages
have large planets, we must conclude that all the members
of the opaque stage have large planets, and resemble in
this, as in every other respect, the solar system, which is a
member of that stage, and has large planets.
Hence, all the members of the sidereal system are
similarly constituted, have large planets, and similar
sources of light and heat, they must also have similar
means of maintaining those sources of light and heat, and,
therefore, those means must be adequate to the purpose.


It follows that every member of the sidereal system
consists of two divisions separated, as in the solar system,
by an asteroidal zone ?? An outer shell of large planets
surrounding an inner globe of smaller planets.?
Hence, the nebulous, solar, and opaque stages of the
sidereal system consist each of the corresponding stages of
its members, and, therefore, the corresponding stages are
identical. In the opaque stage, however, only the planets
Mercury, Yenus, Earth, Mars, and Sun form part of the
corresponding stage ; the other planets being still in the
solar stage, and so adjusted in size and position as to
become opaque in succession.
And as the indistinct appearance of Uranus leads to the
conclusion of there being between that planet and Saturn
a zone analogous to that of the asteroids between the first
and second division of the solar system, its second division
would thus be subdivided. Jupiter and Saturn correspond-
ing to the Milky Way, and Uranus and Neptune to the
nebulae ; the first division of the two systems thus being
identical, and the subdivisions of the second corresponding,
and this is confirmed by the fact that the same provision,
short of a sun, which will be provided at the proper time,
is made for illuminating Uranus and Neptune and Jupiter
and Saturn, as for illuminating at present Mercury,
Yenus, Earth, and Mars.
As the asteroidal zones are relatively to the planets
exterior to them exactly in the same position in which the
zodiacal zone is relatively to the inner planets, such
correspondence in position implies a correspondence in
purpose, and, therefore, in structure and material; so
that the purpose which the zodiacal zone serves the sun
in illuminating the inner planets, the asteroidal zones
may serve in future stages of development; and as the
zone between Saturn and Uranus appears larger than that
between Mars and Jupiter, so the latter appears larger
than the zodiacal zone.
It follows that the zodiacal zone, like the asteroidal,
consists of the materials of asteroids, which, from their
proximity to the sun, must be in a state of vapour, and


this is confirmed by the fact that their state of vapour
affords a more natural and consistent explanation of the
phenomena of the zodiacal light than the cometic hypo-
thesis, which appears untenable for one obvious reason,
that the zodiacal light gives no indication of the bright
nuclei of comets, and as Mr. Proctor?s clear explanation of the
phenomena of the zodiacal light on the cometic hypothesis
is equally applicable to the vaporous asteroids, I beg leave
to quote it:
? The remarkable phenomena presented by the zodiacal
light; its strongly fluctuating figure ; its varying position,
and the singular increase and diminution noticed in its
distinctness, are not accounted for by any of these theories.
But if we recognised in the zodiacal light merely the
effect of the above considered aggregation among the
cometic or meteoric systems which exist within the solar
domain, the variations I have mentioned become readily
explicable. A multitude of bodies travelling in orbits of
every degree of ellipticity and magnitude, but with a
marked aggregation in the neighbourhood of the sun, and
with a yet more marked aggregation in the neighbourhood
of the medial plane of the solar system, would, in the first
place, exhibit precisely such an appearance as the zodiacal
light, and, in the second place, the general illumination
resulting from the congregated comets would be liable to
continual variation. Comets would be continually arriv-
ing within and passing away from the region within
which their light would assist in forming the appearance
we are considering. At one time the press of arrivals
would temporarily increase the density of cometic
aggregation ; at another, the reverse would hold for a
while, and the zodiacal light would wax and wane accord-
ingly ; precisely as it is observed to do. So also its figure
and apparent position would be liable to changes corre-
sponding to those which are actually presented. Therefore,
without denying positively that the zodiacal light is caused
by that the existence of a multitude of minute bodies
travelling in orbits of small eccentricity around the sun, we
hold that the phenomena correspond far more closely with


those which would he presented if there is in the neigh-
bourhood of the sun a great increase in the density with
which cometic and meteoric systems are congregated
together in the neighbourhood of the medial plane of the
solar system.?
Hence the zodiacal zone differs from the asteroidal zones
only in its asteroids from proximity to the sun, being still
in a state of vapour, which from the similarity of the
zodiacal and coronal lights would appear to be the cause of
the latter also. In fact our sun is a nebulous star, the
nebulosity of the zodiacal zone being so faint as to be
visible only after sunset and during a total eclipse,
whereas with the addition of the asteroidal zones and
meteoric systems the nebulosity would be apparent?
similar to that of the remote nebulous stars now visible.
And as the members of the solar system were simul-
taneously in the solar stage, and as small bodies cool down
sooner than large ones, the large planets, from their great
Tucld]size, must like the sun who being the largest is still
be still in the solar stage, and, therefore, uninhabitable,
which the violent agitation observed in Jupiter, and the
approach of Saturn?s rings to that planet?conditions
inconsistent with habitability, confirm.
Thus in the vaporous asteroids of the zodiacal zone we
have bodies still in the nebulous stage in the sun and
large planets ; bodies still in the solar stage and in ? the
-central globe of smaller planets ? the opaque stage ?pre-
liminary arrangements for illuminating the large planets
in the gradual advance of the system from its present state
to its usual limits far beyond the orbit of Neptune.
It necessarily follows from the perfect correspondence
in the succession of the stages of the two systems, and
from the stages of the solar system forming a part of the
corresponding stages of the sidereal system that the large
planets must become habitable, and be supplied with light
-and heat between the present state' of the solar system
and its state as an irresolvable nebula.
As the preceding stages of the present opaque stage of
the solar system were the nebulous and solar, if we


Divisions.
Sidereal Order.
Transpositions of Order.
3. Nebulous
nsonsonso
o n s o n s o n
2. Solar
sonsonson
sons o n s o
place these horizontally, and the sidereal* order of those
stages perpendicularly with the opaque stage common to
both ; as their opaque stages are identical we can ascer-
tain the other two sidereal orders, which must have re-
spectively to these stages a correspondence similar to that
of the present sidereal order to the present opaque stage.
1. Opaque onsonso ns n s o n sons
And as Jupiter and Saturn correspond to the Milky
Way, and Uranus and Neptune to the nebulae, and the
solar system becomes an irresolvable nebula, a similar
arrangement of the stages will represent the transition of
the system in succession into the two nebulous stars, and
finally into the nebulous stage, the only difference being
that the nebulous stage or star into which the present
opaque stage will pass remains in that state augmented
in succession by the nebulous stages of Jupiter and Saturn
and those of Uranus and Neptune.
Order of corresponding stages of large planets :
Uranus and Neptune ns on 3rd. Asteroidal Zone.
Jupiter and Saturn so n n 2nd. Asteroidal Zone.
Opaque or present on n n Ist. Asteroidal or Zodiacal.
Thus we see the two next sidereal orders correspond
respectively to the solar and nebulous stages, as the
present order corresponds to the present opaque stage, and
though the order of the stages through which the solar
system has passed is identical with that of the sidereal
order, yet the other two corresponding sidereal orders
show each stage of tlm sidereal order to be a distinct
division through which development passes as the cycles
in endless succession show.
We see also that the present order of the stages of the
sidereal system, like the cycles in each of its divisions, is
maintained through every change in endless succession.
We see too that the opaque stage of each order in the
two systems becomes the nebulous stage of the succeeding


order, so that in the next two orders the nebulous stage
is next to the opaque, and it is obvious that only by this
position of the nebulous stage which can result only from
the present order, can the sun combine in succession with
the planets as nebulous stars.
We see, moreover, that in every transposition of the
present order these positions of the opaque and nebulous
stages would be reversed.
Hence, the present order of the stages has been selected,
and all these arrangements have been made for the purpose
of furnishing with light and heat the large planets of
systems in their gradual transition into the nebulous
stage.
Thus the positions of the nebulous stages or stars in the
next two orders relatively to the asteroidal zones, and
planets exterior to them, are identical with that of the sun
in the present order relatively to the zodiacal zone and
inner planets, and thus the positions of the nebulous stars
in the next two orders relatively asteroidal zones
and planets exterior to them, bear strong _ evidence of
their purposes and the purposes of the asteroidal zones as
the position of the sun in the present order relatively to
the zodiacal zone and inner planets, bears of his purpose
and of that of the zodiacal zone.
Hence is confirmed the conclusion that the materials of
the zodiacal are analogous to those of the asteroidal zones,
but from proximity to the sun still in a state of vapour.
It is obvious that this position of the nebulous stage
next to the opaque can answer no purpose in the sidereal
system whose stages are separate divisions and consist
each of the corresponding stages of its members, and,
therefore, this position of the nebulous stage can only be
prospective in the sidereal system of its results in its
members?solar systems. And this is confirmed by the
fact that the results of the present order in the sidereal
system do not materially differ from those of its transpo-
sitions, but in every transposition of the present order the
present positions of the opaque and nebulons stages would
be reversed.


Hence, the purpose of which the sidereal system is
prospective, and the purpose which its member the solar
system is adjusted to effect, are identical, and thus obtain
in the sidereal system that which obtains in every depart-
ment of nature that the structure of a system is the arche-
type to which its members in structure must conform.
As the stages of the sidereal system consist of tho
corresponding stages of its members, and as in the nebulous
and solar stages the solar system was simultaneously in
each, this simultaneousness would appear to be the rule,
and the opaque stage wherein the planets become opaque
in succession the exception, and we thus see the purpose
of this exception, without which all the other arrangements
would be ineffectual.
Thus in the present opaque stage the sun and central
globe of smaller planets form part of the corresponding
stage of the sidereal system; and the large planets
which form the exception so adjusted in size and position
as to correspond to the Milky Way and nebulae and
become opaque in succession.
It is assumed from the analysis of their light that the
large planets are habitable. But this does not follow, for,
as has been mentioned, the interior of Jupiter is observed
to be violently agitated, yet the analysis of his light gives
no indication.
We must come to the same conclusion as to the light of
Saturn, who resembles Jupiter in outer coating, and the
approach of whose rings towards the planet indicates a
condition inconsistent with habitability.
As the sun?s light and heat must fail without some source
whence to replenish and maintain them, and as none has
been discovered adequate thereto, and as the spots of the
sun arise from the same cause* as that of the variability of
stars of which we see so many gradations from that of our
sun to that of TCoronm, it follows that when the large planets
have become habitable the sun?s light and heat must ha ve so
diminished as to be inadequate to the supply of Jupiter
* Father Secchi.


and Saturn, and still more so to that of the remote
planets.
We appear, therefore, to be obliged to conclude that the
large planets, from their great size, may require a period
of time to become habitable equivalent to that required by
the sun and inner planets to become a nebulous star to
illuminatethem, or to accept the only alternative that the
large planets when habitable will have no source of light
and heat.
As the sidereal system is composed of solar systems in
the different stages of aprocess common to all, it follows that
their various appearances can only be phases which they
assume in different states of their cycles of development,
and as we see so many systems in a state similar to that
of the solar system, and know the members of the Milky
Way to be in a state similar to the preceding state of the
present opaque stage, we may reasonably conclude that
the next or succeeding state of the present opaque stage
may also have its analogue in the sidereal system.
Mr. Proctor, in speaking of the difficulties presented
by nebulous stars, says: ?If the central brightness be
really, what it appears to be, due to the presence of a
single star, how largely must the dimensions of this sun
exceed those of the other members of the system it belongs
to, and how different therefore must that system be
from our own Galaxy. ?
It is obvious that this nebulous star corresponds to the
appearance which we may reasonably suppose the nebulous
stages of the planets, combined with the sun, would
present, and therefore this nebulous star is a solar system
in one of those states into which the sun and planets will
develope.
? Nebulous stars thus surrounded are apparently like
all other stars, save in the fact of the presence of the
appendage.?*
A nebulous star, more than any other nebula, resembles
our sun, and its abnormal size may naturally result from
*? Locker.


combination with its planets in the same manner as in the
solar system, we know ? the planets must creep in age
by age towards the sun,? and as a nebulous star thus
formed in succession in the advance of the system to the
nebulous stage appears to be an adequate source of sup-
plying the remote planets with light and heat?when,
moreover, the order of the sidereal system is clearly pro-
spective of, and that of the solar system so adjusted as to
accomplish this result, these and the preceding facts
amount to proof positive of these being the means of illu-
minating the large planets, and therefore of the correct-
ness of the previous conclusions in the various steps
leading to this result.
A nebulous star then is the first phase of a nebula ;
therefore, all other phases of irresolvable nebulae must be
intermediate between a nebulous star and resolvable
nebulae; and as the preceding stage of the nebulae was
the opaque or habitable, it follows that those members of
the nebulae still opaque must like nebulous stars be more
remote than ordinary nebulae, and would not appear to be
numerous, as variability indicative of transition into
nebulous stars prevails so much towards the centre of the
sidereal disc, where nebulous stars must next appear.
The present opaque stage being the last of the cycle
must comprise the remaining portion of the present state
of the sun, which, as indicated by his spots, must be of
shorter duration than the preceding ; and his two succeed-
ing states as nebulous stars, when the system must revert
to the nebulous state, the commencement of a new cycle.
As the spots of the sun arise from the same cause as
that of the variability of stars ;* of lost, new, and
temporary stars, and of. the phenomenon of T Coronse;
it follows that all these phenomena are the same in kind,
and therefore gradations of one process of which the spots
in the sun must be the commencement, and the phenomenon
of T Coronse the farthest advance yet observed of that
process.
* Father Secchi.


Hence, as ?the planets must creep in age by age to-
wards the sun,? we see in these variable stars the com-
mencement of that process by which those stars, with their
inner planets, will become nebulous stars to illuminate
their Jupiters and Saturns.
But these are phenomena attending the transition of
the opaque stage into nebulous stars which can only take
place among those remote members of the nebuhe still
opaque and towards the centre of the sidereal disc, now
occupied by the opaque stage, where, as we see no
nebulous stars, these phenomena can only indicate the com-
mencement of that transition.
But the transition of the nebulous into the solar stages
attended by somewhat similar phenomena, must occur
?in or close upon the borders of the Milky Way, and only
within the following semi-circle, the preceding semi-
circle having offered no example of the kind.?*
Hence, the transition of the solar into the opaque stage
must occur on the inner borders of the Milky Way, ? on
the confines of that starless interval which separates us
from the Milky Way,? and is not so perceptible what the
transition of a luminous into an opaque body would lead
us to expect.
Sir Wm. Thomson says: ? Planet after planet must
creep in age by age towards the sun. When each comes
within a few hundred thousand miles of his surface if
he is still incandescent, it must be melted and driven into
vapour by radiant heat; nor if he has crusted over and
become cool and dark externally can the doomed planet
escape its fiery end. But before this consummation can be
attained in the matter of our solar system, there must
be tremendous throes and convulsions, destroying every
now existing form. ?
? There is nothing chimerical, nothing unphilosophi-
cal in the belief or expectation of this ultimate
phenomenon. It is the settled opinion of cautious
philosophers. ?*f*
Sir J. Herschel.
t Mr. Pritchard.


All the phenomena of lost, new, and temporary stars
point to this conclusion.
? The remarkable outburst of light in T Coronse,? Mr.
Pritchard says, ? may have arisen from the falling into it
first of a world like our own, and subsequently of its satellite.
Such an hypothesis is somewhat consistent with the greater
and the lesser outburst that succeeded the former.?
Exception may be taken to this on the grounds of the
variability being only for a few days, whereas a planet
like our earth would, it is calculated, cause a variability of
years. But it must be remembered that when a planet
comes within a few hundred thousand miles of a sun?s
surface, it must, like the asteroids of the zodiacal zone, be
driven into vapour by radiant heat, at which time the first
outburst of hydrogen light may occur, and the subsequent
outburst on entering his atmosphere ; for as transition of
the opaque stage into nebulous stars is only commencing
only small bodies near the sun, not any planet so remote
as tohave a satellite can as yet ? creep in.?
Hence, the phenomenon of T Coronse appears to be the
first instance as yet ascertained of a planet ? creeping in
towards a sun ;? ?of that combination of a planet with a
sun by which our sun must become a nebulous star,
gradually increasing and advancing from its present state
to its usual limits far beyond the orbit of Neptune, thus
maintaining its perfect correspondence with the sidereal
system, whose nebulous stage follows the opaque, gradu-
ally advancing to its usual limits?the boundaries of the
system.
Thus cycle succeeds cycle without apparent end; as
cycle preceded cycle without apparent beginning ; and it
is remarkable how perfect the correspondence is between
all the cycles from that of the Moon to that of the sidereal
system.
As the present stage of the sun corresponds to full moon,
the nebulous and solar stages through which he has
waxed correspond to the first quarters, and remembering
that the sun and large planets are still in the solar stage,
the two nebulous stars through which he must wane to


the last quarters, and his subsequent state as an irresolv-
able nebula becoming a little resolvable, the commence-
ment of his new cycle to the moon in conjunction becoming
a slender crescent ?the commencement of her new cycle,
and these waning quarters of the sun must as inevitably
follow from the structure of the solar system, as the wan-
ing quarters of the moon, as the waxing and waning
quarters of the earth, between whose cycles and quarters
and those of the sun, there is an equally perfect
correspondence.
And the same correspondence which subsists between
the cycles and quarters of the moon and those of the earth
obtains between these and the cycles and quarters of the
solar system; between the cycles and quarters of solar
systems and those of the divisions of the sidereal system,
and between the cycles and quarters of these divisions
which constitute the sidereal system.
Thus the opaque stage of the sidereal system ?like its
member, the solar system ?corresponds to full moon, and
having waxed through nebulous and solar stages must
wane through two nebulous stars; and the same corre-
spondence obtains between the cycles and quarters of their
members and those of the nebulae and Milky Way re-
spectively ; the nebulae corresponding to the first, and the
Milky Way to the second, of the waxing quarters, and
each division becoming opaque in succession, must wane
in like manner.
But these stages, as constituting the sidereal order,
stand to each other in relations analogous to those in
which the corresponding stages of the members of the
system stand to each other. Thus in the solar system the
opaque stage comprising the central globe of smaller
planets and the sun forms part of, and is identical with
the opaque stage of the sidereal system. Jupiter and
Saturn correspond to the Milky Way; Uranus and
Neptune to the nebuke ; and these stages in both systems
become in succession opaque nebulous stars, and finally
irresolvable nebulae. Thus the Milky Way and nebulae
are respectively in the second and first of the waxing


quarters through which the opaque stage lias passed, but
constituting the sidereal order, stand to the opaque stage
as waning quarters; each division thus waxing to the full
or oqaque stage, and in the sidereal order waning in end-
less succession. Thus, when the Milky Way becomes
opaque, the nebulae will be Milky Way, and the present
opaque stage nebulous; and when the present nebulae
becomes opaque, the present opaque stage will be Milky
Way, and the present Milky Way nebulous, and so on.
There are in the Bible a few incidental descriptions of
different states of the system, which so perfectly accord
with, and clearly confirm, the preceding conclusions, that
I take leave to quote them.
Professor Blackie says, in reference to the passage : ? In
the begining God created the heavens and the earth.?
? Certain is it to me that in the Hebrew language there
is no word answering to our idea of to create out of
nothing. By creation Moses means only the creation of
order out of a confusion.?
Confusion implies order, for it is a state of the dis-
ordered materials of order. Hence, ? the creation of order
out of confusion ? is the creation of order, of a system, of
the present out of the confusion, the confused materials of
order, of a system which must have been previous, and
these confused materials must have been identical with
the confused materials out of which we know from other'
sources the solar system has passed, and to which it must
revert.
Hence we see in the confused asteroids a remnant of
the confused materials of that previous system, and in
the planets the order created out of them and their con-
fusion being as we know similar to that state into and
out of which we see so many similar systems pass must
have been the confusion of a previous system.
Thus, in the order of planets, and in the confusion of
the asteroids, we have occular demonstration that it could
not have been ? Inherent material forces, acting under
the government of a primoidial necessity ? that restored
the system to order, otherwise the asteroids could not be


in confusion, but that it must have been an intelligent
cause, otherwise the materials of all the planets must
have remained in a similar state of confusion.
Moreover, as the asteroidal zones in future stages of
development will become nebulous rings analogous to the
zodiacal ring their forming an exception to the order of
the planets when their order would be unnecessary is
evidence not only of their purpose being analogous to that
of the zodiacal zone, but of their purpose and exception
being the result of an intelligent cause?of mind, for it is
similar to, in fact identical with the mode in which
mind acts. Hence, order and its exception in the solar
system, and, therefore, order and disorder in the sidereal
system are alike the results of mind.
Sir Isaac Newton says, ? The growth of new systems
out of old ones without the mediation of divine power is
absurd.?
The next passages refer to the end of the present
system : ? The earth shall wax old as doth a garment.?
The heavens and earth shall pass away with a great noise.?
? The elements shall melt with fervent heat.?
These passages give a concise and accurate description
of, if I may so speak, the decline and fall of the solar
system. They convey virtually the same meaning as the
above quotation from Sir Wm. Thomson, for waxing old
is implied in ? creeping in age by age towards the sun,?
and ?great noise? in tremendous throes and convulsions.
In fact, Sir Wm. Thomson?s description is an accurate
explanation of the Bible description of the same event.
The next passage, ? The new heavens and new earth ?
refers to the system that will succeed the present.
New and old are each the reverse of the other, and
being each a state of the other they mutually imply each
the other and its effects.
Hence, ?New heavens and new earth,? &c., imply
renovation, order created out of their states when old of
disorder?confusion, and the meaning is identical with that
of ? the creation of order out of confusion,? and, therefore,
the events of which these passages are the descriptions


are similar events; ?the present system the order created
out of the confusion of the old or previous system, and
? the new heavens,? the order created out of the confusion
of the old or present system.
Now when we reflect how long it is since these state-
ments have been made, how incomprehensible they have
hitherto remained, and when by our advanced knowledge
we can interpret them how accurately they indicate the
successive changes through which we know the solar
system has passed and will pass we must conclude?the
conclusion is inevitable that these statements have been
made solely at the instance of Him who alone knows the
end from the beginning.
When, moreover, we reflect how equally incomprehensi-
ble the order and structure of the heavens have hitherto
remained to every individual of the human race, except
to the authors of the Bible, and how a knowledge of this
order and structure only lately acquired has led to the
true interpretation of their statements hitherto equally
incomprehensible, it follows that these statements
some from the Old Testament, others from the New
made so many ages ago, and at times separated by so
many ages confirm the truth of this lately-acquired know-
ledge, and this lately-acquired knowledge confirms the
truth and inspiration of the Bible.
Hence the solar system and the Bible mutually confirm
the truth of each other as the British Constitution and an
accurate account of it mutually confirm the truth of each
other ; and it follows that the authors of the Bible must
have had as accurate a knowledge of the constitution of
the solar system as the author of the British Constitution
must have had of that constitution.
When we reflect on the interdependence which subsists
between all the members of the solar system, that each
member is exactly in that position required by its size,
and within certain limits, exactly of that size required by
its position, both with respect to its own purposes and
those of every other member of the system? that of the
three asteroidal zones, one the zodiacal is now fulfilling
D


its purposes, and that the other two are exactly in corre-
sponding positions ready to fulfil similar purposes at the
proper time.
Thus the central globe of smaller planets is adjusted in
size and position to become habitable the sun in size and
position relatively to the first asteroidal or zodiacal zone
to remain in the solar stage to illuminate them?the large
planets so adjusted in size and position as to remain also
in the solar stage till the sun and central globe of smaller
planets having fulfilled their purposes become a nebulous
star with the second asteroidal zone to illuminate Jupiter
and Saturn then become habitable, and next with the
addition of these planets, as a second nebulous star with
the third asteroidal zone, to illuminate Uranus and
Neptune, then become habitable, and that these have been
the arrangements these will be the processes not only of
the solar system but of every member of the opaque
stage, of every member of the Milky Way, and that
all these adjustments, all these arrangements have been
made during the transition of each system out of the
nebulous stage, and it follows that these adjustments and
arrangements are now being made in every nebula of the
sidereal system.
When we reflect that the order of the stages of the
solar system is identical with that of the sidereal system,
and that this order of the stages in the sidereal system is
only prospective of this order and its results in its mem-
bers solar systems, ?that like the provision in the male,
only coming into use in another system?the female to
nourish her young, so this provision in the sidereal sys-
tem comes oidy into use in its members solar systems as
a sun to nourish the planets.
Thus we have an instance of that uniformity, which, in
the sidereal as in every other department of nature,
underlies so much diversity.
That the sidereal system, like the human system, should
have provisions only prospective of their results, in other
systems its members is an unfamiliar truth, but no doubt
only so through our ignorance.


Wlien we reflect that great as is the complexity of the
mechanism of the sidereal system, we can comprehend it ?
. its several parts and their purposes thus standing with
respect to the sidereal system and its author in positions
precisely analogous to those of our children with respect
to us and the mechanism of our hands. They can com-
prehend the purpose, for instance, of a telescope, its
various parts, &c. ; but its construction, the formation
of its parts, and of their materials, are to them as yet
wholly impossible. Hence mind in its present system is
as prospective of another system more suitable for the
discharge of its functions as the structure of the sidereal
system is prospective of its results in other systems ?as
the provision of the male only discharges its proper
functions in another system.
When we reflect that forty-nine moons are required to
make the earth, 800,000 earths the sun, and therefore
more than 14J millions of moons required to make the
sun ; that a cycle of the moon comprises a month, a cycle
of the earth a year, a cycle of the solar system may com-
prise a million of years, a cycle of each division of the
sidereal system millions of years, and a cycle of the
sidereal system millions of millions of years ; yet, between
their cycles and quarters there is as we have seen a per-
feet correspondence ; that as the order of the stages in
the sidereal system is prospective of its results in other
systems, so this order of correspondence from that of the
, moon to that of the sidereal system is equally prospective
of its results in similar sidereal systems standing to our
sidereal system, to each other, and to a vast system com-
prising them, in relations analogous to those in which
solar systems stand to our system, to each other, and to
the sidereal system which comprises them.
But this vastness transcends mind?s present powers, but
may be commensurate with its powers in that other system
of which in its present it is prospective.
When we contemplate the vast number of sidereal
and solar systems thus presented, and what this vast
number implies?the astounding adjustment of causes and


effects?of correlations of magnitudes and times of stages
of their transition, of their succession, of the coincidence
of stages of their transition, of their succession, that so
many so diverse results, separated by times and distances
so enormous, should yet be coincident at their proper
times and places, forming a consistent and a perfect
whole !
There is implied in these facts a power, a sovereignty,
beyond human conception !
From these accumulated facts, and they are but a small
portion, it necessarily follows?in fact they amount to
demonstration ?that the Author of the sidereal system is
the Author of the solar system, the Author of the human
system, the Author virtually of the Bible, the Sovereign
of the universes, the God and Father of us all.
Stillwell and knight, printers, collins street east, Melbourne.
