

(OPENED FEBRUARY, 1867 J
T. D. P. S.
ACTA 187 7'. IST O. 1.
N.B.—The Class Lists will be issued at an early date.
SYDNEY:
F. CUNNINGHAME & Co., GENERAL MACHINE PRINTERS,
1 86 PITT STREET.


ACTA, 1877. IsTO- 1.
CONTENTS.
I. Introductory.
11. List of Pupils.
111. Weights and Measures, No. i.
IV. Thermometers.
V. English Phonetics.


'9 3 v 79
T.D.P.S.
ACTA, N.S. 1877, No. 1.
INTRODUCTORY
Though it is necessary in every school to adopt and maintain
a certain definite series of manuals for the systematic education
of the young, yet there are many subjects which are both more
interesting and more instructive when taught from time to time
only, as suggested by the course of current events, or other
circumstances which may give them a temporary prominence.
For instance, the war now imminent between Russia and Turkey
indicates the History and Geography, the prevailing Religions,
and other chacteristics of these countries as subjects peculiarly
suitable for study at the present time. So the occurrence of an
eclipse will naturally lead to a brief consideration of some leading
facts in Astronomy; Anniversary Day to the early history of
Australia; and an alarm of small pox to some notice of plague,
and its preventives. Indeed, with the exception of Languages,
Mathematics and Drawing, there is scarcely any subject which
young boys can study better Systematically than thus Accidentally.
And it is seldom that there is no event more important than a
Cricket Match or Regatta to attract their attention and interest;
while any assistance offered at the right moment to their freshly
awakened curiosity is of infinitely greater effect than when it is
pressed upon the sluggish or forced intellect. It is, however,
impossible, or at least very difficult and expensive, to obtain
books for this purpose, and oral teaching in such matters is to a
considerable extent lost upon those who are too young to note
down or write out the heads of a lesson. In order to meet this
want, it is proposed to publish once a month, or more frequently
if desirable, abstracts or synopses of such occasional lessons,
together with notes of subjects in which the ordinary manuals
seem deficient. The same means will enable Examination
Papers to be conveniently set and preserved ; will place the
results of Examination before Parents and Pupils; and serve in
general as a channel of communication between the different
members of the school.
V3-3SS F 935*


It is obvious that a periodical whose objects are so various in
their scope will not admit of any very precise scheme or plan.
Each number will have its matter arranged in the method which
may seem most convenient for the occasion, and any serial
papers will be continued, suspended, or resumed according to
circumstances.
If this enterprise should answer all the hopes in which it is
undertaken, it may grow to cover a wider field, and be of'service
more general than to one establishment only. But if it fail to
meet with such acceptance as would lead to a more extensive
development, it will at any rate serve the particular purpose
of the Editor.
PUPILS N.S. 1876.
School
No.
132. Simpson, Edward R. P.
134. Bayly, Nicholas Paget
140. Norton, James Albert
155. Macarthur, Arthur H.
164. Tucker, Rupert Foster
175. Williams, Frederick S.
176. Tucker, Francis
177. Anderson, Arthur W. H.
182. Speer, Charles E.
183. Tucker, Walter
186. Hancock, Sydney H.
190. Suttor, Horace M.
1 95. Jones, Frank
197. Holle, Ernest T.
198. Barry, John F. W.
202. Alderson, William M.
203. Denne, Pembrook
207. Owen, Langer
210. Webster, Harry Carrick
215. Holdsworth, Ernest F.
216. Holdsworth, Alfred T.
217. Norton, William
218. Slade, Joseph
219. Myers, Mitchell
220. Gilchrist, William G W.
221. Gilchrist, John Watt
224. Dillon, Clement
225. Reilben, Albert
226. Cansdell, Henry M.
School
No.
227. Thorne, Henry
228. Holle, Hubei tG
231, Harrison, Frederick J. W.
233. Manning, Albert
234. Massie, Godfrey E.
235. Woolcott, Edward P.
236. Thorne, Sydney H.
237. Holden, Edwin A.
238. McQuade, Arthur F. H.
239. Hardie, John
240. Chauvel, Henry G.
241. D.Hay, Richard T.
242. Hassall, Rowland G.
244. Mortis, Augustus G. H.
245. Grasset, Louis
246. Curtis, Harry
247. Marks, Herbert
248. Marks, Percy
249. Dowe, Sydney H.
250. Brownlow, Gilbert R.
25r. Kidman, Charles
252. Lee, John
253. Thompson, John
254. Ranken, Thomas
255. Ranken, Robert
25b. Bremer, Ernest
257. Spencer, Horace A.
258. Lamb, Percy A.
259. Stewart, Sydney


WEIGHTS and MEASURES.
No. i.—MEASURES OF LENGTH
Questions and Answers.
What is the English Standard Unit of length ? Ans. —The
Yard , which is the distance at 62° Fahrenheit between two
marks on a certain bar which is kept in the office of the
Exchequer, at Westminister, several official copies thereof
being preserved in other places.
What is the French Standard Unit of length ? Ans. —The
Metre , which is, approximately, one ten-millionth part of
the distance from one of the earths poles to the equator,
is four hundred and forty-three thousand two hundred and
ninety-six times the eight hundred and sixty-four thousandth
part (s£-) of the distance, at the temperature of 32 0
Reaumur, between the ends of a certain bar called the
“ Toise of Peru.”
What is the ratio of the English Yard to the French Metre ?
Ans. —l : 1.0936231 ; or, 0.9143918 Metre = 1 yard.
How many Inches then are there in a Metre ? Ans.—
39-37°43-
Questions and Problems.
Find the Equivalents in Decimetres of the English Hand
Foot, Half-yard, Fathom, Pole, Chain.
What is the Equivalent of the Kilometre in English Yards,
Feel, and Inches, respectively ?
Find in Millimetres the equivalents of the English Inch,
Half-inch, Sixteenth, Three-quarters, and Line.
Find the difference, in Millimetres and Lines , respectively,
between one Link and two Decimetres.
The Nautical or Geographical Mile, or Knot, is the mean
length of one minute of longitude at the Equator, which is
nearly 6086 feet. What then is the ratio of the Statute Mile
to the Knot ?
10. Express in Metres the Statute Mile, the Knot, and the Mean
Length of a Degree at the Equator.
N.B.—ln these and similar papers it is assumed that the
pupil is Jullv acquainted with the ordinary English Tables , and with
the French Nomenclature in both Weights and Measures.


THERMOMETERS.
Water Boils , under a pressure of one atmosphere, at a tempera-
ture noted at 212° by Fahrenheit, Bo° by Reaumur, and ioo° on
the French or Centigrade Thermometer.
The Freezing Point of Water, or the Melting Point of Jce is in
like manner noted at 32 0 Fahr. and at o° or Zero, Reaum. and
Cent. The same range of temperature is therefore divided into
180 degrees Fahr., 80 degrees Reaum., and 100 degrees Cent.
Hence we obtain the following equations :
1. Temp. Fahr.=-Temp Cent. + Temp. Reaum. + 32 0
2. Temp. Cent.=j| (Temp. Fahr, - 32°)=- Temp. Reaum.
3. Temp. Reaum. ~ (Temp. Fahr. - 32°)—-Temp. Cent.
PROBLEM.
Represent 62° Fahr. and 32 0 Reaum, (111, 1 and 2) in all three
scales.
CATECHISM of ENGLISH GRAMMAR
Part I.—QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS.
Chapter I.— Grammar in General
1. What is Grammar? Ans. —The science of language. The
word is derived from the Greek root graph=write.
2. And what is Language ? Ans. —Language is the means by
which we tell other people our own thoughts, or learn what
theirs are. And it is either spoken or written.
3. What are the Instruments of Speech ? Ans. —Its instruments
are on the one part the organs of the mouth, and those of
the ear on the other. The mouth of the speaker forms and
delivers a series of shocks and vibrations of the air, which
pass on to the ear of the listener, and are intelligible to him.
These are called articulate sounds.
4. But how does the hearer know what these sounds mean ?
Ans. —He has learnt them by practice; and also feels them
to be the same sounds by which he would express certain
thoughts of his own. He is thus able to catch what the
speaker means.


5. What are the Instruments in Written Language ? Ans. —The
hand of man to form, and the eye to read the characters
which represent speech. The writer may be jmderstood by
the reader at any distance either of time or space; whereas
the hearer must be in the immediate neighbourhood of the
speaker.
6. What is Print ? Ans. —Printing is only a method of manifold
writing, by which we are enabled to multiply copies to any
desired number, with rapidity and at small expense.
Chapter ll.— English Grammar.
i. What is the chief office of English Grammar? Ans. —To
settle and teach the most natural, sufficient and appropriate
expression of our own thoughts, and to obtain as perfect an
understanding as possible of the thoughts of others, in
Speaking, Reading, and Writing English.
2. What are the principal branches of this Study? Ans.—
First: —the true Pronunciation and Orthography of the
language. Secondly :—The Accidence or the rules of correct
Inflexion and Formation of words. Third : —Their proper
combination in sentences, which is called Syntax. Fourth :
The determination of the exact meaning, origin, and history
of words. This is Etymology. To these we may add a
Fifth, which considers language with respect to the measure
and Rhythm of its movement, and may be called Prosody.
Chapter lll.— The Alphabet, No. i, Vowels.
i. Of what is an Articulate Sound composed? Ans —Of a
Vowel, either alone, or in union with one or more Consonants.
The vowel is the Voice or Body, and the Consonant the
Form or Limit of the articulation.
2. What are the Vowel Sounds in English ? Ans. —It is not
possible to represent them by fixed letters in our ordinary
Alphabet, which cannot record the existing language satis-
factorily. Every one knows how different spelling and
pronunciation are in English.
3. Can you not describe them or point them out in any other
way ? Ans. —Yes, we can take words whose sounds are
well known and agreed upon, and by these we can number
and illustrate the vowel sounds.
4. How many are there ? Ans. —We must commence by
dividing them into two classes, according as they are pro-
nounced with the mouth wide or pursed .


What are the Vowels of the First Class, sounded with the
mouth wide ? Ans. —Three, A, E, and I, as in the following
examples.
A, long in Ah!, Ha!, Bard, Clerk, Sergeant, Heart;
short and flat in Hat, Sang, Rap, &C.
E, long in Air, Mare, There, Lair, Heir;
short in Then, Said, Head, Waistcoat,
and modified in May, Maid, Great, Haste, Gaol,
Apron.
I, long in Seed, Mead, Receive, Believe, Quay,
Fever, Invalid;
short in Thin, Lynx, Guilt, Sieve, England,
Breeches.
What are the Vowels of the pursed mouth ? Ans. —Three
also, Au, O, U, as follows:
Au, long in Awe, Lord, Fall, Bawl, Naught,
Brought, Broad, Horde ;
short in Hot, Trough, Knowledge, Malt, Hough.
O, long in Hole, Coal, Bowl, Roll, Roe, Owe, Sew;
short m Opinion, Tobacco, Profound, Rotund.
U, long in Fool, Moon, Rue, Blew, Fruit, Through,
Shoe;
short in Could, Hood, Full, Soot.
Is there any other Vowel in English ? Ans. —Yes. We
have the Neutral Vowel , which occurs in Bird, Word,
Blood, Dove, Hunt, Heard, Her, Ton, Rough, Cut,
Rust, &c. The length and sound of this vowel is variable,
and its position in the scale ambiguous ; but it is exceedingly
common, and is very apt to take the place of all unaccented
vowels in the mouth of people who are indolent or negligent
in pronunciation.
What then becomes of the Grammar Vowels a, C, i, O, U, y ?
Ans. —These letters do not represent definite sounds, as is
shown in the examples given above, but are used in various
ways for various vowels and diphthongs.
How many Diphthongs are there in English ? Ans. —It is
difficult to answer precisely, on account of the shifting
character of the English vowels, especially when open, i.e.,
not followed by a consonant. Thus E, the second vowel
of the first class, is apt to end in I, the third ; as may be
observed in the common pronunciation of Eh ?; and O, the
second of the second class, in U, the third ; as in O ! But
the principal diphthongs are combinations of the first of
each class with the third. For example—
A followed by I is heard in High, Lie, Fry, Buy, Guile,
Height, Eye.


A followed by U in Plough, How, Sound.
An followed by I in Buoy, Toy, Noise.
Chapter IV.— The Alphabet, No. 2, Consonants.
1. How many Consonants are there in English? Ans. —In
order to answer this question properly we must arrange them
in classes according to the organs by which they are
principally formed ; which are the Lips, Throat, Teeth,
Palate, Nostrils and Tongue.
2. What are the Lip-Consonants? Ans. —They are called
Labials , and are six in number, viz. t: —
1. B, as in Bob, Habit, Abbot.
2. P, as in Pop, Open, Upper.
3. V, as in Vain, Knave, Revive, Of.
4. F, as in Fan, Off, Rough, Philosophy.
5. W, as in Wife, Once.
6. M, as in Madam, Emmet.
3. What are the Throat-Consonants ? Ans. —The Gutturals
are five, as follows —
1. G, as in Gag, Gig, Guard, Waggon.
2. K, as in Kick, Can, Make, Ache.
3. H, as in Home, Hap-hazard, Adherent.
4. Y, as in You, Yet, Union.
5. NG, as in Sing, Singing.
Of these H and Y are not sounded at the end, nor NG at the
beginning of an articulation.
4. And what Consonants are formed by the teeth ? Ans. —The
true Dentals , also five in number, are —
1. D, as in Deed, Adding.
2. T, as in Tact, Utter.
3. DH, as in There, Wreathe, Either, Weather.
4. TH, as in Think, Wreath, Breath, Ether.
5. N, as in Nun, Annual.
5. What Consonants are principally formed by the Palate ?
Ans. —Two, which are therefore called Palatals , viz.—
1. J, as in Jane, George, Judge.
2. CH, as in Church, Chain, Teach.
6. With what Consonants are the Nostrils concerned ? Ans.—
The Nasals, which have been already enumerated under the
Labials, Gutturals and Dentals. They are M, NG and N,
and their relation to B, G and D is made plain enough if
one endeavours to pronounce them with the nostrils
closed.


What office has the Tongue in forming the consonants ?
Ans. —lt is more or less concerned with all, but especially
with the Dentals, which are therefore sometimes called
Linguals.
Are there no other Consonants ? Ans. —Yes, we have four
Sibilants, as below.
1. Z, as in Zeal, Lazy, Amuse, Phrase, Busy.
2. S, as in Sauce, Cede, City.
3. ZH, as in Treasure, Leisure, Adhesion.
4. SH, as in Shine, Dish, Impression, Chaise.
You have not yet mentioned L and R : where should they be
placed ? Ans. —They may be called Trills, and placed with
the Dentals, to which they bear a close affinity,
1. L, as in Lull.
2. R, as in Roar.
Are there any other arrangements of the Consonants ?
Ans. —Several; and we must particularly notice their division
into Mutes, Aspirates, Liquids and Semi-vowels.
What are the Mutes ? Ans. — Medials, B,G,D; Tenues , P,K,T,
as pronounced in the examples already given.
What are the Aspirates ? Ans. —V,F; H ; DH, TH ; ZH,
SH. L,M,N,R are generally known as the Liquids ; V and
W as Semi-vowels or Coalescents.
How many letters then are required to form a sufficient
English Alphabet ? Ans. —Not less than seven (7) for the
Vowels, A,E,I; Au,O,U, and the Neutral, as explained
before ; and twenty-four (24) for the Consonants in like
manner, viz.—
Medials.
Tenues.
Aspirates.
Valgse.
Nasals.
Labials
B.
G,
D,
V,F,
H,
M,
NG,
Gutturals
K,
T,
Dentals
DH, TH,
L,R.
Palatals
J.
Z,
Sibilants
ZH, SH,
January


Notice.— The School-year will henceforth terminate with
the Autumn Quarter, in order that the Examinations may be con-
ducted under a temperature more favourable to mental exertion
and physical endurance than the heats of December allow. And
the Distribution of Prizes will take place in the beginning of the
School-year, at some convenient day in the month of April. It
is confidently believed that this arrangement, though involving
some inconvenience, and departing very widely from the usual
practice, will be found, on the whole, to possess very considerable
advantages in respect of the bodily health and intellectual vigour
of the pupils.


mao "
|HE gEW SCHOOL
DARLINGHURST ROAD, SYDNEY, JN.KW
Principal - W. J. STEPHENS M.A., Oxon,
FIRST Class Literis humanioribus, AND Third Disciplinis
Mathematicis et Physicis, 1852,
Late Fellow and Tutor of Queen’s College Oxford ;
and First Head Master of the Sydney Grammar School.
ASSISTANT
MASTERS
General
Mr. MILLS
Occasional
French -
Mr. BAMFORD
M. LEFEBVRE
Drawing
Dancing ■ -
Drill
- Mr. FOWLES
Mr. NEEDS
Mr. BAMFORD
Gymnastics
Mr. D’HARCOURT
ENTRAN(]E ONTE POUND
—-0~-
(Quarterly Fees—General Course.
Including Elementary Drawing and French.
I.—Day Scholars - - - - - £S 0 0
2. —Day Boarders - - - - - -9100
3. —Resident Pupils - - - - - 25 o
QUARTERLY THICKS FOR EXTRA TUITION
Special Instruction in any of the regular Subjects, or Dancing - 2 2
Drill - - ■ - - - - 1 1 0
Chemistry - - - - - - 33°
Gymnastics—lst quarter only, 2nd and 3rd, any subsequent
quarter, £1 : l : o.
N.B.—Each pupil is expected to present each morning (except under special
exemption, a written exercise, Geometrical Drawing, Map, or other Drawing.
AUTUMN TEEM, 1877-COMMENCES MONDAY JANUARY 29.
