

THE [PART 6.]
VICTORIA SONGSTER
CONTAINING VARIOUS
NEW & ORIGINAL COLONIAL SONGS
TOGETHER WITH A CHOICE SELECTION OF
THE MOST POPULAR SONGS OF THE DAY.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
SECOND EDITION.
MELBOURNE:
CHARLWOOD & SON, 7, BOURKE STREET, EAST.
1860.


THE
VICTORIA SONGSTER.
ADVERTISING.
A new Original Song, written and sung by Thatcher with great applaiuc.
Tune—“ Guy Fawkes.’*
The march of intellect just now
Is really quite surprising;
As a proof you’ll find that every one
Is bent on advertising;
In the papers we can puff away,
For very cheap they do it us;
"We have the Herald, Argus, Age,
As well as sheets gratuitous.
The new chum when he’s landed,
To the Argus quickly flies, sirs,
And in the column “missing friends”
Begins to advertise sirs:
For the phrase of “ should this meet the eye”
He has a wond’rous liking,
Of course, supposing if it does,
That the notice will be striking.
If your wife off with another man
Should chance to run away, sirs,
You rush to print and tell the world
No debts of hers you’ll pay, sirs ;


But some implore them to return—
Their grief they cannot smother;
If such chaps advertise at all,
It should be for another.
An hotel some fellow wants to sell—
He’s retiring from the trade, sirs;
And he tells the enterprising
That a fortune’s to be made, sirs;
But somehow he forgets to state,
When thus he begs us try it,
That it’s regularly cleaned him out.
And he’s lost a fortune by it.
The theatres, too, advertise-
Their overflowing houses,
To see a-ehap that’s called a star,
Curiosity it ’rouses:
To hear him rant for three long hours
In misery you sit, sirs,
With thirteen in the boxes,
And not fifty in the pit, sirs.
If you’re in trade, and find that you
Don’t take a blessed shilling,
Some customers you’ll soon get if
To advertise you’re willing:
Thank the public for the great support
That you have not received, sirs;
By those that read the advertisements
Ten to one you’ll be believed, sirs.
HOW LIGHTLY THE VESSEL.
Haw lightly the vessel glides over the wave,
But one true heart is sad—one visage is grave;
!And the gold miner brushes the tear drop aside,
As he ponders with fear on the fate of his bride.
148


Three years spent in anguish and care have passed o’er
Since he left, full of bright hope, his fatherland shore:
And ho murmurs, what fortune my love has befel,
Since she sobbed on this bosom, and sighed a farewell.
He has toiled with a spirit undaunted and bold,
And the mines of Australia have blessed him with gold;
By the sweat of his brow, and his weapon the spade,
The deserving gold digger a fortune has made.
To his old home he rushes, but ah! - what a change!
The place is much altered, the features are strange ;
In the bloom of his manhood, that gold miner brave,
Broken-hearted, weeps over his bride’s lonely grave.
GOING TO SHOUT.
Now Original Song, by Thatcher. Tone— “ Maypole."
I’m a green, new clffim just lately come
From England right out here,
And the expressions in Australia
To me seem devilish queer:
Whenever in the town
I may he walking out,
They say, “old flick, now b« a brick,
And come along and shout.”
The first time I was thus addressed
Says I “what do you mean?”
Each winked his eye, and looked so sly,
Because I was so green:
To a public house we went,
And I jolly soon found out,
For they did me brown for half-a-crown,
The price of that ’ere shout.
The moon shone bright the other night,
As I walked down Great Bourke Street,
And there a gal, named Sydney Sal,
I happened then to meet;
149


Says she “ how aro you, dear?
Does your mother know you’re out ?
I can see that you’re good-natured
So come along and shout.’ ’
With Sydney to the National
I straightway did repair.
And some other pals of the young girl
Were standing talking there;
Says she unto the lot,
“ What will you have ? speak out
So for a score of gals or moro
I had of course to shout.
Says she “ my dear, come home with me.
To talk here ’tisn’t meet,”
And so we went into a house
At the top of Stephen Street;
A man then knocked jjw) down,
And my pockets he turned out,
And threatened to dash out my brains
If I once dared to shout.
I laid there still, but felt quite ill—«
My head spun round and round,
And my consciousness seemed going,
As I lay upon the ground :
When I came to again,
In the street I’d been kicked out,
And ’twas plain to see she’d hooussed mo
When first I stood the shout.
My watch was gone, and tin I’d none ;
When I got home ’twas late ;
But being robbed was all my fault.
So take warning by my fate.
Of Sydney Sal beware
When you are walking out,
Or p’raps like me you’ll find 'twill bo
A most expensive shout.
150


WILLIE, WE HAVE MISSED YOU.
As sung by Miss Emma Stanley, at the Princess* Theatre.
*O, Willie, is it you, dear, safe, safe at home ?
They did not tell me true, dear, they said you would
not come;
I heard you at the gate, and it made my heart rejoice,
For I knew that welcome footstep, and that dear familiar
voice,
Making music on my ear in the lonely midnight gloom;
Oh, Willie, wc have missed you—welcome, welcome
home.
We’ve longed to see you nightly, but this night of all;
The fire was blazing brightly, and lights were in the
hall;
The little ones were up till ’twas ten o’clock and past;
Then their eyes began to twinkle, and they’ve gone to
sleep at last;
But they listened for your voice till they thought you’d
never come;
Oh, Willie, we have missed you—welcome, welcome
home.
The days were sad without you, the nights long and
drear,
My dreams have been about you— oh, welcome Willy
dear;
Last night I Wept and watched by the moonlight’s
cheerful ray,
Till I thought I heard your footstep, then I wiped my
tears away;
But my heart grew sad again when I found you had
not come;
Oh, Willie, we have missed you—welcome, welcome
home.
151


THE AFFECTING NARRATIVE OF CHINK-A-LI.
One Chink-a-li, a Chinaman,
A youth of high degree,
Has taken ship at Singapore,
To cross the briny sea;
His friends in Melbourne sent him home
So many glowing lines,
That, although but a minor, ho
Feels bound to see our mines.
To sweet Miss Tink-a-tink.he’s sworn
Before great Fo above,
That, by the holy chopsticks, ho
Would not betray her love:
He has promised to his good mama
And venerable sire.
That he’ll often write and fill a ream,
If that's all they inquire.
Thus in the circle of his friends
Things being made “all square ,”
With prospects fair he said farewe 11,
And went to pay his fare.
How, how he fared upon the sea,
I never heard him tell;
So, with no ground to work upon,
Why, I’m at sea as well.
But, when they anchored in the bay,
Our hero, I’ve been told,
Could hardly wait to pay his tax,
He hanhered so for gold:
And when, by chance, a sable broke.
He swore he had been sold
By some vile cabal which had schemed
To keep him from the gold.
At length in Melbourne safely housed,
He deems his troubles past;
Alas for his fatuity,
It was not doomed to last;
152


For, walking once in Collins-street,
A nymph well known in town,
Levelled at him her latter-eyes,
And fairly brought him down.
He gazed at her, then at the dog
She carried in her arms,
For to his heart or appetite
They mutually had charms:
“Oh, would,” poor Chink-a-li then cried,
“ That lovely pair was mine,
That I might make the one my bride,
And— on the other dine.”
The lovely vision passed away,
But Chink-a-li in vain
Strove both night and day to drive
Her image from his brain;
Then everything “celestial,”
Poor fellow, he forswore;
His puppy-eating he es chewed,
And opium chewed no more.
At length a fever seiz’d his brain,
And ravingly he cried,
“ Oh, stand aside, don’t hinder me,
For she shall be my bride: ”
A veil they spread before his face,
But ’twas of no avail ;
So they put leeches on his head.
And then they cut his tail.
But, oh! sad tale, ’twas all in vain,
That thus from vein and tail
They tried to draw out his complaint,
And make him strong and hale ;
For, after all their kindness, he
Still pined and fell away,
Until, through love, this Chinaman
Was turned to common clay.
153


I’M THE PET OF MY PAPA.
As sung by the inimitable Sprightly, with vociferous applause
Tune— u Lo\e~back'd Car
■When first I saw my papa
I can’t exactly say,
But on the first of April,
Now, that is my birthday;
And on the mom as I was bom,
As you may plainly see,
I was the prettiest little dear
As possibly could be;
For the nurse cried out “ oh la,
What a whopping fine child you are; ”
And the doctor he smiled,
And said “what a fine child,”
As he took a guinea from my papa.
My mother often told me
When in my infancy,
I certainly was the finest child
That ever she did see;
I’d got my papa’s nose,
And my papa’s eyes;
Such a cheerful chubby cherub was I,
And a baby of such a size.
All the neighbours came near and far
To compliment my papa;
I was kiss’d and caress’d,
By every one West,
Saying, “ you’re a credit to your papa.”
The nurse would hug and kiss me,
When sitting on her knee;
She often said she never seed
So fine a child as me:
Such little trouble I gave them all,
As I have since been told;
And papa would mb his hands and say,
I was worth my weight in gold.
154


I was a pleasure to my mama—
She said “ what a treasure you arc,
But so young and so wise
They say mostly dies”—
If I had it would kill my papa.
I began to notice very soon.
What nature did bequeath;
At nine months old you’d scarce believe
I'd all my double teeth ;
And now I quite surprised them all,
So very fat I’d grown;
At ten months old I toddled with nurse,
And at twelve months went alone ;
Then I could say quite plain, “papa,
I wants to go out a ta-ta: ”
And I looked so gay
In a little shay,
When dragg’d by my dear papa.
Nor I never was mischievous
As I much older grew;
I never cried when I was weaned,
As mostly babies do ;
I never stole the sugar or milk.
Knock’d at doors and ran away,
Nor ever did my sisters clout,
Nor kiss the girls at play;
What a many big boys there are
At my ago take a cigar—
I buy lollipops
And peppermint drops
With the browns that I get from papa.
And now that I’m fourteen,
They’re going to apprentice me,
And if that I am strong enough,
A barber I shall be;
155


I’m going a week on liking,
And if that I shall do,
"Won’t I crop the girls and lather the boys,
And lam a thing or two:
But now I must say “ta-ta,”
Or they’ll be wondering where I are;
And I’ll ride a cock-horse
To Banbury Cross,
On the knee of my dear papa.
LAND, HO ! LAND, HO !
How welcome the sound of the mariner’s cry,
As with keen eyes ho gazes afar,
And tracks out the land from the sea and the sky,
As we join in his hearty hurrah!
There’s joy in the ship, from the stem to the stem,
As we eagerly look o’er the main;
The land, boys, the land for which all of us yearn—
Look ahead, there’s the land, boys, again!
Hurrah!
Our brothers are waiting to welcome us there,
And to talk of their old island home;
They’ve heard our loud shout, and an answering cheer
O’er the waters will joyfully come.
Up, up with the signal! the pilot bears down,
There’s his boat like a speck on the sea;
Australia, the hopeful, the land of renown,
Is now looming fast on|our lee.
Hurrah!
156


REMINISCENCES OF BRIGHTON.
Brighton, dear Brighton, still I think of thee,
Though separated by a trackless sea.
Dear home of childhood, since I saw thee last,
Three years of mingled joy and pain have past,
Yet though ’tis long, fond memory lores to dwell
On such a spot remembered but too well,
let it assist me while I call to mind
The scenes and pleasures I have left behind.
My mind in fancy to old Brighton soars,
And shows me once again the well-known shores.
’Tis early mom, the town is still in sleep,
The sun’s faint rays have just commenced to peep
In th’ eastern sky; the sea that’s oft so wild,
At rest is slumbering like the unweaned child.
To the fish-market, now a scene of strife
I wend my way—the place is full of life;
Boats from the trawlers rowing to the shore
Bring loads of live-fish, and still go for more;
"Whilst busy fish-wives, baskets with them filling,
Depart, and cry out “mackerel four a shilling.”
And now there’s sign of business in the town —
Shopmen are slowly taking shutters down,
The milkman down the areas shouts his warning,
And small boys cry out “any rolls this morning.”
My breakfast over, to the beach I go,
A great resort for visitors you know;
And now the excursion train arrives from town,
Bringing the Londoners by hundreds down;
"While children'scream and scamper with delight,
The moment that the sea appears in sight,
And down the gap in one vast throng they go,
And on the shingle wander to and fro.
Now boatmen slowly thither make their way,
For to them Cockneys fall an easy prey ;
The salt, with round frock and sou’wester hat,
"Who has an innate knowledge of a flat,
Gets into conversation with some swell,
And an astounding yam proceeds to tell,
And if he finds his listener very “ raw,”
Calls schooners, frigates; luggers, raen-of-war;
Answers his questions, while his hat ho touches,
Knowing full well he has him in his clutches;
But when he sees the youth about to go,
His features settle in a look of woe :
He tells a tale then with a decp-fetch’d groan,
Kuough to soften any heart of stone,
157


)f sudden shipwreck, loss of nets as well,
Of boats capsized by some tremendous swell;
Of poverty too, and what makes it keener,
A wife and children sick with scarlatina;
And after cramming him with many a cracker, .
Ends thus, “Come, won’t you stand some leer and bather ?”
Now bathing women wander to and fro,
And strangely they’re attired, for you must know
They wear a very curious blue sorgo dress,
Appearing quite amphibious I confess;
But stranger still, you’ll find that every one
Tunis out to be the famous Martha Gunn,
Mho dipped young George the Fourth, noble child,
liut who unfortunately turned out wild.
Martha had saved the country many a blunder
If, when she bathed him she liad kept him under;
And he, when he had lost the spark called vital
Of finished gentleman” had earned the title,
liut to proceed, the fishermen now hail
The numerous Cockneys just to take a sail,
The breeze springs up, well filled is every boat,
How pleased they all appear when they’re afloat!
On every face is seen a pleasant grin,
How different they seem when they come in !
Looking disgusted, paler too, and thinner,
tvith not the slightest appetite for dinner.
But time flics on, for there in the far west,
The sun is sinking to its usual rest;
Or rather, comes to the Antipodes
T’illume the land of kangaroos and fleas.
The Cockneys now rush to the Terminus,
And there kick up a most confounded fuss.
Bound to the carriages away they dart,
The excursion train is just about to start,
Some mother there you’ll see with grief half wild,
For in the struggle she has lost her child ;
At length she sees him, joy succeeds to pain,
And child and mother are at ease again.
Now railway guards are rushing to and fro,
Locking the carriages as on they go;
Now for the last time rings the station bell.
And friends crowd up again to bid farewell;
The whistle sounds, the carriages move on.
And handkerchiefs wave till the train is gone.
The moon is shining o’er th’ unruffled sea,
The rippling wave is plashing silently,
How calm the evening and how still tlie deep!
How faintly the cool zephyrs o’er it sweep!
The treacherous wafers now are lulled to rest,
Just like the infant on its mother’s breast,


Bpt let the south-west wind begin to blow,
(And oft it docs, as Brightoners well know)
The sea soon rises, and the seamen mark
The sudden change, and steer their fragile bark
With no delay unto the friendly beach,
And with the capstan haul it out of reach
Of the rude wave that dashes on the shore,
Whilst breakers lash the beach, and billows roar ■.
But all is still, it is a lovely night,
The moon sheds forth a flood of glorious light.
There safe at anchor, tired boatmen sleep
Secure from harm upon the placid deep,
Whilst with their telescopes, preventive men
Scan the horizon every now and then.
The town is still, ’tis twelve o’clock at night,
And now from many an upper room a light
Is feebly flickering, and plainly shows
’Tis time I also went to seek repose,
And so, reluctantly I leave the spot,
But Brighton, in my dreams thou’rt not forgot.
THE CAMERON MEN.
There’s many a man of the Cameron clan
Who has followed his chief to the field;
He has sworn to support him, or die by his side,
For a Cameron never can yield.
I hear the pibroch sounding, sounding,
Deep over mountain and glen,
While light tripping footsteps are trampling the
heath,
’Tis the march of the Cameron men.
Oh, proudly they walk, though each Cameron knows
Ho may tread on the heather no more,
Yet boldly he follows his chief to the field
Whore hia laurels were gathered before.
I hear, &c.
The moon has arisen and shines o’er the path,
How trod by the gallant and true;
High, high, are their hopes, for their chieftain has said
That whatever men dare, they can do.
I hear, &c.
159


THINGS YOU DON’T OFTEN SEE.
A New Original Song, as written and sung by the inimitable Thatcher.
Tune—“ Things I don’t like to see.”
Kind friends, once again I appear before you,
And as you seem craving for something that’s new,
If you’ll all pay attention, and listen to me,
I’ll tell you some things that you don’t often see.
You don’t often see the mayor wear a blue shirt,
Yor big nuggets rolling about in the dirt;
Hot boys crying muffins; and, I’ve' a great doubt
If ever you witnessed a Chinaman shout.
Chorus —I’ve the honor before you once more to appear —
Some things I say you may think very queer;
Just think what you like, it’s nothing to me—
I’ll tell you the things that you don’t often see.
You don’t often see young girls keep their station —
Of course, that will tell you about emigration;
You don’t often see a chap given to 'shite,
Can do very much when it comes to a fight.
You don’t often see beggars going about;
Yor beadles with cooked hats in gold lace togged out;
Yor a boy here that isn’t a saucy young pup ;
Or a swell with a bad hat, that isn’t hard up.
I’ve the honor, &c.
You don’t often see a newspaper, I’m told,
Without lots of advertisements full three months old;
Yor a squatter who don’t of the gold fields complain;
Or a digger who don’t wish for old times again.
You don’t often see here a lord mayor’s show;
Yor a jew with a blue bag exclaiming “old do’;”
Yor champagne ever tapped by a land auctioner,
I’or it’s always bad eider, and makes you feel queer.
I’ve the honor, &c."
Yow, you don’t often see dustmen ringing a bell —
We’ve few cinders, for coals are too scarce you know
well ;
Or for wrenching off knockers a swell charged in court.
For of knockers this colony’s awfully short.
160


You don’t often see—no, you don’t, I declare^
A peeler whenever he’s wanted, all there; '
You don’t often see a pound weight to the tub;
Or a loafer that ever squares up for his grub.
I’ve the honor, &c.
Now, you don’t often see —if you do I’ll be blowcd—
An earl’s carriage driving along on the road ;
You don’t often see rag and bone men about;
Nor females hard up, putting things up the spout.
You don’t often see many natives out here,
That of brandy or rum entertain any fear;
Nor a roadside hotel, go wherever you please,
Where the blankets are not the head quarters of fleas,
I’ve the honor, &c.
You don’t often see on the diggings, my friend,
A cove crying out “ any bellows to mend
Nor ladies of quality wheeled in hand-chairs ;
Or a pretty young girl but what gives herself airs.
You don’t often see noblemen driving drays;
Nor a trap that keeps sober for two or three days ;
Nor a lawyer that’s more fool than rogue, for I swear
That’s a marvel that ain’t to be seen anywhere.
Chorus (last verse.)
I’ve the honor before you once more to appear—
Some things I have said you may think very queer;
Just think what you like, it won’t affect me,
Tve - told you the things that you don’t often see.
BOBBING AROUND.
In August last on one fine day,
Bobbing around.
When Josh and I went to make hay,
We went bobbing around.
161


Says Josh, to me, lets take a walk,
Bobbing around.
Then wo can have a private talk,
As we go bobbing around.
Wc walked along to the mountain ridge,
Bobbing around.
Till we got near Squire Slipshop’s bridge,
As we went bobbing around.
Then Josh and I tripp’d o’er the lea,
Bobbing around,
And I kiss'd Josh, and Josh kiss’d me,
As we went bobbing around.
Then Josh’s courage no more tarried,
Bobbing around,
Says he, dear Patience, let’s get married,
Then we’ll go bobbing around.
I knew he loved another gal,
Bobbing around;
They called her long-legg’d, crooked-shin,
curly-tooth’d Sal,
Where he went bobbing around.
So after we got into church,
Bobbing around,
I ran and left him in the lurch,
Then he went bobbing around.
You chaps who would deceive a gal,
jßobbing around,
Think of long-legg’d, crooked-shin, curly-
tooth’d Sal,
When you go bobbing around.
162


AUSTRALIAN HUMBUGS.
Written by Mr. Mulholand.
Tune—’ 1 The King of the Cannibal Islands.”
If attentive cars you’ll yield to me,
From our present colonial history
I’ll prove the enormous fallacy
Of some Australian humbugs.
Professional men to me appear
The greatest imposters we have here ;
I regard the coming events with fear,
For their number increases every year;
Some manoeuvres, therefore, I’ll unfold,
By which unthinking men are sold,
And the clever ones frequently cajoled
By various Australian humbugs.
If attentive ears, &c.
Solicitors, who, without a spark
Of intellect in law embark,
Transferred from a threadbare lawyer’s clerk,
Are legal Australian humbugs ; .
But the barristers I consider the chief,
Who lead you into the firm belief
They’re necessary for your relief,
Though at home they couldn’t get a brief:
Performing like pantaloon or clown,
Assuming forced forensic frown,
They gammon you with a wig and gown,
These legal Australian humbugs.
If attentive cars, &c.
The medical men, without leave to kill,
Who dose you with black draught and blue, pill,
And make you believe you’re dreadfully ill,
Are also Australian humbugs.
Although ignorant of ailment or disease,
Each doctor tacitly agrees
On every victim he can to seize,
And he never forgets to claim his fees ;
163


The science of medieine is thus profaned,
By vilest quackery fortune’s gained,
And the poor man’s purse is frequently drained
By Australian medical humbugs.
If attentive ears, &c.
The sanctimonious parson’s face
Is seen in every important place,
As he talks of virtue and of grace—
Another Australian humbug.
I never would thus ridicule
A minister of the proper school,
Who acts from conscience, not from rule,
Without proving himself an arrant fool :
Gathering his audience in a clump,
To hear him spout, and see him jump,
On burnt log or gum tree stump,
A canting Australian humbug.
If attentive ears, &c.
I speak with all sincerity,
Of tragic scenes and comedy,
And most of our actors seem to me
Thorough Australian humbugs.
Tragedians often a smile will raise
At the murder of Shakspere’s grandest plays,
Whilst a comic performance makes us gaze
In mute surprise or wild amaze :
But still they’re praised to great excess
By our fair discriminating press,
To which we owe the triumphant success
Of acting Australian humbugs.
If attentive ears, &c,
Land jobbers, who freely speculate
On sections of land sold by the state,
I also seriously contemplate
As barefaced Australian humbugs :
They purchase up some barren land,
And when subdivided, mapped, and planned,
They put it forth in colors grand,
And exorbitant prices they demand;
164


And whether on stony rise ormooF,
With their fine descriptions they are sure
The credulous public to allure—
Enterprising Australian Himbugs.
If attentive ears, &c.
A CHEERFUL GLASS.
New Original Song, written and sung by Thatcher _with immense'applause
Tune—Original.
What a colony this is for drinking !
To not a few places I’ve been,
But yet, sirs, I cannot help thinking
It beats every thing that I’ve seen.
Folks out here must love nobblerizing,
For publicans large fortunes make;
And to me it is truly surprising
The quantity some people take.
Chorus —What a colony this is for drinking;
To not 'a few places I’ve been,
But yet, sirs, I cannot help thinking
It beats every thing that I’ve seen.
At homo you’re aware that a fellow
Sighs for his half-quartern of gin,
And often he gets pretty mellow
Through taking that quantity in;
But here, where there’s plenty of money,
’Tis as common to him as his food,
And he takes, though it may appear funny,
Six nobblers before he’s half-slewed.
The digger a nice evening passes —
His work being done for the day—
With his mates he has throe or four glasses
In a jolly and free sort of way :
A drop of good liquor soon cheers him—
He’s easy and quiet in mind;
And his wandering fancy then bears him
To the girl he has left far behind.
165


The loafer who ne’er soils his fingers,
And of gold who won’t work for an ounce,
You’ll find in hotels often lingers,
And ordcA his glass on the bounce ;
And his tumbler with brandy half filling,
He’ll drink, and commence then to “ skite;”
And replies when he’s asked for the shilling,
'• Stick it up, you know me, it’s all right.”
The lawyer sits over his sherry,
And muses on warrants and fees;
Thoughts of fresh clients make him quite merry,
And in fancy ho draws up new pleas.
The doctor sees prime consultations—
Compound fractures are pleasant to him ;
With joy thinks of bad dislocations,
Or taking off some Fellow’s limb.
The Yankee'is fond of his nobbier,
And the way that he drinks sangaree,
Gin cocktails, and prime sherry cobblers,
Is really surprising to me.
The trap loves his two or three glasses—
He’s a jolly convivial dog;
And nothing his pleasure surpasses,
When thinking of seizures of grog.
ENGLISH IMITATIONS.
A new Original Song, written and sung by Thatcher with great applause.
Tune—“ Guy Fawkes.**
As I rode down the Melbourne road—
'Twas only t’other morning—
I saw a board stuck in a field,
And ’twas a gentle warning;
I read it then, and with surprise
I to the spot was rooted,
For it said that trespassers would bo
Had up and prosecuted.


Thinks I, one of these “ cockatoos”
Has bought the land for farming,
And so to bounce us he puts up
This notice so alarming :
Ho doubt he’s some chap who at home
Has been had up for poaching,
And, tit for tat, he means to keep
The public from encroaching.
The squatters p’raps may take the liint,
And to keep us from their runs,
They’ll caution us about man traps
And dangerous spring guns ;
But of the former punishment
Ho one just now afraid is,
Tor the only man traps I know of
At present, are the ladies.
Look at Australia, and behold
Increasing immigration—
You’ll find a wondrous mania
Exists for imitation;
The English projudices
We copy to the letter;
But, as regards some things, I own
’Tis hard, p’raps, to do better.
At the bare idea of railways
The squatters used to laugh ;
But they’re in quick formation—
And we’ve got the telegraph ;
Bushrangers now will shortly find
Those blessed wires have sold them,
And Victoria be rendered soon
By far too hot to hold them.
A great colonial workhouse
Will, no doubt, shortly follow,
To beat the one at Mary’bone,
Or famed Whitechapel hollow;
167


Where loafers can pick oakum,
And the women use the needle,
And the next innovation then
May be a gold-laced beadle.
Delinquents that, at present,
Are a set of jolly dogs,
Won’t be allowed to spend their tin
So idly in the logs;
The Erixton dodge they’ll introduce,
To give defaulters pepper ;
And the next step for the common “'weal”
Will doubtless be the “ stepper.”
Whene’er the treadmill they apply
To these colonial towns,
The folks when writing home can talk
About their ups and downs ;
Should you e’er take this exercise,
Hero’s good advice to all—
Ee particular to choose the side
That’s nearest to the wall.
THE WHITE-WASHED YANKEE.
Written by Mr. Mulholland.
Tune—' 1 The Old English Gentlemen.”
I’ll sing you quite a novel song, made by a colonial brick,
Of a thorough white-washed Yankee who was “ tarna-
tion slick”—
Who thought in every movement his imitation fine.
And aped the manners of the States so truly genuine,
Like a regular white-washed Y r ankce, one of the
present time.
168


His hat -was placed quite jauntily on one side of his
head,
And he fumbled his big -watch seals at every word ho
said;
He wore knee boots with gilt red tops to make his legs
look flash,
And at his sides the ends fell down of a long silk yankee
sash,
Like a regular, &o.
He had no whiskers nor moustache, hut sported a goatee,
He guessed and calculated, and used the word “sirree; ”
And to every true American he’d cause a cruel pang,
His conversation was delivered with such a nasal twang,
Like a regular, &c.
He lounged at billiard tables, tenpin alleys, and hotels,
And smoked cigars six inches long with other white-
washed swells,
Or chewed his cake tobacco, and by General Jackson
swore,
Expectorating on the furniture, but seldom on the floor.
Like a regular, &c.
But with all his imitations, this ‘harmless’ white-washed
rogue
Was nothing but an Irishman, and had an awful brogue:
Sh ould you ask if he’s a Yankee, as his manners indicate,
He’ll say, though born in Ireland, he was raised in New
York State,
Like a regular, &c.
But men from every country the Yankee customs seek,
If in California or the States they’ve only been a week,
By every man of common sense such conduct must be
blamed,
And all these imitators of their country are ashamed.
Like a regular, &c.


THE DISAPPOINTED GIRL.
New Original Song, written and sung by Thatclier with immense applause,
Tun©~“ Susan had. Lovers,”
In London there once lived in Finsbury Square,
A girl of the name of liana ;
Her round face was freckled, deep red was her hair,
And no one to make love would come nigh her.
She’d saved up some tin, but so ugly was she,
Ho policeman had asked her to lend it;
No soldier would e’er take her out for a spree;
So she’d had no occasion to spend it.
So, as she had saved up a few pounds or so,
At home she resolved not to tarry,
But made up her mind to Australia to go,
Where, no doubt, a rich digger sho’d marry.
For her passage she paid twenty pounds, s’elp me bob,
Though to do so she had no occasion ;
For she might have belonged to the emigrant mob,
But she didn’t like free emigration.
She arrived in November eighteen fifty-two,
And a chap come on board for a wife ;
He offered her marriage, and also to do
His best to support her through life.
That he was a government clerk she’d no doubt,
And although she admired his figure,
She frowned, and immediately said quite plump out,
“ You don’t look like a lucky gold digger.”
Another young man, who has plenty of pelf,
Imagined a good wife sho’d bo ;
Her plain face was, doubtless, he thought to himself,
For her virtue a good guarantee.
He proposed, but was instantly struck with surprise,
For she drew herself up, and looked bigger,
And said, while contempt flashed out from her green
eyes,
“ You don’t look like a lucky gold digger.”


She saw girls with flash diggers daily ride out
In cabs, and it made her blood tingle,
And she said “what can all the blue shirts be about,
To let a young girl remain single.”
The Bendigo was in its glory just then,
But in vain for a husband she waited;
And she leered at and ogled the whole of tho men,
And wished that she’d not emigrated.
But now to bring to a conclusion this song—'
Things didn’t turn out to her wishes;
And if you go to a well-known restaurant,
You may there see her washing up dishes.
So, young girls, j ust ponder this song in your mind—
Don’t treat every suitor with rigour ;
A willing though- poor man’s as good, you will find,
P’raps as any flash lucky gold digger.
I’M LEAVING THEE IN SORROW, ANNIE.
I’m leaving thee in sorrow, Annie,
I’m leaving thee in tears;
It may be for a long time, Annie—
Perhaps for many years.
It is more kind to part now, dearest,
Than linger here in pain,
To think of joys that once were brightest,
But ne’er may come hack again.
I’m leaving thee, &c.
I’m thinking of the past, dear Annie,
When your locks wero bright as gold ;
Your smiles wore soft, hut, now, dear Annie,
Our hearts seem growing cold.
It was not time that stole the blossoms
Prom off thy cheeks so fair,
But winter came too soon upon them,
And chill’d the flow’ret there.
I’m leaving thee, &c.
171


YANKEE FIXINS.
A* sung by Mrs. Carney Williams. Tunb—“ Old Dog Tray.’
I don’t mind telling you
I can bake and boil and stow,
Can sing, and feed the chickens every day;
Mint juleps I can brew,
Make beds and cider too,
As slick as any girl in my way:
Hot com cakes and apple dumplings—
I guess you’d better let me stay j
For if you’d only try
My pumpkins in a pie,
Gosh! you’d never let me go away.
A powerful one I am
At huckleberry jam;
Pork fixins come a little in my way;
Apple sarse and succotash,
Hominy and brandy smash,
Makes me merry as a coon at play.
Ain't I spry for a frolic,
To dance all the night until day,
Then home again to ride
In a waggon by your side—
Gosh! you’d never let me go away.
Nqw, let me you advise,
Young fellows, if you’re wise,
“When a pretty widow comes in your way,
Don’t stand whittling of a stick,
But sit down beside her slick,
And tell her she is as lovely as the day; .
Squeeze, and please, and tease her.
She’ll scream, but it’s always the way;
You want a kiss—oh, fie!
She won’t, but if you try,
Gosh ! a dozen you may take right away.
172


THE VOYAGE TO AUSTRALIA.
Tune—“ Bow-wow-wow.”
Left Plymouth one day in July,
And soon was on the ocean;
That I should ’scape sea-sickness
I had a curious notion :
All the while that it was calm,
I felt quite gay and frisky,
But, oh ! how pale and ill I looked
"When in the Bay of Biscay.
One day the cabin passengers,
For nothing but diversion,
Hung out some pork, and hooked a shark,
By dint of great exertion ;
It lashed its tail, and soon around
The water was quite bloody—
By jingo, didn’t this delight
The inmates of the cuddy.
One splendid night, when near the line,
Some folks, to trick their betters,
Cried, bring a light, a ship’s in sight,
And waiting for your letters :
With nightshirts on some got their desks,
And some got wax and matches.
But they found it was a downright sell,
When they got up the hatches.
Each ocean novelty would bring
The passengers on deck, sirs,
To see a light, or ship in sight,
They’d run to break their necks, sirs;
Some one cried out, a whale, a whale,
And lots of eyes were on it,
But it soon turned out to be a tseil
From off a lady’s bonnet.
173


ENCORE VERSES TO PETTICOAT LANE
Jly pleasures are gone, and it makes me feel moody
To think of the sports that in childhood I’ve seen;
How I’ve laughed with delight at that dear Punch and
Judy,
And wandered for hours with Jack in the Green :
I roamed with the jugglers one day to Spring Gardens—
’Twas awfully late when I got homo again ;
And I remember the thumps that I got, reg Tar hard’uns,
For straying so far from old Petticoat Lane.
Gh! those were the days, when, along with Jem Parker,
By one of the ha’penny boats I did ride,
To follow the lucrative trade of mudlarker,
And pick up anything that was left by the tide :
The coves from the bridge coppers down would he shying,
And there we would scramble again and again,
And to find them all smothered in mud we’d be trying,
Then walk through the Strand home to Petticoat Lane.
Sometimes things were dull, and I’d then cross the water,
"With no shoes or stockings a rum dodge to ply, •
To the "Waterloo Hoad, or somewhere in that quarter,
And yarn a few ha’pence from coves passing by:
On the pavement I’d chalk out a mackerel or salmon,
"Write under I’m starving, and look full of pain ;
And the old ladies, my eye ! how I’d stuff ’em with
gammon,
Then go with the browns home to Petticoat Lane.
To get information a trifle I’d give now,
As to how my poor mother in London now hires,
And if in that crib she continues to live now,
Where the rats used to run about under the stairs:
I’d like now to drop in and sec the dear creature—
To what greater happiness could I attain,
Than to see the glad smile that would light up each
feature,
As she welcomed mo back to old Petticoat Lane.
174


I wonder, now, if she still lets out the beds, sirs,
In that dingy and queer-looking room on the right,
Where the weary itinerants laid their poor heads, sirs,
And dozed for the small sum of twopence a night.
"The fleas in Australia banish my slumber ;
I get up, light a candle, but hunt ’em in vain ;
And I question much whether they do not outnumber
The bug population of Petticoat Lane.
The beggar would enter with many a tatter ;
The blind man once there soon recovered his sight ;
The area-sneak, too, with the ragman would patter,
And the poor crossing-sweeper join in with delight:
The sailor that lost his leg in the Crimea,
With his leg restored to him, would chant out a strain,
And the dumb man most lustly shout for his beer,
And swear like a rum ’un in Petticoat Lane.
I think of the day when from home off I started,
When myparents the sad farewell scarcelycould speak,
And how my poor sweetheart seemed half broken-hearted
As the tears chased each other like pearls down her
cheek.
But, ah! she is faithless, my love I must smother—
To think of her perfidy gives me great pain;
She’s got three young kids, for she’s married another— j
’Tis Jim Lobbs, the pieman of Petticoat Lane.
Oh, why did I leave the sweet scenes of my childhood,
To wander in desolate regions like these;
’Tis well termed the bush, ’tis a sad gloomy wild wood,
And, to my poor ideas, it isn’t the cheese.
I’d rather go home and just earn bread and butter,
Than in this queer colony longer remain ;
And, though they may talk of the Ballarat gutter,
Give me the black gutter of Petticoat Lane.
175


MY MARY ANNE.
Fare you -well, my own Mary Anne,
Fare s’ou well for awhile;
For the ship it is ready, and the wind it is fair,
And I am bound for the sea, Mary Anne.
Chorus —Faro you well, &c.
Don’t you see that turtle dove
A-sitting on yonder pile,
Lamenting the loss of his own true love—
And so am I for mine, Mary Anne.
Fare you well, &o.
A lobster in a lobster-pot,
A blue-fish wriggling on a hook,
May suffer some, but oh! no not
What I do feel for my Mary Anne.
Fare you ■well, &c.
The pride of all the produce rare,
That in our kitching-gafding grow’d,
Was pumpkins—but they couldn’t compare
In angel form with my Mary Anne.
Fare you well, &c.
The calf, when in its nussin’ days,
Is gentle, innocent, and mild;
But, oh! that tender crittur’s ways
Ain’t nothing by the side of my Mary Anne’s.
Fare you well, &c
I seen a half-fledg’d carrion crow
Get shot right in his mother’s sight;—
But even that aged bird didn’t know
The loss I mourn in my Mary Anne.
Fare you well, &o.
I hcem the experienced parent-bird
• Caw—“ Don’t go there! oh, don’t go there!
And now that mother’s breast is stirr’d.
E’en a’most as much as mine for my Mary Anne.
Faro you well, &c.
176


Mortals is at best but weak;
The longest-winded has to die;
But if I ain’t spilin’ I wouldn’t speak,
And all for love of my Mary Anne.
Fare you well, &c.
The needle points up to the pole,
The pole points to the sky;
But pole nor needle points as true
As my love points to my Mary Anne.
Fare you well, &c.-
The cuckoo is a loving bird,
More loving than the dove;
But the cuckoo nor the.dove feel not
What I do feel for my Mary Anne.
Fare you well, &o.
SMOKE NOT.
A PARODY ON “LOVE NOT.”
Smoke not, smoke not your weeds or pipes of clay ;
Cigars they are made from leaves of cauliflowers—
Things that are doomed no duty e’er to pay,
Grown, made, and smoked within a few short hours.
Smoko not—smoke not.
Smoke not, smoke not, the weed you smoke may change
The healthfulness of your stomachic tone;
Things to the eye grow queer and passing strange ;
All thoughts seem undefined —save one—to be alone.
Smoke not—smoke not.
177


WAIT FOR THE WAGGON.
Will you come with, me, my Phillis dear, to yon blue
mountain free ?
Where the blossoms smell the sweetest; come, rove
along with me.
It’s ey’ry Sunday morning, when I am by your side,
We’ll jump into the waggon, and all take a ride.
Chorus —Wait for the waggon, wait for the waggon,
Wait for the waggon, and we’ll all take a ride.
Where the river runs like silver, and the birds they sing
so sweet,
I have a cabin, Phillis, and something good to eat';
Come, listen to my story, it will relieve my heart,
So jump into the waggon, and off we will start.
Wait for the waggon, &c.
Do you believe, my Phillis dear, old Mike, with all his
wealth,
Can make you half so happy, as I with youth and health ?
We’ll have a little farm—a horse—a pig—a cow;
And you shall mind tho dairy, while I do guide the
plough.
Wait for tho waggon, &c.
Your lips are red as poppies, your hair so slick and
neat,
All braided up with dahlias and hollyhocks so sweet,
It’s ev’ry Sunday morning, when I am by your side,
We’ll jump into tho waggon, and all take a ride.
AYait for the waggon, &c.
Together, on life’s journey, we’ll travel till we stop,
And if we have no trouble we’ll reach the happy top.
Then come with me, sweet Phillis, my dear, my lovely
bride !
We’ll jump into the waggon and all take a ride.
Wait for the waggon, &c.
178


TOLL THE BELL FOR LILLA DALE.
My Lilia dear is sleeping
’Neath the old chestnut tree,
The spot where oft she wandered,
When innocent and free.
The wild rose and the myrtle
Still cluster round the spot:
But my heart’s filled with sorrow,
And lonely is my lot.
Chorus —Toll, toll the bell, for gentle Lilia Dale,
And let its tones echo through the vale;
Our Lilia dear we’ve lost, so loving, kind and
true ;
Sing to day one sad lay—lost Lilia Dale.
'Tis spring : the birds arc warbling
A sad and mournful talc,
Of beauty once so blooming,
Now lying cold and pale.
The streamlet ripples onward,
So quiet through the vale ;
The wild rose drops a dewy tear
For earth-lost Lilia Dale.
Toll, toll the bell, &c.
My Lilia dear, I’m watching ;
0 ! wilt thou never come,
To greet me with a blessing
From thy far, angel homo ?
My sad heart now is aching,
With heavy care oppressed ;
0 ! may I quickly greet thee
In that pure land of rest.
Toll, toll tlie bell, &c.
179


OLD DOG TRAY.
But, unless my watch is fast,
The morning time is past,
And to sing of the dawn it’s too late in the day;
Yet I’ve tried a change of air,
Almost more than I can bear —
It reminds me of my old dog Tray.
Old dog Tray was ever faithful —
Grief came upon him though one day;
For the governmental hacks
'Would insist upon his tax,
"Which was fatal to my old dog Tray.
Chorus —For the governmental hacks, &e.
He was very good at rats
And a mortal foe to cats;
We were more like brothers than I care to say:
But eight shillings every year
For his company it was dear,
And there was nothing left of old dog Tray.
Old dog Tray had a plateful
Of bones and potatoes one fine day;
And inside the sav’ry mass hid
Was a dose of prussic acid,
Which made an end of old dog Tray.
Chorus —And inside the sav’ry, &c.
They bore him from my sight,
And it overcame me quite—
I was ill—l was wretched—l was wasting away;
From my food I loathing turned,
And my dinner beer I spumed;
Ah! thinking of my old dog Tray.
Old dog Tray, we met again though;
To eat they persuaded me one day,
With some tempting mutton pies,
In the which I recognized
The flavour of my old dog Tray.
Chorus —With some tempting, &o.
180
