

, ' u * ' : ■/ ■
e WHMsmwbe#
• . r
| . V ■ - . rv:.. ■<•.;■; , -’■,;' ‘Cl yZ-yf. ■ *C- • •-*. .•■ ,.


PARKSIDE, STOKE TRISTER, WINCANTON, SOMS. BA9 9PH
TEL; WINCANTON 32222
4th. November 19Y«.
Parkside, Stoke Trister, Wincanton, Somerset. BA9 9PH
Tel: Wincanton 32222.
10th. June 1970.
f). t I
Uu by- '°
s I
Ay4 '* y^Ce^ti^A-
jLy /(jLu/ MlA <04 *
<t*t v brcdl Ct*u> J dy t iy
/kjtr— / €r / t I ' y> j (
/s/Z' r*
*✓ yUJ*4, rts?
? 13 > * 87g * — y/Li*
V 4*44** '
Wa, the undersigned, first saloo p f K vovage , vo /
Cuxco. Unreal tha eJertaia ol (t
*j JL) <// ijufrcvl*.
BUncesln which over f H V
of the mam shaft 1700 miles iron ftcci< j ent we , y / ✓ I
S^ , SW^».yy^ u '3!fKSJfiS 4cv-*mj /Mtv
of wind, and wo fool that we owe it splendid y
f »rtUS £* tt Jour command, that , , , , //
. Cession ol of what you 7 ' J J
DCa yours faithfully, / y /> /
m.rr. follow 9d signatures.) fL*/f S yf7^C4f t' M* t'VT'
iKnvT TO


THE- AG2
- Mectlon Notices
“mu’tbi endTf thfp^esemptrr^' lll^^ o '
h*a an opportunity of evnr >c electors will have
folicy, and IHbem P c ‘I r O ' ,inion on »"«
•uch an appeal being th«l a £ pom,ed if - upon
be not very decidedly I o ' thecomit^
system. y , ® a ‘ tJSt ™e continuance of the
farther” asduring thVhinpM to e^ tcnd theae remarks
lianientaiy life "fo?’ ,Ed period *“* **•
have become very gcnVrlTu, i 8t 3 uest,oDij must
only add that in ewkW 0^ 0 - * W,U
yen may rest assured i*h. ect,on at >’ our han,i ».
serve, and if vouar-afn r * Ve 120 personal object to
I shall parLe ttrnm f Y orme wi ‘h your confidence :
emanate, a ,ul fn l,,n^l rt ' Vh:Uev ‘‘ r P* rt y measures may
intoreBts P of t r? rOpP l OS,ti ? l, . fl9 1 u,a .V J"dire j
course of indener doni *. le colony) that moderating- -
sodded UuSnafThe Uon , bv which 1 have been I
representing you ° 3 ear sl have hud the honor of ;
1 be "’ t0 subscribe myself, gentlemen.
■Faithfully yours,
J. J?, BEAR.


PARKSIDE, STOKE TRISTER, WINCANTON, SOMS. BA9 9PH
TEL: WINCANTON 32222
4th, November iyy«,
Parkside, Stoke Trister, Wincanton, Somerset. BA9 9PH
Tel; Wincanton 32222.
10th, June 197«.
i, f)..
/ ✓ / 3* 6f y&
6*4-
Situ)*
, di*/ t
\Jioy SC) A**) isPLMsl
H)auaJ LfU> *fjfUm Y l *i* ,}H/h ** u>
£ V~Viy ‘M~it iS-tSA) /rt^£
<tv 4nstySts*yvd) 'Vri f 4 a?
dLy /(vfLtJ/ A *44*4) 4L4 As ’K44bty*ia4u
<*> 4 SiA*&b trcJl A wit) I /&yfjf *b*A
4~u>h (&LtA*j *^ r ib) iCeyn*th?rW f CsrHs/d
Atui/) (C tn»s*\***d> -+j 4nx> fAeMs 4eud**yS
AiU SAi) 1 (as*) A* /***>
WtA/ St JldjLtV JjflCLAo ri£?
-jAy) /*i***d
4C> Si&M,
SSo d</> ifa^CC^A*
'Av *cJihM) SA*4 Jit*yK) 4cS~*mj J Ab*o)
tlsv -AS* <l*yAye) SAcJ r^a^t4
'4 / 'Av*StO 4s*nO J *■»**))
'Aytyjd-h. cL&xyfa jLttS 'SAtifi' *♦»


y^*/ /££t y b> J tMc4 . V siao
I £ $ ij JCo d J bs tf'A* 4/hi C^'€iA4^ ty
JL c<t^^ d 'M-c**e*/^
*4h~ 'b'd thuj\
■Lz/j^tAsC'O y
jt /^mu)
Jhtot $4u4l/j iidlt eJ* £4) V*r4i
4*> /£& £ I h 'b-J A ft 1 '*** *** f**'
( -^bi4 y 4 f 0**A / *4/
JU >Ji'ljb4y
'j( / *Stlu4*lO t \yfautC*4~++Ti/,
‘/ps/'LiA %J(/'
>A '£uvfa' j4~U4st)s*y As/i**A'jl~4c*S
fa, *j /1 *^'* t**UJ £0 S£t*S*
JA.


PARKSIDE, STOKE TRISTER, WINCANTON, SOMS. BA9 9PH
TEL: WINCANTON 32222
4th, November Iyys.
Parkside, Stoke Trister, Wincanton, Somerset. BA9 9PH
Tel: Wincanton 32222,
10th. June 197«.
jL i. d'JjL'
Thank you so muon for your most interesting
letter in connection with the Orient Line Centenary,
fourty-six of us sat down to lunch at
Holbrook House Hotel, Wincanton, on Thursday, and
you can imagine that the air was blue with
nostalgic reminiscence . The lunch was a great
success even tnough, perhaps, i should not say so
as 1 organised it r and we had turee former Directors
of the Company plus a goodly mixture of sea staff,
dock staff, and Head Office staff.
1 read out your letter to my colleagues
and was asked to thank you for your good wishes
and for the way in which you spoke of the Company
whicn has meant so much to all of us.
for my own part, as i live within easy
distance of you 1 should very much like to accept
your kind invitation to visit you and see your .
Orient fine "souvenirs'*. 1 am going away for a
short holiday this week but would like to contact
you in due course.
With many thanxs for writing to me.
¥ours sincerely,
n


SO MS, BA9 9PH
PARKSIDE, STOKE TRISTER, WINCANTON, SOWS, BA9 9PH
TEL: WINCANTON 32222
4-th. November 1 9Y«.
fa-
Thank you Tor your lei/ter and for
returning tne s.iall Orient nine history.
i have oeen ratner remiss in not having
written to tnank you for inviting me over to your
nouse for lunch and for tne most interesting
talk whicn went with it. I thoroughly enjoyed it
as i realised that tne Orient Line meant quite
a lot to you too. it was fascinating to oe aole
to look tnrougn your O.L. treasures.
on referring to tne two books written
by Orient Captains which i mentioned to you *
GOODBYE RUSSIA hy Gapt. E.V.Cameron (1934)
FIFTY YEARS OF OCEAN HAZARD hy Commodore
Sir Charles G-. Mat he son (1939)
I find that the photograph which I thought was
of Gapt, Tuke is, in fact, one of Gapt .A. J .Goad,
another rather famous Line Captain.
I am sure you would he interested to read these
hooks. I have no plans to travel to your part of
Somerset at the moment hut they will keep and I
will let you have them in due course - probably in
the New Year I expect as Christmas will he on us
before we know what is happening.
It has been grand to find someone who
treasures these Orient mementoes. I had to leave
quite a lot of old stuff at the office when I
retired and am now rather regretting it hut, as
I am sure you will agree, it is all a question
of where to keep it. I do regret that there is no
Orient Line museum to which one could eventually
send such material. I do not feel that the present
generation, on the whole, have much time for the
tilings of the past, hut they are valuaole whatever
anyone says.


Again, my grateful thanks for a
interesting tirns and I hope we may meet agai *
sometime. I will let you have the books as we
must get over to hunster Castle when it opens
again as we have not "done" that yet.
fours very sincerely,
To refer back to Capt. Tuke. I did
that I remembered him arriving in the 0-i.fice
to see the Managers. On talking to one of my
colleagues, it would seem that, as this was in
about November 1924, he had retired from the sea
and was Marine Superintendent at that time.
My wife bought a R.h.L.I. calendar this w ek
and included is a colour photo, of Porlock
Weir. The caption relates the story of the
lifeboat being hauled over the hill to the
re s cue!




* ' ( * ; ' ', :> ■ ... ’■ .*fj
i- f a ~ """
■g V / \ ./i
v'y-Xi-'/
. V. I
0R1 EMT STE1AM MAY 1GAT!ON. G? ■
#
TttE "CUZCO" tYPE.
. ■, ’ • • ’ ; • r a :
v 4 fm * m
tLi .NOGl, I
SCUZCO 2>Oco HP
Jotrxmjfyd&i' ” fcuiJ (Xin'l i S"*‘I . ■ ' (
V ( > J* 4 ;• / A,
%■ ■ ‘ fan. Ji'lA/. i ioLcch., [-(??' t- r .#., •■ 4 • i' 1^:?


THE “CUZCO” LYRE,
A WooUy Jouaal Di?otsd to full.
Registered for Transmission abroad . Price 6 d., Annual Subscription , 26^.
PROSPECTUS,
Feeling deeply, as we have long done, that a company so
talented and intelligent as we have here collected on board
the Cuzco should have no organ through which to give
free scope to their>talent (for the sheet hitherto published can
scarcely be called a penny whistle, much less an organ) ;
that the events deeply interesting to all of us which daily
and hourly crowd our busy lives should be lost in oblivion
from there being no means of chronicling them ; that our
numerous artistes, musical and muscular, should be deprived
of their well-earned I’eward of seeing their names, deeds,
and performances embalmed in ink; that the Cuzco should
be ploughing her weary way across the ocean at the rate of
ever-so-many miles a day, and no one to record it for the
benefit of an admiring world and the envy of rival steam-
ship owners, who will never see our daily card with its
stupendous figures ; in short, that all these, and more, should
perish, and leave no more mark than our track a mile astern
across this smiling tropical sea. Feeling, as we say, all
this and more, far more—for our feelings are a deal too much
for us—we have resolved, at all hazards and regardless of
expense, to supply the crying want; and therefore, on Wed-
nesday next, Bth May, will be published the first issue of a
new weekly journal, to be called The Cuzco Lyre.
As the risks and labour of such an undertaking are enor-
mous, we trust to the well-known liberality of the Public,
as shown at the Bar, and to their appreciation of that great
engine, the Press, honestly conducted, to ensure for the
ventui’e that success which we well know it will deserve.
The Lyre will be devoted to the interests of Truth and
justice, and will contain a faithful account of all the news of
the day, including telegraphic intelligence, transmitted at
great cost by our own private wire.
The Proprietors have secured, at immense cost, the ser-
vices of a number of gentlemen entirely guiltless of any
previous connection with the Press, or any other literature,
to conduct the literary portion of the journal, and they feel
confident that their past inexperience and general innocence
of any knowledge of the Press will be a sufficient guarantee
that the principles professed by the journal will be duly
observed.
The Lyre will be non-political, open to the expression of
all shades of opinion, and the Proprietors invite contribu-
tions from all who feel themselves overladen with ideas, or
walking about with thoughts which it would relieve them
to be rid of, whilst offering to their less fortunate fellows a
source of pleasure now and of sweet reflection hereafter.
In our capacious columns the Poet will find room for his
sweet singing, the Philosopher for his depth of thinking, the
Man of Science for his observations, the Joker for his
jeu d’ espri', the Man of the World for his experiences, the
Traveller for his tales, the Penny-a-liner for his heart-moving
concoctions, the Literary Man for the products of his brain,
Politicians of all shades may air their pet ideas for the
regeneration of mankind, the Monied Man may discourse of
stocks, market and dividends, the Farmer of sheep and oxen
—in fact, all may come and welcome.
Contributions for the first number must be sent in not
later than 6 p.m. Tuesday evening. Contributors will
please deposit them in the Editor’s boxes, which they will
find beside this notice.
N.B. —Matters personal or religious will be rigidly
excluded.
N.B. again. —This journal offers a splendid medium for
advertising, and on the lowest possible terms.


THE CUZCO LYRE,
A JOURNAL DEVOTED TO TRUTH.
No. I.] WEDNESDAY, Bth MAY, 1878. [Price Sixpence.
ANNOUNCEMENTS.
Every day at 9 a.m., 1 p.m., and 6 p.m. No charge made.
THE BUSY BEES OR THE MUSICAL FEEDERS.
(If we were only at the other side of the grating we might imagine
ourselves at the “ Zoo.”)
PROPOSED PROGRAMME FOR A CONCERT.
Song—“ Don’t make a noise, or else you’ll wake the Baby ” —By The
Devoted Father.
Tableau Vivant—“l’ll strike you on the ‘Smeller,’”a parody on
“ I’ll strike you with a feather.”
Song with Chorus—“ Take care, beware, she's fooling thee” —By
several Bachelors.
Reading—“ Advice to young ladies on the choice of a husband ”
By that Wicked Old Man.
Song —“ Come Landlord fill the flowing Bowl ” —By those who
Sleep in the Smoking Room.
Starting a journal is a matter of no small moment and
requires an effort of thought, more than is generally supposed;
but if we can assist to relieve the monotony of the voyage,
and to a degree help to interest our readers, jointly with the
talent already displayed in the Cuzco Times, we shall be
amply repaid for having undertaken the task.
It must however be understood that contributions ought
to be tendered by all, otherwise our paper will be a failure,
not for want of money, but for want of brains !
Time, the great solver of all problems, is enabling us to see and to
judge a little of the characters and dispositions of most of our little
community.
The little hint given us the other night in the little problem which
we were asked to solve “ What is the difference between the
“ Cuzco and the passengers ?” The answer to which was “ One is
fast and the other is slow,” is to a great extent true, yet at the
same time much as we wish to see a great many of the passengers
faster (not however in the common acceptance of the term), we
should also like to see the Cuzco do likewise, as it pains us to see
that she has of late considerably diminished her speed.
It would, we confess, be-a great pleasure if many of our neigh-
bours would come out of their nutshells and not keep quite so much
to themselves, particularly many of the charming ladies on board,
whose sweet voices we never hear except on Sundays.
If it were not for one or two amiable ladies and some gentlemen
who do their best to give us some music, we should recommend our
Captain to throw the piano overboard as a piece of useless furniture.
We cannot believe that out of so many ladies,so few are musical,
we therefore humbly entreat them to help us in our concerts and
other entertainments.
Altogether we may congratulate ourselves on having such an
amiable society on board. Up to the present we have not heard of
any rows, excepting those between husband and wife (a
common complaint in the best regulated society) and with the ex-
ception that we should wish some of our fellow passengers to have a
little more go-a-head about them, it is seldom one meets with a more
agreeable lot of people collected together.
In our next we hope to be able to report more favourably in this
respect.
SEA SPRAY.
Who is Sarah’s young man ?
Wherever we go on board we hear this enquiry being made. Can
any of our readers satisfy us on this point?
A Suggestion. —Picnic parties are now being formed for the
Cape, which we hope to reach on Friday evening next. We should
advise those who have not yet made their plans to do so at once.
A Riddle. —How do young ladies show their dislike to mous-
taches ?
Answer.—By setting their faces against them.
We have heard it stated that as good people are so scarce it is
well they should take every care of themselves. Is it for this
reason that several well-known personages are heard to lunch daily
off the ice tub ?
CORRESPONDENCE.
To the Editor of the Cuzco Lyre.
Sir, —A little bird overheard the following conversation a few
days ago between two ladies :
Ist Lady.—Do you know that I have amused myself by writing
my observations upon the passengers.
2nd Lady.—What a good idea. I’ll do the same, and we will then
compare notes.
If these two ladies would be good enough to present their obser-
vations to the Cuzco Lyre, they would, by so doing, confer an act
of kindness on the passengers, and contribute to their amusement.
I am, Sir, &c.,
SEA GULL.
To the Editor.
Sir, —Would it not be possible to arrange a Children’s Concert.
By this time we are all pretty well acquainted with their vocal capa-
bilities.
Several crying infants, accompanied by Mr. Macgregor on the
Bagpipes, would produce a musical symphony, classical in construc-
tion, and quite Wagnerian in its effects.
I am, &c.,
A LOVER OF MUSIC.
To the Editor of the Liar.
Sir, —We were all startled at dinner on Sunday last with a sharp
report, followed by a deep and long-continued reverberation.
On enquiry we found that a steward had inadvertently discharged
a soda-water bottle, the cork of which had struck a young lady on
the back of her head. The medical talent present whilst regretting
that there was no chance of a fatal termination, suggested that the
long-continued, hollow rumbling was due to the large cavities gene-
rally occupied by the brain. Concussion of the brain was therefore
in this instance an impossibility.
I am, Sir, &c.,
NEMO.
MONEY MARKET.
Since leaving Plymouth the course of the market has been unevent-
ful. Currency has been in good supply, well distributed, and freely
offered (for drinks) and as freely taken.
Monday, 6th May, was settling day at the bar, and though scores
were generally heavy, we understand they were well met. Coppers
are plentiful, and piles of them may be seen daily on the nap tables;
sixpences in moderate supply ; sovereigns kept in reserve. We see
no reason to fear any advance in the market, unless the drain at the
Cape is severe.


We are requested to intimate that Messrs. Fergusson and Co. will
receive bonds, payable in drinks, to be redeemed every Saturday by
the giver in hard cash. No interest allowed, except what may be
felt when consuming the commodity given for the bond. Particulars
and forms of bonds may be had on application at the bar or to any of
the stewards.
PRODUCE MARKETS
Ice much run on for the last fortnight; demand moderating.
Gossip, Scandal, and other articles often found at sea, scarcely in
circulation—no demand for them.
Peace and Harmony advancing.
Stray Cattle. —We have been informed that on the night of Sunday,
the 6th May, two or more sheep on the look out for their native
pastures, after wandering all over the ship and failing to find what
they wanted, were driven at last—no doubt by fellow-feeling and a
certainty of sympathy, to take up their quarters in a cabin, said to
be the Editor’s room of The Cuzco Times.
They were, however, we regret to say, when discovered, turned
over to the butcher.
One more instance of the absence of family affection so prevalent
in this world.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
Advt. —Lost, Stolen or Strayed, Two Sheep. Last seen a few
yards forward of the Bridge. Any one bringing the same to the
Editor will be highly complimented.
Advt, —Lost, on leaving Gravesend, the sight and taste of Boiled
Eggs. A reward of Five Shillings will be paid on restoring the
same to the Editor.
Advt. —Matrimonial Engagement.— A young lady having lost her
her heart is open to an Engagement. A Cuzco passenger pre-
ferred (No Scot refused).


THE CUZCO LYRE.
A JOURNAL DEVOTED TO TRUTH.
No. 2.] WEDNESDAY, 15th MAY, 1878. [Price Sixpence.
We have received so many compliments on the success of
our first number, that it behoves us to use every endeavour
to maintain the quality and popularity of our journal.
It is, however, necessary that our fellow-passengers should
all lend us their aid by contributing such items of infor-
mation as, from their perusal of this and the previous
number, they know will be acceptable.
We have long wished to have instituted an editor’s box,
but have not yet succeeded in getting one. All communi-
cations may, however, be addressed to Mr. F. B. Kyngdon,
who has undertaken to act as the representative member of
the Committee whose province it is to conduct this journal
as well as the various entertainments provided for the
amusement of the passengers.
Since our last issue we have safely completed the first
section of our long voyage, have spent nearly four days at
the Cape of Good Hope, and are now entered upon the final
and, possibly, the roughest stage.
Hitherto our progress has partaken of the nature of a
most enjoyable pleasure trip. Fine weather and calm seas
have favoured us all the way from the Bay of Biscay. The
transit through the tropics was not rendered so very unen-
durable as we had imagined it would have been ; whilst the
breaking of our journey at the Cape of Good Hope, has
given many of us perhaps the only opportunity we may
have of visiting Africa,
We are now venturing into the region of storms and
boisterous weather. If, however, the winds be favourable,
we shall hope to reach Adelaide in an unusually short time
—possibly by Friday fortnight next.'
Some of our friends have expressed the hope that our
journal will be printed for distribution when the ship arrives
at Sydney. We will undertake to have it printed, and
forwarded to all those who may desire to possess a perma-
nent record of a very pleasant portion of our lives—provided
these two conditions be fulfilled : Ist. That a reasonable
number of copies be subscribed for. 2nd. That the sub-
scriptions be paid beforehand. The cost per copy will, in
all probability, be about 2s. to 2s. 6d. It will be requisite
that our friends kindly send their names in to the Editor
with as little delay as possible, and he on his part will
undertake to see the journal through the press, and post it
to all subscribers immediately on arrival at Sydney.
MUSICAL DOINGS ON THE CUZCO.
On Tuesday evening, 7th May, 1878, a concert was held on the
quarter deck, commencing at 8 o’clock. The attendance, considering
the state of the weather, which was not quite so smooth as usual,
was decidedly good. The audience warmly applauded the per-
formers, some of whom, on this occasion, made their first appearance
before the critical and highly appreciative public of the Cuzco.
Short notice had been given ; consequently, there had been but little
time for practice ; but all acquitted themselves with great credit.
The chair was taken by the chief officer, Mr. Powell, who introduced
each artiste with the funeral tolling of the dinner bell and with
words of solemn humour. During the interval, between the first
and second part, the prizes won at the late athletic sports, were given
away by Mrs. Kyngdon, We notice, however, with extreme regret,
the absence of ladies’ names amongst the performers ; but we enter-
tain the hope that, for the future, they will come forward and second
the efforts of those who are striving to make our sojourn on board
pass by plfeasanlty. The concert is the first, but will not, we hope,
be the least successful of many more that we expect to hear before
leaving the good ship Cuzco.
Obituary.
May 11.—The Cuzco Times, after a brief existence. Also, on the
same day, the Editor and Sub-editor of the above. N.B. —The
butcher had the skins as a perquisite.
We have to announce, with great regret, the discontinuance of the
publication of that old established newspaper, the Cuzco Times. It
had attained a very limited circulation, and the second number of its
existence. The position it occupied in the field of literature was won
by the accuracy of its information, the breadth of its views, and the
delicacy of its wit and satire.
We noted in our last the wandering of two gentlemen in search of
pastures new, and the unsympathetic reception they met with at
the hands of two officials of the ship. We had no conception who
the sufferers were when we wrote, and least of all that we should
ever eat the Editor and Sub-editor of the Cuzco Times. We must
confess, however, that we never enjoyed roast and boiled mutton
more, and as for the braised sheep’s head, it was simply perfection.
Thus it comes to pass that the intellect of the Times transfused itself
into the Lyre.
Somebody has lost the chance of becoming a benefactor to the
human race, as represented amongst the saloon passengers of the
Cuzco, by forgetting to purchase at the Cape a few gallons of “ Mrs.
Winslow’s Soothing Syrup,” or “Godfrey’s Cordial.” Armed with
a bottle of the magic fluid and a spoon, he would be a welcome guest
anywhere.
A VISIT TO THE KAFFIR PRISONERS AT CAPE
TOWN.
The rebellion of the Kaffirs now in course of suppression by Eng-
lish troops, aided by Colonial volunteers, has caused no small anxiety
and expense to the Government of the Cape.
In dealing with savages, troops trained in modern tactics have
many difficulties to cope with, among which we may enumerate the
immense extent of country over which the rebellion extends, the
intimate knowledge the natives have of their land, and the impos-
sibility of crushing a horde of savages, save by constantly harassing
them, and by cutting off their supplies of food and ammunition.
An enormous trade has been carried on from Birmingham in the
supply of percussion guns, the quality of which may be estimated
from the fact that they are sold, with a profit, for 7s. fid. each.
These, with coarse gunpowder, are bartered by the traders for pro-
duce and skins with the natives.
It has been customary for great numbers of the women of the
Galekas, a so-called neutral tribe, to come down to KingWilliamstown
for the purpose of procuring food and ammunition, and these sup-
plies are immediately handed over to the rebels. Colonel Thesiger
determined to put a stop to such practices by sending all the women
and children to Cape Town, and, much to their surprise, over 3,000
were shipped by steamer from East London, and over 1,000 are still
located in a large yard and shed near Cape Town. The colonists
can engage them for'servants, having to pay them a small wage after
the first six months.
The contrast between the savage, in the blanket given by the
Government, and one engaged as a servant, decked out in new finery,


was very great—a more deplorable specimen of humanity than the
former could scarcely be conceived, whilst the latter looked most
respectable.
African savages are not by any means prepossessing members of
the human race. These women were all clad, or partially so, in a
Government blanket —a most luxurious attire to the one they are
accustomed to at home, which usually consists of a string of beads
(more or less), a brass bracelet or so, with a tobacco pipe in their
mouths, curiously wrought out of stone.
Beauty is perhaps a mere matter of taste, but the charms of a
Kaffir are not regarded as such by a European, whilst the converse
is equally true to the African.
The feminine accomplishment most appreciated in Kaffraria is
muscular force, and wealth is estimated by so many cows. A
daughter is sold for cows, and a husband marries as many wives as
he can spare cows to purchase.
The women have to hoe the ground, to plant, weed, and harvest
the crop, to cook for the household ; but on no account must she
have anything to do with oxen. The men are warriors and plough-
men, and fabricate their weapons and garments.
The possession of many wives undoubtedly entails no small
amount of domestic affliction, and leads to a constant struggle for
supremacy amongst the ladies. In this rebellion the women rush
between the troops and their warriors when retreating, and prevent
the men being fired upon.
The latest news at the Cape is that a company of the 90th rashly
pursued the retreating Kaffirs into the bush, and, they, instead of
fleeing, turned and killed twelve soldiers and wounded two officers,
one of whom died immediately. He had only held his commission
for a year, and was the heir to a considerable property.
The intention of the Government is to break up the tribal organisa-
tion, to reserve a large tract of land for the Kaffirs, and to hold the
surplus acreage for the purposes of colonization.
The origin of the war is difficult to arrive at. One party say that
as no young Kaffir can marry without having killed a man, the
young natives have urged the war on for this reason ; others say,
that as the natives have lately obtained a large supply of old
muskets, they thought themselves able to cope with European
troops. The clergy think that the natives have not had justice done
to them, having been greatly victimised by encroaching colonists—
the Dutch Boers, and avaricious traders. One thing is certain, that
as the wave of civilization advances, so must the savage retreat ;
and as it has been with the North American Indian, so will it be
with the Kaffir—he must either be civilised or be exterminated.
LET LOOSE ON SHORE.
Mr. 0 m’s menagerie we are glad to learn behaved themselves
with moderate propriety, considering the absence of their chief and
their long confinement.
On Saturday, owing to the detention of Mr. 0. on board ship, and
the wet weather, their feelings were kept somewhat under control,
and on the whole they behaved in a dignified manner and took care
not to disgrace the names of the noble families to which they
belong. As the names of “Laughing Hyena,” etc., would appear
too aristocratic to the uncivilized natives, they decided on adopting
the more dignified ones of the “Boss,” “ Sir Charles,” and “Graf
Von S.” They visited the public walks, the Kaffirs, and High Con-
stantia, and they came to the conclusion that the governor had not
done his duty in not having found out that they were on shore and
conducted them personally to the different sights ; in fact their just
indignation rose to such a pitch in the railway carriage that one of
the parties smashed a window, for which he had to pay the sum
of ss.
On Sunday it was decided to take a carriage and do an airing,
and during their drive they made many scientific observations and
took note of many things which common minds would pass by
as devoid of interest. It was discovered that they could
attract the observation of the passers by, by kissing their hands to the
women, saying good morning to the men, etc. The Graf discovered
that the Dutch came from Holland ! ! They visited a religious
service of the Malay, but the devotees got so excited, and made
such a clamour, that the menagerie took fright. About middle day
they arrived at “ Muttenburg” where they fed.
It was observed however that their feeding did not go by without
interruption. The Boss began scratching himself violently, and dis-
regarding all the usual conventionalities of society, turned up his
trousers, when a little host of black animated dots hopped off his
legs, and he was found to be severely bitten. The others very soon
found themselves to be like infected, and Sir George, who is a pro-
found naturalist, pronounced the little creatures to be “fleas.” No
sooner was feeding over than it was deemed advisable to move on,
and the next half hour was occupied in collecting these interesting
little insects.
About five miles further on they arrived in sight of Cork Bay,
and put up at the “Gentle Shepherd of Salisbury Plains,” and
here Sir George was confirmed in his original opinion as to the
species of the insects by reading the following sign over the door :
“ Multum in parvo /” “ Pro bono publico ,”
Entertainment for man or beast, all of a row,
“ Lekherhost" as much as you please,
Excellent beds without any fleas.
“ Nos patriam fugimus," now we are here,
“ Vivamus,” let us live by selling beer,
‘ * On donne a boire et a manger id, ”
Come in and try it, who ever you be.”
After a short rest at the above hospitable inn, the party decided
upon going up the mountain side to search again for fleas in a quiet
secluded spot, and they had the satisfaction of finding some
hundreds. One of the party remarked that the side of the mountain
was covered with geraniums and other flowers. Upon returning to
their hotel they were delighted to find their respected chief, to whom
they related their troubles and adventure ; he accordingly decided
upon taking his menagerie under his wing, so next day took them
for a drive round the “Lion’s Tail,” and regaled them with
champagne on top of the hill. We understand he has applied to
the doctor, for a packet of flea powder. He thinks it advisable to
make a further search for these interesting insects.
THE LADIES COLUMN.
We have come to the conclusion that certain parties who retire to
the extreme north of the deck, in order to look at the Southern Cross,
prefer darkness to light.
“ Keep your eye on the sugar ” the colonists say when a young
fellow is after a girl with money. We in England say “ Keep your
eye on the brass." We know of several young men, including Sarah’s,
who make no end of eyes at the sugar, whilst the young ladies keep
their eyes on the brass (buttons).
‘ ‘ Will any one inform us who that lady is that has such sharp
nails, as we shall be glad to supply nail scissors free of charge upon
application. ”
This is the burden of a communication sent to us, signed, “a
Sufferer.” We give it publicity, because such “animals," we were
about to write, but beg pardon, such charming ladies we mean, are
really dangerous in more ways than one.—[Editor.]
We hear that great latitude is allowed by young ladies to a gentle-
man of considerable longitude !
This morning two young ladies had pointed out to them a large
shark floating by—instead of looking at it, they immediately turned
round to see what gentlemen were doing so.
We are given to understand that some young ladies were bitterly
disappointed on opening the ostrich eggs they had purchased, to find
that they contained no feathers. We commend the idea to bird
fanciers of producing a strain of ostriches that, when fed with chaff,
will lay hats and feathers already trimmed
We heat that the officers of the S. S. Cuzco do not intend, on their
return to London, to give their celebrated minstrels performances at
St. James[ Hall. If they had, it was the intention of several ladies
on board to return, in order to be present. We have no doubVthat
Messrs. Green would have granted free passages, but Messrs. Ander-
son, their partners, were not likely to be so green.
We are disappointed. We thought we should have been favoured
this week with a sight of those interesting diaries kept by two ladies,
one of which contains thirty-nine pages of remarks respecting their
fellow-passengers. In all good faith we should so much like to
publish a selection. Please don’t forget.


We have now a little request to make, and we trust it will be
taken in good part—viz., that an excellent lady, who takes an interest
in everybody’s business, would confine her remarks to a diary, rather
than scatter them abroad to the hurt of some sensitive feelings.
Those gentlemen who had the hardihood to venture ashore on
Saturday, brought back wonderful accounts of their adventures. Not-
withstanding the rain, they felt themselves to be in excellent spirits :
evidently some were in a state of single X, some XX, some XXX.
By-the-bye, can anyone inform us who the individual was who was
so happy outside the theatre ?
SEA SPRAY.
The Cape of Good Hope.
Hope deferred maketh the heart (sea) sick. Everyone hoped,
when we left Plymouth, to reach the Cape in eighteen days ; in
reality, it took twenty days four hours, whilst the quickest passage
on record was by the Union Co.’s new steamer, German, in nine-
teen days eighteen hours.
Everyone made arrangements for picnics on our arrival. We all
hoped for fine weather; an early breakfast was provided, but our
hopes were sadly disappointed.
Everyone who landed hoped to see a thriving colonial town, but
found the place literally stuck in the mud.
Everyone hoped to go to church on Sunday.
We all hoped against hope to get the coaling done on Monday.
We hoped all Tuesday to be off every hour.
We hoped the niggers were honest, but they stole eleven firing
shovels ; if it hadn’t been that the captain hoped the steam-launch
was bringing them, a certain passenger would have been left at the
Cape of Good Hope.
The beer at the Cape is brewed without hop(e)s.
Finally, we all hope to once more visit the Cape of Good Hope.
ACCIDENTS AND OFFENCES.
A pane of glass broken in a jeweller’s shop in Cape Town. Dam-
ges assessed at £2, but 10s. was finally accepted.
Sesveral hats smahed in a Railway train ; one gentleman to pre
serve his from being crushed sat upon it. His unprotected head
was next pushed through the window. Damages, ss. paid.
A second-class passenger projected his stick through both win-
dows of a Hansom cab.
A boat was stolen from the shore by some of the steerage passen-
gers, finally swamped, and rudder lost. Offenders not discovered.
Brigham Young fell into the water alongside the ship. His first
thought was about his wig, which sank. He however immediately
put his hat on his head, and then swam about until he was rescued.
It seems that an excellent lady, who takes an interest in every
body on board, thought of civilising the native negro by presenting
him with a paper collar, for which purpose she had collected a large
stock of those used by the gentlemen when passing through the
Tropics. Imagine her surprise to find the niggers thought them-
selves in full dress when they had a bracelet on and a paper collar
around their knee.
PEPPER AND SALT.
If any one has visited a certain establishment in Monte Carlo,
they cannot help being struck with its resemblance to our smoking
room.
Would it not be desirable for the infants in arms to play Nap as
well as their elders. They never seem to take any naps.
A gentleman was heard to say at dessert that he preferred dates
to raisins unless the latter were out of date. Perhaps he would give
us his raison d'etre for taking dessert at all.
Another gentleman exclaimed at lunch that the sea air made him
aa hungry as a shark. In fact he had a sharking appetite.
When the ship lurched so on Saturday morning we knew there
was a great swell in the Bay. We afterwards learnt that the Har-
bour-master had visited the vessel.
Might we suggest that passengers who persist on going ashore on
such a day as Saturday last should, for the future, be lowered into
the boat with a rope round their necks.
We never before saw such a crowd on board the good ship Cuzco
as on the day of publication of The Lyre.
Are we to consider the biscuits brought to young ladies by the
Captain’s steward as Captain's biscuits.
CORRESPONDENCE.
(The Editor is not responsible for his friends.)
GOOD NEWS FOR CARD-PLAYERS.
Sir, —In talking of games to-day, a gentleman remarked that
chess was very ancient, but that cards were modern and invented to
amuse an idiotic king (Charles IX. of France). Another gentleman
suggested that if cards were invented for idiots, what a number
must be on board. Thinking this information might please the card-
players. —I am, &c.,
One or the Idiots.
May 15, 1878.
FROM THE TROPICS.
Sir, —The following conversation, overheard when entering the
Tropics, is too good to be lost:—
Enter Perspiring Passenger. He seats himself on the Refrigerator.
To him enter the Barman.
Barman : Hullo ! what are you sitting there for ?
P. Passenger : Trying to get a little iced.
Barman : Then you’d better get off; ’cause you’re only keeping
the ice warm.
I remain, &c,,
Long Ears.
THE POOR NEGRO.
Sir, —The niggers in Cape Town are a terribly lazy set of fellows
and we have to thank them for keeping the Cuzco so long coaling
They keep the Mahometan Sabbath, Friday ; the Jewish Saturday
the Christian Sunday ; and then everybody has a holiday Monday
—I am, &c.,
Cape Town.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
WANTED by several couples on board, a cover for the Moon,
Apply to Berths Nos. —.
NOW ON VIEW.
Admittance Nothing.
1. The man who carves the fowls.
2. The chopper he uses.
3. The faces made by the folks he helps.
4. The carving knife he might use with advantage.
LEFT BEHIND AT THE CAPE.—5s. Reward.—A gallon of
Mrs. Winslow’s Soothing Syrup. 5s. will be paid to anyone who
will forward the same by post. Address, Cuzco, 36 - 17, S.
2110 E.
CAN anyone supply a fractious baby with an ounce bottle of
“Godfrey’s” Cordial? Address, Berth No. —.


THE CUZCO LYRE.
A JOURNAL DEVOTED TO TRUTH.
No. 3.] WEDNESDAY, 22nd MAY, 1878. [Price Sixpence.
We have again to chronicle the completion of another
week. In itself we may regard it as an uneventful one
were it not that we have made good progress towards our
destination, having been favoured with strong westerly
winds.
The distance traversed may be said to amount to 2,800
miles, and we can now look forward to reaching Adelaide
before Monday, 2nd June.
One more number of our Journal will be published on
Wednesday, May 29th, and this will complete the series.
The expressed wish of so many that the whole should be
printed at Sydney, cannot be undertaken unless subscrip-
tions amounting to £lO have been paid. If every one
would take two copies the difficulty would be solved.
The appreciation felt by so many at the quiet and orderly
observation of the Sunday, and for the hearty and well
attended services, has not yet found expression in our pages.
We hasten to rectify the omission, and beg now to testify
to the indebtedness we all owe to the Captain and Doctor
for their impressive reading of the beautiful service of the
Church of England, and to the ladies for their assistance in
the singing.
A. B. C.
BY GEORGE ! ! !
A is the Anchor which on Tuesday we weighed,
For we thought at Cape Town much too long we had stayed.
B is the Bar where we tipple and swill,
And, unless I’m mistaken, where some make themselves ill,
C is the Cuzco, that jolly old ship,
And also the Captain, a jolly old brick,
D is the Doctor, I saw him, oh my !
When on shore at Cape Town with a glassjn his eye.
E is for Elwes, a rattling good chap,
But he walks about deck in a horrible cap.
F’s the First Officer, best of us all,
But he’s awfully fat, and he’s terribly tall.
G is a Girl, who wherever she goes,
Into other people’s business will always poke her nose.
H is for Highett, not mother and son,
But mother and daughter, they both are A 1.
I are the Infants, the sweet little dears,
They always are squalling, in trouble and tears.
J, for Jessie and Jeannie, and “J ” eraldine too,
They’re a very important part of our crew.
K are the Kaffirs, we smelt when on shore,
As we all smelt them once, let us smell them no more.
L are the Ladies, God bless ’em I say,
Oh what shall we do when they’re all gone away.
M is for Mac, we have lots of them here,
When one plays his bagpipes, you’d best not be near.
N are some Naughty young people I know,
When their mothers are’nt looking aflirting they go.
0 is for Oram, we’ll put him in prison,
For stealing a kiss, which he knew was’nt his’n.
P is the Purser, who passengers pursues,
If your luggage is heavy he’ll make you pay dues.
Q is the Quizzing goes on in this ship,
Young people don’t mind it, but just let it rip.
R is for Rutherford, wicked young chap,
He spends all his time a playing at Nap.
are the Stewards, who hand round the Ham ;
’Tis also for Southey, who is “Sarah’s Young Man.”
T is the youth who this song doth compose,
If you all feel offended, don’t all pull his nose.
U is for Uhrlaub, who raced in a sack,
When he tried to stand up, he fell down on his back,
V are the Victuals, they carve with an axe;
Don’t speak to the carver, he’ll get in a wax.
W is the Water they give us to drink,
You'll find it much nicer with Whiskey, I think.
X is the Tenner I spent when on shore,
’Twas all I had with me, or I should have spent more.
Y are some Youngmen who should’nt do so,
But the girls are so nice, they can’t help it, you know.
Z are the Zephyrs that blow us along,
As the letters are finished, here’s an end to my song.
What would lead us to suppose that this ship is filled with
convicts ? Answer. —Because all the passengers are in Cuzcody !
MALAY FANATICISM.
To the Editor of The Cuzco Lyre.
Sir, —When at Cape Town, I and three other “ Cuzcoites ” by a
great piece.of luck, saw a sight of such an extraordinary nature that
you may possibly think a description of it worth publishing.
About nine o’clock, I and a worthy Scotchman were strolling
about the streets of Cape Town, when a stranger came up and asked
if we were going to see the Malays, if so he would be happy to show
us the way. We refused at first, thinking it might be a ruse to get
us into trouble, but on being told that the Malays killed themselves
and came to life again, our curiosity got the better of us, so we
followed our guide up several back streets until he came to a small,
white house, opposite a church. Here we found a number of blacks
and Malays crowding round a window, the door of the house and the
passage being so full that it was impossible to enter.
A tremendous noise was going on, which sounded to us like a
regiment of drummers, each doing his best to outdo the other;
this was accompanied by no small shouting (a song I suppose it was
intended for), but although not exactly discordant, it was impossible
to follow the tune.
By dint of pressure (my friend and I being heavy) we succeeded
in getting a peep through the window, having refused to follow our
guide into the house, as we were the only white people there.
Seated in a small room we saw about 200 Malays squatting on the
floor ; twenty or so of these had a very large kind of tambourine in
their hands, while others had cymbals. They were all working away
at these as if their lives depended on it, each at the same time singing
at the top of his lungs. The solo parts of these songs were sung
by a great big fellow, who, with three others, was sitting in a
sort of raised box, before which a number of lights were arranged,
and around it were hung a number of peculiarly worked flags.
The four men inside, we were told were priests, who presided over
the whole ceremony, which was a religious one that happened twice
di year.
In the centre of the group, hopping about from side to side with a
most peculiar action, was an active looking fellow with a beard.
He held in his right hand a sword about three feet long, and as we
looked he deliberately drew it across his throat, and the blood
poured down his neck on to a white blouse he was wearing. As he
did this the shouting and drumming increased to a fearful pitch
(applause, we suppose), then the man retired to the side and sat down.
His place was immediately taken by another, stripped to the
waist, who began the same fantastic dance, pointing the blade of his
sword straight to his stomach ; suddenly, to my horror, I saw him
draw the sword across him, inflicting a gash from which the blood
gushed out a foot in front of him. He now retired, and I saw him
lie down.
We now became aware of one of the most unpleasant odours tnat
it has ever been our lot to meet with, compared with which the
Kaffirs were as “ Eau de Cologne.” Looking down, in front of


me I saw a nigger’s head. I turned and ran; and as Mark
Twain says, “the subsequent proceedings interested me no more.”
Feeling better, I looked for my friend. There he was—one hand
on his waistcoat, the other on his head. “A fellow feeling makes
man wondrous kind,” so linking our arms together, we staggered
down to the hotel, where we tried to cure ourselves with brandy.
Meeting now with two friends, we told our tale. Five minutes
later all four of us were on. our way to the Malays, our friends being
slightly incredulous. This time we went in, and giving a fellow a
shilling, we told him to make way for us if possible. By this means
we obtained a capital place, and as soon as we were settled we saw
a young fellow go down on his knees, and a man with two long thin
swords took hold of the lobes of his ears between his fingers, and
ran the swords through. There was no mistake, as the fellow
came up to us with the blood oozing out of the holes. Next a man got
up with two daggers and plunged them into his thighs, and working
himself into a perfect frenzy, so excited did he get that he was stopped
by the others. Now came quite a young man with a long sword in
his hand; he was so close to us, only three feet away, so we
are all certain there was “no deception,” as the conjurors say.
Raising the sword, he brought it down on his left forearm half-a-
dozeri times, till the blood was literally running on the ground. A
white handkerchief was thrown to him, with which he wiped his
arm, and as he retired he threw it aside perfectly saturated. We
could stand it no longer, all of us being overcome by the terrible
heat and smell.
With regard to the effects of these terribly self-inflicted wounds,
I asked an intelligent little fellow next me. He said sometimes the
men die from the effects, and that if we wait for an hour or two,
when they got more excited, we would see some of them nearly
kill themselves. However, we had enough of it, and we left
thanking our lucky stars that we were not Malays, and that our reli-
gion did not require us to cut ourselves in half as these poor
wretches seemed to be doing. I am, yours, &c.,
One who Knows what a Nigger’s Head is.
On Dit.
We have much pleasure in being able to announce that a marriage
has been arranged to take place between a lady, well known in the
world of fashion for her wit, accomplishments, and beauty, and a
distinguished officer of the famous Orient line. The nuptial ceremony
will be celebrated in the Cathedral of Sydney, and the happy couple
will leave immediately in the S. S, Cuzco for Europe.
THE CUZCO MINSTRELS.
On Saturday evening last, 18th May, the above-mentioned per-
formers gave an entertainment in the Saloon to a large audience of
first and second-class passengers.
The troupe was composed of fifteen members, each of whom was
introduced by Mr. Johnson, the conductor (The Chief Officer) with
a few words and many humorous gestures. He was assisted in his
duties by “ Wang Bosh ” (the Doctor), who was arrayed in the wild
garb of a ferocious North American Indian.
The opening overture by the company was the “Mulligan
Guards,” with a good resounding chorus. George (Mr. Torrens)
was called upon to sing “ Down upon de Swanny River,” a nigger
melody upon the banjo. Silvertenor ( ) next
gave “Do they Miss Me at Home.” The Purser, under the
pseudonym of Snowball, sang “ Have you Seen my Sally ?” with
good effect. “ Just Before the Battle, Mother,” by Lily (the Chief
Engineer); “The Belle of the Ball,” by Dewdrop (Mr. Bowman),
were both sung with applause. “ Orange Blossom ” (Mr. Ferguson)
was encored with “Mary’s Little Lamb.” “Silver Threads
Amongst the Gold,” by Honeysuckle { ), and “Nancy
Till,” by Sunflower (Mr. Bates), completed this first part.
During the interval George gave an original composition, accom-
panied upon the banjo, entitled “ A B C,” the words of which will
be found upon page
The 2nd part commenced with an overture and chorus “ The
Three Jews,” by the company; Silvertenor sang “Just after the
Battle“ Old King Cole ” was given by Orange Blossom;
“Beautiful Star,” by Lilly ; “ Lousianna Lowlands” by George, on
the banjo; “Driven from Home,” by Dewdrop; “Jones’ Sister,”
by Sunflower; “ Killarney,” by Honeysuckle; “The Twins,” by
Moonbeam (Mr. Donkin); and finally “ Wang-go-wah-book ” (the
Conductor), and “Wang-bosh” (the Doctor), brought the enter-
tainment to a close with an original composition, set to the tune of
“The Brave Gendarme.’’ The comical get-up, and still more
comical acting, gave no small amusement to all present
) next
It was announced that shortly a concert would he given to the
third-class passengers.
By reason of the length of the saloon, and the noise of the screw,
many who were present at the far end could hear but little. The
gratitude of all the passengers is due to these gentlemen for the
trouble they have taken to add to the amusement and entertainment
of all on board.
THE CONCERT GIVEN BY THE SECOND-CLASS
PASSENGERS.
On Thursday evening, 9th May, the ladies and gentlemen of the
second-class gave a grand and very successful concert in their
saloon, to which they very courteously invited the first-class pas-
sengers. The vocal and instrumental music was fully appreciated
by the large audience, and the final song, entitled “ The Brave
Gendarme,” was most characteristically sung by the Chief Officer
and Doctor, arrayed in fantastic costumes. Especial remark must
be made to the wonderful hats they wore. The accompanying illus-
tration will vividly recall their appearance. Mrs. Ashton and
Oppenheim, Miss Quine and Knight, Messrs. Swanson, Ferguson,
Donkin, Henderson, Dean, and Foley, are the names of those who
so kindly gave their services on this occasion.
A CASE FOR PHILANTHROPISTS.
We understand that a small boy stowed himself away on board at
the Cape, and was not discovered until the ship was well at sea ;
when discovered he was at once sent to the Galley !
A passenger who has heard of this, asks us to call the attention of
lovers of liberty to what he considers a case of slavery, such as he
thought had long been abolished amongst civilized society. He is
making enquiries with a view to report the matter to H. M.’s
Consul at Adelaide, or any other British possession where we may
call, and will be glad of assistance. He wishes specially to know
where the galley is, as he is not certain whether the lad was sent
adrift in her to row himself on shore, paddling his own canoe in fact,
or whether she is cruising about with her solitary crew chained to
the oar on an inland sea somewhere in the lower depths of the ship.
He is determined that Britons never, never, will be galley slaves,
whilst he is about to protect them.
Notice. —We believe that since the increase of the Tobacco
Duties, more especially it has been the wish of the Government that
smokers who contribute so much to the Inland Revenue, should not
be put to any avoidable inconvenience, and that in particular the
smoking room of the Cuzco should not be occupied on wet and cold
days by non-smokers to the exclusion of hona fide consumers of the
weed.
THE SOCIETY FOR THE RECLAMATION OF
CARD PLAYERS AND OTHER BAD CHA-
RACTERS.
This society, organised a few evenings ago, has, under its worthy
President, commenced its laudable work with much vigour, and it
gratifies us to be able to report that it has already met with success
beyond what could have been expected in so short a time.
The system pursued, as our readers may be aware, is much the
same as that followed during “The Women’s Whisky War” in
America.
A number of the members established themselves beside a “loo”—
no matter how hot —and, by preaching and example, in the shape of
showing how much amusement can be got out of the harmless little
games which they carry on one with the other, it is hoped the poor
sinners may be induced to throw away their cards and join the
society which is ready to embrace them all, without distinction
of age.
As already mentioned, a most encouraging success has attended
these operations. A well-known “ flutterer,” weary of the excite-
ment, has folded his wings and settled himself in-the serene dovecot
prepared for him, and it is hoped that others will soon follow him.
A series of tea-parties will at once be arranged at which the inter-
esting convert will attend and give an address and exhortation,
exhibiting himself as the frightful example, but, at the same time,
illustrating the old adage that “It is never too late to mend.”
A s we go to press we hear that, to ease the strain of a sudden
deprivation, the convert has been allowed to go loose for one more
flutter, but he is expected hopefully to return. Will he ?


MONEY-MARKETS.
Supplies of the former are well maintained ; if not just in the same
pockets, in others.
In commodities there is a wonderful steadiness in good feeling and
forbearance. Gossip mild—harmless qualities abundant. Holders
of stocks of vinegar and bitter kinds find difficulty in moving them.
Cape lamb offering—not believed in ; we believe it will have to be
moved off as mutton. Some Cape cattle have been added to stock,
but we understand they will be used to drag the ship to Adelaide
if necessary, for which their fibre and previous experience eminently
suit them.
Amusements nearly exhausted ; fresh supplies will be welcome, as
also would a stock of the capacity to be amused, which is also
failing.
A DREAM.
The other night being rather done
I turned in early after one;
And as I slumbered in my bunk
I got in an infernal funk.
I tried to move, I tried to scream,
I couldn’t. I’d an awful dream.
I dreamt that we were all at sea ,
And going on right merrily ;
The wind was fair, the sea was calm,
And no one thought we’d come to harm ;
When suddenly the whole scene changed—
A mutiny was all arranged.
A lot of Scotchmen got together
And blew their pipes and changed the weather.
The Captain reading, book in hand,
Was quickly bound. An iron band
Was rove around his lovely waist,
They stuck him to his chair with paste ;
And next our worthy chief was tied,
But not until he had black-eyed
Least half the crew of mutineers,
And made a nose shed bloody tears.
Then little Mac was put to bed—
Macgregor sat upon his head ;
The third and fourth chucked overboard,
The Purser threatened with the sword.
And there they kept him in the blues
Until he paid back all the dues.
Then the scene changed. I saw above,
Four wretched couples all in love.
I thought I heard the organ pealing:
’Twas nothing but the bagpipes squealing.
Methought the ship was made a church,
When just then in came with a lurch
Old Southey, with a great big book,
A lofty glance, his side-long look.
Kind friends, he said, as here you are,
I’ll read the poems of grandpapa ;
Then he began with deep emotion
To read a poem on the Ocean.
I thought I heard a church bell tolling,
’Twas caused by the vessel rolling ;
For what I thought a big bell’s crash
Was all the tumblers gone to smash.
Old Southey smiled, and hummed and hawed,
The audience at once looked bored :
Said he, I publish now the banns
Of marriage twixt some girls andjmans ;
The audience at once looked pleased,
And here old Southey turned and sneezed.
A widow first I’ll give away
Unto a bachelor so gay ;
And now a spinster young and fair
Unto a youth with golden hair ;
One of two sisters given is '
Unto a man who’s called Elwes ;
But here old Southey’s eye grew fixed—
Said he, kind friends, I’m rather mixed ;
For here’s a maid two people claim.
One is called Lewis, t’other swain
Is named Powell, a greatbig man ;
Well! let him have her if he can.
For sad to tell, I here report,
A lovely spinster has a thought
To bring an action soon “in re”
He offered marriage unto she.
This maid confessed to twenty four—
Methinks, kind friends, she’s twenty more.
Again a change came o’er my dream,
But in a church still was the scene.
I thought that I was to be married,
And for the bride alone we tarried ;
At last she came, the knot was tied,
When quick she threw her veil aside.
Oh, horror! horror ! Sad my tale,
The awful creature with the veil
Was not the Bride I hoped was mine.
Poor me, I got knocked out of time ;
For there, dressed out in wondrous clothes,
An awful creature with a nose—
Alas ! alas ! Oh, sad my lot,
The Albatross Macgregor shot.
In vain, in vain, I tried to run,
She always threatened with a gun.
She closer came, and got quite near,
When I was seized with awful fear ;
A dig she gave about the ribs, —
1 really am not telling fibs—
And then a harder dig I got,
“ Some porridge, sir, its nice and hot.”
I wokS up with a start and yells,
My steward said “ It’s gone eight bells.”
NIGHTMARE.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
Found on the after deck, a Ladies’ Hairpin. The owner can
have it by giving a proper description of the same, and paying the
expense of this advertisement. Apply to one of the Managers.
Found on the quarter deck a Wink and several Sly Glances.
The owners can have them returned with interest on applying to
certain well-known parties.
Notice. —Always on hand and for sale, Preserved Child’s
Screams of the most approved and penetrating quality. Mothers
dealt with on the most approved terms. Those taking a quantity, a
pound or two of Yells will be givep in. Apply at Cabin No. **
Notice. —No doubt it will be satisfactory to many of our readers
to know that Wedding Rings in Melbourne are quoted at from
10s. 6d. to 255. Those intending to invest had better (to save trouble)
be measured at once. Orders taken at the Editor’s office, and fit
guaranteed, as well as advice given.
Travellers Beware. —Escaped from Mr. 0 m’s Menagerie, a
very ferocious Flea. This terrible insect is now at large in the
Saloon, and the proprietor hereby gives notice that he will not be
responsible for damages. Ladies are requested not to skip this
advertisement.
NIGHTMARE.


THE CUZCO LYRE.
A JOURNAL DEVOTED TO TRUTH.
No. 4.] WEDNESDAY, MAY 29th, 1878. [Price Sixpence.
We were about to take farewell in this, which we thought
would have been our last issue, of our many friends; but the
unfortunate mishap to the machinery of the vessel will permit
us to appear once or twice more. Our noble vessel is in a
somewhat helpless condition, and can, if favoured with suit-
able breezes, only reach her destination after great delay and
at a very slow rate of speed.
All immediate danger may be thought to be remote—but
to ships in their finest trim the sea is fraught with great un-
certainties. Our vessel is one of the strongest; her officers
are most competent; well manned, and with every precau-
tion taken, we hope for the best; and with delay only we
look forward to reaching Melbourne in safety.
The thoughtless may give but little heed to what may be,
as long as the present is all serene; but the more serious
minded will feel that we are in the hands of God’s provi-
dence. He alone can control the storms and waves and
grant us favourable winds. It is therefore with much plea-
sure we notice that, in accordance with the wishes of a great
many, a service of prayer has been arranged to be held in
the saloon, every morning and evening, at 10 o’clock. By
thus publicly recognizing the Almighty and asking God’s
blessing, we may rest assured that the disappointment and
delay will be overruled for our good, and prove a blessing to
many.
Notice to the Passengers.
“As you are aware we have met with the misfortune of breaking our
main shaft, thereby losing all assistance from our engines; and as
we have to depend upon our sails alone, it is impossible to say what
detention we may have.
I have therefore thought it necessary, under the circumstances, to
reduce the expenditure of provisions, which I hope you will see with
me is the right course to pursue. I know I can rely upon your kind-
ness to assist me by accepting this with a friendly spirit; for I assure
you no one regrets more than I do, that you should, in any way,
be inconvenienced.
28th May, 1878. (Signed) John Murdock, Commander.”
Early Tuesday morning, passengers sleeping in the saloon were
awakened ,by the unusual vibration of the screw, and one
called the attention of the chief engineer to it. The engines were
slowed, and about 7 o’clock a snap or jar was heard; and then they
finally were stopped. This vibration was caused by something being
wrong with the screw shaft —in all probability a slight flaw originally
existing in this massive forging, measuring, as it does, eighteen and
a half inches in diameter, and weighing one ton a yard, has been
gradually extending, and strained by constant work, first a twisting
of the shaft, and at last a complete severance has occurred. What
is exactly the matter cannot be accurately ascertained, as the injury
is in the water chamber —an inaccessible position, until the vessel is
docked for examination.
The following letter was forwarded to the captain, signed by all
the saloon passengers, testifying to the sympathy felt for the dis-
appointment, and expressing the willingness of all to accept what-
ever he may think necessary to arrange for the welfare of all on
board :
“ Captain John Murdock,
Sir,
We, the undersigned, first saloon passengers, in thanking you for
the notice posted to-day for our information, would take this oppor-
tunity of expressing our deep sympathy with you in the accident
that has happened to the ship; and our assurance that whatever
measures you may deem it necessary to take, will be cheerfully
concurred in by us all, and that you have our confidence in all that
relates to the caring for the safety of the ship and all on board.
We remain, yours faithfully, &c.”
(All the first saloon passengers appended their signatures.)
At the time of the accident Cape Otway was about 1,750 miles
distant, and as the progress of the ship may vary from two to six
knots per hour, a daily average mean of say SO miles, would permit us
to look forward to reaching that point in about seventeen days time.
Of course a high following sea would necessitate the ship being
brought-to because of the danger there would be of some great sea
overtaking and pooping her.
There is, we hear, an ample supply of provisions, sufficient to
last the 530 souls on board for forty days, whilst the condensing
apparatus is capable of providing an unlimited supply of fresh
water.
The change of the dinner hour to 1.30 is regarded by many as a
change for the better ; whilst the curtailment of the courses is more
of an improvement than otherwise.
A word on behalf of the children’s meal may not be here out of
place. Many feel that the adults would willingly forego all their
puddings if the little ones might have them, or even one of them,
say the plainest pudding that may appear at table, provided the
children were not stinted. A little self-denial would but increase
the enjoyment of dinner by those who have enough and to spare.
“ OUR SKIPPER.”
“Lost, lost, and can’t be found,
Upon the Cuzco outward bound,
There strayed from 0 ’s menagerie—
A hopping insect called a flea.”
Such',was the notice that I read,
Early one morning leaving bed,
Where I had been most snugly hid,
Living securely. What I did
Perhaps you all will ask of me;
I am the lost one called a flea ;
My native place is Kaffirland,
And I was hatched beneath the sand
That covers part of Africa ;
Where lived my father and my ma.
A roaming spirit, early felt,
I left the land where I had dwelt,
And as a lion stopped to drink,
I jumped upon him in a wink ;
W ho being by a Kaffir shot,
Upon the Kaffir quick I got;
This Kaffir wearing neither clothes,
Nor hairy skins for my repose,
When he went home, his joy, his life,
Came out to meet him, ’twas his wife.
Her hair was frizzly, nice, and thick,
I jumped upon it pretty quick,
And here I dwelt with ease and joy,
For ne’er a comb did me annoy. * -
At last one day there came a row,
A lot of firing. Anyhow,
My home got moved with many others,
The little girls, their little brothers ;
For it appears they were at war
With Whites and Dutchmen (what a “ Boer ”),
For all the women now were sent


Away to Cape Town, where I went,
Here in a long and smoky hut
A thousand Kaffirs got shut up.
These, many people came to see,
And here I saw a chance for me ;
For still, although so far from home,
I felt a yearning yet to roam;
A well-built white man passing near,
I sprang, and landed on his ear,
Aha ! said I, I wont go back,
I much prefer white blood to black.
As hungry dog sticks to a bone
So stuck I to my new found home;
But somewhat queer I soon did feel,
My new found home began to reel,
And then I got into a funk—
My new found home had got quite drunk.
Well, some days later we did go
Upon the good ship The Cuzco-,
And here I saw strange things for me,
A lot of animals at sea.
Ah ! what a noise these beasts would make,
And what a lot of drink they’d take ;
And when I went to bed, each chap
Would tell how much he’d lost at “ Nap—”
A game I do not understand,
Where money goes from hand to hand.
They’d play the candle low in socket ;
They’d play till they were low in pocket;
And all this time good luck for me,
I fed on the Menagerie.
At last one day, being well and strong,
I took a hop, but hopped too long,
1 missed my mark, fell on the floor,
But quickly rose, and sprang once more ;
But this time jumped more meek and mild,
As luck would have it, on a child.
The little beggar went to bed,
I bit it well upon its head ;
The more it cried, the more in frolic
The child 1 bit—they called it colic;
And then I roamed about at ease,
And called myself the King of Fleas ;
But hearing now an awful noise,
“ Oh, oh,” said I, “here must be boys ; ”
So hopped along until I came
Unto a door that had the name
Of “ Surgeon” graven on the plate
Of brass upon the door. ’Twas late,
And many a weary one in bed
Now fain would rest an aching head,
But couldn’t for the awful din
That filled the room I now was in.
A youth there sat, a “ banjo ” playing,
Upon the bed three men were laying,
And crowded round were several more,
Also a crowd outside the door ;
Each with his loudest voice was singing—
Still through my head their songs are ringing—
And all, as I heard some one say,
Because it was the Queen’s Birthday.
How pleased her Majesty must be
To have it kept so well at sea.
They all were drinking “ ginger beer ”
With whiskey in it, this I swear ;
But often by mistake were led
To pour it on each others head ;
And then would come a sad disaster—
A broken glass—which caused much laughter.
At last from here they did disperse,
Some-trjuch the better, some the worse ;
Then some to bed now did retire,
But others, roused by loyal fire,
Of which they now were pretty full,
Out of their beds began to pull
Some subjects of her Majesty,
Which caused a great calamity,
For off they rushed to the saloon,
And not a single bit too soon ;
For there 1 saw, oh joy for me !
A friend of the Menagerie,
For there he sat, don’t think me pert,
Playing the piano in his shirt.
I took a spring and landed fair
Upon his long and curly hair,
I found my home, I there remain,
I will not stray away again.
* A BITTEN ONE.
THE NEW REFORM CLUB—(See Advt)
Motto (D.T.— De Tea—De Te).
A highly successful tea was given in the saloon the other afternoon
by the promoters of the New Reform Club to a distinguished circle
of friends. The promoters of this influential institution have long
felt that the sway held by that unwholesome decoction known as
Tea could only be successfully controverted by the introduction of a
less hurtful beverage, and to judge by the success of the first
crusade, soon every teetotaller will be numbered amongst their sup-
porters. The N.R.C. aim likewise at reform in public speaking, to
judge by the assiduity with which those who addressed the meeting
always stuffed biscuits into their mouths before opening them. The
Chairman invariably requested each speaker to ‘ ‘ dress the ladies.
The delicate colour of the new liquid, its fragrant aroma and
exquisite gustatory sensations, eloquently proclaimed it as a product
derived from the celebrated warehouse of Messrs. Moet and Chandon.
Some of the company complained of D.T. as an after effect.
WHY SHOOT THE POOR BIRDS?
To the Editor of the Cazco Lyre.
Sir —Though only an Albatross, I venture to address you as the
exponent of public opinion in these seas, in the hope that you may
be pleased to listen to a sad tale of ill-treatment and murder. Please
use your powerful influence to get it put a stop to.
A number of us, along with many birds of other species, make it
a practice to follow ships across the ocean wide, and we flatter our-
selves that we help in no small degree to relieve the tedium of a
voyage, and to take away from the feeling of loneliness all must
experience, by exhibiting ourselves in all our beauty of plumage and
grace of movement. ~ ,
Thus we show, amid the solitude of the ocean, all the pride and
glory of vigorous life. In return for this, we only ask for such scraps
of food as you reject', but which are welcome to us, who have to
work harder for our living than you have to. ~
Instead, however, of the welcome we usually get from travellers,
you have taken to shooting at us, and numbers have already fallen
victims to the cruel guns. Some have happily met death at once ;
but by far the greater number have been left to linger on and to die
most miserably from wounds, starvation, and agony unspeakable.
Even those who seem to recover will have to live maimed and
crippled, and all but unfit for the hard struggle for existence.
Surely, Mr. Editor, the customs that prevail amongst men cannot
justify all this infliction of suffering and death upon us. What
harm do we, and what good do you get from maiming and mutilating
US
We sometimes get newspapers thrown from ships, and so we know
that it is considered sport, when you are on shore, to shoot certain
animals and birds ; but then there is much labour and skill required,
and more than equal chances of the game, as you call it, escaping
altogether ; and, even should they be killed, they have the satisfaction
of knowing that they are much relished as food. Neither labour nor
skill is required to hit us, and, when shot, what use are we Even
if we fall on deck, you throw our bodies, with their beautiful wings
and feathers, into the sea. , . . , ,
In a newspaper I once picked up, I saw that in England certain
people called “ Cockney ” sportsmen, out of sheer cruelty and love of
killing, shot our brethren who live in the northern seas, slaughtering
and wounding myriads ; but the rest of the people had combined to
Pr Even that those who take a delight in such
things must be only a minority, and that a small one In_ your ship
we can see that that is so. Pray, therefore, sir, publish this in your
paper, and get the better-minded people to come and interfere and
protect us, as they did in England. • xn i i
I don’t think a law will be required on board, as it was in England,
since the people that use us so cruelly do so only from thoughtlessness ;
and I am sure an expression of opinion against their proceedings will


be enough. Pray thank the ladies very much ; the poor Cape
Pigeon that was caught in a string yesterday and was released, told
us that the ladies, one and all, had expressed their horror in strong
language at the shooting ; and, from the deference all men pay to
them, we feel sure that for the future we shall suffer no molestation,
and we shall be for ever grateful.
From Yours on the Wing,
“THE SPOTTED ALBATROSS.”
SEA SPRAY.
Was the pigeon pie we had for dinner on Saturday made of Cape
Pigeons ?
Some ladies want to know if Cape Pigeons are young Albatrosses ?
Are we not correct in supposing that the sea which leaped on board
early last Saturday morning, and jumping down the cooking galley,
to disappear overboard again through the scuppers, had been cele-
brating the Queen’s birthday in a convivial manner, and was “half
seas over ?” Like other loyal people, it seems to have given great
additional trouble to the stewards.
We were asked an absurd riddle to-day—viz., “ How did the
Cuzco keep the Queen’s birthday.” The answer was obvious—viz.,
“By rolling about all day, and being screwed." Another instance
of being “ half seas over.”
Somebody told us last week, that the cockroaches in Melbourne
were so numerous, that if you left an empty whiskey tumbler out
over night, you would find two or three drowned in it next morning.
Motto for ladies who walked on the deck last Saturday. “ She
stoops to conquer,”
The escaped flea ferociously attacked the Editor last week, on the
Queen’s birthday of course.
Those notes on fellow passengers have not yet come to hand. We
don’t mean to dis(parry)ge them, but we wish the ladies were in the
(hume)our to send us a selection.
MONEY MARKET.
Supplies of money are getting more and more transferred to the
custody of the Bar-keeper; but we believe amongst other arrange-
ments, consequent on the breaking down of the ship, Mr. Keith
will hand it back again to the original owners, who will thus be able
to commence afresh, and the process will be continued “ad
infinitum .”
Stocks of patience, which were getting low, have since risen ; the
heavy call made upon them necessitated their being replenished, and
we hope they will prove sufficient to last the voyage out.
Jollity of the most happy kind is in fair supply. Though belonging
to our Fashion column, we may say here, as we have no such
column, that faces which were worn long fora day or two are now
being cut down to their original dimensions.
Amongst the ladies, pluck and confidence are plentiful, attempts
to introduce tears and despondency were speedily discouraged.
Provisions, when they appear, are rapidly cleared. In order to
keep up the demand, and insure a clearance, the take-off is carefully
gauged, and supplies brought forward accordingly.
Quality, nothing to be complained of.
Jam has not been offered for some days, and in consequence, bread,
which is rather sour, goes down slowly.
It will allay the anxiety of many friends, when we announce that
the Chief Officer was heard to say to-day (Friday) that he had had a
good dinner.
In explanation of the name given to this paper, the title is typical
of the harmony and good-will that have from the first existed on
board, and may such ever continue.
CORRESPONDENCE.
To the Editor of the Cuzco Lyre.
Mr. Editor, —Gentlemen returning from the Opera, on the night
of the 24tb, were astonished to behold the Menagerie loose, one of
the beasts in white robes playing “God Save the Queen,” whilst
others sitting on their tails howled.
We could not help being struck with this most singular proceed-
ing, which shows how great is the instinct of beasts.
1 have not the slightest hesitation in saying that England knew
not what she was losing when these animals embarked, and should
recommend the Cuzco people to keep their eye upon these wonderful
animals.
BY AN OPERA-GOER.
[The above letter calls attention to a curious fact in Natural
History, that notwithstanding the civilizing effects of the Menagerie
the nocturnal instincts of these encaged beasts seemed to delight
themselves at periods of time not commensurate with the peace and
quietude of the more intellectual portion of the community.
The De-scent of Man is not so improbable after all, when we find
educated bipeds, in exuberance of loyalty, attempting to keep
the Queen’s Birthday, by singing so early the next morning the
“ National Anthem ” with howls and not words.
The learned Professor Darwin would undoubtedly classify them
as members of that group of which “The Howling' Baboon ” is a
distinguishing type, or the “Oram”-outang.]
Short commons quicken the intellectual faculties, as the following
gathered at dinner to-day, testify :
Why are many people like The Cuzco ?—Because they have a screw
loose.
What extinct bird do the rolls we now get resemble ’—The
Dodo. (Dough.)
The Cuzco resembles a good many people, because she gets
screwed ; but now she is stopped, whilst they ought to be.
A WARNING.
Kind Editor of “The Cuzco Lyre,”
A paper which one day I’ll be a buyer,
Allow in some column of your respected sheets
This warning to appear for the ensuing weeks.
Some fair young couples, pursued by Cupid’s dart,
Of late—now that the nights grow dark
Choose seats serene soon after tea,
Not thinking that they’re seen by you or me;
And under skylights, in chairs so snug,
Both seemingly content to share one rug.
Here these fair young couples, seeing all before them dusk,
Gradually to one another’s keeping heads entrust;
While through the frosted glass, a soft light from behind
Beams on those heads whom Love hath made so blind!
Kind reader, you may wish to know
How it is that I’ve observed—so-and-so.
Just take a walk at the time I’ve stated,
And perhaps you find remarks not overrated ;
Though if advice you’ll take, my worthy pairs,
Settle down to spoon where no one stares.
If here you cannot some more secluded spot contrive,
Draw it mild until at Melbourne you arrive.
By no Mean Intruder.
FOUND, in the Smoking-room, an insect that might be called
m polite language a “four-wheel cab.” It is now on view at the
Menagerie, but will be restored to the flock from which it has
strayed on application. In case of more than one claimant, identi-
fication will be required
NOTICE TO GENTLEMEN HELPS.-Wanted a Laundry Maid
Apply to the Chief Steward,
WANTED, by a Young Gentlemen of long experience (height 6
feet 2 inches), and amiable disposition, a situation as Lady’s
Maid. Accustomed to tie up Cambridge blue ribbons in half a gale
of wind. Is a safe and suitable companion for fiancees.
SPLENDID OPPORTUNITY. N. R. C. D. T. Wanted imme-
diately by the New Reform Club an earnest ypiSli, accustomed to
small tea parties and the reformation of disreputable characters
Inexperience no obstacle. Duties, every evening to report on the
“goings on” of several well known parties, and other menial occu-
pation. If possible, should have a faculty for meddling in other
persons business. The salary will be paid in soft soap, and an
introduction will be given to a Private Inquiry Office on arrival at
Melbourne.


First Week.
Days
from
Plymouth
Date.
Lati-
tude
Longi-
tude.
Miles.
Remarks.
1
2
3
4
Thun, 18th April
Friday, 19th ,,
Sat., 20th „
Sunday,JJ1 st ,,
Monday,
Tues., 23rd ,,
Wed., 24th „
43.09 N.
38.33 N.
34.01 N.
9.28 W.
11.14 W.
18.11 W.
490.6
290
288
Gravesend to
Plymouth.
Left Plymouth 6 p.m.
Hy. W. gale, conf. sea.
Less rolling & less wind
Still Atlan. swell. Wet
Second Week.
Days
from
Plymouth
Date.
Lati-
tude.
Longi
tude.
Miles.
Remarks.
5
Thur., 25th April
29.10 N.
15.33 W.
315
Very fine, light airs.
6
Friday, 26th ,,
24.08 N.
17.25 W.
318
Do. do.
7
Sat., 27th „
18.44 N.
18.06 W.
326.2
Do. do. Hot
8
Sunday, 28th ,,
13.28 N.
18.11 W.
316
Very much hotter.
9
Monday, 29th,,
8.53 N.
16.26 W.
310
Do. Head wind
10
Tues., 30th ,,
5. 7 N.
13.18 W.
292.9
11
Wed., 1st May
1.23 N.
10.18 W
287.4
Do. Strong do.
PART V.
PASSENGERS.
ADELAIDE.
Mr. Edmund Bowman Mr, J. M. Lewis
Melbourne.
Mr, and Mrs. Thomas Bates Mr, and Mrs. Nasmith
Mr. W. Elwes Mr. and Mrs. Allan and Mr. G.
Mr. A. F. Harding Rutherford
Mrs. and Miss Highett Mr. and Mrs. Salomon
Mr. and Mrs. Horne and party (8) Mr. Simonson
Miss Hume Mr, A. Torrens
Mr. Ed. Lucas Mrs. Vale and Family (5)
Mr. W. P. and A. and Miss Mac-
Gregor
SYDNEY.
Dr. W. N. Erith Mrs. Le Patourel and child
Mr, and Mrs. Finlayson, family (3) Mr. C. and N. Newton
and servant Mr, Gustave Noblot
Miss Gibson Mr. F. J. Round
Mr. and Mrs. Humphreys and Mrs. Stuart Russell
child Mr. Sydney Scammell and Miss
Mr. and Mrs. Kyngdon and family Scammell
(7) Mrs. Mayo
Mr. W. Lance Mr. John Treseder
NEW ZEALAND.
Mr. and Mrs. Richard Parry,
Mr. John Butler Mr. H. Southey
Mr, W. P. Croft Mr. John Phillips
Miss Godfrey Mr. J. McArthur
Miss Catherine Hill Mr, Edward P. Wilson
Mr. J. W. Oram
TASMANIA.
Mrs. and Master Fincham.
QUEENSLAND.
Mrs. DeCourcy Barton, family (4) Mr. and Mrs. Frederick Horwood
and servant and family (9)
Miss Bogue The Misses Ross (2)
Mr. Albert and Carl Henricks Miss Street
Mr. and Mrs. Robert Travis
Officers of the Cuzco.
Captain, John Murdock 4th Officer, Mr. Lea
Chief Officer, Mr. Powell Chief Engineer, Mr. McDougall
2nd ditto, Mr. McDougall Doctor, Dr. Barnes
3rd ditto, Mr. Ridler Purser, Mr, Francis
THE DIARY OF THE S.S. CUZCO.
Diary of the voyage of Orient Steam Navigation s.s. Cuzco, from
London to Melbourne, April 18th to June 18th, 1878 :—
Average speed to Cape 288'5 miles per day.
Do. from Cape to breakdown .. 309 ,,
Greatest run 330 ,,
Miles to Cape .. .. 5,820
Miles to Portland .. .. 5,902
Miles to Melbourne .. .. 250
Total about.. .. 11,972 miles.
Thursday, 18th April, 1878. —Passengers joined at Gravesend.
First night on board exquisite moonlight.
Friday, 19th April.—Left for Plymouth at 10.6 a.m.; proceeded
slowly at first. When off the Goodwins suddenly enveloped in a
fog; anchored for 3 hours. Constantly sounding the fog whistle.
Proceeded carefully down channel. Could distinguish the various
towns on the coast by the reflection of their gas lights.
Saturday, 20th April.—Delayed by fog until midday, when sud-
denly disappeared, and we had bright sunshine. A swell coming
up the Channel somewhat affected many of the passengers. All
were pleased with the short respite afforded on entering Plymouth
Sound. The mails and passengers were quickly transferred on
board ; those friends who had accompanied the ship from Gravesend
returned in the tug Volunteer, and at 6 o’clock the Cuzco left for
Australia, via the Cape of Good Hope. On the way out H. M. S.
Hotspur was passed, at anchor, home from the Mediterranean for a
refit.
Sunday, 21st April, First Day.—The vessel felt the long swell
coming up Channel, and as there was a strong westerly gale with
heavy cross sea running in the Bay of Biscay, the “Cuzco ” had a
lively time of it. There was no service. Those who were not con-
fined to their cabins had a difficult task to walk on deck. They
report the waves as being higher than the ship’s rail, and when
rolling, the waves came far above the portholes. Nearly all the
passengers were ill.
(The Cape mail steamer, Conway Castle, left Dartmouth on
April 19th at 12 noon, and had (we learnt at the Cape) a heavy
westerly gale with confused sea, and had had her live stock washed
overboard).
Monday, 22nd April, Second Day.—Run from Plymouth, 490'6
miles. The sea moderated somewhat, slight showers. Sighted Cape
Finisterre, and at intervals the Portuguese coast.
Tuesday, April 23rd, Third Day, 290 miles, 780'6 from Plymouth
- Somewhat cloudy, with showers. Breeze favourable, most of the
invalids on deck.
Wednesday, 24th April, Fourth Day, 288 miles, 1,068*6 miles.—
Bright sunshine, light airs, delightful weather, the sea exquisitely
blue. Scarcely any rolling. Off the Morocco coast. A stowaway
found, made to work for his passage.
Thursday, 25th April, Fifth Day, 315 miles, 1383 6 miles.—See
calm, little or no wind, passed at a distance the islands of Canary
and Teneriffe standing up mistily beyond the crisp deep blue of the
horizon. We were closer to Canary, and could distinguish many
crags and pinnacles of rock. A sweepstakes amounting to over £7
on the number of miles run to-day was won by Mrs. Highett, £1 of
which was witheld on behalf of the Aged Seaman’s Society.
Friday, 26th April, Sixth Day, 318 miles, 1,701'6 miles.—The
increasing warmth of the weather betokens our approach to the
Tropics. The awning is up, and serves as a protection from the sun
and smuts. We notice the shortness of the twilight, the sudden
setting of the sun, the brightness of the Zodiacal light, and the first
appearance of the Southern Cross. All our boxes were had up to-
day from the hold. An attempt was made to get up a dance on
deck after tea, the officers used their utmost persuasion, but the
ladies did not respond.
Saturday, 27th April, Seventh Day, 326-2 miles, 2,027-8 miles.—
The good run of to-day raised many hopes of our overtaking the
Conway Castle , and of making a very quick passage to the Cape.
The first number of the Cuzco Times was posted up, and created a
great deal of interest, both as to its contents and who the editors
might be. It contained theories of its own upon the failure of last
night’s dancing, quizzed the high heels of the ladies, and did not
spare the Doctor and Chief Officer. We saw several birds, some
Portuguese men-of-war, and a school of whales.
Sunday, 28th April, Eighth Day, 316 miles, 2,343 8 miles.—A
very bright sunny day, the heat being tempered by the vessel’s own
breeze. The ship’s company were all mustered, and called to boat
and fire drill. The Captain, at 10.30, read the Church of England
service on the quarter-deck, there being a large attendance of pas-
sengers. Several ladies led the singing, and great satisfaction was


Thibd Week.
Days
from
Plymouth
Date.
Lati-
tude.
Longi-
tude.
Miles.
Remarks.
12
Thurs., 2nd May
2. 5 S.
7,40 W.
261.2
Very hot.
13
Friday, 3rd ,,
5.43 S.
4.36 W.
285
Do.
14
Sat., 4th „
9.19 S.
1.36 W.
280
Head wind and adverse
15
Sunday, 5th ,,
12.54 S.
1.24 E.
278
Do. do. [current
16
Monday, 6th ,,
16.33 S.
4.37 E.
288
Do. do.
17
Tues., 7th ,,
20. 9 S.
7.46 E.
281
Do. More cloudy.
18
Wed., 8th ,,
24. 2 S.
10.43 E.
286
Do.
Fourth Week.
Days
from
Cpe.—Ply.
Date.
Latitude.
Longi-
tude.
Miles
Kun.
Remarks.
19
Thurs., 9th May
27-31 S.
13 39 E.
278
5471'3, head wind.
20
Friday, 10th ,,
31-50 S.
16-47 E.
289
5760 3, delightful day.
21
22
23
24
1 25
Sat, ilth
Sunday, 12th ,,
Monday, 13th ,,
Tues., 14th ,,
Wed., 15th „
About 60
In Table Bay.
3617 S. | 21.10 E. | 217
5820'3, arrd. atlOp.m.
Too rough to coal.
Coaling.
Left at 4 p.m.
Rolling in Gf. Agulha*
expressed at the orderly observance of the Sunday and the impres-
sive reading of the service. There was also evening service at 8
p. m. Two very hearty services were held by a clergyman of the
Church of England and some Nonconformist ministers for the
second class and steerage passengers.
Monday, 29th April, Ninth Day, 310 miles, 2653'8 miles.—A plea-
sant breeze tempered the heat of the weather during the day, but the
nights were trying to all, several slept on deck, others in the saloon
The death of a steerage passenger cast a gloom over the whole ships’
company. He appears to have increased a cold by sleeping on deck
the night after we had passed through the Bay of Biscay. An
African dove, exhausted with her long flight, having evidently been
driven from the coast some 80 miles distant, hovered around the
ship and alighted on the rigging, only it is feared to fall into the sea
later on in the day.
Tuesday, 30th April, Tenth Day, 292 9 miles, 2946 7 miles. —At 8
a.m. the steerage passenger was buried. The body was sewed up in a
shotted hammock, and covered with a flag ; the Captain reading the
burial service. Many of the passengers and crew attended at this
solemn occasion. Before night, sad to say, the only relative of the
deceased on board, an elderly man, was found dead in his cabin.
Although the day was exceedingly hot, the athletic sports came off.
Many of the competitors were bruised and strained somewhat, all
felt the extreme heat, and one young fellow severely cut the sole of
his foot by treading on the coal bunker plate, which happened to be
turned the wrong side up.
Wednesday, Ist May, Eleventh Day, 287’4 miles, 3234 I miles. —A
very hot May day. The burial of the old man was conducted before
six o’clock this morning. We crossed the line to-day, but none of the
proceedings that sailors delight in were permitted. We saw the last
of the Pole Star this evening. By reason of the moisture-laden
atmosphere the stars are not so brilliant as might have been expected.
The piano being brought upon deck, dancing was carried on with
spirit by a few.
Thursday, 2nd May, Twelfth Day, 261 2 miles, 3234T mile.—
Another hot day. The speed of the vessel cannot be maintained,
when the heat of the water used for condensing is as high as 80°,
besides the furnaces cannot burn their full proportion of coal when
the air is so rarified. Also the number of windsails, necessary for
ventilation, greatly impede the ship’s progress. Boxing and sparring
are now in fashion, even the small boys have to put on the gloves.
Friday, 3rd May, Thirteenth Day, 285 0 miles, 3780 3 miles.—Our
runs each day fall off by reason of the wind and current being both
against us, so that our hopes of making the quickest passage on
record to the Cape are not likely to be realized. Boxing still the
ruling mania. In the evening we had a spirited performance on the
bagpipes. Our first good sun-set ; hitherto they have been very
disappointing. The rich blue tints of the ocean are, however,
worthy of all admiration.
Saturday, 4th May, Fourteenth Day, 280 miles, 4,060'3 miles.—
A little colder, we still have wind and current against us. The
ocean so far has been singularly devoid of life, but during the day a
large fish was seen, probably a shark. The second series of Athletic
Sports came off today. In the evening the “Cuzco Minstrels”
gave an entertainment on deck, in a stage rigged out with flags. The
get up was capital, and the performance was most successful. It
would be invidious to distinguish one member of the troupe before
the other, but the costume of “ Bones ” and his comic by-play were
most laughable—Mr. Powell, our chief officer, was the hero. The
“ Cock-a-doodle-do ” song of Mr. Ferguson, the chief steward, was
perfect in its mimicry and crowing. The chief cook danced a break
down. The riddles asked were very much to the point, for instance,
“What is the difference between the good ship Cuzco and the
passengers? Answer.—The one is fast, and the others are slow.”
“ Why are young widows and the Cuzco Minstrels very much alike?
Answer.—Because neither intend to wear their black long.” The
piano being on deck, dancing as a matter of course ensued. The
second number of the Cuzco Times was posted up, and soon after
mysteriously disappeared, very few having read it. Several of the
passengers feeling the point of last night’s riddle, joined together
to form an “ Entertainment Committee.”
Sunday, sth May, Fifteenth Day, 278 miles, 4,338'3 miles.—A
Tropical day, with a pleasant breeze for those beneath the awning.
The service was again held on the quarter deck, the captain reading
the beautiful Service from the Prayer Book in a very feeling and
impressive manner. The Lessons were read by the Doctor, and the
singing was lead by the ladies. The ministers held services for the
second class and steerage passengers in the forepart of the ship. A
sad casuality happened at lunch —a lady was shot in the back of
the head with a sodawater cork ! The sunset was exquisite, the
bright disc of the sun going down so rapidly behind the deep blue of
the horizon followed by twilight for a few minutes, and then night.
Just before bed time the lights of the homeward bound Cape Mail
Steamer were discerned. It was to be regretted that we had not
passed her in daytime, for then our number would have been
signalled, and friends in England would have heard of us many
weeks sooner than they now will be able to do.
Monday, 6th May, Sixteenth Day, 288 miles, 4,626 3 miles. —Many
plans are being talked over with regard to what we shall do on our
arrival at the Cape, which we look forward to doing on Friday next.
The “ Entertainment Committee ” was formed to-day, they
determined upon the publication of a newspaper, and made arrange-
ments for some concerts. Accordingly the prospectus of the Cuzco
Lyre, a Journal devoted to Truth,” made its appearance. Great
amusement was created by the vigorous dancing of the second class
passengers, amongst whom the chief officer and doctor were
conspicuous.
Tuesday, 7th May, Seventeenth Day, 281 miles. 4,907‘3 miles.—Still
very fine, slightly stronger head breeze, and a long ocean swell,
which troubled some of the passengers, nevertheless, the grand
concert was given in the evening on the quarter-deck. During the
interval, Mrs. Kyugdon distributed the prizes won at the recent
athletic sports. We think we overtook the Conway Castle during
the night, as the lights of a steamer were passed.
Wednesday, Bth May, Eighteenth Day, 286 miles. 5,193'3 miles.—
Head wind and swell, causing the vessel to roll. The first number
of “The Cuzco Lyre ” was published to-day, together with a car-
toon of the First Officer in nigger get-up. Numerous sea birds
hovered around, indicating our approach to land ; amongst them
were Cape hens, whale birds, and several of the petrels.
Thursday, 9th May, 1878, Nineteenth Day, 278 miles, 5,471
miles.—ln the prospect of our stay at the Cape for a day or
two, passengers were busy arranging picnic parties and excursions.
During the evening the concert given by the second class passengers
took place in the saloon. To it they courteously invited the first
class passengers ; and all passed off with satisfaction, the Chief
Officer and Doctor figuring away in the “ Brave Gendarme.”
Friday, 10th May, Twentieth Day, 289 miles, 5,760 miles. —The
pleasantest day we have had—so bright and refreshing. Just before
dinner a hitch occurred in the steam-steering gear, and when the
ordinary hand-steering wheels were being thrown into use, it was
found that the clutch was Jammed; meanwhile, the engines were
going ahead full speed, and in consequence the ship began to perform
a grand circle. When, however, the engines stopped, all was
quickly set to rights. The steam gear is a new patent by Messrs.
Bow and M ‘Lachlin, of Paisley, and the experience gained this
voyage in working it, will prove of service to perfect the invention.
In the afternoon we first discerned land, and, until daylight failed
us, could plainly see the high mountains of the African coast. At
ten p.m. we arrived, after a run of twenty days and four hours from
Plymouth, the quickest passage on record, save the famous one


Fifth Week.
Days
from
Cpe.—Ply.
Date.
Lati-
tude.
Longi-
tude.
Miles.
Remarks.
2 26
Thurs., 16th May
38.47 S
26.37 E.
300
Fair wind.
3 27
Friday, 17th „
39.13 S.
32.44 E.
288
Not much wind.
4 28
Sat., 18th ,,
40.23 S.
39.27 E.
319
Wind more favourable.
5 29
Sunday, 19th ,,
40.29 S.
46.51 E.
334
Very favourable wind.
6 30
Monday, 20th,,
40.35 S.
53.34 E.
314
Do.
7 31
Tues., 21st ,,
40.37 S.
60.41 E.
324
Do.
8 32
Wed., 22nd „
40.32 S.
67.40 B.
318
Do.
-
Sixth Week.
Days
from
Cpe.—Ply.
Date.
Lati-
tude.
Longi-
tude.
Miles.
Remarks.
9 33
10 34
11 35
12 36
13 37
14 38
15 39
Thurs., 23rd May
Friday, 24 th ,,
Sat, 25th ,,
Sunday, 26th ,,
Monday, 27th,,
Tues., 28th „
Wed., 29th „
40.40 S.
40.25 S.
40.26 S.
40.26 S.
40.38 S.
40.16 S.
40.21 S.
74.21 E.
81.35 E.
89.35E.
95.10 E.
101.58 E.
107.45E.
108.53 E.
310
330
322
300
318
255
51
Heavy sea.
Do. with squalls.
Do. Head wind.
Strong head winds.
Fair wind, heavy sea.
Broke main shaft.
Not much wind. .
made by the German, the new steamer of the Union Co., on her first
voyage, when she had every favourable circumstance to accelerate
her progress. It was past one o’clock before we anchored. The
water in Table Bay was exquisitely phosphorescent, and the lights
of Cape Town just fringed the base of the grand and magnificent
Table Mountain, which we could discern distinctly. The Conway
Castle arrived two hours after we did. They did their best to pre-
vent our beating them. In contrast to the harmony that has
reigned amongst our saloon passengers, we learnt that no two ladies
on board of her were on speaking terms. The Torrens, a full-rigged
ship from Adelaide to London, arrived just after we did, having had
an unusually rapid run. She had on board 300 tons of breadstuffs
on speculation for the Cape, but could get no market. There were
fifty passengers.
Saturday, 11th May, Twenty-first Day, 60 miles, 5820'3 miles. —To
the disappointment of everybody a brisk gale had sprung up during
the night, a heavy swell came rolling in, and the driving rain pre-
cluded all excursions on shore. Moreover, it was impossible to
attempt coaling—much to the vexation of the Captain. Table
Mountain was wholly obscured by mist. Several gentlemen had the
hardihood to venture ashore, notwithstanding the danger of getting
on board the boat. Their exploits in embarking afforded no small
amusement to those on deck. On their return they reported Cape
Town to be a sea of mud.
Sunday, 12th May, Twenty-second Day.—A little rain fell in
morning, but the rest of the day was tine. The sea moderating,
several ventured on shore, the getting into the boat not being so
dangerous. Those remaining on board had an excellent view of the
Table Mountain, and of the Blueberg Mountains on the opposite
side. Coaling was continued all day, but it was very vexatious to
see the lazy way the blacks worked —only 315 tons were got on
board.
Monday, 13th May, Twenty-third Day.—A most delightful day.
Everyone going on shore, and breaking up in various parties. Some
having friends to visit, some to explore the town, whilst the greater
number went the beautiful drive to High Constantia and inspected
Messrs. Van Renen’s wine cellars. Three qualities of wine seem to
be made—Sherry, Hock and Pontac, or Port. The wines are some-
what sweet in character. Large quantities of the Pontac are used
for Church purposes in England. The stoppage at Table Bay
affords a break in the long sea voyage, appreciated by all save the
Orient Company. One curious sight at the Cape was the captured
Galeka women and children, an account of whom appeared in the
Cuzco Lyre, No. 2; together with the curious and dreadful cere-
monies performed by the Mahometan Malays. Everyone rejoined
the ship at dinner, when all had some experience to relate, and
anecdote to tell. The Cuzco is the second vessel of the Orient Line
that has stopped at the Cape, but the slowness and delay in
coaling are very vexatious—Boo tons were on board when work was
over to-day.
Tuesday, 14th May, Twenty-fourth Day.—About 150 more tons of
coal were taken on board ; also twelve beef oxen, purchased at £l4
a-piece ; together with supplies of fish, fruit, and vegetables, which,
with 950 tons of coal, involved an expenditure of about £3,500. In
addition to this, the money spent by the passengers cannot fall far
short of £4OO a ship. If a vessel of this company calls each month ;
the total sum of money that will be expended in Cape Town cannot
amount to much less than £40,000 a-year. It would be as well if
the Cape Town people were a little more energetic in business
matters. At the very last moment it was discovered that the
negroes had stolen eleven tiring shovels, and as the steam launch
was sent for them, the ship delayed till she came alongside. She
had not the shovels, however, but a second-class passenger, the
clerk to the Purser, who had a narrow escape of being left behind.
Two firemen were detained at the Cape, having broken the laws of
the colony; and several passengers had duckings and other accidents
through a temporarily impaired state of health. We started for the
second instalment of our voyage, amounting to 5,500 miles, at 5
o’clock, and passed, about 10 o’clock, Cape Agulhas light, the
southernmost point of Africa. The whole night we had plenty of
rolling, because a sqod sea is generally to be found off this point.
Wednesday, 15th *May, Twenty-fifth Day, first day from the
Cape, 217 miles.—Picked up a breeze from the westward, all sails
set, which considerably helped our onward progress. A clipper
ship will sail quite as fast as a steamer with the strong trade winds
of these latitudes. The tin of a large shark was seen to-day. Our
course is edging down slightly towards the south in order to fall in
with the trades, but the Captain does not intend going below 41°.
Thursday, 16th May, Twenty-sixth Day, second day, 300 miles,
517 miles. —The second number of The Cuzco Lyre was published
to-day, and speedily became the chief topic of interest, it being
considered a good issue. When at the Cape a small boy got on
board, making no attempt to hide, and being discovered, has to
help in the cooking galley. We heard that two negroes, who had
been engaged in coaling the “ Garonne,” have been missed. It is
supposed they fell asleep in the coal bunkers, were smothered there,
and in all probability would be dug out before reaching Adelaide.
The two stowaways from London ran off at the Cape.
Friday, 17th May, Twenty-seventh Day, third day, 288 miles,
805 miles.—The Purser distributed the extra luggage charges to-day,
so the passengers had something to grumble about, but it is his duty
to collect the charges made in London. The first albatross was seen
to-day, also a whale. It was suggested that the Lyre should be
printed at Sydney.
Saturday, 18th May, Twenty-eighth Day, fourth day, 319 miles,
1,124 miles. —Picked up the S.W. winds before nightfall, and with
them came a little more rolling. Our course is now due East.
After dinner the “ Grand Cuzco Minstrel Entertainment” was given
in the saloon to a large audience of first and second class passengers.
It was somewhat long, and the people at the far end could scarcely
hear ; however, the “ gets up ” were very good, and the conductor-
ship of Mr. Powell afforded no small amusement, more especially
his joint song with Dr. Barnes of the “ Brave Gendarme.”
Sunday, 19th May, Twenty-ninth Day, fifth day, 334 miles,
1,458 miles. —S.W. trades blowing fresh, with increasing sea, and
all sails set, thus helping our progress materially. Had service
morning and evening in the saloon ; well attended, and a day well
kept. After evening service many joined in the usual hymn singing.
In the second class saloon a very hearty service was also held.
Numerous sea birds hovering around the ship in search of morsels of
food thrown overboard.,
Monday, 20th May, Thirtieth Day, sixth day, 314 miles, 1,772
miles.—Strong winds and high following seas. It was very pleasant
to watch the graceful soaring of the numerous sea birds, to see how
closely their wings would skim the tumultuous waves, and then
rising without a flap or seemingly any muscular effort to pounce
upon and flutter around any piece of food thrown overboard.
These living friends accompanying us across the trackless ocean
should be cherished, and not made a target for cruel and wanton
sport. The evening was memorable from the episode in which the
* * and a certain young lady were the chief figures, and will ever
be recollected by those present in the saloon by the following words,
“ Charlotte, name the day, and make me a happy man.”
Tuesday, 21st May, Thirty-first Day, seventh Day, 324 miles, 2,096
miles.—Dull and showery and sea rather rough. Mr. Ashton, an
artist proceeding to Melbourne, kindly lent his sketch books, which
helped to pass the evening. Steering by the stern wheels.
Wednesday, 22nd May, Thirty-second Day, eighth day, 318 miles,
2,414 miles. —A bright, clear day, wind very fresh and in our favour,
every sail set and making capital progress. The publication of No,
3 of the Lyre created the usual amusement, and was considered a
good number. The engines were stopped ten minutes for examina-
tion, according to the rule laid down by the owners, that they
should be inspected once a week.


Seventh Week.
Days
from
Cpe.-Ply.
Date.
Lati-
tude.
Longi-
tude.
Miles.
Remarks.
16 40
Thurs., 30th May
40.25 S.
109.31E.
31
Light winds
17 41
Friday, 31st ,,
40.50 S.
112.51E.
150
Strong favorable breeze
18 42
Sat., 1st June
40.52 S.
115.52 E.
137
Ditto
19 43
Sunday, 2nd „
41.25 S.
117.56E.
95
Hove-to—a gale
20 44
Monday, 3rd ,,
42.16 S.
119.58E.
106
Gale all day
21 45
Tues., 4th ,,
41.39 S.
122.55 E.
140
Wind favorable
22 46
Wed., 5th „
40.29 S.
126.20 E.
170
Ditto
Eighth Week.
Days
from
Cpe.—Ply.
Date.
Lati-
tude.
Longi-
tude.
Miles.
Remarks.
23 47
Thurs., 6th June
39.38] S.
129.28E.
152
Wind favorable
24 48
Friday, 7th ,,
39.44 S.
131. 0E.
72
High following sea
25 49
Sat , 8th ,,
39.30 S.
132.55 E.
90
S. East gale
26 50
Sunday, 9th ' „
39.22 S.
134. OKI
51
Hurrc. sqls.& heavy sea
27 51
Mon , 10th ,,
39.14 S.
135.49 E.
85
Still hove-to
28 52
Tues., 11th ,,
38.44 S.
138.17 E.
119
Wind favorable
29 53
Wed., 12th „
38.49 S.
139.17 E.
47
Thursday, 23rd May, Thirty-third Day, 9th day, 310 miles,
2,724 miles. —A heavy sea all day. The Cuzco can roll. People
sitting or walking on deck had many a slip or tumble, fortunately
no accident occurred. It was an amusement, rather dangerous for
ladies to indulge in. The greater number of the passengers
have subscribed for copies of The Lyre when published.
Friday, 24th May, Thirty-fourth Day, tenth day, 330 miles, 3,054
miles.—Heavy seas, plenty of rolling, sudden squalls, with a continua-
tion of yesterday’s slipping about. The Queen’s Birthday was recog-
nised at dinner by the drinking of the usual loyal toast, principally
in water. The Orient Company having been so recently formed,
evidently forgot thatthis event would occur during this voyage. Some
however made up for this deficiency, and indulged sleeping ladies
and wearied children to “ God Save the Queen,” with vocal accom-
paniments that made night hideous.
Saturday, 25th May, Thirty-fifth Day, eleventh day, 322 miles,
3,376 miles.—Heavy rolls all day, wind shifting round, all sails
reefed. Air sharp and cold. Before breakfast a sea broke against
the ship and the spray came on board, flooding the galley as well as the
cabins on either side of the engine room. The “New Reform
Club ” gave a tea to many friends, the beverage in the teacup con-
sisted of Moet and Chandon’s celebrated concoction.
Sunday, 26th May, Thirty-sixth Day, twelfth day, 300 miles, 3,676
miles. —Strong head wind, a southerly gale, causing the ship to roll
heavily, and rendering standing up at service a matter of no small
difficulty. The vibration of the screw greatly disturbed those who
slept in the saloon.
Monday, 27th May, Thirty-seventh Day, thirteenth day, 318 miles,
3,994 miles.—Fine day, fresh wind, heavy sea. Our daily average
distance run is lessened by reason of the inferior quality of the Cape
coal. Great complaints of the sour bread made of bad flour, and of
the scanty supply of the preserves, potted meats, and fish.
Tuesday, 28th May, Thirty-eighth Day, fourteenth day, 255 miles,
4,249 miles. —The unusual vibration of the screw so affrighted those
sleeping in the saloon, that the Chief Engineer was called up, and
reduced the speed of the engines in consequence. Neither on deck
nor in the engine-room was anything heard or noticed, notwith-
standing the careful watch kept. However about 7.45 a.m. the
engines stopped. The main shaft was broken in the water chamber,
leaving this ship, distant 1,750 miles from Melbourne, wholly de-
pendent upon her auxiliary sailing power. The notice that appears
in page 12 informed the passengers of the nature of the mishap,
and in response all the saloon passengers signed the letter to the
Captain, printed at length in page 12. Considering that there were 500
lives on board, it was a wise precautionary measure to reduce the
consumption of provisions. It is a matter for serious consideration
with the Directors if they act with justice to the reputation of their
Company in provisioning a ship with so many passengers, and
making one of the longest of voyages, on a scale calculated so closely
as to require this. Query—lf the accident had occurred 3,000
miles from everywhere what would have been the daily allowance ?
At the very least there should have been three months full supply
kept in reserve for any eventuality. Precautions were taken to pre-
pare the ship for her long and dangerous voyage. The steering gear
was secured with chain lashings, and every sail was prepared for
use. The wind proved very light, and our progress was only two
knots per hour, which was just sufficient for the ship to steer by.
By general request a service of prayer was held at eight p.m. in the
saloon.
Wednesday, 29th May, Thirty-ninth Day, fifteenth day, 51 miles,
4,300 miles.—Light winds, and slow progress. Great sympathy
was felt for the Captain at his disappointment in not making the
quickest run, and at the great anxiety our dangerous position
occasions him. Our dinner hour was now to be at half-past 1 p.m.,
and tea at 6p. m. A few would like the late dinner to continue,
but the generality prefer the mid-day meal.
Thursday, 30th May, Fortieth Day, sixteenth day, 31 miles, 4,331
miles.—Light winds. The necessity of dragging the screw through
the water greatly detracts from the speed of the ship, and the
constant watching and shifting of the sails entail extra duties upon
the officers and crew. The screw was secured from shifting and
rotating by passing a stout iron chain around it, for it is feared that
in heavy weather the rudder-post might be seriously damaged, so
that our position would he most helpless and dangerous. Morning
and evening prayers are now daily held in the saloon, there being a
full attendance—Mr, Kyngdon conducting them.
Friday, 31st May, Forty-first Day, seventeenth day, 150 miles,
4,481 miles. —Wind strong from north, and sea rough. The ship
made a capital run of 150 miles. The carpenter is busy making a
“main royal” yard. The second-class passengers gave a very
successful concert in their saloon. The ladies have induced the
sportsmen not to indulge again in the cruel and wanton shooting of
sea birds.
Saturday, Ist June, Forty-second Day, eighteenth day, 137
miles, 4,618 miles.—Last night it blew nearly a gale, and the ship rolled
very much, but behaved splendidly—steering easily, sailing very
close to the wind, and not shipping a drop of water. The chains
securing the screw gave way, so that it revolved freely and enabled
the ship to make two knots an hour more. The new royal yard was
hoisted to-day. The entanglement of sea birds in a line, and thus
hauling them on board, afforded considerable amusement to many,
chief amongst whom Albert Hendrick carried off the palm for
perseverance. A Cape pigeon and Cape hen were thus caught and
let go again. The former measured, from tip to tip of the wings,
3 feet; the latter, 6 feet 10 inches. No. 4of the Lyre was published
to-day.
Sunday, 2nd June, Forty-third Day, nineteenth day, 95 miles,
4,713 miles.—The rapidly falling barometer indicated a gale, which
came upon us at 8 p.m. The Cuzco behaved splendidly—she rolled
very much, but then she was hove-to. A man fractured his ribs.
Monday, 3rd June, Forty-fourth Day, twentieth day, 106 miles,
4,819 miles.—A fierce gale from N.E. all night, with a mountainous
sea, blowing the vessel 60 miles south. A steerage passenger, an
old man of 70, fell and fractured the neck of his thigh bone. There
was a beautiful aurora at 11 p.m.
Tuesday, 4th June, Forty-fifth Day. twenty-first day, 140
miles, 4,959 miles. —Strong wind —half a gale— heavy sea. Split
mainsail which was mended on quarter-deck, and re-set before tea.
Another case of fractured ribs.
Wednesday, sth June, Forty-sixth Day, twenty-second day,
170 miles, 5,129 miles.—Heavy swell with favourable breeze, enabling
the ship to do six knots. Saw several whales very close to the ship.
Thursday, 6th June, Forty-seventh Day, twenty-third day,
152 miles, 5,281 miles. —Finer to-day, with a heavy swell from south-
ward, making five to six knots. Had boxes up from hold for last
time, preparatory to reaching Melbourne, Cape Otway being distant
about 800 miles.
Friday, 7th June, Forty-eighth Day, twenty-fourth day, 72
miles, 5,353 miles. —Making a little progress, but the high following sea
caused the screw to thump so that fears were entertained of the
rudder-post giving way. A very strong iron chain was therefore
passed around the screw, and every precaution to secure it.
Saturday, Bth June, Forty-ninth Day, treaty-fifth day, 90
miles, 5,443 miles.—The falling barometer indicated a south-east gale,
which commenced about 8 p.m. with a hurricane squall and driving
rain. During the afternoon a sail was sighted and signalled ; she
proved to be the American three-masted schooner Ralph R. Hay ward,
bound for Sydney, with slates. The Chief Officer boarded her and
entrusted to her captain letters for the Cuzco's agents. We subse-


Ninth Week.
Days
• from
Cpe.—Ply.
Date.
Lati- { Longi-
tude. tude.
Miles, j Remarks.
30 54
Thur., 13th June
38.56 S. | 140.30 E.
57 1 Making for Portland.
31 55
Friday, 14th ,,
At Portland 4 p.m.
50 I
32 56
Sat., 15th ,,
Do. do.
33 57
Sunday, 16th ,,
Do. do.
34 58
Monday, 17th,,
Left for Melbourne at 8 a.m. in tow of tugs Williams
36 59
Tues., 18th ,,
and Albatross. Arrived at 8 p.m.
36 60
Wed., 19th „
Melbourne.
quently learnt that rough weather prevented his sending them
ashore at Cape Otway, but on arrival at Sydney his information
came to hand just half an hour before the telegram from Portland.
In the evening the Steward’s Concert was given in the saloon, and
proved very successful. The collection made afterwards for the
“Aged Seamen’s” and “Royal Alfred” institutions amounted to
£lO.
Sunday, 9th June, Fiftieth Day, twenty-sixth day, 51 miles,
5,494 miles. —A very fierce gale with hurricane squall and mountain-
ous sea. The ship was hove-to and in considerable danger, yet she
kept her head to the wind and never shipped a drop of water.
Monday, 10th June, Fifty-first Day, twenty-seventh day, 85
miles, 5,579 miles.- Still hove-to, the wind subsiding, but the sea being
still very high. Cape Otway is distant 350 miles.
Tuesday, 11th June, Fifty-second Day, twenty-eighth day, 119
miles, 5,698 miles. —The glass fell again most rapidly, the ship was
hove-to, and preparations made for the gale which came upon us
about 8 p.m. with a terrific squall. The bolts of the mainsail gave
way, the masts and funnel swayed like fishing-rods. It was an un-
usually heavy gale, and placed the ship in great danger.
Wednesday, 12th June, Fifty-third Day, twenty-ninth day, 47
miles, 5,745 miles. —Such a hurricane and tumultuous sea as the
Captain has not experienced in his twenty-six years of sea life. Hove-
to, and rolling very much. The wind subsided at 8 p.m., but the
sea was mountains high.
Thursday, June 13th, Fifty-fourth Day, thirtieth day, 57
miles, 5,802 miles.—Wind and sea moderating. We were given to
understand, although it was surmised on Tuesday last, that we were
to make for the large and safe harbour of Portland. All night the
constant thumping of the screw made the vessel quiver from stem
to stern, with an undulating vibratory movement like an earth-
quake.
Friday, 14th June, Fifty-fifth Day, thirty-first day, 50
miles, 5,852 miles, Portland 5,902 miles (about). —Wind most favour-
able for entering Portland harbour.
After running an estimated distance, the ship was steered straight for
the land, and so accurately had the observations been kept, that, to use
an officer’s expression, “had the entrance been a bung hole, the ship
would have hit it.” The heavy chain lashing to the screw was un-
fastened, and on inspection showed two links nearly cut through
by reason of the chafing of the propeller.
Land was discerned at 11 a.m., and by 3 p.m. we were safe at
anchor. At first the Portland people mistook us for a large sailing
ship. Immediately, however, when the agent recognised us, our
arrival was telegraphed. We learnt afterwards that considerable
anxiety had been felt for us, the Loch Ard disaster intensifying
people’s fears.
English war news was eagerly inquired for, but the Australians
were so engrossed with the Cricketers, that they first told us of
their success, then came the winner of some horse race, thirdly the
Loch Ard, and finally that there was not to be war.
We had a champagne dinner, and every luxury that had been
buried in the storeroom. Even marmalade and preserved fish and
sardines reappeareala£i;er their cessation on the thirty-fourth day of
our voyage. preserved ginger for the second time, but
the unpalatable bread made from damaged flour was still continued.
The Captain’s health was proposed, and he replied to this effect
“This is probably the last occasion on which we shall all be
assembled together, and before parting I must state that I have received
from the whole company the greatest moral support, and the con-
duct of the passengers has been splendid. Had the ship been per-
fect, and I had the question asked me, I would have wished no
change in their demeanour. All have felt the great difficulty and
danger that we have encountered, and I really thank you from my
heart for the moral support you have afforded. I have been twenty-
seven years with passengers at sea, and have come across a large
number of people, and none could have behaved better under these
circumstances. This ship is not a sailing vessel, only a steamer
with auxiliary sailing power ; but from a nautical point of view I
am surprised at the readiness with which she answered every call
made upon her, and we are to be congratulated that we are on
board such a ship, which has sailed over 1,700 pules of ocean with
auxiliary sail power, and it will give confidence to all that travel
that they can go in such a ship. Had we met with our accident a
week earlier our position would have been fraught with the greatest
danger.
‘ ‘ I have had great experience in steamers, and there are ninety-nine
to one hundred chances that one could make any but the smallest pro-
gress under sail. What, then, would have been our position had our
vessel been one of these ? As it is, we couldn’t have been in a
better ship. I have sailed all my life in first-class ships, and Ido
not intend ever to go in a second-class one, and there is no ship that
I would sooner go to sea in than the Cuzco. I hope all, if they hear
any unkind remarks about our ship, will say that she is sail and sea-
worthy, and can find her way without steam.
“ Now, good-bye, and 1 wish you all every success.”
Saturday, 15th June.—Very many passengers left by the 7’45 a.m.
train for Melbourne, which they reached after a fatiguing journey of
fourteen hours, not caring to run the risk of being towed round Cape
Otway. Those remaining had a run on shore, and appreciated above
all things the sweet bread and fresh butter.
Sunday, 16th June.—A showery day, but some went to church on
shore, when thanksgivings were offered for our safety. The Adelaide
passengers, eighty in number, were put on shore to await the arrival
of the next steamer from Melbourne. Our tugs, The Williams and
Albatross, arrived before dark. During the afternoon, all Portland,
in their primitive but best attire, crowded on board to see this great
ship.
Monday, 17th June. —We started at 8 a.m, the wind blowing
strongly off shore, the barometer falling rapidly. Outside, we met a
roughish sea. From time to time the Cuzco had to shorten sail for fear
of overrunning the tugs. The sun set very ominously, and we learnt
afterwards that this night caused the officers greater anxiety, and we
were in more imminent danger, than at any previous time of the
voyage; for, had the wind veered round, blowing so strongly as it
was, the tugs must have cut the ropes and left us on a lee shore,
close to where the Loch Ard was wrecked. Seamanship might have
saved the Cuzco then, but it would have been most improbable. We
passed Cape Otway at 10 p.m.
Tuesday, 18th June. —We had a strong head wind all day. Port
Phillip Heads were passed at 2 p.m., and Sandridge was reached at
9 p.m. Thus our eventful voyage terminated after a passage of
59 days from Plymouth, and 35 from the Cape.
Next day, Wednesday, the passengers separated, some leaving for
Tasmania, and others for Sydney, Brisbane, and New Zealand. The
Cuzco discharged all her cargo preparatory to entering dry dock to
have her injuries inspected and repaired, and will return to London
via Suez Canal, leaving Melbourne on 17th July.
A purse of £5O was subscribed by the saloon passengers, and the
following Testimonial was handsomely engrossed on vellum and pre-
sented to the Captain:—
* “ Melbourne, 18th June, 1878.
S.S. Cuzco.
“To Captain John Murdock.
“Dear Sir, —We, the undersigned, First Saloon Passengers per S.S.
Cuzco, desire at the termination of our voyage to express to you the
high sense we entertain of the courage, skill, and devotion to duty
shewn by you and your officers, under the trying circumstances in
which you were placed, by the breaking of the main shaft 1,700
miles from land, with over 500 lives under your care.
“ Since the accident we have encountered heavy and almost con-
tinuous gales of wind, and vve feel that we owe, under God’s provi-
dence, to you, your officers and crew, and to the splendid qualities
of the noble ship under your command, that we have been brought
safely to port. ■ <
i _< .« iui i < A
S.S. Cuzco.


“ We ask your acceptance of the accompanying testimonial as a
memento of an eventful voyage, as an expression of our appreciation
of what you have done for us, and of our esteem for your personal
character.
“ Wishing you every prosperity in the future,
“We remain, yours faithfully.”
(Here follow the names of the subscribers.)
Sydney, 11th July, 1878.
I have, this day, completed my duties in seeing the Cuzco Lyre,
hrough the press. It has been necessary to cut out nearly one-fifth
if the subject matter, because the funds in hand are insufficient for
he expense of printing even the present edition. Wishing each
md all every success and happiness.
I remain,
Yours faithfully,
FRANCIS BOUGHTON KYNGDON.
20
THE CUZCO LYRE.


