

| the' |
I Miracles of the Bible:
' 5
i SIX LECTURES, i
Jy DELIVERED IN A
\ |
)) Hite Australian (JThurch, i
I " j
W. E. ADDIS, 8.A., K
v) Assistant Minister. y
0
il
: ’ J (|
X Iplkmnu'; T
X MASON, FIRTH & M‘CUTCHEON, GENERAL PRINTERS,
12 St. James’s Buildings,- Little Collins Street West. y
PRICE SIXPENCE.


F o
v>£. 2
\
\


THE
I Miracles of the Bible;
SIX LECTURES,
DELIVERED IN
me Australian Church,
W. E. ADDIS, B. A.,
Assistant Minister.
Ipllmrm:
MASON, FIRTH & M'CUTCHEON, GENERAL PRINTERS, *
12 St. James’s Buildings, Little Collins Street West.




PREFACE.
The following Lectures were written in the ordinary
course of ministerial duty, without the least thought of
publication. They are now printed at the desire of some
who heard them. lam painfully conscious of their slight
and imperfect character, but I have thought it best to
leave them unaltered. They are intended as a contribu-
tion, though a very humble one, to the cause of Rational
Christianity.
In some cases my quotations from the Bible do not
correspond exactly either with the Authorised or Revised
Version. The reason is that I have often made my own
translations from the original texts. I pursued no con-
sistent system, as I should have done had I been writing
for the public; but the difference can scarcely cause any
practical inconvenience, and my translations are, I believe,
close and literal.
It is possible that these Lectures may fall into the hands
of some whose theological views are very different from
mine. I would ask these persons to believe that I have
striven to express myself, on the one hand, with perfect
clearness ; on the other, with courtesy and moderation. I
should be sorry indeed to think that I have said one word
likely to give needless offence.
W. E. ADDIS.
Balaclava,
Melbourne, November, 1889.




BIBLICAL MIRACLES
I.—INTRODU CTORY.
“ Truly the signs of an apostle were wrought among you in all
patience, by signs and wonders and mighty ivories.” — 2 Cor.
xii. 12.
In the year 1749 the theological world was thrown into a
ferment by a book which to most of you, perhaps, is
unknown, even by name. The author of the book in
question was Dr. Middleton, and in his Free Enquiry he
ventured to attack the miracles of the primitive church.
Observe that he had nothing to say against the miracles of
the Bible ; he left them untouched. But he drew a sharp
line between the apostolic and post-apostolic age, and
maintained that miraculous gifts had died out with the
first disciples of Christ. Now, Dr. Middleton stood exactly
where orthodox Protestant divines stand at the present day.
At the time, however, he was contending for a new position.
He excited general scandal. The University of Oxford
conferred degrees upon his opponents, and the Lutherans
of Germany were no less vigorous in their denunciation of
his dangerous scepticism. It is worth while to note this
fact, and that for several reasons. First, it,reminds us how


quickly things move, how speedily the heresy of one age
may become the orthodoxy of the next. So completely
has opinion changed that the view which was so alarming
little more than a century ago is now taken for granted.
Protestants, as a rule, do not argue about the miracles
ascribed to the early saints and fathers of the church.
They dismiss them as if they were not worthy of any serious
thought. Next, it is well to recall the fact that the Bible
miracles do not stand by themselves. Their occurrence at
the time has been asserted in all ages, just as it is asserted
by Roman Catholics at this hour. Take one instance out
of many. There was a well-known Bishop of Lyons who
wrote in the year 190 a.d. a treatise against all heresies.
He is famous for this, among other reasons, that he is the
first extant writer who mentions the four gospels by name.
This, then, is what he has to say about the miracles of his
own times. He assures us that when he wrote there were
men in the church who could drive out devils and cure
diseases miraculously, and predict the future. Nay, he
adds that dead men had been raised to life, “ and remained
with us during a considerable number of years.”* It would
be easy to multiply evidence on this point. There is
scarcely a saint in the whole history of the church to
whom miracles have not been ascribed. It is better,
however, to quote an early saint like Tremens, because it
may help to disabuse our minds of a prejudice which is held
in the teeth of history. People often think that a wonderful
change happened when the last of the twelve went to his
reward. The gifts of the Spirit ceased ; there was no more
speaking with tongues ; the sick had no help, except in the
physician ; when the eye closed in death there was no hope
that it would reopen at the word of a wonder-worker.
The answer to this is that those nearest to the time were
wholly unconscious of any such change. We have, on the
contrary, as direct evidence for miracles in the time of
Irenreus as in the time of Paul. Further, we are driven
to ask whether we have any right to reject unexamined all
miracles after, while we accept those before, a certain date.
* Iren. Adv. Haer. 11. 32, 4.


It is difficult to avoid the conclusion that the position of
orthodox Protestants is radically illogical, and is no better
than a temporary expedient. The spirit of the time has
touched them, and they have lost the courage of their
opinions. They are like men in a ship which is beset by
the winds and the waves, and they are glad to throw half
the cargo overboard. Lastly, ecclesiastical history relieves
us from a dilemma into which some are eager to force us.
We are told that we must accept the gospels with their
miraculous stories or reject them altogether. It would be
as reasonable to insist that we must accept the legends of
the Catholic saints as they stand or deny the existence of
these saints altogether. No historian would dream of
accepting such an alternative. He knows very well that
the existence of these saints is frequently a matter of
demonstration, and he does not shrink from sifting the
evidence—from that separation of the legendary dross from
the historical ore which is the proper business of the critic.
But I may be told that the biblical miracles differ from
all others because they, and they only, rest on a firm basis
of evidence ; and the moment this ground is taken we can
join issue. Most undoubtedly, the whole dispute should
cease, if only this contention can be made good. The object
of the lectures to which these remarks are introductory, is to
examine the evidence for biblical miracles. By that test
they must stand or fall. First, however, let us clear away
one or two more possible misconceptions.
What is a miracle ? Aquinas* defines it as an effect
which transcends all natural law, and it is doubtful
whether any better account can be devised. In any case,
we must accept the substance of this definition, for other-
wise we shall lose ourselves in a cloud of words. It is of
no use to tell us that a miracle only means something
marvellous, and that all nature is full of wonder and
mystery. This is true, but nobody disputes it, and to talk
of biblical miracles is meaningless, if we attach so vague a
sense to the miraculous. Again, it is a mere evasion to
explain miracles as due to some unknown law. Any
* Aquin. Summ. Theol. I. cv. 8.


English chemist could perform experiments which a savage
would deem miraculous. But the savage would scorn to
do so the moment he understood that they were the result
of law, and his previous belief would be a mere delu-
sion. Whenever we represent miracles as due to some
higher law, their value as evidence is gone. The sign
attests the doctrine, precisely because it is supposed to be
beyond all natural agency. The whole force and value of
the miracle consists in this, that it is the direct interposi-
tion of the Almighty. The Egyptian magicians cried,
“The finger of God is here,” when Moses stretched forth
his rod and changed the dust into gnats. They felt that
no human skill could create life, and they were constrained
to acknowledge the energy of a supernatural power. So,
when the author of the fourth gospel affirms that Jesus did
many other signs which are not written, “ these,” he
continues, “are written that ye may believe that Jesus is
the Christ, the Son of God.” Once find a natural law by
which these signs can be explained, and they are signs no
longer. They might add to our knowledge of the physical
world, they might show that Jesus was possessed of know-
ledge far beyond that of his age, or of our age ; they would
not, however, strengthen even in the smallest degree his
claim to be the Son of God.
I have been maintaining the old and accepted definition
of miracle, and I proceed to make a further advance in the
same direction. Believing with my whole heart and soul
in a personal God, I do not dream of denying His
power to interrupt and suspend His ordinary laws. I
cannot tell whether or no He is likely to do so, and I should
esteem it little short of blasphemy to dictate to the
Supreme, and to insist that He must never overstep the
laws which are the ordinary expression of His will. We
are of yesterday, and we know nothing, and He is infinite
in counsel. But, on the other hand, it would be mere
petulance to rebel against the universal reign of law,
should that be the will of the Supreme. He is the humble
man who lets the facts speak and is ready to learn from
them. The one safe course is to examine the evidence in a
patient and sober spirit.


It would be dishonest on my part to assume a doubtful
attitude, and perhaps you will allow me to make a personal
•explanation. When I began to make the study of the
Bible the serious business of my life, many years ago, I had
no prejudices against the miraculous; indeed, I had the
most inveterate prejudices in its favour ; I ended with a
disbelief which cannot, so far as I see, be easily shaken.
History, I think, in no case affords the evidence which
miracles require. But more, and much more than that,
history, and in particular Bible history, disproves miracles,
because it enables us to see the miracles grow.
This needs explanation ; and you will understand it
better when, at a later time, we take samples of miracles
from the Old and New Testaments, and examine them
singly. For everywhere the same law recurs. If the
evidence is that of an eye-witness, or is at all near to the
event, the miraculous is either wholly absent, or can be
•easily explained. On the other hand, just in pro-
portion as the documents recede from the event the
marvels grow in number, and become more and more
difficult to explain, or, if you like, to explain away. At
present this can only be illustrated in a cursory way ; but
that may be enough to make you see what I mean. Let us
begin with the New Testament. The earliest writings
which it contains are the Epistles of Paul, and there we do
find a claim made to miraculous power, but a claim of the
vaguest kind, unsupported by any shadow of proof. Paul
tells us, indeed, that he was on one occasion caught up into
the third heaven. But he was unable to say whether this
took place in the body or out of it. The qualification
witnesses to the transparent honesty of the great apostle,
but it does not inspire much confidence in the accuracy of
the narrative; and what is the third heaven ? To Paul, who,
like the Jews of his day, and the Moslems of our own day,
believed that the earth was over-arched by seven concentric
vaults, the answer was easy. But we know that the tele-
scope of the astronomer has long since swept those heavens
away, and when they are gone the last vestige of the
miracle is gone also. There is only one other miracle of
which Paul gives a full and definite picture, I mean the gift


of tongues. That was a kind of speech in which it was
supposed that the tongue became the passive instrument of
the Divine Spirit. It was an ecstatic form of utterance
which could only be comprehended by those who had
another miraculous gift—viz;., that of interpretation. It
was adapted for solitary prayer, and the impression which
the exercise of the gift was likely to produce upon strangers
was that those who so spoke were mad. Turn to the Acts
of the Apostles, and you will find a description of this
speaking with tongues altogether different, and to those
who are seeking for the miraculous, far more satisfactory.
The hysterical ecstatic speech has changed its character, and
become the power of speaking foreign languages with which
the speakers had no previous acquaintance. We can see well
enough how in a later age the compiler of the Acts of the
Apostles misinterpreted the phrase “ speaking with
tongues,” and took it to mean speaking in other tongues—
i.e., other languages. Unfortunately, he forgot when he
represents eleven men as speaking at once in foreign
tongues, that no effect could follow except confusion, and
further, that, according to his own narrative, Paul and
Barnabas seem to have had no power to speak or under-
stand Lycaonian. Everywhere the same law prevails.
Think of the persons whom Jesus is said to have raised
from the dead —the oldest story is that of the daughter of
Jairus. It is common to the three earliest gospels, and,
therefore, comes from that earlier document, from which
all three must have borrowed. Here it is said that the
girl was just dead—that Jesus even denied that she was
dead when he raised her up and bade the attendants give
her food. Here you have an early story which may well be
substantially true. There is nothing extravagant in the
belief that the Great Teacher was called to see a girl thought
to be dead, and that she revived at his touch. No such
natural explanation, however, will serve for a miracle
recorded by Luke at a much later period. The corpse of a
young man at Nain, so the story runs, was being carried
out for burial; Jesus met the sorrowing mother as the
funeral train was passing from the city of the living to the
city of the dead, to the silent tombs cut in the rock of the


hillside. The Lord of life bade the bearers stand still.
Death itself was obedient to his will. The glad mother saw
her only son arise, and heard once more the voice which
had been hushed, as she thought, for ever. Here it would
be mere folly to seek any natural explanation. We must
accept the miracle in its literal sense or deny it altogether.
Still more striking is the narrative in the fourth gospel.
We need not for the present enter into any vexed question
of authorship, According to the tradition of the church
itself the fourth gospel is the latest of all. It is in the
latest gospel, written in any case when the first generation
of believers had all but passed away, that the resurrection
of Lazarus is recorded. He is raised neither from the bed
of death nor from the bier, but from the closed tomb. The
stone is removed ; Jesus prays, though the evangelist, with
a theology at which the true Jesus would have shuddered,
takes care to add that he had no need to pray ; he cries with
a loud voice, and Lazarus issues forth to the land of the
living bound with the grave-clothes of the dead. Even the
unbelieving Jews could not gainsay the miracle. Those who
accept it as fact have to face the difficulty that the earlier
biographers omit all notice of this the most remarkable
event in the whole of their master’s life.
It is impossible to take leave of stories so touching and
beautiful without some feeling of regret. We shall examine
them more fully afterwards, But I cannot end without one
additional reflection. It may be sad, it is sad from some
points of view, to resign beliefs which, to many of us, are
bound up with sacred memories. It would be far more
than sad, were it true, that disbelief in miracles is all one
with abandonment of a divine revelation. But those who
make this bold assertion do a wrong to Christianity, and deal
a death-blow to all religion. No revelation without
miracles ! Then for eighteen hundred years God has been
silent, and He who spoke of old speaks no more. No
revelation without miracles! Then the voice of conscience,
then that witness of the Divine Spirit with our spirit, is all
delusion. Catholic saints have erred when they declared
that a holy life and the change which God’s Spirit works in
the heart were greater than all miracles. Paul was mistaken


when in the words of my text he declared, “ Truly the signs
of an apostle were done among you in all patience .” Can
we forget one greater than Paul who, being asked for a sign
from heaven, refused to give it, and who, recounting the
proofs of his mission, assigned as the climax of them all,
“ Unto the poor the gospel is preached?”
IL—THE EARLY HISTORY OF ISRAEL.
“ For what great nation is there that hath a God so nigh unto
them as the Lord our God is ivhensoever we call upon
him.” — Deut. iv. 7.
Last Sunday night I ventured to say that a candid exami-
nation of the evidence for miracles is fatal to a belief in their
reality, because this examination enables us to see the
miracles grow. Everywhere the same law recurs. The
narratives of eye-witnesses either relate no miracles, or else
record events which they themselves believed to be miracu-
lous, but which can be explained, more or less easily, as
instances of natural law imperfectly understood. But the
miraculous element increases in exact proportion to the
distance of the narrator from the events which he describes,
and baffles more and more every attempt at rational ex-
planation. 1 gave some examples, which, however, though
sufficient to illustrate my meaning, were not enough to
establish my position. I propose in the rest of our course
to take the chief epochs of Bible history, and to consider
them in their relation to the marvellous. 1 begin to-night
with the early history of the Israelites— i.e., their exodus
from Egypt and their settlement in the land of Canaan.
But first I must say a few words on the criticism of the
documents.


The facts, or supposed facts, which concern us at present
are all contained in the Pentateuch, or books of Moses, and
the book of Joshua, and we have scarcely any other source
of information. It is doubtful if the very name of the
Hebrews occurs in any Egyptian monument. All would be
well if we could be sure that the narrative, or even a con-
siderable part of the narrative, had been drawn up by Moses
himself. That of course was the traditional view, and for
centuries it was a perilous thing to call it in question. The
motives, indeed, for doubt were obvious. When the Penta-
teuch, describing the entrance of Abraham into Palestine,
is careful to add, “No Canaanite was then in the land,” this
surely seemed to indicate an author who lived at a time when
the Israelites had for a long period held possession of Canaan,
and had extirpated, or at least completely subdued, the
original inhabitants. It was no less surprising to meet with
a list of Edomite kings introduced by the remark that Edom
had kings long before any kings reigned over Israel. So
strong is the evidence that even in the deep night of the
middle ages Eben Ezra had a glimpse of the truth, though
he could but hint at it and add, “ The prudent man will be
silent.’”" At present all independent scholars are aware that
the Pentateuch is a composite narrative, even the earliest
parts of which were written centuries after the age of Moses.
Now, my task to-night would be a very easy one if I allowed
myself to take the results of criticism for granted. I prefer
to make no such assumption. I will content myself by
setting the discordant narratives side by side, and leaving you
to judge. I must, however, remove one misapprehension.
It is often said that critics reject the authenticity of biblical
records because they reject the supernatural to which these
records testify. This, however, is directly contrary to fact.
You may read a whole library of German or Dutch theology
and hardly find a trace of the disposition to treat documents
as spurious because they contain accounts of miracles.
Wholly different tests are applied; they are set aside because
they contradict each other, contradict themselves, contradict
* The words occur in his commentary on Gen. xii. 6. He speaks more fully to the
same effect on Deut. i. 1.


the certain facts of history. One example may bring this
home to you better perhaps than any amount of general
assertion. A German scholar, Delitzsch, has been for half
a century the acknowledged champion of orthodoxy and
conservatism. For Oriental learning he has no equal on
his own, no superior on any side. Till very lately he
supplied the orthodox with a favourite argument. If, it was
said, your negative criticism is so clear, how is it that a
scholar like Delitzsch fails to see its force ? But slowly and
unwillingly Delitzsch has come to see its force. He has
retreated before the enemy step by step till at last he has
entirely abandoned his old ground. First of all he had to
admit that Moses could not have written Genesis, Exodus,
Leviticus, or Numbers, though he fought hard for the Mosaic
authorship of Deuteronomy. But in 1887 he published a
new edition of his Commentary on Genesis, and in the
introduction, with a candour which is much to his credit,
he announces his change of mind. He confesses that only
a few fragments can have come from the hand of Moses, and
maintains that for the rest we have the combined works of
four different authors belonging to different periods, but all
long posterior to Moses. Remember that these admissions
come from one who still holds fast to the miracles of the
New Testament, and further, that though there are, and
perhaps always will be differences on matters of detail, the
main questions on the composition of the Pentateuch are
now settled. “He who has eyes to see, let him see.”
For our present purpose, however, we shall regard
nothing as settled. I will only ask you to regard the
question of authorship as an open one. Turn to the early
chapters of Exodus. Here is one account which we can
disentangle from the complex web of the narrative. God
appeared to Moses in the bush and sent him back to Egypt.
He went to Pharaoh with the very modest request that the
people might be allowed to go three days’ journey into the
wilderness and sacrifice there to their tribal God. “ Let
My people go, that they serve Me.” “ Let us go three
days’ journey into the wilderness and sacrifice to Jahveh our
God.” It cannot be said that Moses merely began with
this moderate demand and afterwards asked more. It is


continued in tlie same form from the fifth to the tenth
chapters of Exodus. Even when the plagues are all but
over, the Egyptians still understand the Hebrews to ask no
more than this, that they may go and sacrifice to Jahveh
their God. Pharaoh’s refusal is punished by plagues ; and
these are clearly miraculous, for this, if for no other reason,
that they only touch the Egyptians. But the plagues
connected with this demand to sacrifice in the desert are
connected with natural phenomena. The modest demand
for three days 1 leave of absence is connected by a thread of
narrative with miracles which are also modest. The
plagues of the frogs, gad-fly, cattle plague, and locusts are
supernatural in degree and in the circumstance just men-
tioned rather than in kind. Even the turning of the water
into blood and the three days’ darkness seem to be the
exaggeration of a writer who was aware that the Nile does
turn red and putrid, and that the March winds in Egypt
drive the clouds of sand before them, and produce a darkness
which can be felt. Notice, too, that Jahveh’s agency by no
means excludes natural causes. It is an east wind which
brings the locusts and a west wind which carries them off.
At last, in one dread night, the first-born of Egypt are
stricken by death. The terrified Egyptians thrust the
Hebrews forth, laden with spoil. The Hebrews seize the
opportunity and carry the unleavened bread in the troughs
because they have no time to cook food for their journey.
Side by side with this account stands another, and a con-
tradictory one, in which the miraculous has grown
enormously, and the natural is simply ignored. According
to this second narrator, Moses from the very first demanded
the complete liberation of the people. “ Speak unto
Pharaoh that he let the people go out of the land.” He
utterly denies that the Hebrews escaped by taking advan-
tage of a sudden panic on the part of the Egyptians. On
the contrary, he expressly says that Jahveh had prepared
them for their exit four days previously. And does he,
like his predecessor, explain the use of unleavened bread at
the passover by the fact that the Hebrews at the passover
of the Exodus were driven out in hot haste and had no time
to bake their bread thoroughly ? Far from it. He says


that Jahveh four days before had told them to remove all
leaven from their houses and to choose the passover lamb.
To him the whole matter is a ritual observance instituted
by God, and binding for all time. Common sense forces
us to believe that two narratives, originally independent,
have been welded into one, unless it is common sense to
suppose that one and the same narrator could not rest
when he had given one complete account, but deliberately
added another contradicting the former one in the most
determined manner. Here, too, we have miracles, but
miracles strangely diverse. Secondary causes are, as has
been said, disregarded. The miracles are wrought, not by
secondary causes, but by the rod of Aaron the priest. They
are not so much plagues as a graduated exhibition of
Jahveh’s irresistible power. The rod of Aaron is changed
into a serpent, and the Egyptian wizards perform the
same feat; but Aaron’s rod swallows theirs. They fail to
create life as Moses does by changing the dust into gnats.
They are next covered with boils so that they cannot stand.
At last the destroying angel smites the first-born of Egypt,
but passes the houses of the Israelites, because the blood
of the lamb has been smeared upon the lintel,
Israel went out of Egypt, and dated its national life ever
after from the events of that time. God led the nation
forth with a high hand and an outstretched arm. The
Hebrews marched through the sea as if it had been dry
land, and their enemies sank in the depths like lead. Here
it may be said we have a miracle pure and simple, which
sets the most ingenious rationalism at defiance. Un-
doubtedly this is the case with one narrative in the four-
teenth chapter of Exodus. Jahveh said to Moses, “ Raise
thy staff and stretch out thy hand upon the sea and cleave
it, that the children of Israel may walk in the midst of the
sea on dry land. , . . And the children of Israel went
in the midst of the sea as on dry land, and the waters were
to them a w T all on the right hand and the left. And
Jahveh said to Moses, Stretch out thy hand, that the w’aters
may return upon the Egyptains, their chariots and horse-
men. And Moses stretched out his hand, and the waters
returned and covered Pharaoh’s host; . , . there was


not left so much as one of them.” Here there is scarcely
any room left for natural agency, no room at all for the slow
action of natural causes. It is surprising then to read in
the same chapter that “ Jahveh drove the sea with a strong
east wind all the night, and made the sea to dry land, and
the waters were cleft. ” This of course is utterly at vari-
ance with the other story, that Moses raised his magic
wand and cleft the sea in an instant, so that the waters
stood up like a wall on each side. Surprise increases
when we read the song attributed to Moses, and which,
though none of his, because it mentions the settlement in
Canaan as an accomplished fact, still bears the marks
of high antiquity. We may be sure that a poet who had
ever heard of the miraculous features in the history of the
transit would have made the most of them. As it is, he
passes them over in silence, or rather he shows that these
miracles were altogether unknown to him. He writes as a
religious Hebrew who sees in natural phenomena the hand
of his national God, but he says not a word about the
magical staff and —here is the point—he lays no stress at
all on the fact that Israel crossed on dry ground. On the
contrary, he describes the waters as driven back by the
wind into one heap (how different from the other picture, in
which the waters stand up as two walls !); the Egyptians,
eager for plunder, rush after the fugitives, and a counter
wind forces the waters back, and the Egyptians perish.
“By the wind of thy nostrils were the waters heaped.
The enemy said, I will pursue ; Thou didst blow with thy
wind ; the sea covered them,” The language is that of
poetry, but of poetry which may be translated into credible
prose, especially if we suppose that the change of the wind
was assisted by a turn in the tide. Events closely similar
are known to have occurred in Greek and Roman history.
But in importance few events can compare with that which
in the good providence of God saved the national life of Israel.
For Israel was the soil from which a spiritual religion was
to spring; w r e owe our very Christianity to the fact that Israel
went free. Israel’s history is our history, and we cannot be
too thankful that we can pierce the overlying mass of fabu-
lous miracle till we reach the solid fact which lies beneath.


We get the same kind of result when we sift the history
of the conquest. The Hebrews are said to have inarched
out with 600,000 fighting men— i.e., with a population of
something like two millions and a half —besides a mixed
multitude of aliens and a great quantity of cattle. The
walls of Jericho fell flat at the sound of the priestly trumpets,
the sun and moon stood still that their victory might be
complete, and in a short time not one of the Ganaanite
aborigines was left. This account involves sheer impossi-
bilities. The cattle alone would have exhausted the
pasture in the barren peninsula of Sinai within a week, and
the facts, even if they were facts, that manna rained from
heaven, and water flowed twice from a rock which Moses
struck with his magic wand, do not help matters in the
least. The miracles of the conquest are useless because an
enormous army of 600,000 might have destroyed the
inhabitants of so small a country as Palestine without an
effort. We know that the immediate extermination of the
Canaanites is a fable—for this among other reasons, that
the Canaanites held the central fortress of Jerusalem down
to the time of David. Here, too, the truth of history has
its witness even in the Pentateuch. An older writer there
tells us that the Israelites, far from mustering an enormous
army, were the least of all nations, inferior in numbers to the
petty nationalities of Edom and Moab. He says they were too
few to occupy the territory of Palestine, small as that was,
so that if the aborigines had been exterminated, the beasts of
the field would have increased against them. At the very
end of Joshua’s life, the powerful tribe of Joseph complain
that they can make no head against the inhabitants of the
plain with their chariots of iron.* Above all, a precious
record, preserved in the first chapter of Judges, sets the
historical truth before our eyes so that he who runs may
read. There we see the scattered tribes of Israel fighting
even for its own hand with desperate energy, and with
varying success, and with no miracles to assist them.
The Deuteronomist held Israel to be the greatest of
nations, and he was right. It is in vain that we base this
* Exod. xxiii. 29, 30 (compare Deut. vii. 7); Joshua xvii. 14 —18.


greatness on the miraculous features in its history. All
ancient nations have similar miracles to recount, and the
candid inquirer finds that Israel’s claim to miraculous pro-
tection is not a whit better than theirs. The true great-
ness of Israel consists in the sublimity and truth of its
religious ideas, in its confession of the Divine unity, in
the moral character which the prophets breathed into
its worship. In these respects Israel stands alone. If lam
helping you to understand the history of Israel a little
better, if I have added a little to your intelligent interest in
the Bible, and aided you in some degree to distinguish
fable from fact, then I do not regret the trouble I have
taken.
lII.—THE HEBREW PROPHETS.
“ His ways are everlasting .” —Hab. iii. G.
Last Sunday night we were occupied with the legends
which are our only sources of information on the early
history of Israel. To-night our task is much easier.
Rather more than a thousand years b.c. the regal govern-
ment and the real unity of the nation began. In 580 the
Jews were carried into exile by the Babylonians ; in 536
many of them returned, by the leave of Cyrus, the Persian
conqueror, and within a century from that date the temple
was rebuilt, and although national independence was gone
for ever, Ezra and Nehemiah succeeded in organising a
Jewish church. Now, for many portions of this period we
have this inestimable advantage, that we can refer to con-
temporary records. We cannot, indeed, rely implicitly on
the books of Samuel and Kings. These books, by their
own profession, were written long after most of the events
which they record. They contain much valuable material;
b 2


but the process of sifting the truth from the legendary
matter which encrusts it, is far too long to be attempted in
a single lecture. We have, however, documents which need
no sifting. The authenticity of the prophetic writings on
the whole is undisputed and indisputable. We have nothing
to do with the question as to the predictive powers of the
prophets. We have to think of them as historians of their
own times ; and in this respect their testimony is simply
invaluable. Besides the prophets, we have the books of
Ezra and Nehemiah. Parts of these books are written in
the first person, and nobody denies that these parts rightly
claim to be the work of contemporary witnesses. At last
we stand upon sure ground.
Now, the remarkable thing is, that in the history which
the prophets give, minute and vivid though it often is,
miracles are conspicuous by their absence. Think what
this implies. Amos, the first of the prophets, wrote in
the former half of the eighth century; Malachi, the last,
about 450 b.c, ; and yet not one of them has a single miracle
to record. Jeremiah lived through the terrible years which
ended in the destruction of the city and the temple, and, as
we read his pages, we can almost feel as if his experience
was our own. He had seen the most pious of the Judaean
kings struck down in battle by the heathen Egyptians ;he
saw confusion following upon confusion, till the last terrible
catastrophe came, yet not one word does he say about the
suspension of natural law ; he records no single miracle in
which the God of Israel stretched forth His hand to avenge
or to redeem. It is just the same if we consult the later pro-
phets and the records of Ezra and Nehemiah. One after
another we see the Jewish bands returning, their faces turned
Zion wards. An unknown prophet of the exile had predicted
a glorious restoration. His hopes were sorely disappointed.
Haggai and Zechariah pathetically complain that the wrath
of heaven still rested on land and people. Even under
Nehemiah the walls of the city were slowly rebuilt in peril
and fear. The Jews were only able to occupy a circuit of
twelve miles round the capital. On no single occasion did
God work marvels to sever their lot from that of other men.
They were left, like ourselves, to the ordinary providence of


God. Never might miracles have been expected with better
right. It was a crisis in the history of Israel, and the
prophecies ot the second Isaiah lacked fulfilment. You
will, indeed, find the miracles in apocryphal books written
centuries later. The later tradition of the Jews has much
to say about the marvels wrought by Ezra; but Ezra
himself knew nothing of them.
The case against miracles in the prophetic period is
strengthened by three brilliant exceptions to the rule which
I have been trying to establish. Miracles do occur in three
of the prophetic books. If, then, it can be shown that
these narratives are much later than the events which they
relate and the authors with whose names they are associated,
we have the strongest confirmation of the law which can
be desired. This is precisely what can be shown with the
most absolute cogency. The apparent exceptions occur
in Jonah, Isaiah, and Daniel. We will examine them
singly.
We will pass lightly over the story of Jonah, because I
have discussed it at length on a previous occasion. The
prophet, we are told, was sent by God to Nineveh, and
instead of doing as he was bid, set sail with Phenician
sailors for Spain. A storm arose, and while the sailors
cried to their gods for help, Jonah lay asleep. They drew
lots to find out the cause of the storm, and when the lot
fell on Jonah cast him at his own request into the sea.
There he lived for three days and nights in the belly of a
great fish, which after this set him on dry land. There-
upon he went to Nineveh, and prophesied its destruction.
At the bidding of this unknown stranger, king and people
fasted and clothed themselves in sackcloth, and were con-
verted to the God of Israel. The story is full of wild
impossibilities. Even if we are ever so ready to accept
miracles, the miracles do not help us to understand how
it was that the capital of a great empire suddenly changed
its religion at the word of a stranger who came with no
credentials and spoke a foreign tongue. They do not
explain the fact that prophets like Isaiah, who have so
much to say of Nineveh, do not allude to this strange crisis
in its history. The numerous monuments of the Assyrian


empire have all entered into the same conspiracy of
silence. Again, the book of Jonah does not tell us who the
king of Nineveh was who was converted so marvellously :
it gives no details by which we can test the truth of the
narrative. It represents Jonah as composing a psalm in
the belly of the fish, though the psalm makes no reference
to Jonah’s strange position, and was evidently meant to
describe the deliverance of a shipwrecked traveller. But
the point is that the narrative does not profess to be the
work of Jonah. And when we read “ Nineveh was a great
city,” surely we cannot doubt that the record before us was
written after Nineveh’s destruction, and therefore long after
the supposed events.
Two miraculous stories are interwoven with the
prophecies of Isaiah. According to the former, Hezekiali
seemed to be dying ; the prophet Isaiah promised him
fifteen more years of life, and in token that the promise
would come true, the sun went back ten degrees on the
dial. Did Isaiah write this ? The firmest believer in
the inspiration of the Bible has no right to take this for
granted. The very same account, told for the most part in
the very same words, occurs in the book of Kings, and two
theories are at least possible. Either the book of Kings
borrowed the story from Isaiah, or a later editor of Isaiah
borrowed it from the book of Kings. The question may be
easily settled. In the book of Kings the story, miraculous
though it is, is told in an orderly manner. The prophet
visits Hezekiali, leaves him, and shortly returns with the
promise that he will recover. He also orders a poultice of
figs to be laid on the king’s ulcer. The king then asks for
a sign, and the miracle of the sun-dial is performed. Here
all is straightforward. But the editor of the book of Isaiah,
copying hastily from the book of Kings, omitted the details
about the poultice of figs and the king’s request for a sign,
and at the very end, after the sign and the cure are over,
and after Hezekiali has chanted his psalm of thanksgiving,
he adds, out of all connection, and in defiance of sense,
“ And Isaiah said, Let them take a poultice of figs and
rub it on the boil. And Hezekiali said, What is the
sign that I shall go up to the house of Jahveh ?” The


second story is that of the destruction of Sennacherib’s army.
Here also the narrative is found with verbal agreement in
the book of Kings, whence it was copied into the book of
Isaiah. According to the former, Sennacherib invaded Judah
and took many cities. Hezekiah tried to buy him off with
precious metal taken from the temple. Finally, the angel
of the Lord smote in one night 185,000 Assyrians. There
are strong reasons for believing that some great disaster,
probably a plague, did happen to Sennacherib’s host. We
are not told that anyone saw the destroying angel, and the
anonymous author of the book of Kings probably lived
some time after the event, otherwise he would have
mentioned the scene of the calamity. The editor who
copied the story into the book of Isaiah was later still.
The statement about Hezekiah’s attempt to bribe Sen-
nacherib with temple treasures was too natural and humili-
ating lor him, and so he left it out. The book of
Chronicles goes further still in the same direction. It
will not even allow that Sennacherib had any measure of
success against so excellent a king as Hezekiah. He took
the fortified cities of Judah, say the books of Kings and
of Isaiah ; Sennacherib “ thought” to do so, says the more
cautious and orthodox Chronicler.
We come, last of all, to the book of Daniel; and here it
must be acknowledged that we encounter the marvellous in
profusion. Daniel read the secret thoughts of King Nebu-
chadnezzar, interpreted his dream, and wrung from him the
public confession that the Jewish God was the God of Gods
and Lord of Kings. In spite of this, Nebuchadnezzar insisted
that all men should bow down to a colossal image which he
erected. Daniel’s friends, on their refusal to do so, were cast
into a fiery furnace. They were able to walk unharmed in
the flames which consumed their executioners, and the king
beheld an angel walking in the fire with Daniel’s friends.
Once more Nebuchadnezzar confessed the absolute supre-
macy of the one true God, but even then his conversion was
incomplete. Daniel told him that for seven years he would
live in the fields and eat grass like an ox. In an instant
the prediction was fulfilled; and once more, on returning to
his reason and to the common life of men, Nebuchadnezzar


confessed the God of heaven, and recounted his strange
adventures in a letter addressed to all the nations of his
vast empire. Once more Daniel appeared before Belshazzar,
Nebuchadnezzar’s son, explained to him that miraculous
writing on the wall which had terrified him in the midst of
his impious revels, and of course the prediction was fulfilled
to the letter. The Assyrian empire vanished, and Darius
the Mede, monarch of a new empire, cast Daniel into a den of
lions because he had disobeyed the king’s strange edict which
forbade anybody to pray at all for thirty days. The lions,
however, did the prophet no harm. Darius the Mede, like
Nebuchadnezzar, avowed his belief in the living God, and
caused Daniel’s accusers, with their wives and children, to
be devoured by the wild beasts. Apart from these miracles,
Daniel, if we could but believe the stories told of him, was
the most remarkable character in Jewish history. His public
and official life extended over some seventy years. He, a
captive Jew, was the minister and adviser of two Baby-
lonian kings. The scene changes ; the Medes overthrow
the Babylonians, but Daniel holds the same high place under
Darius the Mede. Once more the scene shifts, and the
Persians succeed the Medes, but Daniel still prospers under
Cyrus, and the wreck of empires and the changes of dynasty
harm him no more than the lions. It is surprising, then, to
find that though we have minute accounts of the exile in
Jeremiah and the book of Kings, neither of these authorities
make the faintest allusion to Daniel. Ezekiel does indeed
mention a Daniel who was a model of wisdom and virtue,
but he sets his name between those of Noah and Job. This
is natural if Daniel was a mythical hero of whom Ezekiel
had heard. It is strange indeed if Daniel was, as he must
have been according to the book which bears Daniel’s name,
a younger contemporary of Ezekiel himself. Add to all this
that even in our modern Hebrew Bibles Daniel is not placed
among the prophets, but at the end of the Bible among the
hooks of latest date. Here is enough to excite suspicion;
and the explanation of the whole matter is simple enough.
Scholars have demonstrated that the book of Daniel is a
forgery, constructed about the year 168 b.c., after the col-
lection of prophetical writings was already complete. It is


a fiction from beginning to end. A brief glance at the
prophecies will convince you that this language, strong as
it may appear, is a sober statement of the truth.
We may divide the prophecies into three sections, the
first extending from the exile to the time of Alexander the
Great, about 330; the second from Alexander to the time of
the Maccabees in 168 ; the third embraces the time subse-
quent. The prophecies of the first section contain truth
and falsehood mixed; those of the second are accurate in a
very high degree; those which go beyond 168 are wholly
false. The reason is obvious. The author of the forgery
lived about 168. He had a rough and inaccurate knowledge
■of times remote from his own time, a very thorough know-
ledge of Jewish history near his own time, no knowledge at
all of the history which was to follow his own time.
Thus in the first section it is said that Belshazzar was
Nebuchadnezzar’s son, though we know from contemporary
monuments that he was not even a descendant of Nebuchad-
nezzar. There was no Median empire, and probably no such
person as Darius the Mede. At all events no historical trace
of him is to be found. Daniel prophesies that there were
to be three Persian kings after Cyrus. There were at
least eleven.
But in the eleventh chapter these mistakes are redeemed
by brilliant success in prediction. Daniel tells us in the
eleventh chapter how the empire of Alexander was to be
divided; how one Greek dynasty, the Seleucidre, were to rule
over Syria, and another, the Ptolemies, over Egypt. He
enters into the most minute details about the wars and
treaties and intermarriages of these two dynasties till at last
he comes to that terrible time when one of the Syrian
dynasty, Antiochus Epiphanes, prohibited the sacrifices in
the Jewish temple, and set up a heathen idol—the abomina-
tion of desolation, as Daniel calls it—in the holy place. The
orthodox and the critics are at one as to the interpretation
of this chapter, and no one will deny that it is prophecy of
the most marvellous sort, if it is prophecy at all. I cannot
help thinking that even the staunchest defenders of the book
would have been better pleased with predictions a little
more vague.


Unfortunately the author of the book did not stop at the
year 168. He felt sure that God would interpose on behalf
of His afflicted people. He mentions the erection of the
heathen idol, and he continues his vision. “At that time,”
he says, “Michael is to contend for the people of God.
Many of the dead are to rise.” We know that none of
these things happened.
These are but specimens of the reasons which establish
the date of the forgery. We have seen all contemporary
evidence for prophecy melt in the crucible of rational
inquiry. And what is left? God, who holds to the ancient
ways ; God, who governs now as then by law and not by
miracle ; God, who alone knows the secrets of the future,
but gives us all light enough for the present. “ This is my
God, and I will praise Him; my father’s God, and I will
exalt Him,”
IV—THE INFANCY OF JESUS.
“ 117(0 was horn of the seed of David according to the flesh,
who xoas marked out as the Son of God with power,
according to the spirit of holiness." —Rom. i. 3, 4.
Nearly five hundred millions of human beings worship
the holy Lord Buddha and reverence his law. No wise
man will doubt that there must be some element of good in
a religion which has exercised so wide a sway, nor can we
be surprised that Buddhists are unable to believe that their
teacher was born like other men. They tell us how his
mother, Maya, dreamt that archangels carried her into
heaven, when a son, born from no human father, entered
her right side ; how the pious Brahmins interpreted her
dream ; how, when the fulness of time was come and the
Buddha was conceived, ten thousand worlds were filled
with light, and the blind saw, and the deaf heard, and the


lame walked, and the very fires of hell burnt low. Now,
there is an analogy between these Buddhist myths and the
accounts of the infancy of Jesus which the Gospels have
made familiar to us all. Buddhists and Christians alike would
not be content with the marvels of the spirit unless accom-
panied by material marvels. The one and the other were
wholly wanting in the critical faculty, and, so far from
shrinking from miracles, felt they never could have enough
of them. Such is the resemblance between the birth stories
of Buddha and those of Jesus; but let us also frankly
acknowledge the difference. Our materials for the life of
Jesus are better, beyond all comparison, than those which
we have for the life of Buddha. The records of the New
Testament as a whole were written before the marvellous
could assume those gigantic proportions which we find in
the sacred books of the Buddhists. A real knowledge of
Christ’s life was maintained, and that knowledge exercised
a restraining and sobering influence. It is far easier to
know what Christ was than what Buddha was. True, as
we examine the beautiful but incredible stories of the
marvels which accompanied the birth of Jesus, we shall see
how each contradicts itself and then contradicts the other.
This, however, is not all, nor nearly all. For when we turn
to the earliest records we shall find the story of the
miraculous birth disappear, and give place to another
account which is at once consistent with itself and natural.
Throughout these lectures I have tried to show that miracles
dwindle away in proportion as the records stand nearer and
nearer to the supposed event. An examination of the
records'which concern the infancy of Jesus furnishes the
most brilliant confirmation of the law in question.
Let us begin with the gospel according to Matthew. It
opens with a genealogy which traces the birth of Jesus to
Abraham. Here we are struck at once by the fact that this
genealogy is useless for the purpose intended. Evidently
the evangelist means to prove the royal descent of Jesus
from King David. But he gives a genealogy of Joseph;
although, according to his own story, Jesus was not the son
of Joseph at all—was not even, so far as the gospel relates,
connected with him by blood. The genealogy therefore


is absolutely useless for tbe object in view. It does not
prove that Jesus was tbe son of David, and therefore
qualified to rank as the true king of Israel and the
Messiah. Look a little more closely at the genealogy, and
you will perceive the almost incredible carelessness with
which it is constructed. The evangelist makes a great point
of the number fourteen, probably because it is the double
of seven, the sacred number. There were fourteen genera-
tions, he says, from Abraham to David, fourteen from
David to the exile, fourteen from the exile to Christ.
This coincidence is a fabrication of his own. In the list of
kings who sat on the throne of David, the son following the
father, Matthew has omitted four names given in the books
of Kings and Chronicles, so that the mysterious number
fourteen falls to the ground, and should be eighteen. Strangest
of all, even if we dismiss the Old Testament from our
memories, the arrangement in three sets of fourteen fails.
We have but to count the lists and we find that the last
list only contains thirteen names, unless we are prepared to
count the name of King Jechoniah twice over and give him a
double place, first at the end of the second, and then at the
beginning of the third set. A writer so careless and
confused does not inspire much confidence. Now, the
story which he tells is such that it demands the utmost
trust in the narrator. We are told that shortly before the
birth of Jesus Mary was espoused to Joseph. He was on
the point of sending her away when an angel warned him
in a dream that the child soon to be born was conceived of
the Holy Spirit. All had happened, the angel assured him,
that the word of the prophet might be fulfilled, “ A virgin
shall be with child, and bring forth a son, and they shall
call his name Immanuel— i.e., God is with us.” Now,
there is no fact better attested, more absolutely certain
than this, that the prophecy quoted has no such sense.
The word translated virgin simply means a young woman
of marriageable age. It is little more than a century since
a scholar had to spend a great part of his life in prison
because he stated this plain matter of fact. But times have
changed since then, and here at least we can without any
danger refuse to do violence to the fixed laws of the


Hebrew language on the authority of Matthew. The
incidents which follow are no doubt far more miraculous
than the narrator knew. We are informed that wise men
saw a star in the east, but we are not informed in what
part of the east they lived, or how they knew that this star
betokened the birth of a Jewish Messiah, or how, if they did
know it, these wise men were persuaded to abandon their
hereditary faith and set forth on a religious pilgrimage to
the Messiah’s cradle. This star pursued an erratic course.
It rose in the east; it appeared again at Jerusalem, and
then conducted the Magi to Bethlehem, a distance of some
six miles, till it stood over the house in which the child
lay. It would be amusing, if it were not sad, to find
educated men at this day labouring to show that a remark-
able conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter did occur at the
year of Christ’s birth, and that the belief of the Magi in
astrology was the means by which God led them to the
Christian faith. Let us give those who believe in miracles
all the benefit of these assumptions. They will not help
them to explain how the conjunction of planets led the
Magi along a road of six miles and then stood still over
a single house. It is useless to attempt any reconciliation
of the narrative with astronomy. The evangelist was in
all likelihood densely ignorant of astronomy, and had no
idea of the number of miracles which his story postulates.
The rest of the narrative defies history and the laws of
human nature, as the former part defies the laws of physical
science. Observe the conduct of Herod. We read that
when the Magi asked him where the king of the Jews was
to be born he calmly consulted the Jewish scribes, with
whom, by the way, he was, as we know on good authority,
upon the worst of terms. Next, he told the Magi to return
and tell him about the child, that he might also go and
pay him homage, though in reality he meant to murder
this child who had rightful claims to the throne which
he usurped. Lastly, finding that the Magi did not return,
he slew all the children at Bethlehem from two years old
and under. It cannot be denied that Herod was a cruel
man, though it is remarkable that in the full accounts of
his life given by Josephus no notice is taken of this


particular atrocity. But he was no less certainly an adroit
and cunning man ; and no such man ever acted like the
Herod of Matthew’s gospel. With abundance of spies at
his command, he trusted all the future of his dynasty to
the chance of the Magi returning and telling him where to
find the new-born king. He showed this confidence in
strangers of whom he knew nothing except that they were
under divine guidance, and therefore very likely to discover
his design. As it was, he struck too late, and having shed
a torrent of blood to no purpose, he desisted from further
search.
Matthew, however, is not the only author who supplies
an account of the marvels which ushered Jesus into the
world. Luke, or the writer who goes by that name, has
his story to tell. According to him, the angel Gabriel
appeared to Mary and announced the coming Messiah, who
was to be born of her, having no man for his father. John
the Baptist leapt in his mother’s womb in recognition of
the Messiah whose forerunner he was to be, but who was,
like himself, still unborn. The heavens rang with the
songs of angels when Jesus was born in the stable at
Bethlehem, and the chief of the heavenly host sent the
shepherds to fall down in awful reverence before the holy
child who was the true shepherd of Israel and the preacher
of glad tidings to men as poor as they. Forty days
later the mother, with her mysterious child, entered the
temple at Jerusalem, to make the offerings required by the
Jewish law. Here Anna and Simeon, inspired by the Holy
Ghost, announced the glory that had come, not to Israel
only, but to the world, and predicted the sorrows which
were waiting for the Son, and were tos pierce the mother’s
heart as with a sword.
It is difficult to conceive of pictures more exquisitely
beautiful, nor need it be denied that they symbolise deep
truths. But if we are bidden to take them as true history
—and of course they were intended for history by the
author who penned them—we must try them by historical
tests. "Will they stand the test ? Observe, first, that they
contradict Matthew in almost every point. Luke, too,
begins with a genealogy of Joseph, but it is quite different


from that of Matthew, so different that very few names agree;
and I suppose that even the belief in miracles will not
enable us to believe that a man had two different sets of
paternal ancestors in the direct line. If you follow Matthew,
you will hold that Joseph was the son of Jacob; if you follow
Luke, you will maintain that he was the son of Heli. Com-
mentators have contended that one genealogy is that of
Mary, the other that of Joseph ; but the theory does obvious
violence to the words of the text, and has been abandoned
even by the most determined conservatives. Others have
suggested that Jacob died childless, and that Eli, having
married his brother’s widow, called his children by the
name of his dead brother, according to the Jewish law.
In that case, the grandfather of Joseph would have had the
same name in each list, whereas the names are different;
and apart from this, the names of Zerubbabel and Shealtiel
are common to the two lists, and as Matthew and Luke
assign a different father to Shealtiel, you must, if you
adopt this way of escape, have recourse to the same expe-
dient over again, and suppose that the evangelists, without
giving any hint of it to their readers, mingled legal and
natural genealogies in the most senseless confusion. Here,
however, we are only at the beginning of troubles. Matthew
excludes all doubt that Bethlehem was the home of Joseph
and Mary. He tells us they had a “house” there, and
after relating their flight into Egypt and their return, he
says that they “turned aside” to the region of Galilee
because they were afraid of Archelaus, the king of Judah,
in which Bethlehem lay. Luke, on the contrary, declares
that their home was at Nazareth—that they only went up
to Bethlehem, the cjrty of their ancestors, because this was
required by the rules of the census, and so far from having a
house there, they sought lodgings in an inn, and were obliged
to take refuge in a stable. Finally, Luke’s story of the pre-
sentation in the temple excludes Matthew’s story of the
Magi, of which he had never heard. If we believe both, we
are forced to place the presentation second in order of time,
because Luke says that when it was over they returned to
Galilee, let alone the fact that they would have had no motive
for retracing their steps to Bethlehem when the census was


over. What then follows ? This, that Joseph and Mary,
when Herod was seeking the child’s life, and had bathed
Bethlehem in blood, calmly entered the very centre of the
danger, and allowed the matter to become the common
talk of pious people at Jerusalem.
I have allowed that there is much beauty, something
even of ideal truth, in these mythical narratives. But it is
refreshing none the less to turn from them to the fact, which
is far more beautiful because it is divine. Let us suppose
for a moment that the miraculous stories are true. In that
case Jesus must have begun his life as no other man ever
did. What expectations must his mother and his brothers
and sisters have formed of him whose birth in itself had
called wise men from the East and angels from the
heaven! How anxiously they must have waited till the
hour of his manifestation came, and his greatness shone
forth! Mark’s early and truthful gospel assures us that no
such expectations had been formed, and puts it beyond
doubt that the mother of Jesus and her own family never
dreamt that there had been anything strange in his birth.
On the contrary, Mark lets us know that when Jesus began
to teach in the synagogue, his relations, who had looked on
him as a simple carpenter, thought him mad. His mother
was one of those who were aghast at this new departure,
and Jesus began his work in utter loneliness. Those who
knew him best distrusted him, and till the very end his
brethren did not believe in him.
The fact is that none of the early disciples had ever heard
of the miraculous birth. The witnesses to it contradict
each other; they contradict themselves; they testify
unwillingly to the older belief, for each of them has adopted
from some older source a genealogy in which the origin of
Jesus is traced through Joseph. In Mark, the earliest
evangelist, not a word is said of the miraculous birth, though
facts are mentioned which are utterly inconsistent with it.
Paul, too, preserves an absolute silence on the subject. But
Paul, in the words of my text, fixes our attention on the real
difference between Jesus and other men. It does not depend
on the fable of his miraculous birth, but on his life. He
was declared the Son of God, with power according to the


spirit. He is our perfect example, nay, Ins holiness was
perfect, and could be perfect, just because, his nature
being like ours, lie stands alone in tlie perfection of
sanctity. And knowing that every good and perfect gift
descends from above, we, too, confess that God was in
Christ reconciling the world to Himself.
V—THE LIFE OF JESUS.
“ And he could there do no mighty work , save that he laid his
hands upon a few sick folk and healed them. And he
marvelled because of their unbelief .” —Mark vi. 5.
Many good people, of whom I for one desire to speak with
sincere respect, would be shocked at the assertion that any
marvels were beyond the power of Jesus. They believe
that he was the incarnate God, and they count it nothing
short of blasphemy to say that there were things which
he could not do. Yet tins is just the statement which
Mark does make. He utters it quite simply, as if it were
a matter of course. His view of Jesus, then, must have been
very different from those which prevail in most of the
churches at the present day. That, however, is not all.
Long before anybody dreamt of calling Jesus God,
Christians had come to think of him as a mighty wonder-
worker, and they were not disposed to admit that miracles
caused him any difficulty. Hence Matthew (xiii. 58)
substitutes the words “ did not do” for Mark’s bolder
expression “ could not do many mighty works ” Here is
one of the many proofs that Mark is the earliest and the
most faithful of the evangelists, Mark reports another
saying of Jesus which calls for special attention. He tells
us that when the life of Jesus was nearly over the


Pharisees came tempting him, or, in other words, testing his
claims to reverse the ordinary accepted teaching. Mark
continues his narrative thus : “ Jesus sighed deeply in his
spirit, and saith, Why doth this generation seek a sign ?
Verily I say unto you, There shall no sign be given unto
this generation. And he left them.” Now, both Matthew
and Luke attribute the same words to Jesus, and so far
testify to the accuracy of Mark. But they are not content
to leave the words of their Master in their original
simplicity. Accordingly, Luke amplifies the saying of
Jesus thus : “ No sign shall be given it”— i.e., this genera-
tion— save the sign of Jonah.” Matthew goes still
further. He represents Jesus as drawing a minute
parallel between Jonah and himself. As the prophet was
three days and three nights in the belly of the fish, so
Jesus was to be three days and three nights in the heart of
the earth (Matt xii. 38, 39), It is scarcely necessary
to point out that Matthew has altered the oldest form of
the story for the worse. On his own showing, the difficulty
still remains that though Jesus, if we believe the Gospels,
had wrought many stupendous miracles, the Pharisees, as
if they had heard nothing of them, asked for a sign, and
that Jesus, instead of calling these facts to their remembrance,
replied that no sign would be given. But, worst of all,
Matthew refutes himself, because he turns the wise and
deep words of Jesus into nonsense. For surely it would
have been nothing short of folly to call the generation to
which he spoke evil and adulterous because they sought for
a sign, and to add that no sign would be given except the
most amazing sign of all, namely, that the body of Jesus
would rise from the dead after it had been three days and
three nights in the tomb.
Let us return, however, to the words of my text, and see
what light they throw on the life of Jesus and the miracles
attributed to him. The text implies, first, that Jesus actually
did strange and mighty works, and in particular that he healed
the sick. Next, so far from compelling us to believe that
these wonderful works were miracles in the strict sense—
i.e., suspensions of natural law—it excludes this supposition
by bringing them into direct connection with the laws of


physiology. Take the miracle of the sun-dial. The sun
at Hezekiah’s request went back ten degrees. Here you
have a miracle pure and simple ; for there was nothing in
the mind of Hezekiah which could have the slightest
natural influence on the course of the sun. It is quite
otherwise with the wonderful works of Jesus. He healed
those who believed that he had the power to do so, and
when this faith was wanting, the power of Jesus failed.
This in itself is quite credible. Physiologists no less than
Mark assure us of the wonderful power which the soul exer-
cises over the body. Lastly, a comparison between Mark
and the later evangelists, nay, between different parts of
Mark’s own narrative, enables us to see, at least to some
extent, the way in which the belief in Christ’s miracles arose.
John the Baptist, so the fourth evangelist writes,
wrought no miracles. This statement of his may have
been made, probably was made, for a purpose. He wrote
a very long time after the events, at a time when many
had come to think that Jesus was, not indeed the Supreme
Being, but still a person of divine dignity through whom
the world was made. He wished to contrast the Baptist
with the Word made flesh, to impress upon his readers that
the Baptist had but one office, and that to lead men to
Jesus and point them to the Lamb of God. Still, it is
remarkable that the older records mention no wonderful
work of the Baptist. There is a reason for this. John
was an ascetic, he was a preacher of repentance, and he
was no more. But Jesus was much more. It was not
only that the words of Jesus are far more original and
striking, and his influence, therefore, much wider and
deeper and more permanent. Jesus, with a sympathy
different from that of his predecessor, drew near to men
and bore their infirmities. The Baptist fasted in the
wilderness, and when the crowds sought him confronted
them with the sternest aspects of the truth. Jesus came
to save that which was lost. He sought souls out, instead
of waiting till men came to him. He was known as the
friend of publicans and sinners. He was moved with com-
passion for the multitude. Think, then, of the sights which
met his eyes. There were the lost and the depraved, the
c 2


sinners and the outcast, and for them Jesus mourned most.
But there, too, was the raging lunatic, the man with
epileptic tits, the helpless paralytic. It may be asked
what these cases of bodily suffering had to do with the
preaching of the Gospel, except so far as the spirit of love
which Jesus infused prompted men to heal bodily disease,
if they could, by natural means. But the view of disease
at that time was wholly different from that which is com-
monly held now. The Jews had learned from the Persians
an intense belief in diabolical agency. Almost every form of
bodily suffering and mental disease was accounted for on the
theory that a devil had taken actual possession of a man
and tortured him at will. Turn over the pages of the three
first gospels, and you will find ample proof of this. Lunatics
and epileptic persons, nay, even the paralytic, the blind, the
deaf, and the dumb, were supposed to be possessed by devils.
‘•Master,” said a poor man, “I have brought unto Thee
my son who hath a dumb spirit, and wheresoever he taketh
him he teareth him, and he foameth and gnasheth with
his teeth and pineth away.” Evidently, if a Jew of those
days had wandered through one of our hospitals or asylums,
he would have regarded the patients as the victims of
diabolical possession.
The three first gospels give a prominent place to the
power of Jesus in driving out devils. Even his enemies
acknowledged it, though they tried to account for it in a
way discreditable to his character. They said that he cast
out devils through Beelzebub, the prince of devils. More-
over, Mark distinctly indicates that the fame of Jesus as a
wonder-worker originated in the strange influence which
he exercised upon the possessed. He tells us that when
Jesus began to preach in the Synagogue at Capernaum,
he was interrupted by a man who was possessed by an unclean
spirit. “ What have Ito do with thee,” he cried, “thou
Jesus of Nazareth ?’’ The young teacher addressed him,
in those firm and gentle tones which have always great power
over the insane. “He rebuked him, saying, Hold thy peace
and come out of him.” Those who stood by were amazed.
“What is this? A new teaching*! With authority he
commandeth even the unclean spirits, and they obey him.


And the report of him went out straightway into all the
region of Galilee round about.” No reasonable objection
can be made to the truth of this account, and indeed it
bears the stamp of reality. We can imagine what the
sympathy of Jesus must have been. We can picture to
ourselves the control which his strong and gentle spirit
enabled him to exert. We can understand, that madness
was aggravated, perhaps even caused in some cases, by the
fact that the unhappy victim shared the prevalent belief
that an unclean spirit held him in his grip. For the same
reason, he was very likely to gain that self-control which
puts an end to madness the moment he felt himself in the
presence of one whose purity could put the unclean spirit
to flight. The young teacher rebuked the evil spirit.
There was one final struggle, the possessed man writhed in
agony, then the devil left him and he was free. I have
been trying throughout to show you how miracles increase
and assume a character which is palpably miraculous—how
wonderful works, in short, become real miracles as the
documents recede from the supposed event. Contrast the
beginning of Christ’s ministry in Mark and John, and you
have an excellent illustration of the law. Mark, the earliest
evangelist, informs us that the fame of Jesus began in the
synagogue at Capernaum, when he cast out an unclean
spirit. The fourth and latest of the evangelists affirms
that Jesus changed about one hundred and twenty gallons
of water into pure and excellent wine. “This beginning of
miracles Jesus did and manifested forth His glory,” Said I
not rightly that miracles grow ?
Mark and the so-called John contradict each other, and
it will be well to examine the cures of possessed persons a
little more closely. Such cures were wonderful, no doubt,
but they were not the signs which the Pharisees sought,
because they were not miracles. The Pharisees, too, pro-
fessed to drive out devils, and Jesus does not dispute their
claims. But the method of Jesus was different from theirs,
and, mark it well, made less pretence to a miraculous
character. Josephus reports that in his time devils were
driven out by magic incantations, which were supposed to
have come down from King Solomon, and by the use of a


herb whose qualities were discovered by the same wise
king. He reports that a contemporary of his own, called
Eleazar, expelled demons by means of a ring containing
this herh, and ordered the devil to overturn a pail of water
as he quitted the man whom he had enslaved, in order that
there might be no uncertainty about his exit. Jesus trusted
to no magic remedy, but to the natural force of his look
and of his word. Far from magnifying the marvel, he
warned his hearers that the cure need not be permanent,
and that the devil might return. It is quite possible that
cures of other sorts were effected. Far more than we
usually think may have been done by agencies which were
purely natural. He told his disciples to anoint the sick
with oil, which was a common medical treatment in those
days. Mark alone has preserved the notice of this remedy ;
it was too natural for the later biographies. All the first
three evangelists make much of the cure of demoniacs.
The fourth evangelist omits them altogether, because the
growth of the mythical element supplied him with far more
indubitable evidence to the miraculous power of Jesus. It
is certain, moreover, that paralysis has been cured by strong
excitement, and probably there is at least a substratum
of truth in cures of this kind which the evangelists record.
It is true that from very early times Jesus was believed
to have wrought miracles which admit of no such easy
explanation. He walked on the sea, he healed the blind,
he even raised the dead. But I pointed out in the first
lecture that we can see those miracles grow before our
eyes. It was only as the first generation of the disciples
was dying out that any biography of Jesus was written.
The miraculous had had time enough to spring into being. It
needed longer time, however, to attain its full dimensions.
The common source from which the three first gospels
drew represents Jesus as restoring to life a girl of whom
he himself said, “ She is not dead, but sleepeth.” In Luke
he recalls to life a young man who is being carried out to
burial. In the fourth Gospel he summoned from the
tomb Lazarus, who has lain there for four days—a marvel
unknown to the earlier writers, for how could they have
passed by unnoticed the greatest miracle their Master ever'


wrought, a marvel, moreover, which was widely known and
which was the immediate cause of his own death ? More-
over, the evidence for the miracles is one mass of contra-
dictions. If you believe Mark, Jesus healed one blind man as
he was leaving Jericho ; if you believe Matthew, he healed
two ; if you believe Luke, he healed one blind man as he
was entering Jericho. Who can trust evidence like this?
I can only refer, in conclusion, to one fruitful source of
belief in the miraculous without attempting to exhibit it
fully. The disciples were not spiritual enough to understand
Jesus, and they were continually changing his metaphors
into hard and material prose. The same thing has
happened in the case of all religious teachers. Let me give
you one example from the life of Mohammed. He was far
less likely to be misunderstood than Jesus, because he was
far better known than Jesus, and far easier to comprehend,
just because he was far less spiritual. Yet even his
followers changed the spiritual into the material reality.
The ninety-fourth sura of the Koran begins with the words,
“Have I not opened thy heart?” This is plain enough.
So we should have thought, but so Bochari, the oldest
collector of the traditions, did not think. He makes
Mohammed say that he was lying on his side in the temple
at Mecca, when an angel cut his heart out, washed it in a
golden vessel, and then replaced it.* The same causes
produced analogous changes in the words of Jesus. He had
given his disciples power to tread upon scorpions, and
upon all the power of the enemy. Clearly the language
was metaphorical, for none knew better than Jesus that
neither he nor his disciples could escape the ordinary
conditions of life. But the author of the appendix to Mark
failed to see this, and he makes Jesus say that those who
believed in him might take up serpents and suffer no hurt.
Similarly Jesus described the faith which could remove
mountains; and later ages had a story to tell of St. Gregory,
the wonder-worker, who heaved a mountain out of its place
by the might of his prayer. Unconsciously Jesus gave a
* The miracle continued to grow after Bochari’s time. Its subsequent course is
traced by Dozy, Het Islamisme, p. 83. seq.


programme for the miracles which were to form so great a
part of his biographies. “Tell John the things you see and
hear—the blind see, the deaf hear, the dead are raised,
the poor have the gospel preached to them.’’ He was
thinking of no literal marvels, else he would not have closed
with the preaching of the gospel; and even on the most
orthodox theory Jesus did not habitually raise the dead to
life. But imagination easily turned the .spiritual into
material marvels, and supplied the details. There is, too,
at least one case in which a parable seems to have been
transformed into a miracle. Jesus compared the Jewish
people to a barren fig-tree, and predicted the judgment
which would cut them down unless they bore fruit.
Some who heard him lived to see the prophecy fulfilled.
Luke has preserved the parable. But in Matthew, and
even in Mark, this is turned into the absurd fiction that
Jesus sought figs on a fig-tree though it was not the time
of figs, and finding none, cursed it so that it withered away.
You may ask whether we can separate the real Jesus
from the Jesus of the miracles. Yes, and for this reason :
Belief in miracles is common to all religions. They have
been attributed to Mohammed, though he disclaimed them.
Miracles are invented easily. But it would not be easy to
invent the Sermon on the Mount, or the parable of the
Prodigal Son. It would need a Jesus to invent a Jesus.
Strip him of all the legendary miracles, and you will still
find that he spoke as no other man ever spoke; lived and
died as no other man ever lived or died.
VI.-THE RESURRECTION OF JESUS.
“ I was dead, and behold, I am alive for evermore.” —Rev. i. 18.
St. Paul, in a well-known passage of his First Epistle to
the Corinthians, declares that, if Christ be not risen from
the dead, then the faith of Christ’s disciples is vain, and
they of all men most miserable. There is, I believe, a
sense in which the words of the apostle may be thoroughly


accepted, and we shall have something to say about that
aspect of the question before we have done But if we
mean by the resurrection of Jesus that his body was raised
to life on the third day, that in this bodily form he appeared
to men, spoke to them, and ate with them; if we make
Christianity stand or fall with the evidence for the resurrec-
tion so understood, assuredly there is no case for Chris-
tianity, our faith is vain, and we are resting our hopes on a
delusion. For the bodily resurrection of Jesus there is no
evidence worthy of the name. The witnesses contradict each
other to the utmost, and here, almost more conspicuously
than in any other instance, we see the wonders growing and
multiplying as the documents which attest them recede
further and further from the date of Christ’s death. Let
us begin by examining the accounts given in the gospels.
Mark’s gospel ends abruptly, without any mention of the
resurrection. No doubt the evangelist believed in it, for he
represents Jesus on the very eve of his death as warning
his disciples that they would be scattered in dismay, and
then consoling them with the news that he would be
raised up, and would go before them to Galilee. But either,
for some reason which can never be known to us, the
gospel was left unfinished, or else it was mutilated by some
accident before it became the common property of the
church. To the rational Christian this mishap is an
unfortunate one, because it has deprived us of the earliest,
and therefore most valuable, narrative. To the believer in
biblical inspiration it is a much more serious loss, because
he has to admit that the Providence of God has failed to
preserve the best witness to the central point of Christian
faith. It may, however, be said that we have been
exaggerating the loss. Matthew, Luke, and John tell the
story of the risen Christ. Matthew and John were eye-
witnesses, Luke was intimate with eye-witnesses, and
here surely is a threefold cord which cannot easily be
broken. We proceed, therefore, to hear these evangelists
one by one, and to see whether they agree with themselves
and each other.
We turn, then, to the gospel which goes under Matthew’s
name, and try to ascertain its credibility. Here, as through-


out these lectures, we have nothing to do with objections to
miracles as such. We insist upon evidence, and we
endeavour to ascertain the worth of the evidence given,
b irst of all, we are struck by the fact that Matthew relates
very remarkable events, not one of which is noticed by any
Jewish or heathen writer. When Jesus died, Matthew
assures us that the earth shook, the world, or at least the
land of Judaea, was shrouded in darkness, and the veil of
the temple was rent in twain. . The more educated Chris-
tians in the third and fourth centuries of our era felt it
would be more satisfactory if they could support the story
ot the darkness from independent testimony, and they con-
trived to find the notice of an eclipse of the sun which
happened about that time in the work of a Greek
astronomer. Unfortunately, when Jesus died the moon
was full, so that an eclipse of the sun is out of the
question.r Our suspicion of Matthew’s accuracy is
increased, when we read that the bodies of the saints rose
from their opened tombs, went into Jerusalem, and
appeared to many. This is a miracle which even the other
evangelists did not know, or else did not believe, because
they could not have described the death of Jesus and omitted
so marvellous an incident, had they known or believed
it. All this is strange. The next story which Matthew
tells is not only strange, but demonstrably untrue. The
Jewish Sanhedrim (so Matthew relates) went to Pilate and
told him that Jesus had promised to rise from the dead on
the third day. They therefore persuaded the procurator to
appoint a watch for the tomb, on which, moreover, they set
their own seal. They took these precautions lest the dis-
ciples should steal away the body, and the latter error be
worse than the first. All was in vain. The angel of the
Lord rolled back the stone at the grave’s mouth, “and for fear
of him the watchers did quake and became as dead men.”
Each point in this story invokes a fresh absurdity. It im-
plies that, although the disciples utterly failed to understand
their Master when he foretold his resurrection, the
* See the words quoted by Eusebius from Phlegon, and the discussion of the ques-
tion in Routh Rail. Sacr., Vol. IV., p. 477 seq.


Pharisees grasped his meaning thoroughly. Next, we are
asked to believe that when Jesus had risen, the priests per-
suaded the soldiers to tell a clumsy lie, and say they had
gone asleep and thus suffered the body to be stolen away.
We must suppose that the soldiers accused themselves
falsely, and so exposed themselves to death, that the Jews
could count on persuading Pilate to forgive them, and
finally kept the secret of their dealings with the soldiers
so badly that it came to the ears of the evangelist. The
women who are said by Matthew to have come to the
sepulchre betray no knowledge of the guard at the tomb.
Nay, Mark reports that on Sunday morning they went to-
embalm the body of Jesus, and only wondered how they
were to get the stone rolled away. They, therefore,
can have known nothing, or rather Mark, when he repre-
sents them as so acting and speaking, can have known
nothing of the watch by the tomb or the seal set upon it.
It need hardly be said that he must have known these-
incidents if they had been real.
Matthew recounts two apparitions of the risen Lord.
The former occurred near to the tomb, and prepares the way
for the meeting of Jesus with his disciples on a mountain
in Galilee. An eye-witness would not have failed to-
indicate the mountain more precisely; and the very vague-
ness of the phrase, “the mountain where Jesus had
appointed them,” betrays the hand of a writer remote from
the event. At this apparition Jesus spoke, and the words
attributed to him deserve attention. Jesus declared that
all authority had been given to him in heaven and earth r
and in virtue of that authority he commanded his disciples
to baptise all nations “into the name of the Father and the
Son and the Holy Spirit.” Now, quite apart from the
general question of his resurrection, we know for certain
that Jesus never uttered these words. We learn from the
Acts of the Apostles, and still better from Paul’s epistles,
how slowly and unwillingly the older apostles admitted the
heathen converts to the church. Paul gives not the
slightest hint that the older apostles themselves had
received the charge to preach to the Gentiles, that it had
been laid upon them with the most solemn emphasis by


their Master himself. Again, we know from their “ Acts”
that the apostles did not baptise into the name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. They baptised into the
name of the Lord Jesus, and who will venture to affirm
that the apostles deliberately altered the form which Jesus
had imposed? The formula, “Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost,” was probably quite unknown to the apostolic age.
We find the germ of it in the closing words of Paul’s
. Second Epistle to the Corinthians. This, then, is the con-
clusion we reach with regard to Matthew. His credit is
shaken by the fabulous character of his history when it
deals with events subsequent to the death of Jesus. And
in particular, his story of the meeting between Jesus and
the eleven is contradicted by well-attested fact.
There is every reason to believe in the honesty of this
evangelist. He neither was, nor claimed to be, an eye-
witness. His real name is unknown to us. We can only
say that he told the stories current in his time when the
generation which had seen Jesus was gone, with little
discrimination, but in good faith. He preserves the notice
that when the risen Jesus spoke to the little band, “ some
doubted,” and he holds to the older and more authentic
tradition that the place in which the disciples thought they
saw Jesus was Galilee. “ Behold, he goeth before you to
Galilee ; there shall ye see him.” On this point Matthew’s
evidence is confirmed by that of Mark.
It is this fact which puts Luke’s account out of court.
Luke recounts two apparitions, the former to two disciples
on the way to Emmaus, the other to the eleven at Jerusa-
lem. It will not avail to say that Jesus appeared both in
Galilee and at Jerusalem, and that Luke confines himself
to those which occurred in the latter place. Luke does not
merely pass over the apparition in Galilee: he silently
excludes it. Jesus, he says, appeared to the eleven at
Jerusalem on the very day of his resurrection, and bade
them tarry there till Pentecost. We are travelling still
further from the original tradition, and the miraculous
element grows visibly. Does the risen Jesus in Matthew
speak ? In Luke he eats, in order that there may be no
doubt of his bodily resurrection, that no one may mistake


him for a spirit. So little could Luke pretend to accurate
information that he contradicts himself on a vital point.
In the Acts we read that Jesus tarried with the apostles
forty days. The gospel, on the other hand, distinctly
implies that Jesus ascended into heaven on the first
Easter Sunday.
The fourth is, even on the admission of the most conser-
vative scholars, the latest of all the gospels. Like Luke,
the author of the fourth gospel places the scene of the first
apparitions in Jerusalem, though he combines these, by an
afterthought, with the story of another apparition in
Galilee. Like Luke, the author of the fourth gospel
depicts Jesus not only as speaking to, but also as eating
with, his disciples. Note the advance of thought along the
whole line. Some even of the eleven doubted—so Matthew
reports, without telling us how these doubts were removed.
The fourth gospel also tells us of a doubting apostle, and
the gospel reaches its highest point in the triumphant
revelation which sets the apostle’s doubts at rest. Observe
how skilful an artist the evangelist is. Matthew admits
that the very witnesses of Christ’s apparition doubted
its reality. John makes no such incautious concession.
Thomas doubts not the evidence of his senses, but the
evidence of the other apostles. He was absent when Christ
stood in their midst. He insists on the most rigorous
conditions. He is satisfied to the full. He is invited to
touch the print of the nails. Then his faith leaps up like
a flame. He cries, “ My Lord and my God,” that great
confession for which the whole construction of the plot in
this gospel prepares the way. The scene is dramatic in the
highest degree. It is in no sense historical. It would
have been nothing short of a crime in the older evangelists
to leave this the greatest of all the apparitions unnoticed.
Suppose for a moment that the first gospel was written by
Matthew the apostle. Ho you think he could have men-
tioned the doubts of some apostles in the reality of the
apparition vouchsafed without one word about that
apparition to Thomas which made all rational doubt
impossible? Nor would Tbomas, even if he had seen the
risen Christ, have called him his Lord and God. The


other gospels give no hint that Jesus was a secondary
God. The apostles in the Acts are said to have preached
that Jesus was the Messiah, but they never allude to his
divinity; nor do the Jews, with all their hatred of the
Nazarenes, ever charge them with disloyalty to that belief
in the divine unity which was dear to every true Israelite.
Here is another instance in which we are compelled to
surrender belief in a miracle on grounds which have
nothing to do with the credibility of miracles a priori.
We have still to speak of Paul’s evidence. He recounts
the apparitions of Jesus, first to Peter, then to the twelve,
then to about five hundred brethren, then to James, then
to all the apostles, last of all to himself. Paul then puts
the rest of the apparitions on a level with that to himself.
How could that be ? There is the most marked contrast be-
tween Paul’s vision and the apparitions of the risen Jesus as
recorded in the gospels. Paul believed that he had seen the
Lord from heaven ; the gospels, on the contrary, speak of a
Christ who had risen from the tomb. Paul had seen Jesus
of Nazareth, but this Jesus did not speak with a common
human voice, for those who were with him, so far as we
can rely on the story told in the Acts, neither saw nor heard
anything distinct. We understand Paul still better when
we read his general theory of the resurrection as he explains
it to the Corinthians. He lays it down expressly that flesh
and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God. He believes
that the risen spirit is clothed with a body, but it is a
spiritual body, altogether distinct from that which is laid
in the grave. Jesus did not resume that body of flesh
which he quitted at death—nay, he had said farewell to it for
ever. Paul assumes, moreover, that the belief of the older
disciples upon the point was one with his own.
Paley asks what became of the body of Jesus if it did
not rise to life. Surely the buried corpse must have
remained to refute the delusive belief in the resurrection of
Jesus. The answer is that the resurrection of Jesus, as the
first generation of Christians accepted it, had nothing to do
with his body. They felt that God could not have
abandoned Jesus and left him in the world of the shades.
Enoch had gone direct to God, and God could not have


•done less for His Christ. One disciple after another believed
in an ecstatic moment that he had actually seen the Lord.
On one occasion a whole congregation felt the same electric
thrill pass through them. The belief was easy in an age
when nobody doubted the reality of ghostly apparitions.
You may remember how, according to Luke, Herod
Antipas was much perplexed because some said that John
the Baptist whom he had beheaded was risen from the dead.
It may be objected that five hundred persons could not
have fallen under the same illusion at the same time. It
is certain, however, that many persons together have seen
the same vision, because they desired to see it, or at least
were prepared to see it. The Huguenot Jurieu, a learned
man, and undoubtedly honest, testifies that one persecuted
Protestant after another heard the angels singing psalms
over a ruined meeting-house of the Huguenots. Nay,
Catholics were constrained to admit that they heard it also,
and ascribed the portent to diabolical agency. And did the
five hundred all see Jesus at one moment ? Had Paul
examined them all ? Were there none who doubted
even for a moment ? These are the questions which
demand an answer before we can reasonably believe that
the visions had objective reality. Paul does not answer
them. He gives no details, and most likely relied too
much on that revelation of Christ within his own heart
to care much about them. The gospels do give details, but
on examination their accounts prove late and fallacious.
And yet we may believe, and that firmly, that Jesus
lives. We need no miracle, we trust no vision ; we dare
not believe him to be more than man; but we know
that his soul is safe with the God and Father in
whom he trusted. The cause of Jesus and his spirit live
also. Church and State have combined to substitute a
dead for a living Christ. They have set routine and in-
difference and selfish prejudice to guard the tomb; they
have set the seal of dogma upon it, lest it open. In vain.
The spirit of Jesus re-asserts its power. They who hold
the watch fall back as dead, but he is alive for evermore.


F 'S't'f o
MASON, FIRTH AND M‘CUTCHEON, PRINTERS,
12 st. james’s buildings,
LITTLE COLLINS STREET WEST, MELBOURNE.


3 1508 01200043


■ -
.
■
, .
K -:3.
.
■ v •
4 ■ , - < • ' -*■ S-r; '
* “ ■ i* ■’ —■ ■ ■
