

EMIGRANT TRACTS.—No. XII.
THE
EMIGRANT FAMILY.
BY
C. P. FORD.
PUBLISHED UNDER THE DIRECTION OF
THE COMMITTEE OF GENERAL LITERATURE AND EDUCATION,
APPOINTED BY THE SOCIETY FOB PROMOTING
CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE.
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR TOE
SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE;
SOLD AT THE DEPOSITORY,
GREAT QUEEN STREET, LINCOLN’S INN FIELDS;
4, ROYAL EXCHANGE;
AND BY ALL BOOKSELLERS.
1851.
Price Fourpence.
LONDON: PIUNTKD BY JAMES TRUSCOTT, NELSON SQUARE.








EMIGRANT TRACTS.—No. XII.
THE
EMIGRANT FAMILY.
BY
C. P. FORD.
PUBLISHED UNDER THE DIRECTION OF
THE COMMITTEE OF GENERAL LITERATURE AND EDUCATION,
APPOINTED AT THE SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING
CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE.
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR THE
SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE;
SOLD AT THE DEPOSITORY,
GREAT QUEEN STREET, LINCOLN’S INN FIELDS,
NO. 4, ROYAL EXCHANGE;
AND BY ALL BOOKSELLERS.
1851.


LONDON:
Printed by James Truscott, Nelson Square.


ADVERTISEMENT.
The following narrative is written by a
person who has lived for ten years in
New South Wales.
The incidents mentioned have oc-
curred under his own observation, and,
he trusts, present a true picture of the
progress of an industrious emigrant
under favourable circumstances, and
show the way in which numbers have
risen to competence.
The farm on which they are supposed
to be employed, is intended for that of
the Messrs. James and Wm. MacArthur,
at Taralga, to the north of Goal burn,
near to which the author lived for some
years.
a 3




THE
EMIGRANT FAMILY.
We arrived in Sydney on the 6th of April,
after an average voyage of 120 days, with
only the usual quantity of storm and acci-
dent. The first day of our arrival no one
was allowed to go on shore, the ship being
very carefully cleaned, the passengers being
mustered for the inspecting officer, who in-
quired if we had any complaints to make of
the conduct of the officers, or crew, or of the
accommodation or provisions ; and although
there was a great deal of grumbling on the
voyage, yet when it came to the point no one
complained, which I was very glad of, as the
grumbling was more caused by ignorance of
what are good provisions for ship-board, dis-
comfort inseparable from a ship, and want of


something to do, than by any real grievance.
On the second day after our arrival, the
people who needed servants came on board
to hire us, and I was very anxious to see our
future employers. They had generally a very
pale appearance, and many were very care-
lessly dressed; some whom I heard were
very thriving settlers, were really not better
dressed than the men they were about to
hire. The single men were all hired the
first day, and went ashore immediately. The
single women were also soon hired; but there
was some little more trouble with them than
with the men, as the immigration agent took
pains to satisfy himself that the employers
were in all cases respectable people.
None of the married folks with families
were hired the first day, and I found that the
settlers of Australia were very shy of hiring
married people; in fact, as I readily under-
stood when I began to consider of it, there
were comparatively but a small number of
people whose arrangements and circum-
stances permitted them to hire them. The
Colonial Government pays the passage of
married people from motives of public policy,


otherwise the single folks are much preferred
as servants. I was very much afraid we
should never be hired, as the third day came
without any person having taken a fancy
to us.
My sister, who could easily have been em-
ployed, was very unwilling to leave us; and
I wanted some one to hire us all together,
which, of course, did not suit everybody; but,
at last, a gentleman who was inquiring for a
maid and shepherds for the country agreed
with us all, so that we had the very great
happiness of being on the same farm without
being separated.
The gentleman who hired us acted for a
large grazier in the interior, who was not at
present in town. He brought printed agree-
ments with him with blanks to be filled up,
and the following were the terms agreed
upon :
My husband and two boys were to shep-
herd and watch 3,000 sheep, and I was to
shift the hurdles. We did not exactly know
what was to be done; but as some of the
other emigrants had signed similar agree-
ments, and the immigration agent seemed to


think that there was nothing extraordinary
in what was to be done, we gladly signed
them. The terms were, —we agreed for two
years; the master was to send us and our
property up the country free as to food and
carriage, but the money payment was not to
commence until our arrival at the station.
We—that is, my husband, myself, my two
boys, aged ten and fourteen years—were to
get forty pounds a year; we were to have as
rations weekly, 40 lbs. of flour, or a bushel of
wheat, 30 lbs. meat, 6 lbs. sugar, | lb. tea,
some soap, and 2 oz. tobacco for my hus-
band. A hut to ourselves was to be found
us, furnished with an iron pot, frying-pan,
bucket, mill and sieve, and axe. My sister,
who was to be employed in the superintend-
ent’s house to wait on his family, was to
have ten pounds a year, and live in the
kitchen.
The gentleman who hired us advised us to
remain on board until the next day, when
we were to go to the Brickfield hill, to an
inn called the Black Swan, where the dray
put up.
Some part of the day we spent packing


up and arranging our stock of clothes, which,
thanks to the kindness of some good people
in England who befriended us when we were
starting, was still in very good condition,
and the rest of the day we spent in watch-
ing the shore and speculating on our future
prospects.
We sat up very late. My husband was
very anxious to go on shore and see the
Black Swan, and the dray and the bullock-
driver who was to take us up the country.
I had great difficulty in persuading him not
to go, as I was afraid he might get into
some scrape if he was alone the first night
ashore. We neither of us slept much during
the night, and were soon stirring in the morn-
ing, and had our bedding and boxes ready to
go on shore.
We landed about eight o’clock at the cir-
cular wharf; and as we could not carry our
boxes and bedding ourselves, we hired a bar-
rowman for a shilling, who was to carry our
luggage and show us the way. There was a
little stall at the corner of the street, at which
an old woman sold apples and oranges, and I
could not resist the wistful eyes of my dear


boys, who were so anxious to taste fruit, that
although I had determined on the most care-
ful economy, yet I could not refuse them;
we spent a few pence on fruit, and ate them
as we walked by the side of the barrow. My
husband had on a red worsted nightcap, such
as is commonly worn by emigrants on board
ship; and from the remarks of some little
blackguard boys I met in the street, who
began to laugh, and tease, and call us grants
and new chums, just as children in an En-
glish village ridicule anything strange, I
thought it would be better to buy a straw
hat, such as I saw other labouring men
wearing, which I did at a small shop for a
shilling.
On first landing, I had a strange feeling as
if I was abroad in some unknown place, and
had some sensation of dread about me; but
these little incidents, although very disagree-
able, re-assured me at once: I felt at home,
and was as little at a loss as I should have
been in a town in England,
Indeed the houses, and people, and streets
and lamp-posts, and carts and horses, and
English talk, soon put that out of my head.


We soon got to the Black Swan, which
was very like an English country inn; and on
inquiring for the dray, we found it standing
in the yard loaded, covered over with a tar-
paulin, ready to start.
Several men were lounging about the
yard, and they told us that Harry Smith, the
bullock-driver, had gone to Botany for the
bullocks, which were feeding there in a pad-
dock belonging to the inn-keeper, and was
expected back every minute. We lounged
about for some time, till the landlady, hap-
pening to pass through the yard, recognized
me, and asked me if my name was not Jones;
I said that was my maiden name, but that I
was married now. She inquired about the
village we had come from, and was evidently
anxious to know about it. She asked us into
the parlour, and gave us plenty to eat and
drink. I was a long time before I could
make out who she was; but I gathered a
clue at last from her questions about people
in the village, that she was a woman
who had been transported. She soon found
that I recollected all about her, when she
begged me not to mention it, as people
n


thought her an emigrant, and she was mar-
ried and doing very well, and had bitterly
repented of her fault. This was the first
friend I had met in the colony. She took a
great deal of pains to make me comfortable,
and told me I was going to a good master.
The bullock-driver came in with the news
that some one had left the slip-rail of the
paddock down; that the bullocks had got
out; that he could not find them all; and
proposed that my husband should go with
him to help seek for them. My husband
was very glad to go, as he was anxious to
see what the country was like. The land-
lady told me that there was no chance of our
starting to-day; that I should stay with her,
and tell her all about old England.
We had a great deal to talk about, she so
anxious to hear about Dorsetshire, and 1
to hear about my adopted country. She
sent for a relation of her husband s to mind
the tap, and we had a very cosy talk over
our tea.
My husband and the bullock-driver came
home late at night, having found the bul-
locks and put them up safe. He was dread


fully tired. It was so long since he had
walked at all, and he had become so lusty
on board ship, that he was quite knocked up
and disheartened. He described the ground
he had been over as nothing but sand, and
swamp, and bushes, and grumbled at it
most heartily. The landlady, however, only
laughed: she said Botany must not be taken
as a sample of the country, for that the land
in the interior was very fine, with plenty of
grass upon it. My husband and I got a
comfortable bed over some of the stables;
my sister slept in the house; but the boys
were put to sleep under the dray in the
yard.
Next morning the bullock-driver brought
in the bullocks very early, and we prepared
to start. The friendly landlady gave us a
capital breakfast of beef-steaks, bread, and
tea; and when we offered to pay would not
hear of it, as we were the first country
people of her own that she had met; and
when we pressed her hard, —though God
knows we could ill afford it, — said that we
could pay next time we came to town. She
came into the yard to see us start, and by
b 2


her good-humoured persuasion to the bul-
lock-driver, got us all very nicely placed on
the dray ; he was willing enough to make us
comfortable, but the suggestions of the land-
lady we found of the greatest service. We
started in excellent spirits, altogether think-
ing very highly of Australia, My sister and
I rode on the dray, my husband and the two
boys walked alongside. The road was very
wide, with houses on each side for some dis-
tance from Sydney; but we soon got into
the bush. The . bullocks moved so very
slowly that it became very tiresome, and we
were very glad to get down sometimes and
walk. We stopped at Sundown, and drew
up by the side of the road. My husband
took the bullocks to the water at a little
distance, while the bullock-driver and my
two boys gathered wood to make a lire;
they went afterwards for a bucket of water,
with which we made the tea and had our
supper, which we really enjoyed very much,
both from the novelty and because we were
very tired and hungry. We had some
laughing about our arrangements for bed;
but it was finally decided that we should


sleep on the load under the tarpaulin, which
was propped up a little with sticks so as to
give us room to lie down. The men and
boys slept on the ground under the dray.
We brought some hay with us to feed the
bullocks, as the land was too much enclosed
so near Sydney for them to be turned out,
and some of them were chained up to small
trees near to keep them from straying, so
that we had a very early start in the
morning.
We came this day almost to Liverpool;
and as we camped very soon, my husband,
sister, and I walked about a mile to see the
town and buy some more tin-pots to make
our tea in. It was a very dull place; the
people complained very much of the soil, and
it appeared to be nothing but sand. We
walked quietly back to the dray before dark;
when we got there we found a number of
other drays camped near, and some of our
shipmates who were also travelling up the
country were with them, so that we had
quite a pleasant party. It was very delightful
to meet familiar faces in such an out-of-the-
way place; we had a large fire made, all
n 3


brought their supper and sat round it, and
we had a great deal of fun and joking.
Amongst them was a family who had not
been thought much of, as they were not very
well-conducted people in the ship, where
they were always talking about some i ich
relation of theirs in the colony. Their boast-
ing, however, turned out to be true, for he
had come down to Sydney to fetch them up
to his place. They had a large covered cart
to ride in, which kept them from the sun by
day, and was very comfortable to sleep in at
night. They were going to their uncle’s
property, who possessed a great deal of land,
of which he was to let some to them on a
clearing-lease 5 he was to start and keep
them the first year, they to repay him as
soon as they could. We sat up round the
fire talking until quite late; but broke up at
last and turned in.
We travelled on for a day or two, some-
times in company with other drays, but
generally alone, without anything unusual
occurring; until one evening, after camping
in the usual manner, and having our supper,
I missed one of my boys. I was not alarmed


at first, as I thought he might have gone on
to a fire we saw at a little distance; but
when we shouted and got no answer, and
his brother had gone to the fire, which was a
camp of blacks, and found that he was not
there, I became really very much frightened.
I had given him his tea myself, so that he
could not be far off; but we did not know
which direction to take to look for him. The
bullock-driver went in one direction, my hus-
band in another, I and his brother down the
road; but although we made a great noise,
made the fire blaze up, and wandered about
until we were quite exhausted, still we did
not find him. Oh, the horror of that time!
My dear boy, perhaps, wandered into the
bush to he starved to death ! My husband
was as frightened as myself: hut the bul-
lock-driver, Harry, assured us that it was a
very common occurrence; that he would not
starve in a night or day; and remembering
the blacks’ camp, went there and persuaded
them to come and help look for him. He
went up to the camp, and all the blacks
came down immediately. Frightened as
I was, their black faces alarmed me still


more. One of the biggest and ugliest came
up to me and said, “ You been lose your
picaninny ? Bail you cry, white gin, black-
fellow soon find him; you sit along a fire,
blackfellow track ’em and then began to
cry himself.
There was something so really kind in the
man’s sympathy, and he seemed so confident
of finding the hoy, that I quite forgot his
ugliness; an angel from heaven could not
have encouraged me more. They lighted
some bark to serve as torches, and scattered
themselves round the dray to find his track,
which after some time they did, and sent one
of their picaninnies to tell me of it.
They soon saw him; hut he was in so
great a fright, that when he saw the black
fellow he thought it was the devil, ran away
still faster, and they had some trouble to
catch him and hold him until his father
came. The story he told was, that he heard
something move in the bush by the road-
side, and seeing it was some small animal, he
followed it, thinking to catch it, but that it
got away from him into a hollow log; and
when he looked up, he found he was out of


sight of the dray. He walked for some time
in the direction that lie thought the dray
was; but when he found that he must have
passed it, if he was in the right way, he
became quite confused and did not know
where he was going to; became quite giddy,
and the sight of the black fellow, and his
catching hold of him, completed his terror.
He was very ill the rest of the night, and it
was some days before he was himself again.
This little affair alarmed me very much; it
was a long time before I could bear to see
my children out of my sight; but it served
as a good lesson to them to be more careful.
We travelled on with the dray in the
same way, the monotony of the journey being
only varied by the circumstance of the bul-
locks being found sooner or later in the
morning; until one fine morning they were
not to be found at all, the bullock-driver
coming to the camp and giving up all hope
for that day. We thought this would be
a good opportunity to get all our clothes
washed; so filling the bucket, and setting
the iron-pot on the fire, my sister and I had
a great washing of all the dirty clothes, and


hanging them in the clear sunshine, they
were soon dry. The next day the bullock-
driver went to look for them. As my hus-
band was too inexperienced to be of any use,
he and the two boys stayed behind, and
greased the wheels of the dray, and repacked
the load, so that we were all ready to start
again as fresh and as clean as the first day.
The bullocks were found in the evening;
and we still kept crawling on, sometimes
being passed by a herd of fat cattle coming
to Sydney, or a mob of horses galloping-
past and making an intolerable dust, until
we arrived at a small town, where we were
to leave the main road on which we had
been travelling, and continue our route by a
real bush road. There was not much dif-
ference between the main road and this one,
except that the bush road was not cleared at
all; the dray threaded its way between the
trees as the bullock-driver chose, keeping of
course the beaten track as much as possible.
The first evening on this road we camped
near a farm belonging to a very large pro-
prietor in the country; and I was quite
surprised to see such an establishment.


There was a very large cottage, with green
verandah and sun-blinds, looking very bright
and clean; blacksmith’s shop, carpenter’s
shop, place for tanning, stores, stockyards,
all surrounding a large square courtyard.
At a little distance were large barns, shear-
ing-shed as big as a church, and huts for the
men. In one corner of the courtyard was
the hut originally inhabited by the pro-
prietor when he first went to the place,
making a striking contrast in its humble
squalid look to the fine buildings around.
Three days more would bring us to our
destination, which was the next farm to this.
Our road led through the run belonging to
the farm we were to live on. The country
was open and undulating; the trees very
far apart, the grass growing between them
like an English park; the bark of all the
trees being white, much assisted in making
the place look bright and cheerful. Every
one we met now was a friend or acquaint-
ance of the bullock-driver’s; and as the
news of his expected arrival had reached
the place before him, many of the shepherds
were looking out by the road-side to hear


the news and see the new chums. All we
saw were busy either plaiting straw or
making straw-hats, their work of minding
the sheep being very much intrusted to their
dogs. One of the shepherds had a commis-
sion to make a hat for the bullock-driver,
which he brought down to the dray, and
which served to help Master Harry’s appear-
ance on driving up to the store at the sta-
tion. These men were the first we had seen
who were doing the work that my husband
and sons were to be employed upon; natu-
rally they were very anxious to see as much
of it as possible, and I was delighted to find
that they were not in any way discouraged
at the prospect before them.
We reached at last the head station; for-
tunately we were all right, all the bullocks
were in good order, nothing was stolen from
the dray. The superintendent was very
pleased, and sent us into the kitchen to
refresh, while the dray was unloaded, and the
storekeeper took charge of the stores brought
up. My sister saw here her future mistress,
a respectable Scotch lady, with her first
baby, which was to be her principal charge,


and which she took to at once to the great
pleasure of her mistress. I tried to make as
much a friend as I could of the superintend-
ent’s wife, and I believe succeeded; at any
rate, my sister being at head-quarters would
be a very great help to us. The station we
were to go to would not be ready for a day
or two, and my husband and boys were kept
busy about the garden and fences until the
arrangements were made.
We started one Saturday afternoon to the
station to which we were appointed, with a
cart carrying rations for us for the week, con-
taining our luggage, and which was to take
back that of the present shepherds. It was
arranged that we should arrive there a little
before sunset, so as to see the sheep counted
into the pens, w hich from that time were to
be under our charge. We all went up to
see the sheep counted in, and found them
all right. A memorandum of the number
was marked up in the inside of the hut in
large figures with the end of a fire-stick.
The pens were moveable enclosures of hur-
dles, in which the sheep were shut up for
the night, and which were moved every day,
c


so that the sheep had always a clean place
to sleep in. This part of the duty I intended
to do. One of us alternately was to sleep at
the pens, accompanied by several fierce dogs
to serve as watchmen to prevent any harm
to the sheep at night.
After the sheep were counted over we all
went into the hut. The shepherds, upon
going away, treated us to some tea, and
gave my husband some general advice as to
the feeding on the run, and the distance in
each direction that the run extended. After
wishing us all good night and luck with the
sheep, they went away, and we were left all
alone in the hut.
I believe it was the first time we had
been alone together since our departure from
our cottage in Dorsetshire, fully six months
before; during all this time we had been
travelling either on sea or land almost with-
out any care or w ill of our own, and entirely
at other people’s cost and responsibility. We
certainly had behaved very well, and given
as little trouble as possible to those wdio had
charge of us; and it was a very great matter
to have arrived safe through so many diffi-
culties and dangers.


During- our passage out, Divine Service
had been performed every Sunday, at which
we had regularly attended ; but in travelling-
up the country we had not attended to our
religious duties as we ought to have done.
It was one of those calm still evenings which
naturally dispose our thoughts to heavenly
things; we were rather subdued by the lone-
liness and novelty of our position, and by the
dread, mingled, however, with great hopeful-
ness, for the future which we all felt: I
believe four people have seldom settled to
prayer in a more sincere and befitting spirit
than we did on this occasion. I read a
chapter from the New Testament, my hus-
band from the history of Job, and my boys a
prayer each from a book kindly given to us
by some religious people who came on board
the ship when we embarked. After this duty
performed, the eldest of the boys went to the
watch-box to watch the sheep ; the youngest
slept before the fire, while my husband and
I made up our beds on an old bed-place in
the inner division of the hut.
Next morning our duties began; my hus-
band took out one flock of sheep to feed in
c 2


the bush, and my eldest boy another; myself
and the youngest boy remained at home to
shift the hurdles in readiness for the flocks
when they came home at night. We found
it very hard work; it took us the greater
part of the day, barely leaving us time to
prepare the food for the evening. We were
not used to the work, and did not know how
to set the readiest way about it.
My husband and son came home with the
sheep in the evening; and here we had a
difficulty we did not expect, neither of them
had ever counted sheep before, and when
they tried they found they were not able to
make them come right; they tried again,
and found they made the number different
from before; in fact, like many other things
that appear easy, they found this amazingly
difficult, and they were at last obliged to
give up the attempt, uncertain whether the
sheep were right or not. This was a very
great annoyance; it would have made us so
very easy in our minds to have felt certain
that the sheep were correct.
My husband had no dog; and though he
had taken every precaution, yet still the first


time he could not be sure. We did not go
to rest very comfortably. In the morning,
to our very great comfort, an overseer made
his appearance to count the sheep, and see if
all was right. We told him what a fright
we were in about our uncertainty as to the
number; he advised my husband to learn to
count the sheep as soon as possible, and to
get a dog to help him. He was to come
every day to see if we were right, and put
us in the way of managing. He showed me
also how to carry the hurdles conveniently,
and to shift them properly. I found the
great advantage of going the right way
about everything, doing in two hours what
took so long before. The overseer went to
my husband on the run, and found great
fault with him for keeping his sheep too
close, he being too frightened to allow them
to spread much out of his sight; and conse-
quently the sheep could not feed so easily as
if they had more of their own way, and, in
consequence, would soon become poor. My
eldest boy took great delight in the sheep,
and would evidently soon make a better
shepherd than his father. He found a great
c 3


deal to amuse him in the ways and habits of
the sheep, and also in the opossums, bandi-
coots, kangaroo rats, he met with in the
bush; he also took to counting the sheep very
well, and was a very great comfort to us. The
younger boy was very useful; he was never
tired of chopping wood, and often went out
with his father or brother to look after the
sheep.
It took us more than a month to become
sufficiently used to the ways and customs of
the place to feel completely at our ease ; but
after my husband and son had learned to
count the sheep, and to make use of the dog,
everything went on smoothly; so much so,
that we began to feel tired of our lazy life.
My husband was continually patching and
improving the hut. We soon made a new
bed-place, certainly of very coarse carpentry;
but some coloured calico that I had brought
from England, became of great use to cover
over the rough work. It gave a very finished
look at a very trifling cost of time and trou-
ble. My husband felt his time hang very
heavy while minding the sheep; all the diffi-
culties and troubles were over, and the mo-


notony was disagreeable; he began to split
straw and plait it like the rest, but his fingers
were too clumsy, and he gave it up, and
contented himself with attending to his
sheep.
The place where the hut was, was not so
very lonely, as a road passed the door. We
often had visitors; the neighbouring shep-
herds often called in the evening to see
how we were getting on, and we learned
something of the ways of the bush from
them ; but their language and oaths were so
bad, that I was more annoyed than cheered
by their company. Sometimes people tra-
velling with sheep or cattle would pass;
sometimes they camped the night near us;
on these occasions it was a very great amuse-
ment to go to the camp in the evening to
hear the news and see the way they ma-
naged ; sometimes, particularly if there were
gentlemen with them, we would offer them
the shelter of our hut, and if they came they
generally gave us a little present on leaving,
some tobacco, or some tea and sugar. There
were two young gentlemen settled a few
miles off with a small number of sheep, and


they often called on passing our hut. They
were very nice good-tempered young men;
and as they were very carelessly dressed, I
often joked them about their appearance.
They said they had no woman near to wash
for them ; but that, if I would do it, they
would pay me Sydney price, bring the
clothes, and take them away. Sydney price
was four shillings a dozen, taking large and
small; and I readily agreed to it, promising
at the same time to do the mending, and
putting on buttons, if they found soap.
I had plenty of time to do this, the only
trouble was the carrying the water from the
creek up to the hut; but we managed to
borrow another bucket, and my husband
making a yoke, it was done comparatively
easily. Many of the single men shepherds,
when they found I washed for the gentlemen,
brought their clothes too to wash, so that in
a short time I had from two to three dozen
a week to wash, which was a very great help
to us, as from being on the road we were
often obliged to entertain people travelling,
and several times we had run short in conse-
quence. I could have bought any quantity


of rations I chose from the master, but I
did not like to draw upon our wages. This
business of the washing brought a great
many people to the hut; but as we made
something out of them, we put up with them.
Now and then, leaving my youngest boy in
charge, I would go to the head station to see
my sister ; I had always very great pleasure
in hearing from her that my husband’s atten-
tion to the sheep was appreciated.
The superintendent’s wife was always
kind ; and when I told her about the wash-
ing, gave me some starch, and sent me some
washing to do for herself. I told her about
the number of people calling, and the nui-
sance they were; she said that it could not
be helped, and advised me to carry out my
plan by having something to sell, and so
make customers of them; she advised me to
get a cow if I could, and make butter, I
had often seen cattle driven past in great
herds, and this idea had never occurred to
me; but I was determined not to lose sight
of it. We were all going on very nicely ;
the sheep were thriving under my husband’s
and son’s charge; my washing was giving


great satisfaction to everybody. The super-
intendent, joking me one day, said that I had
made a greater change in the appearance
of the men than he had believed possible.
None of the men ever went up to him on
business, or got themselves up for any great
occasion, without a shirt with a stiff collar of
my washing; and the superintendent him-
self was obliged to dress himself smarter to
keep up to the mark. As I was saying, we
were all going on very nicely, when, one
evening, my husband came home in a great
flurry, having found something wrong with
the sheep. He counted his in, and made
them appear a much greater number than
what he ought to have had; he counted
them again, and found he must be right;
my son came home, and counting his in,
found that they were right. This was very
mysterious ; but as it was evident that some-
thing was wrong, one of the boys went up to
the superintendent at the head station to
report it. He left orders that all the over-
seers should be informed of it, and came
down himself immediately. It appeared that
the sheep my husband had brought home


had been lost by somebody else, and having'
accidentally met his flock had mixed with it.
The shepherd who had lost them had chanced
his sheep in the bush while he went to sell a
hat at some hut in the neighbourhood ; a
wild dog had got among them, and scattered
them all over the country; only part had
come into my husband’s flock; some were
picked up by the people sent to look for
them; some got into other flocks; but se-
veral were killed and eaten by the Dingoes,
wliich the shepherd, for he was a free man,
had to pay for. This, although no loss to us,
m fact quite the contrary, as the superin-
tendent was much pleased at our promptness
in informing him of what was wrong, made
us very anxious. It was very true that the
man was careless and very much to blame;
but an oversight was so easily made, and
our boy was so young, that we never could
be sure but that some day or other either
my husband or son might lose some sheep;
more, perhaps, than our whole year’s wages
could pay for. It could not be helped; it
was a great lesson, and made both my hus-
band and son much more vigilant.


I was very anxious to get a cow, and con-
stantly on the look-out for one. People
with cattle often passed the place, but never
had any suitable for sale. I had by this
time saved some money by washing; some
of the men never paid me at all, some did
work in return, but altogether I managed to
have a few pounds in cash. Wh had nevei
drawn any of our wages; we were very un-
willing to do so, as the money left in the
master s hands served as a sort of secmity for
good behaviour, and gave us a more respect-
able and independent position on the farm.
One day a stockman passed with a herd
of cattle, which had come from a great dis-
tance ; they were very tired and weary, and
one of them, a fine cow in calf, was so foot-
sore that it could not possibly travel any
farther; the man offered to sell it very cheap,
and I bought it. It was some time before it
got well enough to stray far; and by that
time it calved, giving us a fine heifer calf.
Browney, for that was the name we gave
her, turned out a very good milker; my
husband put up a small stockyard, with a
bail in it, and we milked her every morning.


The calf was shut up in the stockyard every
night, and the mother turned out to feed; in
the morning the cow would generally he
found at the gate waiting to get in for the
calf to suck her, when we would bail her up
and milk her, turning them both out together
for the day.
The expense of getting a churn and some
milk-dishes exhausted all my spare cash; but
the sale of the butter soon made it up.
When it was known that we had money to
spare, many of the small settlers in the
neighbourhood offered to sell cattle to us;
our credit was so good, that I could have
bought any number I chose, and they would
have taken my word to pay for them at
some distant day. I preferred, however,
going on more slowly, determined when I
bought to do so with ready money. Having
the cow gave us a great deal more to do;
but by managing my time well, I got through
my day’s work very easily.
We felt now in comparatively easy circum-
stances, the only drawback was the dreadful
ignorance in which our dear children were
brought up. It was true they had plenty to
D


eat and drink, and were rich compared with
what they had any chance of being in Eng-
land, but they had not the opportunities of
education possessed by the greatest pauper or
criminal at home ; fortunately they had both
been taught to read at a Sunday-school in
their native village: the elder boy had retained
what he had learned very well, hut the younger
one was going sadly back. Neither could
write ; I had taught them their prayers, and
every opportunity I heard them read, but was
too busy to attend properly to them.
There were some small settlers living at
some distance who had been born in the
colony and brought up in the bush, their
ignorance was quite melancholy to see; and
to find one’s own children growing up in the
same way was dreadful. Many of these men,
and rich men too, did not know the days of
the week, the hours of the day, the months
of the year; one of them was considered
quite a genius, because he knew the time by
a watch.
There was a story told by one of the gen-
tlemen settlers that showed the ignorance pre-
valent among us. He said that he rode up to


one of their huts one day to get a bullock, which
was not ready for him ; and was going away,
when he turned to tell them that he would
come again on Sunday : “ Oh ! ” said one of
the children, with whom he was a favourite,
“ don’t come on Sunday, Mr. Brown; come
on the pretty grey horse”
There is a great deal of education acquired
imperceptibly where people live in a town or
village, or close together, which it is quite
impossible to learn in a place where people
see one another so seldom. Where we were,
the country was considered very thickly in-
habited, but the huts were five or six miles
apart; they might as well be fifty, so far as
the intercourse of children was concerned.
We had now been a twelvemonth in the
bush, and were comfortable and thriving be-
yond our anticipations. My husband, by his
steady conduct, and the knowledge of the
management of sheep he had acquired, might
reasonably look forward to be appointed
overseer at the end of his time if there
should be a vacancy, which would give us
much more wages, and him a much greater
command of his time. My eldest boy began
d 2


to feel that he was competent to keep him-
self, and it would have been unfair to have
kept him in a subordinate situation in our
family when he was able to be independent.
I found a great sale for the butter we
made, and bought two more cows with the
proceeds. By the time the two years we
had hired for originally had elapsed, we pos-
sessed three cows and calves, dairy utensils,
several little articles of furniture and for
cooking, eighty pounds in our master’s
hands, our clothes and bedding, and some
cash I had made by the washing and butter.
We had been very lucky with the sheep; at
the end of the time they were fully in as
good order as when we took them. My sister
had sounded the superintendent through his
wife, and found that there was no objection
to my husband as an overseer; he applied
accordingly the first opportunity; the super-
intendent was glad to have him, and pro-
mised the first vacancy. We still continued
minding sheep at the same station on the
same terms, by a tacit agreement, until an
overseer was needed.
My sister during this time had refused


so many offers of marriage, that the young
men in the neighbourhood began to have
a down upon her for being a proud woman.
She chose, however, at last—a very steady
man too —one of the overseers, much liked
by his employers, possessing a well-fur-
nished hut, and a small herd of horses.
It was at first intended that the wedding-
should be held in the township; but the
superintendent’s wife persuaded my sister
to wait until a clergyman came who was
expected in a short time. They were mar-
ried in the superintendent’s cottage, and
afterwards went to their own home, where
there was a large party to meet them.
My sister brought the greater part of her
wages, and some presents from her mistress,
so that it was a good match on both sides.
During some changes that were afterwards
made, my sister managed to have her hus-
band moved, so as to be near the head
station, and still had some charge over the
superintendent’s children. At last one of the
overseers was killed by a fall from his horse,
and gave my dear husband the opportunity
he so much desired, of becoming an overseer.
d 3


We were now in a very different position
from what we were before. My husband had
for himself fifty pounds a-year wages, two
horses to ride, and full rations. We removed
to a nice weatherboard hut, with plenty of
room in it, an underground dairy, a nice gar-
den ; altogether a very respectable place. His
business was to ride about a particular divi-
sion of the run, and see that the shepherds
were doing their duty; to count the sheep
whenever he thought it necessary; to teach
the new shepherds their duties; and, in fact,
to look after his employer’s interest in every
way.
It was a very great change to me. I had
a great battle with my pride as to whether I
should give up washing for other people;
but I compromised the matter by giving up
the shepherds, and only washing for those
above me.
My youngest son still remained with me;
and I now managed to get an old man, who
had been a soldier, to come in the evening,
and teach him and his brother, who came a
distance for that purpose, to read. It did
not cost much ; indeed I believe, if I had


offered it, lie would have been glad to have
come for the sake of his supper and a quiet
place to pass the evening. This was a great
blessing. Both my boys feeling that there
was a good prospect before them, took a
great deal of pains to learn; the teacher
praised their progress, and varied their in-
structions by giving them a little writing
and arithmetic. I got some books from the
superintendent; and, after constant practice
in the evening, I was glad to find they took
their books with them into the bush.
The first month or two my husband was
so taken up with his new duties, that he had
not time to attend to his private affairs. I
still made butter and sold it, and had part of
my washing connection. We often had very
tempting offers to purchase stock of all
kinds; but we had now sufficient experience
to know exactly what would suit us, and
determined to wait for it. My husband was
constantly riding over the run in the pursuit
of his duties, and had great opportunities of
seeing what was going on in the way of buy-
ing and selling among the neighbours. His
time was more at his command, and he had
d 4


some little power over the shepherds under
him, who were always anxious to propitiate
him by telling him the news, and what bar-
gains were going.
There was a man, who had formerly been
an overseer at a neighbouring farm, who had
lost his situation by his misconduct, and pos-
sessing a few head of cattle, had squatted
on a creek in the neighbourhood on his own
account. He did not bear a very good cha-
racter ; and had latterly taken to drinking,
and, in consequence, neglected his business.
While he was an overseer he had obliged a
storekeeper in the township, who advanced
him money to help him when starting for
himself. This money, with the accumulation
of interest, and his habits, he had never been
able to repay; and the storekeeper, in con-
sequence, intended to take possession of the
property, and was looking out for a pur-
chaser for it. This was exactly the sort of
thing to suit us. There were, however, some
difficulties in the way ; the man himself was
not very willing to part with his property,
as he imagined that, if he was allowed time,
he would be able to pay off the debt. He


bad no right except that of sufferance to
his run. It was supposed he had not come
very honestly by many of the cattle. There
was a great objection on the part of the
gentlemen settlers and large proprietors
around, to allow any man to settle in that
unauthorised manner so near them; as they
believed, and, in his case, with some truth,
that the hut served as a harbour for cattle-
stealers and vagabonds of all kinds. My
husband, therefore, set about his inquiries
very carefully, and found that the store-
keeper was willing to sell his right to the
place for a very moderate sum, quite within
our means.
The gentlemen, however, were very anx-
ious to get rid of the place, now what they
considered a favourable opportunity had oc-
curred. My husband inquired of the super-
intendent what he thought of it, and he at
the first moment advised him not to think of
it; but as he rode past afterwards in the
evening, said he thought more of the subject,
and would inquire of the neighbouring gentry
and find out what was their feeling on the
matter. The owner himself, when he heard
d 5


that my husband was in treaty for his station,
was excessively wrath; said that it was an
unneighbourly act, and vowed vengeance
against us all. He made such an outcry,
and carried his threats so far, that my hus-
band thought it would be better to see him-
self about the matter, and endeavour to make
some arrangement with him, which, I believe,
was what the man wanted. My husband
wanted him to go with him to the store-
keeper in the township, and settle the matter
there; but he would not do it. The man
might in his drunken fits do us some harm,
so we thought it better to offer him five
pounds, his horse, saddle, and bridle, if he
would give up his opposition and go away.
Although this was a very liberal offer, and
the man had not the slightest claim to it, he
asked time to consider of it. The superin-
tendent kindly took an interest in our affairs,
and spoke so well of my husband, that the
gentry and magistrates withdrew their oppo-
sition, and allowed us to keep the station.
The former owner took the money at last,
and rode off on his horse to try his luck at
Port Philip. We had to pay one hundred


and twenty pounds for the station, cash down.
We got a cheque from the superintendent
for the money, which was rather more than
was due to us; he advanced the money,
however, liberally, and wished us luck with
the station.
In this purchase was included a hut, stock-
yard, small cultivation paddock, not very
good of their kind, nor in very good repair;
about 100 head of mixed cattle, two mares
and foals, a plough, yokes and bows for four
bullocks, and an old dray. The cattle were
not of a very good breed; they had been
picked up by the owner in various ways, and
were of course a very mixed lot. My son
got very good wages as a shepherd, which
he was to lay out in cattle and keep on the
station, so as to accumulate a stock in readi-
ness for his marriage. We would have
gladly kept the youngest boy at home, but
he was offered very good wages to go as a
stockman to Port Philip; and we let him
go, as it would, at any rate, give him very
great insight into the mode of managing
cattle.
If we had chosen to have lived upon the
d 6


station, we could have done so; but we
thought it better for my husband to keep his
situation as an overseer, at any rate for some
time, as we could manage the cattle without
living there. The possession of so much pro-
perty we felt to be a very great cause of
anxiety; the cattle were always straying,
and gave us a great deal of trouble in get dug
them back.
My husband found the station rather a tie
upon him, and that it divided his attention;
though I believe that he was more attentive
to his duties than before, and he gave the
greatest satisfaction to his employers. Our
youngest boy being away was the cause of
much uneasiness to me, knowing the bad
characters and reckless kind of men he must
associate with. I was continually conjuring
up imaginary dangers, and fancying him
leading a life of drunkenness and dissipation
in Port Philip.
We now found a very different description
of people willing to associate with us on
equal terms. This was very pleasant to feel,
but practically it was very disagreeable.
With some of them we had nothing in com


mon ; others were too familiar to be plea-
sant; and I could not plead my poverty, and
be so ready to trade with them for my butter
and washing, which had, therefore, fallen off
a little. My husband had more time, and
often went into the township, where, of
course, he must spend some money. It was
true he often when there made friends, or
got a purchaser for a bullock that more than
covered the expense of his trip; but some-
how I always felt uneasy, and was not nearly
so happy as when we were only shepherds.
Ino longer had any hurdles to shift; and,
in fact, my labour was not considered in my
husband’s wages.
When I was moody and grumbling, my
husband would laugh at me, and say that I
was only vexed because my exertions were
not of the same importance in the household
as they used to be, and jokingly proposed to
make me a female overseer.
We had a very nice garden, with plenty of
fruit-trees as well as vegetables, which was a
great source of pleasure, and after a while of
profit; as I got some sugar and pots from
the township, and preserved the fruit, for


which I had very ready sale both in the
township and among' the neighbours. This
I found very profitable; and as it could only
be done for a short time at one season of the
year, it did not interfere much with other
duties. My sister had learned to ride, and
often came over to see us and spend the day.
She was much younger than I, and had
fallen into the ways of her husband and of
the country with great facility. I never
could ride on horseback ; I was too timid,
and, perhaps, too stiff. My husband was
very desirous to take me into the township
to see his friends there, but never could get
me on a horse; he borrowed, however, a
light cart and horse to take me into church
in the township. I was to arrive there on
Saturday night, sleep there, go to church on
Sunday, and start again early on Monday
morning. We got in very safe, and were
very kindly received by our friends ; whom,
however, I did not envy very much, their
conversation consisting entirely of the affairs
of their neighbours, and they seemed to
think very ill of one another.
It was a very great pleasure to go into


church again after our very long- deprivation
from it; and though it was unfinished, and,
in consequence, very rough inside, yet the
sound of the prayers and hymns I had been
used to at home, and was so familiar with,
moved me to tears, and I was not relieved
until I had a good hearty cry. We dined
afterwards at another friend’s house, went
again to church in the afternoon, slept at
another friend’s, started very early in the
morning, and reached home safe.
I found the great difference in travelling
with the cart and horse ; I went in one day
as far as took four or five days with the
dray; but I was very tired and shaken; now
and then one wheel of the cart would fall
into a hole where a tree had rotted out,
giving a jerk which would send me dying,
and my husband would sometimes have great
difficulty in keeping his seat. When there is
a large party travelling together, these jerks
are often the cause of great merriment, and
are called bonesetters.
This excursion did me a great deal of
good ; I found myself much more easy when
I saw that the towns-people were not much


better off than I. Soon after this I had the
pleasure of hearing from my son in Port
Philip, and that he was doing very well.
This was a great relief; and, as he gave us
his address, I wrote to him to come home,
for we had need of his services at the sta-
tion, and indeed he would be of the greatest
use to us.
Our life went on in this way for two or
three years. My husband constantly adding
to the stock on the station by selling bullocks
and buying cows, and by laying out his
wages on cattle ; my son’s cattle, which were
branded differently from ours, were also at
the station: so that, what with the additions
and the natural increase, our stock was get-
ting too large for our run. It was evident,
therefore, that we must make some change
in our arrangements; and after a long con-
sideration, we determined that the best way
was to save up money instead of cattle, so as
to put us in funds to pay our expenses on
the road to Port Philip, there to start a new
station.
We were the more moved to this, as we
were not in a very fit situation on the farm.


Our stock had so increased, that we could
almost afford to keep an overseer ourselves;
and it was disagreeable and anomalous for
the superintendent to have such a man under
him. However he was well used to it, as very
many very thriving settlers had commenced
their career on this farm, and several under
his personal superintendence. He was not,
therefore, surprised when he heard of our
determination; but said he was very sorry,
looked out for another overseer, and did all
he could to assist us.
We saved as much as we could to pay the
expenses on the road; and were about to sell
many of our bullocks, when we fortunately
heard that they were in very great demand
in Port Philip. Our youngest son arrived
at this time from Port Philip, where he had
been stock-keeping at very great wages,
bringing a good deal of money with him,
and what was worth more, a perfect know-
ledge of the road and country.
He was very sanguine of success, and was
for starting at once; but we were anxious to
wait until our year of service had expired.
His expedition to Port Philip had wonder


fully improved him; and the early age at
which he had begun, had given him an
opportunity of acquiring bush-craft, which
none of us could boast of. We had after all
very little preparation to make. When we
came to examine our property, we found
that we should merely have to buy a dray;
we intended also to repair and take the old
one. My sister was very anxious to come
too ; her husband had accumulated a good
many horses, which were reported to be
fetching great prices at Melbourne. He
would travel with a horse and cart; and
when we came to consider of it, we could
not see any very great objection, as each was
to carry his own stores, and the stock was
different, and we expected many advan-
tages.
We accordingly waited for the spring of
the year; and, in the meantime, collected as
much information and little necessaries as
possible, and my sons were constantly em-
ployed in breaking-in bullocks.
We tried very hard to sell our right to
our old run; but could not, as the gentlemen
were determined not to allow any person to


squat there any more, and only waited our
departure to divide it among themselves.
As the time for our arrival drew near, my
attachment to the place increased; and when
the time came it was with feelings of very
great regret that we went away from a place
where we had been so successful, and so
kindly treated. We laid in a great store of
flour and tea and sugar, enough to last us
more than a year; and had some very large
tarpaulins made to shelter us, so that we had
a home wherever the dray was.
There was a great deal of bother to get us
started ; first one thing or other delayed us,
until we were quite wearied. The first day
or two it took a great deal of care to keep
the cattle from straying; those that were
calved on the run were as unwilling to move
as I was. My brother-in-law with his horses
went first; but it soon became evident that
it would not do for us to travel together, as
our notions were quite different; his horses
could travel so much faster than our cattle,
and we should be in each other’s way in
dealing. One part of our road led very near
the township, and we managed so that we


all went in on Sunday to church in the
morning, as it would be, perhaps, the last
time in our lives we should ever meet in a
church again. It was a very good oppor-
tunity to separate ; my sister and her hus-
band going on first to seek a small run near
Melbourne, we to look for a larger one
towards Portland Bay. It was a very wet
season, which, although very disagreeable to
us, was very convenient for travelling, as
there was grass and water everywhere; and
although it made the road very heavy, we
did not mind that as we had plenty of
draught bullocks.
There was not after all very much differ-
ence between the management of the stock
when travelling and when at a station, except
that they needed watching at night. We had
a quiet cow or two milked every morning,
and the cattle fed along the road nearly as
well as if they were at home. It was dis-
agreeable enough travelling so slowly; but
there was a vast difference between travel-
ling as hired servants as we did on our
first arrival, and now driving our own stock,
and riding on our own dray, eating our own


beef and bread, and realizing our indepen-
dence as we did. Port Philip was being-
settled at this time, and there were a great
many people travelling there with sheep and
cattle, but more particularly with sheep;
many quite new chums, who were constantly
losing their bullocks, and knocking them up.
Sometimes they were in a complete fix, and
would give any price we chose to ask for
draught cattle. We broke in a great many
on the road in our dray, and found a very
ready sale for them. Of course as we found
it so profitable to be on the road, we were in
no hurry to move on, as we were doing
quite as well as if we were on a station,
and had plenty of provisions and coverings
with us.
We intended keeping the main-road to
Melbourne as long as we could for the sake
of trafficking. We crossed the Murrum-
bidgee with some trouble, the drays being-
taken to pieces and carried over in a punt
made of a hollowed log, and put together
again on the other side, and then the various
goods carried over and reloaded. The cattle
were made to swim across; they were very


unwilling to go, they had to be driven in,
and it was very provoking, when they were
in, to see them turn round and swim back to
the side they went in at. We lost several
by drowning ; the stupid wretches would not
go over to the proper landing-place, but
would try to get up an impracticable part
of the bank, and struggle until they were
drowned.
We were, however, becoming very tired of
living in a dray, and very anxious to become
settled again; we therefore turned off the
road in a direction where we supposed there
was some unoccupied country; and after
some trouble, got information from a stock-
man of a run which, if it suited us, we were
to pay him for. We found the place without
much trouble. It was a beautiful box coun-
try, well watered, and suited for either cattle
or sheep. We got a license to occupy it
from the Commissioner of Crown Lands;
and after paying the stock-man handsomely
for his information, and a small sum annually
to the Government for license and agistment,
it was ours to all intents and purposes. We


had about ten miles of water-frontage, and
an unlimited back-run.
We soon set to work to build a hut and
stockyard; and after the first trouble of
breaking-in the cattle to the run was over,
everything went on smoothly. We had now
plenty of cattle, and a good sum of money,
which we laid out on sheep, so as to occupy
as much of the country as possible. My
eldest son married a respectable immigrant,
took his cattle away, and settled a little
farther on.
We got a nice house built, a garden fenced,
and a good cultivation-paddock. I hired
an emigrant and his wife, the one to wait
on me in the house, the other to mind the
sheep. My youngest son after a while took
some cattle and went away, and sat up, or
rather squatted down, on his own account.
My sister and her husband did very well in
the neighbourhood of Melbourne ; they kept
an inn, and made a great deal of money.
Our sons were fortunately near enough to
ride over sometimes on Sunday and see us.
We had nothing more to do now than make


ourselves comfortable. Now and then we
sold part of the increase of our cattle and
sheep as the run became too crowded; but
we had occupied so much at first, that it was
long before we were straitened for room.
THE END.
London:
Printed by James Truscott. Nelson Square.






