

With Author's Compliments.
The War Memorial
OF
Victoria and Capital
A SUGGESTION
BY
WILLIAM LUCAS,
F.R.G.S., F.R.V.I.A.
MELBOURNE,
MAY - DAY 1919


THE WAR MEMORIAL
OF
VICTORIA and CAPITAL.
A SUGGESTION
BY
WILLIAM LUCAS, F. R. G. S.
Fellow Royal Victorian Institute of Architects.
THE expression of the Commonwealth's tribute to those military
and naval achievements of her sons and daughters (some
60,000 of whom are of “the famous dead who have for their
bodies the whole round world as sepulchre’’), which aided not only in
the deliverance of the Empire, but that of humanity at a pronounced
juncture in world-history, will, of course, be unusually strikingly
emphasised at the Federal Capital, where the Commonwealth’s War
Museum will also necessarily find permanent location. And on a scale
commensurate with the dignity of the position Australia holds by virtue
of so full recognition at the Conference of Paris.
At this stage, however, though these remarks are intended to refer
in particular to the War Memorial of Victoria and capital, it has been
thought well to reiterate the fundamental essentials for every public
embodiment of gratitude, viz., the assertion of pure dramatic force and
measured poetic feeling, set forth in dignified proportions and allied with
a simplicity of grace far removed from the merely monumental; and
when one considers the numerous successes achieved as the outcome of
other occasions, the task now uppermost can but make unusually excep-
tional demands upon various mental powers, the foremost being the
imaginative. “Consider, for instance” (as Henry T. Haro, President of
the Royal Institute of British Architects recently stated), “how Paris
commemorated the Napoleonic epoch in the vast scheme of which the
Place de la Concorde is the centre, and how Italy recorded her war of
liberation in the Victor Emmanuel monument in Rome; yet the events
which these memorialise, great as they were, sink into
Comparative insignificance
beside the present great world-upheaval.”
In the face of so unique a situation, it is therefore trusted the fullest
publicity will be given to all suggestions in their initial stages, whether
for Commonwealth, State or Capital; and the closest scrutiny and most
leisurely critical examination encouraged, so that when outstanding
acceptable lines are determined upon, public, competition Avill ensue.
The memorial for each of these, or for one or more in combination,
must at the very least be of a class by itself, and that will, perforce,
reduce to a minimum the possibility of a rival marking a far less occasion ;
and, moreover, be so situated as not to be, or appeal' to bo, an appendage
to another structure, existing or prospective. Further, environment and
site, as well as composition, should as far as practicable be locally unique.
In fact, to in any wise satisfy highest basic requirements, these should
each be of a character to ensure continuance of the sense not only of
isolation, but to imperiously stand alone (yet, in the words of the War
Memorials’ Advisory Committee, “not so placed as to obstruct traffic”),
whilst to encroach on any civic garden spaces would be unwarrantable.


As to whether a great memorial should be intentionally placed
where there is the compelling of comparison between it and environing
natural features, the answer is not only yes, but wherever possible the
relationship of the setting of each to the other ought to be such as to
enhance the admiration of the highest qualities of both.
kor au important capital city, in this matter there is no alternative
to
The heroic course,
‘the building up to the sense of the big maimer,” since it is still true that
"what is waste for science is yet the condition of monumental form.”
Fortunately the occasion arises at a stage in the history of modern
art. when it is being more and more seen that architecture is primarily
the expression of a main idea through the medium of the science of
planning. To the practice of ‘‘art, that intangible something that moves
the emotions and stimulates sentiment, and is of spiritual importance,”
all civilised peoples look for the embodiment in material form of ideals;
and this looking is peculiarly directed to architecture as the factor
capable of expressing in the shaping of natural materials to the largest
dimensions possible to the human brain, and to the highest degree on
the greatest scale, the attributes of majesty and sublimity. Further, as I
heard uttered by a prize essayist in the Shcldonian, Oxford, ‘‘Architec-
ture is an effort informed by hidden purposes, and shaped to an unknown
dream. ’ ’
Contradictory as it may appear, that effort —shaping—building—
architectural is ever bound to mean in its best reaches a product
Essentially simple ;
for, as Scott put it at the age of twenty-three in the report
on his successful design for Liverpool Cathedral, ‘‘No amount of rich
ornament can equal the beauty and charm of a blank wall relieved by a
touch—but only a touch —of inch detail.” And it is specially fortunate
for the present high demands, that for some years past there has been
in the mind of man regarding architecture a growing appreciation of the
sense of solidity.
‘‘We, as a people, have been tested in time of war, and not
found wanting as a whole; we have now to be tested in the after-
math; and by our conception of what is a fitting memorial, posterity
will judge not only our claims to rank in art, but our power to grasp
the significance of the struggle through which we have passed.
‘‘lt has often been said that architecture cannot be great with-
out having something great to express; for generations past there
has not been such a dramatic opportunity, and for generations to
come there may not be again.”
W. H. BAGOT, A.R.I.B.A.,
President Houth Australian Institute of Architects.
Returning to Melbourne a few years since, after a very lengthy
absence abroad, during which several of the great memorials of the world
were visited, and their sites and environments noted, I have come to the
conclusion that the city possesses, at least at one point, conditions
approximating to the ideal; and which might well he the envy of many
communities resolved on rearing at no distant date a worthy embodiment
of homage.
As to this specific point, take first the matter of
ENVIRONMENT.
In actual touch with the city, the panorama extends in crescent form in a
southerly direction eastward and westward. (Most remarkably, the
area is that which happened to lie immediately before my eyes on their
introduction to the world on the site to be referred to, over half a
century ago).


Expansive treasures of natural features on rising ground are robed
in the main with carefully nurtured foliage, bounded on either hand
respectively with urban and suburban architecture, whilst a stretch of
water (for whose absence in a panorama there can be no compensation;
enters into the composition, and, what is of vital importance, the chief
features, including those of the horizon, may be taken as ensured for
all time. In the immediate foreground is a vast area of exposed railway
lines, but the axial portion is considerably below the adjacent street
level; so, when one remembers what he has seen elsewhere in the handling
of factors of transit, notably at Edinburgh and Rome, the magnificent
potentialities of that foreground are realised as simply immense. Quite
irrespective of the outlook of any specific memorial, that foreground, so
unusually favourably environed to the south, will undoubtedly be taken
in hand and radically altered in appearance, though perhaps not by this
generation, or at least until electric power has greatly minimised the
noise of transit; and a great piazza over-arching the lines extend from
the street towards the river—a piazza rivalling in both character and
dimensions many of those of the European continent—and, furthermore,
furnishing access to the river bank. Not only so, but by means of
terraces and broad flights of steps and a spacious landing stage (after
the manner of that already constructed on the opposite side) reaching
the river itself, when a ferry would give direct escort to both the Botanic
and Alexandra Gardens, which, by a striking coincidence, find their
juncture at this point, as does also the triple way of Alexandra Avenue
with the riverside. Or, if preferred to a piazza with all its accessory
features, it would be no insuperable engineering task to form a boule-
vard or an Avenue of Victory across that network of rails, or even a
foreground after the manner of that to St. George’s Hall, Liverpool.
And, in addition, there would be riverway, direct and majestic, to the
memorial.
The southern terminus of the main axial line is Government House,
which, whatever the political changes of the future, must ever be applied
to highly dignified use.
However masterly treated in itself, and however judiciously placed
on its site, a memorial is bound to depend to a considerable extent for
its stateliness of manner and effective impressionism on the nature of
environment.
SITE.
The site under review, which comprises the foot of Exhibition-street
between Flinders-lane and Flinders-street, and adjacent buildings,
appears to have patiently awaited this hour of victory, and would now,
as ample return for that patience, plead for fullest comparison with all
others. With a gradient of about thirty feet, say one in ten, commercial
possibilities are hampered to such an extent that practically all traffic,
both vehicular and pedestrian, avoid it. The nature of the buildings
generally ar ( e quite out-of-date in appearance for a locality so centrally
situated, and can hardly claim to be entirely worthy of the site.
Of course, all would strongly prefer a broadly, spacious, unoccupied
area, but as Melbourne has no such area of sufficient dimensions to
visualise the memorial demanded for so outstanding an event, and as
going beyond the heart of the city could not be considered, there can only
be the creation of a site, trusting to the influence of whatever is erected
thereon to ultimately determine immediately surrounding structures.
That there is so fitting a site abutting on one of Melbourne’s main
arteries, and that not only pronouncedly adjacent to where the traffic is
destined to always beat with vigour, but in close touch with the most
frequented railway station —all circumstances that are of practical im-
portance if the object of the memorial is not to have one of its primary


PROPOSED ENTRAINCE
TO THE FUTURE
BOULEVARD
PIAZZA,
OR AVENUE.
RAILWAY
ABOUT 30. 0 BELOW STREET
YARDS
PROPOSED ENTRANCE
TO THE FUTURE
BOULEVARD.
PIAZZA.
OR AVENUE.
WILLIAM LUCAS
FECIT.




functions defeated—is unusually fortunate. Moreover, the east end of
Collius-strect, with all its incidental advantages, is in proximity to the
north.
And it is not without peculiar significance that the venue should be
the first of the city’s thoroughfares after crossing the river, and that
named after the early navigator by whom the name of Australia was
given to the great Southern Continent.
Another point is that the characteristics are such as to make it
practically impossible for any obstruction to arise which would mar the
charm of the extensive view, or to render whatever structure may he
reared upon the site invisible from over a wide area of land and river.
As to the site itself, its assertion is on lines which render it without
a parallel In the city, and autom£cally rules out of court any mechanical
formalism as would consider, in its presence, the intersection of city
streets for the placing of a memorial making go unique’ demands.
With high crown and steep gradient, the site so obviously co-operates
with the fcSense of the community,
as well as with panoramic outlook, that the instinctive feeling
is that the task of fulfilling the fundamental .essentials of
memorial structure in superlatively dignified order afie immensely
simplified. As to the precise form there may he great diversity
of opinion, though hardly as to the domination of its main axial
line, focal point, and the ultra-compelling factor of extensive publicity
by reason of the unusually marked differences of level between southern
and northern boundaries: insomuch that there is conspiracy towards a
structure into which the sense of spaciousness must substantially enter
in order to grip the vision and haunt the imaginative faculties. For
these purposes there ought to be facilities for undisturbed contemplation,
both of its entirety and the several accessory features.
STRUCTURE.
A structure to celebrate, and in a permanently satisfying manner
maintain the honour throughout the ages, of so unique an event as the
War and its outcome, must primarily evidence the most forcible effort to
express architecture at its highest and purest, and in an architectonic
form that, whilst illustrating at casual glance the sense of masterpiece
in its magnificence and dignity, has also the quality of arousing keen
thought and compelling unusually leisurely contemplation. .So to these
cuds the structure, necessarily far removed from eccentricity, should be
along such eminently distinctive lines that, whilst worthy of alliance
with all existing memorials, must be without a competitor in the State,
and, moreover, by virtue of its being the outcome of greatest measure
of sacrifice and most wide-reaching, promising results, be unusually
magnetic, and in an ultra-dominant manner packed with strikingly
suggestive symbolism.
On such a site, and with such an environment, the problem as sot
forth ought to be far from insoluble. To reproduce an old-world struc-
ture, particularly of Northern Europe, would, of course, not meet the
ease, for the consciousness of the spirit of Australia is essential; and for
that to be adequately met, the structure requires to be of the open air.
and so disposed as to be peculiarly favourable to the play of sun and
moon; yet the occasion is also unique for something freshly reminiscent
of the best principles that resulted in the grandeur of the past with all
its supreme educational value.
Now, architecture, though “a subtle thing closely responding to the
facts of life,” in its essence is a matter of plan, and in this instance, what-
ever the site and environment, should most markedly he the dominating
note in fullest evidence. Elevational treatment is ever necessarily of high


importance, still absolutely secondary, since the crux of a scheme must
inevitably be the commanding element of plan.
Several of the
Great forms of architecture
suggest themselves, and the question arises whether there should be the
pronounced assertion of one, or the alliance of two or three. In this
instance, quite irrespective of the site under review, the conviction is
that into the memorial should prominently enter the most arresting of
forms of architectural expression, viz., that of the amphitheatre. If this
De admitted, as so much depends as to how a structure is placed upon
the site, it is evident steeply rising ground is singularly favourable to
the curvature involved.
Agreeing that a tower, column, or obelisk is unusually difficult to
treat monumentally when in isolation; when allied with symmetrically
varying levels, as rising tiers of steps or terraces, the difficulty is greatly
reduced, and practically vanishes when curvature can be introduced to
an 'ascending foreground. Broad stretches of curved surfaces, as au
amphitheatre affords, also greatly assist in buttressing a lofty central
feature.
Though one would not suggest anything approximating to the
column of Berlin, which, with rows of captured camion in the flutings,
towers some 200 feet, some of the Italian towers, the columns and
obelisks in various European capitals, as well as the Choragic monument
in Athens, may, in conjunction with their settings and surroundings, bo
studied to advantage. But to my mind it is absolutely imperative there
be no utilisation of the summit of the central feature for sight-seeing.
Built severely sternly of rough-faced stone, it is. suggested there may
appear on the lower portion an heroic sized, alto relievo band of heroes
of Victoria’s recipients of honours, whilst the upper portion may be of
dressed stone (and, if a tower, culminating in columnar features).
Prominently displayed may perhaps be the words:—“Every one a
Volunteer,” and “In response fo Empire’s call”-—the former to the
south, and the latter to the north. At the base would be
The Place of Tribute.
As to the amphitheatre itself, several of the upper seats might be
lettered and reserved throughout successive generations for representa-
tives of the various regiments, battalions, etc., which shared in achieving
victory.
In regard to the treatment immediately at Flinders-street, the main
feature is The Terrace, with broad tiers of steps, and a central slab
lettered, “His Majesty’s representative halted here to give thanks to
Almighty God. (Date.) ” At each extremity is The Stone of Panegyric,
from which on special occasions orations would be uttered, whilst
ordinarily used for viewing to best advantage the respective Altar Bays
of Honour. These great semi-circular recesses at the ends of the
colonnades of the War Museums, would have the names of all who had
passed away boldly displayed beneath the inscription, “In praise of
famous men”; whilst on the side of each, facing Flinders-street, sculp-
tured medallions would be.encircled with “Greater love hath no man
than this.” Au( fc/ nrtMiy illimm fr»w* ****** upper
IfekicJiiMK) Aijiit
Masses of sculpture would cluster about these terminal points,
finding their climax in the two main groups respectively emphasising the
Army and the Navy, whilst other groups would embody the cardinal
iricidents of the Commonwealth in general and Victoria in particular; all
symbolising some of “the many strains of which our Empire is woven,”
and so conceived with that studied reticence and reserve that the result


may not only be sculptural masterpieces, but touches of richness in-
tensifying the beauty of the broad masonry stretches.
Beneath The Central Plaform is entrance and accommodation for
the more fitting reception of a distinguished visitor on a special occasion.
On the southern side of Flinders-street columnar screens are sug-
gested, with balustrading and seating forming a recessed bay for the
better contemplation of the memorial as a whole; and would it be unfitting
that, through the medium of an ordinary-sized statue in the centre,
Flinders, with face Continent-wards on the boldly rigid sky-line, should
be honoured as nearest to greet on behalf of his “Australia” the recogni-
tion by Victoria and her capital of valiant sons and daughters 1
Whatever the forms of the War Memorials which the Commonwealth,
Victoria and capital, and other communities determine on, it is trusted
there will be in every composition the sense of “a freedom, a freshness,
and large harmonious simplicity akin to Nature itself”-—elemental
qualities whose absence would prove disastrous to the purport of the
scheme. Moreover, it is imperative that site and environment should
conspire in no commonplace measure with structure in order to fire the
imagination of those who are brought into contact with it, either actually
or through illustration, and particularly in
Future generations.
Far beyond the kindling of immediate and transitory interest, there
must -b.e the furnishing of considerable appropriate fuel for those
faculties which go to the making of “that keener vision which is quick
to read the heraldry of larger, lordlier worlds,” and also (to quote
another) “to set the gateway wide to ampler dreams, to prize the spirit
beyond the letter, the work’s self beyond the fruits of working.”
That the approximation to the fulfilment of these main objects in
any material, to any form, is no easy task is very strongly recognised;
yet it is equally felt that there need be no far short-coming in face of the
unusually exceptional inspiration so profound an occasion offers.
Whatever is reared, it appears to me the site should be slightly
removed from the rush of passing traffic, and the surroundings favourable
for individual lingering, allied with that indefinable something which will
so generate surprise as to rivet the attention in such marked degree
that the leading features of the memorial, once seen, shall remain among
the most vivid memories. And in this direction, all will agree that it is
specially desirous that those children in whom is writ large the power to
rule—so valuable as assets of Empire—may be so attracted as to gain
in early life accessions to that love of the “comprehensive vision of the
wide outlet, and the cherishing of the seeing below the surface of
things,” which will deepen in their breasts the sense of the highest
patriotism as they
“Look up, and feel the heart
Flushing with pure emotion reverently.”
Then, it further seems as absolutely necessary that at no long in-
tervals the memorial should resound with the music of the proposed
Anzac Band, and also that the services of that band be availed of at
various occasional functions of a naval and military character, including
the reception of distinguished members of those forces.
But all utilisation of the memorial as a foregathering centre .must
pale before the two main functions of the year. One of these functions
Would, of course, be on Anzac Day, somewhat after the ancient Greek
Festival of the Dead, when, with ceremonial, those most interested would


wend their way to The Place of Tribute and lay wreaths and other floral
emblems on that height at the base of the memorial tower, whilst as
many as possible of those returned from battle would assemble as spec-
tators in reserved positions hi the Court of Amphitheatre. At a stated
hour,-say-noon, The Stone of Panegyric for the Army and Navy respec-
tively would witness the dtdivery therefrom of brief orations regarding
“those whose worth has been proved in the greatest crisis in the history
of our race, and whose memory will be treasured as long as language
has a meaning for mankind. ’ ’
As to the second function, it would focus thought, and express in
forcible manner a sense of victory for the cause of humanity; and this I
would prefer to take place of an evening, when
“The bright armies of the legioned stars
Unwavering hold their old eternal course
Along the paths of heaven.
And the moon on high,
A fretted globe like new-worked silver bright,
Riding at anchor in the peaceful sky.
O’er-brims the deeps of deep blue heav’n with light,
Kindling to beauty new the dark reluctant night.’’
At those times all architectural character, and even natural environ-
ment, must be purely subsidiary to the sway of the arts of poetry and
music as they voice high praise for the maintenance of civilisation, and
speech voices prayer for the fuller realisation of the noblest privileges
of freedom. It*is hoped that poem, song, and music, also oration, will
be the subject of annual public competition.
Whatever the nature
of the design—architectural ’ and sculptural—the character of the
material, and the amount of devoted labour expended thereon,
may every memorial —the outcome of the past five years of
s tern eg t straggle with forces far deeper than physical and mental—be of
the order that shall powerfully induce great numbers to “bring a soul
attuned to catch-the sweet and plaintive song of Life, and the far-off
majestic roll of Universal symphonies”; and marking, not only success
in war,-but. the -promise of a surer basis than heretofore evident for the
fulfilment of humanity’s brightest prospects, may the structure be such
that no one will be long within range “before he feels a throng of forms
invisible brush him by, and strain to whisper to him” words inaudible
to all else.
“Ah! then, who shall proclaim it profitless” to strive to visualise
a memorial of the highest order conceivable, since the occasion
possesses a--significance, the measure of which- it is simply impossible
to estimate?
Hot ham House,
East Melbourne.
