

THE WESTERN DIVISION.
THE LAND ACT
AND
THE RABBITS.
BY THE
WILCANNIA PASTORAL PROTECTION ASSOCIATION
Sydney:
WALTER AKHURST & Co., Printers, 307 and 309 Kent Street.
1886.




Extra copies may be obtained
on application to the President
or Messrs. Bio mfield & Dickson ,
139 Pitt Street 9 Sydney.


THE WESTERN DIVISION.
The Land Act and the Rabbits
[BY THE WILCANNIA PASTORAL PROTECTION ASSOCIATION.]
I|PN stating the case of the pastoral lessees of the Western Division,
|jl| it is necessary, in order that their position may be understood,
to go back for a few years and to inquire what was the condition
of the country, and on what terms it was held previous to the
passing of the Amending Land Act of 1880, and during the period
between 1880 and the introduction of the Act of 1884. It will then
be necessary to show how the lessees are affected by the Act of 1884,
and how that Act will affect the district to which it is applied—first
as to the present, then as to the future.
It is also necessary to affirm that the positions here laid down as
to the past refer to the great bulk of the country now known as the
Western Division, but not to all of it. Eoughly, the country herein
referred to is bounded on the west by ,the South Australian border, on
the north by the Queensland border, to its intersection by the
Warrego Eiver, or perhaps the Culgoa, and from that point of inter,
section in a southerly direction towards Bourke ; thence by a line to
Nyngan, thence to the Lachlan about Euabalong, thenca along the
Lachlan and Willandra to about Kilfera, thence south-westerly to
about Balranald or Euston, and thence by the Murray to the point of
departure.


These lines would include all the Western Division proper—the
poor Crown Lands of “ the dry country”—and to such country, whether
within these lines or beyond them, the statement of facts herein made
apply. They most particularly apply, however, to the vast area of
country back from the only permanent watercourse which flows
trough this immense district—viz., the Darling Eiver. The Warrego
in the north-east, the Lachlan, Willandra, and Murray waters on the
south, and the Darling running through the centre of the vast stretch
of dry country, were bases of operation from which the work of im-
provement proceeded.
Any statement herein made must not be understood to refer to
the better country, with Brewarrina for a centre, or to that country
which lies between the Lachlan and the Willandra.
For clearness and brevity throughout this statement the Govern-
ment will be referred to as “ the landlord,” and the squatter as “ the
tenant.” “Bun” is the official term for each area of country as
separately tendered for originally, several runs in most cases con-
stituting a holding, popularly known as a station. If this is kept in
view by the reader, it will save explanation and repetition.
THE PAST.
During the currency of the Land Act of 1861, the settlement of
the Western Division began and for many years the progress was
slow. Little effort was made to improve the dry country. It was
held at rents which have been called nominal, and in few cases did
the rent received by the landlord much exceed the minimum of £lO
per run, except for naturally watered country. With few exceptions
the runs in this district were 10 miles square, or 100 square miles of
country.
Much of the dry country was tendered for, held for a year or two,
thrown up, tendered for again and once more thrown up and
abandoned by tenderers, who could not see their way to do any good
with the country they had tendered for, even at the nominal rent.
So far as natural advantages are concerned, as the country then
was it still remains, as a matter of course. Judged by the thermometer,
the heat is ultra-tropical, the climate is peculiarly dry, and the


rainfall is only certain in one respect, and that is the certainty of
getting too little. Owing to these peculiar conditions no one who
knows the country can wonder at the slow progress made.
The first Act to amend the Land Act of 1861, passed in 1875,
and no effort was then made to increase the minimum rent of £lO per
run, because at the time it was under discussion considerable stretches
of country were not under occupation at all, or had only lately been
tendered for, and the landlord was well satisfied to have as much as
possible occupied without caring to be very exacting as to the terms
of occupation.
The next Amending Act came into force in 1880. For a year or
two previous to 1880, efforts were being made here and there with
some success, little or more, to improve the dry country and make it
available, and enough was done to prove that it was possible to bring
into bearing most, if not all, of the country which had hitherto lain
useless. Before that time the portions which had been used were
those on which there was permanent natural water and those on
which artificial water, whether from wells or by making dams or tanks
was easily obtainable owing to their proximity to a base, either
permanently watered or occasionally watered for a considerable
period.
On such portions stock was grazed, and the work of improving
the dry country was slowly proceeded with, for the most part in
connection with more favoured runs, and from profits made on the
country thus favourably situated and held at a low rent.
When the Act of 1880 was introduced, its intention was avowed,
and in spite of natural grumbling at a minimum increased from £lO
to £IOO, it was seen that the intention was just and reasonable—viz.,
to compel the tenant either to improve the country he held, whether
the area was large or small, or to abandon all or a portion of it, and
allow someone else to do the work. It was evident that if the land
could be improved so as to enable it to carry enough stock to pay
interest on the cost of improvements, the cost of stocking, in addition
to working expenses, it was better to do that work and hope for a
profit rather than to hold on at a rent now becoming considerable.
One hundred pounds a year rent for a 10-mile square run would not
preclude profit, and judicious improvements always added to


the selling value of a station more than they cost, because, evid-
ently, improvements which are completed and which enable stock to
be depastured are worth more in connection with the stock than
while they are being made and while there is still a doubt as to their
efficacy.
In addition to this, the increase of minimum—great as it seemed
—was not, as a matter of fact so immediately serious, because nearly
all through the dry country the runs were still entitled to the renewal
or extension of lease by virtue of improvement, which the 15th clause
of the 1861 Act secured to them. This right to extension, which
hitherto had scarcely been exercised by any tenant of dry country in
the Western Division, remained after passing of the amending Act of
1880, so that for a period of at least five years, and possibly for nine
years from the passing of that Act, the tenants could not be asked to
pay much more than the then current low rent for this country.
On these conditions—first, to secure that extension to which they
were entitled under the law, and, second, to enable them to pay a
rent which, when the extensions were exhausted, promised to become
far from nominal. The Act of 1880 at once produced the desired
effect. Encouraged by the one condition, the hope of extension, and
compelled by the other, the prospective high rent of £IOO per block
per annum, the work was done at a rate and at an expenditure which
seems now to have been quite extraordinary, and which, viewed by
the light of present experiences, must have been either a mistake or
in some other way quite unjustifiable.
The condition of rent appraisement under the 1861 Act (see
section 14, sub-section 6) was continued in the two amending Acts,
and was that the assessment should be made at the fair annual value
of the land for pastoral purposes. On all dry country (extension or
no extension) this could not be more than the minimum, no matter
whether that was £lO or £IOO, so long as the country remained dry,
and till 1880 fair increase was only made in proportion to the diffi-
culty or ease, and consequently greater or smaller cost of the work of
improvement, as that was shown by the development of natural
advantages.
Previous to 1880 the work of appraisement was done by per-
manent officers, men who from long experience knew the country


they had to appraise, and were neither deluded by a good season, nor
deceived by a bad one. Under these appraisers the rents were
relatively fair, one run in proportion to another, and the landlord
received the full, fair, annual value of his land for pastoral purposes.
After 1880, the work was done by new men, and it seemed to be
an accepted principle that the less an appraiser knew about the
country he had to value, the better his work would be done, because
the same men were never sent to the same district a second time.
Even naturally-watered country for pastoral purposes, in such a
climate fairly assessed, could not be asked to pay a high rent, so that,
tenants, dealing with a fair landlord, were justified in supposing that
their rents could not be ruinous.
There was only one other element of doubt which the tenant had
to take into consideration, and that was, whether by alienation he
was likely to lose any of the property on which he intended to spend
his money. On this point he was guided by his knowledge of the
country and climate, and so guided, was certainly justified in supposing
as he did that nature had given him a tenure for his holdings,
sufficiently good for his purpose, so long as his landlord did not alter
the conditions under which the country was held. And was he not
justified in supposing that these conditions would not be altered ?
Had they not been maintained from 1861 to 1880, and was not the
Act of 1880 passed to compel the work, which was only justifiable on
the ground that these suppositions were reasonable ?
Every tenant in the dry country feels that he was deluded into
giving a value to the land he leased by pouring money on to it, to
maintain his power to hold it. As the tenant’s power to hold his
country depended on the improvements he made, it will be seen that
the landlord gained more than the tenant did if the improvements
made by the latter enabled him to pay a rent, which, without such
improvements, could not be paid either by him or by any successor.
The landlord is the only gainer, until, in addition to paying rent, the
tenant has received a profit from the improved land sufficient to
return him the cost of the improvements and interest on his outlay.
With anything over that the tenant begins to share the landlord’s
gain —£ 100 per run per annum was a rent which no tenant could pay
for such country without improving.


During the period between 1880 and 1884 the landlord was
gradually working up to this rent, and the tenant, busy spending the
money, has not had interest on his outlay, far less a return of
principal. Every tenant feels that his landlord has not treated him
fairly, because the very improvements, encouraged and compelled,
are now taken advantage of to increase rents to a further height, from
£lO to £IOO in 1880; and the 1884 Act nearly trebles the larger
sum. This second increase applies more to the present than the past,
and will be more fully referred to in the next section of the statement.
The point which it is desired to put clearly here is, that improvements
compelled so lately as 1880 are taken advantage of to apply in 1884 a
“ minimum ” rent and conditions with reference to these very im-
provements which, had they been applied in 1880, could and would
have been laughed at. The landlord could not introduce such rent
and conditions into the 1880 Act as were embodied in the Act of
1884, because then the tenant had not spent the tens and hundreds
of thousands which the wise Act of 1880 encouraged and compelled
him to spend, and by which expenditure alone he is now held to his
position.
No Western tenant will say that the Act of 1880 was perfect.
Although the tenure was all that he desired and the rent conditions
as embodied in the Act perfectly just, it became evident that, in the
administration of the Act the rents were being assessed on no
principle at all, and the tenant had absolutely no appeal. As an
instance of this, five holdings on the Middle Darling can be cited, on
which for frontages equally good (or bad, as the case may be), —at all
events similar in character —rents were assessed on a gradually
ascending scale from £1 11s. per mile in 1880 to £6 per mile in 1884,
steadily advancing about 20s. per mile every year for no conceivable
reason. All that time the seasons were getting worse, and in
1883-4 the losses all over this particular neighbourhood were
enormous. It appeared that, good season or bad season, high price
for wool or low price, up rents must go.
This was one of the disabilities under which the Western tenant
laboured, and it was a serious one ; one also which was utterly unac-
countable to those who were compelled to pay. Had there been any
form of appeal from the ipse dixit of the Minister as to the rents, and


had there been a fair fencing clause to compel a possible selector to
fence —to whom such compulsion would have been no hardship—the
old Act was perfect enough to satisfy the Western tenant for years to
come.
It has already been stated that by the outlay for improvement
between 1879 and 1884 the landlord had gained, and only the
landlord ; and this is such an important point that it is worth while
putting it still more strongly. It is evident that, although a tenant
may be improving the property, lie cannot look for a return for
improvements such as fencing, tanks, wells, or buildings whilst the
money is being spent, particularly if the expenditure is rushed, as it
was in this case—the money is spent for a prospective advantage.
But the landlord gains at once, because, whether he increases the
rent at once or not, the future rent-paying power of his property is
being increased. If by 1890 the rents for the Western Country had
reached an average of 20s. per mile, the landlord had good reason to
congratulate himself on the result, because the 1880 Act would then
have forced into bearing much country which was exceedingly difficult
to improve. “ Bearing,” it must be borne in mind, in this case means
not sheep-carrying only, but men also, labourers, taxpayers. In this
case, however, the landlord is not satisfied with fair present and
greater prospective benefit, he must have the greatest increase at
once ; the men who could spend their tens of thousands on his
property must have more in them. The landlord, therefore—and he
is the law —introduces an Act in 1884, which says : “ You must not
only give me the increase of rent at once which you say should be
prospective, but I will also have the improveme n ts themselves. True,
I did all I could to encourage and compel you to spend your money;
it is now mine and the fruit of it is mine—principal and interest —all
pass to me.” Rents, which are in course of being increased tenfold,
are at once increased thirtyfold, the minimum which was £lO in 1879
becomes £IOO in 1880 and £266 in 1884. There is also a provision
for a periodical further increase of rent during the currency of a lease,
which the landlord generously gives his tenant for half the country,
the whole of which he had encouraged and compelled that tenant to
improve. He takes half the country, root and stump, improvements
and all, in such a manner that the tenant shall have no more right


to it, and only fails to induce settlement on that resumed half because
nine-tenths of the resumed country is too poor for the purpose he
wishes to put it to—the failure is one in fact, not in intention. Rents
increased 30, 40, and 50-fold, and called “minimum,” and the im-
provements which alone give the country any paying power, are
swept into the landlord’s pocket. The position is unique—a landlord
put such conditions on his tenant while the unfortunate tenant stands
aghast—cannot believe it possible that such conditions will be put
on him —does not realise the fact when they are put on him, and only
awakens to a sense of his position when ruin stares him in the face.
He is then told he has every reason to be satisfied, he has security for
half his holding, and any further change is bound to be still further
detrimental to him, because is he not a squatter ? He has half his
holding, truly, but on hard terms ; he has also given security for all
his debt, and his position is that if he is heavily involved he is ruined
—if he is lucky enough or rich enough to have been free of debt, his
capital is gone. The improvements, which had a full selling value,
have no longer much value to him ; they are forfeited to the landlord
and rent is charged on them. No use to say that they are not to be
reckoned in fixing the rent—the minimum is £266, and a tenth of
that sum is too much on dry country, unimproved; but, if only the
fair value of the run is charged, a dread something known as “ the
country,” will not be satisfied.
It must be borne in mind that over a very large portion of the
district referred to the work of keeping sheep is purely experimental,
and it is a matter of notoriety that the experiment, so far, has not
been a success—forced as it has been by previous legislation. Station* 3
in the West that have paid working expenses for some years back
have been fortunate indeed.
And this brings us to the present, when the tenant still stands,
as he stood since the introduction of the last Land Act, in the position
that, if he is offered the cost of his improvements and the value of his
sheep, cattle, horses, and plant, he will gladly accept it and let some
one else find out the value of the goodwill of such Crown Lands, on
such terms of occupation as are embodied in the Land Act of 1884.


THE PRESENT.
In dealing with the past an effort has been made to put clearly
the extraordinary position into which the tenant has been forced by
the legislation of his landlord. He may be what is known as a “ rich
man ”; if so, then truly the order of things which is generally
supposed to be usual is here reversed, and now justice or ordinary
tenant-right is asked for by the rich tenant from the needy landlord-
If an ordinary landlord were to refuse a poor tenant a just measure
of tenant-right in such a case, or one infinitely weaker, the law would
compel him, but the Western Crown tenants, whether they are rich
men made poorer by such legislation, or poor men sunk hopelessly in
debt, cannot compel their landlord ; he is the law.
On what principle can it be equitable, just, or prudent to refuse
to one class of tenant, be they rich or poor, that measure of justice
which must be meted out to another class ? If a tenant, for his own
purposes, improves his landlord’s property, the landlord must pay
back the full value of the improvements, whatever they may be to
him, at the end of the lease ; but if the landlord compels the tenant
to improve his property, he must at once give him a quid pro quo.
There is a difficulty, unavoidable in such a statement as this,
caused by the extraordinary use of the word “ minimum,” as applied
to the rent and fees payable under the 1881 Act. It is a minimum
which is not a minimum, because there is an appeal from it and a
possibility of payments being placed at below the minimum. This
difficulty may be capable of some sort of explanation, and Mr. Farnell,
a late Land Minister, who is responsible for the use of the expression,
explained it as a “ minimum of average ! ” probably meaning a simple
average. The word used in the Act, however, is “ minimum,” and as
that word has only one meaning the minimum rent will be referred
to throughout this statement. This explanation is given to show that
there is no misunderstanding. The law which says “minimum”
means “ average.” Minimum or average, however, does not much
effect the principle, as country in which it has appeared justifiable to
spend tens of thousands is not likely to be much under the average


in improved value, low as that is ; and if natural annual value is not
taken as a basis, improved value in some proportion must be taken.
The raw material, in this case, bears a smaller proportion to the
value of the manufactured article than does the quantity of wool that
goes to make a suit of clothes to the value of the suit, and the wool-
grower has about as much right to receive a portion of the profits of
the manufacturer and tailor as the landlord has to receive rent for the
improvements until the tenant, who has spent the money, is recouped
his outlay, either directly by payment or by easy terms of rent granted
for the purpose.
It is as reasonable to point to the enormous price per pound that
the wool in a suit of clothes brings, if the suit is weighed, as it is to
point to the tens of thousands of pounds that stations sell for and say,
“ That is a profit made by the man who got our land at a peppercorn
rent.” This is unquestionably the popular view of the matter when a
station that paid a rent of only a few hundreds is sold for, perhaps,
£IOO,OOO. It is not the land that is sold, but the stock and improve-
ments—the manufactured article. A study of the speeches made on
the 1884 Land Bill will show that members of Parliament were not
guiltless of this popular error.
At present the Western Crown tenants have a hope that the
injustice of their position and the imprudence of their landlord’s action
may yet be recognised by him, both points being already recognised
by all classes in the district, where alone the truth of such a
statement as this can be estimated. They feel that the legislation
of 1884 was surely not an effort to crush them ; they are satisfied
that insufficient knowledge of the conditions under which the country
has been worked, and under which it is worked and will still be
necessary to work it, is at the root of their difficulty. For want of
this knowledge, the landlord has taken a course unjust to the tenant
and detrimental to his own best interests.
All who are familiar with the country know that to get a fair
return from it, the area held must be large compared with 10,000 a.,
and it cannot be worked at all until considerable expenditure has been
undertaken. The best examples of this, perhaps, are the large
holdings in the most eastern parts of the district, such as Dunlop,
Kallara, Momba, and similar stations. These properties are an


aggregation of runs, and, except as much frontage as forms a base of
operations, are composed of blocks with no permanent natural water
—“ dry country.” These and other large holdings are large, because
they are dry. If the blocks they include had been more favoured by
nature, they never would have been large. On each of them much
over .£IOO,OOO has been spent in improvements, and nearly all of the
money has been spent since 1879. It is utterly impossible that any
return could have been got from this outlay between 1879 and 1883,
and it is certain that such dry country could never have been im-
proved, except by the expenditure of large sums of money on large
areas, worked from a workable base. On all such stations the cost of
individual improvements—immense tanks or wells—runs into
thousands, and the largest tanks are not absolutely permanent, if
never a hoof of stock watered at them. For small holdings such a
cost could not be faced and would not be undertaken, and as a rule,
the smaller the holding in the West, the more favoured it is by nature.
The effort to work small holdings of dry country with a limited
expenditure has always proved a failure. Nothing short of permanent
water is any safety in one of the often recurring droughts ; and the
Government tanks, large and costly as they are, and put down, as they
haye been, by competent engineers, after careful inquiry as to the
best sites, are not all permanent. The tendency of late years has
been that the holdings should increase in size and be held by firms or
syndicates in very large areas, and in such country it is not prudent
to try to force small settlement in the teeth of a tendency founded on
results.
It is needless to assert that none of the Western country is fit
for agriculture- -the rainfall proves that and other assertions to those
who can estimate the effect produced by such a cause—nothing short
of irrigation could compel a crop of produce, except wool, mutton and
beef.
If the driest part of this district can be best improved in large
areas, then, although very large areas may be objectional in a better
country, they cannot be so here. The first point being to get all the
country so improved that it will yield a sure return, and that the
losses by drought, in a country so subject to severe droughts that
they can never be altogether avoided, may, at all events, be reduced


as much as can be accomplished by judicious expenditure. If
it becomes advisable to reduce the size of large holdings —if a
better return can be obtained from a small area than from a large
one—the holders of large areas may be trusted to reduce them; but
they will take care that the value of each sub-division is maintained as
much as possible ; the reduction of area will be made, not arbitrarily,
but in accordance with natural conditions.
Under the present arrangements, how do the large stations stand ?
They are divided under the Act of 1884 into pastoral lease and
resumed area in equal portions. The pastoral lease may be market-
able with the stock, and it may be possible to reduce the size of that
portion, but has the resumed area any selling value, and can it be
reduced ? It is questionable; and yet it remains an immense area
half improved, and never likely, under present conditions, to be
further improved, and never the least likely to be fairly occupied by
any other class of settler than the present—except, perhaps, in the
small proportion of naturally watered country.
The improvements alone give the resumed area any power to pay
a rent or license fee, and consequently are already paid for by the
present occupation licensee as if they were the property of the land-
lord. The license to occupy is a yearly one, and if there were no, fee
a successor to the original licensee would hardly care to give much for
that, which probably requires more improvement to be a safe stock
run, and which, if further improved, is liable to be dealt with year by
year at the good pleasure of the landlord.
With reference to the resumed areas, it may be useful to explain
that when the 1884 Act came into operation, the tenants of the runs
thus holding, being compelled to divide their holdings into two equal
parts, were also compelled to apply for the occupation license of the
resumed area. At the option of the landlord, either portion might be
granted as a lease or might be resumed, and the bare fact that the
landlord had the power to say which half the tenant might be allowed
to lease, compelled the tenant to apply for the occupation of the
resumed area. Otherwise, the landlord might have said, “ I must
have all my country occupied, and will give you for lease the half you
have not applied for, and resume the half which you have shown to be
the best by applying for it only.” It is only fair to say that due


consideration was given to tlie wishes of the tenants as to which half
should be the leasehold area, and as to the justice of the selections,
there is little ground for complaint.
The present condition of the half of the holding, which is held under
pastoral lease is that all improvements not on purchased land are now
Crown property absolutely, and any value they possess to the tenant,
who has sunk his capital in them, is no greater than the value of his
interest in the Crown lands —a certain “goodwill” in both being
apparently given by a lease for half the country and half the improve-
ments. The ownership of the improvements has passed from the
tenant, who so lately spent his money upon them, to the landlord,
whose property is improved, absolutely, no compensation—no quid
pro quo being given. Rent, already high, must according to the act.
be raised in some proportion to the value of the property the landlord
has possessed himself of. Apart from the improvements, no tenant
could be got to pay one third of the minimum, or any rent at all, on
the present tenure, and be obliged to start improving, as he necessarily
would be, in order to utilise his country.
It is said that the prospective rents for the pastoral lease under
the 1884 act are not too high, because the tenure is improved—ls
years instead of five. The tenant preferred his old tenure of the
whole area of the holding ; under it, land could only be alienated on
terms which compelled the alienee to put the land to a better purpose
than the Crown tenant could see his way clear to put it to. Begging
this question, however, and supposing that the tenure is better and
that this is a good reason for increased rent, the tenant must be
allowed to carry the same argument to its proper conclusion from his
point of view. Putting the converse case, he says : “If better tenure
is a fair reason for increase, then worse tenure must be a reason for
reductions. The resumed area with its yearly license will be reduced
as to the license fee, because the tenure is yearly, and worse in every
way as compared with the previous five years’ lease.” But no. An
increase only a little less than that asked for the pastoral lease is asked
for the resumed area also. The improved tenure is often cited as a
reason why the tenant should be contented with his present lot, and
to prove the justice of the increase ; and, if the reasoner is sincere in
his desire to understand the matter on which he reasons, surely this


simple carrying out of his own argument will convince him that he is
wrong. If not, it is not justice but rent that is wanted—revenge
dragged from the best citizens in the community—men who have spent
their thousands in an effort to subdue the wilderness —certainly not for
philanthropy’s sake, or purely in the interest of the landlord, but in
the hope of a fair return, as all men invest their money. Those men
can invest no more on such terms, and before the end of such leases
the landlord must find out that he has overdriven the once willing
horse. The tenant must get back what he can, and will work his im-
provements so as to exhaust them, if not before, then certainly towards
the end of his lease. Those who know how absolutely dependent the
country referred to is on the improvements for mere occupation, how
absolutely necessary it is that these improvements be kept in order,
and how costly a matter it is to keep them effective, can appreciate
the truth of this statement and the effect of such a course.
It cannot be to the interest of the landlord to run this risk, and
yet what is the tenant to do ? He certainly will not sacrifice himself
for the benefit of the landlord. Take the case of a tenant who was in
debt, owing to bad seasons and other difficulties, to the extent of two
thirds of the previous selling value of his whole holding ; and suppose
for the sake of example, that the desired effect has been produced on
the resumed area, that it has been all settled by contented homestead
lessees. The value of the pastoral lease is less than half that of the
previous lease, because any selling value the improvements previously
possessed is gone, or already much reduced, and certain to be gone
at the end of the lease. The two-thirds debt being confined to half
the original whole, the tenant now owes one-third more than the
present value of his property. He must, however, go on paying
interest on his debt, and as that amounts to one-third more than his
property is worth he must make enough over working expenses to pay
not 9 per cent., but 12 per cent., on the new value. Not only so, he
must see his way to clear off his debt altogether during the currency of
his lease—which, by the way, has an increasing rent—in order that
by the time it expires he may be free of debt. This will mean a
sinking fund to be provided, after paying working expenses and 12 per
cent., of about per cent., or a return of close on 20 per cent., from
the property. In this case the fortunate tenant who gets the splendid


retnrn of 20 per cent, from all of his property which his landlord has
allowed him to retain will be in an enviable position. At the end of
his 15 years anxious worry he will have cleared off his debt, and if he
lives long enough will be able to begin then where he now is—at the
beginning.
No such returns can be looked for in this district. Stations that
paid 12 per cent, over working expenses and maintained their selling
value, were doing marvellously well. One of the largest investors in
the district referred to, and one of the most enterprising, said often of
late years that if he could get 2 per cent, over bank interest, he was
quite content to go on. Only by such men has much of the work been
done —men content with a moderate return from the very largeness
of their transactions,
No man who realises this position—and but for the aceident
(suggestive accident) that the country is too poor for the proposed
purpose there would be many in it—could hold on to his property;
he must abandon it to his mortgagees, and that will not get rid of the
liability, except as far as he is concerned. The security must be
written down in the books of the bank or company that advanced the
money till the debt represents no more than the value of the halved
property.
There is not a tenant in the west, who, if he could get the value
of his stock and plant and the cost of his improvements, and were to
invest that sum at the average value of money, would not be in a
better position at the end of 15 years than he can be under the terms
of this Act. He must not only pay interest on the sum every year,
but must also get his capital out during the currency of the lease, and not
one can do it, because towards the end of the lease th'ere is no selling
value except the stock.
If those who passed this Land Act could control the rainfall and
guarantee ample and seasonable showers to ensure 15 fat years, and
if wool were to maintain a fair value during the whole period, the
money might pay interest and return capital invested during tho
currency of the lease ; but as they had not this power they did an
injustice to a large class and district, giving neither class nor district
anything in exchange for what they took away. The tenant suffers,
the district suffers, the community also suffers, but as yet hardly


realises it. It matters little whether the tenant can pay his debt, or
whether the mortgagee has to take possession; law is at war with
capital, and capital, arbitrarily treated by legislation in one direction,
may be as badly treated in another. The loss to individuals, hard
though it be, must be borne by them, but it must certainly re-act on
the community. Capital will try to recoup itself, and in the effort has
already withdrawn from work and has lowered wages. Reduced wages
and less work must tell on the community; they have already told in
this district, as the district can testify. All classes are feeling the
pinch, and at a time when extra effort should be made to avoid a
repetition of late losses nothing is being done.
Hitherto stations have had an increasing value as, year after
year, better improvements increased the security. Now all leaseholds
must have a fast reducing value, because the rent increases, and the
improvements necessarily decrease in value. Capital value is reduced
in the reducing value of the lease, much more is gone with the im-
provements, which have passed to the landlord, and rents are to be
increased to nearly three times their late minimum, which was only
in course of being worked up to. Every £IOO per annum of rent
decreases the selling or capital value to the tenant of each run he
holds by £IOOO. Thus, in addition to other sudden reductions of
capital value, the unfortunate tenant has to submit to a reduction in
value of over £2OOO for every run he holds if he wishes or is compelled
to sell.
This point requires consideration in connection with previously
stated facts. In the 1875 amendment of the Land Act no increase
could be made in the low minimum of £lO, because much of the
country was so little valued as to be unoccupied at that rate, and all
the country which was held, even in 1879, fairly appraised, was not
considered worth an average of more than £SO per year per run—or,
say, £SOO capital value of a lease, likely for such country to extend
ad infinitum. Now, the tenant a few years later nothing being
changed, except through his improvements—is asked to submit
to a reduction of selling value equal to £2OOO per run. Obviously it
cannot be the fair value of such country that is reduced, and equally
plainly it must be the improved value which his improvements have
given the country, and improvements together. The same old story


told in another way —the tenant has cnt a rod for his own hack, and
the landlord shows no mercy in the nse of it.
The position of the pastoral lessee has heen stated fairly with
reference to his improvements and the rent, and has heen considered
on the supposition that the resumed area will he used for the purpose
of homestead leasing in 10,000 a. blocks, as contemplated by the 1884
Act. It is true that such occupation is impossible, hut that does not
alter the intention of the Act or weaken a statement of the position
from the point of view that that intention had been accomplished.
An effort will now he made to state the case of the resumed areas as
they are and as they must remain till the climate alters —altering
with it the conditions under which the country must be worked.
Nearly two years are gone since the present Act passed, and quite two
years have elapsed since intending homestead lessees might have had
an opportunity of examining the country with a view to settlement.
During most of this time the country has looked exceptionally well,
thanks to a very heavy rain in January, 1885, and again in December
of the same year. Both these rains had Wilcannia for a centre, and
Wilcannia is the centre of the large district herein referred to. Under
such circumstances, if homestead leasing is to he a success, surely a
start should have heen made on the best parts of the areas —the
naturally-watered portions and the portions capable of being easily
watered by artificial means. There were plenty of contractors out of
work —men who, thanks to the profit made from improvement work
now suddenly come to an end, were pretty well off. Surely some of
these men availed themselves of the privilege. Station
whose salaries were reduced, thanks to legislation supposed to have
heen intended for their especial benefit, sons of squatters, or other
young men with a command of a moderate capital, where are they P
The resumed areas still remain practically untouched, and so they
will remain for all time so far as any of the sort of men above-
mentioned are concerned, if they know the country. A reference to
the speeches on the Bill, however, will show that these were the men
that were expected to avail themselves of the privilege.
Of all the resumed country within the lines defined in the intro-
duction, not one-sixth will ever he taken by homestead lessees under
any circumstances, and hitherto the few leases that have heen taken


are near towns, or have exceptional circumstances to explain the fact
that they were taken and not the ground equally good—or had —
which joins.
Homestead leasing is an unquestionable failure in such country,
and must he so till the country alters. This fact cannot he too
strongly stated. It confirms the assertion made and implied all
through this paper, that, apart from the improvements, the land has
no value. Rent free, the men who occupy the large areas of average
country would not undertake the work of improvement on a 15 years’
lease, and under the terms of the 1884 Act. If they had the work to
begin, they would not do it rent free on such terms ; and occupation
rent free is a good occupation for the landlord if all the country is
Occupied compared with ‘,the occupation of a picked spot here and
there at a high rent.
Homestead leasing, applied to such country, is a theory of
legislation, and will never be more. It is a good one if the country
were fitted for it, but here disastrous for the tenant and bad indeed
for the district and the community. Apart from the tenant, how long
is the injury to the district to continue ? Ho work can be done on
the resumed areas by the occupation licensees, and there is not the
slightest chance of more occupation in the form of homestead leasing
than will render five-sixths of the resumed areas useless to anybody.
In June last, at a deputation to Mr. Copeland, the Minister for
Lands, the spokesman on behalf of the Western Division asked that
water or water improvements, which were necessary for the occupa-
tion of the areas under occupation license, should be reserved for the
use of such areas. This request, which is so obviously reasonable and
absolutely necessary, if the occupation licenses are to be held, was
refused consideration because it was said that it meant security of
tenure for the whole resumed areas. If that answer is correct, and
perhaps it is, can there be a stronger condemnation of the system p
The request was explained in this way, and it refers to scores, perhaps
hundreds, of cases which exist: —A large tank or a well is on a 10-
mile block, and only one 10,000 a. portion can be served by it; but
there are six 10,000 a. portions in a 10-mile block, and the occupation
of the six depends on this best water. Is it better for the landlord
that the six areas should be held in connection with the water or that


the water should go to serve one-sixth, while the five-sixths remain
unworkable, owing to the loss of that on which the working depends P
If small leasing is to he a success, the five-sixths must he taken too,
and where would he the hardship of the landlord saving himself by
arranging that the sixth, on which the occupation of the rest depends,
should be the last portion to go. Evidently a prudent course and
absolutely necessary. The landlord, however, who must see the
necessity, dare not save his own property in this way, because the
mistaken popular cry is to the effect that the squatter’s only wish is
to get his land in perpetuity and for nothing. The squatter, as
things now are, has only his pastoral lease sure, and that on terms
which, it has been shown, are so hard as to mean years of extra-
ordinary and continued good fortune, such as he can never hope for,
before he can be on sound ground. But this poor remainder of his
property is more than threatened if it is surrounded by abandoned
lands ; it is, therefore, a matter of life and death to him to secure
the continued occupation of the resumed areas; if not by himself,
then by someone else. All abandoned lands will certainly be
occupied before long by a tenant that will pay neither rent nor license
f ee — a curse to the country, not yet appreciated as he will be —and
he is the Rabbit.
If homestead leasing is not to be successful to any greater extent
than to take away the small proportion of resumed area, on which
their occupation depends, then it is a self-confirmed failure, and the
advancement of one half of this vast district should no longer be delayed
in view of that which at best can be no better than a loss to all
concerned.
In this connection again the landlord has taken care to be on the
right side, and, having by law compelled the first application for
resumed areas, he has made arrangements whereby no portion of a
resumed area can be given up; either the occupier must keep the
whole or none, so that the request for reservation of water, on which
the occupation of these areas depends is not unreasonable. Nay, as a
matter of necessity it must be granted, or leave must be given to
abandon any portion of a resumed area rendered unfit for occupation
by reason of the loss of any water, whether natural or artificial.
There is no provision in the Act for dividing a resumed area in any


way —either all or none must be held apparently. It is said that if
any such concession is made, the principle of homestead leasing is
threatened ; so because a so-called “ principle ” based on a misapplied
theory is threatened the life of a district must he sapped, and work
on one half of a half-improved country must cease. One holder,
willing to improve all his country on fair terms, is prevented for lack
of those terms ; the work he has already half done is taken from him,
and he is forced into a position from which he can do no more, were he
ever so willing.
It is said that if homestead leasing cannot he successful it cannot
injure the present holder. No, but a yearly tenure does, and from
high places the western tenants are called foolish, because they spend
their money under compulsion and encouragement of the 1880 Act.
They were foolish, but experience teaches fools, and they cannot be
expected again, and with their eyes opened, to give the landlord a
chance to repeat the process of forfeiture.
It is said that if a homestead lessee should take a water im-
provement there is no hardship to the occupation licensee —he is
paid its assessed value. This can in no case he more than the cost,
probably much less, hut the man who made the improvement made it
for a prospective benefit, and the cost even is no adequate return to
him, who must remove stock depending on it from a much larger
area than 10,000 a. He could, perhaps, replace the improvement he
lost by spending more money on another position if he could find
one; hut that would he a stretch of folly too great to he looked for from
the man whom experience has taught. True, he would he paid the
value again, hut that does not include the months, perhaps years, of
waiting for a shower of rain heavy enough to fill a large tank, or the
half-dozen failures to be made before he gets a successful well. He
has no chance of receiving his own with usury, and it is too much to
ask him to risk receiving back only a portion of what he has spent
as soon as the work on which he has spent his money becomes
available.


THE FUTURE.
If the present Act is not radically altered it is not hard to pre-
dict what will occur in the future. Millions of acres must he aband-
oned before long, and the present dearth of work must increase. The
district will never regain the prosperity it had once attained and from
which it should have advanced, with the recurrence of fair seasons
for a time and a fair price for its only article of produce. There is a
factor in the calculation which has only just been referred to. As
the case is surely strong enough without this its almost important
element, and that element, it is needless to say, is the rabbit.
At the late rabbit conference the Western representatives were
told by their fellow-members that they were met to discuss rabbits,
not rents and land questions. But every now and again the two
questions proved themselves to be inseparable in the West, and it was
impossible to avoid discussing them together. So much are they
connected tha,t, if Hew South Wales keeps on her present course, she
will be compelled, sooner Or later, to follow the example of South
Australia and Victoria and, as they are, be content to accept a
shilling of rent where she now asks a pound.
Rents and rabbits are both questions of annual outlay, and the
total annual outlay must be under receipts. In the immediate future
all the country herein referred to will have to bear a cost for rabbit
destruction, the limit of which it is hard to foresee. Already the far
western stations are spending their thousands annually, and the area,
on which such vast expenditure seems to be unavoidable, is constantly
increasing in an easterly direction. At the conference the western
men laid down just principles in which the cost of the work of pre-
vention and destruction should be borne. On similar just principles
the whole matter must be immediately considered, and both questions
dealt with in their relation to one another.
In connection with the rent question, and particularly with
reference to losses by draught, Mr. Copeland, at the deputations
already referred to, compared the case of the pastoral tenant to that
of the miner, and said that the miner also had difficulties, and when


lie paid his rent for his mineral lease and did all his preliminary
work, and after all his expense, frequently bottomed on no gold, did
not ask the Government for assistance, but tried again. As far as
this goes, it is, perhaps, a fair analogy; but carry it further, and
suppose that the landlord, who also receives the miner’s rent, were
to allow him his lease, encourage him to erect his whip, his whim or
his pumping-engine, and after he had sunk his shaft and bottomed on
a fair prospect, were to say to him, “ This gold that you expect to get
has been in the ground for years, and you might have had it before ;
now you can go about your business, and I will clean up your wash-
dirt or crush your quartz.” What would be said to that ? Would
not the miner have the country at his back to insist that he be rein-
stated in his claim ? And yet, where is the difference ? The Crown
tenant has erected whip, whim or pumping-engine, or their equivalent,
and had a “prospect.” The landlord seizes the “ prospect,” as in the
continued comparison he seizes the miner’s “ prospect.” In this case,
however, the “ country ” is said to say : “ Serve him right; the land is
ours ; he had no right to improve it; if he did, he did it at his own
risk. We gain, and if he suffers it is his own fault. He is a squatter
and he can stand it.” Does the “ country ” say this, or has it taken
this action from want of knowledge of the facts P
The Crown tenant, who is called “ the squatter,” will neve r
again put himself in that position, so that for the future the work
may be looked upon as at an end, except, perhaps, for a few years.
and to such an extent as will enable him to tide with more safety
through a drought. Any work that is done will not be done in the
best possible manner, but will only be just sufficient for the purpose,
and even this only early in the lease. Later on, if bad seasons
come, as come they must, the losses will have to be borne as best they
may. By that time any value the lease has as a security will have
diminished by at least 10 per cent, per annum, and there will be
nothing for a mortgagee except the stock, or what is left of it. The
case is serious, but it is necessary to state it as it is ; the whole plan
on which station property has been worked must be altered, if this
Act remains unaltered, and Hew South Wales must receive a twist
it will take long years to recover. There is another difficulty and
danger visible enough to many of the tenants, and certainly not


appreciated by tbe landlord as it deserves, and that is, the spread of
pine and other scrubs. True, there are scrub leases, or scrub-clearing
terms of lease ; but they are of such a description that few tenants
will be inclined to take advantage of them when they understand
their position. The reason for the spread of such scrub appears to
be the absence of the previously-recurring bush fires, and, if arrange-
ments must be made by the tenants for a recurrence of that clearing
cause, it means reduced stocking and consequent loss of returns.
This is one of the difficulties that must be met by practice, as the
experiment of trying to run stock on all the poor Western country
proceeds, and is a further illustration of the absurdity of fixing a
high value on that, the low value of which those most intimate with
it are only discovering.
It is true that it is more easy to condemn and pull down than to
build or re-build. In all matters requiring legislation it is necessary
to have a correct knowledge of the conditions to which the law is to
apply. Here the dry climate, consequent barrenness of both food
and water, and the now greatest difficulty of all on such poor country
—the rabbits—are peculiar conditions, which have not been apprec-
iated, they must be fully considered and legislation based on a correct
knowledge of them must be applied.
It is generally believed that the plan of homestead leasing was
suggested by a Royal Commission ; neither of the members of that
commission, at the time they sat, had any personal knowledge of the
country, to which this theory was to be applied— or at all events of
that portion of it to which we now refer. One of the commission,
Mr. Ranken, afterwards took a trip through a portion of the country,
as correspondent of the Sydney Morning Herald. In that paper of
date May 24, 1884, Mr. Ranken said, in his twelfth article on “ The
Dry Country ”: “ Though the way to settle these lands cannot be
seen at present, it does not follow that it will be always so. By some
industry, at present not guessed at, a population may yet prosper
even west of the Darling, and therefore I hold that a portion of each
station should be reserved from the lease to be granted, and should
remain in trust in the hands of the Crown for the specific purpose,
It is only by first frankly and honestly complying with this legiti-
mate requirement that the non-squatting public will be prevailed on


to concede to the squatters such a tenure as will give them the bes
chance of using the country to advantage.”
What does such a statement from such a source mean ? First
of all, it seems to condemn homestead leasing, after an inspection of
the sort of country to which before inspection the theory was to be
applied. Then it suggests that part of the runs (say one half) should
he reserved from lease and should remain in trust in the hands of
the Crown for a specific purpose not guessed at. The end suggested
has been attained, and for a purpose that cannot even he guessed at
the improvement of the whole country is stopped.
This statement of fact has been written to no purpose if it is still
maintained that want of frankness and honesty has been on the part
of the Western squatters. So frankly and honestly would any
Western tenant accept such a condition of lease, viz., that any or all
of the country he holds should be liable to resumption for specific
purposes only, that he would be content to hold his country at a
fair rent, with no better security of tenure, so long as sheep or cattle
growing was not one of the specific purposes.
In every instance a squatter knows that he must retire in favor
of any better industry than his. He has done so in the past and is
willing to do so in the future; he takes such risks and suffers the
loss entailed by them with what cheerfulness he may. It is a totally
different matter when a new risk which he never guessed at is thrust
on him, whereby his own improvements are used as a means to
enable a class of small squatters to make the very same use of the
land that he himself had put it to; and not even the same nse,
because he knows well that only the very best portions of the holding
all of which he is willing to work, can be worked by the smaller
tenant.
After past experience it may be conceded that fair security of
tenure is a sine qua non before work will proceed. It must be granted
that the country is not fit for agriculture, that any use for the country
better than the present has not yet been guessed at, and further that
in the nature of things the area to be held must be large ; that, as
a rule the largest holdings are those that require most consideration,
because they contain an aggregation of the driest, and therefore, most
useless blocks. If these facts are appreciated, as they are in the


district, and as, sooner or later, they must he by the community, the
course of legislation that would he reasonable and just for such
country is not difficult to state. It is granted that on the part of the
tenant that the landlord is entitled to a gradual advance of rent, as
the country is opened up by railways or other public expenditure;
but this advance should certainly be taken on a just basis, and not by
a process of force applied to one class, apparently only because that
one class ought to have the money to pay the advance whether it has
or not.
In assessing the rental of the holdings in the Western Division
the carrying capabilities of the country, and not the acreage, should
be taken as a basis.
A fair and equitable rent, such as the tenants in this district
should be called upon to pay, is at the rate of 4d. per head in the
carrying capacity of the country in its natural state. This rate
should only apply to those leases most favored as regards position
and natural advantages, and should be graduated, in respect to less
favored holdings, with reference to distance from rail or water
carriage, difficulty of obtaining or storing water and the area required
to graze each sheep at proportionately lower rates. Every lessee,
whose holding contains pine or other noxious scrub or undergrowth
should have the right to apply for conversion of the whole of the
area so infested within the holding into a lease of “ scrub lands ” for
a term concurrent with his pastoral lease, subject to the conditions of
section 87 of the Act of 1884. In the case of useless mallee country,
however, the conditions of clearing should not be enforced.
That is, the full, fair value of such country, and the full, fair,
annual value cannot be justly increased, except under circumstances
which give a greater value to the country likely to be permanent, and
which are not the result of the tenant’s exertions.
The conditions of the old Act under which satisfactory work was
done, with the result that the landlord gained whether the work paid
the tenant or not, can never be returned to. The tenants have been
taught a lesson they will not soon forget, and yet hundreds of
thousands of pounds must be expended before this part of the
country—nearly one-third of the area of the whole colony—can be in


a position from which it can avoid as much as possible the national
calamity of loss by drought.
There is one way perfectly just and perfectly businesslike and
practicable, which it is now proposed to put forward as the view of
the district, blot the view of the tenants only, but of all who are
concerned in the welfare of the district, and who are dependent on a
fair measure of prosperity accruing to the men, engaged in the only
industry permitted by the present conditions of climate, which will
he gained by a prospect of a fair profit, and so encourage them again
to proceed with productive work.
Let the conditions suggested by Mr. Eanken, as likely to satisfy
the non-squatting public, be applied, and give security of tenure at
the fair annual value for all the country until it (or a portion of it)
may be required for a better purpose than sheep or cattle growing.
Country which is purely pastoral, apart from improvements,
whether by the landlord in the form of facilities of carriage or produce,
or by the tenant in his various necessary works, certainly depends for
increased value on a possible permanent increased selling value for
its aitides of produce. These are principally wool and mutton
Wool goes up and down, and probably the average for the past 15
years will be the average value for the next 15. Mutton is more
likely to go down than up in value ; the probable limit will be
regulated by the price of frozen meat in the great market of the
world, and that, apparently, will only justify the use of the process
when the average value of sheep is low.
The land has no value apart from the improvements, and the
improvements no value apart from the land. They should not be
divorced, as they have been under legislation, which allowed improve-
ment purchases, by which the tenant had to save his improvements
as much as possible, by buying a small area round them. He had to
buy that which had no intrinsic value, and the landlord in selling
parted with that which gave value to his land. The process was bad
for both parties.
The fair annual value of the country being once fixed, the tenant
or his successor should be allowed to hold his country at that value,
and if any advance is required it shonld be taken in a manner fair to
the tenant, if such a manner can be suggested.


Let the landlord pay the tenant for all the improvements, and in
proportion to the amount paid let him charge an increased rent.
The landlord can borrow money at 4 per cent., and if he charges
the tenant say 10 per cent, on the sum paid in compensation for im-
provements, he gains an advance in rent eqnal to 6 per cent, on the
amount paid.
The improvements would he valued on a basis which would
secure the fairness of the valuation ; the interest of the tenant would
be to show a fair relative proportion between his rent and his idea of
the value of his property. After the improvements were bought the
stock and the goodwill would remain his, and would have a selling
value which would depend much on whether the improvements
adequately represented a rent payment fixed by their value. Thus,
if the compensation asked for is too great, the rent payment would
be great in proportion, and the goodwill of the going concern would
be worth less. On the other hand, if the compensation is too small the
rent will be proportionately small, and consequently the selling value
of the property will be high.
If a successor to the present tenant bought the station before
compensation was given, he would know that until a return for his
outlay in purchasing the improvement portion of his property was
made good to him in a fair manner by the landlord he would be asked
to pay no more rent, and stations would regain a selling value equal
to the value of the improvements which have gone from them. The
country being his under fair terms of lease till it could be put to a
better purpose, the tenant would understand his position and the risk
he ran and, as on such an arrangement with regard to his improve-
ments he would not stand to lose by good and sufficient work, he
would be prepared to do thoroughly good work. His own interest
would compel him to maintain the selling value of his improvements,
both before and after the landlord’s purchase. Wells, tanks and dams
would be made well and kept in thorough repair, and fences, which
are as necessary as water for such country, would also be kept up to
value, because, as to the selling value of a station in the future as in
the past, the condition of improvements would be an important
matter of calculation—next only to the rent payment consequent on
their purchase.


Roughly, the amount required to buy all the improvements in
the Western Division would be £8,000,000 for the 80,000,000 acres,
which would be about the area of the Crown Lands to which this
process would be certainly applicable—all the laud included within
the lines specified in the introduction, and any portion of similar
country that may be outside those lines.
Probably, one-tenth of the country referred to would be
permanently and naturally watered, and nine-tenths dry in its natural
state ; so that about £150,000 would be got for rent till the increase
was desired. A payment of £8,000,000 would secure an increase of
£500,000, and both sums would be almost netted as the machinery
necessary to work such a plan would not be costly. The money would
be so well invested that the more the landlord had to pay the better
his position would be.
The investment of public money in such a manner is more
certainly profitable than the investment of large sums on irrigation
could be—here the return is absolutely certain. The rent must be
paid, and on the grounds of advantage to the district and community
already stated, the investment would be justified even if it were
immediately necessary. But it is not so ; and only secures for the
landlord a proportion of the increased value given by the tenants’
improvements to their joint property if the landlord desires to secure
his share, and when he sees his way clear to give the necessary quid
pro quo.
Stronger inducements than those already presented would not be
required to induce an ordinary landlord, controlled by the law, to
grant reasonable terms to his tenant, but stronger than all those are
the scrub and rabbit difficulties.
Stronger inducements than are possible under present conditions
must be offered to the tenant before he can undertake the work
necessary to meet both these difficulties. Compulsion under an Act
of Parliament, possibly unexampled for the severity of its provisions,
and enforced by a succession of Ministers as rigidly as it was possible
to enforce it, has utterly failed with the rabbit difficulty. Such work
cannot be compelled by any Act of Parliament if put on men other-
wise brought to the verge of ruin. Pair conditions mean hope of
recovery, and with that hope the work can be left to the tenant.


Self-interest to maintain the selling value of the property would
compel the work, if it was in the power of man to do it effectually-
Rent, condition of improvements, freedom from rabbits and absence
of scrub would be the great elements of calculation on which the
selling value of the property would depend. Thus the landlord
would be saved all expense in this matter, and the work would be
done which, under compulsion, he has failed to get done. If rabbit
fencing were required, and in the view of a large majority of practical
men, nothing else will give a hope of meeting the difficulty if rabbit
fencing were required, it would be undertaken on such conditions, and
the only interference required from the landlord in the labbit
question would be an Act of Parliament to arrange about party
fencing. Such an investment of public money, as is here suggested,
is not without a close parallel in land legislation, both past and
present. The unpaid balances of selectors’ payments are about
£10,000,000, and that sum is represented by land or a debt secured
on future payments for land, most of which might have been cash,
and which, if it had been put into that form, would have saved the
borrowing of an equal sum for public purposes. It is needless to
compare the different forms of security for the annual payments in
the two cases; both are probably ample, but it may be useful to the
present purpose to point out, that in the case of selectors balances, a
rate of interest is charged which hardly covers the cost of the
borrowing, viz., 4 per cent., while for the purpose of purchasing the
tenants’ improvements a profit equal to 6 per cent, on the amount
paid is offered in the form of rent, or a sum equal to £500,000 per
annum on the present value of the improvements.
By a loan raised for such a fair and business-like purpose, the credit
of the colony would be improved, and not the least important reason
for the improvement would be the feeling of returned security, which
would soon make itself apparent in financial circles by the loosing of
the purse strings, now tightened to the continued risk of all con-
cerned. There may be a good season or two ahead, but nothing is
surer than that drought in this country is also not far distant. The late
losses have abundantly shown that, although much has been spent on
improvements, a much larger expenditure is still necessary.


<§£*>tus ;
WALTER AKHURST AND COMPANY,
KENT STREET.


