

THE CHUECH’S WAEFAEE:
SERMON,
PREACHED IN ST. GEORGE’S CHURCH, SYDNEY, AT THE OPENING
OE THE SYNOD OE EASTERN AUSTRALIA,
REV. JOHN KINROSS,
(THE RETIRING MODERATOR)
SHEEEIFF AND DOWNING-,


w
»
I
M


THE CHUECH’S WAEFAEE.
“ All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for in-
struction in righteousnes.”—(l Tim. iii. 16.) While the
Bible is a book for all—for the learned as well as for the
illiterate, for the rich as well as for the poor, for saints as
well as for sinners, for the members as well as the office-
bearers of the Church—yet, some portions of it are better
fitted than others to awaken the careless, or to comfort the
sorrowing, or to stimulate the slothful. If there is any
portion of Scripture more than another incumbent upon the
minister of the Gospel, earnestly and constantly to study,
it is the Epistles of Paul to Timothy and Titus. Most of
Paul’s Epistles were written to the members of the Church—
e.g., “To all the Churches of Galatia,” “To the saints
which were at Ephesus,” “To all that were in Eome called
to be saints,” and “ To all the saints that were at Philippi
with the bishops and deacons ;” but these were addressed
to two ministers of thewoid exclusively. In these Epistles
we have the advice of one who laboured long and hard in
the holy work of preaching the blessed Gospel, and of
ruling the Churches that had been formed through his in-
strumentality. They give us a lively representation of the
state of the Church in apostolic times. They show that
there were divisions then as now—error of as deadly a
description as that prevalent now—so that he had to com-
mand the form of sound words to be held fast. There were
strifes and contentions as now—wherefore, he says, “Neither
give heed to fables and endless genealogies which minister
questions rather than godly edifying which is in faith.”
“ But foolish and unlearned questions avoid, knowing that
'2.
A7-y-77 • 11


they do gender strifes.” Ungodliness and sin existed
amongst the people then as now —wherefore he exhorts
ministers to “Preach the word; he instant in season and
and out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all long
suffering and doctrine.”
The words of the text form part of that general exhor-
tation addressed to Timothy. “ But thou, 0 man of God,
flee these things, and follow after righteousness, godliness,
faith, love, patience, meekness; fight the good fight of
faith.” They seem to contain an allusion to the games
which were so celebrated throughout the whole of Greece,
and of which Timothy had doubtless heard from his father,
who was a Greek. This is not the only occasion on which
the apostle refers to these games for the purpose of illus-
trating divine truth. “ Know ye not, ”he says, “ that they
which run in a race, run all, but one received the prize ; so
run that ye may obtain. And every one that striveth for
the mastery is temperate in all things. Now they do it to
obtain a corruptible crown, but we an incorruptible.”
(1 Cor. 9, 24.) “This one thing I do—forgetting those
things which are behind, and reaching forth into those
things which are before, I press toward the mark for the
prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.” Thus in
these passages the Christian life is compared to a race, in
which they are so to run that they may obtain an incor-
ruptible crown.
As in the Grecian games there was the exercise of
wrestling as well as running; so the apostle compares the
life of the believer to a fight as well as to a race. “ Fight
the good fight of faith.” That to which Timothy is here
summoned is a fight or contest, and that of the most formi-
dable description. The word in the original might be
literally translated “agonise,” “contend earnestly” in the
good contest —thus denoting that there must be the fullest
possible concentration of all the faculties of the soul in
maintaining this good warfare, as its energies will be taxed
to the utmost.
This contest is further described as the “ fight of faith.”
It is well known that faith in Scripture is used both in an
objective and subjective sense —denoting either the truth in
the word believed, or the belief itself in the mind. In the


former sense, we are commanded “to contend earnestly for
the faith once delivered to the saints;” “Eebuke them
sharply that they may he sound in the faith.” In the
latter, we are said to he “justified by faith;” “The just
shall live by faith.” In which sense is the word used in
the text ? Is this warfare so denominated from the faith or
doctrine contained in God’s word which summons us to
engage in it, or from the faith wrought in the heart by the
Holy Spirit which leads us to fight, enables us to prolong
the contest, and at last to gain the victory ? It is imma-
terial which view we take. The fight to which we are
called by the faith revealed in the Bible, is precisely the
same as that in which faith will lead every one in whose
heart it is to engage. Without faith in the heart we cannot
fight the battle to which the faith of God’s words calls us.
In the original, it is fight the good fight of the faith; and
though the article is sometimes used when the other mean-
ing is intended, yet most frequently when supplied, it is the
objective meaning that is to be taken.
The good fight here meant, therefore, is that to which
the faith of God’s holy word summons us. It is a contest
against error, and in behalf of truth; against the flesh, and
in behalf of the spirit; against the world, and in behalf of
Jesus. The lusts of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the
pride of life, are the powerful enemies against whom a per-
petual warfare is to be waged. The believer is to fight
against sin in himself and in others. He is to “mortify
his members which are upon the earth.” Every thought
must be brought into captivity to Christ. The nature of
the warfare is strikingly described by the apostle (Ephis.
vi. 12). “For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but
against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of
the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in
high places.” In the verses that follow we have an enume-
ration of the armour, defensive and offensive, with
which the saint is to be equipped. His loins are to be
girt about with truth; he is to have on the breastplate of
righteousness ; his feet shod with the preparation of the
gospel of peace ; above all, taking the shield of faith where-
with he shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the
wicked—and he is to take the helmet of salvation and the
sword of the spirit, which is the word of God.


There can never be a truce betwixt Him and His enemies.
Unlike the wars that are known among men, this will never
cease till sin exists no more. The Christian must be a
warrior to the last. The soldier who has been for years
away from home, exposed to numerous hardships, and his
life frequently endangered, as he sighs to return to his
fatherland, may entertain the hope that soon he shall rest
from his weary marches, and his sword return to its scab-
bard. There is no rest for the people of God here. Eternity
will be long enough for that. His sword has been un-
sheathed, and it will never rest till he has won the crown
of glory that fadeth not away. The battle field is the whole
world, wherever there is a Christian man or woman. It
may be fought on sea or on land, at home or abroad,
in prosperity or adversity: even upon a sickbed has this,
warfare been waged. This fight can be carried on on our
knees: and they that wrestle most in prayer, succeed best
in the Christian warfare.
On the present occasion, I do not intend to discuss all the
topics connected with this extensive subject; and those
which I shall consider are not entitled to be regarded as
the most important. I wish merely to point out the bear-
ings of the text on our duty as a Church in the present
state of the world, and to direct your attention to some of
the foes we have to fight.
I. The Church is called upon to contend earnestly against
prevailing unbelief.
Every one who has of late been observing the signs of
the times, must admit that a spirit* of scepticism pervades
society to a very large extent. This is an age of inquiry,
and of doubt, and of most presumptuous speculations.
There is no truth however sacred, no opinion however
venerable, that is not called in question. Truths, that former
ages admitted without raising a doubt, and regarded as
possessed of the certainty of first principles, are now pro-
nounced baseless assumptions. Unquestionably, physical
science has made most rapid progress during this last half
century ; and in the arts, inventions have wrought wonders
in promoting the material comfort of mankind. Knowledge
is also much more extensively diffused than ever it has been
before. It -would not be difficult to show, I think, that


what we have gained in breadth, we have lost in depth;
because men are now extremely desirous of having a
smattering of everything, and not a thorough well-digested
knowledge of anything. One effect of this diffusion of
knowledge is that the mass of men take a deeper interest in
political and theological matters than formerly. When
violent changes have been effected in societies and com-
monwealths, it was to have been expected that religion
would not escape surrounding influences. It seems as if,
in the present day, the very existence of Christianity, as
well as of all religion, were put on its trial. This is the
case not only in one country, but throughout Christendom.
The Protestant Church of France is at present in a ferment,
not about a question of common doctrine or Church govern-
ment, but even respecting the divinity of our Saviour and
the reality of His resurrection. The same state of things
meets us in Holland. In Great Britain, till within these
few years, we have been tolerably secure—while in
Germany, there has been a life and death struggle carried
on betwixt the friends and foes of Christianity. This state
of things, however, no longer exists. At the present
moment there is intense excitement there, respecting the
very topics that were discussed in Germany twenty years ago.
So far as man can see, things are likely to take a similar
course amongst ourselves, as they did there ; and this holds
out a prospect dismal enough. It is surely our incumbent
duty to be prepared for the contest which has already com-
menced in Britain, and may any day begin in New South
Wales.
The phases of prevailing unbelief may be conveniently
(if not accurately) divided into three classes, the Atheistic,
the Anti-Christian', and the Anti-biblio —the first ques-
tioning the existence of God ; the second denying the divine
origin of Christianity; and the last denying the infallibility
of the Bible.
Atheism, and her sister Pantheism, have existed in all
ages. Pantheism, especially, pervades our literature to a
most lamentable extent; not so much by an avowal of its
principles, as by statements which necessarily imply it.
Some have doubted whether the heart of man has ever risen
to such a daring height of impiety as to call in question


the existence of the Creator ; but there seems to be
no sin of which the corrupt heart of man is not capable.
The most practical form which British Atheism as-
sumes, is that called “Secularism.” It does not affirm
that there is no Grod, but only that there is not sufficient
evidence for believing in his existence, or in that of a
future state of reward and punishments. The inference it
draws from this is, that man’s thoughts ought to be con-
centrated upon time, and eternity be left to take care of
itself. This accords well with the practice —if not with the
creed—of most. It makes religion a question of profit or
loss : yet it sadly forgets this truth: —lf Secularism be
true, the Christian loses nothing. If Christianity be true,
the Secularist loses everything—body and soul for ever.
Secularism is no dry, barren speculation of the schools,
but a thoroughly practical system. Many of the writings
of the old school of Atheists might circulate for years
amongst one people and not do the slightest harm, simply
because they are of such an abstruse character that the
popular mind could not comprehend them. It is entirely
different with Secularism. Its principles are but few and
simple, and have a strange affinity to the corrupt heart of
man. It is not unknown to us that in this colony, not
more than two years ago, a youth under twenty declared
in the witness box he had no Grod. Whether such a per-
nicious system is spreading, I know not; but surely we
ought to be on our guard against its insidious progress.
The forms which Anti-Christian unbelief assumes are
more varied than those of Atheism. I class under this
head all who admit the existence of Grod, but deny the
divine origin of Christianity. Just as all are not Atheists,
from the same reasons, so all are not Anti-christian on the
same grounds. The opponents of the special claims of
Christianity may be ranked in two classes namely,
Naturalism and Spiritualism, The former exalts nature
and natural laws ; the latter the powers and sentiments of
the human spirit. Naturalism looks abroad on the fields
of Nature, observes that every event happens according to
law, and that every effect has its cause. It is so much
enamoured of law that it refuses to admit the existence of
miracle. The whole creation, in its view is one grand


machine which God has made—each part exactly fitting
into its place, and which now goes on with certainty. God
having once set it going, now leaves it to itself. In such a
system there is no room for prayer ; no possibility of the
resurrection of Christ. This form of infidelity has long
existed, and is likely to continue while Christianity has an
opponent. Spiritualism, on the other hand, despises Natu-
ralism, although when hard pressed by the Christian advo-
cate it has to borrow some of its weapons. The human
spirit or soul is everything in this system. A marvellous
power is ascribed to the innate ideas or intuitions of the
human mind. It does not formally deny the possibility of
miracles, but strongly asserts there is not the slightest use
for them. The mind of man is naturally religious—hence
there is no need of a Bible, or what it contemptuously
styles a “book revelation.” There is no need of a
Saviour. God is a loving God. All men will find a conge-
nial home at last in the bosom of The Eternal. There is
so much of inward light in the soul that there is not the
slightest use for outward light in the Bible. This system
apes the language of the Bible, and talks in a most reli-
gious strain. Whilst Naturalism may be described as a
deifying of nature —this may be called a deifying of
man.
It is very remarkable that the most recent phases
of Anti-christian error have assumed the form of an
attack upon the life of our blessed Redeemer. In this
unholy war two authors stand out prominently in the field
—the one a German, and the other a Erenehman.
Strauss nearly thirty years ago published his life of Jesus.
It fell like a thunderbolt on the Theologians of Germany.
The excitement created by it was intense. Government
thought of suppressing it, but they wisely took the advice
of the great Neandef, who persuaded them to allow it to meet
its doom from the weapons of argument. It brought men
to a decided stand. Everyone had to take a side; and
many who were on the highway to infidelity shrunk back
with horror. Answers from the most celebrated divines
soon made their appearance ; and although there are some
things even in the best of these answers, from which we
would strongly dissent, yet they had the effect of most


thoroughly extinguishing the influence of that arch-heretic.
At the present moment there is none looked upon as pos-
sessing less influence with Theologians. Thus vanquished
in the schools, he has, during the present year, I under-
stand, appealed to the people of Germany in a new life of
Jesus. The two portly volumes are reduced to one ; and
it remains to he seen what his success will he since he has
appealed from divines and universities to the people.
It is surely a melancholy, if not an alarming sign of the
times, that in a few weeks Renan’s hook, containing an
attack upon the character of Jesus Christ, should have
reached a circulation of many thousands. It is said that
it found more readers than the most popular novels of the
day. By competent judges this is pronounced a much more
superficial work, than its heavy German predecessor. On
that very account it is more popular, and is likely to do
immense injury among the masses. Unbelief is descending
in the social scale. It is no longer confined to schools
and cloisters, and the saloons of the wealthy; hut it has
found its way among all classes. We may expect very soon
to meet it face to face amongst ourselves. We need not
fear the issue. He that is with us is greater than those
combined against us. When the alarm has sounded, let it
he seen that we are at our posts and prepared for the con-
flict.
The errors I have called antibillic , are more various
than either of the preceding. The enemies of the Bible are
even more numerous than those of God and Christ. The
atheistical and antichristian systems are held by those
without the Church, while the Bible now-a-days has some
of its most formidable opponents within it, and in one case,
holding the very highest official position. In former days,
all but universally, those who believed in Christ believed in
the Bible; now it is different. Many who now believe Jesus to
be a Divine Person, and who own the mysterious doctrine
of the Holy Trinity, refuse to admit that the Bible, in the
sense usually attached to the terms, is the inspired word of
God. It was always considered that a Minister of the
Gospel in any Christian Church, was bound in honour to
uphold and defend the authority of Scripture. Now, how-
ever, we have men occupying the most conspicuous places


in the Church and in the Universities, maintaining 1 that
many things contained in the Bible are not true. Those on
whom we looked as the sworn friends and defenders of
revealed truth, come forth before the world to oppose it.
The views taken of the Bible by those professing some
deference to Christianity are various. Some regard it as a
human record of many supernatural events. Such persons
may believe in the resurrection of Christ, and in the reality
of Old and New Testament miracles. This, I think, is logi-
cally possible, although it but seldom or never happens.
The man that believes in the deluge, or in the plagues of
Egypt, generally believes in the Mosaic authorship of the
Pentateuch, and in the inspirations of the Bible ; while the
one that does not so believe makes a strenuous effort to get
rid of both.
There are three grand fundamental inquiries respecting
the Bible, namely, the genuineness and integrity of the
writings, in other words are the writings of Scripture as we
possess them the productions of the authors to whom they
are ascribed ; secondly, the authenticity of its statements,
or the truth and credibility of the matters contained in it—
such as Creation, the Pall, the Plood, the events of the Life
of Abraham, Moses, David, and so on; and lastly, the
inspiration and consequent infallible authority of the whole
record. All these inquiries are closely, but not necessarily
cennected. A book may be genuine without being authen-
tic, and authentic without being genuine ; but jt cannot be
inspired without being authentic, i.e., every statement in an
inspired book must necessarily be true. An error conclu-
sively established disproves the infallible authority of a
book. To apply this to present opinion : Bishop Colenso
denies both the genuineness, authenticity, and inspiration
(in the common acceptation of the term) of the Pentateuch;
the first, because he asserts Moses was not its author; the
second, because he affirms many statements contained in it
to be false ; and of course the third follows necessarily from
the preceding, since Giod could not be the author of error or
misstatements. All the assaults which have been made
upon the inspiration of the Bible have originated in ques-
tioning or denying the truth of some of its statements. As
I said before, it is conceivable that it might have been true


without being inspired ; but it cannot be tbe latter without
the former. In a logical argument, therefore, the truth of
Scriptures must be established before its inspiration is
claimed.
Here arises a question possessed of immense importance,
namely,—Must we be convinced of the truth of every
statement in the Bible before we can believe in its inspira-
tion ? or rather, —Must we be prepared to show on indepen-
dent evidence, that all which the Scripture states is true,
before we ask a person to believe in its inspiration ? I
answer without the slightest hesitation, certainly not. There
is no ground in reason or common sense why we should
make such a concession. You might as well say that you
wont believe a person to be an honest man, till you know
every thought, word, or deed in his life. It is manifest you
must know some of them—very many of them, and these
leading actions of his life. One act of dishonesty demon-
strated, is conclusive against him; several difficult to be
reconciled are held in abeyance till matters be cleared up,
provided there be strong counter evidence in his favour.
It must be shown that the leading facts of the Bible are
true, and its writers truthful men, before we claim for it
inspired authority. This it is not difficult to substantiate ;
and accordingly the question of inspiration must be settled
by the testimony of the writers themselves. ■ This is un-
questionably, so far as I can perceive, the only legitimate
method of meeting its opponents in the present day.
There is another very remarkable feature in the character
of present unbelief, namely, the rather novel idea that the
Word of Gk>d is in the Bible, but that the Bible is not the
word of God. Some parts of it are inspired, others not;
some true, others not. Of old it was considered that Scrip-
ture stood as a whole, or fell as a whole. According to the
highest legal authority of the land, the Church of England
is not to be held as maintaining that the Bible is the Word
of God, but only that the Word of God is in it. Such a
state of matters is fitted to give rise to most serious concern
on the part of every Christian man. Since the late decision
of the Privy Council, unbelief has become more outspoken.
Heresy is no longer uttered in secret and in whispers, but is
now openly proclaimed. We have no reason to fear this.


An open foe is not so much, to be dreaded as a concealed
traitor.
I have not attempted to discuss the views to which I have
referred, neither do I intend doing so now, only remarking
that this view of Scripture is of the most injurious character.
It unsettles every thing and settles nothing. What parts
of the Bible are the work of God and what of man ? What
is the relative proportion of the two ? Is it a half, or
three-fourths, or a tenth of the whole, that is infallible ?
We may be assured that many will be glad to leave it to a
very small minimum. Such a system would give rise to
interminable dissensions as to what part is inspired and
what not. What is the criterion by which the wheat is to
be separated from the chaff ? It wdll be left to the caprice
of every individual. All will be free to pick and choose.
The most solemn doctrines of the cross wdll be sacrificed;
those truths that have afforded consolation in life to many
weary souls, and supported them at the hour of death, will
all evaporate under the influence of such pernicious views
of the Bible. The divisions of the Church are numerous
enough, the points of difference separating one communion
from another, are often of vast importance for the welfare of
the soul, even when all universally profess to walk by the
same rule and to adopt the same standard ; but these evils
will be increased tenfold by others of even greater moment
respecting the very standard itself. Such views are
thoroughly characteristic of a transition state of things.
They will not remain long at that point. Some will push
right ahead till they say there is no Bible; and others who
are now in a doubting state, wdll feel that a whole Bible is
the only safeguard of morality, and the only foundation for
the faith of poor sinners to rest upon.
It surely becomes us to ponder these matters well. We
must fight against every form of error as well as every
kind of iniquity. It is not a fight in which we have only
to show our weapons, and the enemy will retreat from the
field. AVe require all the knowledge we can acquire; we
need all the wisdom and grace that can be bestowed. A
great general ascribed his success in the field to his acting
rigorously upon the principle, “ never despise an enemy.”
Unbelief is far too formidable to be despised. Mere de-


nuneiation or invective will not succeed. Men are reason-
able creatures, and reason canuot be silenced by the
authority of a mere dogmatic decree. “We must be able
to render a reason to every one that asks us of the hope
that is in us.” On the other hand, there is no reason why
we should view this matter with undue alarm. Un-
questionably, there are many difficutties—some of them
formidable, surrounding the facts and truths of the Bible.
Science seems sometimes to take one side, and Scripture
another. It may be no easy matter to reconcile them. We
would do well to keep always in mind these two very
obvious facts—namely, that Philosophers are not infallible,
and that Theologians may err. Some people are very
anxious to deny the infallibility of the Bible, and to claim
infallibility for geologists. If a geologist broach a new
theory, it is lauded by a certain class of men as an incon-
testable fact, likely to secure the downfall of Christianity.
Give us facts, and let theories go to the winds. I suspect
there are quite as many fancies in the w r orks of men
of science as there are facts. It is rather too much
to expect us to surrender inspired truths at the bidding of
men’s theories, which grow up in a night and wither in a
night. It is a most wholesome rule to take no theory for
granted. I should like to know whether there is even
one theory opposed to the Bible, in which all the
leading men of science are agreed. We could say, there-
fore, with good grace, “agree amongst yourselves first
before you even ask us to consider the matter.” Some
years ago, many naturalists had great difficulty in believing
that the present races of men could have descended from
one original pair. They could not see how the negro, the
Malay, and the Mongolian, so different in colour and form,
could have sprung from Adam and Eve. Another class who
are now most popular, I understand, see no difficulty wffiat-
ever in this, since it is probable that man may have been
developed from the ape. If we contended for victory only,
and not for the welfare of souls also, we might leave the
enemies of the faith to agree among themselves, before we
uttered a word in its behalf. The two opponents of Chris-
tianity just named, Strauss and Renan, contradict each
other on fundamental points. Strauss denies the genuine-


ness of John’s Gospel—and admits that if it were so, his
theory falls to the ground; yet, his brother Renan grounds
a part of his theory on that very Gospel which the other
used all his might to overthrow. The German admits the
pure perfect character of Jesus, and the Frenchman denies it.
Let us leave them to fight this out, and they will effectually
crack each other’s head.
We have to hear in mind that Theologians are about as
fallible as men of science. They contradict each other as
well as the latter. Sometimes it turns out that a scientific
discovery which appeared to clash v ith Revelation, only
did so with men’s interpretation of it. Theory has done im-
mense injury in the domain of Theology; and it may be
one of the reasons why such erroneous views in science are
permitted to exist, to arouse men to believe in the certainty
of Divine Truth, but not of Men’s Interpretation of it.
Dr. Ohalmer had one way of harmonising the Bible and
geology; Kurtz had another; and Hugh Miller differed
somewhat from both. Does not this suggest the thought
that perhaps the right interpretation of Genesis has yet to
be discovered ? It is not to be maintained for a moment
that the Church of the present day understands thoroughly
the whole Bible. Augustine was far ahead of most of the
fathers that preceded him; Calvin left Augustine far
behind. The Reformation was an immense improvement
upon the Church of the fourth century ; and the intolerance
of most of the Reformers finds no defender among their
successors of the present day. Let us wait with patience
and without alarm for a complete solution of the difficulties
in Scripture. As the people of God advance in knowledge,
and in godliness, we may expect that these will disappear.
11. We have to contend against abounding Immorality.
Every one that takes merely a casual glance at the state
of morals in this colony, must be struck with the lamentable
state of society. Every sin that disgraces the land of our
nativity obtains a rank and luxurious growth in this the
land of our adoption; and many other forms of vice meet
us here frequently that are but seldom heard of at home.
Intemperance, which has long been the standing disgrace
of Scotland, prevails to a much greater extent amongst
ourselves. The temporal evils arising from this sin are in-


calculable, and must strike every one as being enormous.
Many of these are unknown to the public; and some are
compelled to endure in private, intense sorrow on account
of its progress. The number of the public houses, in pro-
portion to the inhabitants, is highly discreditable. Surely
every legitimate method of checking this gigantic evil should
receive the earnest attention, the strong sympathy, and the
practical support of the Church.
Dishonesty, in all its varied forms —from the violence of
the bushranger down to the petty artifices of common
business —is fearfully prevalent. It is no uncommon thing
to find men boasting of successful fraud. When this sin
prevails extensively in a community, religion will be found
to be at a very low ebb. Where the latter exists in a lively
state, it exerts such a controlling influence over the maxims
and habits of ordinary society, that hundreds are compelled
to be honest from policy, who would never be such from
principle. When speaking of unbelief, we had to say that
the battle has not yet thoroughly begun amongst ourselves ;
this cannot be said of the matter now in hand. In town
and country it meets us at every step. Our police reports
and processes at law, are standing testimonies to the truth
of these statements.
Licentiousness, in its most revolting forms, exists in our
midst. Whether it is on the increase or not generally, I
am not prepared to say. This is a subject not pleasant to
speak about, and still more disagreeable and painful to
have anything to do with. As guardians of the morals
and purity of the community, the ministers of the blessed
Gospel dare not shut their eyes to what is going on, nor re-
fuse to use all the influence in their power, in order, if
possible, to extirpate the evil. There is something fearfully
revolting in the manner in which vice is paraded before the
public in our land. Men who basely seduce and desert
the defenceless, are too frequently received into society as
if they had done nothing amiss. It is this want of a general
abhorrence of vice in every shape that renders the matter
more hopeless than it would otherwise be. There is some-
thing exceedingly callous in the way we generally regard
crimes of the worst description. They have become so
familiar that they cease to be wondered at, and worst of all,
to be abhorred.


Unquestionably the greatest part of the immorality is to
be found among those who seldom or never enter the house
of prayer ; and it is to be presumed that none such, when
known, are allowed to remain members of the Church.
Laxity in the administration of Church discipline is calcu-
lated to do immense injury to the cause of morality, not to
speak of religion. Discipline is assuredly one weapon
which the Church is urgently called upon to wield in the
cause of purity. The Church of our fathers in days gone
by was noted for the strictness and impartiality of its dis-
cipline. Lords, and ladies of high rank, were often com-
pelled to submit to the humiliation of a public rebuke.
This latter form has now very generally been abandoned at
home and here ; but whether morals have gained or lost
thereby I leave you to judge. If vice is to be discounte-
nanced anywhere, it is surely in the Church. If the vicious
are to be reclaimed from their unholy ways, to whom can
we look as the agent of the change but to the Church ? Is
it not the case that we find it more difficult to tell one man
in his own house that he is an offender against the law of
Cod, than to tell the whole congregation in Church that
they are sinners. We have surely to take heed lest we
satisfy ourselves and quiet our consciences by publicly con-
demning sin or sins in general, when a more private and
personal admonition would be requisite.
Whilst we are to trust to the truth and spirit of Cod
alone in our endeavours to banish immorality; whilst we
believe that the preaching of the Cospel in all its fulness
and sweetness, and of the law in all its length and breadth
and terrors, accompanied by the blessing of the spirit, is
the only effectual means for checking all vice and producing
purity and holiness in heart and life, we have to ask how are
we to bring this to bear upon the people at large ? Those
who come to church will hear ; those who stay away, will
not. It is a lamentable fact that very many amongst us
never enter a church door. Some of them (sad that we
should have to make the admission) have not the oppor-
tunity of hearing the gospel preached from one end of the year
to the other; many especially have no opportunity of hearing
it from ministers of our Church ; whilst others have places
of worship almost at their very door. Our first duty is


surely to carry tlie gosppel to all who profess to belong to our
communion. I need not t say that hitherto we have lamentably
failed in discharging thus primary duty of the Church. How
stands the fact ? Accoirding to the census returns there are
about 35,000 Presbyterians in the Colony, and of these
only 7356 attend the house of God on sabbath. It is
generally considered thiat about a half of the population
might attend the preaclhing of the word on the Lord’s day,
but of our people only about a fifth part attend. The
Wesleyan body numbers about 23,000, and in attendance
on their churches there are upwards of 27,000 people.
Now, it is quite right that we should condemn their Arme-
nianism, because we believe it to be erroneous ; but it is
much easier to condemn that than to imitate their activity.
Surely it is high time that we should bestir ourselves in this
matter, and set our shoulder at once to the work. Even
supposing we were faithful in preaching and admonishing
those that wait upon our ministry, what is that to those
who do not ? Our preaching to those in the church will
not profit those in the street. If the people will not come
to us, we must go to them. We must go out to the high-
ways and hedges, and compel them to come in. They who
live within sight of the church, and within hearing of the
church-bell, are undoubtedly guilty of great sin in not
coming to hear the gospel of Jesus ; but we are also guilty
in not asking and entreating them to come. We must
adopt, and, by God’s grace, vigorously carry out what has
been w ell called the “ aggressive system.” If the minister
is only seen by the people in the pulpit, we may perhaps,
and this but seldom, retain what we have ; but we cannot
gain those that are without. Some say “ the chief object
of the ministry is the preaching of the gospel.” Unques-
tionably it is. But to whom and where ? The composi-
tion of sermons for those that come to church is no dis-
charge of duty to those that stay at home.
I look, therefore, upon pastoral visitation as one of the
indispensable requisites in the colonial field. It is manifest
that this is not the duty of ministers exclusively. And this
leads me to make a remark or turn on that most admirable
provision of our Presbyterian constitution —“ the ruling
eldership.” It is evident to common sense that one man is


utterly unable to exercise that minute inspection over the
members of even a small congregation which is necessary.
The sick require to be visited, the erring to be reclaimed,
the transgressor to be admonished, and the sorrowing to be
comforted. This, of itself, would tax the energies of a
powerful man. Hence we have the ruling eldership to
take a part in the oversight of the flock. Presbyterianism
owes much to her elders. They have exercised a most
beneficial influence in her courts, and have helped on the
good cause when ministers were time-servers. But if
elders are only seen by the people at the communion, there
will be the same kind of abuse as when the minister is only
seen in the pulpit.
Our Synod has queries respecting the visitation of minis-
ters, but none respecting that of elders. In my humble
opinion this is a serious defect. Our Church will never do
her part to those that are within or to those that are with-
out till elders as well as ministers heartily engage in the
work of visitation/*
Many a youth would have been arrested in his career of
wickedness had he been kindly spoken to, and solemnly
admonished by a pious office-bearer of the Church. The
work is so extensive that every member ought to engage in
it. lam no advocate for ill-informed persons taking upon
themselves the work of spiritual instruction ; but there are
some tilings which even those of the meanest understand-
ings are quite competent to perform. Let any hearer
whose neighbour never goes to church at all, ask him to go
with him to hear about his soul and about Christ; let him
inform his minister and elder of all new comers that they
* Such questions as the following were wont to be put to elders
at Presbyterial visitations : —(I) Do you worship God in your fami-
lies, morning and evening? (2) Do you visit the sick in your
quarters, and pray with them ? (3) Do you take notice of the families
in your quarter, if they maintain and keep up the worship of God?
( 4) Is there any scandal in your quarter ? (5) Do you exhort parents
to put their children to school? (6) Do you exhort and admonish
persons in private before you delate them before the session ? (7)
Do you instruct your children and families in the knowledge of the
principles of religion ? (8) Do you notice such persons and families
as are in worldly straits ? (9) Are you faithful in admitting and
debarring when the roll of the congregation is read before the session.


may at once be attended to ; let him rebuke friends or
neighbours whom he finds yielding to sin. Thus may even
the humblest, if their hearts are rightly influenced, do
much for the cause of Christ. Truly, it requires all the
energies of all the people that can be brought to engage in
it. Time is rapidly passing away. Many are dying for
whom nothing has been done ; many are being born with
the dismal prospect of growing up in ignorance, and of
becoming pests to society. Who can duly estimate how
unfavourable the existing state of things in many parts of
the interior is to the interests of religion ? There is no
preaching, no family worship, no religious education. The
sabbath, except as a day of recreation, will soon be all but
unknown. This state of things will bear its bitter fruits
at no distant day in this world, and none can adequately
depict its awful consequences in eternity.
ITT. Another foe against which we have to contend is
Spiritual Deadxuss in the Church. Religious duties are
apt to degenerate into a lifeless form. Are we ourselves in
a lively state spiritually considered ? Ido not suppose that
those who take the most favourable view of religion in the
colony generally, and in out Church particularly, will
affirm that it is in a flourishing condition.
Spiritual deadness is manilested by the intense wordli-
ness that so generally prevails. The love of wealth ex-
ercises a powerful sway over the habits of the colony.
Business is everything. Everything must be sacrificed to
it. It is the constant subject of conversation when friends
meet. It haunts the mind, it is to be feared, when the
solemn duties of religion are to be observed. There is no
time for prayer—none for self-improvement—none for
doing good to others. Such a state of things may please
the worldly-wise, but is anything but satisfactory to the
Christian. The worldly spirit shows itself in the want of
liberality to the cause of Christ and to the poor; although
I do not think we are inferior to our triends at home in this
respect. Throughout the whole of Christendom is it not sad
to find how few examples there are of men consecrating
a just proportion of their substance to the cause of Christ ?
Why do not many of our rich men sell all that they have,
and go to proclaim the glad tidings of salvation to the


perishing heathen ? If men were in earnest about the sal-
vation of souls and the glory of God, there would not be
such miserable contributions cast into the treasury of the
Lord. What is given is too frequently bestowed to keep
conscience quiet, rather than from burning love for Christ
and for souls.
Spiritual deadness is also manifested by the irregular
and heartless manner in which duties are performed. The
attendance on sabbath is fair : at the prayer-meeting gene-
rally miserable, Meetings for prayer amonst members are
but few. Religious fellowship is at a very low ebb. When
meetings are held amongst each other, anything and every
thing but religion is talked of. You would never know
from these that men have souls to be saved—that Christ in
the Saviour, waiting to save sinners. Religion is certainly
not all duty—not all prayer, or reading, or meditation, or
speaking; but it can no more exist in this life without
these than you can be here without a body. These duties
are, as it were, the embodiment of religion. Wherever it
exists, there they will be ; wherever they are not, there it
cannot be. The body may exist without the soul; so there
may be prayer-meetings, family worship, religious educa-
tion where there is no true religion. It has all the appear-
ance, but it wants the reality of life. Is the work of con-
viction and conversion going on amongst us ? Are our
Sabbaths days of enjoyment to believers, and full of re-
freshing power to thirsty souls ? Unquestionably, where
the Gospel is telling upon our hearers, there will be a spirit
of inquiry abroad; and the external services will not be
regarded as the whole of religion. Surely the state of our
churches on this subject calls for solemn searching of
hearts, unfeigned repentance, and earnest prayer. We
may have well-filled churches, liberal contributions, regu-
lar ministrations, and the whole machinery of our Presby-
terian constitution in good working order ; but what will
this profit if the spirit has fled, and souls are still dead in
trespasses and sins! Our preaching is vain. The great
end of our ministry has not been gained. The Gospel has
proved a savour of death. The Lord in mercy grant that
these solemn matters may weigh upon our spirits, and lead
to a corresponding change in ourselves and in our people.


It is farther maniifested in our want of the fruits of the
Spirit, such as “ loove, peace, long-suffering, gentleness.”
Christians, and espeecially ministers of the Word, are ex-
pected to exhibit a s superior morality to that of the world.
Many of what we maay call the external virtues exist in no
ordinary degree amoraigst those who make no profession of
religion. They are f amiable in social intercourse, strictly
honourable in busineess, liberal in their contributions to the
poor, and carefully aabstain from slandering the character
of a friend, and frorm misrepresenting or taking a mean
advantage of an opponent. What will such persons think
when those calling themselves Christians and Christian
ministers often act very differently ? Want of brotherly
love is one of the imost crying evils in the church of the
present day. When the old saying can be reversed into,
“ Behold, "how these Christians hate one another,” we may
depend upon it that religion is at a very low ebb. Chris-
tianity teaches us to) control our tempers ; but what can
men think of members and office-bearers of the Church in
Synod, or Presbytery, or congregation assembled, when
they speak and act (and that not seldom) under the influ-
ence of strong, if not violent, passion ? when they are back-
ward in confessing an error committed by them, or in for-
giving an injury that has been inflicted upon them ? We
cannot atone for such grievous faults by the soundness of
our creed, the length of our prayers, or the warmth of our
zeal for what we regard as the truth of God. Those who are
totally ignorant of the power of religion are quick enough
to perceive that, if we show little love to man, we cannot
have much to God ; that if we habitually neglect the ele-
mentary virtues, it is not likely that we have learnt the
higher lesson of vital godliness. The inconsistencies of
professing Christians are the most successful of all attacks
upon Christianity; and the example of a bright, cheerful,
self-denie d and holy life, its most successful apology.
Let us, in humble dependence upon the Divine blessing,
exhibit the utmost conscientiousness in the discharge of
every ministerial duty; let us maintain a guard over the
state of our hearts ; let us ever seek close communion with
God in our closets; and let all the members ofevery flock
feel that we seek not theirs but them




, v< v -
6i$L 10 - -
f mq . ■ '• ■
,A/2
•
•
, ' •/
*
. ,
<
, ,
; v. *
.
.
/ *'
9
i • ‘
/
■*
■
