

THE PETITION
OF CERTAIN APPLICANTS FOE
MINERAL CLAIMS,
WiLKAWATj NEAR TIPARA.
THE REPORT UPON THE SAME.
Ordered to he Printed by the Honorable House of Assembly;
AND SOME
REMARKS ON THAT REPORT;
TOGETHER WITH A SKETCH OF THE POSITION NOW ASSUMED
BY THE OCCUPANTS AND CLAIMANTS OF THOSE
MINERAL CLAIMS,
BY A PETITIONER.
ADELAIDE, SOUTH AUSTRALIA, JANUARY, 1863,




THE PETITION
OF CERTAIN APPLICANTS FOE
MINERAL CLAIMS,
WILKAWAT, NEAR If ASA.
THE REPORT UPON THE SAME.
Ordered to he Printed hy the Honorable House of Assembly;
AND SOME
R MARKS ON THAT REPORT;
TOGETHER WITH A SKETCH OP THE POSITION NOW ASSUMED
BY THE OCCUPANTS AND CLAIMANTS OP THOSE
MINERAL CLAIMS.
BY A PETITIONER.
ADELAIDE, SOUTH AUSTRALIA, JANUARY, 1803.




THE
PETITION, REPORT, &c.
OF THE
WILKAWAT CLAIMANTS.
THE PETITION.
Ordered by the House of Assembly to be printed, Sept. 30, 1869.
Petition from Promoters of Mitford Mining Adventure, together with
Surveyor-General’s Report thereon, accompanied by various Maps and
Diagrams ; also, Reports, &c., relative to receiving Applications for
Mineral Leases before Office Hours.
To the Honorable the House of Assembly in Parliament assembled—
The humble petition of the undersigned persons, interested in certain
jnineral claims at Tipara :
Sheweth—
That your petitioners did, on the fifth day of June, one thousand eight hun-
dred and sixty-one, apply at the Crown Lands Office for four mineral claims at
Wilkawat, near Tipara, on Yorke’s Peninsula.
That your petitioners' application was not received.
That your petitioners were told, by the clerk in the Land Office, that the only
Bald Hill near Tipara, on the map then exhibited in the office, was distant from
the sea-coast twelve miles; and your petitioners were further informed “ that if
the bearings of the claims they then applied for were taken from that point the
said claims would cover the ground already applied for by Peters, Taylor, and
others, on the twenty-fifth day of May, and the third day of June, one thousand
eight hundred and sixty »one."
That your petitioners were, therefore, advised to communicate again with their
explorer, in order to amend the terms of their application; and the explorer
replied “ that he could not amend the application nor alter the bearings, as it was
substantially correct.”
That your petitioners did again apply on the eleventh day of June, one thou-
sand eight hundred and sixty-one—for mineral claims on the same terms, and
with the same bearings, as contained in their application of the fifth day of June,
and that this second application was approved and confirmed by the Honorable
the Commissioner of Crown Lands, in a letter dated the twenty-sixth day of
June, one thousand eight hundred and sixty-one.
That your petitioners did, on the eighteenth day of July, one thousand eight
hundred and sixty-one, communicate to the Honorable the Commissioner of
Crown Lands that the claims near Tipara, so granted to them, were then occupied by
others, who claimed a right so to do; and the Honorable tbe Commissioner of
Crown Lands then informed your petitioners “ that the official maps in the survey
office were utterly incorrect.”
That on the same day your petitioners were assured by the Surveyor-General
“ that the application of Peters, dated the twenty-fifth day of May, one thousand
eight hundred and sixty-one, was ‘word for word’ the same as the application of


your petitioners of tile fifth day of June, one thousand eight hundred and sixty-
one ; and that the maps in the survey office were perfectly accurate in all
respects.”
That your petitioners then asked permission to inspect the said application of
Peters, dated the twenty-fifth day of May; that this request was very decidedly
ref used ; and that every subsequent request made by your petitioners to examine
this application has been met by peremptory denial.
That your petitioners did, on the seventeenth day of July, forward to the
Honorable the Commissioner of Crown Lands a letter containing a protest against
Hughes and others being allowed to occupy or work the ground applied for by
your petitioners —which letter is now declared to be lost; and also that many
other maps, plans, and letters ordered to be laid on the table of your Honorable
House have not been produded ; amongst others, a letter granting the application
of your petitioners for the mineral claims at Tipara, now occupied by Hughes
and others, and also their leases.
That your petitioners complain, that the Surveyor-General did afterwards go
to Tipara, on the fifteenth day of August, and placed Walter Watson Hughes, or
his agent, on the precise ground applied for by your petitioners ; and that, by so
doing, your petitioners were prevented and deprived of all power to undertake a
proper survey of their claims in accordance with the terms of the mineral lease
regulations.
That the Surveyor-General did also assure your petitioners “that they need
not waste their money or time in making a survey—as their survey, if made
would not be accepted ; that Peters’s application being prior to theirs of the fifth
day of June, therefore you* - petitioners’ application was null and void; and that
they had no claims at Tipara to survey.”
That on the fourth day of November, one thousand eight hundred and sixty -
one, Mr Fenn obtained permission to examine the application ofPeters (dated
the twenty-fifth day of May) ; and it was then discovered, to their great surpprise
that the wording of that application did not coincide with the statement of the
Surveyor-General to your petitioners, on the eighteenth day of July, and that
this application of Peters described a place entirely distinct, and about five miles
distant from the claims applied for by your petitioners.
That your petitioners were informed, by letter from the Crown Lands Office*
dated the twenty-eighth day of November, one thousand eight hundred and
sixty-one, that the claims applied for by your petitioners on the fifth day of June,
and the eleventh day of June, one thousand eight hundred and sixty-one were
declared forfeited ; whereas your petitioners believe that no forfeiture could be
incurred of that which, according to the statement of the Honourable the Com-
missioner of Crown Lands and the Surveyor-General, your petitioners never were
entitled to hold or claim.
That your petitioners complain, that certain leases were granted to Messieurs
Hughes and others for mineral claims that were applied for and granted to your
petitioners; that these leases were executed and ready for delivery fifteen days or
thereabouts, previous to the expiration of the time allowed to your petitioners
according to the mineral leases regulations, before any forfeiture could be incurred;
and that forfeiture being declared shows distinctly that the original right of your
petitioners, to the claims in question, is acknowledged by the Honourable the Com-
missioner of Crown Lands.
That your petitioners further complain, that, in defiance of the official state-
ment made on the fifth day of June, “that Peters and Taylor’s claims were
about twelve miles from the sea coast” (as shown on the official map at that date),
Messieurs Peters and Taylor, or their agents, do now occupy ground only four
miles from the coast, which ground is precisely the same as that applied for by
your petitioners, and granted to them, on the twenty-sixth day of June; and
mat Peters (or Hughes),or his agents, do now hold leases for four mineral Sections
which never were applied for by him or them, and which, therefore, your petiti-
oners believe to be illegally held.


That your petitioners would resepectively draw the attention of your Hon-
orable House to the remarkable fact, that Hughes’s surveyor is, as seen by the
printed correspondence, continually obliged to alter his survey fixings, on the first
day of June, the third day of June, the sixth day of June, the twelfth day of
June, and the first day of July (continually correcting “ errors of consider-
able extent”) ; and finally, that he is obliged to call in the assistance of the Sur-
veyor-General to place him anywhere; whereas your petitioners further most
respectively call the attention of your Honorable House to the important fact, that
the diagram handed by them to the officials in the Land Office, oh the fifth day
of June, forwarded from Wallaroo by their explorer on the fourth day of Ju e,
lias never undergone the slightest variation or alteration.
That your petitioners complain that, in consequence of the irregular conduct of
the Government, the acknowledged defective state of the maps by the Honorable
the Commissioner of Crown Lands, together with his totally ignoring the protest
sent to him, under date the seventeenth day of July, by your petitioners, they
have received a very great wrong, a serious injury, and have sustained very great
pecuniary loss.
That your petitioners humbly submit to your Honorable House that the alle-
gations contained in this petition can be most entirely substantiated.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly pray, that your Honorable House will
cause such enquiry to be made into the circumstances, and such relief to be afforded
to your petitioners as to your Honorable House may seem fit.
And your petitioners will ever pray, &c., &c.
M. PHILLIPSON, Chairman.
EUSTACE R. MIT FORD, Explorer.
R. CUSSEN, per T. L. G.
B. J. PRICE )
DANIEL HARROLD ] Comnilttee-
\V. MORGAN
W. W. GALL
J. LAWRANCE
HENRY STOODART
THOS. L, GOODE.
Promoters of the Wallaroo and Milford Mining
Adventure.
Ordered by the House to “be referred to the Surveyor-General for his im -
mediate report”
J. N. 8.,
Clerk Assistant, &c., House of Assembly.
Idth September, 1862.
Remarks on allegations set forth in a petition to the Hon. the House of Assembly
respecting mines at Tipara, Yorke’s Peninsula, accompanied by a report showing,
the order in which the mineral claim were applied for between the 24th day of
May and 20th day of June, 1831, arranged according to date of application and
priority of claim; showing also the circumstances under which the first survey
■Was made, and the means adopted to attest its accuracy.
Prepared by order of the House,
96th September, 1862. G. W. GOYDER, Surveyor-General.
REPORT
Report fo the Honorable the House of Assembly on Allegations set forth in a
Petition to the House respecting mineral claims in the neighbourhood of
Tipara , Yorke’s Peninsula. Laid on the table of the House on the \lth
September , 1862.
Surveyor-General’s Office, 26th September, 1862.
Gentlemen—Aordered by the House, I have the honor to report the case of


the petitioners rests upon the truth of the allegations set forth in their memorial.
It is indispensible, therefore, that whilst acknowledged the accuracy of some of
the statements, those that are erroneous should also be referred to; and in order
that the House obtain data, to enable it to decide upon what further action is ne-
cessary, that such reference be supplemented by a brief reveiw of the circumstances
under which claims have been made and leases issued in the locality specified.
The allegations contained in the petition are fifteen in number:—
The first asserts that the petitioners made application on the sth day of June
1861, for four mineral claims at Wilkawat, Yorke’s Peninsula.
The second—That the applications were not received.
The third—That the only Bald Hill on the office maps was twelve miles from
the coast; and that the bearings given placed the lands an those previousely applied
for by Peter, Taylor, and others, on the 25th day of May and 3rd day of June,
1861.
Tlie fourth—That petitioners were advised to communicate again with their
explorer to amend the description; but that such being already accurate could not
be amended.
With referrence to these statements it is only necessary that I should remark—that none
of the petitioners having applied to lease any mineral lands at or near Tipara before the
11th day June, 1861, all transactions stated to have taken place on the sth day of June,
with reference to those claims, must necessarily be false.
The fifth allegations sets forth that on the 11th day of June, 1861, the petition-
ers again applied for the four claims on the same terms, and giving the same bear-
ing as those stated to have been contained in their applications of the sth day of
the same month, and that such second application was approved by the Commis-
sioner of Grown Lands on the 26th of that month.
This statement is in part true, as the petitioners did, but for the first time, lodge four
mineral claims on the 11th day of June ; so little value, however, did they even then
appear to attach to the discovery, that they omitted to complete the applications by
paying the fees as provided in Clause lof the Mineral Lease Regulations—and it was
not until the 19th day of the same month that those fees were paid by Mr. Cussen —
though the Chief Clerk in the Lands Office had informed him on more occasions than
one that, until such had been done, the claims were incomplete. It will thus be seen
that the claims were presented at the Land Office, in the first instance, on the 11th June;
but the fees not having been paid until the 19th of the same month, they were not
brought to me by the Chief Clerk for inspection until after that date, when, perceiving
that the fixings given placed the lands over those already granted to Elder, Peter,
and Day, I declined to receive them, informing Mr. Cussen that they were identical
with others already granted. It was replied by Mr, Cussen that it was not the Bald
Hill shown upon the Government map that was referred to in the claims (although
Hughes’s Hill was therein named), but some other hill not yet shown. Understanding
such to be the case, I informed Mr. Cussen that I would receive the claims con-
ditionally, and recommend that time be allowed to prove their statement.
On the 24th day of June, I forwarded the four claims for the consideration of the
Government, with the following report—of the substance of which Mr. Cussen was well
aware—namely, <c The fixing given would place this claim on lands already applied for.
Applicant states, however, that the Bald Hill is some other hill not shown on the
Government plans; I recommend, therefore, that he be allowed a fortnight to fix the
position cf the hill named, provided that his claim is not allowed to interfere with others
made during the interim.—G. W. Goyder, Surveyor-General.—24-6-61.” On the 26th
of the same month the claims were approved by the Commissioner, subject to the con-
ditions named in my recommendation, and the applicant informed accordingly.
The sixth allegation notifies that the Commissioner of Crown Lands was ap-
prizied that other persons occupied the Tipara claims, who stated that they had
a rght to do so; and that petitioners were informed by the Commissioner “ that
the official maps in the Survey Office were utterly incorrect.”
The former portion of the statement is true ; as occupation had been continued by the
original discoverers from the first. With respect to the latter portion, I would merely
observe, that, as one plan and one plan only has been used in the Land Office for the
record of mineral claims in the neighborhood of Tipara, since the 7th day of June, 1861
—viz., four clear days prior to the claims of the petitioners being lodged in the Land
Office—a misstatement so palpably absurd can have nothing whatever to do with the
subject.


The seventh allegation states that the Surveyor-General on the same day in-
formed the petitioners that Peters’s application of the 25th May was word for
word with theirs of the sth of June ; and that the survey maps were perfectly
accurate in all respects. , . . _ . ,
To this I would reply, that it was simply impossible for me to compare Peter •
claims of the 2 >th of May with others in the same locality, made on the sth day of
June, when the latter claims had no existence. With respect to the survey maps,
every care is taken to ensure their accuracy. I make no secret, however, that many ot
them are merely what they are stated to be, viz., mere approximations of the truth.
The eighth allegation asserts that access to Peter’s applications was, in every in-
stance, refused to the petitioners.
This is perfectly true; and it is to be regretted that so stringent a precaution is
indispensably necessary to defeat the machinations of persons that are to be found who do
not hesitate to take advantage of misdescription to deprive the original claimants of the
benefits arising from their discoveries—however important or insignificant they may
happen to be.
The ninth allegation states that the protest against Hughes and others being
allowed to occupy was sent to the Commissioner, which letter, is now declared to be
lost; and that many other maps, plans, and letters, ordered to be laid on the ta-
ble of the House, have not been produced, and amongsts others, the letter gran-
ting the application of the petitioners and the leases of the lands at Tipara.
With reference to the above, I may state that the receipt of the protest is admitted,
although the letter appears to be mislaid or lost. So far as I recollect, no action was
taken upon receipt of the protest, on my recommendation ; as, from a survey made by
myself, I was aware that the lessees were in rightful occupation, and that the petitioners
had no more right there than persons who, seeing a good thing after it had been disco-
vered by others, hope to obtain a share by importunity and misrepresentation. The
only other document that has been withheld is the letter of conditional approval, sent by
the Commissioner to Mr. Cussen; and this, f would respectfully submit, should have
been furnished by the petitioners, to whom it was forwarded on the 26th of June ; but
as its production would, in all probability, show too surely the nature of the transaction
in which the petitioners are engaged, their prudence in withholding it is easily accounted
The tenth allegation asserts that the Surveyor-General, on the 15 th day of
August, 1861, placed W. W. Hughes in possession of the lands petitioners ap-
plied for, and that, consequently, they were deprived of the power to make the
survey of their mineral claims, as required by the Mineral Lease Regulations.
To this assertion I can only reiterate that it was only on the positive assurance of Mr.
Cussen, that the claims made by him did not include the lands previously applied for
by Captain Hughes or his agents, that they were even conditionally received, as the
fixings on the face or the claims contradicted the statement made by that gentleman—
and I may be permitted to doubt if Mr. Cussen has ever authorized his signature to be
appended* to any document where the contrary is stated.
The petitioners are wrong in stating that I placed anyone in possession of the land in
question, as, when I made a survey from Wallaroo to the Moonta, to test the
accuracy of the position of claim 930, I found that claim to be correctly marked upon
the ground, and merely intimated the fact to those then in possession ; and, as the
petitioners were bound by the conditional approval to show that the land claimed
by them was not that previously claimed by others, on or before the tenth of July, I do
not see how my testing the accuracy of a private survey in the middle of August could in
any way interfere with operations that ought to have been completed at least one month
before.
The eleventh allegation sets forth that the Surveyor-General assured the peti-
tioners that they need not waste their money in making a survey which would not
berecepted—as Peter’s claim being prior to theirs of the Sth day of June, those
of petitioners were null and void.
Such, assuredly, would be the advice I would have preferred, on ascertaining from the
petitioners that the lands including their alleged discovery were in reality those pre-
viously claimed by Peter; but I never saw, at least to know, any of the petitioners at
Wallaroo or Moonta, and deny most positively that they ever made any claim at the
Government Land Office for mineral lands at or near Tipara on the sth day of June.
Mr. Cussen’s name to petition appears to be appended by “T.L.G.”—G.W.G.


This denial I consider necessary, as 1 perceive that the petitioners dwell upon this utterly
false statement as frequently as it can be introduced—and, when it is so often repeated,
the fact that their claims were not officially noticed until the 19th of June, when the
application fees were paid, is liable to be lost sight of.
The twelfth allegation states that, on the 4th day of November, 1861, the docu-
ment shown to Mr. Fenn did not coincide with the Surveyor-General’s statement
made on the 18th July, and that Peter described a place entirely distinct, and about
miles distant from the claims applied for by the petitioners.
I have already stated, in rjply to thj s-vrnth allegation, that it was simply impossible
for me to compare the description on Peter’s claims with those made by the petitioners on
the 6th June, when no such claims existed.
I will elsewhere show that the discovery claimed by Peter was that included in the
survey of the claims applied for by him on the 25th day of May, 1861.
The thirteenth allegation asserts the petitioners were informed by letter, on the
28th November, 18 >l, that the claims applied for on the sth day of June and the
11th day of June, 1831, were declared forfeited; whereas no forfeiture could take
place of that which, according to the statement of the Commissioner of Crown
Lands and the Surveyor-General, had no existence.
In tho letter alluded to {vide 1711-61, Council Paper No. 190) no reference whatever
is made to claims dated the sth day of June ; Mr. Mitfod it is true, in his letter to the
Commisioner dated November 25th, 1861, refers tp claims made on that date by a Mr.
Price (vide Council Paper No. 190), but I repeat emphatically that no such claims were
made on that date. VV hen a mineral application is made a fee of £b is paid, as provided
by clause 1 of the Mineral Regulations, and the accountant in the Crown Lands Office,
issu es receipts for such fees ; these documents (if they exist) should be in the possession
of the petitioners, but they do not exist.
As respects th forfeiture of those applied for on the 19th June, I can only suppose that
the Honorable the Commissioner, utterly disgusted by the unscrupulous statements of the
petitioners, and anxious to adopt what appeared at the mom~nt the rediest mode of termi-
nating attempts on the part of the petitioners to obtain the advantages thi'y were in no way
entitled to. give orders to conditionally,and the terms of tl ose conditions the petitioners
were well aware, preclud ;d them from the first from taking the lands alluded to—that is,
those previously applied for, and surveyed before their claims were even lodged in the
Land Office.
The fourteenth allegation sets forth the complaint that the leases were granted
to Messrs. Hughes and others previous to the time allowed in the Regulations in
which forfeiture could be incurred by the petitioners; that the declaration of for-
feiture shows that (he Commissioner allowed the prior right of petitioners to the
claims; and that in defiance of the official statement made on the sth day of June,
Peter and Taylor, or their agents, hold lands four miles from the sea-coast, in-
stead of about twelve miles, as shown on the official map of that date; and that the
leases are thereby illegally held.
As I cannot reason the peculiar manner adopted by the petitioners. I shall confine myselt
to the following remarks with leference to the above, namely —I consider that the leases were
properly granted, and are accurate in every respect; that the petitioners’ claims being only
conditionally allowed, and on the distinct understanding that they did not include lands
previously applied for by others, and that proof to that effect should be afforded by t lem
within fourteen days from the date of such conditional approval, their attempt to set up a
claim to such land is absurd; that the alledged odicial statement was never made to tem
on the sth day of une. 1861, or any other day before or since, the wording of refer s
claim b ’ing a sufficient contradiction to such statement, irrespective of the proof ere
afforded that no claims were made by the petitioners on hat date, and my distinct assever-
ation that I ever saw nr held any conversation with any of the petitioners upon me su vj-ct
of such claims qnthe date specified ; and that no plan in his office—at all rj * jrr - |° * n
any way on the subject of mineral claims—.-.bowed the claims taken out by i eters 0 e
twelve miles from th ■ sea coast. , .
The fifteenth allegation draws attention to the fact that Hughes s surveyor is
continually correcting errors of considerable extent, and finally, that he is oblige
to cal! in the assistance of the Surveyor-General to place him anywhere ; whereas
the diagram forwarded hy the petitioners from their explorer on the 4th day or
June, 1861, and handed hy them to the officials in the Land Office on the sth or
June, 1 61, has never undergone the slightest variation or alteration. And tia
by non-attention to their protest, &c.‘ the petitioners have suffered very great pe-


cuniary ioss, and finally, that the allegations sets forth can be most entirely sub-
stantiated.
To the above allegations I beg to say, that the discrepancies referred to by Mr. Young,
the surveyor, are of the most trivial nature, and will be fully explained in my report.
With reference to the plan said to be deposited by the petitioners, I can but assert
that no plan was ever handed by any of the petitioners to myself, or to the Chief Clerk
in the Land Office, referring to claims at or near Tipara, on or after the sth day of June,
1861. Had such existed, it would have been referred to in the claims lodged on the 11th,
and completed on the 19th of that month by Mr. Cussen.
If it is pretended by the petitioners that the diagram marked No. 1. page 12 of Council
Paper No. 190, is a copy of such document, it is then to be regretted that the description
thereon given, should differ so materially, as it does, from that shown on the claims made
by Mr. Cussen.
Finally, I do not believe that the petitioners suffer any loss whatever beyond what is
justly entailed upon persons attempting to obtain the property belonging to others ; and
I utterly repudiate the possibility of the petitioners proving the truth of the allegations
set forth, and beg respectively to state, that had I seen Mr, Mitford’s letter, dated 26th
January. 1861 (P 62), vide Council Paper No. 190, on an earlier date, I should have ur-
ged upon the Government the propriety of prosecuting that individual, or have left the
service in order that I could have done so myself.
In reporting genarally upon the subject, I now beg to state that the first claims in the
locality above referred to were made by Mr. W. S. Peter, on behalf of Captain Hughes,
on the 25th day of May, 1861, and described as being abouf eight or ten miles north of
Tipara, and south of the Bald Hill, on Yorke’s Peninsula.
This description was apprehended at my request, as neither Mr. Peter nor Captain
Hughes were then able to give a more definite fixing—the claims being made on receipt of
information from one of Hughes’s shepherds at Wallaroo, from him, in the hurry of the
transaction, a more detailed description had not been obtained. This vagueness was
preferred by me, until an accurate survey could be made, as it protected more effectually
the original discoverers from the action of speculative claims, made by persons in the
habit of securing blocks of mineral lands around any reputed discovery of value, on the
bare chance of profiting by its extent, or the misdescrption of the locality by the first ap-
plicants—a practice so frequently adopted as to render it indispensible that priority of
application should form an essential element in the approval and settlement of mineral
claims.
Knowing that the claims made by Peter would be surrounded by applications of this
nature immediately they became known, I instructed the chief clerk in the Land Office
to make them as little conspicious as possible, until the position was accurately fixed,
and at the same time recommend Hughes to have the survey made as early as it could
conveniently be done ; and, though the Regulations allowed three months in which to
effect the survey, it was completed within eight days, and the diagram reached the Sur-
vey Office on the morning of the 3rd June, the surveyor, Mr. G. D. Young, sending at
the same time to his employers, data to enable them to take out twenty-six additional bjocks
making a total of thirty claims, which the original four made by Peter formed a conspicuous
portion, and were fixed by a base line and bearings to a marked mallee tree situated as
shown on plan 4> herewith, and also by bearings and the point A on the base line to
Warburta and Nalyappa Points. The error in the scale, alluded to in Mr. Young’s
letter of the 3rd June (Council Paper 190), is of no importance, as not only does the dia-
gram contain bearings and distances which would enable the scale to be dispenced with,
but the space occupied by the whole figure and area of the combined and respective claims
are means by which such an error could at once be rectified-
On this plan, the point A on base line is also intended to represent the first discovery
at Tipara—and it is to be borne in mind that this survey was completed, and the diagram
had reached my office before any claims from others were sent in.
I may here remark that it is portion of my duty, as Surveyor-General, to verify all
diagrams of survey sent in by licensed surveyors, and that, after verification, such plans,
are accepted by the Government as correct —as provided in section 2 of Act 13 of 1859
In pursuance of this duty, I note in my memory the conspicious features in all diagrams
that come before me ; and, as my acceptance or rejection of such diagrams is decisive,
great care is taken by me to act witn the strictest impartiality to all—and, knowing the
important results that must necessarily follow the slightest deviation on my part from
exteme rectitude, more especially where mineral properties are concerned, I made an un-
deviating rule, from the date of my appointment, never to hold the slightest pecuniary in-
terest in mines, or to receive the smallest emolument, either direct or indirect, from those
with whom my duty brought me in contact; and it is gratifying to be able to state that


in no single instance have I ever swerved from this rule, ev en in the most minute
particular.
On receipt of this plan I observed that, up to the date of its deposit namely, the third
of June, 1861, but one discovery of copper had been made in that locality, namely, that
claimed by Mr, Peter. This discovery was, by the plan sent in, unmistakely connected
wit i a certain marked tree ; and I gave instructions that a plan should be prepared
showing Peter's cl liras in connection with such tree, reserving to myself, the verification
of the diagram until the tree so marked should be identified, not only with the discovery
but also with surveyed claims at Wallaroo, the position of which had been accurately
ascertained and correctly deslineated upon the Land Office plans—the plan so prepared
to form the basis upon which all subsequent claims in that locality should be laid down.
Saortly after the opening of the Land office, on the 3rd of June, Air. John Taylor
entered and made application for twenty-six blocks of mineral lands adjoining those pre-
viously taken out, as shown on plan A above alluded to ; and whilst those claims were
being received lentered the Land Office, and seeing Mr. Wills with some freinds there I
askel what he wanted, an 1 ascertained that he wished to make some mineral claims near
Tipara, and immediately proffered my services to aid him ; but neither him nor his
friends seemed to know anything of the locality, but ultimately agreed to fix them by
the corner of a pastoral claims leased or applied for by Hughes. On completion of Taylor’s
applications I sent Mr. Mills to the Chief Clerk, who subsequently received application
from him for 6 eighty-acre blocks. Mills was followed by Painter, who also applied lor
an equal number of blocks east and west and adjoining those of Taylor’s, for Messrs.
Fulcher, Rankine, and others. No more claims in that locality were made on that date.
I may here state that Mills and his friends subsequently made a charge against the
Chief Clerk in the Land Office, to effect that he had admitted Mr. Taylor by the back
way into the office before it was open to the public. This charge I deeply regretted on
Mr. O’Halloran’s account, he being athoroughly conscientious and most painstaking offi-
cer. That charge was, however, investigated, and is best met by the correspondence,
certified copies of which are herewith forwarded in document marked “ B ”
On the 4th day of June, claims were made by Messrs. Mayo and Phillips, lohn Day,
and McCarthy and Fisher, for lands adjoining those previously applied for by Taylor
and Hughes. On the sth, 6th, and 7th, by Mayo, Phillips, Aldridge, Birrell, and
others. On the llthand 13th, by'Clark, Henderson, and Poole; and, on the 19th, by
E. K. Horn, C. S. Poole, and R. Cussen,
Having now specified the respective applications prior to those whose claims are now
under consideration, I will return to the subject of the survey Jbefore dealing further with
the question.
Under date June 6th, 1861, I received from Mr. Young, from Wallaroo, the rough
plan marked C, giving a connexion with point A, the marked tree, and surveyed claims
at Wallaroo. Vde page 8, Council Paper 190, where Mr. Young states that he has
given, as correctly as circumstances will permit, the distance from A to the tree on the Bald
Hill, which he considers better than a trig. pole. He al.o suggests the possibility of having
made a mistake in the chaining to the extent of one,tally, or ten chains, although he be-
lieves no such error to have occurred.
On the 12th of June, 11, from Watervale, the plan marked D wasjsent; and from
Wallaroo, under date Ist July, 1861, the plan marked E.
In the correspondence several errors are alluded to. In one case, Mr. Young omits
a figure in his chainage of links, but it '» on an intermed ate distance from wham* a bearing
was observed that not in any w>y affect the question ; and there is but * difference of six-
ty links in the lengths of the whole lines in his last survey from that dated 6th June, so
that, pract cally speaking, the rough plan forwarded on that date, with that one sent in
on the Ist of June, would have been sufficient for all purposes, except the detail survey of
the respective boundaries of each claim; and as I never, under ordinary circumstances,
limit a surveyor, in defining a mineral claim, to two chains, unless where he is surroun
ded by the claims of others prev ously defined, it may be allowed that the latitude of six
ty or seventy links was not excessive in a distance of upwards of seven miles. Mr.
Youngs’plans, however, remained in abeyance, as Mr. Painter had discovered a large
lode ot copper south-east of Peter’s original claim, which he supposed to be on one of
those taken by Futcher and Rankine.
My experience induced me to warn Mr. Painter not to be too sanguine, as, from his
description and my recollection of fixings already supplied me, I had reason to believe
that the newdiccovery was still within the boundary of one of Peter’s original claims. I
at once supplied Mr. Painter, however, with the necessary data and he made a detailed
survey, carefully going over Mr. Young’s work and confirmed its accuracy, though such
had been his confidence and that of the party whom he represented, that they had r


ready made extensive arrangements for working the mine. The discovery proved to be,
as suggested by me, on one of Peter’s original claims. This latter discovery is now
known as the Moonta Mine. , _ , . „ ,
The documents marked F, G,and H are certified copies of Peter s first claim, Cussen s
first claim, and a tracing of a portion of a plan in the I , and Office as it existed when Mr.
Cussen made his application, of which the plan marked K is a sketch drawn to scale.
The latter document, placed in position over the copy of the Land Ofhee plan, will
show at once how utterly absurd it would have been for me to have recommended his claim
for approval without the condition shown on his application, and which Mr. Mitfordhas
the unparallelled assurance to insinuate that I interpolated cunningly to deprive him of
his discovery—though he took care, when in my presence with Mr. Fenn, to let no such
hint drop, and at the same time wilfully shut his eyes to the fact that the Commissioner s
conditional aproval that the Secretary’s signature bore dates subsequent to that of my
minute (vide document marked G). Did the petition possess fewer signatures I should
not then hesitate to characterize the document as it deserves; but there are the names of
persons included that I should be sorry to think would be appended to such a document
did they not suppose its allegations could be substantiated ; under which circumstances I
must be c ntent tn let the statements go lor what they are worth ;jfeeling satisfied that the
Honorable the House of Assembly has adopted the only course by which the truth could
be easily obtained. , . , , .
I may now be permitted to quote from my report to the Commissioner, under date
August 19th, 1861, the following paragraph, which, with the information already sup-
plied will probably afford sufficient data to set the question at rest.
r “ In accordance with instructions 1 proceeded with as little delay as possible to fix the
position of the claims taked out by Mr. W. S. Peter, at Moonta, about eight miles north
bv east of Tipara, in May last—the accuracy of the survey made by direction of Captain
Hughes, on whose behalf the claims were taken out, having been disputed by other
claimants for mineral lands in the same locality. ...
<t In effecting this object I considered it best to commence the examination from the
claims at Wallaroo, to which the survey was tied ; and thence, by the data supplied, to-
wards the discoveries at Moonta. This method, whilst it enabled me to test the accuracy
of the first survey and portion of that subsequently made by Messrs. McCarthy and
Macgeorge, rendered it unnecessary that I should notice the conflicting statements made
by the persons interested, gave the relative position of points referred to in the respective
diagrams, and established the accuracy of Mr. Young’s survey to within a distanace of
fourteen links; a fact that was at once communicated to the persons assembled to meet
IXl6*
A diagram of the survey made by me is herewith forwarded for the purpose of com-
parison with those of Mr. Young. (See L.) „ . . , , 4
In conclusion, I beg respectfully to thank the House for the honor done me, and to
state that none of my decisions or recommendations have been objected to in this case, or
even questioned by the Hon. the Commissioner of Crown Lands and Immigration.
I have the honor, &c.,
G. W. GOYDER, Surveryor-General.
CORRESPONDENCE.
i oi.fil Crown Lands and Immigration Office, Adelaide,
1 11th September, 1861.
Gentlemen—l have the honor to inform you, in reply to yours of the 28th ultimo,
that leases of Mineral Claims Nos. 900 and 931 are now ready tor execution by tha
lessees. _
X have, (fee#,
E. T. Wildman, Secretary.
Messrs, Elder, Stirling, and Co., Adelaide.
Laid on the table 12th August, 1862.]
1,10 fji Crown Lands and Immigration Office, Adelaide,
1118 - bl * & 26th July, 1861,
Sir—l have the honor to acknowledge your letter of the 17th instant (1321-61*)
relative to the mineral claims made by the Wallaroo and Mitford Adventure Asso-
-01 The Commissioner desires me, in reply, to remind you that in failing to fix the


position of the claims within the fornight allowed you for so doing, you rendered them
liable to forfeiture.
As, however, the Government are unwilling to throw any difficulties in your way,
the Commissioner is willing to grant you an extension of one month from the present
date for fixing their exact position; but on the distinct understanding that the said
claims so to be fixed are entirely subordinate to any claims already made, or to any
that may hereafter be made prior to the receipt and approval of your plan ; and
that you will have no claim of any kind on the Government, arising out of such
extension.
I have, &c.,
E. T, Wild man, Secretary.
Mr. M. Phillipson, Adelaide,
Grenfell-street, July 29, 1861.
Sir—ln reply' to your favour of the 26th, received at half-past eleven o’clock a.m.
of the 27th, I beg to say it is totally at variance with fact, and that Mr. Cussen
and myself had an interview with the Surveyor-General, handing him a diagram
of our claims within the period granted for fixing the position of the claims, and
that they were placed precisely in the same position as we originally claimed on the
sth June.
The pretext of “ failing to fix the position of the claims’’ is therefore incorrect;
and were it even a fact, it is a subterfuge not worthy a Minister of the Crown,
who, instead of acting impartially as an umpire in the disputed claims of the Tipara
district, appears to be an abettor of and using all his influence to make that, which is
known to all outside the office, to be wrong—right for Peters and Taylor.
I ask for nothing hut that our claims of June the sth shall be recognised—your own
officer informing us we were wrong, notwithstanding we handed him a correct diagram
with positive and defined bearings, your own plans incorrect, and, by your admission,
your survey of the Peuinaula in the Crown Lands Office inaccurate ; I therefore cannot
admit you “ are unwilling to throw any difficulties in the way,” but on the contrary, you
want to put every obstactle you possibly can to prevent us and others from being con-
vinced we are wrong; and were you not positive it were otherwise, you would not have
delayed in complying with the request of the Association, contained in mine under
date July the 17th, for the plan of claims as taken out by “ Peters and Taylor, north
of Tipara, on the 23rd of May.” I have further to add, my application for an extension
was made on the 11th, and not on the 17th, and that was only done at the suggestion of
the Surveyor-General, given by him on the 9th.
1 have endeavoured to act in this matter with that courtesy I considered due to the
powers that be: but when there is so much biass shown there is no alternative left but
to be advised by others who are more qualified to give an opinion officially on our claim,
based on our description of diagram submitted to your office on the sth June ; and as
vou have taken our deposit on the basis of that diagram for four mineral sections at
Tipara, I cannot understand your permission of an extension provided we fix our claims
anywhere but where we originally took them—and having received the £5 for each
section, we either expect you will give us all and every information to convince us we
are wrong, or, as an act of justice, but those that are are wrongly placed in their proper
position, and put us us where we have a right to be.
You will therefore probably let me know if yon will instruct the Surveyor-General to
inquire into our claim as given into the Land Office on the sth June, so that I may
direct Mr. Mitford to meet him on the ground to give all information, and point out tho
whereabouts from whence he took his bearings.
I have the honor, &c.,
M. Phillipson,
Chairman of the Wallaroo and Mitford Adventure.
To the Hon. the Commissioner of Crown Lands.
Adelaide, August 5, 1861.
Sir—Not having received any reply to my respective letters under date 27th and
29th ultimo, and hearing the Surveyor-General is leaving Adelaide for Tipara on
Tuesday—say to-morrow —will you inform me if that is the case, so that I may
instruct our explorer, Mr. Mitford, to meet him on the ground on Friday next, and
there personally show him the whereabouts he took his bearings according to the
diagram he transmitted, and which was presented at the office, as before advised, on the
sth of June.


The bearer will wait your reply, as the mail leaves this evening at 5 o’clock.
I have the honor, &c.,
M. Phillipson,
Chairman Wallaroo and Mitford Association.
1179-61, Crown Lands and Immigration Office, Adelaide,
August 6, 1861,
Sir—l am desired by the Commissioner to inform you, in reply to yours of fjie
sth instant,, that the Surveyor-General starts for Wallaroo to-morrow ; but as he
has several matters requiring his attention on the road, it is uncertain when he will be,
at Tipara.
I have the honor, <fcc.,
E. T. Wildman.
Mr. M. Phillipson, Chairman of the Wallaroo and Mitford
Mining Adventure.
Adelaide, 21st November, 1861.
Sir—ln consequence of your permission given to see the applications for mineral
claims lodged by Peters and Taylor in the Land Office, May 23 and 25, or thereabouts,
Mr. Penn and myself waited on the Honorable Surveyor-General.
On a previous occasion (July 18) the Surveyor-General very distinctly stated to Mr.
Phillipson and myself that Peter’s application (May 28) was in wording and in all its
forms precisely the same as that put in by 11. J. Price (June 5), Chairman of Wallaroo
and Mitford Mining Adventures.
The application (Peters’s) produced by the Surveyor-General for Mr. Penn’s inspection
is totally different in wording and in all respects from that of Price’s (June 5), and
no reference whatever to the same locality—Peters’s application (May 23) taking’ position
by a landmark well known in that district, and placed on the map in the Land Office,
and by Tipara; whereas Price’s (June 5) takes position by Kadina, the sea-coast, and
a landmark not known at the Land Office at the date of this application, nor for some
weeks afterwards, which landmark Price was directed to give in a position of that position
beng given at the Land Office (June 29.) As there seems to be a direct variance
between the statement made by the Hon. the Surveyor-General (July 1) as to terms
of Peters’s application and the application produced to Mr. Penn, it would seem pro-
bable that the document then seen was accidentally not the one intended to be produced
—for the purpose required. , .
Should there be arty other application of date, May 23, on the part of Peters, and in
the terms or form alleged by the Hon. Surveyor-General, now in the l and Office, 1
would humbly solicit your permission to be allowed to see the same, as it would render
it quite needless to give you any further trouble.
Mr. Penn being constantly engaged for days in the Supreme Court has prevented an
earlier notice of this presumed mistake.
I have the honor, &c.,
Eustace R. Mitpoed.
The Hon the Commissioner of Crown Lands.
1675-61 Crown Lands and Immigration Office, Adelaide, 25th Nov.. 1861.
Sir—l am desired by the Commissioner to acknowledge receipt of yours of the 21sfc
instuit (2078-61), relative to mineral claims at Tipara, 1039 to 1042, and to inform you
that no further information on the matter can be given.
I have the honor, &c.,
Edwd. T. Wildman,
Secretary Crown Lands and Immigration.
Mr. Eustace R. Mitford, Adelaide.
Grenfell-street, November 25th, 1861.
Sir— U a Committee meeting of the Wallaroo and Mitford Association it was re-
solv’d “That 1 should respectfully call your attention to the enclosed letter from the
explorer E. R. Mitford,” and solicit yonr earliest consideration to the same, with your
immediate reply. H„. the koner, 40.
M. Phillipson, Chairman W. & M. A.
To the Hop. the Commissioner of Crown Lanls,


Adelaide, November 25th, 1861.
Sir—l had the honor of addressing you on the 2lst, requesting to know if any mistake
had been made regarding a particular application for claims (mineral), shown to Mr.
Fenn as Peters’s, of May 23rd, by the Honorable the Surveyor-General, under your
sanction.
From all yet known or seen, it appears that, hitherto, our adventure has sulfered a
great and peculiar wrong—resulting from no fault of omission or commission on our
side.
Guided entirely by the positive statements of the Honorable Surveyor-General,
placing implicit oor.f; 'ence in that gentleman’s word of honor, and relying with assured
safety on tne integrity of his affirmation, we have refrained so far from operating on the
claims applied l.c, zv 1 granted to us ; and have thereby incurred serious present loss
and the probable risk of ultimate damage.
I have to apologize for thus troubling you again, but our adventurers are anxious to
know if any real impediment exists, or ever did exist, that could prevent our taking
immediate possession of the claims applied for, Mr. Price, June sth; and again by
Cussen, June Ilth, 1861.
Respectfully waiting an answer to this.
I have the honor, &c.,
Eustace R. Mitfoed,
Edwardstown, South-road.
To the Hon. the Commissioner of Crown Lands.
1711-61. » Crown Lands and Immigration Office,
Adelaide, 28th November, 1861.
Sir—.l have the honor to acknowledge receipt of your letter of the 25th instant
(2113-61), covering letter from Mr. Mitford relative to the mineral claims alluded to in
his letter of the 2lst instant, addressed to the Commissioner.
I am now instructed to inform you in reply, that any claim with respect to these
sections is forfeited.
I am, &c.,
Edwd. T. Wild man,
Secretary Crown Lands and Immigration.
Mr. M. Phillipson, Chairman of the Wallaroo and Mitford Association, Adelaide.
Gresham-street, Adelaide, 2nd December, 1861.
Sir—Mr. Phillipson, on behalf of the W allaroo and Mitford Mining Association, has
placed in our hands your letter to him of the 25th ultimo, in which you inform him
that the mineral claims therein referred to are forfeited.
We are instructed to request that you will be good enough to state the grounds of
forfeiture, as the claimants are not aware that they have in any manner neglected to
conform to the regulations of the Government with respect to the granting of mineral
leases.
We have the honor, &c.,
Fenn & Bruce.
Edward T. Wildman, Esq., Secretary to the Commissioner
of Crown Lands and Immigration.
1739-61. Crown Lands and Immigration Office,
Adelaide, sth Dec., 1861.
Gentlemen—-Your letter of the 2nd inst. (2,146-61), inquiring the grounds on which
certain claims, in which the Wallaroo and Mitford Mining Association were interested,
have been forfeited, has been laid before the Commissioner; and I am now desired, in
reply, to refer you to the mineral lease regulations.
I have the honor, Ac.,
Edwd, T. Wildman,
Secretary Crown Lands and Immigration.
Messrs. Fenn & Bruce, Adelaide.
Wallaroo, 3rd June, 1861.
Sir—ln the plan of the thirty mineral claims applied for at Warilka, which I had the
honor to forward to you on the Ist instant, I omitted to mention that the locality is on
Yorke’s Peninsula, about ten to fifteen miles south of the Wallaroo Mines, with the


survey of which I shall send you its connection as soon as I can make it.
If my memory serves me right, I think, on reflection, that in my haste to dispatch the
plan, I accidentally called the scale one quarter inch to one chain, which is of course an
error for one quarter inch to ten chains, or two inches to one mile.
As the error is so obvious, and all possibility of misconception is, I think, prevented
by the figures and writing by which I have shown the lengths of the different lines, may
I request that you will pass your pen through the words “ to one chain,” leaving “ scale
of one-quarter inch,” which would fully explain my meaning under the circumstances,
or make such alteration as you may deem proper ! ! !
I have, <fec.,
Gavin D. Youno.
G. W, Goyder, Esq., Surveyor-General.
Wallaroo Mines, 6th June, 1861.
Sir—l have the honor to forward to you a rough plan, showing connection of Warilka
with Wallaroo survey.
You will perceive that I had shown as correctly as circumstances would admit the
distance from Ato the Bald Hill. The tree is itself better than any trig, pole I could
put up.
With regard to the entire distance to Wallaroo, as I had no means of checking it by
angles, and as a mistake of ten chains might thus accidentally have occurred and passed
unpereeived, I request (although I believe no such mistake has occurred) permission to
amend the plan, should I find it necessary on going ever the ground again,
I beg to be supplied with the numbers to be attached to the Sections ; and perhaps
you will be kind enough to inform me if you require anything more done to fix point A
decidedly, viz., if the plan I have now sent in, together with the workings on the
place, will suffice to indicate the spot, or if it is necessary that I should thoroughly
check my survey,
I have, &c.,
Gavin D, Young.
G. W. Goyder, Esq., Surveyor-General-
Watervale, 12th June, 1861.
Sir—l have the honor to forward to you by this mail, under separate cover, a plan
showing the position of the mineral claims at Warilka (more correctly, I believe
Wilkawat).
It is chiefly a compilation of the two hasty plans already sent in.
I beg leave to deposit it subject to verification of the whole survey, if the position of
the locality is not considered fixed sufficiently by the occupation and working of the
spot, and the connection of it with the tree on the side of the Bald Hill.
I have, &c.,
Gavin D. Young,
G. W. Goyder, Esq., Surveyor-General.
[Laid on table 26th August, 1862.]
Edwardstown, South-road, 20th December, 1861.
Sir—Being the original discoverer of the valuable mineral claims near Wilkawat, and
applied for by Cussen (June 11th) on behalf of the Wallaroo and Mitford Mining
Adventure, I consider myself deeply aggrieved at the difficulties and objections created
to prevent a very simple act of justice.
The reply from Crown Lands Office (December 6th) to Mr. Fenn’s letter (December
2nd), in which that gentleman requests to be informed on what grounds the said sec-
tions are declared forfeited, appears to me so very unsatisfactory that I am induced
very respectfully to request you would do me the honor to point out the clause or
clauses in the Mineral Lease Regulations under which the alleged forfeiture was
incurred.
In making this request I would most respectfully beg leave to observe, that any
omission or irregularity that could possibly be laid to our charge has been caused solely
by the peculiar statement of the Hon. Surveyor-General, whose word, of necessity, we
accepted as unquestionable.
I would also beg leave to direct your attention to a remarkable foot note, now
appended to Cussen’s application, requiring us to fix within fourteen days the position
of the Bald Hill. Of this foot note I know nothing; it is not mentioned in the letter
granted the application, nor in another letter of same date giving us a month to fix


the position of the claims. No intimation direct or indirect of such a note has eve-
reached us.
How this foot note came upon the application, and why statements should have been
made only calculated to mislead and injure, I would decline to conjecture, and would
hope that any very particular inquiry on the points may not be inevitable ; for whilst
seeking the undoubted rights of our adventure, I have no desire to prejudice the name
or reputation of any other person, if such can be avoided.
It has been and still is my wish to leave the issue of this matter entirely in your
hands, confident that in so doing I have the honor of a gentleman for a safeouard; and
further, because I feel it is undoubtedly and painfully evident that many very material
passages in these proceedings, relative to the claims in question, will not bear the test
of a public investigation, *
Respectfully awaiting the favor of reply,
I have the honor, &c,,
Eustace R. Mitfobd.
To the Hon. the Commissioner of Crown Lands.
26-62. Crown Lands and Immigration Office,
Adelaide, 7th January, 1863.
Sir—l have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 20th ult
(2353-61), and am instructed, in reply, to refer you to myletter of the sth ult., which
the Commissioner considers affords you sufficient information with regard to the for-
feiture of the mineral claims alluded to therein.
I am further desired to request that if you have any charge to make against any
officer of this Department you will make it in writing, and in such a shape as*will allow
of its being investigated.
I have th& honor, &c., .
E. T. WIIDMAN,
Secretary Commissioner of Crown Lands and Immigration.
Mr. E. Mitford, Edwardstown, South-road.
Edwardstown, South-road, January 26, 1861.
Sir—l have the honor to acknowledge a letter from the Crown Lands Office, dated
Jan. 7, in reply to mine of Dec. 20, and regret that it does not afford the information
requested.
On referring to your Mineral Lease Regulations, as advised ir, your letter of Dec, 5,
I do not discover any clause iff them that relates to the remafkable occurrences under-
mentioned :
1. The application of Cussen, June 11, was not understood, because there was only
one Bald Hill on the Government map, which hill was fourteen miles east of the coast—
but the bearings and distances from all near points were so carefully and accurately
given that application was accepted.
2. June 26.— Two Bald Hills were acknowledged, and we were directed to fix the
positi nof the second, which was dpne. This second hill was four miles east of coast.
3. July Iff. —The number of Bald Hills was again reduced to one —that alluded to in
our application—the other had disappeared; but, on Nov. 7, the Surveyor-General
assured Mr. Fenn there was no Bald Hill at all in that locality.
4. July 19—We are told by the Hon. Commisioner of Crown Lands that the maps
in Land Office were so incorrect that no dependence could be placed in them. On the
same day, the Hon. Surveyor-General informs us that the Hon. Commissioner knows
nothing about the maps, and that they are perfectly correct in all particulars.
5. July 19.—The Hon. Surveyor-General declares that the applications of Peters
(May 23) and Cussen (June 11) describe the same place, and are in the same form
“ word for word. Nov. 7.—We find, on inspection, they are completely different in
wording, and are in strictly separate and distinct localities.
6. July 19.—W e are informed that the bearings and distance of Cussen’s application
(June 11), being entirely wrong, and therefore the claims are not fixed, we have no
claims to forfeit ! Nov s.—We receive intimation from Crown Lands Office that the
said claims are forfeited .
7. Nov. 7—-We are shown a foot note to our application, of a most stringent nature,
and most formidable as against our interests, of which no notice has ever at any time
been given to us, and which is at direct and remarkable variance with a letter of the
game day from tne Crown Lands Office.


8. At all times we have been told to accept, as undeniable, statements since proved to
be totally devoid of truth, and have been held bound by a document surreptitiously
appended. . _ _ .
Amid such a chaos of contradicting statements, distorted facts, impudent assertions,
and absurd blunders—a hill moved ten miles—two hills knocked into one—-and that one
finally ignored—claims denied —claims without forfeiture —and forfeiture without
claims—maps made to suit all purposes—and documents altered to meet any require-
ments.
I have searched the Mineral Lease Regulations in vain for assistance in the difficu’ty ;
nor, after a most careful perusal, do I find anything in them to imply that false and
fraudulent statements, or even forged documents, issuing from official sources, render
mineral claims liable to forfeiture.
Debarred from all action by these strange official proceedings, I appealed, as one of
the public, to one appointed and paid by the public, to execute the public intentions,
and, as 1 imagine, to protect a sufferer like myself from nefarious Outrage in his
transactions with public officials.
If I am mistaken, the public will have an opportunity of declaring their own views
of the question.
I beg leave to express myself gratified for the permission given to put in form any
charges I desire investigated. The enormous difficulty I have experienced in seeking
a small but simple act of justice for myself, offers but little inducement to undertake
the same devious and vexatious course in favour of another; neither have I any incli-
nation to complicate ray own position, by shifting the inquiry from a gross wrong done
to myself to the misdeeds of some one else.
Nor could I reasonably dare to hope, when Government officers are made things of
sale, as sworn in the Insolvent Court; and the Treasury mulcted to augment a fixed
salary, as declared in Parliament; the mere connivance of an interested official with a
cunning interloper to defraud an original discoverer of valuable claims, would be thought
worthy of particular notice, or very nice inquiry.
The pertinacious and marked refusal to afford me even the least information that
might lead to redress, and the unsought and ready offer to do that which might bring
disgrace or ruin upon others whose damage would not affect the interests of more
exalted offenders, is a brilliant sample of colonial morality, that I trust did not originate
in the Crown Lands Office.
Notwithstanding every endeavour to obtain information has hitherto proved unsuccess-
ful, I would yet venture one more request—to know on what grounds the claims applied
tor by Cussen, June 11, atid granted June 26, are declared forfeited.
I have the houor, &c.,
Eustace Eitelet Mitfobd.
The Hon. Commissioner of Croton Lands.
125-62.] Crown Lands and Immigration Office, Adelaide,
28th January, 1862.
Sir—l have the honor to Acknowledge the receipt of your letter ot the 28th
instant (168-62), and am now desired by the Commissioner to inform you that he
declines to have any further communication with you on the subject.
I have the honor, &c.,
U. N. Bagot, pro Sec. C. L. and I.
Mr. E. Mitford, Edwardstown, South Load.
(Laid on the table 29th August, 1062.]
Adelaide, July 31th, 1862.
Sir—Referring to our conversation on Tuesday last, in reference to the claims taken
out by Mr. Robert Cussen on behalf of Mr. E. R. Mitford (Explorer) and others, and
numbered 1039, 40, 41, and 1042, in the Tipara claim, I should have written to you
yesterday, but hoped that Mr., Mitford might have been in town, and would have waited
on you, when he Would have more fully explained the claimants’ present position, how-
ever, acting on your suggestion, I beg respectfully to solicit an extension ot one month,
When, no doubt, something more definite may be learnt respecting the disputed claims.
In the meanwhile, as a matter of course, should we be in tne Gulf, and we should not
deem it desirable to make any further claim, our money will be returned ; however, I
Cannot conclude without calling your special attention to the fact that on the 4th June.
We, and Mr. S. B. Price and myself, putting in a diagram to take out plans, &e., ns it


now appears that the survey of the coast lino of the Peninsula was wrong, our selection
of claims was thrown out, whereas, had the survey been correct, our diagram and des-
cription must have put us on a valuable claim. Under such circumstances I feel as-
sured that the extension asked for will be granted, and every justice done by the Gov-
ernment.
I have, &c ,
For K. CUSSEN, MITFORD and Others,
M. PHILLIPSON.
G. W. Goyder, Esq., Surveyor-General.
Adelaide, July 26th, 1861.
Sir—T had anticipated a reply ere this to my respects, under date 17th inst., asking
you to forward a diagram of the claims as originally applied for, and taken out by
Peters and Talor on the 23rd May, not having been as yet favored by an acknowledg-
ment of my letter, I am induced again to trouble you, as I understand that the Survey-
or-General is about to proceed to Tipara, and beg respectfully to call your attention to
the following facts, and have to solicit that you will instruct that gentleman to place us
in the position we applied for, as per copy of the description No. 1, which was dated on
the 4th of June, and handed in by Mr. B. J. Price and myself, about half-past ten
o’clock, a.ra., of the sth, when we were told and distinctly shown, from a plan bearing
the Coast line mark, that to be four miles east of the sea beach, and two miles and
three-quarters south-west of highest point of Bald Hill, as per copy referred to, we
should be, “if starting from” one point of the sea beach, twelve miles from the Bald
Hill; and if from another point, about nine miles—to this fact I am prepared most
positively to swear. Now sir, as you have already admitted your map was wrong in
consequence of the defective survey of the Peninsula, I submit, as an act of justice, you
are bound to put us in the position we required on that date; and, as before observed
our application being based on defiend and positive hearings, we may, or may not, be
the first and only applicants for the sections taken out by Peters and Taylor ; Mills’s
description, I understand, not corresponding with the four sections claimed by us, and,
you having named the said sections were twice claimed; however, it is and must be be-
yond a doubt that, if by correct survey we do not immediately claim those, had our ap-
Elication been left on its own merits, we should have been placed so closely that we must
ave 'had a most valuable claim, whereas others are apparently enjoying the fruits of
our explorer’s (Mr. Mitford) knowledge, and that not by our neglect, but owing to in-
correct plans in the office of the Government; under such circumstances I feel assured
that you will especially instruct the Surveyor-General to give our application his par-
ticular attention, the wrong entirely resting with the Government, and who have, I am
instructed, made themselves liable to severe penalties. It is under the peculiarity of
our case that at present I am satisfied to leave the matter entirely in the hands of your-
self and the Surveyor-General, for reinstating us in the position we claimed on the sth
June.
I have the honor, &c.,
M. PHILLIPSON.
Chairman, Wallaroo and Mitford Venture
To the Hon. the Commissioner of Crown Bands,
No. I.—Copy of description given in by B. J. Price and M. Phillipson, referred to in
above letter, outlying claim.
Hough description of position —“ Centre of claims, about two and three-quarter miles
south-west of highest point of the Bald Hill, and about four miles east of sea beach, on
the edge of the thick scrub lying south of the Bald Hill. The distance from home shaft
may be ten to twelve miles, but it is not possible to say precisely, as you have to wind
through the scrub to make a passage to the Bald Hill.”


REMARKS ON THE RETURN OF THE SURVEYOR-GENERAL, AS ORDERED
BY THE HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY.
In publishing these remarks on the Report, the petitioners desire it maybe understood
that the reader is not asked to accept anything as true, that is not accompanied by
proofs, such as letters, plans, or documents, issued by authority of the Crown Lands
Office, or derived by fair inference from the published statements contained in the Report
Ordered by the Honorable House of Assembly.
All assertions not so supported, and put forward by the petitioners, they consider to be
of little or no importance at this stage of the enquiry, unless borne out by collateral
evidence of sufficient weight and authority, and such as an impartial reader may decide
to be satisfactory.
The writer would offer an apology for the numerous repetitions contained in these
remarks. But the reader will observe that nearly every allegation of the memorial is
met by the report with a denial of one particular occurrence.
nd as this material point, required to prove the wrong-complained-of, applies to
each allegation, and more than half the remarks in the report—it will be seen that to
recur to this most important subject on almost every occasion, is unavoidable
If some of the revelations herein contained should appear to be improbable or
impossible, the reader is requested to remember that the writer of these remarks only
holds himself responsible for his own words and deeds—and leaves the proceedings of
more important people to find their own justification,
December, 20, 1862 E, R. M.
ALLEGATION 1,2, 3, 4.
The petitioners say they made or tendered an application for four mineral claims, June
5, 1861. -
That the application was rej mted as “misdescribed.” That the only ball hill then
shown on the Survey maps Was 12 or 14 miles inland ; that the petitioners were advised
to amend their description, but being perfectly accurate they were unable to do so.
The report says “ that all these transactions stated to have taken place June sth with
Reference to these claims must necessarily be false.
In several other parts of the report these four allegations, which refer entirely to the
application tendered and rejected on account of misdescription on June 5, are met'by
unqualified denial ; the tender on that day, as stated, is declared to be “false;” and
some very severe remarks ini reduced occasionally in reprobation of this attempt to
impose upon the House of Assembly by “ false representations.”
As it will be observed by those who read that all through the petition this date is
constantly alluded to as a very important circumstance connected with the injustice
Complained of by the petitioners; as in every letter, plan, and document, and every
interview with heads of departments, this date and seldom any other is made use of,
when referring to our application for claims at Tipara; as it is brought' first before the
House Of Assembly as the most prominent feature of the case, to show the great wrong
we have suffered ; and as the Surveyor-t General without hesitation meets this statement
with positive and emphatic denial; it is evident that if this application, declared to have
been tendered and rejected on acecount of misdescription, June 5, 1861, cannot be most
clearly substantiated and proved, without any the least doubt or qualification, we must
inevitably accept all the charges and insinuations brought against us in the Report, and
stand clearly convicted and confessed as most unscrupulous imi Qstors!
Correspondence page 3rd is a letter dated November 21, 1861, from Mitford to the
Honorable Commissioner in which this application of June sth is mentioned in nther a
remarkable manner, as will be seen. The write” states that, permission having been
given, Mr Fenn and himself went to the Land Office for the purpose of examining and
comparing the application of Trice (Mittbrd’s), June 5, and Peters, May 2>, 1861, and
that they were found to be essentially different in their respective descriptions; state*


several important particulars relating to the application of June sth, and requests some
further information regarding matters connected with that application.
The Commissioner replies :
1675-61 ] Crown Lands and Immigration Office, Adelaide,
25th November, 1861.
Sir—l am desired by the Commissioner to acknowledge receipt of yours of the 21st
instant (2078-61) relative to mineral claims at Tipara 1039 to 1042, and to inform you
that no further information on the matter can be given.
I have, &c„ N
E. T. Wildman,
Secretary Crown Lands and Immigration.
Mr. E. R. Mitford, Adelaide.
This letter declines to give any further information on a mntter of very great con-
sequence to the adventurer, relating to the application tendered June 5, as acknowledged
therein by the Commissioner, by stating both the claims and the numbers thereof at that
date applied for.
The adventure not being satisfied with this refusal to give any further information.
Mitford writes again, and the Chairman encloses the letter in one of his own to the
Commissioner. (See correspondence, page 18, letter dated November 23, 1861); and
the reply from the Land Office shows that it is not considered necessary to notice any
other date except June sth, the Commissioner preferring to acknowledge our appli-
cation for claims 1039 to 1042 at Tipara , as made that day —though it was known to
him that the same application for the same claims was not completed before June 19th.
See answer to Chairman’s letter of Nov. 25:
1711-61.] Crown Lands and Immigration Office, Adelaide,
28th November, 1861.
Sir—l have the honor to acknowledge receipt of your letter of the 25th instant
(2113-61) covering letter from Mr. Mitford relative to the mineral claims alluded to
in his letter of the 2i\st instant, addressed to the Commissioner.
Tam now instructed to inform you that any claim with respect to these sections, is
forfeited.
- I am, &c.,
Ewn. T. Wildmak,
Secretary Crown Lands and Immigration,
Mr. M. Phillipson, Chairman of Wallaroo
and Mitford Association.
Observe, therefore, that the Commissioner’s first letter states that the claims we
applied for at Tipara June 5, 1861, are those numbered 1039 to 1042, which are the
the same graneted to the petitioners June 26, and claimed by the application alluded to
in the four first allegations.
And the second letter states that their claims 1039 to 1042, granted to the applica-
tion of June 5, 1861, are forfeited.
also, that Mitford’s letter of November 21, only refers to an application
of June 5. He does not mention anything about claims, having no suspicion that the
Surveyor-General would venture to deny a circumstance— well-known in the Land
Office by reason of some remarkable transactions that took place in that department—
the value and importance of which was determined altogether by means of this very
application; but the Commissioner plainly and honestly declared his perfect
acquaintance with, and willing recognition of the fact, by showing, without solicitation,
and without Mitford’s letter calling for anything beyond some information of the
application; that the same claims that were granted by the Commissioner to the
Wallaroo and Mitford Adventure, June 26th, numbered 1039 to 1042, are the identical
claims which they first applied for on the sth day of June, 1861; and further to confirm
the actual right and title of the - petitioners as once established in those claims beyond
all after-doubt or denial, the Commissioner briefly states, that those claims—lo 39 to
1042—taken by the application of June 5, 1851— are forfeited.
There are two other letters (unpublished) from the Commissioner that refer very
distinctly to the application of June sth ; but until the report was seen, the petitioners
made no preparation to prove a statement so easily established, so perfectly well known,
and so unexpectedly and boldly denied.
The denial of these allegations is the more strange, when the circumstances under
which the application is declared to have been tendered are taken into consideration.
Two of the adventurers, with a third person, go into the Land Office, June sth, at
•alf-past 10 a.rn., with a letter and description on a diagram arrived by that day’*


Wallaroo mail; people are coming and going ; there are four or five clerks present ;
the chief clerk is questioned ; a difficulty ar’ses ; explanations are made. The applicants,
ignorant of the place required, place implicit confidence in the office maps and the know-
ledge of the chief clerk, who assures them that they have tendered a wrongly-described
locality; explains the supposed error of their diagram ; and advises they should send
the explorer down, or have the description amended. Strangers in the office hear and
note the matter, and have spoken of it. The applicants, perfectly satisfied that the
clerk is right, retire, and write to the explorer that the diagram sent to them on
June 4th has been rejected as a misdescription —there being no bad hill on the office
maps—less than twelve miles from the sea-coast.
A statement that avers so ranch publicity, and so many circumstances open to remark
that must have had eye witnesses, who had no interest in the matter, and moreover
cannot by possibility be forgotten, if true, by the officials who were present, wo Id ba a
dangerous affirmation for us to put forward if without foundation ; and as the letters of
the Commissioner are to be seen, and the conversation held with the Surveyor-General
on the subject, of June 5, must be still in his memory, the motive for this denial of the
our allegations is beyond all conjecture.
Note. —ln the correspondence is another letter, dated Jan. 7, 2892, from the Com-
missioner to Mitford (26-62) which refers again to the claims Nos. 1039 to 1042,
mentioned In the two letters of the Commissioner already allnded to—Nov 25th and
28th, 1861—which two letters, and the last, reply to the observations made about the
application of June 5,1861, by stating only the chains applied for that day as an
equivalent, and as better suited to the intended purpose of informing the petitioners
that the claims applied for June sth are for some reason not stated by the Commissioner
forfeited!
Allegation 5.
The petitioners tendered the same application again June 11,1861, and that it was
received.
Report says—“ The statement is, in fact, true.”
Although this application was rco ived the day stated, it was not completed, by
paying the fees, until June 19th, as dr. Cussen forget to pay the deposit-money before
that day.
This was no doubt a singular neglect of an important part of the operation ; but as it
was found impossible to dispense with that gentleman’s personal assistance at the cele-
bration of his own wedding solemnities, some allowance must be made for a temporary
aberration of intellect under the circumstancss.
The report, taking notice of this omission, remarks very bitterly that “ They did not
appear to attach much value to the discovery.”
We certainly made no particular fuss in the Land Office on applying for the claims,
not supposing the natives of that establishment would take any unusual interest in the
matter; and the writer must bear in mind that we were perfectly ignorant of the
extraordinary assistance and great advantages which, he confesses, were offered to Hughes
when applying for claims, May 25.
This application was tendered by Mr. Cussen and the Explorer (who came from
Kadina on hearing that the application of une sth had been rejected as a misde caption)
for the pnrpose of showing that it was perfectly correct, and to tender it again without
alteration.
The explorer had been on the ground at Wilkawat since early in May ; and had the
Government maps and surveys been only tolerably correct, he could have sent his
application down to Adelaide by the 12th, or probably sooner. Knowing, however, that
no dependance was to be placed on those fallacious documents, he rather choses to trust
to his own observations and measurements of distances. Therefore, when his application
was tendered, June sth, the description being strictly accurate, and a hill mentioned that
was entirely unknown to the Survey Office (they had one of the same name on the map,
about ten miles distant to the south east), and the coast line being quite different to
that given on the maps, the application was quite unintelligible to the chief clerk and
Surveyor-General, and was rejected as a misdescription.
If the maps had been correct and the application in fault, this would have been
perfectly just; as the Mineral Lease Regulations positively require an application u to
identify the spot." As it happened to be precisely the other way, we made our
discovery known without securing the claims, and the time lost by the rejection was takso
advantage of by others.


On June 11th the chief clerk again stated that the application was not intelligible td
him, “as the only bald hill on the office map was twelve miles from the coast,” He
was told that the hill of our description was only five miles inland, and the place was
marked for his information upon a large map that hung on the wall near the window ; on
which map was also to be seen the bald hill then known, twelve or fourteen miles inland.
The chief clerk then said “ The terms of our description (if the distance from the
coast, and other particulars were correctly given) would place the claims applied for
about five or six miles from those of Peter’s, Taylor’s, and others.”
A large sheet of paper with some claims marked on it was offered, on which to place
the claims; but as the paper had no distinguishing mark, coast line, or fixing point
(except a bald hill of doubtful dependance) by which to determine the relative position of
any claims. Mitford objected to use a medium of recognition so dangerous and
deceptive.
The present system of taking out mineral claims may be sufficient for Adelaide
speculators, who require only the boundary lines of a claim already taken, to start a new
mining company ; but it leaves the bona jide discoverer, who only knows the country by
careful observation, and applies for outlying claims in a new locality, entirely at the
mercy of any intruder who may be permitted by the SurveyoriGeneral to apply for claims
by 11 misdescription," as in the case of Hughes (vide repott 5), and afterwards proceed
to survey in any place convenient.
The map here stated to have been marked by Mitford to show about the position of the
new bald hili, is not now to be seen ; and the chief clerk assured Mitford on September
24, 1862, c< That no such map was ever in the Land Office.”
The report then refers to some conversation about the hill and the claims with Mr.
Cussen; but that gentleman says he did not see the Surveyor-General after the 11th
June on the subject and the fees were paid to the chief clerk by Mr. B J. Price So
that there must be some mistake in the writer’s recollections, and the chief clerk as well.
Report next states that in June 24 the four claims were forwarded to the Government
for consideration, and that the Surveyor-General placed on them a report (or certain
condi ions) lor the Commissioners approval, as follows:
“Toe fixing given would place this claim on lands already applied fot. Applicant
states, however, that the bald hill is some other hill not shown in the Government plans.
I recommend, therefore, that Tie be allowed a fortnight to fix the position of the hill
named, provided that his claim is not allowed to interfere with others made during the
interim.”
“G. W. Goyder, Surveyor-General, (24-6-61).
These conditions, or reports, upon the application are seen to have been appended
thereto as a footnote, June 24, 1861 ; whereas the letter from the Crown Lands accepting
the application is dated .June 26, two days later ; and these conditions are not mentioned
in that letter ; nor is any other notice of their import provided for the information of the
applicants.
The adventure further declares that these “ conditions ,” so important to their interest
—so stringent in their terms—and so very remarkable as to be altogether at variance with
the Mineral Lease Regulations—they never heard of by letter or otherwise ; nor knew
to be inserted on the original application until seen in the Land Office November 4, 1861,
by Mr. C. Fenn and R, E. Mitford, when inspecting that document for a different
purpose. And the Surveyor-General then enformed Mr. Fenn that due notice of these
conditions had been sent by official letter to Mr. Cussen ; and, also, that in reality, there
was no bald hill whatever in that place described by the application.
It is necessary here to observe that the petitioners, on several occasions, requested
permission to see the application, and were invariably refused, until November 4th ; and
this refusal is fully admitted by the report. (See reply to Allegation 8.)
It must be explained to those not accustomed to the mysteries of the Land Office, that
every original application for mineral claims is preserved in that department, and, when
approved by the Commissioner, a letter accepting the application is sent from the office to
the applicant.
This letter should he a transcript Or duplicate of the original as far as regards the
'terms and description of the application. Whatever has been added thereto by the office
of any consequence to the interests of the applicant, must of Course appear upon the
duplicate or letter of approval sent to the claimant, that he may know what the office
requires.
The original is kept in the Land Office as security for Government; the copy or letter
of approval is held by the claimant as secu ity for himself.
The first assures the Crown of the actual place intended to be surveyed and leased j


the second assures the applicant that the place he has therein truly and clearly described hat
been fully conceded to his application.
The word of the Grown once passed under signature of the official chief in. recognition
of demands that admit of no question in themselves, and are shown to be in unison with
the laws, and void of suspicion of wrong, should be—pand should also be felt by the
public to be—perfectly sacred and inviolable.
Taking it for granted that these relations between the Crown and the applicants for
mineral leases have been fairly stated, and are in accord with the true principles of justice
and common sense, it has now to be shown that, in the case of these Tipara claims, the
petitioners’ original application preserved in the Land Office and the duplicate letter of
acceptance sent to the applicants do not agree. One bears on its face an addition—most
important and dangerous in its operation —which is found to be wanting in the other.
The petitioners feel themselves entitled to demand by what means and by what right
are the two documents thus made to differ ? How comes the addition upon the otiginal ?
By whose hand and authority was it appended ? And more than this,’how is it possible
that the Houoiable the Commissioner could have given his high sanction to permit such
a dangerous and questionable document to be pieced on the table of the House of
Assembly as evidence and conclusive proof against the petitioners.
The production assumes a much more suspicious and gloomy appeatance when it i*
known that a very short time is given by the conditions for the execution of their terms ;
that these very terms are d.rectly opposed to the Mineral Lease Regulat ons; that the
applicants have always been refused permission to see the document containing these con-
ditions ; that notice of these conditions has never been given to the petitioners ; that the
letter approving and accepting the application contains no allusion to them whatever;
that these conditions are now produced as evidence that the petitioners have forfeited the
claims by not performing the same; and that the office copy of the letter of approval,
which should have been laid before the House as a means of comparison, is declared by
the Honorable Commissioner to be lost! ! !
When, however, we see that altered original produced before an august tribunal, and
the alteration in all its deformity triumphantly held up as conclusive evidence against the
petitioners of fraud against the Government, however painful it may be, there can be no
hesitation in affixing to these conditions the appropriate coarse but legal appellation.
The explorer, in a letter to the Commissioner, December 20th, l-ffil {vide correspon-
dence) took occasion to point out the danger and injustice of perpetuating this “ foot-
note,” being unwilling to take any advantage of that which might have had its origin in
the folly or ignorance of a subordinate.
The reply of the Commissioner clearly indicated that an act of a nature unmentionable
among the most untamed savages was by no means repugnant to the morality of a
Responsible Government.
These conditions (footnote to report) are so very remarkable in their wording that the
reader is impressed with the idea that they were written by some person not acquainted
with the routine of the Land Office and certainly by one whose notions of survey duties
and acquirements were of a very vague and uncertain kind
As this singular document has been unwisely produced for the express purpose of pre-
venting an act of justice, we feel ourselves quite at liberty to criticise its construction and
expose its obvious tendency.
(1). “ The fixing given would place this claim on lands already applied for.”
Then we think the application ought to have been refused at once as inadmissable;
for we presume the Commissioner has not the power to receive an application that included
ground already granted to others.
This objection was first made to the petitioners July 17, 1861, by the Surveyor-
General ; but always previously we were told that the plan described by the explorer was
quite a new locality, five or six miles from any claims.
We believe there is no example on record of claims being granted by the Crown on
lands already occupied as mineral leasehold, except those of the petitioners, as stated, we
presume faithfully, by the report.
(2). “ The applicant states, however, that the bald hill is some other hill not shown on
the Government plans.”
We made no such statement. The chief clerk informed us that the hill on the office
map, by which Hughes had fixed his claim, was about 12 miles east of the coast, and
therefore we inferred that the hill we described was not on the maps, which inference was
acknowledged to be true by the chief clerk. The petitioners had no means of knowing
what hills were or were not on the map save by information gained in the office.
The Surveyor-General on September 12, 1862, removes all doubt about the hill in the
printed reply to Mr. Glyde’s motion for papers The waste lands plans by which


claim* were fixed up to June 7, 1861, shows the hald hill about nine and a half miles
from the coast ;” therefore, on June 24, the Surveyor-General could ascertain, without
troubling the petitioners, that a hill four and a-half miles from the sea must be “ some
other Mil not shewn on the Government plan and also that the fixing given would
not cover “ lands already applied for."
Then we have the assertion made by the Surveyor-General to Mr. C. Fenn, Nov. 4th,
1861. that there was no bald hill at or near the place of our discovery, which shows again
that any information was not required from us.
Lastly it was clearly not our place or business to interfere with the maps of the Survey
Office, or to insist that there was or was not a hill in one place or another. Applicants
for mineral claims expect the assistance of the Survey maps to fix their discoveries ; they
do not feel themselves at liberty to inform the Surveyor-General that his maps are rubbish,
or give him instructions as to the duties of his office. If when they enter the Lands
Office to secure claims they find they have paid their money for correct plans, and
honest statement they are satisfied.
(3). “ I recommend, therefore, that he be allowed to fix the position of the hill
named,”
This permission to fix a hill for the benefit and instruction of the Survey department
is making a novel use of an application for mineral claims that, if we had known at the
time, would have been most decidedly objected to, inasmuch as although the public are
require i to survey their own claims (a proceeding sure to lead to fraud and confusion)
yet there is as yet no law, we believe, that compels claimants to take upon themselves all
the other duties of the Surveyor-General.
Here we are graciously permitted fourteen days to fix a hill which Mr. Fenn was
assured had no existence—but as being in the neighborhood of other claim, granted to
other people, but not yet altogether discovered, as these conditions most imperatively
call upon us not only to do, but to believe and to understand ! which is much more
serious.
(4). “ Provided that his claim is not allowed to interfere with others made during
the interim.”
If the claims have already been granted, and the hill is not to be found, and the peti-
tioners are considered designing knaves for asking the ground, then it follows any other*
applying “ (luring the interim]’ are in danger of acquiring a property of most astonish-
ing value (!) besides adding greatly to the estimation of their character.
If, on the other hand, it can be shown that the tender of June sth truly and un-
doubtedly described the place claimed, and that it was the first and only proper applica-
tion sent in for the ground indicated, then we can only understand by these conditions
that the petitioners are held bound to amend the errors of the survey maps for the benefit
of the Government; explain the geographical formation of Yorke’s Peninsula, and
execute in fourteen days that which the talented Surveyor-General or his office have not
effected in 26-years, with thousand of pounds of the public money to assist the work,
and his great zeal, and duty as a public servant to accelerate its accomplishment.
As a high and honorable reward to the petitioners for this essential service, gratuitously
performed, in aid of the profound ignorance of the Crown Lands Office ; and during the
time so employed in behalf of well-paid officials, the Commissioner very generously
permits any other person to apply for the same discovery “ during the interim,” and thus
deprive the applicants of the valuable result o their explorer’s exertion and very accurate
description. ,
When the duplicate of a valuable and authentic document, held as security for certain
things done and to be done, is produced as evidence against the persons thereby held
bound, and that duplicate is discovered and proved to have been very materially altered
by some person holding the same, to the serious injury and intended loss of those whose
interests are declared in that document, it is not for us to give this alteration its legal
appellation, but only to put the whole of the facts clearly and undeniably before those
who may be entitled to pronounce an impartial verdict on these remarkable transactions.
Allegation 6
Says (July 18) “ the Commissioner was informed that our claims at Wilkawat near
1 ipara, were occupied by other people. ’
occupy first th ' S ** true—and that the Original discoverers had continued to
I t is necessary to show how far this assertion is'supported by permitted action of other*
and by instructions and documents issuing irom the Crown Lands Office. *


(1) JundSth, 1861—An application was tendered for Mitford, in the Land Office,
describing in exact terms the plan of these claims at Wilkawat: and the ground of ths
description was then seen to be by the plans produced—“ Unclaimed Crown lands, open
for Selection.”
(2) June 11th —Same application in same terms tendered again, the place described,
being shown upon the plan as still Unclaimed, the application was received.— vide report.
(3) June 13th, The same ground (Wilkawat). Surveyed and Occupied by Hughes
and others.— Survey accepted, ( Vide Report.)
(4) June 26th.—The application by Cussen (pro Mitford) on this ground (Wilkawat)
approved and granted by the Hon. Commissioner of Crown Lands, (vide letter of ap-
proval.
(5) June 27th. — The block of ground on which these Claims take position—marked t
by orders of the Crown lands offices—“ Reserved, not to be Leased.” ( See plans of tha
date.)
(6) July 18th.—The Surveyor General informed the Petitioners, that they had no
claims at Wilkawat, or near Tipara—that the Grant of the said claims 1039, to 1042, at
Wilkawat, was a mistake, as they belonged to Hughes Advised the Petitioners to ap-
ply for fresh ground, while the opportunity for so doing offered i.self. (Advice declined.)
(7) August 15th The Surveyor-General was at Wilkawat, sent by the Commis-
sioner to enquire into the circumstances of this dispute, and do justice between the Crown
and the rival claimants, and this duty was effected in the following manner :
That Gentleman, saw and witnesseed, that the ground marked by his own instructions,
‘Reserved, not to be leased.” was then occupied by Hughes and others, —and to this oc-
cupation no kind of objection was offered, so that neither the Crown nor the petitioners
received any measure of justice. The reserved lands of the one were invaded, and the ap-
plication, and grant by the Commissioner of certain claims to the petitioners, was treated
with very marked contempt. — Vide Report.
(8) August 20th.—The plans in the Survey Office, again show this same block of
land. “ Reserved, not to be leased.” (vide plans of that date.)
(9) September 26th, 1861 The Government Gazette proclaims Sections 1039, 1040 ,
1041, 1042, the same that were granted to petitioners, on this ground (Wilkawat), June
26th, surveyed, and survey accepted, “as forfeited—no survey.” (vide Government
Gazette, September, 1861.)
(10) September 27th—The ground is occupied by Hughes and others by consent,
of the Hon, Commissioner of Crown lands, and known as the Moonta Mine, (vide re-
port, and Newspapers.)
00 September 26th, 1862 The plan of Mineral Claims, near Tipara, produced by
the Commissioner of Crown lands, and laid on the table of the House of Asssembly—dis-
cover the block of land here alluded to as Wilkawat, as unoccupied Crown lands, open
for selection of Mineral claims, and as never having been claimed, leased, reserved or oc-
cupied, except as a Sheep Run by Pastoral lease. Vide plan of Tipara claims.
The original discoverers, spoken of in the report, represents Hughes and others, and the
mode of their “ occupation from the first" can be best seen, and understood from the list
given here of the varions dispositions of the claims at Wilkawat, and the block of Grown
lands on which they are situated.
The block of land here alluded to will be found upon the plan of Tipara claims, as
situated between the outlying claims of Mills and Thornton, No. 980, 985. Aldridge,
1020, to the West; and the claims of G. O. Cooper, 1015, 1016; Berrill and others,
1021, to the East, and generally known as the original Wilkawat discovery. The first
and only application tendered for their claims, according to the terms of the Mineral Lease
Regulations. And the first and only genuine description of the locality seen by the Land
Office, was regular by the Chief Clerk as a misdescription.
Allegation says:...“ The Commissioner informed us that the maps in the Sur-
vey Office, “ were utterly incorrect and useless.”
Report says, the Commissioner’s statement “is palpably absurd.”
The Report however makes no denial of the Statement, it says “ as one plan, and one
plan only, has been used in the Land Office, for the record of Mineral Claims, in the neigh-
borhood of Tipara, since the 7th of June, 1861, a misstatement, &c,, &c.
This neither disproves the assertion of the Commissioner, nor evinces anything absurd
in the thing stated, but it does prove another circumstance, which the petitioners much de-
sired to ascertain, and have to thank the report for the unexpected disclosure, it shows that
whereas only one plan has been in use since June 7th, 1861; therefore some other plan
was in use, previous to that date. A plan by whieh the claims of Mills, and others ;
butcher and Bankine ; Mayo and Phillips, (1) John Day, McCarthy and Fisher, Mayo
and Phillips (2), G. O. Cooper, GL Aldridge and others, were fixed and their true position.


determined, amountingto 30 claims. And this very plan in use before June 7th, is exactly
one of those papers repeatedly asked for by Mr. Coglin since May 25th last, and which
never made its appearance, although the House was constantly assured by the Ho or-
able Commissioner, that all the papers had been produced. And this one paper, so per-
tinaceously refused to the order of the House, happens to be a Very important and valu-
able document, as may be supposed from the extreme difficulty that has placed in the
way or its producdon.
This plan has on it, the Coast Line, and its production ought to decide the whole ques-
tion of locality and priority ofapplication.
Mr. Glyde moved for this plan in November, and a statement by the surveyor-Gene-
ral was printed by order of the House, made September 12th, 1802. It says, “ there >s
no such map in existenc ■. The waste lands plan, upon which the position of the claims
were approximately sketched in pencil, shoes the bald hil about nine and a half mi es
from the coast , but no mineral claims were fixed with reference to the bald hill so shewn.”
" he claims mentioned above, as taken out before June 7'h, were all fixed on the plan
then in use, to the satisfaction of the applicants, and as they are to be seen upon the
plan now before the House,
The only difference between the two plans is, that the early one gives the distance of
the claims from the sea coast, and the later one very carefully leaves out the Coast lines
altogether Because, if it was given and delineated, as according the fixing approved by
the ■> rveyor- leneral in claim t\o. 980, it would, beyond all doubt or question dis-
cover to the House of Assembly, that the ground now occupied by Hughes and others
and called Moonta, in the precise locality that was granted to the petitioners, June 26th,
186 1 ; and is quite five miles distant from (he claims, numbered 930, to 933, granted to
Hughes.
The Surveyor-General states very plainly (Nov. 12, 1862) that the waste lands plans
or office map in use up to January 7, 1802, show? fie B ill Hi'l near Tipara to he
a>out nine and a-hatf miles from the coast. That hill was one of the fixing points
given in Peter’s application (Mav 25th), and the hill mentioned in the petitioner’s
description ( une 5 and 11) was said to be about four miles from the coast; therefore
the Surveyor-General himself gives sufficient evidence to show that the two applications
were for widely different places, and fbr two perfectly distinct and different hills, and a
reference to the map will discover that the place of Peters application (,May
must be quite or nearly, nine miles from the coast—whereas he occupies, by Hughes’
lands only four miles inland.
If the House would issue instructions to the Survey Office to provide a large plan of
the Pipara claims—like the one now before the Assembly—and to have placeU thereon a
delineation of the coast adjacent, showing the distance of the sea beach as west of claim
No. 98 ), as attested by the Surveyor- General, the whole question of locality, usualy
so difficult for any tribunal to decide, would be at once perfectly clear and intelligible.
Such has been repeatedly asked for by Air. Coglin and again by Mr. Glyde, but
hitherto ineffectually. It seems strange that the Land Office should hold back any
documents or plans relatin nr to the case, especially as the authority of the House has
repeatedly demanded them.~
If, as the Surveyor-General affirms, and as possibly may be the case, the petitioners
are only “ seeking by machinations to deprive others of valuable claims,” the safest and
surest method of defeating such unprincipled attempts would assuredly be gained by
producing every paper, plan, or document that bears on the question 11 we are acting
the part of fraudulent schemers the producnon of these papers will infallibly injure our
cause, and must expose whatever is dishonest or unfounded in our statements.
We ask, and have continually asked, for all, without reserve.
Not e. —The report points out that no claims were fixed by the Bald Hill shown upon
the plan in June, 1861.
I he application first made by Hughes and Goyder, May 25th, although a misdescrip-
tion, referred to that hill as one fixing point of the claims required ; and, therefore, by
some kind of measurement the claims, if admissable at all, must be placed somewhere
between Tipara Springs and the hill mentioned as being nine and a-half miles from the
set—which fixing would place the claim 930 about or nearly in the position it is now
seen to occupy on the plan laid before the Honorable House of Assembly.
Allegation 7.
That the Surveyor-General informed the petitioners that Peter’s application of May 2S
was the same, word for word , as theirs of June 5, —
And, that the survey maps were perfectly accurate in all respects.


Report replies—that it was simply impossible to compare Peters’s claims with others
which had no existence.,
By again denying the tender of June sth, all answer to the alleged statement is
evaded.
As, however, it has been clearly shown by the letters of the Assis ant Commissioner
that the said tender is very distinctly acknowledged to have been made on the day stated,
and as the report does not make any denial of the answer said in the allegation to have
been given, therefore we conclude it is admitted.
The statement was made to .Messrs. Phillipson and Mitford July 17, 186 , and per-
mission to see the application refused
The sta ement appeared to be irreconrileable with known facts and previous occur,
rences, and therefore the refusal to let the documents be seen was the cause of much
trouble and perplexity to the petitioners, who could not suppose the statement of the Sur-
veyor- General to be foreign to the truth
The same information given June 6th and 11th, when the same absolute resemblance
between the applications must have been quite as evident, wpu d have saved the
adventure much needless trouble and expense, and a great deal of apparent in-
justice.
Peters’s application, May 25, was admitted without difficulty. He gave a bald hill
as a fixing.point, which hill was shown upon the office map ; the place he applied for
was clearly understood. The petitioners applied une sth and llth—the locality was
not known ; the office map showed no bald hill as four or five miles from the coast; there
was one twelve or fourteen miles inland.
The Surveyor-General says—petitioners were instructed to send in a fixing of this hill
for the information of the office in 14 days. This intimates that the bald hill of our
application was not the hill of Peters’s description, and therefore that the two applications
described two different places.
The report says—we were distinctly told that the ground we described would cover
Peter’s claims. The Chief Clerk told us that i-ughes (Peter) and others, would be five
or six miles distant from us, and that no application had been received in the office for
the ground described by ourselves.
If the Surveyor- eneral knew, as he states, that we had applied for the ground of
Peter s claims, our application, we imagine, should have been refused.
No opportunity of testing the veracity of the assertion that the two applications were
££ word for word the same, and described the same place,” was offered until November 4,
1861 when, after repeated requests, systematically re used—we did at last, with iMr,
Penn’s assistance, obtain leave from the Commissioner to see these much desired docu-
men ts.
How far they bear out the statement of the Surveyor-General, can be best shown by
giving both from the originals ;
(1) plication for mineral claim of W. S. Peter, May 25, 1861— ££ Yorke’s
Peninsula, eight or ten miles north of Tipara and south of the Bald Hill.”
(2) Application for mineral claims of E. R. .Mitford, tendered June 5,1861 —rejected
for amendment and again tendered in the same terms as before, 'une 11, 1861 accepted
June 26—“ Yorke’s Peninsula, about twelve miles south of Kadina—about four miles
east of the sea-coast, between Nallyappa and Wilburta points, and about 2| miles
south-west of a bald hill on Hughes’s Uun, near the Bald Hill Station.”
Such are the two applications declared to be “ word for word” the same, and to describe
the same place.
Report continued— ££ I make no secret, however, that many of them (the survey
maps) are merely what they are staled to be, viz., mere approximations of the
truth."
This contradicts the reply to allegation 6. There it is said the Commissioner’s
observation about the maps is ££ perfectly absurd and here they are allowed to be not
perfectly correct.
The maps offered to applicants for mineral claims as a means for securely and definitely
fixing the position of the ground required, as specially directed by the Mineral Lease
Regulations, are supposed by the claimants to be as correct and true as maps offered and
authorised for such important purposes can be made by the skill of the Survey De-
partment.
These maps and plans are the security offered by the Crown to applicants in exchange
for the money demanded for the use of the Crown Lands ; and the applicant having paid
lps money, is entitled to believe that the claims have been, by means of these maps, sq


fixed and secured that no future doubt, or difficulty, or question can arise, to disturb hi*
right thereby guaranteed.
These maps and plans are the only means or security by which to fix the claims applied
for ; and the report informs us that these securities on which the public, having perfect
faith aod confidence, have paid large sums of money, are perfectiy worthless and deceptive
—“ mere approximations of the truth''
Until this report appeared, the public felt satisfied that all money transactions with
the Government were conducted by the heads of departments upon the strictest principles
of integrity.
No enquiry was ever made, or suspicion entertained, as to the quality of the goods
offered for sale or Security ; maps, plans, claims, or statements regarding them —all was
accepted without examination or warrant; everything was held to be bona fide and honest
beyond a thoaght of question.
The report upon the Tipara petition has, however, had the unpleasant effect of
awakening the people from a peaceful slumber of confidence misplaced.
The singular disclosure just quoted concerning these maps is hazarded with a cheerful
defiance of moral effects and physical consequences that argues a shingle loose, and a
doubt—if it be within the limits of official comprehension—that a “ mere approximation
of the truth” is, in fact, that which is not altogether true : and that which is not perfectly
true is untrue; and an untruth is a falsehood ; and a falsehood, uttered with knowledge
thereof and entailing damage to others, is a fraud ; and to demand and receive value by
such false representation is, by the law, held as felony.
The report informs us that the securities tendered to applicants in the Lanl Office by
which to fix their claims, and on the faith of the representations contained in those maps
they paid their money for those claims, fully believing in the reliable promise implied by
the offered security, are only “ mere approximations of the truth,” and therefore false
pretences, and no security whatever for the value received.
The writer may be ignorant that mere approximation of the truth—otherwise false
documents—intentionally offered for a consideration, have necessitated more than half
the criminal statutes of English law, and filled more than half of Her Majesty’s
gaols.
If the writer is willing to be convinced that the current coin of the Land Office is held
by honest people in very particular detestation and abhorrence, he has only to offer to the
nearest Bank a cheque, the signature of which is only a “ mere approximation”—
approximating sufficiently to obtain the amount specified—
The cashier may hold it as nothing in extenuation that the utterer declares he has been
in the daily habit of obtaining money to a large amount, and for a series of years, from
the public, by means of equally valuable and creditable mere “ approximations of the
truth but, on the contrary, is likely to consider them equally opposed to morals and
monied interests—discretion and discount.
The writer has, perhaps, forgotten that not many years ago “mere approximation of
the truth ” occasioned the dealer in such doubtful securities the unpleasant necessity of
being hanged.
Reverse the case as given in the report—instead of good money for bad security, let us
suppose that counterfeit notes are paid into a Government office for something really true and
genuine offered as security—say to determine the position of some portion of the Crown Lands
—and imagine a Surveyor-General called upon to prosecute the offender for daring to insult
the office, by feloniously offering “ mere approximations of the truth " —does the report
believe a court of justice would be satisfied if in a jaunty offhand manner the prisoner
gave the reply according to the pattern stated above as the moral code of the Jjand Office.
The truly appropriate defence would be, that the unfortunate prisoner had, on a former
occasion, paid into a certain office good sterling money, in Exchange, for mineral claims,
said to be securely fixed in their true position by maps and plans exhibited in the
office as genuine and trustworthy; but afterwards said to be ee mere approximations of
the truth ■ and, that by placing confidence therein, he had lost a valuable copper
discovery, his time, and expenses.
The petitioners are a striking example of the injury that may be done by false repre-
sentations—and are now suffering the inevitable results of permitting “ mere
approximation of the truth,” to be tendered in the Crown Lands Office as honest and
positively truer security, for the sure and promised fixing of mineral claims.
This passage of the report chiefly interests the petitioners by the assurance that their
application of June 5, was most unjustly rejected as a misdescription; when we now
find it admitted that the office maps are defective, and the surveys since made declare the
description given in our application to be remarkably correct.
To the public it is highly important, and if they are wise they will very speedily


institute enquiry regarding the immediate repayment of all moneys paid on account of
mineral claims now forfeited in every part of the colony.
The statement made by the report, as to the value and honesty of the means by which
the said claims have been granted by the Land Office, should have induced the Govern-
ment to refund the money directly the report appeared ; for the sooner the disgrace
is wiped out by restitution, the better. The stain of the transaction must for ever
remain indelible.
Note —This almost incredible confession was upon entirely public consideration,
and for public benefit, communicated to the Adelaide daily newspapers by the writer of
these remarks.
The editors, not having read the report, very naturally felt doubtful of the actual
possibility of the thing stated.
The usual records of crime were familiar and agreeable to the tendencies of editorial
capacity ; but it was hardly to be expected where more gigantic interests and dangerous
effects were involved, that a discussion of this nature would be found suitable to the
limited calibre of colonial writers.
The Register, indeed,' took higher ground—and objected (as far as it was possible to
interpret the peculiar phraseology of the learned Theban) on the broad principle founded
no doubt, upon itenerant preaching, that the perpetration of a great wrong by people of
standing and influence, is by no means so reprehensible as the audacity that demands
any enquiry or restitution.
The writer suggested, as an act of justice and protection to the public, that the
fallacious documents should be burnt in a public place, by the common hangman ; and
those immediately responsible for the delinquency, should be in public admonished by the
same functionary.
This mild measure of retribution the sagacious editor designated as “ scurilous and
abusive and the mere statement of the fact, openly confessed in the report, he further
declared to be a libel.
Had the communication been anything relating to cotton cultivation, Hare’s system
extension of railways, or telegraphs, or any other rampant insanity, thrown out to keep
the public mind from the only question of moment—the land question. No doubt we
should have been electrified by a leader of great length, and corresponding weakness
properly seasoned with provincial constructions and inconsequential conclusions, diluted
to a washy, unwholesome nutriment fqr public credulity.
Allegation 8.
“ Permission to see and examine Peters’s application of 3lay 25 was in every instance
refused to the petitioners.”
Report says—“ This is true and it is to be regretted that such a precaution is
necessary to defeat the machinations of persons who do not hesitate to take advantage
of misdescription. “
The petitioners having never seen Peters’s application, can hardly be accused of taking
advantage of its terms ; nor do they understand what advantage could be attained by
inspecting a document that, as stated by the report described nothing, and therefore was
unintelligible and useless.
They only desired to see if it was, as stated by the Surveyor-General, “ word for
word the same as their own. Permission to do so was always refused as long as it was
considered available for the petitioners to make objections to its description. IT hen at
the solicitation of 31 r. C. Fenn permission was given to examine the application, it was
seen to be very differently worded to that of the petitioners, and, as far as thev could
decide by the fixing points described, indicated a place several miles to the south-east of
the claims granted to themselves.
1 he report however affirms that, in reality, its description was only a pretence, and
had no distinct meaning, and explains why it was so made, and by whose direction and
sanction ; and therefore, being so made, was quite contrary to the prescribed rules for
making an application for mineral claims.
Ihe regulations state—“ Applications for leases are to be accompanied by such local
description and any other information as will serve to identify the spot,”
Ihe Surveyor-General in this case declined to take the mineral regulations as a rule
of action All other applicants are held bound by the conditions demanded, but this
public officer in his own interests thought himself justified in ignoring the rules laid
down by the wisdom of Parliament.
1 he report tells us that the description given by Peters was appended at the request
qf the Surveyor-General, and that it was at his instigation a c< misdescription,” “ as the


applicant was unable to give a more detailed description.” Which may be translated
that the applicant had heard of a copper discovery having been made somewhere near
Tipara, a d provided the Surveyor-General would favor him by accepting an applica-
tion that did not <£ identify the spot," he would undertake to fix his application defi-
nitely by survey, and so include the discovery, of which he was ignorant at that moment,
but which was sure to be made known by the real discoverer putting in a well described
application.
This e( misdescription” by Peters is a very important and remarkable admission, as it
discoverers beyond all dispute that the whole proceeding of Hughes and others in respect
to toese claims was vitiated from the very commencement; that they never made any
application for claims near Tipara May 26 ; as a misdescription is no description, and
an application without description c{ serving to identify the spot’ is no application.—
Vide Mineral Lease Regulations,
The charge of “ taking advantage" seems misapplied. The only persons who could
derive profit or advantage from an illegal operation must be the delinquents who orga-
nised the unfair mode of imposing on the Crown ; and therefore, had the document been
exhibited, the petitioners would nave felt it their duty to expose and “ defeat the machu
nations of persons who' do not hesitate to take advantage of misdescription."
Tne only advantage that has accrued to the petitioners as yet amounts to this—That
they tendered a bona fide application for a place totally unknown to any others June 5 ;
that Mr. Hughes and others then fixed an illegal application by the description given in
that of the petitioners. That the Commissioner of Crown Lauds, being duly aware, as
chief of the office, of these irregular proceedings, accepted the illegal application and
the surreptitious survey ; and that Hughes, Goyder, and others did thereupon take pos-
session of the claims granted to the petitionees, as being the best to be had under the
circu instances.
And having thus been guilty of a great wrong, a gross injustice, and a decided tres-
pass and outrage, and br means of an inad nissable application and a false survey de-
prived the \V. & M. Adventure of their valuable claims, then the Report informs the
House of Assembly, in a tone of injured innocence and indignation, “ The petitioners
seek to take advantage of Misdescription !”
Allegation 9.
That a protest was forwarded to the ilon. Commissioner of Crown Lands against
Hughes and others being allowed to occupy or work on lease the ground applied for by
the petitioners; that the said protest is declared to be lost.
That many ocher papers, ordered to be laid on the table of the House, have not been
produced.
The report admits receipt of protest, and states it to be lost; “ that no action was taken
upon receipt of the protest on my recommendation ; as from a survey made by myself I
was aware that the lessees were in rightful oi cupation.”
The protest is dated July t7th, 1861—the Surveyor-General was at Tipara for the first
time August Lsth—and went there lor the express purpose of settling the dispute, and
ascertaining, by personal observation, if Hughes was occupying the ground described in
his application; and for this purpose we understood he went to Tipara, as stated by the
Commissioner. Yet we find by the report that one month before he had seen the place,
he decided to take no notice of our protest, as he then knew that Hughes was in rightiu
occupation. . . ,
We object to such decision, on the ground—first, that he had not then visite e
locality in dispute; and, altogether, because he had sufficient means in his power o
understand clearly, by the maps and plans in the office, and by contrasting tie wo
applications of iay 2-ith and iune sth and 11th, that the place Hughes was ru y
entitled to o cupy was decidedly not the ground where he is now established. , ,
Before the report was published, it was difficult to determine with any accuracy
the occupants had circumven ed the Land Office, or the office had circumven e ,
if both had mutually assisted to get each other into a difficulty. . . ..
The report, however, explains pretty clearly, tliat whatever wrong, mj » .7
was done in the premises, 'he Crown Lands Office is acknowledg P
lingly aiding, abetting, and assisting in the same, to the conclusion. -.vw,,! n ~~„
i'L report most d.Ttmctly “ I that the le.eee. tret. » ngh*.
pation, and that the petitioners had no more right there than per. , g g
thing after it had been discovered by others, hope to obtain a share by importunity and
and misrepresentation” must be for the future desision of others,


Wt the “ rightful occupation” is to our present interest, and purpose; and we believe
the replies to some parts of the report will raise a considerable doubt as to the veracity of
that assertion.
The Surveyor-General having, as he himself informs us, made the “ misdescribed”
form of application for Hughes and Reter—“ This description was appended at my
request” —and “ This vagueness was preferred by me’’ (vide report, page 5) and having
thereby having constituted himself the actual applicant for, and consequently pan pro-
prietor of, the claims in question—as the person describing the place applied for is
regarded very properly as the bona fide discoverer—might very likely not feel much
inclined to take any particular notice of the protest, nor be anxious to put any very
great impediment in the way, or object strongly to the occupation by Hughes and
others of those claims they had never applied for
It is no business of ours to enquire how many mineral interests are held by the
Surveyor-General; but holding the office, artd carrying the power in his own hands,
so great and overwhelming to injure the interests of others when they happen—as
unfortunately in our case—to interfere with his own, we unavoidably enquire—What
the great chief of the office is about ? and how is it that all these questionable pro-
ceedings meet with no check or hindrance from his hands in their passage through his
department ?
The Commissioner must have known, if the Surveyor-General did not, that these
claims were to be gazetted as “ Forfeited, no survey,” on September 26th : and that
until that date no other person had a right to occupy, as the claims did not revert
to the Crown befo'i hand.
The Commissioner must have known that the petitioners had properly applied for
the ground, and that he had approved of this application ; and that four different
surveys -ent in, and accepted by the office, all testified to the perfectly correct des-
cription given by the petitioners of the locality
That Feter, per Hughes—or the Surveyor-General for both—had knowingly and
illegally tendered a “ misdescription,” or one that had no reference whatever to the
sections claimed by the petitioners.
The < ommissioner could easily see, by the plans in his office, that Hughes was in
occupation of ground at least five miles from the spot identified, by the numbers therein
delineated, to be the position of the claims granted to himself and others, and further
attested by the leases executed therefore.
All these circumstances, and many others mentioned in.this reply to the report, were
well known to the Honorable Commissioner of Crown Lrnds ; and we complain that all
representations made to him by the petitioners of the injustice, so obvious, at the time it
occurred, were met with perfect indifference, and that it was in vain we requested his
protection.
Report says—“ The only other document that has been withheld is the letter of con-
ditional approval,” and this letter “ should have been furnished by the petitioners ”
The House of Assembly may hold a different opinion on this subject The papers
were ordered by the House for reasons known to that Honorable Assembly, but of which
the world outside are not supposed to hear or understand ; and no doubt the Speaker
would have been justly wroth if the petitioners had ignorantly presumed to tarnish
the purity of that House by thrusting their papers on the table thereof.
And why is the letter of conditional approval withh Id ? We understood it was lost.
It is a letter of great importance—not to the petitioners, who have their own but to the
Land Office, to verify the statement of the conditions, which we most utterly deny, and
which denial the official letter shall substantiate.
Ihe report suggests —“ That the petitioners would have produced this letter of approval
themselves, only they knew that its production would show too surely the nature of the
transactions in which they are engaged; therefore their prudence in withholding it is
easily accounted for."
When the time comes for producing this letter in the proper place, we beFev#
that it will reveal “ too surely ” the nature of those transactions , and when placed sde
by side with the statemen s so foolishly hazarded in the report, will also, to a great
extent, account for our extreme prudence in not saying much about its contents before
the time appointed for its investigation.
Allegation 10.
That the Surveyor-General did, on the 15th day of August, 1861, place W. W.
Hughes in possession of land applied for by the petitioners, and did thereby deprive
them of all power to complete survey.


Report says, t£ That it was only the positive assurance of Mr. Cussen that the claim!
made by him did not include the lands already applied for by Capt, Hughes or his agent,
that they were even conditionally received.”
Mr. Cussen says he had no interview or communication with the Surveyor-General
between the day the application was made and the day it was accepted ; nor upon either
of these two days.
It was not in the power Of Mr. Cussen to know or to say anything about the claims.
He knew nothing more than had been sent from Kadina by the discoverer ; and an
applicant can have no means of being sure what land is taken and what land is not.
Even a discoverer of mineral lands cannot be sure until he reaches the Land Office, that
some more fortunate person has not preceded him with an application.
It seems rather to be within the province of the Surveyor-General to know how far an
application may include lands already applied for. Ihe records of the Land Office are
surely more within tne power and cognizance of officials than of those who may know
absolutely nothing of the rules to be observed in taking out an application, or might
be unable to comprehend the intent and meaning of an office plan of mineral
claims. . . , ,
The Chief Clerk assured the explorer that his application did not include lands
occupied by Hughes and others; and the explorer was quite satisfied, by inspecting the
maps and plans in the office, that no person had applied for the lands he came in that
day ('une llth) to claim, and that Hughes and others were quite five miles distant from
the place of his discovery, as the plans in the House of Assembly very distinctly show
them to be to this day.
The report adds—“ That the fixings on the face of our claims contradicted the
assertion” that they did not include other lands already applied for.
It is quite unaccountable, if such is the case, how the Land Office came to accept an
application which, on the face of it, bore, according to the Surveyor-General, undeniable
proof that it was inadmissible.
Report continues—“ The petitioners are wrong in stating that I placed any one in
possession of the lands in question,”
The petitioners finding that, after the visit of the Surveyor-General to Tipara, the
occupants did not remove from the claims—but, on the contrary, established themselves
the more permenantly—came to the conclusion that they had been absolutely put in pos-
session by active Government interference. •
The report, however, says at this allegation, that the occupants put themselves in the
locality they now enjoy, entirely by their own choice, and therefore at their own charge
and responsibility ; that the Crown had not actively sanctioned their presence or the
claims granted to the VV. and M. adventure ; therefore, if they now occupy by misdescrip-
tion, misrepresentation, misplaced survey, and leases obtained on the faith of these
reliable peculiarities, thare can be no difficulty in persuading such mode of occupation
to cease and determine.
The report says—“ I found that claim (No. 930) to be correctly marked upon the
ground, and merely intimated the fact to those then in possession.”
The claim No. 930 is, the Surveyor-General declares, correctly marked upon the
ground. No one ought to know better than that officer.
The plans now before the House give that claim quite a different position, and show
the place now occupied by 930, at Tipara, to be on the plans —Crown lands not applied.
for ! constituting a discrepancy between statements and facts which will have to be
very carefully brought under consideration in the right place. _
The Surveyor-General, however, says that a claim in that neighbourhood, marked
930, is placed correctly on the ground ; and this the petitioners always believed to be
the case, and are gratified to find their opinion confirmed by such good au ‘ h ? rl ' y ’ h a ,l
they (the petitioners) have some interest in a survey of four claims made in their beba
at Wilkawat by Mr. Macarthy, a licensed surveyor, who informed them that the numbers
now affixed to these claims although not the numbers alloted to them by the Survey
Office—are the numbers (930, 931, 932, 933) ordered or directed to be placed upon
them by express authority of the Surveyor-General; ami with these orders or directions
for which, doubtless, some excellent reason can be given—it is not their province or mten-
At the proper time, and in the proper place, these and several other unaccountable
and mysterious dispensations of the Survey Office will, there is no doubt, receive a m
complete and satisfactory elucidation.


Allegation 11.
That the Surveyor-General assured the petitioners that no survey of their claims at
Tipara, would be accepted. The Report sajs, “Such Assuredly would be the advice I
should have offered, on ascertaining that the lands of their alleged discovery were in
reality those previously claimed by Peter.”
The petitio ers understanding that no survey would be accepted, and being satisfied
that they applications did not interfere with any other lodged in the office prior to the
day on which theirs was completed, June 19, 1861; they, therefore, resolved to conform
with all the requirements of the Mineral Lease Regulations, as far as lav in their power,
being quite conscious that the Surveyor-General could not be held justified in refusing a
survey of claims which had been fully approved by the Honorable Commissioner, and
which were in themselves open to no objection.
The Mineral Lease Regulations require, Clause 2—“ Within three months from the
date of application, apian must be lodged with the the exact
position applied for, with reference to some known trigonometrical point (if such exists
within fifteen miles ofthe claim) and describing the boundaries of the block.’’
The explorer finding Mr. McCarthy (licensed Surveyor), camped at Willkawat,
June 20th. 1861, and ascertaining that gentleman was sufficiently enlightened on several
particulars, regarding Mr. Young’s survey, for Captain Hughes, and of the difference
between the place applied for May 25th, and the ground then occupied, his survey was
accepted as a good and reliable fixing ofthe four claims granted to the petitioners, and
this plan, as in accordance with the regulation above quoted, was lodged with the
Surveyor-General within the three mouths as required, and is strictly and entirely in
agreement with the description of the ground as given in the application tendered
June sth and 11th, and approved June 26th, 1861.
The survey here spoken of, is now in the House of Assembly, pr'xlueed as a reliable
and approved survey by the Honorable Commissioner of Crown Lands, for the information
of and guidance of that Honorable House.
The petitioners flatter themselves, that the Survey Office and the Surveyor-General,
will cheerfully acknowledge that this survey of their claims is the most accurate and
perfectly scientific delineation that has been sent into the Survey Office, relating to any
Mineral claims, either at Kadina Wallaroo, or Tipara,; and it is believed the only
survey, that gave the configuration of the coast adjacent a most important and material
survey mark as regards the claims, most carefully omitted in all other surveys.
The coast line having been left unnoticed by Hughes’ Survey was the immediate cause
of considerable difficulty in the Crown Lands Office, and therefore, when the, claim,
Ho. 930, was by some mysterious agency removed from Warilka to Wilkawat, a dis-
tance of six miles, the question arose as to the disposition of the great body of claims
that lay nearest the coast there being but a small space of land between them and the
sea coast.
Finding it was impossible to place Hughes on the valuable discovery made by the
Wilkawat Mining adventure in any other way, the Surveyor-General, and the Honarable
Commissioner, permitted about thirty or forty of the most westerly claims to be pushed
out into Spencer’s Gulf, and the unlucky occupants on awaking one fine morning, early
in June, found themselves in twenty fathoms of salt water. It is remarka >le that the
Report affirms “ that the lands of the petitioners’ alleged discovery were, in reality, those
previously claimed by Hughes.”
The House is informed through the Survey Office, September 12, 1862, the bald hill
near which Hughes fixed his claims, by his description, is nine miles and a-half from the
coast, and the Surveyor-General is quite aware that the petitioners described a hill only
four miles from the coast in their application.
As locality is always a difficult point to determine satisfactorily, it appears to us
hardly fair to put such very contradictory statements before the House, when in all
probability the Report was ordered not exactly to confuse, but rather with a view to
enlighten the Assembly.,
If the Report had said “ the lands of the petitioners’ discovery were in reality those
which Hughes had surveyed ,” then the House would have clearly understood that the
petitioners requested their decision on that very question.
Can Hughes, or any other person, have the sanction of the House to occupy lands,
which the Report admits were not included in his application for Mineral Claims, which
said lands have been granted to others, who did accurately include them in their appli-
cation and which lands Hughes did afterwards survey and take possession of, in defiance


and contempt of an Act made by the Honorable House, and known as the Mineral
Lease Regulations. ,
The Report leaves the House of Assembly to infer that the reply alleged to have been
taade to the petitioners, was not that the Surveyor-General would refuse to accept ft
Survey of the claims granted to them. It is only said, “ such would have heen the
The applicants did not seek the advice of the Surveyor-General ; the regulations
fully advised all that was necessary for the purpose. The assistance of that officer was
requested to remove trespassers in order that the applicants might comply "4th the
regulations, and enjoy the rights an 1 privileges that the Commissioner had granted to
them. I'hev believe ; themse vea justified in seeking that assistance, and that it was
the office and the duty of the Surveyor-General to give them aid in a matter that
required the action of an authority superior to their own, and they believed that being
holders of the claims by grant from the Crown, they believed the Surveyor-General was
bound to put them in a position to do those things required by the Crown in pertoim-
ance with the Mineral Lin Is Regulations. And they further believe, that any
obstruction, if unjustifiably placed in the way of such conformance by the Surve\
Office, so as to prevent the complete fulfilment of the regulations, will not be allowed by
the justice of the House of Assembly to operate to the prejudice of the petitioners,
inasmuch as they were not only ready anil willing to do all those things required by the
regulations, but that they made every effort, and used every endeavour to persuade the
Commissioner of Crown Lands to grant them, no favor, but the simplest act of justiee,
measured out by the strictest letter of the law.
The 2nd Clause of the Regulations, require-a plan to be lodged fixing the exact
position applied for. This demand it was obviously, not in the power of Hughes and
others to comply with, because the report expressly states, that Hughes or Leter (or
Mr. Goyder) did not apply for any exact position , but gave in as stated, a mis-
description as neither Mr. I’eter nor Captain Hughes were then able to give a more
definite fixing, therefore they could not possibly do what the Regulations require tor
survey, as there was no exact position described so as to he fixed by the plan.
The Report says “ this vagueness was preferred by me until an accurate survey could
be made.” But this very vagueness so preferred, is especially that which the Regulations
appear to deprecate; for they stipulate, first for an application so described, that it
“ will serve to identify the spotand secondly, for survey, “a plan fixing the exact
tins' appears sufficiently distinct, and directly opposed to the course pursued by
the Surveior General, for whereas, that officer preferred a vague application to bo
afterwards fixed by an accurate survey ; the Regulations demand on the contrary, an
accurate survey to fix the exact position described by a definite application
A most material difference; for the report would lead the House of Assembly to
conclude that the Hon. Commissioner of Crown Lands had authority to permit tha
survey of Hughes to indicate the place, not specified, but only intended to bejwpto*
for- whereas the Mineral Land Regulations insist positively that the application
must clearly define, so as to identify the place intended to be surveyed.
Therefore the petitioners believe that, putting the regulations by the side o the
admissions made in the report, it will be very evident that “ the lands of their alleged
discovery are not, and cannot be, “ in reality , those previously claimed by Feter.
Allegation 12
Savs—“ That November 4th, the petitioners discovered that the documents shown to
Mr. Lin on that day did not coincide with a statement made by the burveyor-Oeneral
JU Thimport evades the matter, by denying that we tendered any application at the
La Thil > diTpuud e po\nt has been, we think, set at rest when referring to the first four
•“S^rlntUde'b7'.he July 18. h did no. roly only upon
assorted tender of une ftth The fact declared was, that the two appheauons then
the office (Peter’s and Milford’s) Were “word for word the at two
was afterwards, in October, confirmed by the Commissioner of Crown Lands, at tw 7
interviews which the explorer had the honour of attending at that gentleman s office,
and on each occasion the Commissioner was urgently requested to permit the apphcatio


to be examined, and the request was politely, but decidedly refused. At these interviews
not a single allusion was made to the conditions afterwards discovered on our application.
The Commissioner stated that the two applications were precisely the same, but that
Hughes had the priority in time, and regretted that it was contrary to official regulation
to allow another person’s application to be inspected by strangers.
Report continues —“ I will elsewhere show that the discovery claimed by Petef
was that included in the survey of the claims applied for by him on the 25th of May,
1861.
The petitioners entertain no doubt whatever that very little difficulty could be found
in constructing a survey so as to include any desirable piece of country; and therefore
they see no reason to call in question that the Surveyor General may be able to show all
that he here states. •
He has already informed us that Peter did not know what place he was applying for on
May 25th, or, what comes to the same thing, that he was unable to say where it was or
what it was like, and the Surveyor-General himself proposed “ misdescription” as the most
obvious expedient under the circumstances; and it is certain if an applicant has no idea
of the place he wants, a wrong description is the very best explanation that could be
expected.
It has also one advantage that no well-defined application can include. When the
applicant proceeds to survey, he can take in anything and everything that comes in his
way, withour any regard to landmarks or distances. Any other person’s discovery can
be “ included in the surveybecause his application, describing no place in particular,
must, of necessity, include every place in general. And if any question of right arises,
as—VVhy is a wrong description to run riot over the country, and deprive less favoured
applicants of claims already granted to their more humble and precise demands ?—we
are met at once by the comfortable and satisfactory statement in the report, that is
evidently meant to silence all further complaint and enquiry - u This description was
appended at my request, as neither Mr. Peter nor Captain Hughes were then able to give
a more definite fixing.”
With all these material advantages, there can be no doubt that the survey will be
found to include the discovery here mentioned.
History has whispered that a certain application, tendered and rejected on the sth day
of June, 1861, was found to be of very considerable benefit in manipulating a survey
said to be concluded June 13th ; but history is not always deserving of credit, and mis-
takes have occasionally been made even in the best regulated surveys ; and “ misdescrip-
tion," however much valued and approved in the Crown Lands Office, may sometimes
fail in giving a distinct impression of a particular locality, and has the further dis-
advantage of endangering the result of a well-planned enterprise, in which a grand con-
ception was not supported by a corresponding profundity of intellect.
The report, at this place, gives a very important piece of information for the benefit of
the petitioners. The words just quoted are evidence put in by the Surveyor-General that
Peter did not make an application May 25. It says, that neither Mr. Peter nor Captain
Hughes could, give a definite description—that is, they cou'd not ,£ identify the spot !"
The description “ was appended at my request;" therefore it was in reality the Sur-
veyor General himself who made the application, and not Peter ; the person who gives
the description is the applicant, without any question.
The Moonta is, therefore, actually and undoubtedly, the property of G. W. Goyder,
E quire.
The petitioners offer no objection, and see no reason why that gentleman should not
rejoice in a copper mine with as much peace of mind as any other Government officer ;
and the fact throws additional and satisfactory light upon the favor and assistance expe-
rienced by Hughes in his transactions that day with the Land Office.
Knowing, however, the proper method as laid down by the regulations, it does seem
strange that the head of the survey department should tender a “ misdescription ’’ as a
means of securing valuable claims.
It is also a curious coincidence that Ryan, the shepherd, from' whom Hughes is
is said ( vide report) to have derived the information concerning this valuable discovery,
was himself in the Land Office that day—May 25th—with a person from Port Wake-
field, for the purpose of taking out the same claims on his own and friend’s account, and
Ryan also was unable to give any intelligible account of his discovery. He knew, like
his friend Hughes, that there was certainly copper somewhere or other between Point
Riley and Hardwicke Bay ; but any better or clearer explanation he was unable to
give.
If, therefore, the alleged discoverer, who had been two or more years shepherding on
the very place, could give no sort of description—good, bad, or indifferent—of a place


which really has most excellent distinguishing objects on every side, it can cause no set.
prise that Hughes, who has had the run for oniy 14 or 16 years, and knows every hcl;
and corner of it—coasts and plain, hill and scrub—should be quite unable to give us a
mark—a palpably bald hill with his own hut upon it—or the distance from the sea-
coast, close to his nose.
With all those insurmountable difficulties in the way of making application for a place
of which he has had positive and sufficient information to justify a journey to Adelaide
in hot haste, we find him fairly “ stuck-up ,” but the Surveyor-General kindly steps in
and saves him further trouble.
Surrounded by artistic and expensive maps and plans—the unaccountable lore and vast
information only to be acquired in the company of theodolites—assisted by the combined
results of 26 years’ surveys, and the place to be described comparatively a stone throw
from the Survey Office—science, practice, information, and discretion ! all operating in
harmonious combination, produce— <f a misdescription /”—which, being interpreted,
means—No application was made at all!
Allegation 13.
The Honorable the Commissioner informed the petitioners, by letter, dated Nov. 28,
1861, that the claims applied for June sth and 11th, 1861, were declared forfeited.
Whereas petitioners believe that the said claims being previously declared to have no
existence, were therefore beyond the possibjlity of forfeiture.
The report on this allegation makes rather a confused and contradictory statement, not
very easy to unravel. Some allowance, however, must be made for a difficulty—the
consequences of which were apparently not seen until it was too late to remedy the
mischief.
Forfeiture incurred, implies a previous right possessed; the one can have no power
unless preceded by the other.
Before this report was published, we Were always informed by the Hon. Commissioner
and the Surveyor General, that as our application and Peters’ were “ word for word” the
same, and Peters’ was sent in several days before ours, therefore we had no claims at
Tipara, the application being abortive.
The report says— “ Precluded the petitioners, from the first, from talcing the lands
alluded to ; that is, those previously applied for.'' Again, we are described as (i Per-
sons attempting to obtain the property of others .”
Altogether, the report rather avoids the original, and more express declaration,
of the exact resemblance, and inclines more to the side of forfeiture.
Upon calm reflection, and putting prejudice aside, it does appear absolutely necessary
that our Tipara claims should be forfeited.
Our application was a stumbling-block to the Survey Office; there was no “ mis-
description” by which to place it anywhere else ; nor could it conveniently be moved into
Spencer’s Gulf along with the other obstreperous claims, because, unfortunately, it gave
the distance from the sea-coast as one of its fixing points. There it stood in everybody’s
way, interfering with everyone’s arrangements—a nuisance to the Land Office and
to several highly respectable and influential people—and of no use or profit to the
owners.
Possibly, in the anxiety of the Crown Lands Office to secure, safely and surely, the
forfeiture of these claims, the mark was a little overshot; and when a thing is
overdone, it has sometimes to be undone—which may be awkward and dangerous.
In this case, the forfeitures are rather too many, and are rather opposed to one another;
the second upsets the first, and the last upsets the whole, and then knocks itself over, and
several respeetable people who have got in the way.
The Surveyor-General informs the House—“ In reality, however, the above claims
were forfeited 14 days after their conditional approval, by the failure of the applicants to
prove that the bald hill referred to was another hill apart from that from which Peter’s
claims were fixed.”
The date of the approval is June 26th, and 14 days after that would make the date of
the forfeiture July 10, 1861.
This is, therefore, forfeiture No, 1.
In the correspondence, pages 1 and 2, is a letter dated July 26, 1861—“ The Com-
missioner is willing to grant you an extension of one month rrom the present date for
fixing their exact position.


According to the interpretation of forfeitures as revealed to us by the Surveyor-General,
the termination of the month here given, failing the purpose required, constitutes a for-
feiture on August 2G, 1861.
This is, therefore, forfeiture No. 2,
The Mineral Lease Regulations give three months to survey and fix claims from the
date of application, and this term would be expired September 26, 1861 ; and it is
to be thought if the first forfeiture is sufficient, this must have equal or perhaps greater
weight:
And is, therefore, forfeiture No. 3.
Correspondence, page 4, letter of Novamber 28,1861 —The Commissioner says —“ Any
claim with respect to these sections is forfeited,”
The report, wishing to give a lucid explanation of the reason and manner of this sur-
prising forfeiture, says—“ I can only suppose that the Hon. the Commissioner, utterly
disgusted by the unscrupulous statements of the petitioners, and anxious to adopt what
appeared at the moment the readiest mode of terminating attempts to obtain advantages”
—and then adds —“ The letter was, however, unnecessary.”
All which we interpret to mean that, because the Commissioner was ‘‘utterly dis-
gusted”—because it was £< the readiest mode”—and because it was also “ unnecessary”
—therefore our claims were again forfeited November 28, 1861.
Which, therefore, constitutes forfeiture No. 4.
The last forfeiture we can speak of at present; and we believe there are two or three
more to be found amongst the maps, letters, leases, and other little arrangements that
are not yet discovered in searching the archives of the Land Office—is to be found in the
“ Government Gazette”—which interesting periodical declares, to the utter discomfiture
and denial of all the very peculiar and convenient attempts previously made, that these
claims were forfeited September 26, 1861—“ No survey,"
This is, therefore, forfeiture No. 5.
After so many forfeitures, for so many causes, these unfortunate claims ought, by this
last occurrence, to be totally destroyed; whereas, strange to say, they turn up as vivacious
as ever—.rather improved than otherwise by rough usage; and if we examine the different
causes of these several forfeitures, it will be seen that a large amount of official ingenuity
has been expended for a very small and more minute results.
Forfeiture No. 1 appears to have supervened, because the wretched applicants failed to
prove “ that the bald hill was another hill and the only means of performing such
a novel undertaking was by consulting Peter’s “ misdescription which the Surveyor-
General would not allow to be inspected ; therefore we were to show that a certain hill
was not a hill that was mentioned in a document, not intended to be understood, and not
allowed to be seen, and the writer of which confessed that he knew nothing at all about
the place therein alluded to.
Forfeiture No. 2 befel in this wise. A month was allowed to fix the claims—the
claims were denied. Having no claims, the Land Office insisted that they should be
forthwith fixed —that it Was possible was clearly shown in the case of Hughes. His
application was a misdescription ; that is, he applied for nothing , and the Commissioner
gave him a copper mine !
The Surveyor-Gerieral informs us we have no claims, and the Commissioner grants
one month to define their locality, which we, in our ignorance, imagined to be impossible,
but which was not more opposed to common sense or rational proceedings than the first
arrangement.
Forfeiture No. 3.—The term allowed to applicants by the Mineral Lease Regulations
is three months, to complete survey of claims. If, therefore, the Commissioner was
justified, as the Surveyor-General declares, in pronouncing forfeitures, first in fourteen
days, then again at the end of a month, because we neglected or declined t" say
which was Peters’ Hill, or to give the true position of claims that had no existence or
belonged to some other persons—we cannot doubt that forfeiture on the same terms, and
for the same excellent reasons, must of necessity follow on the expiration of the period
stipulated in the Regulations. The Commissioner is, of course, better acquainted with
the power and intention of the mineral laws than the petitioners, and to his wisdom and
judgment we defer implicitly. If the first two forfeitures are in accordance with justice
and the regulations, this, the third, must be unquestionable.
Forfeiture the fourth is probably the most remarkable of all these curious attempts to
deprive the petitioners of their rights.
The report appeals to our compassion and sympathy; it pictures the Honorable Com-
missioner as a great man in affliction, suffering from the sorrows ignominously heaped
upon him by these unprincipled applicants for claims. His intense disgust is pathetically
drawn by that amusing work of fiction—the Report.
The applicants had been repeatedly told that they never Jiad any right to the claims ;


that Hughes had applied before them ; that the approval of their application was only
conditional; that the conditions had never been executed ; that they had done nothing
right; that all these charges were most clearly proved by Mr. Peter’s “ misdes ription ”
by the many errors in Mr. Young’s survey—by the rejection of their own application
as unintelligible—by the “ foot-note” to be seen cn a document in the office—and, above
all, by the well-known circumstance that all the maps in the Purvey Office were 1 on y
mere approximations of the truth ” —and yet they were not satisfied !
Driven to despair by such inveterate obstinacy and evident intention to defraud, and by
the “ unscruputous statements of the petitioners ,” the honorable aud harrassed gentle-
man was utterly at a loss what to say to these insatiable customers.
The Surveyor-General, indignant and “disgusted” with the conduct of the petitioners,
and the martyrdom of his official Maecenas, “ supposes" (the Commissioner must feel
deeply graceful to his friend’s imagination) that the onorable Commissioner, “ being
anxious to adopt what appeared at the moment the readiest mode of terminating
attempts on the part of the petitioners ,” Sc. c., said, i appears, the first thing that came
to hand, as having nothing better to say ; and, indeed, having already made so many
startling statements, the perplexity can be und rstood.
By way of making the matter more satisfactory and a little less like a blunder (?) the
report goes a step deeper in the mud, and renders all escape from the difficulty impossible
“The letter was, however, unnecessary.
Quite so ! perhans it was unwise as well. The report first knocks the Commissioner
down, and then viciously kicks him for falling.
Not satisfied with telling us that the whole contents of the letter were utterly untrue,
and only written to deceive the petitioners, the report first offers an apology for the
unhappy Commissioner, that throws yet deeper “disgrace and obloquy upon the miserable
transaction , and then plainly says that it had far better have been left undone—it ‘ was
unnecessary ,’, . , , ~,
The Crown Lands might well says—Que diable allais je faire, dans ce.te galere .
After struggling through all the wonderful phenomena of the four first difficulties, each
of which negatives the other in regular succession, and with an order and method that
reflects great credit on the business habits of Land Office authorities.
Forfeiture No. 5 steps in, and puts all the previous dispositions to ignominious dis-
comfiture. . .
The “ Government Gazette” states, in a few concise, and, considering its authority
and source, unimpeachable words, that claims 1039 to 1042, near Fipara, were applied
for by R. Cussen, June 19th; were to him duly granted, as approved, June 26th; and
that no survey having been made, were forfeited September 26th, 1861. _ _
The “ Gazette” testifies that these claims were fully granted to the petitioners, and
that they retained all the rights of possession and occupation, as tenants of the Crown,
up to September 26th, 1861 : . .
That they were bound, and required by the Mineral Land Regulations to do, certain
thing* before that date, and upon the ground so granted; and failing (as alleged) so to
do, the said claims, and the rights and privileges of the applicant, became forfeit.
The “ Gazette”, therefore, bears witness, and declares as follows:—1 hat the occu-
pation of these claims by others is a fraud, both against the Crown and against the
petitioners; . , ... -
That every statement made by the Crown Lands Office respecting the right and title ot
the petitioner to these cleans is totally devoid of truth :
That the previous forfeitures, deliberately announced to the House of Assembly, are
wanton fabrications; ,
T hat the conditional approval of the claims so strenuously insisted upon by ttie report
is flatly denied by the “ Gazette” :
And the “ Gazette” declares, in support of the petition, that the whole tenor of the
report is a wilful intention to deceive and mislead the Honoroble House of
Assembly.
The letter granting our application, and the plans before the House, will distinctly
point out the place where these claims are situated, and an approved survey, showing these
claims fixed, will also show that the application truly described the place to be surveyed in
words that “ screed to identify the spot."


Allegation 14.
Complains that leases were granted to Messrs. Hughes and others for the claims
already allotted to the petitioners, and previous to the time allowed for survey being
concluded.
That the declaration of forfeiture acknowledged that the petitioners had a perfect right
to the said claims.
That Hughes’s or Peters’s application did not describe the locality of those claims,
and therefore they (Hughes and others) do illegally occupy those claims under the leases
they now hold.
The report says, “ I consider that the leases were properly granted, and are accurate in
every respect,”
The petitioners have seen the leases at the Registry Office, and have professional advice
that they (the leases) appear to be “accurate in every respect;” therefore they may have
been “properly granted” as well.
We have no desire to interfere in that which is not our business and does not in any
way concern our interests. Before the report appeared the Adventure were under the im-
pression that the leases granted to Hughes for claims at Tipara were calculated t® damage
the interests of the petitioners in certain other claims granted to themselves.
The report however, we believe, as far as it is possible to understand clearly its various
and contradictory assertions, shews, and the Registry confirms, that the leases held by
Hughes really describe the claims leased by the numbers originally placed on the appli-
cations in the Land Office ; and as the claims so numbered are to be seen in their true
and original position on the plans of claims now in the House of Assembly, and as they
were seen by the petitioners in the Land Office, June sth and llth, 1861, therefore the
complaint of the petitioners is now limited to the injustice remaining, namely, that
Hughes and others do now occupy ground that they never did apply for, according to the
terms and requirements of the law in such cases provided, and which their leases do not
empower them to hold, and which has been, since the 26th June, truly and lawfully
granted to the petitioners.
The 10th allegation says that the Surveyor-General did, August 15, place W. W.
Hughes in possession of the claims now by him and others occupied near Tipara, and the
petitioners believed that this had been done as stated ; but the report distinctly denies that
such was the case, and the petitioners accept willingly the denial, and acknowledge that
they were misled by erroneous information.
Had the Surveyor-General given his sanction to the occupation by Hughes and others
of the claims already granted to the adventure, the enquiry would have been more com-
plicated and much more serious.
As it stands at present it amounts to only a little more than a rather slovenly attempt
on the part of the occupants to take and keep possession of some valuable claims they
have no manner of title to hold or enjoy.
We see by the book in the Registry Office that Hughes holds, amongst others, four
leases for mineral claims near Tipara, numbered 910, 931, 932, 933, and we are not
justified in saying that these leases interfere in any way with the claims granted to us.
Our objection is that the numbers by which these leases are distinguished have also been
placed on certain claims granted to the Adventure, and which are now occupied and pro-
fitably worked by Hughes and others. Whereas the claims numbered 939 to 933, as
shewn upon the plan now in the House, are about or nearly five miles to the south-east
of the locality occupied by Hughes and others.
Great care has been taken not to place the coast line upon that plan, though the peti-
tioners requested that it might be shown for the purpose of convincing the House by
occular demonstration how far away from the place of No. 930 as|given on the plan, and
inscribed upon the lease, is the locality now called the Moonta.
The only mark that can clearly define the difference between where Hughes is and
where he ought to be, beyond all dispute, is the coast line, described and drawn according
to the authorized and true fixing of claim 980.
Where Hughes ought to be, beyond what the evidence of the plans in the Hours
declare, we would not presume to say; for if no application has been made by or for him,
in accordance with the regulations, his leases can hardly be of avail even for the ground
indicated by the numbers.
At present he occupies the ground of 1039, 1040, 1041, 1042, granted by clear and
undeniable description to K. Cussen for E. R. Mitford, June 26, 1861.
Our statement is that the ground now occupied by Hughes, is not the locality of claim
930, according to the plans of claims now in the House. That Hughes occupies the


ground of the four claims 10.19 to 1042, granted to Cussens for Mitford, June 26, 1861,
That on a lease granted to Hughes the claim thereby leased is numbered 930. That
pliim 930 is very distinctly placed, by and with the authority of the Crown Lands OMce,
and according to the position declared by the applicants May 25, 1861, and chosen by
them with the knowledge and assistance of the Surveyor-General. That claim 930 is
to be seen on the office plans, as placed about five miles from the ground now occupied by
Hughes. That the place leased by any applicant is indicated on the lease by the number
pf the claim, and is determined by the corresponding number on the plan of claims, to be
in a position on the ground agreeing with that plan and with that number, as therein
given.
It must be understood that the petitioners do not wish to deprive any person of claims
nropsrly occupied. They seek to obtain possession only of some claims to which they are
legally entitled by grant from the Crown, and which are now held by some other persons
who have no right or title whatever to the property, as is to be seen acknowledged in the
Report made by the Surveyor-General.
Allegation 15
That the survey made by Hughes contains several errors of considerable magnitude.
That by refusing to take notice of their protest, the petitioners have suffered con-
siderable pecuniary loss.
The Report says “The discrepancies referred to by Mr. Young, are of a most trivial
nature.”
The many errors of the survey made for Hughes, although worthy of remark, as
having been accepted as reliable by the Surveyor-General, are not material to the
merits of the petition.
In petitioning for relief to the judgment of the House of Assembly, we have no
intention to resort to any means of justification but that offered by the laws enacted by
the Legislature.
The Mineral Lease Regulations declare, that to obtain legal possession of mineral
claims, as tenants, of the Crown, three conditions must first be strictly complied with,
viz.:—application, survey, and lease. That application “ milst identify the spot that
survey must be “ apian fixing the exact position applied for-’ —that no lease can be
granted without purvey; no survey can be verified without previous application ; and
no application can e accepted or approved that does not accurately describe the plan
or “ identify the spot"
The Report tells us that the present occupants of the Wilkawat claims, made no
application ; that Hughes, Goyder, and Peter tendered a " misdescription” May 25th.
Now, a misdescription is inadmissable, and therefore, incapable of being used as a guide
to a survey, because it is not an application ; therefore, as no application was made, such
as the regulations require, no survey could follow or be accepted.
If the regulations are Binding upon the Petitioners we imagine they cannot be set
aside for the profit or convenience of the Surveyor-General or his intimate iriends ; nor
a false application or misdescription be accepted, and allowed to precede a survey, even
if made by the Surveyor-General himself, who should be the last person to evade the
regulations of his own office.
As Hughes made no application May 25th for the four claims at Wilkawat (which
were properly applied for by, and granted,to the petitioners) therefore they, the
petitioners, do not acknowledge any after proceedings as admissable or legal, unless the
Mineral Lease Regulations can be ignored by the Surveyor-General and the Com-
missioner of Crown Lands, at their will and pleasure.
The Report then says, “That no plan or diagram was ever handed to the Surveyor-
General or to the chief Clerk, on or after June sth by the petitioners.”
There was one ofiered but not accepted certainly, and of this we justly complain. For
when Hughes tendered an application confessing he was entirely ignorant ot the locality
where the claim should be placed, his wrong description was not rejected ; on the con-
trary, the Surveyor-General quite as ignorant, but more able to meet the difficulty,
directed and advised to the extent of framing the application himself; “ this description
was appended at my request .”
The Petitioners on the other hand tender their Explorer’s application, June sth, so
accurately described, that any person with a compass and the direction given, could
■place himself right en the copper.


And this application is rejected, not as having been previously tendered by anyone else,
but as unintelligible because the office plan only showed the Bald Hill of Peters’ claim,
ten or twelve miles inland.
No assistance was offered to the petitioner’s, they were told to amend their application,
already perfectly correct.
The Report, therefore, informs us that a false and inadraissable application was not
only readily accepted, but that the Surveyor-General was the direct means of protecting,
encouraging, and appropriating a most gross imposition upon the Government by
sanctioning for himself and Hughes a misdescription.
And that the Honorable the Commissioner of Crown Hands, so far from interdicting
this scandalous imposition, gave the full weight and authority of his official status, to
uphold and encourage the malefactors in infringing the Regulations or law of the Colony,
to suppose the several misrepresentations and evil doings of the Surveyor-General, and
in every possible way to bring disgrace and discredit upon every word or deed emanating
from the office of the Crown Lands.
The Report thinks the petitioners have no less to complain of in consequence of the
protest being disregarded, it says - “ I do not believe that the petitioners suffer any loss
whatever beyond what is justly entailed upon persons attempting to obtain the property
of others.’*
This statement let it be well remembered, is put before the House, with the perfect un-
derstanding by the Surveyor-General that the property we “ attempt to obtain" is
that which"by his own recommendation has been fully granted to us by the Crown.
The loss complained of by the petitioners is, that other people are permitted to hold
and occupy a Valuable property granted to the honest application of the Adventure, and
that those other people are protected in such occupation by the Honorable Commissioner
of Crown Lands, who is perfectly aware that such occupation is supported by a false
application, an irregular and deception survey, and an illegal lease.
And the further loss incurred by the petitioners is to be found in the fact, that they
might have taken and kept possession of this property without trouble or hindrance had
they found it possible to believe on July 17th, 1861, that the statements of the Honorable
Commissioner of Crown Lands and of the Surveyor-General were of the same relative
value, and the honor and integrity of those two gentlemen worthy of co-equal confidence.
Note The Report says, that Hughes got his information of the “ discovery" from a
shepherd. This was a man named Ryan, who obtained all his knowledge of the place by
watching the petitioners’ Explorer in the scrub. The exact spot Ryan did not know,
May 25th, and the most valuable part of the discovery he never saw at any time.
Had the maps in the Survey Office b a en as perfect and useful as such maps ought to
be, the Explorer might have sent down his application on the 12th or 14th of May ; as
it was, to make his description perfect and undeniable, he found it necessary to be often
in the scrub, and being observed Hughes received such information, as by means of a
“ vague aud inadmissable application" was able to be afterwards fixed by an illegal
survey.
POSITION OF THE OCCUPANTS.
Having remarked upon the Report to each Allegation, it may be convenient to place
a short explanation of the position of the two interests at present concerned in those
mineral claims before the reader for his further information.
The Report insists all through that Hughes is the original discoverer of the Wilkawat
claims—that he was the first on the ground, that he was the first who applied for claims
in the Tipara district—and that his survey will be found to include the discovery claimed
by Peter, May 25th, 1862.
It must be remembered that there are certain regulations made by Act of Parliament,
to be observed by all applicants without distinction, for the proper conduction of appli-
cation, survey, and lease of mineral claims, and having faithfully observed those regu •
lations, applicants look to the Government to protect them from any unfair conduct on
the part of the claimants, or of those who are employed and paid by the public to transact
the official business.
(1) It is affirmed “ that Hughes is the original discoverer.”- The copper being on
his run, this is quiet possible. "lie may have known of thi§ deposit for years. This if.


a question of locality. If a man says he knows of a place, let him describe it, and th*
assertion is proved. On questions of this kind assertions go for nothing.
The Mineral Lease Regulations say plainly, “description must identify the spot; ”
therefore the person just applying by definite description must be accounted the discoverer.
Otherwise any place first accurately described might be claimed by some other person,
as having known it for years;” or by the simple expedient of tendering a “vague
application”—covering a large space of ground, and then fixing the claims by survey
on the exact place described by the bona fide applicant—as was done by Goyder, Hughes,
and others.
If Hughes was the discoverer, why was he unable to give any description of the place ;
why ask the Surveyor-General to make a “ misdescription .”
- The place was on his run, with capital fixing points all round—Tipara—the bald hill
...the sea coast, and a hut of his own alongside ; and yet he can give no account of his
“ valuable discovery.”
(2) “That Hughes was the first on the ground,” as owner of the run for eighteen years.
•This is more than probable—perhaps before any whiteman now living.
(3) “ That Hughes was the first applicant for claims in the Tipara district.”
Mr. Peter’s application for mineral claims, May 25, vague and unmeaning as it was,
certainly meant something in the neighborhood of Tipara ; but “ north of Mount Lofty,
and south of the Gulf of Carpentaria would have even been more intelligible, and have
included a greater amount of other persons’ valuable discoveries, to be fixed by the future
survey.
If any surveyor who understands tracing localities from very wide description, will
take the survey map of that date, and fix Mr. Peter’s claims by the terms of his so-called
application, he will certainly hear of something to his advantage by applying at the office
■of the Moonta Mining Company (limited liability).
Neither Mr. Peter nor Captain Hughes, however, are accused of making that singular
form of words, and calling it a description.
The report very honestly acknowledges the application was made by the Surveyor-
General—“ This description was appended at my request.”
The consequence of framing this description is, we understand, that the Surveyor-
General tenders an application for four mineral sections at Tipara, May 25, 1861—.
Hughes and others aiding and abetting; and having done so, we find by the report the
Chief Clerk instantly receives instructions to make Mr. Goyder’s claims “as little con-
.spicuous as possible .”
Considering the kind of description “ appended at my request,” the Chief Clerk must
have had great difficulty in making the claims a bit less conspicuous than the ingenuity
pf Mr. Goyder had already contrived to render them ; for as nothing was described, the
clerk could only put them nowhere ; and it is quite certain the plan on which they were
first fixed, and a large map that corroborated that fixing, have never been seen
since.
Ho far, then, Hughes, with Goyder, was the first that applied for claims in the Tipara
district.
The report, however, says, that the application, though made by the Chief Surveyor
in the colony, contained a wrong description —a “ misdescription’*—and the Mineral
Land Regulations say that a wrong description is not available ; it must “ identify the
spot,” that the office may know where the applicant is going to survey. Now, a misde-
scription cannot “ identify the spot;” it is no description—it means nothing—and can
be made use of for no purpose.
The Government must have satisfactory information of the place intended to be sur-
veyed, and leased, as a guide to their own decision as to whether they have power to lease,
or otherwise surrender their rights over the land applied for.
It might interfere with some other arrangements : it might include part of a declared
gold-field, or a place suitable for fortification or other war purposes, or any way as being
the waste lands of the colony, the Crown, as custodian thereof, is held bound to be
accurately informed of the locality intended by an application, “so as to identify the
spot” by the description, before granting permission to survey.
The report itself distinctly tells us that, by the terms of the Mineral Lease
Regulations, Peter’s application of May 25th was “ inadmissible," as being a “ mis-
description. ”
(4) “ That Hughes’s survey will be found to include the discovery claimed by Peter,
May 25th, 1861.”
Survey, as no doubt everybody is aware, can be easily fabricated, so as to include any
place deemed desirable or valuable.
If we may take Mr: Young’s letter to the Surveyor-General as evidence of his extra-
ordinary powers of surveying, the only difficulty would be to say what place he would be


unable to include in a survey. Once set him him going with the chain, and the way he
gets over the ground is a caution. Large hills are moved five or six miles without any
inconvenience ; the sea, which generally puts a stop to locomotion on foot, is no impedi-
ment to this intelligent and enterprising surveyor ; and several very valuable claims first
taken out, on his application, for Hughes, are now some miles out in ispencer s
The correspondence discovers five letters from this gentleman to the Surveyor-General,
each lamenting errors of considerable magnitude, which are, however, of no importance.
Here he is at Warilka, then he jumps to Wilkawat. Again he asks— I request you
will pass your pen through the words"— and then—' ‘or make such alteration as you
may deem proper /” „ ■ _ ; ,
the last letter is duly 1, 1861. It says—“ By Captain Hughes’s instructions, I have
laid doion the section (No. 930) exactly as it was intended to be originally claimed /?”
and then gives a sad account of another monstrous survey error.
And all this interesting statement has to be contrasted with the assertion in the report—
<t That the survey was completed in eight days , and the diagram reached the Survey
Office on the morning of the 3rd June." „ „ . . , ,
The report also states, for the information of the House— That the waste lands
plan,” by which M r Peter made and placed his application, May 25— ‘ Shows the bald
hill about nine and a-half miles from the coast” whereas, the bald hill by which the
survey is fixed is only about four miles from the sea ; which fact serves to show the
necu iar method adopted to make “ the survey inc ude the discovery." _
Then again, we have the evidence of the report that a false description was tendered
in “ writing ’ by Mr. Goyder; and but for the report we should have remained in pro-
found ignorance of the false description that was “ diawn" to illustrate the number and
shape of the claims. , , .. . D ,
It is to be seen (page 9of report) delineated as— ‘ -The application of V» .S. Peter,,
made and deposited May 2.ith, 1861. Witness—G. W. O Halloran Money received
thereon, May 25th, 1861. Witness—Chas. W, Draper. Recommended for aapproval,
May 28th, 1861 G. W. Goyder,- Surveyor-General. Approved June 3rd, 1861.
H, B. T, Strangways, Commissioner of Crown Lands and Immigration.”
The names and dates are here given in full, to show the value and importance of the
plan, as evidence of the bona fide nature of the various parts of this delectable trans-
action.
This plan has drawn upon it five claims, applied for as per date May 25th. One of
these claims is No. 957, which claim was absolutely not applied fur or heard of before
June 4th, or ten days after the transaction so solemnly witnessed.
And this is one of the documents, the truth and authenticity of whicb is testified by
nearly all the staff of the Land Office, and sent as a correct and reliable plan of Peter’s
claims into the House of Assembly, to be made particular use of as evidence, strong
and conclusive, against the statements and prayer ot the memorial.
Again, in the survey plans made by Mr. Young, and also sent into the House as
reliable evidence, it is to be seen that, in connecting the Tiparaand Wallaroo survey, a tie
line is carried to a Kadina claim, No. 543. This claim was never surveyed, and there-
fore could not be availuble as a fixing point.
Again, the hill adopted by Mr, Young was a very woody hill; his chief point o
observation a tall mallee among hundreds of others ; and this hill is transmogrified into
a bald hill by clearing off the timber, and is then permitted by the Survey Office to be
used as a substitute for the hill mentioned in the application.
These are some of the operations and transformations by which the “ survey will be
found to include the discovery and these, and other wonderful manoeuvres of the same
kind are, we suppose, to be considered as among “ the essential elements ” of the
approval and settlement of mineral claims.
The report tells us confidentially that Hughes received information of this valuable
discovery from a shepherd ; and it is a remarkable coincidence that this very shepherd
was in the Land Office the same day (May 25) with Johnson, of Port Wakefield, for
the express purpose of claiming this very discovery for himself; and this shepherd—one
Mr. Paddy Ryan—was also totally ignorant of the place, and had to return to Wallaroo
to acquire more definite information ; and Ryan informed Mr. Mills that he had not
given Hughes any description of the place, which, indeed, seems highly probable, as he
was not able to describe it for his own advantage.
So that the interpretation of the parable amounts to this :—That Paddy Ryan knew
nothing, and told Hughes; and Hughes, knowing nything, sent Peter with the intelli-
gence to the Surveyor-General; and that gentleman consulted the maps ; and the maps
being “ mere approximations of the truth !” they combined that with the origina
negation of the Irishman, and sent the result to the Chief Clerk, who made the lot “ as


little conspicuous as possibleand the whole therefore became in due time, what th«i
report declares to be “ an essential element in the approval and settlement of mineral
claims,” and is believed to be the principal and active cause of the curious fact stated in
the report —“ I made it an undeviating rule, never to hold the slightest pecuniary-
interest in mines, or to receive the smallest emolument, direct or indirect.”
An unnecessary affirmation —as the petitioners, with great consideration, forbore any
allusion to such a delicate point of enquiry,
THE SURVEY.
We may now enquire by what power, or on what pretence, the survey undertaken by
Hughes at Wilkawat, is authorised to include a discovery made by another person, or any
ground whatever not included in his application.
For this purpose we will take for a guide the Mineral Lease Regulations, presuming
that the Government will allow such an authority to be sufficient.
By these regulations, no person can hold, or occupy, or work any mineral claims, with-
out having previously fulfilled three conditions, in accordance with the tenor of the Act,
as clearly laid down therein.
(1) Application; (2) Survey; (3) Lease.
(1) An application must describe the locality desired by the claimant “ in terms that
mould serve to identify the spot."
(2) A survey must be a plan, “ fixing the exact position applied for."
The lease must be for the place, identified by the application, and marked upon the
ground by the survey, or the place described by the applicant.
Therefore, a lease does not enable a claimant to hold or occupy any wastelands of the
Crown, as mineral claims, that have not been by him applied for and surveyed in the
clearly expressed terms of the Mineral Lease Regulations:—
(1) Because an application asks for nothing but that which it clearly describes :
(2) Because a survey can include nothing but that which is clearly described on the
application :
(3) Because a lease can give the applicant nothing but that which has been previously
fixed by survey, “ in the exact position applied for."
Otherwise, any Commissioner of Crown Lands might procure leases for any of his
friends, and make an open market of his office for all the mineral discoveries in the colony,
by the facile means of recommending leases to be signed by the Governor, which were
only based upon informal application and irregular survey.
The law, however, has clearly provided against such a contingency, and the Crown has
ample protection against any wrong intentions on the part of the Land Office or the
applicants, by means of certain numbers being allpted to the claims when first applied
for.
The claims are marked out on the office plan in the locality given by the description,
and numbers are affixed to them, which numbers are also recorded in a letter approving
the application, and sent to the applicant.
By means of these numbers, any attempt to defraud the Crown by surveying ground
not specified in the application, and then claiming to occupy the same by a lease, is
entirely defeated.
And as the Crown very unwisely permits, or requires applicants to survey their own
claims—a regulation calculated at all times to lead, as in this case, to fraud and confusion,
it has therefore absolute need for very effective protection against any attempt by a
claimant to overreach or vary his original demands.
The protection afforded to the Crown, in case of survey being made away from
the application, and the lease produced as a right and justification—is secured in this
way ;
(1) The application describes the place :
(2) The letter of approval grants the place truly described, and announces the numbers
allotted to the claims applied for :
(3) The office plan distinguishes the position (as described) of the claims, and places
on them the number mentioned in the letter,
(4) The survey defines, by measurement on the ground, the exact position mentioned
jn the application, and affixes to the claims on the ground the same numbers as those
on the office plan.
(" r >) The lease makes over to the applicant the claims as described by application, as


Numbered and drawn upon the plans, as i lentified by the numbers, and as confirmed in
all these particulars by the survey being in agreement with the description “ that identifies
the spot”—the planthat shows' “ the exact position applied for”—and the numbers of
the claims corresponding to both.
To prevent or abate, illigal occupation under pretence of a Lease, it is only necessary
to refer to the plan in the office, —and the claims therein seen, that bear the same numbers,
as those mentioned in the Lease, indicate the precise plan intended by the Lease to repre s
sent the ground made over to the application.
Therefore, (1). The claimants right to occupy under thelease, depends upon his applic
cation and survey having been made and completed, in agreement with the terms of the
Act in that case made and provided.
(2) If the application has wrongly described, or misdescribed the place occupied : all
after proceedings fall to the ground, having no foundation in law or in fact.
(3) If the Survey varies, the place described by the application, the imposture is de-
tected by referring to the plans, for wherever the Survey may have put the claims, the fixing
and numbers upon the office plan remain (or should remain ?) unaltered and these num-
bers being on the Lease will show and determine where the occupant ought to be, and are
a safeguard to the Crown, as entirely preventing the fraudulent occupation of mineral
claims, on pretence of holding a Lease for the same, as the Lease itself testifies undenie-
bly by the numbers seen upon it, either, that the occupant is, or is not, upon the ground
granted to him by that instrument.
Therfore whatever valuable discoveries may have been included in Hughes’ Survey, his
leases only permit occupation on the ground indicated by the numbers therein specified,
as shown and coroborated by the plan now before the House.
The Crown, and the petitioners are very fortunately protected against any endeavour or
pretence to occupy or hold by lease any lands of the Crown as mineral claims not truly
specified and described by previous application * and also any other attempt to outwit or
defraud the Crown or the petitioners, by “ misdescription —alteration of applications,—
removal of land marks—ignoring the coast line —submurging of claims rejecting bona
fide applications —accepting illegal ones, imaginary Forfeitures, —lost letters, false maps,
claims granted and denied—claims made “inconspicuous" —fabricated surveys—illegal oc-
cupation of grounds—official interests in applications, and Copper M ines or any other pro-
ceedings,that coincide with what the Report declares to be “ Essential Elements in the
settlement of mineral claims ,” or “ mere approximation of the truth.
* Note.—lf the laws made by the Legislatures of this Colony are to be respected,—if
the highest tribunals that the people can appeal to, is to maintain its august position—
notwithstanding the endeavors of the Supreme Court to trample such authority underfoot,
and, if the Petitionnrs are justified in their own sincere belief of the power and suprem-
acy of the Parliament—not fifty leases will enable Hughes and others to hold a single
Mineral claim, that has not been applied for, or surveyed, in accordance with the Act
of the Legislature,—called the Mineral Lease Regulations.”
POSITION OF THE PETITIONERS.
The present position uf the Petitioners is soon told—it has yet to be proved—so that a few
words will cover the case.
They say , that an application for four claims at Wilkawat, (a new discovery,) was sent
from Kadina, by the Explorer, and presented in the Land Office, June 5, 1861, by Messrs.
Price and Phillipson, and a stranger with them.
That this application was rejected, as misdescribed. No bald hill was known in the
Land Office, within ten miles of the sea coast.
That on Jifne 11, the same application was tendered again in the Office by the Explor-
er, the same objection was offered, but he would take no denial, the bearings were known
by him to be correct, and eventually the application was that day accepted, on conditions
offered by the Explorer himself, “ that if his descriptions were not correct, and bearings,
and distances found to be as given, he would admit the application to be void and of no
affect”
The claims were not fixed that day, as the Chief Clerk only offered for that purpose a
sheet of paper with some lines and numbers on it, —a kind of cross between a Chinese puz-
zle and a broken bird-cage,—without a single object or mark, coast line, boundary of a
inn, or any one point of observation, except a bald hill, of which the Chief Clerk seemc^


to know nothing more than that it was twelve miles from the coast; and that Hughes.
Taylor and others had taken out several claims within three miles of that fixing point.
I his p an was utterly useless to fix outlying claims, and therefore the Explorer absolu-
tely declined to recognize it as safe, or even honest to offer it, for the purpose of securing
valuable discoveries. We know now, that this was one of the plans adopted as the deport
says, ‘to make the claims as little conspicuous as possible" and it is to be hoped that
system will, owing, to this enquiry, be discontinued in the Land Office, for the benefit of
future discoverers, and the welfare and good name of the Colony in general.
This application was approved by the Com nissioner, June 26th, 1861. The explorer
returned to VFallaroo, and found the claims at Wilkawat occupied by Hughes and others,
June 32nd. He then went again to Adelaide, to get the tresspasses removed. Had an
interview with the Commissioner July 17th, that gentleman stated that Hughes had made
application prior to ours, and that the maps in the survey office being altogether incorrect,
and not to be depended upon, the claims had been granted to us by a mistake, and the ap-
plication granted i une 26, was therefore void and o no effect. The Chairman and the Ex-
plorer then went to the Surveyor-General; that gentleman denied the assertion of the Com-
missioner about the maps, bur declared that Paters’ application of Way 2oth, and ours of
J wjr3 “ f° r word” the same, described ex ictly the same place, and
that his having priority in time, ours was void, and recommended us to choose fresh
claims, while good ground was available.
■Believing entirely the statement of the Surveyor-General as to identity in the appli-
cations, we asked permission to look at Peters’ that we might lie able to report to the Ad-
venture at the next meeting, the cause of our losing the claims, this request was at once,
and peremptorily refused, in a manner also that at once raised a strong suspicion that there
was something not quite as it should be in the affair, but when vve were told that our sur-
vey would not be accepted, as we had no claims there to be surveyed, it became quite ap-
parent some wrong-purpose was intended.
Tj* e B enera l impression was, that a mistake arising from the inaccuracy of the maps
had been made, and as the Surveyor-General had said he was going to Tipara to make a
full enquiry, there was a confidence felt that justice would be done.
At that time we know nothing of Hughes’s description on the nature or place of his ap-
plication, nor had any idea that his claims were near ours, or could in any way interfere
with them.
When however the Surveyor-General went to Tipara, and did not remove Hughes from
our claims, we became aware that there was no mistake to be guarded against.
On returning from Wallaroo in October, the Explorer had two interviews with the
Commissioner, seeking justice from that Gentleman.
Ihe only information given was, that the two applications were precisely the same in
wording, that Hughes was prior to ours, and again permission to see the documents
was refused,
-I he Adventure were now at a loss how to proceed, if the two Applications were alike
in description. The claims must be Hughes’ as he had applied first.
■By the aid of Charles Fenn, Esq. Solicitor, after some difficulty, permission was at last
granted to inspect the Applications, when to the lasting disgrace of all implicated, they
were found to differ in every syllable, instead of word for word alike, they were word for
word opposed to each other.
do the further credit of those concerned it was also discovered that our application had
b p 6n , s °me very important and ex-official “ conditions” had been appended
o which we know nothing, our letter of approval written two days after the date of the Con-
ditions having nothing of the kind upon it.
J- * le Surveyor-General assured to Mr. Fenn in a marked manner that as we had neglec-
-6 Tni 1686 con(^*ons b our application and claims “ were of course forfeited.”
Ihe Adventure were now more bewildered thm before, it seemed so improbable that a
Minister of the Crown would permit a document to be altered in his office, and a false
statement made of its contents. We could conceive no motive that, upon any consi-
« eration, could sanction Felony, Fraud, and infamously false representations The
explorer therefore in the hope of averting the scandalous, and serious' consequences
that must inevitably ensue, if this matter was submitted to public investigation, wrote two
fetters, dated 2lst November, and 20th December, 1861, that it might be more clearly
seen that the ground relied upon, was desperately unsafe. The well-meant caution was
unheeded. Strong in power, and in position,—Moiality in one scale, and the Moonta
111 mV' ot * ler ’ CO PP er was heavy, and conscience kicked the beam,
' his state of uncertainty and doubt, was at length, quite unexpectedly terminated by
e Commissioner himself, who to our great surprise and gratification, wrote to the Chair-
November 28, 1861, stating that the Claims applied for were forfeited !!
1 his was simply and entirely an admission, that all previous statements made by the


were untrue ! that the claims had been ours all along ; but that our rights
of tenure had become, forfeited, —how, —the Commissioner declined to state.
Mr Fenn wrote to enquire, on what grounds forfeiture had been declared, but no infor-
mation on that point could be obtained—and then the Adventure determined to carry their
wrongs before some higher Tribunal.
Being unwilling however, that blame should fall where it might not be deserved, and
also feeling that a full exposure of these transactions, would tell greatly against the
honor and good name, not only of the Offenders, but in some measure of the Colony
generally ; another attempt was made, to induce the Commissioner to withdraw from the
false position he had assumed.
The letter written by Mitford, December 20, 1861, will show that notwithstanding
all the monstrous Acts, Statements and Injustice perpetrated by the Land Office, there
was no angry wish to bring about an expose, or hurry to a just conclusion. He had taken
the precaution that no one but himself, was fully aw re of the actual occurrences, and
their dangerous tendency ; and the opportunity was offered of saving the prestige of the
Crown Lands. Justice might have been done at the eleventh hour, and the world none
the wiser.
The Commissioner’s reply, only proves that those higher feelings that mark and dis-
tinguish a gentleman, were in this instance wanting,—it indicates hardihood, sufficient to
venture into a difficulty, without sense to appreciate the consequences.
The Commissioner’s letter of January 7, 1862 disdains the intimation, and coldly re-
quests any charges to be preferred in writing.
After the lapse of a year, the offer is accepted,—the charges are made, —and the letter is
thus answered.
Adelaide, January 1, 1862.
To the Honorable the Commissioner of Crown Lands.
Hr,
I have the honor to acknowledg a letter from the Crown Lands Office, of January 7th,
1862, refusing either justice or explanation, and desiring that any charges I may have to
make against any Officer of the Crown Lands department—may be made in writing, and
in such a shape as Will allow of their being investigated.
At the date of that letter, I was unable to take advantage of the permission therein
granted as the evidence required, to substantiate fully the charges to be preferred, had not
then been sufficiently elucidated.
The report lately published by order of •the Honorable House of Assembly on the Peti-
tion presented in behalf of the Wallaroo and Mitford Mining Adventure, has supplied all
the information wanting, to put the intended charges in a proper and effective condition.
As a Minister of the Crown, as Commissioner of the Crown Lands, and, as therefore re-
sponsible for the things done, and, that should not be done in the office of the Crown
Lands—you will do me the honor to understand that the very serious charges to be brought
against the department, are to be found fairly stated in the remarks that follow the Sur-
Veyor-General’s Report, and preface this letter, and that the said charges refer to, and are
made against, entirely and only—the Honorable Mr. H. B. T. Strangways at present the
Commissioner of Crown Lands and Immigration, in the province of South Australia.
I have the honor to be Sir,
Your very obedient Servant,
EUSTACE REVELEY MITrORD,


JAt f
6(6UQ
fKoqi
M c&fLu




