

PRICE SIXPEHCE.


I 6 Lfl OG


THE IRISH STATE TRIALS,
1844 AND 1880.
The speech of Mr. A. M. Sullivan, one of the counsel for the
traversers in the recent State prosecutions in Ireland, which concludes
this sketch, is published with a hope that it may be perused with
interest by his fellow-countrymen in Australia. In it the conduct of
the agitators finds its best defence. The records of her State trials
often contain the truest information as to the causes of a nation’s
discontent; in those of Ireland, at all events, the sources of her many
troubles are easily traced.
The prosecutions of 1880, both in their nature and importance, so
strikingly resemble those of 1844 that a short account of the latter will
not be out of place. The proceedings in both cases were instituted to
muzzle the mouth of public opinion ; for it cannot be denied that it is
an invasion of the popular right of free dismission for the Crown to
prosecute as a criminal every man whose keen consciousness of his
country’s grievances may sometimes elicit oratorical flourishes beyond
the limits of propriety. To supplement both trials, Coercion Bills were
introduced ; but the Act of ’Bl reminds one more of the good old times
of ex post facto legislation, when innocence became crime at the will of
a Minister. At the present time, moreover, the curious spectacle is
exhibited of a Premier, remarkable for his love of liberty, forced, from
party considerations, by the cries of ignorance and prejudice, into a
course of action repugnant to his feelings.
The indictment in 1844 was, like the present one, for conspiracy. It
was, as Shiel said, “ the very Behemoth of indictments,” upheaving its
vastness on the table. “ Nothing,” said he, “ comparable to the
bigness of its gigantic dimensions has ever yet been seen.” The very
sight of it struck terror into the jurors, and induced one of them to
obtain exemption from service, on the ground that, not being in the
best of health, he feared, if he had to serve, the trial would last longer
than his life. It was the habit of the lawyers of those times to spin
out their tales over yards and yards of paper, a practice which, besides
increasing costs, served the double purpose of making the jury crazy
and inspiring them with a profound respect for the majesty of the law.
But, reduced to rational dimensions, its eleven counts charged that the
several traversers—namely, Daniel O’Connell, John O’Connell, John
Gray, Thomas Steele, Richard Barrett, Esqs., Rev. Thomas Tierney,
Rev. Peter James Tyrrell, Thomas Mathew Ray, and Charles Gavan
Duffy, Esqs.—did combine, conspire, confederate, and agree with each
other, and with divers other persons, to create discontent among the
Queen’s subjects, and to procure unlawful meetings, at which to
violently discuss their grievances and induce them to withdraw the


adjudication of their differences from courts of law, with intent thereby
to obtain a dissolution of the Legislative Union between Great Britain
and Ireland.
The legal definition of conspiracy is an agreement or combination to
effect a purpose unlawful in itself, or to bring about a lawful purpose
by unlawful means. It is a crime opposed to the general spirit of
English criminal jurisprudence as it m u one man responsible for the
acts of others beyond his control. Prosecutions for conspiracy for political
offences have, therefore, been seldom resorted to in England; the most
remarkable, or, perhaps, the only one of any importance, being that of
the seven bishops, in James ll.’s reign, for usurping upon the
prerogatives of the Crown. The difficulty of defence against such a
charge will be seen from the fact that proof of having entered into the
conspiracy alleged at a given time and place need not to be, and, indeed,
never is, given; but the fact of having combined is inferred from
similarity of means and ends, as indicated by the speeches, writings,
and general course of political action of the accused. So unpopular has
every species of constructive crime been in England that, when the
celebrated Earl of Strafford was impeached and found guilty of
constructive treason, it was thought fit, to support his conviction, to pass
a special bill of attainder, under which he was executed.
The trial of the repealers practically commenced on the 16th
January, 1844. Several previous days had been spent in making
legal objections to the indictment and formation of the jury panel, the
most important of which was the exclusion of Catholics from the
latter. Those discussions drew forth fierce denunciations from the
English press against the traversers’ counsel, who were accused of
maliciously wasting the public time; but their quibbling bore good
fruit in the House of Eords months afterwards. A melancholy incident
occurred before the pleadings were opened. When, in reading out the
names of the traversers, that of the Rev. James Tyrrell was reached,
Mr. Cantwell, one of the solicitors for the defence, addressing the
court, said—“ My Lords, the rev. gentleman, whose name has been
called on, has been summoned to the judgment seat of another
tribunal: his soul and body are alike beyond the power of this court ! ”
Among the counsel engaged were some of the future lord chancellors
and judges. The Crown was represented by Smith, Attorney-General;
Green, Solicitor-General; Messrs. Warren, Bennett, James Scott,
Brewster, Tomb, Freeman, Martley, Robert Holmes, Smyley, Baker,
and Napier. For the defence appeared Messrs. Moore, R. L. Shiel,
Hatchell, D. R. Figott, Henn, Monahan, Fitzgibbon, Whiteside,
M'Donogh, Alexander M‘Carthy, Clements, Close, O’Hagan, O’Hea,
John Perrin, and Sir Colonan O’Loughlin. The judges were Penne-
father (Chief Justice), Crampton, Burton, and Perrin.
Mr. Napier having opened the pleadings, the Attorney-General
rose and addressed the jury. His speech lasted eleven hours. He
described the formation of the “ Loyal National Appeal Association,”
the root of the alleged conspiracy, a society which bore to the agitation
of that time the same relation that the Land League does to that of the
present. It consisted of associates, members, and volunteers. Those
who belonged to the first-mentioned class paid one shilling a year each,
the second twenty shillings, and the third ten pounds. As a considera-


tion for their subscriptions, newspapers were distributed regularly all
-over the country for the use of members, which helped to educate the
people in the economy of every Irish question. The opening speech of
a prosecuting counsel is generally a very tame narrative of the facts,
interspersed with occasional apostrophes to the dignified personification
•of justice, and prophetic warnings of the certain collapse of the British
Constitution if a verdict of acquittal should be returned. The
Attorney-General had, however, in this case an opportunity of
•enlivening his address by the introduction of some of the poetic gems
which appeared in the Nation at that time. Among others, he read
the celebrated lyric of Dr. Ingram (then a student, now a Fellow of
Trinity College, Dublin), “ Who fears to speak of Ninety-eight 1 ”
When he rhetorically asked, “Was there any counsel on the other side
who would say the Act of Union was void 1 ” the stentorian voice of
O’Connell responded, “ Yes.”
The evidence for the prosecution occupied the court until the 27th
of January, when it was understo6d the case for the defence was to be
opened by Shiel. Every part of the court—even the Judges’ Bench—
was crowded with representatives of both sexes, in anxious expectation
of his eloquence. He did not disappoint them. “ Try,” says the
Nation, “to imagine the man—dark, small, and muscular, with an eye
of surpassing beauty, a lip full of grace and haughtiness, a frame
that seemed to come and go like a vision, a hand that caught at
reasoning as if it were a hawk’s talons, darted out in wrath like a
flashing sword, and seemed to sweep the heavens in its pride and
hope.” They listened to him as Adam did to Gabriel. After stating
how reluctant juries in other cases have been to convict men of
-constructive crime, and showing the difficulty of defence against the
easily-concocted charge of conspiracy, he went on in eloquent language
to describe how the repeal agitation sprung from no newly-acquired
consciousness of the necessity of self-government to the Irish people,
Swift having told them that the remedy for their grievances lay
wholly in their own hands; and that, by the laws of God, of nations,
and of their country, they were, and ought to be, as free a people as
their brethren in England; dwelling upon the struggle for independence
which Grattan brought to a successful issue in 1782, and eliciting a
burst of applause for the noble language in which he described how
baneful to the country was the continuance of sectarian ascendancy and
detestable distinctions of creed—“detestable, because they were not
only repugnant to the genuine spirit of Christianity, and substitute for
the charities of religion the rancorous antipathies of sect, but because
they practically reduce us to a colonial dependency, make the union a
name, convert a nation into an appurtenance, and make us the footstool
•of the Minister, the scorn of England, and the commiseration of the
world.” “We convert,” said he, “the island that ought to be one of
the most fortunate in the sea into a receptacle of degradation and
suffering, counteract the designs*of Providence, and enter into a
conspiracy for the frustration of the beneficent designs of God.”
He denounced the Union in a recapitulation of its evils :—“ If we
look at other countries and find the people in a miserable condition, we
attribute the fault to government. Are we in Ireland to attribute it
to the soil, to the climate, or to some evil genius which exercises a sinister


influence over our destinies ? The fault, as it appears to me, is entirely
in that system of policy which has been pursued by the Imperial
Parliament, for which, on this account, the Union is to be condemned.”
Addressing the jury on the subject of agitation, he said : —“ But if you,,
gentlemen, shall assist the Attorney-General in crushing men who have
had the boldness to complain of the grievances of their country, you
will lay Ireland prostrate. Every effort for her amelioration will be
idle. Every remonstrance will not only be treated with disregard, but
with disdain ; and for the next twenty years we may as well extinguish
all hope for our country. Gentlemen, you may strike agitation dumb
—you may make millions of mutes ; but beware of that dreary silence,
whose gloomy taciturnity is significant of the determination of its
fearful purpose. Beware of producing a state of things which may
eventuate in those incidents of horror which every good man will pray
to avert, and which will be lamented by those who contribute to their
occurrence, when repentance, like that of those who are for ever
damned, shall be unavailing, and contrition shall be in vain.”
Though Shiel nominally appeared for John O’Connell, his speech
was comprehensive of the conduct of the whole of the traversers,
and dwelt principally upon the career of the great tribune. O’Connell
was deeply affected by its closing words, in which Shiel conjured the
jury not to immure “in the domicile of sorrow in the vicinity of this
great metropolis the liberator of Ireland, with his fondest and best
beloved child. No! it shall never be. You will not confine him to
the spot to which the Attorney-General invites you to surrender him.
No ! When the spring shall have come again, and winter shall
have passed—when the spring shall have come again, it is not through
the windows of this mansion that the father of such a son, and the
son of such a father, shall look upon those green hills upon which the
eyes of many a captive have gazed so wistfully in vain ; but in their
own mountain home again they shall listen to the murmurs of the great
Atlantic, they shall go forth and inhale the freshness of the morning
air together, ‘ they shall be free of mountain solitude/ they will be
encompassed with the loftiest images of liberty on every side ; and if
time shall have stolen its suppleness from the father’s knee, or impaired
the firmness of his tread, he shall lean upon the child of her that
watches over him from heaven, and shall look out, from some high
place, far and wide into the island whose greatness and whose glory
shall for ever be associated with his name.”
Whiteside appeared for Mr. Duffy. His speech was also a splendid
effort of genius. “The history of Ireland since 1760,” said he, “has
been but a history of associations and societies to obtain redress for
wrongs which otherwise they could not have righted. . . . Our
vices were magnified into crimes, and the crimes of a few were visited
on the nation.” Humour and pathos flowed from Whiteside alike.
As a specimen of the former, the following is worth extracting.
Referring to the several monster Jtepeal meetings of ’43, to suppress
which the Government took no action until the day of the celebrated
proposed meeting at Clontarf, he said :—“ What could have been easier
than for the Government, commanding a majority in the House of
Commons, to have brought in a short bill to put down these mani-
festations, if they regarded them illegal! But no such thing was.


attempted. Parliament broke up without doing anything, and, in the
midst of all this political danger, the Lord Lieutenant exchanged the
cares and responsibility of government for the congenial and refined
delights of English society—in such a moment of executive danger the
Chief Secretary abandoned his official burdens—in such a moment of
judicial peril the Lord Chancellor betook himself to his beloved solitude
—Mr. Attorney-General retired from the turmoil of the House of
Commons, and Mr. Solicitor-General, in his quiet retreat, indulged in
the pleasures of hope (much laughter)—the Prime Minister proceeded
to Brighton, Her Majesty went to sea, and Ireland was left to her fate,
to rush headlong on destruction (laughter) ; conspiracy was roving
through the land, and all the officials of the country went on tours of
pleasure (renewed laughter). But the storm appears on the political
horizon, and is about to burst in thunder. The Clontarf meeting is
announced, couriers fly here and there, sedition walks abroad, and the
Privy Council must be summoned ; but the Lord Lieutenant is absent,
though sent for ; the Attorney and Solicitor-General have now shaken
■off their lethargy, and may be imagined, with anxious and straining
•eyes directed to the English coast, exclaiming : —‘ Ye Gods ! annihilate
time and space, and make two lawyers happy.’ (Laughter.) The Privy
Council assembled on Friday. He could not tell them, unfortunately,
what was said, but he had it in his power to narrate what was done—
nothing. (Laughter.) The do-nothing policy prevailed, and the
members of the Council separated with the proud and happy conviction
of having done their duty. (Renewed laughter.) On Saturday they
re-assembled —the proclamation putting down the meeting is issued at
the eleventh hour—the cannons are loaded—troops are marched to the
scene of action—bayonets fixed—all the ‘ pride, pomp, and circum-
stance of war ’ are called into requisition —the Pigeon House* bristles
with artillery—and, glorious achievement ! the advanced guard seizes
Aldborough House. (Laughter.) Meanwhile the police are skir-
mishing, and the main body of the army take up an impregnable
position. Nor let it be supposed that such a band of heroes wanted a
general —No ! The Commander of the forces of this country was on
the ground, and did all that Julius Caesar could have done had he been
in his place. How the heart trembles while the tongue relates ! Yes,
surrounded by a brilliant, brave, and numerous staff —attired in the
full costume of his high rank—Sir Edward Blakeney went down to
Clontarf, came back in similar state, and —ate his dinner. Never was
there seen such a glorious day—never since the days of Brian Boroihme,
of immortal memory, when that hero girded his ponderous sword upon
Fis valiant thigh, and smote the Dane.”
On the subject of liberty of speech, he said:—“lf you want the
power to reform the character or redress the grievances of the Irish
people, suffer them to state them : their case to-day may be yours
to-morrow. Cling to the right of free discussion as you would preserve
your life \ errors may prevail for a time, but we know that truth is
strong —like Almighty power, she requires no aid to be victorious.”
The next to speak was Mr. M £ Donogh, who appeared for Richard
Barrett, proprietor of the Pilot. Little did that gentleman imagine
* The fort which guards the entrance to the Liffey.


when, towards the end of his speech, he remarked that “he would not
draw aside the curtain which shrouds the future destinies of this
country”—that within “the dark and prolific womb of Futurity” were
ripening events which would lead to the occurrence of a similar scene ;
and that in such a vision he would have beheld himself, when time
should have dug deep furrows in his cheeks and the frost of eighty
winters silvered his brows, once more standing up in that same court of
justice and pleading the cause of his fellow-countrymen on a similar
charge.
On the sth of February the great man spoke. Every available
spot in court was again occupied, and from beside the sober faces of the
judges there shone out a galaxy of native loveliness to add vigour to
his eloquence. But he appealed to reason rather than passion.
O’Connell defended himself. His address was a noble vindication of
his political career, and a masterly exposition of the considerations
which actuated him in demanding a repeal of the Union. “As to
myself, gentlemen,” said he, “ I am not here to deny or to palliate
anything I have done; on the contrary, I re-assert in court all I have
really said; ” and, in a speech remarkable more for weight of argument
fhan rhetorical brilliancy, he proved that there was nothing revolutionary
in his political doctrines; that he had always been the opponent of
violence and force, but the apostle of legitimate agitation; that the Union,
sprung from corruption, having annihilated her industries, increased
her national debt, and, by absenteeism, opened a vein through which
her life-blood was ebbing, was a curse to Ireland, and he consequently
sought to effect its repeal by legal means. “If,” said he, “I succeed,
or if I fail, it is a glorious struggle to make—it is glorious to strive
that the first land upon earth should possess that bounty and benefit
which God and nature alike intended it should enjoy.”
The rest of the trial was tame. The defendants’ evidence and the
reply of the Solicitor-General occupied until the 9th February. The
Chief Justice then commenced his charge to the jury. It savoured
more of the bias of an advocate than the impartiality of a judge.
O’Connell, speaking at the Covent Garden banquet of 13th March, 1844,
referred to it in the following terms “It is admitted that, since the
hideous days of Scroggs and Jeffreys, so one-sided a charge was never
pronounced by judicial lips;” and “in the presence of the congregated
civilization of the world—in the presence of America, of France, and of
India—l proclaim the proceedings against me a foul and dishonest
persecution, and I hurl at the tyrants of the law my merciless scorn and
defiance. After describing at length the nature of the crime of
conspiracy, he told the jury that for the Queen to call a Parliament of
her own in Ireland, of her own motion, in concert with the people,
would be a violation of the Act of Union, which, by her coronation
oath, she was bound to maintain. The greater portion of his charge
was taken up with comments upon the speeches made at the monster
meetings of ’43. It lasted two days.
At 7.30 on the night of the 10th the jury retired to consider their
verdict. At 11.25 p.m. the foreman returned the issue paper to the
Clerk of the Crown, when their verdict, practically amounting to a
general one of guilty, was read. Owing, however, to a technical defect,
it was sent back for reconsideration, which necessitated the detention of


the jury until 9 a.m. Monday morning. A formal conviction on. the
material counts of the indictment was then announced, and the jury
dismissed. . ,
The case came before the House of Lords m July, on the technical
points reserved, when the verdict was upset by the majority of twelve
iudo'es Lord Brougham, one of the dissenting judges, said of the
decision that “it would go forth without authority, and come back
without respect.”
Referring to this trial, the Times of the 15th February, 1844, says :
“As for the success of the State prosecutions, what of it 1 It is but an
episode in the tragic tale of our internal discords. An Attorney-
General may rejoice at a verdict for the Crown- —a traverser’s counsel
may repine at it—a Government may look with complacency at so
successful a vindication of the law —or a Corn Exchange meeting hang
its head in despair; but for futurity it is nothing, for a twelvemonth
little more than nothing. There is yet no national complaint redressed,
there is no healing balm poured into the unfathomable ulcer—that
moral gulf which, throughout Ireland, yawns between rich and poor,
between churches, sects, and races.”
Thus ended the celebrated trial of ’44. Thirty-seven years have
elapsed since then, and “conspirators” again appear before the Queens
Bench. It was an interval productive of many mighty events;
brightened by few hopes, and black with many sorrows. There was
terrible ’47, with its dead millions, its deserted villages, its awful
silence where once resounded the “ busy hum of men,” when the mercy
of Providence seemed for a while suspended; ’4B, with its. blighted
hopes, its gibbets, and emigrant ships; ’67, with its teeming cells,
glutted docks, and scaffolds once more; and ’7O, with its dawn of hope,
while always, with unbroken regularity, went on the exodus of the
country’s best blood, of its youth, and strength, and beauty.
On the death of O’Connell and the splitting up of the Young Ireland
Party the last traces of the Repeal movement may be said to have
disappeared. Land tenure again became the question of the hour. The
history of this question down to 1870, as far as Government efforts to
reform the system were concerned, may be all summed up in the
one word “commissions.” There were plenty of them. Amidst the
strife of political parties in England, and glorious and interminable
debates about the emancipation of slaves, this canker near, home would
occasionally disturb the quietude of Ministers. Something must be
done for
“ Those rough, rug-headed kerns,
Which live like venom, where no venom else,
But only they have privilege to live.”
Then would issue, under the hand of royalty, another commission of
plump nobles, followed by massive reports, angry debates, and a general
result of nothing. .
This land question in Ireland is an old one. Mr. Sullivan, in Ms
speech, refers to several select committees and special commissions
which sat upon it down to 1870. One of the most important of the
latter was the Devon Commission, which was issued by the Peel
Government, on the 20th November, 1843, to inquire into the state of
the law and practice in respect to the occupation of land in Ireland. It


was. composed altogether of representatives of the landlord interest.
Their labours extended over a year, upwards of 1,100 witnesses having
been examined ; and their report was issued on the 14th
1845. After stating the miserable condition of the Irish tenants, and
expressing their strong sense of the patient endurance which the
agricultural labouring classes have generally exhibited under suffering
greater than the people of any other country in Europe had to sustain,
they stated their conviction that many of the evils of the system were to
be traced to the small number of proprietors, and the limitations under
which properties are generally held, which prevents them expending
largely in improvements. This was a grievance which affected the tenant
indirectly, and to which reference will be made later on. The following
extract comes nearer to the root of the question :—“ It is well known
that the want of fixity of tenure has for some time past been sedulously
put forward as one of the most prominent grievances of the Irish tenant.
It is said to paralyze all exertion, and place a fatal impediment in the
way of improvement.” The rottenness of the system was conclusively
exposed by the report, but search for any solid recommendations on the
subject of reform would be vain. The Commissioners exposed the
disease, but recommended no cure.
The sequel to this was, of course, a debate in Parliament. On the
9th June, 1845, Lord Stanley (afterwards Lord Derby) brought
foi ward, in the House of Lords, a bill to provide compensation to
tenants on eviction. It proposed “to give a legal security to the out-
going tenants, that, under certain circumstances, he shall be entitled to
compensation for the effects of his own industry, and the expenditure of
his capital in improving the value of land, if he should be ejected
before he has had time to reap their fruits.” This bill contained the
germs of Mr. Gladstone s Land Act of 1870. During the course of his
introductory speech, Lord Stanley said that the tenant held « not by
the character of his tenancy on the payment of rent, but by the security
he derived from the fears of his landlord ; ” a remark which is of
peculiar significance at the present time. Replying to an observation
of a noble Lord, he continued : —“ How, imagine the case of one of your
lordships having an estate of £20,000 a year divided into twenty-acre
farms, the owner never visiting the tenants, those tenants holding
under an intermediate lease, and, as tenants at will only, paying a
rackrent, and required not only to make good and keep in repair & all
drains, fences, and outbuildings, but even to build their own dwelling-
houses, could the noble Lord be surprised to find that no improvement
took place on those farms, and that the dwellings of the tenants were
mere hovels 1 ”*
* The following letter, the original of which is in the writer’s possession,
shows how Irish affairs were usually dealt with :
“ Irish Office, February 13th, 1832.
“Sir,—l have the honour to acknowledge your letter of the 31st ultimo,
accompanied by your pamphlet on the subject of the reclamation of waste lands in
Ireland.
i understating the importance of the subject on which you have
bestowed so much attention, I must assure you that at the present moment the
number of. legislate measures that are to be brought before Parliament, and
which admit of no delay, render it impossible for me to take any active steps for


Now, though this hill was framed upon principles which should
underlie all sound legislation upon the subject, it carried them very far
short of their logical conclusion. The compensation to be awarded
extended only to certain classes of improvements, and was made
proportional to the outlay and the length of the tenant’s enjoyment.
In some cases a use for thirty years, in others for fourteen, was to be
sufficient to bar all claim. Statesmen should remember that a tenant
effects improvements with a hope not of receiving their money value on
eviction, but of continually reaping the benefits of the increased produc-
tive power of his farm. “ The labour and outlay,” says Mill, “ are
immediate. The benefits are spread over many years, perhaps over all
future time.” But what did the Lords do to this miserable instalment
of justice ? They gave it such an uncompromising opposition that it
was dropped.
On the subject of the Devon Commission an article appeared in the
Times of the 6th February, 1844, which, from its bearing on the
land question, is worth extracting at some length. The Queen’s speech
was read by Her Majesty in person, on the Ist February. It expressed
the continuance of her determination to maintain inviolate the Legisla-
tive Union between Great Britain and Ireland, and to develop the
natural resources of that part of the United Kingdom. It then
continued : —“ My attention has been directed to the state of the law
and practice with regard to the occupation of land in Ireland. I have
deemed it advisable to institute extensive local inquiries into a subject
of so much importance, and have appointed a Commission with ample
authority to conduct the requisite investigation.”
“Now,” says the Times, “we profess to be among the number of
those who do not always hope for much from ‘ inquiries ’ into subjects
with which the minds of half the world have long been familiar. We
give, at the same time, all credit to the estimate declared to be formed
by Ministers of the importance of this great land question in Ireland.
It appears to us that the Queen’s Government not merely ought to
be alive to the fact that this is an ‘ important ’ subject, but that the
solution of it is a most the most portentous question with regard to
Ireland to be found within the vast scope of material economy, on which
depends in a manner the continuance of the Irish as a nation, existing to
the degree to which it does exist, under the sway of civil government.
“ Why, what is this great question of the ‘ occupation ’ of land in
Ireland? The ‘occupation of land’ is a simple-sounding phrase. But
what if we say, instead of it, a ‘ war for land ’ —land against life, and
both against law ! —for so, if we call things by their proper names, so it
stands—a bloody war, which rages against rich and poor, and against
the laws that are insufficient for the defence of either—a mutual war of
the stomach against the purse, and vice versa —of desperate passion on
the promotion of a more extended cultivation of Ireland.—l have the honour to
be, your obedient servant,
“E. G. STANLEY.
“James O’Sullivan, Esq.”
On the same subject, the High Sheriff of Clare for 1829, Mr. James Moloney,
writes to the same gentleman : —“ The greater number of resident landowners are
prevented by incumbrances, and by the expenses of their families, from laying out
capital on their estates.”


behalf, and for the relief, of inevitable hunger—of the right to live,
original and inalienable, against the right to possess, the creation of
conventional society.
“We must not, for fear of subordinate and prospective peril, be
scared from the assertion of one which already exists—which actually
surrounds and bids fair to overwhelm us. We must not be deterred by
the sly pedantry of Lord Brougham from looking at the question as it
really is. We must not patiently listen to that lingerer of all things in
and out of season, while he lectures the Earl of Devon, when just on the
eve of opening his gigantic task, upon the necessity of shrinking from
the faithful and heroic discharge of it. When Lord Brougham has the
face to caution the Earl of Devon against doing, in the conduct of his
Commission, ought that shall in any manner compromise the rights of
property, we ask him what does property mean ? Is it alone the rich
man’s right to his acres, to the use of them, and infinite abuse of them 1
Or does he not mean to include in his protest some regard for the right
of the poor man, under God’s charter, to live and breathe on this the
Almighty’s world 1
“We say of a mere lawyer, usurping and defiling the name of
philosopher, that it is too audacious in such a man to attempt this
barricade upon the conscience of a great public officer just entering, like
Lord Devon, into a function so sacred and so difficult that he must have
a care to take none but a conveyancer’s view of a question, embracing
as well rights antecedent to human society as rights derivative under it,
and be governed by a one-sided interest for the maintenance of the
subaltern interest to the overthrow and subversion of the chief!
“ What was this same Lord Brougham’s argument in the case of West
Indian slavery 1 Why, he scouted scornfully the notion of respecting
the property of West Indian colonists. He said their property in
slaves was a disgrace to the country ; that the public interest and public
honour, and our place among nations, required that such property
should no longer exist; that such a right as that of the colonists in
their slaves should be no longer tolerated ; yet it was lawful property—
yet it was a vested right. But the national interest called for its
abolition, and abolished it was—Brougham non dissentiente. Then, is
the Irish landlord’s right so to use his land as to make it an instrument
for the destruction of human life one whit more sacred, according to
law, than the right of the West Indian to the fruits of that capital
which he has laid out in the lawful purchase of slaves ? But we
propose nothing so monstrous as Lord Brougham did. We recommend
not the confiscation of any man’s estate.
“ Here is the case Lord Devon has to deal with. The peasant
population of Ireland are in pressing want of land to raise food for
their families. The immediate possession of every given five acres out
of lease is essential to, perhaps, each one of some 20 individuals
having wives and children. They bid against each other without
exactly calculating the produce of the land ; they have a right to do so
a legal right. The landlord accepts the highest offer, which, also,
without professedly calculating the acreable value, he has an undoubted
right to do. We say nothing of the moral right of either party—of the
tenant to offer more than the land will pay, or the landlord to accept it.
But if we must give an opinion upon the subject, beyond all question it


is as dishonest in the tenant to offer as it is in the landlord to let the
farm for a higher rent than can be fairly made of it. But the difference
is this: the tenant is compelled by the iron-hand of hunger—an excuse,
assuredly, for deeper crimes than an untenable promise under pinching
want; whereas the landlord is not forced by famine, and is not to be
■ excused by purblind cupidity, for demanding a rent which the most
industrious occupier could not pay—for which no solvent tenant, and
none but a perishing desperado, would have the face to pledge himself.
What, then, happens 1 The rents are not paid, ejectments are executed,
the defaulting tenants are ousted, the incomers murdered in their beds.
Is not this a true picture 1 Is anything exaggerated 1 And must the
reality last for ever 1
“ This is what Lord Devon has to deal with. Property is already
outraged ; living men are sacrificed to the name of property; yet there
comes in a vociferating lawyer— ‘ Oh ! take care you don’t touch the
rio-hts of “ property,” hold sacred every blood-stained clod ; let peasants
by hundreds gasp in their own gore ; let them, Lord Devon, manure
the wasted soil with their bodies, but, above all things, protect the full
purse—prey upon the empty stomach.’
“ How, we tell Lord Devon that such things are not to be reconciled.
The rights of property thus abused are inconsistent with the paramount
rights of human beings to their existence. If some law be not founded
by his lordship and his Commission, or some expedient devised by
which such horrors shall be put an end to, you may talk as you will,
Lord Brougham, about the rights of property ; but so sure as there is a
Power above this world, the rights, in spite of all speculative theory—
the rights will fall a prey to the abuses.
“ We heartily wish success to every effort of this Royal Commission
to maintain all the interests of society, and, more than any other, the
interests of the famishing and helpless poor. It has long since been
stated by the Times that the best-contrived scheme of Irish colonization
is but a makeshift, and a hazardous and temporary makeshift ; that the
disease is chronic, and relief from such means but transient; still,
combined with other medicines, let this, if it must, be tried. Among
the landlords of Ireland there are, we dispute not, many generous,
humane, and excellent individuals; but what can individuals do with
such a mass of inveterate evil—with such a grey-grown system of even
involuntary wrong 1 Private persons can effect but little; political
followers, or even heads of Irish parties—witness the frivolity and
foolishness of Parliament-house —worse than nothing ; the cure must
be undertaken by the Imperial Government, or the patient of centuries
is, beyond redemption, lost.
“ Let Lord Devon, then, we beseech him, nerve his resolution. Let
him not sacrifice greater things to less, nor set up that idol of clay—
land—against life, and the sapless form of justice against its vital and
immortal spirit.” .
Thus spoke the Times in ’45. Comment upon such an article would
be superfluous. It shows how, sometimes, in spite of the necessities of
remunerative politics and professional opinions, the honest convictions
of a manly heart will find passionate utterance.
From the report of the Devon Commission until 1850 few events
of importance marked the progress of the land movement. In the*


presence of famine and disease, all discussions about remedial legislation
were laid aside. Immediate death stared people in the face. The cry
from everywhere was for food. ’46 saw the people nervous and
frightened. Over their heads were gathering, in ominous silence, those
black, menacing clouds which next year burst upon the land : then
came graves and world-partings.
At length, in 1850, the state of the agricultural population once
more attracted attention from all quarters. The “ Irish Tenant
League” sprang into existence. On the 6th of August, 1850, a
meeting of representatives of the tenants’ interests was held in
Dublin. It was composed of members of all religious persuasions,
and in other respects opposite politics, their bond of union being the
land question. Resolutions were passed embodying the recommen-
dations of the Royal Commission of 1881 ; and the meeting pledged
itself to agitate for legislation on the principle of what is now known
as the three F’s—Fixity of tenure, Fair rents, and Free sale. To carry
out the objects of the meeting, a few days afterwards “ The Irish
Tenant League ” was formed, with a council of 120 gentlemen, among
whom were some of the most influential men in the country, as far as
education and respectability of character are concerned. The work of
provincial organization was then begun, and the leaguers soon found
themselves in a position to be able to take advantage of the first oppor-
tunity that offered itself for pressing their demands upon Parliament,
through representatives pledged to their principles. In the House of
Commons they had already one staunch friend—Mr. John Bright. He
had, since the formation of the League, called the attention of the House
to the question of land tenure in Ireland, and said he thought it “ time
the House should resolutely legislate upon it.” The general election of
’52 found fifty members returned for Irish constituencies, all of whom
had pledged themselves to carry out, by their advocacy, the principles
of the League, and all went as merry as a marriage bell until those
detestable distinctions of creed, of which Shiel deplored the existence,
once more caused a split in the ranks.
The Ecclesiastical Titles Bill of Lord John Russell, whose purport
was to deprive Roman Catholic bishops of their right to territorial
titles, was at that time extended to Ireland. The Catholics were
furious. A movement for the repeal of the Act was immediately
started. To sustain enthusiasm upon a subject it is necessary that nothing
else of equal, or presumedly equal, importance should press itself upon
the attention; and here, at a critical moment in the history of the land
question, arose a national insult that challenged immediate and passion-
ate remonstrance. The result was a division in the ranks of the Irish
party. The Nation , true to its old principles and instincts, advocated
union upon one point in vain. The Keogh and Sadleir Brigade soon
diverted the current of Irish political thought from its proper channels
—people trusted them in spite of the prophetic warnings of the Nation
and Freeman —they were returned to Parliament sworn to discard every
other consideration but the repeal of the obnoxious Bill and the settle-
ment of the land question, and in a few months accepted office under a
Government opposed to both. The people were hopelessly betrayed.
Demoralization and the temporary extinction of all hope of l'eform
ensued.


From ’53 to ’7O there was nothing done to improve the relations
between the tiller and the owner of the soil. An Act of Parliament
was passed in 1860, entitled “The Landlord and Tenant Act,” but it
was simply a consolidation of the existing statutes and precedents, and
had nothing to do with the question of the occupation of land in its
economic aspect. It was a lawyers’ act. But 1870 came, and the
Queen’s speech on the opening of Parliament announced that it would
be proposed to Her Majesty’s Lords and Commons “to amend the laws
respecting the occupation and acquisition of land in Ireland in a
manner adapted to the peculiar circumstances of that country, and
calculated, as Her Majesty believes, to bring about improved relations
between the several classes concerned in Irish agriculture, which,
collectively, constitute the great bulk of the people. These provisions,
when matured by your impartiality and wisdom, as Her Majesty trusts,
will tend to inspire among persons with whom such sentiments may
still be wanting, that steady confidence in the law, and that desire to
render assistance in its effective administration, which mark her subjects
in general; and thus will aid in consolidating the fabric of the
empire. ”
Vain hopes ! Her Majesty might have had by this time, on the
western side of St, George’s Channel, a prosperous, contented, and
deeply loyal people, had her Ministers not shrunk from the entire
discharge of their duty. If they had, in 1870, grasped the subject as
.sound statesmen, and not continued the system of patchwork legislation
which has been so characteristic of the action of English cabinets in
relation to Irish affairs, the “ Boycotting ” of ’BO would never have
been heard of.
As the Land Bill of 1870 became law, and is the Act which at
present governs the relation of landlord and tenant in Ireland, it would
be well to say a few words about its provisions. Previous to its enact-
ment the landlord’s power of eviction was unlimited. It was not only
an abstract right, but one which was often exercised with the most
.savage cruelty—a right the use of which depended more upon the
temper of the landlord than the conduct of the tenant. There are
many Irish families in Australia who could tell tales of desolated
homesteads and razed villages ; and to some of them the memory of
such scenes as that of the Bth April, ’6l, at Derryveih, will ever be
green. To deter landlords from taking frequent and unjust advantage
of this right of eviction, the Land Act annexed penalties to its
capricious exercise. It affords to the tenant, when evicted through no
default of his own, compensation of two kinds, between wliich, in
general, he must elect. He can claim either for improvements effected
by himself or his predecessors in title, or for disturbance. The amount
recoverable for disturbance is proportional to the rent paid ; for
improvements, to their value and the length of their enjoyment. The
scale of compensation for disturbance ranges from seven times the
.annual rent as a maximum, in case of its being under £lO a year, to
one year’s rent where it reaches £IOO or over; but in no case can more
than £250 be recovered. The second part of the Act contains what are
known as the “ Bright clauses.” Their purport is to facilitate
purchases of their holdings by the tenants of estates under petition of
sale in the Landed Estates Court. The Board of Works is authorized


to advance two-thirds of the purchase-money, repayable by annual
instalments extending over a period of thirty-five years. Owing to-
cumbersome and expensive machinery, want of division into suitable
lots or parcels by the court, and technicalities which unfairly handicap
tenant purchasers, this part of the Act has become almost wholly
inoperative.
The legalization of the Ulster tenant-right custom was also effected.
The nature of this custom is not the same throughout all Ulster, but
with slight differences, dependent on estate rules, it generally consists
in the right of an evicted tenant to sell his interest to the highest
bidder. It sprang into existence at the time of the plantation of
Ulster by James 1., whose prudent Scotch settlers objected to accept
land on such disadvantageous conditions as the native population held
under.
On the 15th of February, 1870, Mr. Gladstone introduced the Bill
to the House of Commons. On the subject of the identity of the
system of land tenure in England and Ireland-, he said: —“It is true that
the naked law of the occupation of land in Ireland, as founded upon,
contract and not upon tenure, as in England, is founded upon the
relation of two persons, one of whom has something that is given him
by a written or an unwritten agreement, and the other has all the rest.
It is quite true that that is the law of both countries, but only the-
mere skeletons of the laws of the two countries bear any resemblance-
to each other. The flesh and blood with which the figures are invested
are wholly different : all the circumstances, all the associations, and all
the accretions that have grown round the naked ideas are different in
the one country from what they are in the other. We cannot name a
point in which the relation of landlord and tenant in Ireland and in
Great Britain are the same, except in the abstract and general idea.
Down to a late period Ireland has been full of degradation and the-
marks of conquest, while in England nothing of the kind has existed.
In Ireland the landlord has commonly differed from the tenant in
politics and in religion, whereas in England the landlord and the
tenant have commonly been of the same mind in both religion and
politics. In Ireland the landlord does not, as a rule, find the capital
necessary for the improvement of the soil, although he does so in
exceptional, and, perhaps, multiplying instances. In England the
landlord is the person who does find the capital. In Ireland the
landlord is frequently an absentee, and, unhappily, has been so during
the 700 years of the connection between the two countries. In
England and Scotland absenteeism is exceedingly rare. In Ireland a
great jealousy has prevailed among a large body of the landlords
during the last forty years against granting tenures longer than from
year to year, whereas in England and Scotland, on the contrary, the
almost universal practice has been to grant longer terms; and in
England there is hardly a quarter to be found where such jealousy on
the part of the landlords is maintained. In Ireland, where tenant-
right does not exist, the law has refused to recognize in any and in
every shape the right of the tenant in anything he has put into the
soil, whereas in England there is not a single county in which, in one
form or another, customs do not prevail which mitigate the strictness
of the law. In Ireland, from the unhappy circumstances of the


country—l have no doubt, as regards the present race of landlords,
from their want of will—there has not rested in the hands of the
landlords the discharge of that immense mass of public duties without
fee or reward which has honourably distinguished for so many
generations the landlords of England, which I think is a just relic
and true descendant of the feudal system, a system which never took
a real or genuine root in Ireland. And lastly, whereas in England
and Scotland the idea of holding by contract is perfectly traditional
and familiar to the mind of every man, in Ireland, on the contrary,
where the old ideas and customs were never supplanted except by the
rude hand of violence, and by laws written in the statute book, which
never went to the heart of the Irish people, the people have not
generally embraced the idea of the occupation' of land by contract, and
the old Irish notion that some interest in the soil adheres to the tenant,
even although his contract has expired, is everywhere rooted_ in the
minds of the people. If time permitted, I could prove this by a
multitude of persons who well know the condition of Ireland,
Therefore do not let us suppose or imagine for a moment that the
resemblance between the Irish and the English law is a reason why
there should not be good cause for special legislation on the subject of
the occupation of land in Ireland.”
Later on, he said :—“ If we have a peasantry endowed with vigorous
arms, with both ability and will to earn their own subsistence, and if
we encourage a system under which that peasantry is expected to
labour, with only a precarious title to occupation, and ever liable to be
evicted without fault or neglect, and if we then think it enough to say,
‘ Although you are evicted, still the doors of the poorhouse are open to
receive you,’ my answer is, that this is not an operation by which you
can bring about the existence of national content.”
Mr. Bright regarded it as a just and comprehensive measure, and
hoped the moderation and patriotism of Parliament would soon enable
it to become law. The Bill was objected to by the Irish members, on
the ground that it was a mere tinkering with the subject, and would
prove wholly inadequate to give the requisite protection to the tenant.
Isaac Butt, a name that will ever be associated with honour in
connection with this question, in a letter to the Limerick farmers
Club, pointed out the principal defects of the measure; and, writing to
the Times of March 7th, remarked that nothing short of “ stability” of
tenure would raise the Irish occupier from the state of thraldom and
serfdom in which he was then held, and expressed his belief that “ the
provisions of the Bill, instead of accomplishing this for the great mass
of Irish tenants, will only aggravate the evils of their condition,
because, while they give them no adequate protection against landlord
power, they will throw new elements of discord into the relations,
already too distracted, between the owners and the occupiers of the
soil.” On March the sth, a deputation of gentlemen, representing the
Irish National Association, the Irish Tenant League, and other organi-
zations connected with the agitation of the land question, waited upon
Mr. Gladstone, to express the dissatisfaction of the people of Ireland
with the Bill. Lord Bellew, one of the speakers, said that what they
wanted was “ the right of occupany, subject to the payment of a rent to
which the tenant is liable, or such charge as may be afterwards settled


from time to time by fair valuation; the tenant to have the right to
sell his interest to any solvent person to whom the landlord cannot
make reasonable objection. They felt that, under the Bill as it stood,
the landlords would still be able to exercise a capricious system
of eviction.” But Mr. Gladstone stated that he had to satisfy
Imperial opinion—the opinion of England and Scotland, which ran
contrary to that of the Irish upon their own business. Eleven years
afterwards we find this Imperial opinion having to make way for a
settlement upon principles which were regarded as communistic in 1870.
What a lot of crime and bitter feeling might have been avoided had
Ministers then acted upon a strict sense of duty !
. -^ le Irish were right. This Land Act has been an utter failure. If
violent agitation for reform is again a bug-bear, it is the fault of those
■who imposed upon them the necessity for its continuance.
And how has the Land Act failed ? The Bright, or acquisition,
clauses have, as has been said, completely broken down. To purchase
under them in the Landed Estates Court requires an expenditure of
time and money altogether without the competence of the tenants to
bestow. Theriots are never subdivided suitably to the wants of tenant-
purchasers. The required preliminary attendances of the latter before
examiners and masters would remind one of the Circumlocution Office,
while the rental and conditions of sale are nearly always settled to suit
the convenience of purchasers of large allotments. The costs of the con-
veyance would, in this country, stagger credibility. Besides, the multitude
of reported decisions on the meaning of those clauses, however much
they may have contributed to the corpulence of lawyers, are enough to
drive into consumption those who hope to evolve from them anythin**
sensible. °
. the disturbance clauses are not preventive of capricious
eviction. In the first place, every facility is afforded to the landlord to
borrow money f or payment of the annexed penalties, a circumstance
which lightens their pressure. In the next place, the amount actually
recovered on ejectment never compensates the ejected. Take a case.
A tenant applies for compensation for disturbance, the rent of his
holding having been £l2 a year. The maximum to which he is entitled
under the provisions of the Act is £6O, or five years’ purchase of the
rent. This maximum is seldom approached, and almost never reached ;
and the sum awarded is always considerably diminished by a long bill
of law costs. If a balance of £2O remain after all deductions,
be considered lucky; and with this sum, and, perhaps, a long family,
le is turned adrift upon the world to compete for employment, in avoca-
tions wholly foreign to his former habits of life, against the skilled
labour of others.
The case of improvements is similar. The amount recovered is
seldom equal to two-thirds the value of the tenant’s original expenditure
and labour. But the hope of receiving a diminished capital on eviction
is scarcely an inducement to its investment in increasing the productive
power of land; profit, not loss, is the end of industry.
There are several minor provisions in the Act which have contri-
buted to render the beneficial clauses almost useless. It is possible, for
instance, for a tenant to contract himself out of the benefits of the Act
altogether, if the rent of his holding exceeds £5O a year. His election


-to do so is in most cases the result of a fear of eviction, in case of non-
compliance with the landlord’s wishes.
A detailed analysis of the provisions of the Act of 1870 would
exceed the limits of this subject. It will be sufficient to mention that
its defects have been over and over again pointed out in Parliament •
but every attempt to amend them has been defeated by the brute force
The T St im Portant was the Land Bill introduced in
lb 7 bby Mr. Butt. It proposed to give the tenants perpetuity of tenure
at a valued rent, with power to periodically vary the rent by arbitration.
Ihe landlord s reversion, m case of non-payment of rent or breach of any
of the statutable conditions as to subletting, &c., was reserved. Its
principles will probably be found analogous to those of Mr. Gladstone’s
ill of this year . “ I go,” said Mr. Butt, “on the great principles of
jurisprudence, which will allow no rights of property to stand in the
way of the general good.”
In judging of this question, the excesses of a few village demagogues
must be overlooked. It is the blindest prejudice only that will condemn
a movement because a few of its advocates use arguments “ full of sound
and fury, signifying nothing.” Those who do so have profited nothing
by teachings of history, which tell us how much bad logic may be used
in the advocacy of a good cause. But underneath has been the deep
current of educated opinion, which now undoubtedly flows in the direc-
tion of radical reform. It has declared that the maintenance, in a few
. a despotic right (such as that of eviction) which can urge nothing to
justify its continuance except the fact of its antiquity, is not to be
tolerated where it acts prejudicially to the happiness of millions. With
the home markets now flooded by the produce of America, and the giant
resources of Australia threatening, with improved facilities of transit
to continue the course of depreciation in the value of the fruits of the
soil at home, it is utterly impossible for tenants to fight under the old
conditions. Ireland suffers principally from this competition, two-thirds
of her income, as against one-seventh in England, being derived from
land. Ihe land laws are bad, because—
They afford no encouragement to industry, every improvement
effected by the tenant being liable to be confiscated by a
proportional increase of rent.
Capricious eviction is possible and frequent under them the
penalties having proved wholly inadequate either to deter the
_ landlord or compensate the tenant.
Their offspring absenteeism, produces an annual expenditiire else-
where without return, of over £4,000,000 of the country’s
capital. J
They promote disloyalty, by denying any staple interest in their
country to a people with opposite traditions.
They give the lion’s share of the fruits to those who contribute in
no way to the costs of production.
And because they have retarded the progress of a nation blessed
by Providence with many natural advantages.
The State Trial of 1880 so strikingly resembles that of ’44 and
its events are so fresh within the memory of every reader, that a very
nef reference to it will suffice. The charge was again for conspiracy—
tfie theatre the same, but the tribunal different. It would be


impossible to find within the limits of the United Kingdom two judges
more remarkable for their courtesy, impartiality, and wisdom than
those who tried the case. The constitution of the jury gave general
satisfaction. The trial commenced on the 28th December, 1880, before
Justices Fitzgerald and Barry, and a special jury; Chief Justice May
having retired, owing to the existence of a doubt as to his impartiality,,
in consequence of some expressions which he made use of in giving
judgment upon a motion for postponement of the trial. The indictment,
though much shorter than in the Repeal case, consisted of nineteen counts,
the last of which was judiciously withdrawn by the Attorney-General
during the course of the trial. It would have let in some damning
evidence against the Irish land system. The Right Hon. Hugh Law,
Attorney-General, in his statement of the case explained the nature of
the charge against the traversers, which is reduceable to conspiracy to
incite tenants not to pay their rents and to “ Boycott.” He described
the formation of the Land League on the 21st October, 1879, reciting
“ Paudeen O’Rafferty’s Ten Commandments,” and gave a general
outline of the evidence to be adduced, which principally consisted of
extracts from the several speeches of the traversers. The conduct of
the trial was in every respect similar to that of ’44. On Tuesday,
the 25th January, the twentieth day of the hearing, the jury were
discharged without a verdict, the foreman having declared that “ they
were unanimously of opinion that they would not agree.” On the
previous Thursday, the seventeenth day, Mr. A. M. Sullivan addressed
the jury on behalf of Mr. Patrick Egan, Treasurer of the Land League..
Mr. Sullivan is a member of the English and Irish bars of a few years
standing, and has resided in London since his call to the former.
Since the departure of Mr. Charles Gavan Duffy for Australia until the
latter event he was editor of the Nation, which is now conducted by his;
brother, Mr. T. D. Sullivan. He spoke as follows :
May it please your lordships and gentlemen of the jury. On me it
devolves to speak the last words in their defence; and, with my gifted
and learned friend, Mr. Adams, I can truly say I rise to occupy a brief
portion of your time, not with, but against, my personal choice, yielding,
only to the call of duty pressed on me by my clients and my colleagues.
I appear for Mr. Patrick Egan, and for him I can but feel that he stands
before you at some disadvantage to-day, in that he has confided the justi-
fication of his conduct and the vindication of his aims, his objects, his
principles, to an advocate but poorly endowed for so serious a responsi-
bility. I ask some measure of your consideration for him. I ask for myself
your kindly indulgence for rising to address you, at this exhausted yet
critical stage of the defence—unaccustomed to address you, now almost
a stranger here. Speaking in this court to-day I exercise for the first
time—and, in all human probability, for the last time in my life—the
privilege, which I proudly prize, of belonging to the bar of my own
country. That kindly indulgence I feel, gentlemen, I shall receive not
only from you but from their lordships. Iso presume, for I know that
of one of them it is true to say that with him his generosity to those who
need it has become a proverb in the profession; and of the other, the
distinguished president of this court, I can never forget that I have
ere now received at his hands (in the supreme moment of my life)


fairness and courtesy as a judge, magnanimity as a man.* There has
arisen to many a lip, as there recurs at this moment throughout this
trial to every mind, a memorable parallel to the eventful drama of
which this court for weeks past has been the theatre. Our thoughts
instinctively go back to the episode of nearly forty years ago, which
fixed upon our city the gaze of Empires, the anxieties of this country.
In one sense it may be said that the cause and the issues are still the
same—nought but the 11 personnel” is changed. To-day, again, the
Irish people, represented by their most trusted leaders, stand at the
bar. Once more the law officers of the Crown are the accusers. Again
the charge is conspiracy. New faces are on the bench and in the Jury
box; but in the theories of our law the tribunal is still the same, for
in their lordships we are presumed to see the Queen in person presiding
in this court, and in you, gentlemen, the country. Mark you well, the
country is supposed to be present listening to the evidence, and by that
evidence to declare the issues of innocence or guilt. But there is another
sense, and a very real and important sense, in which I see not parallel, but
contrast—a striking contrast between 1843 and the scene of 1881...
Gentlemen, when I come to point that contrast I have a complaint to
make, and it is this, that what I would say in all sincerity and truth of
the tribunal is robbed of half its force by the language of insincerity
and complaisance paraded in that time. Yielding to considerations of
policy or. propriety—perhaps I ought more justly to say, deferring
considerations of what was due to the dignity of a public court of
justice in the abstract—men spoke of and to jurors of that time as if any
man believed them to be unprejudiced, and of the president of that
court as if he was regarded as a miracle of impartiality. The inexorable
judgments of history have long since passed upon those men, one and
all. We know to-day what the highest legal and constitutional
authority pronounced upon the rulings and the charges of that time.
We know what universal history declares of the animus of that
prosecution, of the verdict of that jury. In all, or nearly all, of these
respects, I say, in the sincerity of my soul, that I believe the State
trials of to-day are destined to present a luminous contrast with the
miserable exhibition of partizanship, passion, and subserviency.
Gentlemen of the jury, I said that you sat in the box as the .country.
I believe it was the learned Attorney-General who remarked that my
distinguished leader in this case went back as far as Magna Charta the
Barons and King John. That is one of the artifices of debate and
contention in a case like this, yet most relevant—most necessary, may be,
to connect the past often with the present, and to show how down
through the stream of history great rights have come, and duties have
accrued, to men like you. He referred to a clause in the great charter,
not for the purpose of distracting your mind by retrospect of history,
but of enforcing the Constitutional argument that to jurors belong
rights, privileges, duties, which no power in the land, no judge however
illustrious, no monarch however powerful, can ever take away—the right
to judge of the innocence or guilt in criminal cases, but especially between
the subject and the Crown. Gentlemen, this is a composite tribunal. You
* Mr. Sullivan refers to Mr. Justice Fitzgerald’s words in pronouncing
sentence against him on the 20th February, 1868, when he was convicted as a
journalist. —Ed.


sit in that box, their lordships preside upon the bench, and yet if
any man were asked in all broad Britain, or here in Ireland, by an
inquiring foreigner in what consisted the pre-eminent glory of our
jurisprudence, he would be answered, “ Trial by jury.” The man would
be laughed to scorn who called it trial by judge, and yet the judge is a
necessary part of the tribunal. Why has national history and political
instinct in a free people fastened upon the phrase “ trial by jury ”
rather than “ trial by judge,” or “ trial by judge and jury.” Gentlemen,
it is because that, in the wisdom which has shaped the development of
legal institutions in these countries, it has been not only most wise, but
found most necessary to commit to the twelve men in the box, rather
than the twelve judges on the bench, issues that require a breadth of
view and a comprehension of popular instinct; and because the English
people know that, although many a glory surrounds the names of their
judges, and will ever attach to the bench of justice, yet the English
people know, or have been made to feel, that in the hour of their agony,
in struggle against oppression from the Crown, they leaned upon a
broken reed when they depended for the protection of liberty upon a
judge; and in the juries in the box in the reign of the Stuarts and
the Hanoverian line ever since the Revolution, liberty has found its
truest bulwark. Gentlemen, I speak not thus to disparage the rights,
the functions, that are committed to the Bench; and in the day when
juries attempt to invade the domain that belongs to their lordships
justice will be wrecked, though passion or faction may triumph for an
hour. It is in the just and due observance by each portion of this
tribunal of its own just rights that the ends of equity as well as
law and public justice can best be attained. But, gentlemen, there
are two subjects pre-eminent of all the subjects that devolve upon
the jurors. Of all the questions and the issues that need their
special vigilance and care there are pre-eminently two in which it
behoved twelve jurors to grasp firmly their rights, and part with
them only with their life. Those two questions are political
sedition, political conspiracy. Gentlemen, there are reasons why
these two questions should belong specially to the jealous care of
jurors. Firstly, because these matters of political sedition, these
charges of political conspiracy, arise in conflict between the Crown and
the people. Secondly, because they are questions touching matters
vague and indefinite—matters of opinion; because they require to be
viewed in conjunction with the surrounding circumstances of the times.
You cannot draw the line—it has never yet been drawn; it can be
■drawn by no hard rule—it must always depend upon the elastic judg-
ment of a jury to draw the line between the patriot’s duty and the
language of seditionists. There have been moments in the history of
this empire when that which technically might be ruled seditious saved
the commonwealth and protected the rights and liberties of the people.
The third reason why you need to keep within your own powers these
great issues in cases of political conspiracy—it is because these conflicts
and these accusations are often the resorts of Governments whose every
cry, whose misfaisance of all duty may have promoted the act which
they seek to fasten on the men they charge. Sedition ! Why there
exists not to-day in our land, or in Great Britain, a public man of any
eminence who, when denouncing some public indignity or wrong I


speak in the broadest spirit of all public men, whatever party they may
beilong to—not one of them all against whom an indictment for sedition
might not be made, and if juries were to apply the law in all its rigid
technicality they would be bound to convict for such a crime. As for.
conspiracy—conspiracy! the last miserable resort of imbecile powers."
When often no juror can be trusted to pronounce, a verdict in sedition,
you will always find some feeble hand weaving the net of conspiracy.
There is this distinction between conspiracy and sedition, that in'a
charge of sedition the men who have used seditious language, each man
might answer for himself, but in conspiracy the machinery of God’s
goodness, 4,000 miles beyond the ocean, may be held accountable for the
ravings of some village patriot at home. So odious to all honourable
minds is this miserable resort of conspiracy that the military law—in many
respects more severe than the civil law—has repudiated it and condemned
it. Lord Woodhouse Lee, in his text-book on military law, quotes a
remarkable letter from the King, through his Secretary of State,
reproving in angry language from the royal lips officers of a court-
martial in Edinburgh who stored up offences against men, not dealing
with them as they arose, but kept them up for eight long months, and
at last brought the culprit to the bar, and the King, through the
Secretary of State, declared that this was an outrage on justice that
the ministers or officials who saw crime—if it was crime—passing
before their eyes, and stored it up for some future use, deserved the
censure of the Crown. That is the resort of the Irish Government
indict for conspiracy ! Gentlemen, you know what evil it has already
done in this fair land of ours; you know, gentlemen, that it was found
potential to convict as a criminal a man who was held lip to us as an
example of legality and respect for law in the opening speech for the
Crown. All men knew that if ever there arose a public man in
Ireland whose whole purpose—whose set purpose and endeavour it was
to keep the people within the law—it was O’Connell. He carried the
language of scrupulous reverence for the Crown and the tribunals of
justice to exaggeration. Sleeping and waking his anxiety was to teach
the people that within the law, and within reverence for law, right
might be done. Yet even then this miserable resort of conspiracy was
potential, and the co-operation of jurors was obtained—of jurors who
had been reduced from a sense of duty in response to appeals that never
should have been made to them. Gentlemen, it was agitation that has
protected your interests and industries, and secured your franchise,,
which you now enjoy; and I see before me merchants of this city of
high position : you have not a right—you have not a possession of
property and of political endowment that has not been won for
you by agitation that might have been crushed by prosecution
for conspiracy. But you may hear when I have done it is right
to agitate, but you might agitate with propriety and decorum
—your language must be within certain bounds, and your conduct
should be regulated by drill. Yes, gentlemen of the jury yes,
that is true, and it is right that you should be so told by whom-
soever will state to you the strict letter of the law ; but while we know
the jurors are bound to take into their minds this constitutional truth,
that it is impossible in a free country to conduct the agitations that are
directed to save a nation’s life by the prim and strict rules of drawing-


Toom decorum or the proprieties of language that ought to prevail in a
■court of justice. No. You, gentlemen, would have no rights if these
■cast-iron rules of prim propriety of act and language were to he held
-against the Hampdens of two hundred years ago, or against the Parnells,
Egans, and Sheridans of to-day. I care not how humble the man. I
care not how lofty the man. Now, gentlemen, the English people
possess many inestimable blessings of liberty—they have the reality of
a free Constitution, the envy of the world. Its miserable parody is
sometimes seen on the Irish shore. Gentlemen, you have been referred
to the great Reform movement some forty or fifty years ago. Was
language of prime propriety, was conduct of decorous legality, pursued
then by Lord John Russell, one of the leaders of that agitation? No.
Were acts of violence resorted to? Why, never in Ireland—not even
in the tithe war, much less in this most moderate and restricted agitation
•of to-day—has there been anything to equal the records of the Reform
agitation of 1831. Palaces blazed then, the King was hooted in the
streets, resolutions were passed which not even Mr. Nally’s extravagant
language could approach. Yes, resolutions were passed as extravagant
as this—that for those who denied them justice they would prepare
their powder and melt their lead. The Common Council of the city of
London—the municipal parliament of the British metropolis—passed
resolutions calling upon the people to give the King no tax till the
Reform Bill was cai'ried. Think of these things, and what do they
mean ? The struggle then was not to keep the wolf of hunger from
their doors—it was not to save life; no, it was for a very different
object. Compare, I adjure you, the motives of that agitation, when
they almost combined in civil war, with this land agitation, and say if in
the eyes of man or God these two can compare for a moment. And
yet no officer of the Crown attempted to prosecute Lord John
Russell or any of the other leaders of that movement. And why ?
I say fearlessly here, in the responsibility of an humble member of the
bar, that by a strict and technical holding of these hateful doctrines of
conspiracy, Lord John Russell would have been convicted on the
decision of the judges—but he was not tried, and I will tell you why.
Because right well the Attorney-General of that day knew that twelve
honest Englishmen, no matter how strongly they differed in politics or
in religion, they were undivided ; no twelve honest men could be got
to find a verdict of guilty because these men have erred in the heat of
language. The true culprits were really in the cabinets of the king.
And the answer is here to-day. Gentlemen, there is a violence that all
persons must honestly be ever ready to discriminate—the passion of
faction and the movements of a nation. If you have travelled, as I
have done, the forests of America, or even passed through the
indigenous woods of our own beautiful Killarney and Glengariff, there
you may see many a vast mass of rock which has been rent asunder by
the development of a single slender root, a little seedling that fell into a
fissure of that rock. You might have crushed it with your fingers as
it grew, yet by the development of nature it rent asunder the mass of
rock that a giant could not move. That was the force of physical law
-f—it was the law of nature ; and so the violence of some of these
movements has rent apart some wrong that has attempted to cramp the
progress and development of a nation. Now, what has incited these


men to the course which has brought them before this court to-day ? I
assert that the objects—and I shall make this good—that my client —
my clients, I may say —have had in view were just and legal, and that
they are the wrong men at the bar. The true culprits sit round the
council board in Downing-street. Government have their duties as
well as their rights, and although no Cabinet—no government in its
individuality—can be held accountable for the wrongs of past years, yet
the Government as a continuous body fail in their first great duty to
the people over whom they preside if they note not the evils of the
time and redress them. If these evils can be traced from year to year,
and if the Government —not, as I said, in an individual sense, but in its
continuity—is fixed with knowledge, official knowledge, of the necessity
for measures needed to cure the wrongs, and have the power within
their reach to apply them—the Government which fails to do so has, I
assert, committed the direst, the deepest, and darkest crime that any
Government in history can commit. During sixty-eight miserable
years I will fasten on the Government official knowledge of this
state of things ; and I shall ask your verdict, whatever its technical
effect may be, your verdict of acquittal of my clients in the
•condemnation of the Government. Gentlemen, what is it these meil
are engaged in 1 The land agitation—the land war. In all countries
this land question has been the cause of embitterment and strife
between classes. I shall not go back upon Irish history. I can
imagine you shudder at it. I shall only ask you to take note of an
historical fact—that the land system against which these men have
agitated was established in the last century. There have been conquests
and confiscations in other countries, there has been conquest and
confiscation here; and, heaven knows, criminal should I feel if I were
to rake up again history to embitter feeling because there has been
conquest and confiscation in Ireland, as there has been in England—in
every country in Christendom. But, gentlemen, there is great distinction
between the cases of Ireland as regards confiscation and as regards
conquest. In all other countries the conqueror and the conquered
learned to fuse. In all these countries what was done by the confiscation
was soon obliterated in the memory of the people, because the new
owners of the land assimilated with the population. In fact, gentlemen,
it seems to be a natural law in other parts of the world that if men
did come upon the land and confiscate it, they did, at all events,
assimilate in process of time with the people round about them. And
if any class came upon the land from the Vistula to the Tiber, from
the Danube to the Shannon, and sullenly isolated themselves, and did
not assimilate with the population in the midst of which they were set,
their position was simply that of a festering sore and wound in an
otherwise wholesome body. Gentlemen, I only refer to the conquest
and the law as regards property in the last century to establish this
fact, that the land system under which we now live, established in the
last century, has ever since kept alive wounds, has never allowed them
to heal, so faithfully has the landlord class hugged the traditions of
those who were the early settlers here, so continuously have they kept
their feet upon the conquered and prostrate race. It is the simple
truth to say that Cromwell lives to-day in the land system of the Irish
■people, with the result to them of miseries unutterable, of suffering


unknown in any other country of Christian Europe. What effort did
the landlords ever make to benefit the people 1 ? They might have
moulded the people as the potter does the plastic clay. The land-
lords made the laws alone. Alone they sat on the grand juries.
Alone they sat on the bench and administered laws which they alone
had made. Whatever Ireland is to-day, culpable or liable to
accusation, I lay it at the door of the long dominant and ruling class ;
whatever of virtue, of humanity, remains is in despite of the rule of
those men. Gentlemen, no people have a right to conspire against their
Government if they have not afforded that Government a fair and
honest chance of doing their duty by them. Let us see how that is.
In 1819 a select committee of the House of Commons was appointed to>
inquire into the condition of Ireland. That committee took official
evidence and reported to the House—“ That the state of things was
calamitous to the last degree, and called for immediate legislation.”'
What was done 1 Nothing. Four years passed by. In 1823—1 seek
by these facts to fasten knowledge, and official knowledge, on the
Government of a state of the country which in any other country
would have led to a revolution—in 1823 another committee was
appointed, and it said—“ The condition of the people is wretched and
calamitous in the last degree. The people live in a state of the utmost
destitution, with scarcely an article of furniture in their miserable
cabins, using as bed-clothes a little flannel and a quantity of straw
thrown over it.” In 1879, Mr. Gladstone, the Minister of to-day,
stated that such a state of things as that was enough to forfeit the
right of the Turk to govern Bulgaria. Gentlemen, nothing was done
on the report of 1825. A few years more passed, and in 1829 another
crisis arose, and another committee was appointed. Mark you, it is
always a committee, never redress. The committee reported that the
state of the country called for immediate legislation ; yet, owing to the
state of business in the House, there was no chance of getting a bill
passed through. During all these years it was not for votes or
franchises that the Irish people were waiting—as the reformers of 1831
—it was only for leave to live in the ordinary condition of human
existence. In 1830 another committee makes its report, on the 18th
July. The report was laid on the table, but the people were left in
their misery and distress, as if to tempt them to the last
resort of rebellion, well knowing that the strong armed power
of England could trample out the revolt in blood. Gentlemen,
I ask you is there not in all this a criminal neglect, an utter
abandonment of duty by the Government. Mr. Stanley, after-
wards Lord Derby, taking the plaint from the people of Connemara, as
it comes to-day, said—“ Severe as are the sufferings of the people in the
extremity of their distress, they do not give utterance to one syllable of
insubordination, or even of discontent ; ” and that was one of the
reasons why he thought their condition deserved the attention of
Parliament. Not a syllable of insubordination ! Did they fare the
better for it h I believe in my soul if, instead of lying down under
tyranny that oppressed them, they took a very different course, they
would not have been left to linger in their wretchedness and subjection.
Well, in 1834 another is made, but in vain, and shortly afterwards
Sharman Crawford—a name of honour—appeared on the scene. He


was a Protestant gentleman, of the North of Ireland. Perhaps I may
be excused if here I repeat what has been often said elsewhere. I often
think that Almighty God has given it, as a ray of sunshine illumining
the gloom—that whenever Ireland was down and prostrate, there is
always found a Protestant patriot to arouse her spirit and lead her on.
Sharman Crawford was the man at this time. From 1834 to 1847 he
strove for some justice to the people. Not less than six times he
brought measures into Parliament—and, mark you, what were they ?
They were measures falling very far short of what even the landlords
of to-day would gladly accept. But here beneath my hand are the
results of the division lists upon these measures, and what do they tell 1
They tell that, as every effort, however small, to obtain justice for the
people was made, the Irish landlords and their representatives sprang
forward to arrest the blessed effort of the kindly, honest, Protestant
gentleman. The division lists, I repeat, show how persistently the Irish
landlords resisted justice—that they resisted it from day to day. I pass
on. Soon came the gloomy shadow of a terrible calamity. In 1846, in
the midst of these vain pleadings, in the midst of this long-continued
story of the utter failure of the Parliament and Government to do their
duty, the gloom of a deeper shadow fell on our land. In other
countries—would it were so in our own—the gentry class discharge
noble functions in social and public life. They are the natural leaders
of the people, selected by education, fortune, position, and oppor-
tunity. They might have been so here. They would have found a
kindly, warm-hearted, grateful people, ever disposed to render the
tribute justly payable to virtue and to birth. All the world over such
men are the first to scent danger to the people—the first to meet it.
When the gloom of a terrible famine fell upon our shores, what did the
landlords do ? Many of them, no doubt, nobly did their duty when
the distress was in its full force. But what is the history of the
people at this time 1 There were some of them who, like the popular
leaders of 1880, cried out that the famine cloud was over the land.
How were they met 1 They were met by incredulity. They were
charged with exaggeration. A member of Parliament who is every
day attacking the Land League made a public speech in 1847, in which
he described the warnings of famine as the language of “panic-
mongers ” —there was no famine coming. Oh ! gentlemen, famine was
coming. We read that, by a sort of instinct, even the lower animals
feel that the hunter’s foot is on their track, and the peasantry of our
Western counties felt that the hour of their doom was near. And
when almost the last meal of food was gone from them, the Govern-
ment appointed inspectors to inquire. Ah ! when their report came in
it was too late \ the measures that were taken in precipitancy to
mitigate that which all men worthy of being of a Government should
have known was coming, only plunged our country into the demoraliza-
tion of a profligate expenditure without result. I must pass rapidly
over this portion of my statement. They said the destitution could not
be extreme because the workhouses had room for more, and workhouses
were built while the people were dying. Let the Pashas of Turkey
study the story, which will show that even kindly-hearted landlords,
when they come to act as members of a system, will fall into conduct of
a murderous result. In the Irish Poor-law, modelled, and framed, and


passed for the Irish landlords, there was a clause called the “ quarter-
acre clause,” by which no man who held more than a quarter of an
acre of land could receive relief. Our people did not fill the work-
houses ; God bless them for it. They did not fill the workhouses for
reasons every man of humanity and right feeling will sympathize with :
because going into the workhouse meant the destruction of the home—
the destruction of all future industry and effort. Once a man who held
an acre or half an acre of land left his cabin door and came to the
portals of the workhouse, he might read overhead the words of the great
Italian poet:—
“Abandon hope, all who enter here.”
Gentlemen, of the conduct of the landlord class at this time of awful
calamity we could give ample evidence. His lordship kindly told us,
to facilitate our defence, that public statutes were passed to restrain the
fell work of the landlords. No sooner was the faint and exhausted
farmer obliged to seek the relieving officer at the gate of the work-
house, than came the crowbar to level his home —that home he would
never see again. And thus were thousands and tens of thousands lost
to home, shut out from all resources in future, and made a perpetual
charge upon those who survived them. A perpetual charge 1 Oh no.
The Angel of Death was was doing his work. In the crowded fever-
sheds of these workhouses, as well as at the gates, hundreds of families
were broken up, never to meet again. Each father knew that when
the rules and discipline of the home departed, their little gathering
disappeared. He knew that his wife some day, perhaps a fortnight
hence, would be carried off in the midst of the last cartload of unpainted
coffins that left the workhouse gate. He knew that perhaps in that
load one day would be carried away to a pauper’s grave his little idol—
the light of his once happy home. They shrunk from this ordeal. I,
in my own parish, when a boy, stood at the workhouse gate and saw
the heap of dead humanity go by, and I paid my penny to the bearer
when I had seen put into one vast pit 200 human bodies. It was at a
moment as terrible as this that even the Parliament of England had
stepped in to arrest the hand of brutal landlordism that came to evict
the starving tenantry when the sun had set and the moon was in the
sky. That Parliament, you may trust it well, is not too ready to
interfere, the record I have quoted will tell you—yet it had to
interfere, and to enact that the anniversary of the birth of our Saviour
at Bethlehem should at all events be sacred from the rapaciousness of
Irish landlordism ; that Good Friday, a day made holy for ever by the
death and agony of the Redeemer, should not be made a day, as it had
been made, for carrying out this foul work, but that upon that day the
spoiler should hold his hand. If Irish landlordism had only that record
against it, no blacker record could be found against it than that the
Parliament of England, in the midst of the scenes I have described,
passed that statute to put an end to acts which, in the face of humanity,
had brought disgrace upon this land. The famine was pronounced a
blessing sent by God. Oh, blasphemy ! sent by heaven to clear off a
redundant population, and now Ireland is to be turned into a great
grazing tract—the fruitful mother of flocks and herds. In that year
arose an effort—one of the noblest our country ever saw, when Ulster


joined with Munster, when Protestant and Catholic, priest and minister,,
joined in the Tenant League, and thought to renew that appeal to Parlia-
ment—thought that that Parliament which had been deaf as stone for
years before would have done its duty as a Government, without
which I deny its right to govern the people. How was that appeal
received ? Where is that Tenant League now ? It is broken up and
scattered. Some have passed away; some with sorrow, disheartened,
withdrew from the movement and were seen no more. Some went to
foreign lands and showed that there the genius of an Irishman, on a
fair field, could make itself a road to future fame. Then the Saturday
Review, and that Press of London which has hounded on this prosecu-
tion, screamed aloud, and said —“ At last Ireland is our own—soon the
Celt will be as rare on the banks of the Shannon as the wigwam of the
Ped Indian on the banks of the Hudson;” and as each emigrant ship
left this land laden with its cargo of human beings flying from misery,
seeking a happier home on other shores, there arose a cry of exultation
and execration, and the shout of derision and laughter from those who
exulted in their fall, and there was gladness and peace in the country—
such peace as would gladden the heart of an Irish Attorney-General.
We had peace, which showed that honest, open, Constitutional political
agitation like this was absent. But the work was going on. The people,
driven from the public arena of agitation, took what I call, even at the
risk of misunderstanding from my countrymen, whom I love, the politics
of despair. They conspired, not in the technical language of the law,
but in the daring of men who were ready to spend their lives, to have an
end to this dreadful system. Again we have the terrible panorama of
Irish miserable history before us at Green-street—the convict dock and the
cell chockful again with men whom I fearlessly say, whatever their guilt
before the law, showed themselves in that terrible hour animated by
feelings and aspirations as noble as ever animated the human heart.
Did these things arouse the generous impulses of English statesmen?
What aroused them ? I stake upon this fact the justification of the
Land League. What awakened, what stirred, what moved, the fatal
torpor of England, that requires not only the ordered movement of
theoretical public life but something like a public convulsion ? Before
Catholic emancipation Wellington said we were on the verge of a civil
war, and so it is the time of dissatisfaction and insurrection that
awakened the English to the conviction that there was something
wrong. Something was wrong. Why, all society needed to be con-
structed in this desolate island; and so Mr. Gladstone at last passed a
Land Bill as good as public opinion at the moment, in my belief,
warranted him in attempting to pass, yet ineffectual—too crude for the
magnitude of the evil it sought to remedy. The people who trusted to
it when it passed found themselves on treacherous ground. It did not
arrest the landlords’ cupidity, and it gave the tenants, what ? the right
to a lawsuit! It benefited those who live by litigation, and it was in
the end for the tenant a delusion, a mockery, and a snare. That was
the scope of the protection the Land Act gave. Yet it was gratefully
received by the people, and not one word shall fall from my lips,
disparaging the effort, even in the measure of its accomplishment, but
no sooner did it pass than the tenants found it was insufficient. It
failed to give security, yet the people tolerated it; but how did the


landlords receive it? If, even in 1870, Irish landlordism had said
*“ Come, let the dead past bury its dead,” there might have been an end
to this contention ; but no. The ingenuity of lawyers was set to work
by the Lord Leitrims and Dukes of Leinster of the day to devise leases
that might cheat the tenants out of the beneficence intended for them
by the Government of England. Not even at the twelfth hour would
these men swear to bury in kindliness and goodwill, with a grasp of the
hand, this long record of strife and contention. From 1870 to
1880 there were introduced into the House of Commons eight-
and-twenty public measures for the reform and amendment of
the insufficient though well-intended Land Act of 1870. Who intro-
duced them? Were they all mild Home Rulers? Oh, no. Were
they all Liberals ? No. I will not make a speech here of a party
man: the subject is too solemn for that. I cannot forget that
Conservatives as well as Liberals in the House of Commons did their
share in these efforts in the last few years. But how were these efforts
received ? Let the order book of the House of Commons tell us how.
Shall I say they were spurned ? I should be within the truth if I said
they were answered with scoff, and jeer, and taunt. And what was the
taunt ? The taunt is this, that there was no demand in Ireland, no
public exigency, because there was no public agitation; spurned from
the door of the Legislature because we were too calm in Ireland;
prosecuted in the Queen’s Bench to-day —spurned again the efforts of
good men of all parties, and all creeds, and so in 1880 history repeats
itself. The days of the gleams of prosperity for Irishmen again had
faded into gloom, and men could see, if they wished to see, that the
wolf was on the path as in 1847. Was it for Irish landlordism that
the shout of danger and warning came forth ? No. The instinct of
selfishness at the very moment of public calamity made them not reach
-out the hand to God’s poor, but to clutch their pockets, and say, like
Shylock, “It is my bond; it is my bond.” Who shouted in the
Legislature ? Charles Stewart Parnell and the men who are dragged
here to-day to be sacrificed for a public virtue. It is a matter of public
notoriety, these men implored the Government to be awakened that
famine was at hand. How were they received ? Again laughed to
scorn; again they were charged with exaggeration for the purpose of
putting Her Majesty’s Government into embarrassment. They had not
read history in vain, and well they knew that unless they did more
than in 1847 the fate of 1847 was upon us again to desolate the land.
It was in that hour these men sprang to action. What was their first
act ? They formed the Land League, and they set to work to see how
best they could save the people. Yet what was the language which, in
the jargon of that legal document—the indictment—was applied to
them ? They were evil-disposed persons; that with mind of guilt, with
purpose of guilt, with intent of guilt, of wilfulness of guilt, went into
some conspirators’ meeting-place and combined. What did they meet
to do ? They saw what was at hand. Some of them charged here,
forsooth, were too young to have seen the scenes of 1847. Oh, these
things could not have animated them, because they were not born.
Do the prosecutors here not know that the memory of wrong and
suffering, of vengeance, if you will, that may be handed down
from father to child, accumulates rather than loses by time ? And


the greatest dread England has to fear to-day is not from the-
Irish emigrant himself whom misgovernment swept across the sea,
but from the second generation, born on a foreign soil, who have
learned from their fathers the story of Ireland’s wrong; and so my
young friend, Mr. Brennan, and so all his compatriots, who, if too
young to have seen the famine scenes, know the famine story; and the
first act of the Land League was to determine that human life must be
preserved. They looked abroad, and they saw in no other country the
husbandman slaughtered by these oft-recurring famines. They could
not see in the fair lands of the Rhine, in gallant France, that land
system which, though it might have been admirable in its day, was
unsuited in its present age. They saw that in these lands the tiller of
the soil was the lord of his little patrimony, and they set about winning
for the Connemara tenantry that which had made frugal, and loyal, and
contented the Frenchman and the German. Was it for the purpose of
guilt, for hateful greed, or as hateful slaughter, as the London press
would have it ? We see the grandson of the illustrious Irish Protestant
patriarch, a youth bearing honours from the halls of an English univer-
sity ; the proud young man takes literally, not figuratively, his hat in
his hand, marches through the tens of thousands of the audience, and
begs alms for the suffering. Roused by the example of the Land
League, the noble, kindly-hearted organization arose, one of them
headed by a noble woman—bless her all the same because it was the
act of a woman —the Duchess of Marlborough. She did nobly and
well. Better still your own Chief Magistrate, and you, the citizens of
Dublin. There was seen at that board that revered and distinguished
prelate of the Protestant Church, the Most Rev. Dr. Trench, a man of
European fame as a scholar. He sat at that bar and did his share of
the toil and labour with the Catholic Lord Mayor of the city, and never
absent when good was to be done in Ireland, God bless them ! were the
Society of Friends. I saw the fruit of their charity and munificence
in 1847. It was ready to well up in 1847, and it was ready
to well up then. Home came Parnell from America, a victor in
the cause of charity; and now what was the task before him ?
Was this visit to the nations of the world to become periodic ?
The Turk has given us his alms, the Indian prince, the Mahometan,
and the Hindoo dropped a munificent contribution into the alms-
box of Ireland. But had we no pride—no pride of manhood—to
make us recoil from this thing becoming perpetual 1 ? Was it not the
most supreme act of benevolence to try to arrest the system which made
these things periodical visitations in Ireland, and in Ireland alone ? So
they said, “We shall make an end of Irish landlordism.” No “ Irish
landlords,” said the Attorney-General, as if when he and his political
chiefs were, a few years ago, conspiring, confederating, and combining
to make an end of Irish Ohurchism, they intended to destroy and
massacre all Irish Churchmen. They pretend to see no difference
here; but he knows the difference very well. The difference is
between assailing a system and the individuals who compose
it. So they girded themselves up for this struggle. Who were
they? Here they stand to-day brought to trial in an atmosphere
—I had almost said of calumny-—no, not of calumny, for the
shafts that have been aimed at them have fallen short; but you


know, gentlemen of the jury, that the Crown lay by for months while
public journals in this city and elsewhere, as they thought, educated the
jurymen to a proper pitch of prejudice and passion. . And for that
purpose this trial was delayed until the moment had come to strike,
when the beastly caricatures of the London press had made the name of
Irishmen sufficiently odious and detestable, and the broadsheets of
prejudice had gone to every home, it was thought, to poison the minds
of the men who might sit in that box. What was the picture drawn of
these men ? They were wicked conspirators and communists. Even in
this court a prosecutor to whom I pay the homage of my respect, I
cannot praise; but I know the contrast this prosecutor presents to
others that went before, but still he made these charges; and look at the
men ! Is Charles Stewart Parnell the real agitator, living on agitation
as his bread 1 What have these men put in their pockets 1 Look at the
humblest of them all, who is sneered at because he plied his honest
trade in a Western town. It came out in the evidence that he pays
out of his too slender purse his travelling expenses, being no paid agent,
and not even, I believe, a member of the Land League at all—a charge,
and I hope the Attorney-General, who has left it rankling, perhaps, in
some minds, will have the honesty to withdraw what he was unable to
prove, because it was false that either Nally or this man were members
of the Land League at all, much less that they were paid agents. And
my client, Patrick Egan, in whom I see 'not only a client but proudly
claim a friend of many a long year—-that friend for whom I would cross
not merely sixty miles of sea, but speed from the utter ends of the
world, were he in peril, to give him my advocacy and aid. I have
known him long—is he a real agitator 1 What has he given up—what
has he done in this noble work of benevolence and patriotism 1 Provi-
dence has given to him all that makes life happy at this side of the
grave—the wife whom he loves, children who wait his footfall in the
hall. I have known him long; but little as he moved in the outer
circle of public life, he is well known in every organization in this
city, whether at Christmas or at winter’s depth, for the alleviation
of the suffering of the poor. Knowing my friend as I do, I
should have called him false to all his career and the principles of
his blameless life if the efforts of the Land League found him
absent from its ranks. These are the men whom you are asked
to convict as criminals to-day. They have gathered the alms of the
world ; and now, were these alms to pass into the landlords’ pockets as
rent ? It is no imaginative case, it is a public fact well known, that
in many cases the alms given from the charities of these societies in
Dublin were appropriated or donated as rent. Long, long had those
impossible rents been paid, but by nothing that the landlord had a
moral right to tax, but by the remittances of the child, the son or the
daughter, in America. Long had these impossible rents beyond the
Shannon been paid by the supreme history of these Western harvestmen
who have been libelled as indolent and lazy. And, oh ! gentlemen, at
what a price, how often, was that rent won by them ! Not a coasting
steamer crossing to Liverpool from Sligo, Cork, Drogheda, or Dublin,
comes to disaster in the summer time that some of these poor harvestmen
are not sent to their doom in their effort to wring from a foreign land
the impossible rent for the land. No, not a railway disaster in the sister


isle at some seasons of the year, with its tale of suffering and death, in
which some freize-coated man does not perish. I cannot present to you
for I respect too sincerely and well an indication from the bench—l
will not present to you as a fact of history, lest I may not be allowed,
any individual case in illustration, although many a time I have been
touched, as doubtless you have been, in reading of some of these
episodes. I can only present as an illustration of my argument a fact
which I present, as it were, my own imagination, of the fate of some of
these poor harvestmen in these English railway slaughters. . And I ask
you to picture one of them, lifted from the wreck of the train, mangled
and bleeding, while in his pocket is found the letter that tells the story
of his life—that he had left in distant Mayo a wife and four little
children, and came the second time that year to earn another .£l2—an
additional rent, put on, may be, by the landlord because the noble lord
was spending munificently in garden parties in the AVest End, and as
the kindly-hearted English station-master lifted him up, and saw the
life-blood welling from his lips, he murmured of the children and wife at
home. Gentlemen, you remember the lines in which Byron describes
for us the gladiator dying in the Roman arena while the shout of
exultation was in his ears—
“ He heard it but he heeded not,
His eyes were with his heart, and that was far away ;
He reck’d not of the life he lost, nor cried,
But where his rude hut by the Danube lay,
There were his young barbarians all at play ;
There was their Dacian mother—he, their sire,
Butchered to make a Roman holiday.”
Ah, yes ! Charles Stewart Parnell, John Dillon, Patrick Egan, not in
this court, where you appear arraigned as criminals, but before that
dread bar where all men must one day stand, should you account for it
if, amidst gathering perils like these, you felt not for your own
countrymen j if, hardening your hearts and closing youi ears to the
plaints of misery, you wrapped yourselves around in sordid selfishness of
profit, pleasui'e, or ambition, and stifled conscience by murmuring, “Am
Imy brother’s keeper 1 ” And in that you passed not by the wounded
on the wayside, but sought to lift him up and staunch his wounds in
that you have pleaded and begged, and striven, and fought and suffered
for the lowly and the desolate—you shall have your reward from Him
who has promised that the lightning of His just wrath shall strike the
oppressors of the poor. Nor shall this band of conspiring Samaritans
wait for vindication even here. The world often stones its prophets,
and the track of the philanthropist and the patriot is often but the
road to martyrdom, yet kind Heaven often gives the man to see the
fruition of his hopes even at this side the grave. Yes, living witnesses
shall behold the accomplishment of the blessings these men will have
won for us. Yes, it must be so. There will be an end of this horrid
phantasmagoria of history. The Temple of Janus must be closed.
Peace and good-will, concord and kindly feeling—between class and
class, and creed and creed—must have their homes in this isle of ouis,
long wasted by the demoniac passions of this cruel land war. Rich and
poor we may have still, but no longer tyrant and slave. No eternal
spectre of despair shall darken for ever, with its abiding shadow, the


peasant’s home. The Irish farmer shall lay down at night beneath his
humble roof, to start no more ill dreams of terror of the crowbar and
the bailiff at the door. And, think you, gentlemen of the jury, that the
Irish people made free, and happy, and secure, will fail hereafter in
their blessings and their prayers to remember the men who have worked
out their liberation 1
If they value the blessings that shine on each hearth,
The wife’s loving welcome, the children’s sweet mirth,
When they taste them at eve they will think upon those
Who have purchased for them their domestic repose ;
And give honour to him, who, when danger afar
Had lighted for ruin its ominous star,
Left pleasures, and country, and kindred behind
And sped to the shock on the wings of the wind !
And you, gentlemen, you too, mean to bear a part in the great events
that are at hand; you will have a part in the gratitude and the glory
which history will afford to the benefactors of their country. You well
know what great changes are drawing near; you well know what
important measures the Ministry of England is even now preparing.
Yes, at the very moment when he asks you to link your names with
the proceedings which he knows posterity will execrate, he is about to
win for himself fresh glory and power by overthrowing the very system
he asks you to endeavour to sustain ! Your share to be all the
obloquy; his, all the fame. No, no ! you will answer him back that,
howsoever divided you may be in religious or political belief, you are
twelve Irishmen resolved to leave upon record a nobler part in
this moment of your country’s fate. I told you you were there as the
country. Speak with the voice of Ireland for justice and for right.
And if you haply hear, as doubtless you shall when I am done, an
adjuration addressed to you “ to vindicate the majesty of the law”
that ancient formula so oft invoked to lure twelve honest men into
complicity with the darkest crimes of oppression—answer through your
verdict that law derives no majesty from its vindictive power of terror
or punishment; none, when divorced from the sacred principles it is
presumed and bound to mirror forth—the eternal equities of God. Speak!
Speak the words that shall be hailed as a message of mercy in the
peasant homethat shall resound as an evangel of peace and liberty
throughout this long-distracted land; and be yours the hands to close
for ever this record of a nation’s suffering, all stained and blotted by
blood and tears.




