

Chancellor’s Address
AT
THE ANNUAL COMMENCEMENT,
20th MARCH, 1897.
20th MARCH, 1897.
dariian, jUtelirminte:
MDCCCXCVII.




THE UNIVERSITY OF MELBOURNE,
:—(<•
Chancellor’s Address
THE ANNUAL COMMENCEMENT
20th MARCH, 1897.
(Sarlton, jKelltonntc:
FORD & SON, PRINTERS, 372 & 374 DRUMMOND STREET.
M DCCCXCVII.




M33SS
Eni&mifg of lEclftciumc
CHANCELLOR’S ADDRESS
THE ANNUAL COMMENCEMENT,
20th MAECH, 1897.
Gentlemen oe the Council, Me. Waeden
and Gentlemen oe the Senate.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I am sure that you will all join with me
in sincere regret that pressing engagements have
prevented His Excellency the Governor and Lady
Brassey from accepting the invitation of the Council
to he present at this Annual Ceremonial; they
have desired me to express their regret at being
unable to be present.


The Vice-Chancellor has also desired me to
convey to you his regret that other duties have
prevented his attendance.
I have, however, to congratulate you on the
presence of several members of the Ministry, who
have done the University the honour to attend on
this occasion; and on behalf of the whole University
I tender to them our warmest thanks, as it is a
matter of the highest importance that the Govern-
ment should take an active interest in the pro-
ceedings of an Institution which has done so much
to elevate the standard of Primary, Secondary and
Higher Education in Victoria; for I think that the
most ardent lovers of Democracy will feel that if it
is to he a success it must he by the masses being
able to obtain at a cheap rate such education as
will fit them, if they have the ability and industry,
to rise to the highest positions in Statesmanship, in
Professional Life, in Science, or in the Mechanical
Arts.


It will, therefore, not be out of place to draw
the attention of this distinguished audience to what
benefits this University has conferred upon the
community during the forty-two years which it has
existed as a Teaching Body. ]S T ot only has it done
its part in regard to Higher Education, hut it has
been the means of elevating the standard of educa-
tion in the Primary and Secondary Schools year by
year in such a manner as those only who knew
what those Schools were before the University
started and what they are now can understand or
appreciate ; hut, nevertheless, it is a fact, and will
be recorded in the history of this country.
In regard to the success of the University in
Higher Education, I need only point to the fact
that our Graduates are now occupying the highest
positions in the Learned Professions, in Engineering
and Architecture, and many have achieved consi-


derable success in Science, and are working witli
such industry and zeal that their names will soon
he known as lights in the Scientific World.
DEATH OE BABON SIB EEBDINAND YON
MUELLEB, K.C.M.Gf., E. 8.5., &c., &c.
When speaking of Science I cannot refrain from
paying a tribute of respect to the memory and to
the great talents of my late dear old friend the
Baron Sir Eerdinand von Mueller, whose fame, as
one of the greatest of Scientific Botanists of the
present age, was world-wide. Whilst the benefits
which he conferred on the Australian Colonies by
the dissemination of most practical information to
agriculturists and others ought to cause him to he
remembered with the deepest gratitude in these
Colonies, he will also he long and kindly remem-
bered in many other countries for the benefits he
conferred upon them by the introduction of the


Eucalyptus as the destroyer of malaria and the
conservator of human life.
PROGRESS OE THE UNIVERSITY.
It is a great pleasure to me to he able to state
that, notwithstanding the general financial depres-
sion, the number of Students presenting themselves
at the Matriculation Examinations during the past
year considerably exceeded the number of those
who presented themselves in 1895, and that the
number of Students attending Lectures during last
year, although slightly less than those attending in
1895, is an increase of 74 on those attending in
1894.
I am happy also in being able to add that the
number of Students entering for Lectures during
the present year is very large, and is likely to
considerably exceed the number attending Lectures
during the past year.


MATRICULATION EXAMINATIONS.
The number of Students presenting themselves
at the two Matriculation Examinations in 1896 was
1377 ; of these 858 were men and 519 women
Students.
ORDINARY EXAMINATIONS.
The total number of Students presenting them-
selves at the Ordinary Examinations in the past
year (1896) was 617, of whom 471 entered for
regular courses for Degrees ; the remainder con-
sisted of Articled Clerks, Certificated Teachers,
and those taking single subjects.
ATTENDANCE UPON LECTURES.
During the past year (1896) 668 Students
attended Lectures, and were classed as follows: —
161 in Arts ... ... 52 being Women
Students.


5 in Science
1 being Woman
Student.
84 in Law
238 in Medicine
16 being Women
Students.
50 in Engineering
130 in Music
127 being Women
Students.
Total 668
GRADUATION.
In November, 1896, 17 direct Degrees were
conferred.
In December, 1896, 25 Degrees were conferred ;
of these 24 were direct and 1 ad eundem.
On this day 73 Degrees have been conferred;
of these 71 were direct and 2 ad eundem.
The total number of Degrees conferred since
the last Annual Commencement being 115.


RESIGNATIONS AND APPOINTMENTS.
On 13th April, 1896, Mr. John Box, M. 8., Ch.B,,
was appointed an Honorary Assistant Demonstrator
in Anatomy.
On the 11th May, 1896, Mr. George Campbell
Bennie, M. 8., Ch.B., E.B.C.S.Eng., and Mr.
Horace Percy Godfrey, M. 8., Ch.B., E.B.C.S.Eng.,
were appointed Honorary Assistant Demonstrators
in Anatomy.
On the Ist June, 1896, Mr. Thomas Hugh
Boyd, M. 8., Ch.B,, E.B.C.S.Eng., and Mr. John
Gordon, M. 8., Ch.B., E.B.C.S.Eng., were
appointed Honorary Assistant Demonstrators in
Anatomy.
On the 2nd of November, 1896, Mr. Guest,
M.A., LL.B., was appointed locum tenens for
Mr. Gregory, 8.A., LL.M., the Lecturer on the
Law of Property.


On the 7th of December, C. If. Martin, D.Sc.,
M. 8., was appointed locum tenens for Professor
Halford, M.D.
On the Ist of March, 1897, Mr. Ellery, C.M.0.,
E.R.S., E.R.A.S., was re-appointed as Representa-
tive of the University on the Working Men’s
College Council.
On the Ist of March, 1897, Professor Marshall
Hall resigned his position as Eirst Examiner in
Music for the Matriculation Examinations.
On the Ist of March, 1897, Dr. Barrett
resigned his position as Eirst Examiner in
Anatomy and Physiology for the Matriculation
Examinations.
On the Bth of March, 1897, Mr. W. Rosen-
hain was nominated for the London Exhibition
(1851) Science Scholarship.


On the Bth of March, 1897, Mr. A. H. Merrin,
M.C.E., was appointed Lecturer in Mining, vice
Mr. E. M. Krause, E.L.S., E.G.S.
ELECTION OE CHANCELLOR AND VICE-
CHANCELLOR.
On the 13th of April, 1896, the Honourable
Sir John Madden, Knt., LL.D., 8.A., was re-
elected Vice-Chancellor.
On the Ith of May, 1896, Sir Anthony
Colling Brownless, K.C.M.G., M.D., LL.D.,
was re-elected Chancellor, and the Honourable
Sir John Madden, Knt., LL.D., 8.A., Vice-
Chancellor for the ensuing year.
ELECTIONS TO THE COUNCIL.
On the 26th March, 1896, the Honourable Sir
John Madden, LL.D., 8.A., was re-elected a
Member of the Council, his term of office having
expired on the 21th January, 1896.


J. H. Macfarlancl, LL.D., M.A., was on the 4th
May, 1896, re-elected a Member of the Council,
his term of office having expired in April.
Professor Andrew Harper, M.A., was on the
Ist June, 1896, re-elected a Member of the Council,
his term of office having expired in April.
On the 11th of November, 1896, His Honour
Mr. Justice Plood, M.A., was re-elected a Member
of the Council, his term of office having expired
on the 19th of October.
On the 15th of March, 1897, His Honour Mr.
Justice a’Beckett was re-elected a Member of the
Council, his term of office having expired on
the 19th of February.
LEAVE OF ABSENCE.
On the 3rd of August, 1896, Professor Spencer was
granted leave of absence from the Second Pass
Examination to enable him to visit Central Aus-


tralia for the purpose of completing certain
Anthropological and Zoological work in connec-
tion with the “ Horn Scientific Expedition ” to
Central Australia,
On the 17th of August, 1896, in consequence
of serious illness, Mr. Gregory, the Lecturer on
the Law of Property, was granted three months’
leave of absence on half-pay.
On the 14th September, 1896, Professor
Halford was granted leave of absence till the
end of October, 1896, on full pay.
On the 2nd of November, 1896, Professor
Irving was granted eight months’ leave of
absence from his duty as a Councillor of the
University.
On the 2nd of November, 1896, Mr. Gregory
was granted a further leave of absence to the
end of the year (1896).


On the 2nd of November, 1896, Professor
Halford was granted leave of absence to the end
of the year on full pay, and on half-pay for the
year 1897.
On the 7th of December, 1896, Mr. Gregory
was granted leave of absence for 1897 on
half-pay.
INVITATIONS PROM OTHER UNIVER-
SITIES.
A letter from the University of New Jersey,
U.S.A., was received on the 11th May, 1896,
inviting this University to attend at the celebra-
tion of the 150th Anniversary of the foundation
of that University, to be held in the month of
October, 1896. A vote of thanks w r as passed
to the University of New Jersey for their
invitation.


A letter was received also from the Glasgow
University, asking the University of Melbourne
to appoint two representatives to take part in
the celebration of the Jubilee of Professor Lord
Kelvin, to he held on the 15th and 16th June,
1896.
Thanks were sent for the invitation, with
regret that the time was too short to admit of
the necessary arrangements being made for the
appointment of representatives from this Uni-
versity.
GENE UAL NEEDS OE THE UNIYEESITY.
Although I am fully aware that it cannot be
expected until the finances of the Colony are
in a more prosperous condition that Parliament
will vote any large sum for the erection of the
accommodation urgently required for carrying


on the work of the University in a satisfactory
manner, yet I consider it my duty to keep be-
fore the Government and the Public the urgent
necessity that exists for new buildings for the
General and Medical Libraries, for Lecture
Rooms, for the Anatomical and Pathological
Museum, for the Engineering School, and for
others equally necessary.
In regard to the restoration of the portion
of the Annual Grant withdrawn from the
University during the past few years, I cannot
refrain from expressing an earnest hope that the
Government will see fit in the approaching
Session of Parliament to place on the Estimates
the whole, or at least a portion, of the amount
withdrawn, and thus relieve the Council from
the extremely difficult and anxious position in
which they are now placed, owing, primarily, to
5


the want of funds to discharge their liabilities —
liabilities incurred with the express consent of
the Governments in office at the time they were
entered into; and, secondly, to the uncertainty
which for several years has characterised the
amount placed at their disposal annually by the
Honourable the Premier and Treasurer.
The difficulty and anxiety of the position
are greatly enhanced by the fact that the
increase in the number of Students attending
the University necessarily adds to the legitimate
claims upon the Council for extended accommo-
dation and for teaching appliances.
THE GENERAL LIBRARY.
It is painful to allude to the Library; for the
major part of the scanty pittance voted for its
maintenance has to he spent on Periodicals, in


order that the sets may not he broken, and very
little money can he spent in the purchase of
hooks; whilst few hooks can now be hound. Not
only is a much larger amount required annually
for the purchase and binding of hooks, hut very
largely extended accommodation is urgently
needed, and, as soon as the finances of the
Colony will permit, it is to he hoped that Parlia-
ment will vote a sufficient amount for the erection
of a commodious building, adequate for the
reception of such a Library of hooks as should he
possessed by, and be in keeping with, the other
surroundings of a great University.
The principal Donations to this Library during
the past year were :
1. Works by His Excellency the Governor of
Victoria, presented by himself, including
Papers and Addresses (6 volumes), on
5a


Naval, Economic, and Political subjects,
and Voyages and Travels (2 volumes).
“ The Reports of the Horn Expedition to
Central Australia,” presented by W. A.
Horn, Esquire. It is here worth
noticing that this valuable and interesting
scientific work was edited, and a large
part of it written by the Professor of
Biology in this University, and also that
it was printed admirably by Messrs.
Eord and Son, of Carlton.
“ Historical Records of New South Wales,”
as far as published, the gift of the
Government of New South Wales.
“ Reports of the United States Coast and
Geodetic Survey,” presented by the
Government of the United States of
America.


5. “ Rapin’s History of England,” (3 volumes,
folio), presented by Mr. W. H. E. Hill,
a Student of the University.
THE MEDICAL SCHOOL LIBRARY.
The number of books in the Medical School
Library has been increased considerably during
the past year hy Donations; but the small
amount voted for the Library has rendered it
impossible to have many hooks bound. Taking
periodicals subscribed for and periodicals pre-
sented, there is a necessity to bind at least 200
volumes a year.
At present the Medical Library receives
£l5O per annum; of that sum £IOO goes to
the periodical account, and must do so if the
Library is to maintain its present position as
one of the best and most nearly complete


Medical Libraries in Australia. £SO is too
little even to keep up the binding, and
purchasing hooks of reference has had to be
suspended for the last two years.
The Library is not only overcrowded, but
great numbers of books which ought to be there
have had to be placed in other rooms, away
from the supervision of the Librarian.
It must be evident to everyone that a new
building of much larger dimensions is urgently
required, not merely for the books, but also
for the health and convenience of some 250
Students, who are now obliged to frequent
the present small room and breathe its vitiated
atmosphere.
THE BIOLOGICAL SCHOOL.
Huunsru the past year two Women Graduates
in Science of the University have been engaged


in original research, the result of which will
shortly he published.
Considerable additions have been made to the
teaching collections, more especially in regard
to representatives of the fauna of the dry
interior of the Continent, for which the
University is greatly indebted to Professor
Spencer; hut the lack of funds necessary for
the purpose prevents the acquiring of other
material which would he of great value for
teaching purposes, more especially in the matter
of models of various plants and animal
structures.
In the interests of Scientific Research
Professor Spencer spent many weeks of his
summer vacation in the hottest part of the
interior of the Continent, investigating anthro-
pological questions about the Aborigines, as


well as biological questions about the Fauna
of the Central Desert.
May I be allowed to express the hope that
his increased knowledge of those regions may
repay him for all his discomforts, and that the
bounds of Science may be largely extended
by his researches.
MACBAIN RESEARCH SCHOLARSHIP IN
BIOLOGY, FOUNDED IN MEMORY
OF THE LATE HONORABLE SIR
JAMES MACBAIN, K.C.M.G.
On the 7th of December, 1896, the Council
received a letter from the Hon. Sir Arthur
Snowden, the Chairman and Treasurer of the
Macßain Memorial Fund, stating that the
Committee of the Fund had decided to utilise


the balance of the Fund, amounting to
£697 10s. lid., for the foundation of a
Scholarship in the University, to he called
“ The Macßain Research Scholarship in
Biology.”
The Gift was accepted and a resolution
passed thanking Sir Arthur Snowden and the
other Subscribers for it.
THE ENGINEERING SCHOOL.
The work of the Engineering School has pro-
ceeded as usual during the past year. The
appointment of Mr. T. W. Eowler, M.C.E., as
Demonstrator in Engineering, has increased the
teaching strength of the School, and has enabled
a fair amount of practical office training to be
given to the Students. Much inconvenience,
however, has been experienced through the lack


of suitable accommodation for this class of work,
and various suggestions have been made as to
the best way of meeting this difficulty, but so
far without leading to any result. It is hoped
that shortly means will be taken to provide
some suitable rooms, where this very important
branch of work may be carried on.
The number of Students entering for Engineer-
ing, which fell off greatly after the financial
crash of 1893, is now showing a slight increase ;
there is no doubt that, with returning prosperity,
the School will eventually regain the numerical
strength it possessed in years past.
THE MEDICAL SCHOOL
In the Medical School the principal event of
the year has been the retirement of the Pro-
fessor of Physiology from active service, on
account of ill-health.


Professor Halford has been connected with
the School from the second year of its existence,
and has seen it grow from small beginnings to
its present prosperous state.
In its early days the burden of its adminis-
tration rested mainly on his shoulders, and the
University owes him a deep debt of gratitude
for very valuable services continued over a long
series of years.
The University has been exceedingly fortu-
nate in securing as his locum tenens Hr. C. J.
Martin, M. 8., D.Sc., who has been entrusted
with the charge of the Department of Physiology.
Dr. Martin comes to us with the record of a
brilliant career in the University of London, of
further study in Germany, and of many years’
successful work as a Physiological teacher and


investigator in King’s College, London, and in
tlie University of Sydney.
So far as the cramped finances of the Uni-
versity permit, the Council has enabled Dr.
Martin to reorganise on the most practical work-
ing lines the department now under his control.
I heartily congratulate the University on the
accession to the ranks of our Teaching Staff of
such a distinguished Physiologist and experienced
teacher as Dr. Martin.
Another notable occurrence has been the
accession of a large number (17) of Students
from the Medical School of the University of
Adelaide. Whilst giving them a cordial greeting,
we deplore the events which led them to leave
their own Alma Mater, and we trust that the
formerly excellent Clinical School of Adelaide


will soon be re-established on a satisfactory and
permanent basis.
THE UNIVERSITY CONSERYATORIUM
OE MUSIC.
It is satisfactory to be able to inform you that
the second year of the Conservatorium showed
in all directions a marked improvement over
the first, and its success during the past year
gives good promise that it will within a few
years be the means of elevating the teaching
of Music in Victoria
which exists in the
Europe.
to the high standard
principal Capitals oP
The full number of Students enrolled was
130; the number of Students taking the full
course of study was 76; the number of Students
for Singing was 63; for Pianoforte, 70; for
Violin, 9; for Organ, Violoncello, or Clarionet, 9.


A noticeable feature is the large number of
Students that entered for the purpose of
studying professionally, and, consequently, the
improvement in earnestness and diligence, which
was strongly marked.
A far larger number entered for the
University Examinations for the Diploma of
Associate.
Some new Classes were formed : A Teachers’
Class, in which the more advanced Students
are made to give lessons to young children
under the eye of a Professor; a Choral Class,
for Choral Singing and Sight Heading; and
an Operatic Class for more advanced Students
is now in process of formation.
Among the Singing Students are many
exceptionally good voices, which are now
beginning to develope in a most gratifying


way; and two Students of the Violin show
signs of exceptional talent, and have made most
rapid and satisfactory progress.
Eor the three Entrance Exhibitions for the
present year there were 68 Candidates, and the
Ormond Professor of Music has informed me
that there were amongst them some very
talented Students unahle to afford to pay the
fees, and he also said: “If you’ could use any
influence you may have in procuring some few
more Exhibitions it would he a very excellent
thing.” I therefore mention the matter now,
in the hope that some lovers of Music may he
willing to found two or three more Exhibitions
for the benefit of such Students. Mr. J. E.
Mackey, M.A., has already given £2O for
an extra Entrance Exhibition for the present
year.


Whilst speaking of Exhibitions, it gives me
pleasure to state that Madame Elise Wiedermann
has recently given two, of the value of £lO
each, which were open to competition by the
Singing Students of the Conservatorium.
It will be gratifying for you to learn that a
larger number of Candidates than usual (35)
entered for the November Matriculation Examina-
tion in Music.
That these Candidates were sent up from a
larger number of different sources.
That a far larger number passed than on any
former occasion, and that the great majority of
the papers were altogether of a higher standard
than usual, and showed tokens of much more
careful and more thorough tuition than has
before been the case.


The same remarks may he applied to the
practical work ; the elementary grounding in
finger-work had, in nearly all cases, been
diligently attended to, with the best possible
results.
Considering the short time the Conseryatorium
has been in existence, I think the amount and
quality of the work achieved will compare
favourably with that produced by any similar
Institution under the same conditions in any
country, and the general tone of the Students
leaves nothing to be desired. .
UNIVERSITY EXTENSION.
The University Extension Movement, which has
met with very great success in England and the
United States, was adopted by this University in
the year 1890, and has since been carried on with
a most encouraging measure of success. Its


objects are, firstly, to introduce tlie teaching of
the University to that large class of men and
women who are unable to enter upon the ordinary
course of University teaching, hut who still wish
to pursue reading and study under direction in
a systematic and continuous manner ; and,
secondly, to insure that such teaching shall he
thorough. These objects are attained by the
appointment of a Board, which selects competent
Lecturers upon various subjects, and offers to
supply courses of Lectures upon application from
Local Committees.. The choice of Lecturer and
subject, the time and place for the delivery of the
Lectures, the method of raisin g the necessary
funds, are left entirely in the hands of each Local
Committee, which can be formed in any one
locality where there are Students desirous of
undertaking a course of study. By the delivery


of the Lectures in some suitable local hall, the
teaching is brought to the doors of the Student,
andj as the Lecturer is freely available to all
Students, either before or after the Lecture, there
is a personal contact between them which has
been found in all cases to ensure good results.
These University Extension Lectures are not
to he confounded with the ordinary popular
Lecture. They are to be distinguished, inasmuch
as they seek to stimulate and instruct rather than
chiefly to entertain; they are given in a series
rather than as single Lectures, and they offer
every practicable facility for reading, study, and
writing in connection with the course.
The position of University Extension in this
Colony seems now well established. During the
last year or two there has been a decided advance
in the number of Centres and courses of Lectures,


and as its advantages become more widely known,
its work should greatly increase. Whilst it
may not be entirely free from the objection that
the Local Centres pursue a rather varied course
of study, an objection which belongs rather to
its first years, and will be removed as it gains
strength and increased numbers, yet it is admitted
on all hands, and the reports of Local Secretaries
bear evidence to the fact, that the work already
done has been of the greatest advantage to
the numbers who have become Extension
Students. Apart from the connection gained
with the University itself, each course of Lectures
attended by the Student has enabled that Student
to go through life with more or less of added
pleasure. Discussions that arise daily are listened
to or joined in with increased intelligence ; natural
objects are viewed with greater interest; books,


music, and works of art are criticised and enjoyed
with greater zest, or physical conditions are
examined and treated with more care and caution.
It is a matter upon which the University may
well he congratulated, that the Extension Move-
ment last year enrolled over one thousand Students
—men and women —drawn from the classes which
the movement was intended to benefit, “of all
ages and all occupations,” and who, in the absence
of the Lectures, would either have attempted
no study at all, or would have undertaken it in a
desultory fashion, without direction, and without
that enthusiasm which is to be obtained from
the personal intercourse with experienced and
able Lecturers.


SIXTIETH ANNIVERSARY OE THE
REIGN OE HER MOST GRACIOUS
MAJESTY QUEEN VICTORIA.
Before bringing to a close my remarks upon
those subjects of general interest to the well-being
of the University which have occurred to me to
lay before you to-day, it is my duty and
pleasure to make reference to one event of
transcendent interest which is now being
joyously anticipated in every portion of the
British Dominions.
I allude to the approaching commemoration
of the sixtieth anniversary of the reign of Her
Most Gracious Majesty Queen Victoria.
While it will be the privilege of the Council
and the Senate to forward in due time for
presentation to Her Majesty an Address expres-


sive of the devoted loyalty of the University and
of its congratulations on the occasion, unique in
the annals of our Country, I am sure I only
express the sentiment of this large audience
when I declare my thankfulness to Divine
Providence that onr Queen has been spared to
exercise her benign rule for so large a span of
life and for the acknowledged welfare of so
many millions of the human race; and to
express the hope that her beneficent reign may
he extended for many years to come.
And now, Ladies and Gentlemen, before con-
cluding, permit me to offer a few words of
counsel and advice to my young friends the
Students of this University, who will, I trust,
not view this advice as a barren and empty
form of words, used for the purpose of dis-
charging in a perfunctory spirit a duty which


devolves upon me by virtue of the office which
I have the honour to hold, but as an earnest
and heartfelt expression of the feelings and
sentiments of one who takes a deep interest in
the education of the rising generation of this
country, and in the progress of this noble
Institution, of which each Student forms an
integral part.
I will preface my remarks by observing that
they will principally have reference to the Men
Students, as the zealous industry with which
the Women Students have pursued their studies
and their exemplary conduct at all times and
on all occasions render it unnecessary to offer
them any advice except that conveyed in one
word —“ Persevere ! ”
Students, you have had a splendid example
set to you by many who have preceded you;


some of whom, by their talents and persevering
industry, have, subsequently to the completion
of a brilliant career here, brought honour to
themselves and their Alma Mater by the
distinctions they have obtained in Competitive
Examinations in the Old Country, where they
measured their strength successfully against
members of the older Universities; whilst many
others, equally distinguished, have remained with
us, to add learning, weight and brilliancy to
literature and the learned professions in Victoria
and the surrounding provinces of the British
Empire.
Some centuries hence, when this great Hall
shall have grown venerable in appearance by the
hand of time, and on the occasion of some
grand Ceremonial shall he crowded with distin-
guished Graduates and the Magnates of this


then Mighty Country, the Public Orator will he
heard, amidst this brilliant scene of Academic
Circumstance and Pomp, recounting the names
and deeds of the University’s worthies, and in
the van will place those of our time who w'ere
the first to enter on the path of glory, and to do
battle for the honour of Alma Mater. Will you,
then, follow in the footsteps of these industrious
Students, who have done honour to themselves
and to this University by their attainments?
Do you intend to emulate their success and to
achieve the honourable distinction of having
your names enrolled in the archives of the
University as worthy to receive the substantial
rewards of merit during your lives and the
grateful remembrance and posthumous fame of
posterity ?


If you do, you must imitate these gentlemen
in their patience, in their industry, in their
perseverance, in their good conduct, in their
freedom from habits of dissipation, in their
respectful behaviour to their superiors, and in
their readiness to receive advice from their
teachers.
Look hack into the history of all our dis-
tinguished scholars, and you will find that they
are principally indebted for their success to the
habitual practice of the virtues and conduct which
I have named.
Genius falls to the lot of very few, and those
endowed with it, hut not possessing industry and
perseverance, like meteoric lights, rather astonish
by their temporary and erratic brilliancy than
assist in the permanent benefit of society, for the


advancement of which persevering industry and
calm reflection are of infinitely more avail.
I do not for one moment doubt that you have
come here determined to work hard, and to
distinguish yourselves as much as your natural
abilities will permit you to do, and that, at the
present moment, you see nothing to hinder you
from carrying out this excellent resolve.
But, if there were no obstacles in your path ;
if there were no temptations in your way; if,
in a word, there were no dangers to be avoided,
it would he a work of supererogation on my part
to stand here to advise you, nay, to entreat you,
to walk in the path which religion, duty and
interest point out to you as essential for your
honour, your happiness and your success.


Students, I do not wish to exaggerate the
difficulties or the dangers that will heset you in
your University career; hut it is my duty to
remind you that you have entered from the
life of boyhood, with its parental protection and
scholastic discipline, into the life of manhood,
with its exposure to vice and temptations of
manifold kinds.
It is said that “to he forewarned is to be fore-
armed.” I earnestly trust that this may prove
true as regards you, and it is for this purpose
I now address you at this important epoch in
your lives.
To he brief: Shun evil companions, for associa-
tion with them must inevitably lead you to ruin.
Avoid idle companions, for idleness is the root of
all evil, and a sure preparation for more serious
vices.


Engage not in debasing amusements, for they
will emasculate your bodies and destroy your souls.
Select those fellow-Students for friends and
companions who are most distinguished by their
propriety of demeanour, morality, punctuality,
and diligence in the pursuit of their studies.
Be temperate in all things, using the gifts
of God for the support and invigoration of mind
and body, not for their injury and destruction.
Be regular, methodical, and industrious from
the beginning of your studies, for you will never
he able to make up for opportunities lost at
the commencement of your University career.
Finally, let nothing turn you aside from
this path of duty, hut, beginning well,
persevere with diligence to the last.
ANTHONY COLLING BROWNLESS,
Chancellor.




