

THE EXTINGUISHER;
OR,
ILLAWARRA FACTION UNMASKED.
When Masonry was first introduced into this District, not many months
ago, under the above imposing and specious title, it was fondly, but
vainly hoped, that the establishment of an order,.as its style inferred,
would practically demonstrate those two grand objects, so desirable and
so long wanting in the social circles of our limited district, and would
give rise to a new order of things, would commence, if not carry out,
a new and improved era in the habits and manners of many, to whom
any change would proye a gain of priceless value, would so harmonize,
and allay the contemptible and petty feelings of envy, hatred, and
malice, of pride, vanity, and ignorance, and would so neutralize the
baneful effects of corruption and injustice, that those who have so long
practiced them with impunity, would be rendered harmless by the
superior power and attraction of the combined virtue, the social har-
mony, the “ Unanimity and Concord,” and the public example, of in-
tegrity, of honor, and truth, to be afforded Jjy this Lodge of Freemasons
sending its ramifications of good throughout the length and breadth of
■this District, hitherto and still divided against itself through the evil
agency of would-be Legislators —but alas, to hope so, was but a vision,
a mere idle dream of the dreaming philanthropist. •


That good, extensive and universal good, was the well intentioned and
happy design of the Gentleman (the present Worshipful plaster) who
lent all the activity and energy of which his mind is capable to estab-
lish this Society upon a firm and fair basis, I have not the slightest
doubt, and that the other few, very few Gentlemen who assisted him
were .equally desirous to promote an end so desirable, I have as little
doubt; but was it likely that nn.y good could be achieved with such
a presiding genius over the mind of the Master, as G-eorge Brown, of
tlife ,IllaAvarra Motel, Papto, avßli suph a rvj-ing power Avithin the
Lodge Room, backed by the support of others whom he had introduced
into the Society 1 it Avas distinctly stated and loudly A'aunted, that this
Lodge above all others, was to be a Select one, in order to invite and
induce the Gentry ami others throughout IllaAvarra of integrity and
irreproachable characters to become Members of it—nay more, it Avas
boasted that many Avho Avere disgusted with the Sydney Lodges, had
signified their intention to become Members; have either of thpse idle
boasts been realized ? is it true, or is it not true, that both Illawarra and
the Sydney Masons are disgusted Avith the select conduct of BroAvn
and Company,
It must be a Select Lodge that from whim, caprice, or private malice,
black balled from admission amongst them, a gentlemen of unimpeach-
able honor and unquestionable integrity, and admitted at the sams
time, a low drunken tailor as an “honorary member;" it must be a
Select Lodge that will admit and initiate, contrary to rule and custom,
on the one and the sapm night, a servant of George Brown, and refuse
the same privilege or convenience, upon a frivolous pretext, to a gentle-
man of the highest respectability, who had ridden upAvards of sixty
miles, upon the understanding that if admitted, of Avhich there was no
doubt, lie should receive his first degree.
Many predicted that with such ingredients in it as G. 8., the best
intentions of the W. M. would be frustrated — that the character of the
Lodge Avould be soon deA'eloped — that the true design of its principal
raontebank, would become too apparent, to realize the wishes of its
fefunder; it Avas looked upon, by many, as another BroAvn trap, to catch
fools or innocent people to bring “ grist to the mill ;” this speculation,
hoAveA'er, has failed, some have AvithdraAvn from the Lodge, and others
their applications.
It has been most industriously Avhispered, that I threatened to oppose
the Masons, or the establishment of the Order, in IllaAvarra—Avhat a
farce ! ! ! the assertion is ns false, as the design in circulating it Ist


mischcviously malicious; can any one acquainted with me, imagine
me so stupid, as to oppose my single voice to a body having its powexv
ful and numerous ratifications throughout the Christian and heathen
world; it would be as safe, and about as wise, to have opposed the
power and progress of the Holy Inquisition, when in the full and un-
bridled zenith of its fearful ruleno, no, nor did he who originated
this base falsehood, himself believe that I ever dreamed of such egregi-
ous folly, but he knew, that I have*personal friends enrolled amongst
the brethren, and he conceived, with that infamous fertility of inven-
tion, for which he is so ignobly notorious, than could .he persuade them
I had so expressed myself, the “ esprit de corps," which is known to
animate the Masons, those of them, who are my friends, would be
hound to become my personal enemies; hut how stands the fact? I
was really most anxious to support and extend the intended usefulness
of this particular Lodge of “ Unanimity and Concord, ’ believing, that
its influence, if properly extended, in the true spirit of true Masonry,
would confer great and lasting benefits upon society in this District,
(hat by establishing “ Unanimity and Concord,” upon a broad and
firm basis, between man and man ] the unfortunate divisions and misr
chevious cabals which exist in our limited society, to the great and
manifest injury of the public interests, would yield, by a better and
more social knowledge of each other, to the spirit of harmony, good
will, and social peace, which brotherly love, founded and propagated
by the Ancient and Christian order of Freemasonry, is calculated, as
it was intended, to infuse throughout the land wherein Masonry exists
in its pristine beauty and uniformity ; but I regret, deeply regret to
sav, that a little time induced me and many others to suspect, that this
same Lodge was designed, more for the personal aggrandizement of a
selfish, grasping, and unprincipled individual, than to confer that
general good which its euphonious title would lead the public of Illa-
warra to infer; therefore, at all times actively alive to the advancement
and well being of this, the home of my adoption, I essayed to stop the
growing evil, well assured that if the public were once confirmed in
their insipient belief, that this Lodge was the mere make-purse of such
a man as George Brown, and composed too of his servants and obse-
quious friends, to the exclusion of gentlemen of high character and in-
dependence, because they would not submit to such humbug, it must
jevfentuate, and has it not? in the lodge being confined to a few in-
dividuals of motly hue, to be known only by the distinguished cogno-
men of Brown, Bonyman, & Co. ; to obviate, or neutralize this, 1 did


, ~11 upon more than one Mason, and told them, that unless this Lodge
were conducted very differently, and according to what I believed to
he the true principles of Masonry, I would endeavour to have another
Lodge established in Wollongong ; does this evince any desire upon
my part to oppose Masonry ?—But as a more convincing proof of my
real feelings on this subject; and of the perfect knowledge of those
feelings in favor of this particular Lodge, on the part of him who fab-
ricated this vicious falsehood, I venture, with much diffidence, to pub-
lish the following attempt —my first—at a poem, addressed to the
Worshipful Master of the Illawarra Lodge, on the day of its installa-
tion.
1
On the mountain top I stood, and gazed in raptures,
Upon a fairy scone of brightest comeliness,
Where all-bounteous nature, spread her richest treasures ;
*Twas Illawarra in all her vernal loveliness.
2
I view’d the landscape o’er and o’er, then mused awhile,
That my mind should rest upon the enchanting scene,
Then I lay mo down, and bask'd, in the sun's bright smile,
And dozing, there appeared a vision in my dream ;
3
Of an ancient man —prophet-like—though grey with age,
The majesty of his mien, spoke the strength of youth,
He pointed with his finger to the holy page,
And there was writ, faith and charity, hope and truth ;
4
Wisdom marked his brow, the wisdom of a sage,
His ej.> beam’d forth benignness and beatitude,
And as he scann’d the words upon that holy page,
Ho thus addressed a listening multitude.
5
Let your faith be fixed on Him alone,
Whose omnipotence this world doth rule,
\V T ho hath the boundless heavens for His throne,
And makes the nether earth his footstool.
6
Then will meek charity from above,
Descend in blessings upon all around,
Inspire in each heart, a brother’s love.
And in each soul, will true faith he found.


7
The " hope" divine, that reigns beyond the sky,
Is the true anchor, upon which to rest,
Felt by the soul, unseen by mortal eye,
Tho’ not the wordlings, 'tis the Mason’s test.
8
“ Truth” hinds man to man, in firm “ union,"
“ Friendship" follows of its free accord,
These should form your blessed communion,
Of “ Unanimity and Concord.”
9
The spirit of peace in glory light
On the Illawarra Lodge this night,
And attend throughout its course 1 pray,
To the trumpet sound of judgment day.
Does this breathe opposition to Masonry does this breathe hostility
to “The Illawarra Lodge of Unanimity and Concord V’ enough, for
the present on this subject; let me, however, impress upon those who
desire, disinterestedly, that Masonry in Illawarra, should be respected
and established on a respectable and firm footing, that this Lodge
must be dissolved and re-modeled, under different auspices, and its
bead quarters be fixed in a different place ; it should be in Wollon-
gong, the capital of the District. As it is, Illawarra Masonry is on the
wane, its “moon” is set, the sun has ceased to shine upon it, the
“ compass ” has lost one leg, the “ square” its level, the “ rule" its num-
bers, the pillars of Solomon's Temple are shaken to their foundation, the
“ mallet" however, remains, and will he found as convenient as the poker,
and more orthodox, to knock down an invited guest with,‘and “Illa-
warra Masonry," tottering to its base, is likely, if not re-modeled,
eventually to become a small and of course select clique, to serve the
purposes of a rapacious and crafty speculator.
But something must be done to give publicity and eclat to the
Illawarra Lodge, to catch a few more of the select to become members
of this select Lodge, to throw dust, if not dirt, in the eyes of the
pfiblic; but in order to keep up the appearance of numbers, the son,
the servant, and a confidential attache of George Brown, have been
admitted members of this Select Lodge, -—hence the


MASONIC BALL,
On the 30th of December, about eighty persons —not one hundred and
lifty, so pompously announced in the Herald, assembled to trip it on
the light fantastic toe, to the tune of fiddle, fife and drum ; the as-
sembly, although mixed, was, for the greater part, highly respectable
and fashionable ; the Member for our county, and lady, His Worship-
ful the Mayor of Sydney, his lady, and the Misses. Small, William
Warren Jenkin and lady, Doctor John and Alick Osborne, and their
respective families, and several others, honored the Masons with their
presence. The only phenomenon worthy of remark at this period ot
the evening, was the tinsel tawdry of Doctor Alick Osborne, super-
annuated Surgeon, R.N., he wad'in his full dress uniform, even to the
brazen swabs upon his shoulders —how low the brass descends on some
people —glittering amid the admiring throng ; in the name ol ordinary
and extraordinary vanity, why did he not bring his instruments, with
all the other apparatus and paraphernalia of the “ cock-pit ; U dis-
played at the end of the room, opposite the Masonic Orders, with the
“Union Jack” over them, they would no doubt have assisted the
uniform, to astonish and captivate the wives and daughters of the
Electors present, that, on a future occasion, the wonderful impression
of the epauletts, tools and all, might be remembered to his advantage,
when Ma would be sure to “ Caudle,” and Miss would coax dear
Papa to vote for the dear, nice, charming Doctor, and his uniform ;
what an empty bait to catch fools.
He danc'd alike with satins, and with silks,
With muslin, with calico, and cotton ;
Mere foppish tricks, and empty politics.
Heed them not —the man at heart is rotten.
Supper having been announced to a chosen few—they gathered to-
gether and led the way to the supper room, a large and commodious
wooden building erected for the occasion, and covered in on top with
sail cloth, the tables groaned, not with luxuries, but with right down
substantial eatables ; geese, turkies, ducks, chickens, hams, mutton,
tongues; the sweatmeats were few and far between, and the pastry but
very so so, butter fetching a good price, lard was substituted, the
(arts were, therefore, not so palatable as they should have been on such
an occasion. The wines, except the champagne, were very indifferent
and not very plentiful, and to make them less so, the servants were
detected with a quantity in the ball room, regaling themselves and^


their friends ; mine host " was wroth on the occasion, and threatened
largely to let day light into some of them, what a pity he hai| not the
poker.
Before the ladies retired from the supper table, toasts were given
from the chair, and the hip, hip hurra, loudly and vociferously, but
rather unusually and uncourteously, assailed their delicate ears. Ihe
Mayor made a short speech, and proposed “ prosperity to the Illawarra
Lodge of Unanimity and Concord;” after which, the following song
composed for the occasion, was sung by an amateur.
Air— The Emerald Isle.
Of all the orders wc have upon earth,
The Freemasons doth truly excel,
For friendship, for union, and truth,
From all others it beats off the bell;
The members arc loyal and true,
And this tire whole -world can prove,
And the reason, I’ll tell it to you,
Their secret is brotherly love.
Chorus.
May our friendship be without guile,
And truth in each heart full abound,
May peace and prosperity smile
O'er every true Mason around.
2
As for •• orders" we have them in plenty,
And Lodges of every hue,
Hut tho’ onr pockets may sometimes bo empty,
The Freemason to his friend’s ever true;
Misfortune we cannot well sever,
lint face them like men to be sure,
For desert you the Mason will never,
Till he hunt the gaunt wolf from your door.
May our friendship be without guile, &c,
3
Our forefathers were all of them Masons,
Then why shouldn’t we be so too j
In Lodge, they were as grave as old barons.
To their banner both constant and true ;
They told us while time should remain,
The Freemason in every event,
Like the sun tho’ he roam round the world,
He'll return as true as he went.
May our friendship be without guile, fcc,


4
The true hearted spirit of Masonry,
Is known since the world it began,
The spirit of the Masons high chivalry,
Is to love his brother and give him help when he can :
Thus will “ Concord and Unanimity’’ reign,
]n this land of our adoption and birth, ■
And “ truth, union, and friendship," remain,
To give us peace and contentment on earth.
May our friendship be without guile, &c.
5
Now our homage is due to the fair.
They glad our hearts with the sunshine of lite,
Their lips chase away every care,
’Tis their nectar dispels every strife ;
The sun in tilt heavens were dark,
Were those bright eyes but closed upon us.
For to mortals like us upon earth,
’Tis their glance lights the lamp of our life.
Cuonus,
Then let us drink health to the fair,
And wish them a happy new year,
May their hearts never know any care,
Nor their eyes be e'er dinun’d by a tear.
(i
Their smiles are the sunbeams of bliss,
From which cupid so models his bows,
That his darts arc shot forth with a kiss,
And they enter the hearts of their beaus;
Then ladies beware how you smile.
Lest cupid should enter the door,
And before you can say, wait awhile.
One spark from your eyes may do more.
Then let us drink health to the fair, kc.
The above song was received with rapturous applause, and im-
mediately after, as if by preconcerted arrangement, the supper party
was broken up, much to the surprise and disappointment of many;
after the ladies had been escorted to the ball room, the Mayor, myself,
and a few- others, descended to the supper room to have a few moments
of°social chat and enjoyment, as the previous time had been principally
occupied in paying the usual attention to our fair partners in the happy
dance; but 10, we were mightily dissappointed, the grasping hand of


mine host, had, like magic, removed not only most of the eatables but
all the very small portion of the drinkables that were left at supper
time, so that many who wished for more, were obliged to retire to the
public room of the Hotel, and pAV for what they called for; this, at a
private party too, may be called “making hay while the sun shone
but the decency and propriety of such a low trick, however suited to
the taste and tactics of a Brown, is more than questionable, when
we take into consideration the high respectability of the majority of
the stewards.
In the ball room, the spirit of the dance was dead, the musicians
were hungry, thirsty, and discontented, they were peremptorily forbid-
den to touch a morsel of the mangled supper —something more common
than a cut of mutton, or the leg and wing of a fowl or duck, perhaps
salt beef AND u.vMPBR ” was quite good enough for poor devils, who
had been playing the whole night j what a lucky escape the Sydney
band had by not accepting the invitation of the liberal host and hostess
of “The Illawarra Hotel, Dvpto.”
To wile away the lime, during the silence of the instruments, a song
was proposed, and the following, written for the occasion enlivened
the moment.
Am —All London is quadrilling H.
Oh what a row, what a rumpus and a rioting,
All Illawarra at the bail, cutting such a shine,
Oh such a route there ne’er was seen.
And given by the Masons too, all in their bands and aprons, and dressed so fine.
There's Addison, the W. M., not him they call tins poet tho’.
And Captain SheafTe, and William Way, and in the rear comes Georgy Row i
There’s Mensics* too, from Jambcroo, and little Bate so quizzical,
And Tweodic, Sharp, and Georgy Brown, him they call so whimsical.
Oh what a row, what a rumpus and a rioting.
All Illawarra at the Ball, culling such a shine,
Oh such a route there ne’er was seen,
And given by the Masons too, all in their bands and aprons,and dressed so fine.
2
There arc Freemasons many more, at least they say there’s half a score,
And as many more for grilling yet, ’tis difleront from quadrilling it,
There’s tire, water, brimstone too, and then a red hot poker sirs,
A naked sword, and mallet too, and a pair of cabalistic spurs ;
• Dr, Menrics was not present, it is reported he has retired from the Lodge in dis-
gust. Mr, Row lias also signified his intention to do so likewise,


Bui fear them not, they're not so hot, for little Captain Westmacotl*
Went thro’ the fire, with all his ire, like Gulliver at Lilliput,
But the Auctioneer, felt mighty queer, for they grilled him to the very bone*
He was going, going, going, gone, until he cried och hone, och hone.
Oh what a row, what a rumpus and a rioting, &cc.
3
Now let me look the room along) to sec with whom I’ve got alndng,
Why ’pon my life, 1 can't count all, there’s such a throng,
1m dazzled quite, with eyes so bright, it ravishes my very sight,
The stars have come from heaven, 'twould seem, to light the room this night;
There’s black and blue, and hazel too, with all their sparks of witchery.
They’d fire the soul, of old or cold, whether saint or sinner he should be,
There’s the Misses O, and Misses, All, 1 mean them no disparagement,
They’ re all so fine, if dressed in line, they'd make a handsome colonial regiment.
Oh what a row, what a rumpus and a rioting, &c.
4
There’s the Sydney folk, they've left the smoke, and strangers all you're welcome here.
Only come a little oftener, and partake our cheer,
You’ll find some jovial, hearty fellows, such are met hero to-night.
'Twill drive the bile from off your livers, and set you all quite right;
You can sail our lakes, and roam our hills, or fish around some sea-girt isle.
Then leave city tricks, and politics, and breathe our purer air awhile,
You all can feed, like fighting cocks, and be better fit for city life,
If you’ll only choose, from amongst our belles, an handsome lllawarra wife.
Oh what a row, what a rumpus and a rioting, &c,
5
There’s that busy body, G. U. A., altho’ he has'ntan inch of land,
He thrusts his finger in our pie, and sometimes, crams in all his hand
From “ Bustle Hall” to ” Marshall Mount,” and farther now, than 1 can count,
He has a bird, that acts as scout, and ferrets all our secrets out,
But there is one, an ancient one, the secret of all secrets, sirs,
Oh what would not, the ladies give, if I could now repeat, sirs ;
From the ark of Noah, to lllawarra, they say, it has been handed down,
You’ll say its fudge, but you’re no judge, for old Noah, sent it to George Brown.
Oh what a row, what a rumpus and a rioting, &c,
e
K,ow smothet all our private etuis, and let our imiofi make amends,
For all the ills we'Ve suHerod here, in this our local hemisphere ;
T.et all be as Masons, friendly brothers, of every sect and every creed,
Then we’ 11 go ahead, not as now like had, but with rattling winning, steam-coach speed ,
Then will parish roads, and public roads, he made without regard to self,
And the public good, be understood, regardless of mere paltry pelf;


TAen we'll pull together, all together, with right good will, and one accord.
And we’ll bless the year, that establishes here, true “ Unanimity and Concord.”
Oh what a row, what a rumpus and a rioting, &c.
The musicians remaining away, another song was determined on, and
Mr. M ! Donnell, one of the brethren, favoured us with a song, condition*
ally, that I would sing another —and now comes the song of the night,
at the fourth verse of which such an extraordinary scene commenced.
Dr. Osborne and his party were about the centre of the room, moving
home, their carriage having been announced, when they stopped to hear
ihe song ; immediately at the fourth verse being sung, I fancied myself
some popular singer, interrupted by a senseless vulgar mob, in the upper
gallery of a Theatre, as, within the circle of the. Doctor’s party, some
person (said to be the Doctor himself) commenced the coarse and loud
shuffling of feet along the floor, which they continued until I became so
■disgusted at such pot-house rudeness, that before the conclusion of two
verses I stopped singing. A short time after, “ brother Richard Bate "
■came sideling to me with all the assumed gravity of a sick monkey, and
said, “ lam deputed by the Masons, by the Masons”—with double em-
phasis—“ to request you will not sing any more of that song,” to which
I .replied, your message is unnecessary, I have ceased to sing sometime,
in consequence of the impertinent and rude interruption of some of your
party; now this message of this mighty man among the Masons, was
a foul fabrication, a deliberate falsehood, to gratify the folly and malig-
nity of the party, who, for factious purposes, took offence at a really
inoffensive verse of a song—a clever move of Mr. R. Bate, to throw a
sop to “ Cerberus" to be repaid at some future time, by that favor and
protection—the ready cost of Magisterial popularity, I repeat that it
was a falsehood to say he was deputed by the Masons. The Worship-
ful Master was not in the room at tire time—brother Brown was away—
Captain Sheaffe was absent—-Captain Westmacott, the Master of the
■ceremonies, was also absent—Mr. Wild, M. C., also a Mason, sat next
me, he did not authorize, he did not sanction or even approve of the
message. Mr. Row, another of the brethren, did not depute this verita-
ble deputy to make such an ass of himself, and disgrace the Lodge of
Masons ; who then deputed this mammoth of Masonry, to exercise his
politeness in such a grotesque manner 1 ? What Masons remained-to
“ depute” this doughty champion of fallen popularity 1 ? R was, as I
have already said, a sop to “Cerberus," a panacea to soothe the wounded
Vanity of the stricken chartalan, the canieleon of political humbugs. A
rational man would have thought that the Pantomimic grimaces of


Brother Bate would have terminated this farce, But no, a message was
conveyed to the W. M., that some terrible outbreak had occurred in the
ball room, and, evidently excited, he requested a private interview with
me; I followed to a room down stairs, in which, were Captain Westnia-
cott and George Brown ; the W. M. said " he knew nothing of it, he
was not in the room, —-what is it all about” 1 I told him, that I was
really at a loss to discover any justifiable cause for such extraordinary
conduct on the part of the Osbornes—that the verse of the song was
neither meant or calculated to give offence—that none but those who
were predisposed or predetermined to take and give offence, would
have been offended, at so simple a cause, and further assured him that
nothing was more distant from my thoughts and intentions, than to
wound the feelings or prejudices of any person, directly or indirectly,
and proposed returning to the ball room to express myself so. Captain
Addison retired, apparently satisfied, as any gentleman in his sober
senses would be, with such an ample explanation ; but not so Captain
Westmacott, he ranted and raved about the room, “ he would not for
five hundred pounds, no, not for one thousand pounds, that it had
occurred,” and swore with vengeance that he coli.d shoot me j what
a mighty pother, and all about the verse of a song—’tis mighty easy
and equally magnanimous to talk about five hundred or one thousand
pounds, and bluster about shooting “ but when the wine is in, the wit
is sure to be out” —this explosion over, brother Westmacott retired, and
the poker,.hero, the notorious epitome of evil, commenced his attack,
but finding he could not excite me to give him that personal chasli/e-
---ment which he so richly deserved, which I avoided from the considera-
tion, that he who fights with a sweep is sure to get a dirty coat ; he, m
his ungovernable rage seized the poker, and was about to strike me,
when Mrs. Brown, who must have been convenient, although out of
view, stepped in between, and prevented the descending blow from in-
flicting that “ brand,” which her Bom bastes Purioso so daringly and
loudly threatened ;• having previously taken a glass of water, to mark
my deliberate coolness, I stood up to avoid the brutal attack and leave
such a scene of riot and ruffianly rudeness; not satisfied with assaulting
me in what he called his private room, into which I had been invited ;
was it for the purpose of attacking me apart from any witness ?He
followed me to flie’ ante-room, still brandishing the poker, and was only
prevented from striking roe by the intervention of Mrs. Brown ; not-
withstanding, had it not been for the timely interference of Mr. William
Mears he would have struck me ; indeed he afterwards told that gentle


jtnan, that “ had he not come out, he (Brown) would have branded me
this Mr. Hears proved at the police investigation, and that Brown had
the poker raised as if to strike the intended blow.
Now reader, judge, whether the fourth verse of the following song,
is so offensive as to justify the Osborne rudeness, and the subsequent
violent attack upon me. The now popular song since named ;—-
OSBORNE’S FANCY, OR LAST POLITICAL SHUFFLE.
Am— Hey for Bob and Joan,
Were you at the ball, did you see the Masons
All so very grand, decked in their bands and aprons ;
Did you see the ladies, dressed in silks and satins
All so blooming fair, like nuns, at early matins.
Fal la, la la la, falla la la laddy,
Fal la, la la la, who would’nt bo a Mason,
2
The Masons sent their cards, north, south, cost and westward.
To invite their friends regards, and to celebrate their “ Concord,"
Oh there’s nothing like a ball, especially in hot weather,
If it will not melt you down, ’twill draw you altogether.
Fal la, la la la, falla la la kwldy,
Oh there's nothing like a ball sir.
3 ,
Oh such a crowd was there, dancing, singing, all night,
They came from every where, to see the grand, imposing sight.
llis Worshipful the Mayor, came all the way from Sydney,
Also his lady fair, and from the town so many.
Fal la, la la la, falla la la laddy,
Who would'nt be a Mason.
4
The neyt who comes in order , is the member for our county,
And near him sat another, he who the member would be ;
Jt xoas a race before, 'twill be a race again sir,
ii ut I know whtfli win the score, to me, its very plain, air,
Fal la, k la la, falla la k laddy,
Who would'nt be the member.
$
1 see a laird and lady there, so debonair and civil,
1 wish some who arc here to-night, would follow thtpr example,
But I’ll not name them now, 1 am too good a fellow,
We’re met to-night for mirth, and we may getfou or mellow,
Fal la, ia la k, folk k k laddy,
Am not 1 a jovial fellow.


8
Bless me Jo 1 see, without a bone being broken,
(icorge Row from Miltagong, how came he down the mountain P
For it was but to'ther clay, declared to be impassable.
But pleasure finds a way, which for duty is impossible,
Fal la, la la la, falla la la laddy,
Fal la, la la la, who would’nt be a Mason.
7
Zounds, sir, do yon mean, that Alley’s road’s impossible,
'Tis but the word of spleen, 'tis utterly incredible,
You’re only poking fun, or else you would not joke it,
For lie must beasilly man, who now would dare to Burke it,
Fal la, la la la, falla la la laddy,
Fal la, la la la, who would'nt be a Mason.
8
If.you want to have good cheer, come to The Ulawarra,
And taste the Woodstock beer, Twill wa-m your very marrow,
A premium sure is due, at least should be a dinner,
To II of Jambcroo. for being so good a brewer.
Fal la, la la la, falla la la laddy,
Who would’nt be a brewer. *
9
But laying jokes aside, Twould be but acting fairly
To do honor to the man, who encouraged the growth of barley,
For many an humble man, could find a shilling, rarely,
Until Woodstock began, to mall and brow our barley.
Fal la, la la la, falla la da laddy,
Who would’ijt be a brewer.
10
Hold the tables, or they’ll fall, they groan again so weighty,
Arc the turkeys, geese and all, the ham, and chickens plenty ,
But, take care, what you're about, with that sherry and champagne,sir,
Or your head wi|l reel about, not with sham, but real pain, sir.
Fal la, lab la, falla la la laddy,
Fal la, la la la, who would’ntbe a Mason.
11
Now I’ll drink your health, and then I’ll drink my own, sirs,
If you'll not be advised by me, you’ll think of No. 1, sirs,
You’ll then have less to do, and ’tis the ruling passion,
Oh sometimes think of No. 2, 'twillset a better fashion.
Fal la, la la la, falls la la laddy,
Fal b, la la la, who would'nt be a Mason.-


THE ROW, AND POLICE AFFAIR.
SINCE ADDED.
12
Hold your sides, -or they inny split, while I sing of a certain / action,
Who took umbrage at my song, because it* touched upon the election,
Oh their skins are very thin, or their hearts arc very black, sir,
.Such men if they but dared, would trample on our backs, sir.
Knl la, la la la, falla la la laddy,
But we will never let them.
13
The faction and some Masons, got tired of being civil,
At the fourth verse of my song, their minds being bent on evil.
They kicked up such a row, such a shindy, and a bobbery,
’] was like ruffians in n booth, or a mob in the upper gallery.
Pal la, la Ja la, falla la la laddy,
And these are our gentlemen.
If
The Osbornes shuffled their feet, like bog trotters at a pattern,
Or (he lowest mob you'doh what a pretty fashion,
Westmaeott swore he’d shoot, arid Brown put such a face on,
While he flourished the parlour poker, and swore he’d put his brand on.
Unfortunate C>. U. A., ha ha ha, ha ha ha,
11a ha ha, ha ha, a Bombastos Purioso, sir.
*
15
Then the faction and (leorge Brown, created such a discord,
A mere sample of their manners—their “ Unanimity and Concord
The next time they give a ball, it should be one of “ spirit ,"
Then these mushroom gentlemen in the tap-room may join in it.
Pal la, la la la, falla la la laddy,
Will you give another ball, sirs,
1(1
The police artiiir comes next, but Juslkesat there wccpjng,
At her beam and scales being put into hands of such odd keeping j
the beam was bent in two, the scales turned upside down, sir,
Because the faction wished to rule iu favor of (icorge Brown, sir.
Pal h, la la h, full la 1 1 laddy,
This is iilawarra justice.
17
% Bluff Hal sat on (he bench, as counsel, judge, and jury,
And defended the defendant, ns partially as could be ;


Oh well may justice weep, and honor count for nothing,
Whcn'ftotA. arc held at naught, or only worth a “ farthing."
Fal la, la U la, falla la la laddy,
And this is Ula worm Just he.
THE POLICE AFFAIR.
G. U. ALLEY V. GEORGE BROWN, OF THE ILLWARRA HOTEL, DAPTO.
ASSAULT WITH A POKER.
On the next court day, after the Masonic Ball, I was about applying
fur a summons against the aggressor, but Captain Addison, the W. M,
being present, and having learned my business, begged of me not to pro-
ceed with it; in compliment to him, and desirous to prove that I was
not actuated by vindictive, or revengeful feelings, I consented, pro-
vided that an apology were made : this he guaranteed should be done ;
next day I wrote to him, “ the more 1 reflected upon the outrageous and
ruffianly-conduct of G. Brown, the less inclined Avas 1 to let it go un-
punished, but still consented to let the matter drop, provided a Avritten
apology should he sent me on or before the Kith instant"—thus giving
the party a full AA'eek to consider it; the stated time elapsed without
any apology, and accordingly on the 13th JJiled my affidaA'it and took
out the summons, the case to be heard on the folloiving Friday. On
the bench sat Captains Plunkett and Cole, the affidavit having been
read, the defendant called for. the summons to be read, Avhen he endea-
voured to argue that there was no assault proved, to Avhich the bench
replied, u that may be your laAv, but it is not ours, the assault is dis-
tinctly provedthe defendant then applied for a postponement to
alloAV him time to supoena Avitnesses, us he undertook to prove that
1 Avas so drunk, I could not see a hole through a ladder."
The eventful day for final hearing having armed, the :23rd of January,
marked in the Ledger of my discontent, to he well remembered by
every honest man present, to the additional shame and disgrace of a
faction, if shamed or disgraced they may be beyond Avhat they are in
the estimation of every upright man in the District. The Bench of
Magistrates Avas composed, on this memorable occasion, of Henry Os-
borne, Esq., J. P., (mark the peculiar delicacy of this man’s special
attendance, in a case in Avhich his lavo brothers Avere so intimately con-
nected.) Captains Plunkett and Cole; Charles Throsby Smith, Esq., J.P.;
Gerard Gerard, Esq., J.P. ; and Dr. Alick Osborne, a avitxiss in the
c.as f. and with his brother John, personally isTrarsmt; the assumed


Solemh gravity ami silent sombreness of his manner would lead a per*
sol*, unacquainted with him, to think that he was really disinterested*
“ A shallow brain behind a serious mask.
An oracle within an empty cask ;
't'he solemn fop, significant and budge,
A fool with judges, amongst fools n judge. 1 '
Before going into the ease, Captain Cole suggested that the witnesses
should withdraw ; the Cuair.mvn considered it unnecessary, but Wished
to know if T required it ? I remarked, that “ there arc some witnessed
hero Whom I should not wish to be inconvenienced by asking them to
Withdraw, being perfectly assured that they will speak the truth, but
there are several others in Whom I have not such confidence, as I feel
assured they Will regulate their evidence by that Which goes before,
as no one who comes to this court, to swear in favor of the defendant
In this case can do so, and at the same time swear the truth. I leave
the matter entirely in the hands of the court.' 1 This I did, to
give the bench full latitude to act partially or impartially as should
have been determined, that in case the former should be mani-
fested, (strongly SuspfeciflHHp the titiusual muster,) undiminished
odium should attach to him and his abettors who should so court
it; the Chairman suggested that the witness who Was present at the
assault should leave the court.
The next question was mooted by me—“ the case having been pre-
viously heard —the affidavit read—the assault proved-—and the decision
only postponed, at the urgent request of the defendant, that he might
summon witnesses, not to disprove the assault, but to prove that I was
so drunk I could not see a hole through a ladder is it according to
the usual custom of the police court, or competent for other Magistrate!
to continue the case, or try it " de novo"? this the Chairman deiided,
“ it was quite competent for them to do, as they had only to have the
proceedings read of course, not one word, however, about the pro-
per custom of the police courts, although I mentioned that in Sydney and
Parramatta, it was not usual to adopt the course now decided by the
court \ of course Hot, it would be an idle parade of delicacy, besides, it
Would be a pity, after riding fourteen miles for this special purpose, to
be disappointed of the end aimed at, merely in obedience to the incon-
venient forms of propriety ; nothing like helping a lame dog over tlic
style, even though there should be a fetid mud hole at each side of ft.
Oh this “ i.ittl.l' briki- authority,” what a convenient crutch to lend


a friend, oi- knock down a foe with ; —this point arranged to the satis*
faction of the Chairman, my affidavit was produced—here again the
peculiar “suaviter in modo " of the Chairman was called into
O
requisition ; “ it was not necessary to read the whole of the affidavit,
merely that part which described the assault I was appealed to on
the subject, but with my hand upon the vipers neck, it was not my
purpose to give my opinion, yea, or nay ; accordingly, as it suited the
purpose of the moment, the only part of the affidavit read, was that
which described the assault, omitting altogether the history of the
affair—the previous conduct of the parties concerned, without any re-
ference to the law or justice, or the established custom in such cases.
What matter's such inconvenient considerations, Illawaiuu Jvstick is
quite good enough for the opponents of our would-be legislators.
The first witness examined was William Hears, Esq.—“ Was at the
ball given by the Masons, on the 30th December—saw Dr. Alley
there ; was down stairs, and heard a great noise in an adjoining room ;
'went towards it and met Mr. Alley followed by Mr. Brown, who had a
poker raised in his hand, as if about to strike ; asked what was the
matter, when Mr. Alley said " nevei fear, 3’m not angry or excited—
these men are either madmen or fnoh Mr. A. was perfectly sober;
have known him for seven years, andnSHMethim on several occasions,
both in public and private, and never saw or heard of him being drunk
or even tipsy. Defendant said, after Mr. Alley left the house, 'it is
well you came up, or 1 would have branded him.' "
William Warren Jenkins, Esq.—“ Was at the masonic ball; saw Dr.
Alley there ; observed him during the greater part of the night; saw
; him both at supper and after supper ; lie was perfectly sober j have
known him between six and seven years, and during that period have
met him on several occasions at public entertainments, and never saw
or heard of his beiQgf drunk, or even tipsy, Upon any one occasion."
Dr, John Osborne, J. P., the Court here stated that it is quite un-
■ineafttfjurv to produce *ny additional evidence of my sobriety, as that
iready established. This gentleman and his party having been
the .Origin of the row, I wished to question him as to the cause of of-
fence —he did noMemember the song, or the verse of-the song; being
handed the song would not read it or the verse, nor would the Chairman
allow me to read it ; anyfhttempt, therefore, to prove the pretext for
having taken such ipnbrage, ias both frivolous and vexatious, was ren-
dered completely futile by the Chairman, who also frequently interrupted
.nieVand objected to certain questions which I considered absolutely


Dfcpssaiy to elicit the f ruth, and thus develop* the whole character of
the affair. I then asked the worthy Doctor, « Bearing in mind that the
defendant is a licensed publican, and, in right of that license, a «on*
stable in his own house, was he justified in assaulting me with a poker,
even though I had given him offence?" Three times this honest
man (!!!) quibbled and equivocated an evasive answer; .at length he
forced me to say to him « Doctor Osborne, I have asked you a direct
question, and I insist upon a direct answer—yes or nobut I ex-
pected too much, not being on .the sunny side of the Court, nor being
the delinquent. 1 was obliged to take the following remarkable an-
swer-read it, ye Judges'of t)« land, and hide your diminished heads,
when laying down the law of assault; the light which this upright,
intelligent, and honest magistrate, has thrown upon the subject is such,
that henceforth even the Statute Book must give way to such a bright
luminary—“ I think your conduct merited the treatment you received."
Then, Doctor, we are to understand that the defendant was justifieo
in assaulting me with a poker, in his own house—the same answer was
as unhesitatingly given—and this is Doctor John Osborne, R. N., War-
den of the District, of our Senior Magistrates; verily, the
Executive has been most4«wptMul and merciful, (! !!) j n having in-
flicted upon us such and honest " Justice of the Peace,"
who has thus given it forth, that an assault is justifiable.
The man who would prostitute Truth and Justice, to gratify, his
paltry and contemptible upleen, who brings into a Court of Justice,
whether as a witness or as a magistrate, his private feelings, malice, and
political Was, and gives his evidence or his magisterial decision, to
suit those evil passions, to serve a friend or injure an opponent, is unfit
to be entrusted with any public office, much less that of a Magistrate ;
if, indeed, the magisterial honour be conferred for the benefit c?f th«f
public, and not to serve the private end? of the individual. The Head
of the Executive should look to this—to him is entrusted the ooon
government of the Colony, and to aid him he appoints the Magistrates
throughout its various
acts. Many complaints have been made, and they might be numberless
against the above honourable gentleman, but His Excellency has said*
“ the proper course is to apply to the Supreme Court fora mandamus."
This is 1 an unworthy evasion of that responsibility which he morally
undertakes, when he appoints such persons to such an office; what
chance has the poor man of receiving redress? he cannot apply' to the
Supreme Court, nor should he -be required to incur so great an expense,


lo cleanse the Augean Stable of the ordure ami tilth of corruptiuo
•Which a Governor, from ignorance of the persons, may think proper to
stifle us With. We might endure the abomination of one, for it must
be a most venemolts poison, indeed, to which there is no antidote, or
the evil effects of Which cannot be iti some measure neutralized ; but
to place three such Justices of the Peace upon one Bench, acting
On all occasions with the same unity of purpose as the noble Cerberus,
is even-handed Justice to be contemplated or expected? Ask the
people of Illawarra—it reflects . little credit upon the Head of tt>«
Executive, to have placed such a rim 1 let in one place ; the power is
100 great-—unconstitutionally great —and the temptation to make that
combined power subservient to political and private designs, too
strong and too tempting to be resisted by a Trio, the moral culture of
Whose minds is only equalled, by their well known public integrity (?)
public honour ! ! and incorruptibility ?! ! !
Doctor Alick Osborne, “he Who the member Would be," was next
tailed Was at the Ball given by the Masons on the 30th December,
saw you (Mr. Alley) there ; had something else to do besides observing
you ; do not know hoW many Masons Wrt*V. its the room ; do not know
if there were twenty, or ten, or five, {J£ jj do not know Whether they
Were all Masons; I have not edme give you my opinion.’ 1
Here the Chairman interfered on .behalf-of his brother, and said “ if,
Ur. Alley, you want to make an exhibition,” —perceiving his family
bile was rising, I interrupted his further address by observing, “it is not
my wish to do so, the exhibition has been already made—Dr. Osborne,
you may go down and this is another of our Illawarra Justices, bless
the mark !!! '.there was not one of the many in the Police Office, of
those Who dare think for themselves, who was not disgusted with the
Juan’s conduct 5 he Was pale and trembling, with anger and ill-concealed
hate artd spite, his marked and insolent determination utterly to evade
the truth, his answers were so wilfully false, and so designedly cal"
ciliated to defeat the ends of justice, that the high personal respect I
once, and but a short time before,.entertained for him, was at onert
changed into contempt, pity , and the most ineffable disgust. Of the
three chosen brothers, it is difficult to say which <d them laboured with
most barefaced and unblushing effrontery, and ingenuity, to throw their
shield over the defendant, to justify hisassar.lt, and drag him through,
** per fas ftt ne fas."
Who ! bend their Magislemi power,
To suit their politics and private friends,


To serve some viler purpose of the hour,
Write, themselves, knaves, prepar'd for baser ends,
*
*1 he defendant was then called upon for his defence ; disprove the
assault he did not, nor could he, but, in accordance with the new doc-
< rine of Dr. J. Osborne, he attempted to justify it. For this purpose,
some of his witnesses were prepared to prove that I went to the Ball for
the express, and no other design, of insulting the Messrs. Osborne ; and
first called
William Way, sen., of Dapto, who deposed—“ Dr. Alley was attend-
ing me for a sore leg ; he frequently said, in the course of conversation
on different subjects, that he would take every occasion, in public, to
insult the Messrs. Osbornes; that Dr. John Osborne had signed a pe-
tition, something about the Berrima road, which he knew to be false
and scandalous ; never said he would go to the Ball for the express, and
no other purpose, of insulting the Messrs. Osborne—-had he, I should
have gone, as one of the Masons, to the Lodge and reported it, that Mr.
Alley's card of invitation fnight be withdrawn.”
Mrs. Way, wife of the inst witness, deposed—" Dr. Alley was in
attendance upon Mr.
every occasion, both in piiVllcHP private, to affront the Messrs, Os-
borne and the family 'en masse and on one occasion, when Mr. Way
was lying on the sofa, after having his leg dressed, he (Mr. Alley)
stated he would go to the ball, for the express purpose of affronting
them, the Messrs, Osborne ;ljifte#’ he left. I reminded Mr. Way of it,
and advised him to go to Mr7*Brown or the Lodge, and have his card of
invitation recalled.” I considered, after this “ exhibition,” that it was
quite unnecessary to cross-examine this veritable (! !) witness.
A brazen frontispiece of coarse degree, «
One part a woman, and three parts an hej
A tongue tliat wags like clapper of a mill,
o’er the truth, than be one moment still.
Why ask a question at so/air a dame ?
To doubt her oath, would be a monstrous shame j
Yet, false was his, or hers, be which it may.
Who believes the one must doubt ’tother Way.
Mrs. Brown, wife of the defendant, was then called; previous
to her being sworn, I asked the Court, “ Is Mrs. Brown a
competent witness?” After some little consultation, the Chairman
wished to know if I had any objection ? I replied, "if the witness, the


wife of the defendant, be cdittpetent to give evidence in his behalf, any-
objection of mine would be of no avail; I leave the matter entirely i«
the hands of the Court. I have before stated, that none can come to
this Court to swear in favour of the defendant, in this case, who will
not swear falsely, and I wish to save Mrs. Brown the pain of doing
this. The Court would not rule either way, and, at length, having
forced the alternative upon me-—perhaps the Chairman was afraid to
offend the defendant, I did object to her evidence, upon which the
defendant exclaimed, " Oh, your worship, he’s afraid of Mrs. Brown’s
evidence, he knows she was present at the assaultthe Chairman at
once remarked, with a smile of gratified malignity, " a very good ob-
servation, Mr. Brown, we’ll bear it in mind.” What a mockery of
Justice ! And Mr, tferrard, I suppose in order to interchange civilities
with his friend and neighbour Brown, said, with that sickly, mawkish
attempt at facetiousness, so peculiar to him, —Mr. Brown, did yon want
to make a Mason of Dr. Alley, when you took up the poker to him i I
Dakins is such a scrupulous jfood man !!!
Vos, you may catch him trippim;, ii rwi can ;
He would not, with a
Assert (he nose upon his ‘ /
His evidence, if lie were called by tote.
To swear to some enormity he saw,
For want of prominence and just relief.
Would Iwrtg an honest man, and save a thief,
, ‘‘ %
Two more witnesses were examined, hk&their statement is so utterly
woi’tmi.kss that it is unnecessary to give it in full; one Bonnyman—.
Bmwn’s Bonny man of au> work —swore “ In; was in the next room to
where the assault was committed ; the door was shut; he heard him
st ike the table," —he heard all—saw nothing.
The next and last, upon being asked if I was drunk, said, “ Oh,
gentlemen, I never think a man is drunk until he goes to light his pipe
at a bucket of water!” Is not this a precious witness { was he not
Pit epaßan to swear distinctly that I was drunk : but did not the defen-
dant make a significant sign to him. which saved him from corrupt and
wilful perjury f . Oould he jiave as significantly conveyed similar in-
telligence to other of his witnesses he might have saved them the con-
tempt and scorn with which the public now look upon them.
The court was then cleared for a division, the doors remained olffsed
for about half an hour, to decide this difficult ami knotty question.
The Doctors and the three midlives u most strenu-o! exertions


lo cause aii abortion. but the mountain was in actual labour, and must
be delivered : .'.till, the power and art of the craft were such that it was
feared the life and identity of the bantling were its jeopardy, but
1.0, the mountain leaved and brought forth a mouse.
No, not a mouse, hut a rvnrmxc. The door was at length opened,
and silence restored, the Chairman addressed- mk—he would not hate
looked at the defendant for the world—and thus delivered his judge-
ment :—" We are of opinion that Mr. Ijrown raised the poker to you,
and we tine him osi: i shtuinm ! 1 !"
Uli ! «dl may Justin' weep, and homo eimut for nothing,
When both are !h'M at !i:u.rrlll, or only worth a Forthiiry !•
Wliile wailing for the decision, bets were freely offered, 3 to 1, jOto 1,
“ that although the case is distinctly proved.it will be dismissed, pr the
most minute* atom of justice will be awarded and the following ob-
servations were as freely made, •• what brought all the.Osbornes in, and
above all, what brought Henry to the Bench to-day; does he ever
come, except to do the dils *wk for soine*ftne ; how often has he at-
tended the court during 1 and were not the occasions
on which he did attend >p»eia! un-s. to drag some low friend through
the dirt, or to inflict mjustj* upfU some political opponent i don't you
rememher what he said, when invited to Mr. Wild’s dinner, * I may
forgive a private injury, A® never a political one" *• search the Police
Ofliee." said another, “ aftdl will not the cases abundantly prove, that
not onlv Henry, but the others, make their magisterial power subser-
vient to their private ends, their thirst for mob popularity, and their
political designs, without any regard whatever to truth or justice?’'
Then another remarked, •• let any one attend here on a court day, and
lie will hear plaintiffs and defendants asking their friends, ‘ well, who'j
on the bench to-day -Doctor John, or the Osbornes V " when the
smiling faces of #ne parly and the evident dissupointment and chagrin
of the pther, will at once prove the public estimation bf the honor and
honesty of these men ! !
But this is Illawarra justice, the Osborne mode of admiuisteriiig eveit*
handed justice, to their friends !
Wlip govs to law wit!* Sal in, in with Salon's friend,
And ihvmua be in the dark diodes below,
T!un iajusiitT. there is no sure end,
„An>l trutlj.ami twin, he will overthrow;


Ci rUiuh aits there ii grim defiance,
Snapping at justice, if her sliade appear
S.trh power ronbinod, in foul alliance
Mtnj rclpn in hell, but *ha!l not triumph here.
We in Illawarm understand the analogy, Inw long ate we to groan
under the hated incubus which s i oppresses us f Hail ilie coutl re-
mained closed till morning, we should have been edified with the recol-
lections, the police reminisce.nces. of many ; let me mention one case
which occurred in my hearing ;
When Mr. Arthur Westmacott had a seat on the bench, there was a
ease being tried, in which some of our Justices had some interest, he
argued upon the law of the case, and differed decidedly in opinion with
his brother magistrates. Dr. John replied, “ Never mind, you are in a
minority.” Mr. Westmacott left the bench, in disgust, and, I believe,
never took his seat upon it again.
> It may lie, and has been argued, against the preponderance of possible
evil, “ Oh, yon have other magistrates, who can remedy il ; but if
justice is to be outvoted, of what avail is the incorruptible honesty of
a Plunkett or a Jenkins, especially if co*>! ’derations of private friend-
ship or party coalition, induce others he ranks of a majority.
Who lend themselves to p|.p>w Bet’s "ill -
To aid Injustice, at the beck Office i
labour with most ignominious skill.
To stamp themselves hot* over
I may here inform the reader, that at the conclusion of the evidence,
the defendant was invited to address the Court, while I was refused
permission to speak to evidence, lest 1 should have explained the trivial
discrepancies and other matters, which have, since been taken advantage
of to heap oppression and injustice upon me ; and having the permission
of the Court, presided ovei as it was, lie, uncontrolled, indulged himself
in that coarse, vituperative style, so congenial to low an|| vulgar minds—
he spoke of my “ presumption at having gone to the Masonic Ball,
that I was out of my place!” What a burlesque such a fellow as
George Brown, to speak of " presumption,” he who is the living,
breathing, moving, personification of arrogance and impudence, pre--
sumption, ignorance, and foul-mouthed insolence ; as for my presumption
in such company, whether it be fact or otherwise, is of little consequence,
neither is it of any moment to enlighten the Masonic hero as to who 1
am, or what I am, even though I were the very lowest of the low, whim


Mich a man as Mr. George Brown and his servants were at the ball;
but perhaps it may be not uninteresting to him. and other®, his present
admirers, to know what lam not. lam not an impostor. I have not
pawned myself upon the colony as an officer on board an East India-
man ; I was not cuddy boy, or cook's slush boy, on board that vessel,
instead of an officer ; I did not abscond from that ship; I was not a
vagrant about the streets of Sydney, houseless, homeless, pcunyless. and
characterless; 1 was not taken by a person living in that most reputable
place, the Rocks of Sydney, for charity, and there learn to make lolly •
pops ; I did not. in return for this kindness, rob my benefactor, and get
kicked out for it: 1 was not a baker’s boy in Liverpool, and raise my-
self by contracting debts which 1 never meant to pay: I did not build
my fortunes by swindling, lying, thieving, and villainy; I have nhl
the elegnht soubriquet of thief affixed to my name, by common public
consent, and notoriously known throughout the length and breadth of
the colony ; in the midst of all my misfortunes, privations, and wants,
I never illumined the midnight arch of Heaven with the damning blare
of my infamy—the reeking, smoking, embers of house of mine never
proclaimed, to an indignifr'f. harror-stricken multitude, morally certain
of the origin of the - that I set tire to my house, rather
than suffer the humiliation wf losing it legally ! George Brown, of the
Ilia warm Hotel. Dapto, JSTyou know such a man ? to your kennel,
fellow, and herd with th«e of your class and character-aye, summon
to vour aid the pack from ■Garden Hill, Dritsy Bank, and Marshall
Mount. >• et hoc genus omhe," call your whining whelps around you,
and to each ami all I say, to your kennels, and wallow in the filth and
corruption of your home-made abomination ; hark, you may- bite you
dare not ; for.* though unable of myself to resist with my purse, vice,
fraud, and injustice, there is that w ithin me so indomitable and so in-
corruptible, that I cannot, will not, yield ! and truth, although oppressed
fur a time, must eventually triumph over enemies so mean and con -
temptible. Wilt I cannot myself effect single-handed, public opinion
will--public reprobation and public contempt may, ere long, send you
and your supporters to your proper places.
With reference to that part of Mrs. Way’s testimony, in which she
imputes to me the polite ! courteous! and gentlemanly !! intention of
going to the hall for no other purpose than that of affronting the Messrs.
Osborne; to those who are personally acquainted with me it is un-
necessary to give any contradiction to it ; to those who do not know
me, I most unhesitatingly, unequivocally, and distinctly state, the is


wnlton wholly untrue; th<* ses wf the fair witness. prevent me using
any stronger language ; tin*,however, I have said, viz., that I would, mi
nil public occasions, oppose the Osbornes. because I considered them as
liiihiic men, dishonest ami unfit to be entrusted with aify part or place
hi the public affairs of our District or to the Colony : I now repeat it.
hut when i use flu* tcnu "public occasion.'" S confine tuvself to certain
and fixed limits; namely, on those occasions, when those gentlemen or
any one ot them shall be before the public, n.s candidates for public
favor, and I am prepared to justify my opposition, and prove the cor-
rectness nt n.y opinion—an opinion mm coincided in by more than
three-fourths of the people of illawana.
\\ hat persons would or could bare even dreamed, that so simple a
cause Would lie made a pretext (or Mich rude conduct,, that so inoffen-
sive a verse would June such (iul.auic [lowers, as to set the Osborne
feet slut filing along the door, after the fashion of so many cabin bred
boors, Reader, could you have imagined that a man. supposed to be a
rational being—-supposed to be one of our most cunning tacticians—
supposed to lie an intelligent and .sensible man, one of our most wily
politicians—-ami supposed too to be a genOHpian. would have been so
mua/iiigly c.uilcd by four Midi sjtmjf; 4’., which ically, in general
estimation, lefcr. in the latter part, a-, ■ to the actual, as they do
to mi; wou.ii-iik MKvnn.n. i
Yet these are the men who, with '• wonJfhan folly. and weakness,
predominating in all thtir transactions, expect, that the intelligent and
independent people of Ilia warm will yield to them a blind and slavish
subserviency-—these are the men,the honest gentlemen ! whose insatiable
thirst after vain and worthless popularity—worthless, because not
founded upon integrity, honor, public virtue, consistency, or truth— ex-
pect the freeholders of this fair district, of this great county too, to
repose in them so great a trust, as to place them,or oneuf them, amongst
our independent legislators.
To w hat an amount of monstrous absurdity suite men ore led by
the blind infatuation of a false ambition, based upon avarice,calculating
upon the expectant gains of influence, to be derived from corrupt pa-
tronage, or fnmi the well understood and preconcerted sale- or barter of
the public interests.
110 to— —go (o . the district is not as it was seven years ago, nor is
the county ; it is how peopled by an overwhelming majority of high
minded, intelligent, free, and upright men. and better still, of honorable
ami honest men too. vvlm will not bend the knee to corruption, merely


because tV Representative - y have, in the mistaken and
unwise exercise of the prerogative, t&raw# around that corruption the
protecting cloak of “ a little fetfof authority." The time may com®,
and it may not be far distant either, when the simultaneous voice of
t t ie district may petition to be relieved from that fraternal despotism, of
combined plebeian ignorance, cunning, and deceit, which, unsupported
bv even one dim ray of that rude, but stern honesty, to be found even
in the humblest ranks of life, becomes a curse Instead of a blessing,
wherever the high hand of aifthority plants it, without exercising over
it that wise and just control, to which the people are entitled, and
which is their only .safeguard and protection, against combined injustice,
{.and, and corruption.
If these men must he Magistrates—if it be necessary tdf the govern-
ment that such men are to be sustained in their power, as useful willing
tools, in the face of public opinion, against the happiness, contentment,
and wishes of the people. '* right or wrong.” be it so; but in the name
of justice, and on behalf of the people of Illawnrm, let that power be
so distributed, so divided, that it shall not, at the pleasure or bidding of
a few unprincipled be enabled to conspire and combine to
defeat the ends of party political purposes, pri-
vate animosities, or perafflJPmndship; let the sittings of the Magis-
trates he officially regulaUg* tiUat no more than one of the three brothers,
or one of the same family, shall take his sent upon the bench,
or shall adjudicate, directly or in the same case.
There is a mode by which this may he accomplished, and the Uluablc!!
services of these men may still be preserved to the government, without
anv injury to the public, end be much more efficient and serviceable in
ibeir Magisterial capacity, to the advantage and convenience of n very
important part of ibis District, and better still, without the fear of any
additional expense to the crown or county.
But continue them as they are. with such a case of gross injustice,
sounded throughout the country, made still more grievous by the many
that have preceded it -others that are sure to follow, and each person
weighing his own grievances, from similar injustice perpetrated upon
him by the same authorities, thus demonstrating lllawarra justice as it
is administered in Wollongong, in contradistinction to even-handed
justice as it might to be— and it w ill, nay must arouse such an universal
disgust, that nil ranks will feel hound to unite in one universal shout
of indignation, as against a common enemy, and such an overwhelming
avalanche of public Horn, contm- \ t.and unmixed hale will Ire let loose,


that unless they retreat 'or .time, they, and the fen who at-
tempt to support them, ill be buried in oblivion—wvilhout one tear of
pity to commemorate their well merited fall.
Thus this case, trifling in its origin, has, through then uneasy, pitiful
and ill-concealed chicanery, in their base attempt to crush me, un-
masked the Faction, and exposed them to the ridicule, derision, and
well-earned contempt, of the right-thinking part of the public ; and the
police affair has so elucidated the marked system of administering jus-
tice by political magistrates, that, the little of their fast-fading popularity
that remains to support their overweening vanity, misapplied power and
empty pride, has faded away ; their tergiversations, their inconsistencies,
their peculiar sense of honor, integrity, and impartial justice, has been
made so abundantly manifest that the last glimmer of the political po-
pularity lamp is flickering in the socket- it is gasping for existence —
one struggle more, and all is over —it: is extinguished !by
GEORGE UNDERWOOD ALLEY.
