

* DOOMSDAY
BOOK.
Compiled from the Historical Records of THE COURT
OF KING ARTHUR 11., at JOY JOY,
EASTER, 1899
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
WILLIAM BROOKS & CO.,
PRINTERS,
17 Castlerbagh Street, Sydney.


Introduction.
This Doomsday Book has been compiled
At Arthur’s own command,
And in accord with what is styled
“ The Act ” —just near at hand.
It forms a truthful history
Of each important deed,
Related without mystery,
That he who runs may read.
And those who’d hear of gory bouts
With dwarfs and giants tall;
And of the knightly battle shouts—
“ For Arthur, so for all.”
And of bold deeds in grayling done
By knightly gallants brave,
Who sailed the Rip and Bar—and one
Who dared the raging wave.
And of the many lovely dames,
Who oft at eventide
Indulged in courtly olden games
Beside the moonlit tide.
Or charmed with Music’s tender strain,
And converse sweet and low ;
Or made the welkin ring again
With mirthfulness aglow.
And of the mad and guilty act
Of bold Sir Bob and Co.,
Who (how we blush to tell the fact)
Hanged good King Arthur so.
And of the Storm, and Bungers loud,
The grand and brilliant Ball,
Whereat were gathered brave, and proud,
The fair, and gay—and all.
And of the wild enchanted calf,
The milk-white Arab steed,
The ducks —and yet this is not half
Of what befell indeed.
And those who’d hear of these and more
Should seek a quiet nook,
And readwhat never yet could bore—
King Arthur’s Doomsday Book.


The Doomsday Book,
Being the True History of the Court of King Arthur 11.
and his Round Table held during Easter, 1899, at
Joy Joy,
The History of this important event commences at a
Meeting held on Tuesday evening, the 14th February, 1899
at 8 o’clock.
This preliminary gathering consisted of Messrs. W. H.
Forrest (in the chair), F. L. Johnston, A. H. Norton, R. Men-
love, A. R. Barry, R. W. Thallon, N. C. Lockhart, and E. S.
MacDermott.
The sentiment of the Meeting is contained in the follow-
ing resolutions upon which the structure of the great Court
-of Arthur 11. at Joy Joy was built:
First —“That a ten days’ expedition to Woy Woy be
arranged for Easter next, commencing the 31st
March, 1899.”
Second —“ That an Organising Committee, to consist of
Messrs. Barry, Norton and MacDermott be ap-
pointed, who shall have full charge of the expedition
until its arrival at Woy Woy.”
Third —“That a Judiciary Committee be appointed to
prepare a Constitution for the proper government
of the expedition, and that such Committee consist
of Messrs. Lockhart, Forrest, Barry and MacDer-
mott.”
Fotirth —“ That the number of lady members be limited
to ten and the gentlemen to twelve. The whole
expedition therefore to consist of twenty-two souls.”


Both Committees became at once actively employed, and,,
as arrangements grew settled and difficulties were smoothed
out, the time was considered ripe by the organisers for the
issue of the following circular
EXPEDITION TO WOY WOY.
The expedition will leave Redfern Railway Station on Thursday
afternoon, the 30th instant, by the 4.40 train, which will start from
No. 9 Platform. A Special Saloon Carriage has been engaged for the
whole party.
Members are requested to assemble at the Station at 4.20 p.m. (as a
crowded platform is anticipated), and not to purchase any Tickets. That
will be attended to by the Committee.
Luggage.
Arrangements have been made with Messrs. Sanders and Co., carriers,
for the transport of luggage to Woy Woy by the Gosford steamer, which
will leave Sydney at 8 a.m , on Tuesday, the 28th instant. Any boxes,
&c., addressed per S.S. Wyong, which reach Sanders’ Head Office, King-
street, by 4 p.m. on Monday next, will be so forwarded at a cost of Is. 6d.
per box or bag.
Music, &c.
Members are requested to bring their music, and any musical instru-
ments, games, light literature, &c., they may possess.
General.
Gentlemen are particularly requested to provide themselves with white
duck or linen coats, to be worn at dinner each evening ; also full-bathing,
costumes (from neck to knee), dancing shoes, fishing tackle, oyster knives,
&c.
No firearms of any kind should be brought.
Note. —As it has been necessary to make special arrangements with
the Railway Commissioners for a party of at least twenty, in order to
obtain the concession of a separate car, Members are particularly urged to
travel by the 4.40 Train.
E. S. MacDERMOTT,
22nd March, 1899. for the Organising Committee,.
The Judiciary Committee remained silent as to their labours
but it was understood towards the end of March that a Consti
tution had been prepared, and that it would first see the light of
day in the Kingdom for the Government of which it was.
specially created*


It may be interesting to refer to the following communica-
tion from Colonel J. L. Williams as a sample of what the educa-
tion of the masses has done for this Colony ;
“Monkerey,” Neutral Bay,
Mr. MacDermott, 24th March, 1899.
“For the Organ Grinding Committee.”
Dear Mr. MacDermott, —We received your kind letter yesterday, and
Syd. (that’s our boy) says he thinks you must be a great and good man,
and he hopes to grow up like you. He Ins been reading about the Duke
of Wellington lately, and he thinks the Duke and you are very much
alike. lam not quite sure in what way he meins, but I suppose he refers
to your genius and tactical skill. When Syd, read about the encampment
at Woy Woy and our orders to parade at 4.20 p.m. sharp, armed with
oyster knives (sharp), he wanted to know whether there was going to be a
war, and sud he would come too ; but I told him Bishop Barry would be
there and that he doesn’t like little boys.
Syd. noticed that we had each to be provided with duck, but as we
haven’t any at our place just now, he is giving me a pet goose he has had
for a long time. He hopes you will take it without being very angry, but
I have told him that you will take anything you can liy hands on, so he is
satisfied. I also let him know that the “ Bishop ” and “ Truth” are very
fond of geese and once took one from a poor old woman at night, so he
has ceased to worry about the poultry.
When Syd. had come to the part of your orders in which you describe
the arrangements of the baggage department he asked whether we were
going away for two or three years. He said it was like the account of the
departure of the Duke with his army to Span. I Inve tried to explain
that everything is arranged for the best, and that we must trust in the
Organ Grinding Committee, but he is a little bit suspicious still.
Wh .t puzzled him most was the order that no firearms are to be brought,
although we are going into camp. He bothered me a long time about it,
so at last I had to let him know that some of the men going into camp are
very desperate characters; also that it would not be safe when you and
“the Bishop” are “humorous,” i.e., either for us or for you or
“ the Bishop.” The boy can’t understand it at all. The poor little chap has
been hard at work getting together some things for me to take to you.
Up to the present he has got—One railway ticket to Woy Woy (return) —
Musical instruments Games—Light literature —Music—White goose
(insteidof black duck) —Coats (evening dinner) —Bathing costume (very
full) —Dancing shoes (spring heels) —Fishing tackle (shark) —Oyster knives
(sharp)—Ginger-beer (non-intoxicating)—Onion scales (for weighing fish) —
“ History of Ireland” (with full account of the McGintys and the Smith -
Barrys), and a lot more.
Our gas is just going ouf, so I must conclude, in haste,
Yours to command,
(Sgd.) J. L. Williams, Colonel
(not Commanding).


Mr. Secretary MacDermott feeling that such a commu-
nication as this could not be treated in any ordinary manner,,
felt called upon to let himself go thusly :
To Colonel J. L. Williams.
(JRe Easter Encampment at Woy Woy.
Your despatch, Colonel dear, reached head-quarthers to-day,
Wid the sound av the furst hugle-call—
The sweet note that is dulcetly tootled away,
Whoile you blast him who blasts out the call.
For it’s toiresome, realty, to thus be aroused
From your furst beauty-sleep in the dawn,
And you wish—how you wish—the gay bugler was housed
Safely down wid the divil in pawn.
Now that foine little bit av a Syd. that ye’ve got
Is, I see, an intilligint choild,
For he wants to grow great loike his betthers, and not
Loike an oysther that’s not the laste woild.
And I’m glad to be tould that he’s fixed up your thraps
In a manner that shews he has sinse ;
For he moight have misread me entoirely, perhaps:
Be the Powers, sir, he’s Just imminse.
Tell me, though, where the blazes ye got such a name
For the shmart little gossoon as “ Syd ” ?
Shure he moight have had Pathrick, that’s well-known to fame,.,
Or “ O’Connell ” would just suit the kid.
Then there’s Conor, and Tiege, and Molloy, and O’Mor,
Tumulta-na-Carrig, and Ffrench :
Rest their sowls !—I could shpin on wid foine names galore,,
And niver once give truth a wrinch.
Well, ’tis late, and I’m drinking your healths in the last
Of this iligant dew, Colonel, dear ;
Here’s the top of the morn to ye both ; and shtick fast
To the Irish —they’re friends, nevetyfear.


Mrs. A. R. Barry
Afterwards the Hereditary
Grand Duchess of Joy Joy
Miss Wells
The Ladye Louie
Miss A. Wells ...
The Ladye Annie
Miss Saunders ...
The Ladye Emma
Miss Gritton
The Ladye Minugh
Miss V. Gritton
The Ladye Yere
Miss A. MacDormott
The Ladye Agatha
Miss E. Bristowe
The Ladye Ethel
Miss Wetherell...
The Ladye Madeline
Miss Spark
The Ladye Lily
Mr. W. H. Forrest
Sir Pa de Welsher
Mr. R. Menlove
Sir Lovelace
Mr. A. Wells ...
Sir Oh Cli
Mr. H. Gritton...
Sir Merlin
Mr. F. L. Johnston
Sir Juggins
M. N C. Lockhart
Sir Lanshark
Mr. J. L. Williams
Sir Lez de Line
Mr. W. E. Courthope
Sir Court Ax
Mr. R. M. Thalkm
Sir Robbo del Thalloni
Mr. E. S MacDermott
Sir Pard de Mac
Mr. A. R. Barry
Sir Loin, King Arthur II.
Everything - now appeared ready for a start, and it was
considered advisable to get away from town at the earliest
possible moment. So on March 30th the following ladies
and gentlemen, who were so soon to have greatness thrust
upon them, assembled at the Railway Station in time to take
their seats in a special saloon carriage in the 4.40 p.m.
train :
Mr. A. H. Norton, afterwards Sir Hard Case, the Knight
Mayor of Joy Joy, was absent from Sydney, and com-
municated with the party from Parkes.
It was interesting to stand upon the Redfern parapet and
note the arrival of these distinguished personages. Amongst
the first to appear were the Ladyes Lily, Louie, and Annie,
closely followed by Sir Oh Cli, who drove up quietly in his
own wheelbarrow. He was attended by Sir Court Ax the
Thoughtful, who smiled pleasantly on all sides (of his face).
Sir Robbo del Thalloni was received shortly afterwards. Sir
Robbo had his valet Dan with him, attired in a neat livery of blue
cloth with gold buttons, and a cap, whereon his name, “Porter,”
appeared in gold letters, and carrying a carpet bag, evidently
containing a change of raiment for his master. Poor Dan !
he had no soul. The finer feelings of idealism appear to have


been omitted from his structure. In the days to come when-
ever we felt inclined to soar aloft on the wing's of enthusiastic
imagination it was his especial delight to drag us back to
earth by interpolating some of his wretched matter-of-fact
common-places. There was no poetry about Dan. Some
called him a cynic ; but we never knew. All we did know was
that he could never appreciate the grandeur with which he
was surrounded, nor could he fathom the brave epics of our
“ Blood Boiler,” or estimate the love songs of our “ Soul
Stirrer.” He was soulless.
But to go back to the arrivals. Sir Robbo had scarcely
passed when it was seen that there was some commotion
amongst the spectators, of whom there were now perhaps
75,000 present. A passage through the crowd was quickly
formed and the King drove up, drawn by the same horse
which carried his noble ancestor, Arthur 1., on many an
expedition after the Holy Grail. His Majesty was preceded
by two cabs and a railway ’bus ; and Dan, who considers
himself a judge of horseflesh, remarked that it was a
thoughtful act to place the King and his horse after these
vehicles, as there was then no danger of the King’s person
being walked over from behind ; while moreover the moving-
vehicles in front acted as an encouragement to the horse to
try and keep moving, though Nature bade him rest.
The Heriditary Grand Duchess of Joy Joy, attended by
the Ladies Agatha and Madeline, and also Sir Lez, arrived in
the King’s suite.
The Ladyes Emma, Ethel, Minugh, and Vere, with Sir
Merlin, were announced almost at the same time.
It was noticed that Sir Pa de Welsher, our “ soul
stirrer,” was on the platform wrapped in the deepest gloom.
With downcast eyes and knitted brow he appeared dignified,
but it was evident that he was stirred to the depths,
Dan asked him if he had lost his train money ; Dan is
so untactful. It transpired, however, that the Queen, or
someone, desired his presence in town that evening, and that
he could not proceed with the Court. This was the cause of
the gloom ; but on the matter being reported to the King
things were arranged by an express wire to the British
monarch, and a direct command from the King that the
minstrel should entrain with the remainder of the Court.


No merrier party ever left the Redfern Railway Station
than that which assembled on that Thursday evening - in the
Royal saloon as the train drew out from the station. Every
place was filled except that of Sir Hard Case, who was upon
.affairs of State at Parkes, and that of Sir Lovelace. The
absence of this latter knight was the cause of much sorrow,
but when Dan suggested that perhaps the good knight found
riding on the buffer less expensive and more in accordance
with his usual custom, a wave of indignation moved the
assembled throng. As the train passed through the Field of
Strath a stoppage was made, and colour was lent to the
scorned remark of Dan by the sudden appearance of Sir
Lovelace, who was handed into the saloon through the
window by an elegantly attired gentleman wearing a uniform
which bore a remarkable resemblance to that worn by the
valet of Sir Robbo. This gentleman Sir Lanshark appeared
to be acquainted with, and, on his addressing him as Mr.
Oliver, it became apparent that he was none other than the
Chief Railway Commissioner, whose keen official eye doubtless
recognised the distinguished party. Sir Lanshark said a few
kindly and well chosen words of encouragement to him, and
the train moved on.
The journey appeared to take an incredibly short space
of time, probably owing to a word to the driver from Mr,
Oliver, but the time was occupied in the consumption of
sweets and in choir practice, with intervals for the restoration
of lungs and throats. At Brooklyn the Mayor and Aldermen
of the borough, bearing offerings of apples, oranges,
lemonade, peanuts, and other delicacies of the season,
appeared at the carriage window. Sir Lovelace
assured us of the high civic rank held by these
gentlemen, though they were unknown to us personally The
Mayor and Aldermen were then addressed at some length by
'Sir Lovelace and Sir Merlin. It was not until the train
moved off that we were able to get these civic dignitaries
away from the saloon windows.
Joy Joy was reached about 6.30 p.m., and the silvery
laughter of the fair ones, together with the deep toned hearty
mirth of the knights, spreading on the evening breeze, had the
effect of drawing the natives in thousands to the railway
.station. The platform, wherever it did not happen to be


occupied by our luggage, was crowded with spectators..
Although they appeared to vaguely realise that some great
change in their condition was impending ; although their
attention was fully absorbed in keenly eyeing the party, to
say nothing of their efforts to determine, from the few paltry
parcels we brought with us as luggage, whether w r e had come
to stay for good or only for a lifetime ; although it was
suggested that Woy Woy was not large enough to contain
the Gladesville Asylum ; still there was no actual public
demonstration.
Upon arrival at Camelot the Court was received by the
retainers (two in number) with a display of lanterns, together
with the deep-mouthed welcome of baying hounds. The
retainers regretted that only one lantern was available for the
display, as the other one was required in the kitchen. The
King’s thanks and appreciation were conveyed, and the party
were conducted to their apartments —the ladyes to the north-
eastern wing and the knights to the great dormitory in the
Castle Yard.
The first meal was an informal and merry function. The
whole party were in excellent spirits, and excellent spirits
being' in the party, or in portion of it, the gathering was
exceeding enjoyable. It was noted that the mottoes upon the
wall, such as “ Be Good,” “Love one Another,” “Mind the
Step,” etc., appropriately chosen. The evening was
spent in the vicinity of the Hall of Minstrelsy, in which many
Ladyes and Knights lifted their voices to add to the enjoyment
of those who were cradled in the lap of luxury, so to speak,,
on comfortable verandah lounges close by. The glorious
prospect of a romantic and moonlit Joy Joy had the effect of
placing our bards in a very low state, and it was not until
Wassail was served and the company removed indoors that
we began to feel that we were to be safe after all from an in-
fliction by our “ Soul Stirrer ” on this our first evening in the
Castle.
The Knights retired early to the Great Dormitory, and
after a last pipe, sank to rest on their magnificent down (oa
the floor) beds.


The following' morning broke in a very curious and
interesting manner. It was on this morning that we were
first aroused by the Cock on duty, whose business it was, by
his “ hoarse and shrilly shout,” to awaken the God of Day.
There appeared to be some mistake this morning ; the
“ hoarse and shrilly shout” was there all right, but it only
awoke Sir Court Ax, while the God of Day slept on.
Chanticleer tried again, being bravely seconded by the ducks
and geese who chimed in with loud cries of Ghee ! Ghee !
Ghee ! This time Sir Lovelace and Sir Juggins stirred, but
he still had no luck with the Celestial Being. Next try had the
effect of arousing the remainder of the Knights, and —-
Victory ! —the God of Day was seen casting his first beams
upwards from the horizon. He had been aroused too.
The Knights were now all astir, and called loudly for
their usual early morning stoup of milk and honey. The
milk, however, was not forthcoming ; cows there w T ere in
great number, and many was the bottle of honey at hand hall
marked with the red collar of “Walker” the loved, but
through the hand-maid we were grieved to hear that there was
no milk. Dan said, “What’s the use of cows?” Dan
again; he is so short-sighted. He regards a cow simply as a
source of milk. There is no doubt that at one time the cow
served a useful purpose in supplying milk to mankind, but
these cows were now fully occupied in rendering a service to
humanity of far greater importance than the mere supply of
milk. They were continually engaged in chewing the cud,
and were even at this time occupied in working overtime at
their business. Think of the service they were rendering.
It has been estimated that there are nearly 900,000 cows in
the Kingdom of Joy Joy, each of which chews two and a half
bushels of cud in every 24 hours, so that taking the number
of cows as 800,000, we have the enormous quantity of
2.000. bushels of cud chewed every day. This, in the
course of a year, would reach the startling figures of
730.000. bushels, or sufficient to cover the Kingdom of
Joy Joy with cud to the depth, of six inches. It will be
apparent that in the course of a few years this accumulation
would render travelling impossible, and the ultimate result of
an absence of cows would be the extinction of the Kingdom.
The cud must be chewed, if not by cows then by convicts, so


when we see the mild-eyed cow contemplatively chewing - the
cud, let us remember that she is serving the Kingdom as
heroically as Sir Juggins, Sir Oh Cli, or Sir Robbo, though in
a different way.
At an early hour (7 o'clock) bathing parties, which had
been arranged under the guidance of the Ladye Min for the
ladyes and Sir Lez for the knights, had returned to the Castle,
and all complained of feeling ravenously hungry. Eager in-
quiries were made with regard to the probability, or otherwise,
of breakfast. Eight o’clock, half-past eight, and nine o’clock
arrived, but still there appeared no sign of the morning meal.
Things had now reached a critical stage, and the whole party
advanced in a threatening attitude on the Organising Com-
mittee. That august body, though individually consumed
with hunger, smiled leniently on the angry multitude, and ex-
plained that on the previous evening at the request of the
ladyes, who anticipated a late rising, the morning meal had
been fixed for half-past nine. This comes of women inter-
fering in politics. The arrangements were afterwards left in
the hands of the committee.
Most of the morning was devoted to unpacking and
making things comfortable.
The following proclamation was issued from the Ladyes'
Quarters and posted on the walls at the north-eastern wing:—-
FOR THE INFORMATION OF THOSE WHO MAY BE CONCERNED.
The District of Joy Joy having been placed under the necessary con-
trol of responsible Government —We, the undersigned ten ladyes of Ancient
and Honourable lineage, and peaceful citizens of Camelot, recognising that
unity is strength, have resolved to band ourselves together into one most
exclusive and indissoluble union, primarily for our own protection and the
safeguard of our rights and liberties, and for such other purpose as may
be decided upon. And the said union shall be hereafter known as
THE UPPER TEX.
In virtue of the above, we, the members of the most exclusive set
“The Upper Ten,” publish the following sentiments for the benefit of all
and sundry whom they may concern :
1. Meetings of The Upper Ten will be held in secret.
2. Our Motto, “Be do as you would be doo-ed.”
3. A list will be prepared containing the names of 12 persons of the
opposite sex resident at Joy Joy who will be known as


THE CHOSEN TWELVE,
each one of whom will receive much love, care and attention, and
many privileges at the hands of the members of The Upper Ten,
so long as his name remains on the list.
Names may be removed from the list of “ The Chosen ” for any
length of time at the gathering of “ The Upper Ten,” and “ The
Upper Ten ” will refuse to recognise the owner of any name
during such time as his name does not appear on the the list.
The list of the Chosen will be published in the first instance, but
subsequent alterations will not be announced.
Tobacco smoking may be indulged in by “ The Chosen ” in the
presence of the Upper Ten ; but it is to be distinctly understood
that any other form of smoking is discountenanced. And any
ladies of our most exclusive set may be called upon to decide by
sense of smell if any article smoked is, or is not, tobacco. The
festive onion is absolutely prohibited.
The Upper Ten reserve the right of refusing to dance any particular
dance ; but the requests of the Chosen Twelve will at all times
be favourably considered. Monopolies are distasteful to our Set,
and, if indulged in, our displeasure will be incurred, which, it
will be found, is indeed “ sharper than a serpent’s tooth.”
All Bait to be kept at least 50 yards to leeward of Camelot, and
any of “The Chosen” found taking part in any dance, or entertain-
ment, or coming to meals in his fishing clothes will be marked off,
and deprived of his privileges, without the option.
A test will be instituted, which may be applied by any lady of the
Set to any gentleman of The Chosen, in case of doubt, as to his
ability to take proper care of any lady who may be in his escort.
The Upper Ten are reminded to carry with them at all times their
signals of distress. Upon a signal being made, the whole of the
Set within the zone of sight or hearing will immediately proceed
to the assistance of the distressed member.
Some of the party took to the boats to think the matter
over and to try a little fishing - ; but the fish were evidently
engaged that day, probably because it was Friday. A little
cricket and quoit practice was indulged in, but generally the
day passed quietly, the party evidently awaiting the first move
of the organising committee. At five o’clock it came. A
notification was made that the committee desired the whole
Court to assemble at the banquet that evening in full Court
dress as important business was to be transacted. Punctually
the ladyes and the knights arrived, the former wearing
magnificent evening costumes and the knights their white
mess jackets.


Never before had the old Banquetting Hall presented such
a brilliant appearance ; never before had it held so gay and
gallant a company. Towards the end of the meal the King
designate arose, and suggested that the members should be
now informed of the objects of the expedition, and of the
authority under which they were assembled. At the request of
Sir Pard, Sir Lanshark solemnly arose, holding a voluminous
and important-looking parchment document, and addressing
the company, he stated that he had recently received an Act
of the Imperial Parliament which he would now proceed to read.
At this point a great noise was heard without, and
presently the door was thrown open, and a servant announced
the Knight Mayor of Joy Joy. The whole Court rose, and
greeted Sir Hard Case with cheers. It was a fitting welcome
to the knight on his return from the far Parkes, and the
Court were pleased to learn further that he had accompanying
him an attache of the Japanese Embassy bearing greeting to
the King.
Quiet having been restored, Sir Lanshark proceeded with
the reading of the Constitution as follows :
VICTORIA REGINA.
An Act for the Advancement and Encouragement of Chivalry in
the Nineteenth Century and for other purposes.
WHEREAS divers gentlemen of ancient and honourable lineage, of
gallant and noble daring, renowned for their valorous and knightly aspira-
tions, for their courtesy, bravery, modestv, and respect for “The Right”
and“TheEair” (especially “The Fair”), are desirous of reviving and
reinstating the revered, trusty, well-beloved and N.T.D.B R. Order of the
Knights of the Round Table, and of declaring a fit and sober person to be
a successor to His Most Gracious Majesty the late lamented King Arthur of
the Round Table, of illustrious and knightly memory (the patron of all
gentlemen of true courage and quality), and of dedicating to such person
and his successors the kingdom hereinafter described, and of endowing
such person with the rights, powers, and privileges hereinafter declared.
AND WHEREAS it is deemed expedient, owing to the alarming
increase of the genus “Bounder,” that the spirit of chivalry so evinced as
aforesaid, should be revived fostered, and encouraged.
BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the Queen’s most Excellent
Majesty, by and with the consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal
and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority
of the same as follows :


i (1.) Ancient chivalry and knighthood with all its usages and privi-
leges, and with all its courtly grace, dignity, impudence, and the
perks appurtenant thereto are hereby restored to civilization.
(2.) The revered, trusty, and well beloved order of the Knights of the
Round Table is hereby resuscitated.
(3.) Power to declare a successor to his Most Gracious Majesty the
late lamented King Arthur of the Round Table of illustrious and
Knightly memory, to be called His Majesty 11. is hereby vested
in the persons whose names are subscribed to the Schedule hereto
attached.
(4.) The Kingdom of Joy Joy, and the official seat of Camelot are
hereby vested in the person so named to succeed His Most
Gracious Majesty King Arthur of the Round Table, and his suc-
cessors for ever with a perpetual oyster lease and the right to try
and catch fish.
(5.) Rank and precedence above and before all persons whomsoever
within the Kingdom of Joy Joy is hereby given to His Majesty
11., who shall upon all occasions and at all times be addressed as
“Sire.”
(6.) Power is hereby also conferred upon His Majesty 11. to appoint
gentlemen of quality and courage to be Knights of the Most
Ancient Order of the Round Table, and to confer any other dis-
tinctions.
J 7.) According to established precedent, His Majesty 11, may from
amongst such Knights make selections of gentlemen least fitted to
fill the following offices of State :
(a) Lord Privy Seal, who shall be charged with the custody
of the Great Seal.
(b) Hereditary Grand Almoner, whose duties shall be to
collect all dues, fines, and recoveries.
(c) Lord Steward of the King’s Household, whose duties
shall be to look to the King’s wines.
(d) The Lord Chamberlain, whose duty shall be to superin-
tend the King’s Household.
(e) The Lord High Admiral, who shall command His
Majesty’s Fleet for Naval Defence purposes, and superin-
tend the maritime expeditions.
(f) The Commander-in-Chief for establishing a military
organisation of Knights-Errant for the defence of
Christendom, and Joy Joy and Camelot in particular,
against the Italian and Greek Fishermen, the Pagan, the
Turk, and the Prohibited Immigrant, the avowed enemies
of Knights, Crusaders, and Holy Palmers.
(g) The Lord High Constable, who shall have charge of the
Yeomen of the Guard-
(h) Lords of the Privy Council.
(i) Ministers to control the various Departments of State.
(j) The King’s Herald, to conduct and superintend all
ceremonies of State.
(k) The King’s Jester.
v(l) The King’s Wrestler-


(in) The King s Minstrel,
(n) The Grand Duchess of Joy Joy, who shall have rank and
precedence above and before all Ladyes of the Court>
and whose decision upon all points of etiquette of ye
olden tyme shall be final and binding upon all knights.
(o) Any other Offices of State which His Majesty may see
fit to create.
(8.) The King’s Herald shall be charged with the conduct of the
Coronation Ceremony of His Majesty and of the ceremony for
the creation and installation of knights and of all other ceremonies.
(9.) After the Coronation Ceremony His Majesty shall, if sufficiently
primed, preside over the ceremony for the creation and instal-
lation of knights.
The following shall be the nature of the ceremony :
The King’s Herald shall blow thrice (and no more) upon the lusty horn,
and then in stentorian voice cry, “ Oyez ! Oyez ! Oyez !” whereupon the
whole Court shall assemble to await the approach of His Majesty.
Upon a sign from the King’s Herald, gentlemen desirous of being
elected Companions and Knights of the Order shall present themselves one
by one before the King and Court, uncovered, and, making low obeisance,
shall crave admission into the illustrious Society, and repeat these words :
“ Most illustrious successor to His late lamented Majesty King Arthur
of the Round Table, the patron of all gentlemen of true courage
and quality, considering my honourable reputation, and the great
and courageous exploits I have endeavoured to do in your service
and in the cause of chivalry and honour, I crave leave to wear your
colours, and to be elected and chosen of the illustrious Order of the
Round Table.”
A Ladye in Court shall thereupon testify to some valiant and knightly
exploit of the said gentleman done in her behalf and in the cause of chivalry
and honour, whereupon—no one objecting—His Majesty shall pronounce
these words :
“ We, the successor of the mighty dead, whose kingly name and
courage and majestic mien we inherit, assembled at our seat of
Camelot, within the Kingdom of Joy Joy, this 30th day of March,
1899, in the presence of our Court, hear your prayer, and grant
jour petition, and endow you with this noble badge. Wear it as
a symbol of the ancient and renowned Order to which you now
belong, never to be forgotten or laid aside ; that thereby thou
mayest be admonished to be courageous and chivalrous, and having
undertaken a just war or dispute, thou mayest stand forth
valiantly, fight, and successfully conquer.”
The Court will then sing, with pianissimo effect. “The Knight of
Great Renowm.”
Two ladyes of the King’s Household will then, preceded by the King’s
Herald, conduct the gentleman to the foot of the Throne. The gentleman


will then kiss the King’s ring, and receive the badge, and be thereupon
dubbed by His Majesty with knighthood, the Court again singing the
fsecond verse of “ The Knight of Great Renown ” with crescendo effect.
(10.) The King shall have power, in the presence of the Court, to decree
the suspension for any period he may think fit of all laws of polite
conventionality as now existing, and may also declare that within
his kingdom all Knights and Ladyes shall be deemed equal, and to
have known each other for ten years, and to owe no obedience to
any person whomsoever save the King.
(11.) The chief objects of the first sitting of the Court and Round Table
at Joy Joy shall be the pursuit of happiness and fresh fish, the
PROTECTION OF LADYES, THE CHASTISEMENT OF OPPRESSORS, THE
LIBERATION OF THE ENCHANTED, THE ENCHAINMENT OF GIANTS
AND MALICIOUS DWARFS.
J 12.) The curfew shall not ring without the King’s order, to be given
each evening to such officer of State as he may think fit.
,(13.) After curfew no person shall, without the leave of a Minister of
State, quit the precincts of the castle, or kindle a fire (matches
excepted).
(14.) The King shall sit at the Round Table, so long as he can stand it,
every evening to hear the results of the jousts, tournaments and
grading efforts of the Knights, to which hearing the Ladyes of the
Household may be admitted.
(15.) All worthy exploits which a Knight shall on his honour (if any)
swear to have performed shall, if duly verified, be entered to his
credit in a book called the Doomsday Book, to be kept and duly
edited by such officer as may be appointed.
(16.) The King shall preside at the meeting of the Judicial Committee
of the Privy Council each day for hearing complaints of a legal,
commercial, financial, or social nature, and the decision of the
Court as announced by the King or the Chief Justiciary of the
Court shall be final and conclusive and binding upon all Knights or
Ladyes.
(17.) It shall not be lawful for any one knight to be accompanied by
more than one Ladye of the Household upon any expedition unless
he first obtain the permission of the Grand Duchess.
(18.) In the event of any Knight desiring to rescue any Ladye impri-
soned in a castle or confine he shall first obtain the King’s leave
therefor, and shall faithfully relate to the Round Table the nature
and result of his expedition.
(19.) The King may declare the limits of the kingdom, outside which
it shall be unlawful for any Knight or Ladye to stray or get stolen
or lost.
(20.) Any Knight or Ladye desiring to absent himself or herself from
attendance at the Court must apply in writing to the King, and
state his or her grounds for the desired leave (no funny business).
(21.) No Knight or Ladye shall be allowed to associate with the
Bourgeoisie without leave.
(22.) The King in Council shall have power to make general rules for
the management, conduct, and control of all matters of what kind
soever.


SCHEDULE REFERRED TO
General Rules for the Management of the King’s Court at-
Joy Joy,
meals.
(1.) Unless otherwise ordered by the King in Council meals shall be-
served at the following hours : —•
Chop Chop at 8.30 a.m..
Knight’s Snack on the Ramparts at 11 a.m.
Mid-day Collation at 1 p.m.
Ladyes’ Tea at the Bower, to be presided over by the Grand
Duchess at 4 p.m*
The Grand Banquet in the Great Hall at 6.30 p.m..
Wassail at 10.30 p.m.
(2.) Each Knight and Ladye shall occupy at Table the seat allotted
to him or her by the Lord Chamberlain, and no other—except by
his permission.
(3.) Each Knight and Ladye shall be present in his or her seat when-
the King arrives, and any Knight or Ladye not so present may be
fined.
(4.) Upon State occasions and at the Grand Banquet each Knight shall
wear Full Court Dress, and each Ladye such Costume as the Grand
Duchess shall deem appropriate*
(5.) The King’s Herald shall blow upon the lusty horn three times,
one half hour before all meals, as a warning to all Knights and
Ladyes to prepare to assemble, and again shall blow three times at
the precise hour of meal serving*
(6.) The Lord Chamberlain may request any Knight to say Grace
before meals.
(7.) His Majesty, or the Lord Chamberlain at the Royal command, may
at any meal, or at any other time, call upon any Knight or Ladye
to propose a toast or make a speech upon any given subject.
minstrelsy..
(8.) The King’s Minstrel shall be charged with the duties of preparing;
chants for State occasions, sonnets for the Ladyes’ Bower, and
drinking snatches and hunting songs for the Round Table.
~ (9.) Each Knight and Ladye capable of contributing any vocal or
instrumental entertainment shall assist the King’s Minstrel to the
utmost of his or her power in producing harmonic effects, and
when called upon shall contribute to the entertainment of the
Court, after which he or she may be requested not to repeat the
performance upon any excuse, under a penalty.
FIELD JOUSTS, TOURNEYS, &G.
(10.) The King in Council may from time to time appoint a Knight to
fill the offices of Director of Jousts, Tourneys, and expeditions,,
whose orders, directions, and decisions upon these subjects shall—-
subject to appeal in the manner hereinafter declared—be binding;
upon all.


MARITIME EXPEDITIONS.
(11.) The Lord High Admiral shall have full power and jurisdiction
over maritime expeditions, and his decision, subject to appeal,
shall be binding upon all.
JESTER.
(12.) The King’s Jester shall appear in such costume as the King in
Council may design, and shall attend the King and make merry.
The Jester may be borrowed for a short time by any Minister of
State, at the rata of Is. per hour, payable to the King, who shall
whack it with the Jester.
YEOMEN OF THE GUARD.
(13.) The King in Council may appoint two of the Knights to be
Yeomen of the Guard. No Knight can be appointed to the posi-
tion unless (among other things) his aforetime name be “Bobby.”
THE KING’S WRESTLER.
(14 ) The Knight selected, because of his prowess, to be King’s Wrestler
and Champion shall first take the usual oath, and when appointed
proclaim in these words in the presence of the Court
“If any person of what degree soever, high or low, shall
deny or gainsay our beloved King to be the real suc-
cessor of His late lamented Majesty King Arthur of the
Round Table, or that he be not at present our lawful King,
here is the King’s champion who saith he lieth and is a false
and scurvy traitor, being ready in person to combat with
him, and in this quarrel will adventure his life against
him on what day soever shall be appointed by the Public
Service Board.”
MISCELLANEOUS RULES.
(15.) Each Knight shall be dubbed upon State occasions by his Full
Hereditary Title conferred by the King in Council, and upon all
other occasions as “ Sir Knight.”
16.) Each Ladye of the household shall upon State occasions be
dubbed by her Full Hereditary Title as conferred by the King in
Council, and upon all other occasions as “ My Ladye,” except the
Grand Duchess, who shall always be so called.
(17.) No Knight shall be permitted to greet any Ladye save by ye
Courtly salutation of ye olden tyme.
APPEALS, FINES, AND RECOVERIES.
APPEALS.
IS.) Each member of the Court shall have a right of appeal from any
decision of a duly appointed officer, provided such appeal be
lodged at the office of the Lord Chamberlain before Curfew of the
day when the matter of the appeal shall arise.
(19.) An appellant shall be limited to the grounds set forth in his or
her appeal.
(20.) Appeals shall be heard by the King in Council, and every appel
lant shall be present personally in Court on the hearing thereof
otherwise such appeal may be declared lapsed, but such appellant
may obtain the assistance of an advocate.


Lord Chamberlain and Privy Seal
Sir Pard de Mac
Lord High Admiral...
Sir Lez de Line
Hereditary Grand Almoner
Sir Oh Cli
Lord High Constable
Sir Robbo del Thalloni
Archbishop and Minstrel ...
Sir Pa de Welsher
Merlin
Sir Merlin
The King’s Jester and Herald
The King’s Taster ...
The King’s Wrestler and
Sir Lanshark
Assistant
Sir Juggins
Jester...
Sir Lovelace
Captain of the Guard
and
S'r Court Ax
Mayor of Joy Joy ...
Sir Hard Case
GOD HELP
THE KING ! ! !
(Signed) Paed de Mac,
Chamberlain
FINES AND RECOVERIES.
(21.) The King, with the assistance of the Judicial Committee, may
inflict such fines or forfeits as may appear just, and such fines or
forfeits shall be paid or satisfied forthwith, and in default thereof
may be enforced in such way as may be thought fit.
PRIZES.
(22.) Before the King removes his Court from Camelot a prize will be
awarded to the Knight who shall, at a General As-embly of the
whole Court, obtain the greatest number of votes of the Ladyes of
the Household for his valour and chivalry, or for any other cause.
(23.) Each Ladye shall record the name of the Knight for whom she
votes on a slip of tissue paper, and deposit it in a sealed receptacle
to be opened by the King.
(21.) The King shall declare the winner in the presence of the whole
Court, whereupon the successful Knight may name the Ladye of
his choice to deliver the prize to him.
(25.) At a solemn conclave of Knights, for reasons which shall remain
a profound secret, a prize shall be awarded to a Ladye of the Court.
Sir Lanshark concluded by announcing' officially that in
accordance with the Act, Arthur Redmond had been chosen
as King. These announcements were greeted with great
applause, which fairly shook the Old Hall to its very founda-
tions. When this mighty outburst had subsided, Sir Pard
rose, and, bowing to His Majesty, read the following Pro-
clamation
Lord Chamberlain’s Office,
31st March, 1899.
proclamation.
His Most Gracious Majesty King Arthur 11. of the Round Table, has
been graciously pleased to make the following appointments, in pursuance
of the Act for the Advancement of Chivalry in the Nineteenth Century,
and for other purposes ;


The Lord Chamberlain then requested that for the future
the knights should continue to occupy their present seats at
table, and that every evening each ladye of the Court should
move up one place.
The Herald then blew three blasts upon the lusty horn,
and announcing that the coronation of the King would take
place immediately, placed himself at the head of a procession
which was then noticed entering the hall. Following the
Herald came His Grace the Archbishop of Joy Joy, in his
episcopal robes and mitre, attended by the Lord Chamberlain
bearing on a handsome satin cushion the magnificent Crown
with its glittering jewels. The orb, the King’s robes, and
the famous pen, “ Wilcogbar,” were also carried. The sword
“ Excalibur - ” has been laid aside by Arthur 11., in order that
he might use a mightier weapon —the pen “ Wilcogbar.” The
great “ Wilcogbar ” was so called as a delicate compliment
to three very powerful knights.
Candles were lighted and held aloft (Dan said he had
used up all his matches in trying to see the ceremony),
while His Grace solemnly read the Coronation Service. The
Ministers of State next robed the King, and the Archbishop
then administered the following oath :
Coronation ®atb.
I, Arthur, about to be crowned King of Joy Joy, in this my Castle of
Camelot, do swear, so far as in me lies—or my Ministers can lie for me—
that I will govern this my kingdom justly and soberly, without fear or
favour. And that I will defend these my subjects from attack by day or
by night, and from all their enemies, whether evil or unwholesome spirits,
mankind, or noxious beasts or insects. That in any attack by day, I swear
that I will not seek refuge under the wood heap nor in the wine cellar ;
and that in any night attack I will not crawl under the bed nor bolt
through the window. And I further swear that I will never refuse to drink
with any of my subjects, and that I will always walk uprightly and sit
tight. And that on all occasions I will uphold the honour and dignity of
the Round Table, even though I fall under it. All this I solemnly swear,
and if I should fall short in this my oath, may I be condemned during the
whole of my reign to drink nothing but cold water.
SO HELP ME COGHLAN.
His Majesty was now conducted to the throne at the
end of the Hall by the Archbishop and the Lord Chamber-
lain, and on taking his seat was duly anointed and crowned
amid a storm of mighty cheers from the whole Court, and


cries of “God help the King!” Apparently very deeply
moved by this loyal demonstration, His Majesty rose and
addressed the following touching words to the Court: —
My People,—
To-day should be to you a golden memory from which every heart
should count its happiness. To-day is to you the day of days, for have
you not this day witnessed the re-foundation of a Kingdom, and the re turn
of a Dynasty which is to make its influence felt through the Wide World,
which, up to the present, has been entirely run by Messrs. Newnes and
De Rougemont, at the low price of 9d. per copy.
The eyes of the inhabitants of the fore—and hind—quarters of the globe
are upon you nowy and the hearts of your noble ancestors of the Middle
Ages are quickened once more to life by the Dams—we mean the Blasts—
upon the lusty horn which has lain for centuries silent, for the lack of a
Knight with breath sufficiently strong to make it speak again.
Our revered and saintly Brother, our noble ancestor, Arthur of the
Round Table, is with us in spirit to-day ; in fact we think we can hear him
on his way to the Wine Cellar now. He, we understand, failed in one
thing—he could not, at all times, see what his Knights were at. This no
doubt was owing to his having had but one I after his name. My people,
you will find in us a two-eyed King. We are Arthur 11., and we ascend
the ancient throne of our Fathers to-day, restored to our Kingdom, and to
you our people—to lead you by a silken thread, to govern you with tran-
quility and jusdce, and to love you with a heart swollen with pride.
Our good sister, Victoria, has this day craved permission to convey
greeting to our Royal person, and in addtion to these presents we have
graciously condescended to receive the fealty of our Imperial Brother of
Germany, who has mailed his fist. But upon the arrival of the mail the
fiat was found to be so poor that neither our beloved Merlin nor any sooth-
sayer in the Kingdom could be found to decipher it.
When we look around us and observe the galaxy of fair women and
brave men—the sweetest of the fair and noblest of the brave—clustering
at the foot of our throne, we have no fear as to the safety of our person
and our realm. In times of peace let your watch-word be—“ Love, Loyalty,
and Liquor;” and at the point of the Imce let your victorious shout be
“ for King, for Country, and a Little Bit off the Top. ’
The ancient and mysterious Sword “ Excalibur,” so ably wielded by
our august predecessor who filled this billet, has to-day been laid aside, in
order that our hand may grasp a mightier weapon, The Pen, “ Wilcogbar.”
It will be our pleasure to confer degrees and orders upon our Trusty
Knights and Ladyes, when “ Wilcogbar’s ” touch will exalt the lowly and
inspire the great.
The ancient Tournaments and Jousts will again give opportunity to
every Knight of the Round Table to advance the cause of his Ladye—the
other ancient games played with 52 pieces of cardboard, of which the great
Arthur was so deft an exponent, will again be revived. We remember
to-day how the worthy Sir Geraint was commanded to “ Go to,” and it is
with regret we think also of the poor fortune experienced by our Royal
ancestor, whose persistent bad hands brought about the ‘ Passing of Arthur.”


There will be also grayling exhibitions, strong men, performing dogs,
giant lifting, everything in fact calculated to amuse the crowd, and to keep
it from thinking too much, a distressing habit which is fatal to comfort and
enjoyment.
The maidens of the Court will at all times be our special care ; to con-
sole them, and to receive their tender confidences our Royal lips and ears
will be always ready.
In conclusion we desire to say that we are sensible of the honour thrust
upon us, and our exertions will always be in the direction of liberty and
happiness. Our Standard will be Friendship, and we pray with you, our
brothers, that we may at all times conduct ourselves with dignity, maintain
our rights with firmness, and that this Castle of Oamelot may become the
abode of Freedom and the rallying place of Heroes.
The speech from the Throne was punctuated with
numerous outbursts of feeling - from the Court, and was
generally received with every manifestation of supreme joy.
The herald blew thrice upon the lusty horn, and
announced that the King would presently be pleased to attend
the State Concert to be held in the Hall of Minstrelsy.
Whereupon His Majesty, attended by his ministers, and
amidst the loud applause of the assembled courtiers, retired
To his private apartments.
Later in the evening the Court assembled in the Hall of
Minstrelsy, where His Majesty having divested himself of his
State robes and wearing a sable costume, on the breast of
which were displayed his many glittering orders, appeared
surrounded by his ministers.
Immediately the King’s minstrel came forward and,
making low obeisance to His Majesty, sang the following ode
©f welcome :
H Greeting to Iking Hrtbur n
Ob, Lords and Ladyes of our Court
Give ear unto my song ;
For if I make it very short
It will not keep you long.
A song of welcome I would sing
To greet our well-belovM King.
Then loudly let the trumpets’ blast
Re-echo round our coast,
And round him ever firm and fast
Gather our armed host.
To greet his most majestic face
'We’ve come to this here ble-.sed place.


We offer homage then to you,
Of all great Kings the first,
For you are brave, and wise, and true,
And you have got a thirst,
And we can rest us here awhile,
And bask in your most genial smile.
With all opponents, great and small,
You always are a winner ;
You can make mincemeat of them all,
When you sit down to dinner.
And we’ll put all your foes to rout
If you will condescend to shout.
So bow your heads, ye gumtrees tall,
Smile on ye gleaming skies,
And from the deep blue w T aters all
Ye little fishes rise ;
Sound forth the trumpet: chant the lay :
Our great King Arthur reigns to-day !
King - Arthur and the whole company received the ode
with much favour, and at its termination His Majesty was
graciously pleased to decorate his minstrel with the Blue
Order of Harmony. A grand concert then began, the
excellent items of which were contributed by the ladyes and
the knights of the Court, while between the numbers the King
moved freely amongst the guests, even indulging in a cigar
or two on the ramparts overlooking the water.
After the concert His Majesty presided at Wassail in the
banqueting hall, the Grand Duchess, at his request, occupying
the opposite end of the table, and the ladyes and knights
gathered themselves around. Lights flashed, the wine
sparkled in merry imitation of the ladyes’ eyes, and fast flew
the quips and the lively jests of the King’s jester who made
merry at the expense of everyone ; and loud and frequent
were the bursts of merriment at the expense of those wits
whose temerity had prompted them in turn to wordy tournays
with Sir Lanshark.
On the second day Sir Court Ax and Sir Lovelace, who
had slept during the night with a peaceful “ call-me-early ”
sort of expression, arose betimes and did cast a line. These
knights proved themselves to be indefatigable fishers, but it
was not until the first meal that we knew the extent of their


prowess. Indeed, the quantity and size of the fish procured
by them was a source of continued surprise, and when Dan
asked if it would not be better to open a tin of sardines, as
having more body in them, it was the Archbishop himself
who tactfully covered the remark by pronouncing the follow-
ing grace :
Oh meet it is that here we meet,
And meat it is that we must eat;
So, when we gather round the board,
We eat our meat—and thank the Lord.
A very extraordinary incident took place shortly after
breakfast was over. The ladyes with a few of the knights
were assembled in groups on the lawn when the deep sten-
torian voice of Sir Robbo Del Thalloni was heard exclaiming
as he approached : “ Dam- ! Dam- ! ! Dam- ! !! ” The
effect was most striking. Sir Pa de Welsher, the Arch-
bishop, immediately departed in great haste, and was eventu-
ally discovered under his bed ; Sir Oh Cli turned as white as
a sheet and ran violently round the paddock in search of an
opening. Several ladyes produced their bags, packed them,
and left for the railway station, while others fainted, and Sir
Lez covered his head with a barrel that he might hear no
more. The Captain of the Guard, with fingers in his ears,
approached Sir Robbo and proceeded to arrest him, but when
brought before the King it transpired that the good knight
was, happily, guilty of no offence, as he was merely engaged
in calling his valet “ Dan,” and was at the time suffering from
a cold in his head. Curious how a cold will fly to the weakest
part !
After the Archbishop, Sir Oh Cli, and the ladyes had
been collected and re-assured, the Herald announced that Sir
Lez, the Admiral, would lead a marine expedition through the
Rip to the Bay of Broken, At 11.30 a.m. the Admiral
reported that the fleet was ready to sail, so the party em-
barked, the King occupying a seat in the Admiral’s galley.
The Grand Duchess and ladyes, wearing bewitching sun-
bonnets of many colours, and appropriate caps, were made
comfortable. On pushing off, the bright sun overhead, the
beautiful blue of the water, and the lovely scenery, formed a
most picturesque and mighty fine prospect. As the fleet


passed Lockhart Islands, the temporary quarters of the
Japanese Embassy, the King’s flag was saluted from the
shore, and the courtesy duly acknowledged.
Rowing onwards the fleet soon sped through the curious
boiling of the Rip, which had been specially arranged for the
amusement of the party by Sir Merlin. It proved to be a
source of wonder and interest, and His Majesty was after-
wards pleased to compliment Sir Merlin on the success of his
effort, and Sir Lez on his masterly handling of the squadron
during the dangerous passage. Eventually the fleet was
brought in sight of the Great Lion Island. This was first
discovered by the Ladye Agatha in a very high key. Our im-
pression at first was that something had bitten her, but this
was explained away. It was signalled that a landing would
be effected immediately. The fleet was cleverly brought to
shore, and the whole part}’ disembarked for the first time
upon Kum Longmadline Beach. The day passed merrily, as
days will when Beauty and Courage meet. The knights
smoked and fished, and the ladyes disported them-
selves by wading into the shallow water with bare feet.
The journey home was made during a glorious sunset
which tinted the hills and the still water with ever-
varying colours, and it is a mighty poor sunset which
does not inspire at least one of our bards. It was our “ Blood
Boiler ” to-day, who evidently divined the King’s thoughts
as he so gracefully rowed home by the Ladyes Minugh and
Vere. At the banquet that evening while the attendants
were placing the peanuts and the old port, the Lord Chamber-
lain rose and remarked that he had been privileged on that
day, the first on which His Majesty had adventured on the
waters of Joy Joy, to record the following soliloquy ;
Übe mm Speafcetb to Mot: Mot?.
0, Offspring of the Mighty Deep,
Thou calm expanse of Brine !
How lazy now thy heavy sleep,
Beneath the warm sunshine.
How calm and peaceful dost thou lie
When forth we set to fish ;
How dost thou, when we’d homeward hie
Sit up, and spit, and swish


With fretful spite thy drenching spray,
And mess the boat about ;
Till lines, and bait, and food pourtray
A scene of fearful rout.
Yet oft I’ve seen thee gently flow
Away to greet thy sire ;
Returning with the sunset’s glow,
In brilliant, rich attire.
It may the after-glow have been
From gentle duty done,
That caused the conscious blush I’ve seen
On evenings more than one.
Howe’er, this trip I hope to woo
Thee in a gentle mood,
Please don’t sit up, and spit and “shoo”
The fish ; please don’t be rude !
The banquet being over, an adjournment was made to
permit of the Great Hall being prepared for the ceremony of
the evening, and at 8 o’clock the whole Court again assembled.
His Majesty was on the Throne, surrounded by his Ministers,
while the ladyes occupied seats on either side of the nave,
The herald blasted the lusty horn and announced that the
King, feeling himself sufficiently primed, would now be
pleased to honour and decorate the ladyes of the Court and to
install the knights in accordance with the Act. There was
silence for a time, but at length the Grand Duchess spoke
(she always spoke at length) and presented the ladyes in
turn, each of whom was then decorated with the
N.T.B.D.R. ribbon and medal; Her Grace afterwards receiv-
ing the same Order. At the conclusion of this part of the
ceremony a burst of applause from the assembled courtiers
greeted the ladyes, and no wonder ; for as they stood in the
brilliantly lighted Old Hall their white evening costumes con-
trasting so well with the scarlet ribbons of their Order, the
polished wainscoting reflecting the many points of light and
colour, they made a truly gracious picture. Afterwards His
Majesty conferred knighthood, and the N.T.D.B.R. Ribbon
and Order on his Ministers and Courtiers, each in turn mak-
ing the petition prescribed by the Act, and being supported by
a ladye’s testimony of some valiant exploit performed on her
behalf. Thereupon His Majesty arose and delivered the
following address from the Throne :


My Noble Knights,—
We exhort you to remember at all times to devote yourselves to the
service of Beauty, which is the true aim of chivalry. You will be ever
inspired to spare neither yourselves nor your arms in this noble cause by
the presence of fair ladyes and the fragrance of their love.
Upon your shoulders rests the entire fabric of our Round Table and
our knightly company. You have been admitted to the privileges and
responsibilities of this honourable fellowship ; see to it that your actions
are no less honourable than your profession of chivalry.
Your duties will be onerous, and knowing you as we do, we feel that
the more difficult the task in the cause of honour, the more ardent will be
your desire to carry your cause to a successful issue, be it angling for
Giants of the deep, or rescuing Beauty in distress ; be it in the tourney or
the grailing expedition, that you finally bask in the golden radiance
of the joyous beams of our kingly smile.
Your great duty, then, will be to look to us as your sovereign and
brightest star of this ancient Order. Wherefore, as it is right and fitting
that all things should be right and fitting, it behoves us to command, or-
dain, and promulgate that on any occasion on which our Royal self shall be
considered to have uttered a witticism, each and every Knight, as a true
courtier, shall allow his face to assume, as far as may be. a wrapt expres-
sion of intense delight. This will be enforced even if it be found necessary
to draw attention to the witticism by three blasts upon the lusty horn.
You will be careful to observe that no note shall be taken of any
endeavour at merriment by our Royal Jester, until you have first gathered
from the expression of our Royal countenance that the attempt has been
observed, and mastered by our kingly brain.
No Knight will so far forget himself as to snare and land the wily
flathead, or other piscatorial creature, until your Sovereign, if be be present,
has first shown his prowess in this respect. The non-observance of this
rule is a grave offence, and will be looked upon as an act of Treason.
It shall be the personal privilege of every Knight of our Table Round
to signalise any deed of skill or valour performed by him, either in person
or by proxy, to approach our Royal person with a flagon of liquid refresh-
ment, and petition us to drink to his success. It will be our pleasure at
all times to perform this ceremony, either before or after the deed of skill
or valour has been performed.
In conclusion, it is our pleasure to bestow the Royal Blessing upon
your heads, and we send you forth into the world to overcome treacherous
villains and scurvy knaves, with every confidence that your weapons, be
they lances, blue metal, or bad language, will be used to the credit of your-
selves, the honour of the Throne, and the advancement of the Kingdom.
The whole ceremony was carried out in the most impres-
sive and brilliant manner, and reflected the greatest credit on
the King’s Herald and the Lord Chamberlain, who were
charged with its conduct. Dan alone was dissatisfied and
complained of being over-worked in seeing that the kerosene
lamp was not upset and that the courtiers did not brush their
valuable uniforms against the whitewash around. Wassail


that night was an especially brilliant function. The gallants;
sat talking and smoking until a late hour, but finally lights
went out and quiet reigned.
A clear full moon bathed the surrounding country in a
soft and radiant splendour, and, through the open door-way,
sent a broad bar of light along the floor of the Dormitory.
Perhaps an hour later a few dark forms might have been
seen stealthily “ crossing the bar ” (Dan said it was nothing
unusual for them to be so near a bar) and then emerging from
the Dormitory. Silently they stole without the building to a
point of rendezvous, where a whispered conference was held,
and then set off towards the fields and the live stock. Re-
peated and strenuous efforts were made to secure a young
calf which it was intended to introduce into the
Dormitory, but, though much stratagem was employed, the
attempt was frustrated owing to the quick counter movements
of a protecting and vicious mother, assisted by a number of
her herd. Eventually, after much noisy stampeding of the
now thoroughly aroused live stock, the maurauders returned
with five captive ducks aud a milk-white steed, which latter
shone resplendent in the moonlight. The ducks were fired
into the Dormitory through the windows, and their loud
quacking soon aroused the sleeping Knights. During the
consequent turmoil the Jester was observed placidly
endeavouring to introduce the shining milk-white steed
through the open door-way. He had partially succeeded
when a noisy protest from the King’s Wrestler frightened the
Arab beyond control, and he incontinently bolted By this
time everybody was wide awake and many protests were
heard. The Ladyes of the Court had evidently been also
disturbed, not to say alarmed, by the unwonted commotion,
and it was deemed advisable to reassure them, and to fill the
flowing bowl and pass it round among the Knights. This
speedily acted as a sleeping draught, and after a quiet smoke
the gallants stretched themselves upon their couches and
slept the sleep of the just.
The panic-stricken ducks meanwhile had sought refuge
under the various beds where they remained in silent terror
through the rest of the night; but as the first gleam of dawn
crept in they again raised their voices in noisy protest, until
at length the Venerable Archbishop arose from his couch on


the floor, and with vicious thrusts ot his Crosier drove the
belated birds from the room, the while he muttered savagely
into his beard “ A murrain on the scurvy knave who br ought
these accursed fowls Into my bedchamber.”
Early that morning a mysterious and secret visit to the
neighbouring village of Joy Joy was made by the Lord High
Constable, The King’s Taster, and Sir Merlin the Magician.
It was not until late that evening that the object of this visit
became apparent.
At 10 o'clock, before morning service was conducted, at
which The Archbishop of Joy Joy was to officiate, the Herald
announced that His Majesty would be pleased to take a
Royal Bath in State—in the Briny. Accordingly great
preparations began. The King and Knights donned their
bathing costumes and assumed their Robes of Office, and the
Herald arranged the procession. At this point Dan
appeared, looking very much flurried, and said that Sir Hard
Case, the Knight Mayor of Joy Joy, could not attend in his
robes like his brother Knights, as some one had “touched
him ” for the coloured counterpane off his bed. It turned out
that this had been used on the previous day to carry
the fish home in, but it was quickly restored and the
procession moved off. The King, crowned and
carrying “ Wilcogbar ” in his hand, moved with great
dignity. He was preceded by the Herald, and" the
Archbishop of Joy Joy, in his episcopal robes and mitre, and
attended by his Jester and the Mayor of Joy Joy. Following
came the Taster, who to-day was also acting as Tester
that is, as to the temperature and depth of the water. Then
came the Captain of the Guard, the two Constables, the
Lord High Admiral, Sir Oh Cli, and some thirsty—we mean
thirty—others in single file. The procession moved slowly and
impressively through the Castle grounds and on to the bathing
place amidst the wild delight of the populace. After the
bath the procession was again formed, and the King and
Court filed majestically back to the Great Dormitory to
dress.
It is pleasing to note that no one was injured by the
stampede of cattle, which took place as the procession filed
past them.


A grayling - expedition to the Rip and Kum Longmadline
Beach was well attended. Sir Lez de Line was again in com-
mand, while Sir Merlin, Sir Court Ax, and Sir Robbo were in
attendance. At the banquet that evening accounts of the
■expedition were called for by the King from several of the
party, and this, together with the huge salver of fish on the
table, doubtless influenced the conversation. The fish soon
disappeared. Dan said that after the Grand Duchess had
been served the salver could have been removed, but the King
prevented that. Reminiscences of fishing and tourneys were
told by the knights and ladyes, and it became necessary
during the banquet to remove from the northern wall to a
position facing Sir Lez, Sir Court Ax, the Ladye Annie, and Sir
Juggins, a motto inscribed : “ Fishermen are requested to
draw it mild.” It was at this meal that the story was told
of the painful end that Sir Lez had met with that day. He
met the end of a flathead’s fin. The fish had been secured
by the Grand Duchess, and deposited by her on the Admiral's
bare foot. Before rising His Majesty called upon his minstrel
fora contribution, and he told the following story :
May it please your Majesty. 'Tia but a small episode which happened
me in the days of my far off youth, and whereof I am reminded by
■observing the gusto with which the worthy knight, Sir Lovelace, has just
•cleaned up his platter.
It happened thus: —One day I chanced to be strolling down Piccadilly
when I encountered a young friend of mine, whose name was Tate. He said to
me : “ Old man, there’s a matter I want to see you about. Coma and dine
with me at the Savoy this evening ? ” I replied, “ Right oh ! what time ?”
“ Eight o’clock,” said he. “I’ll note it,” I said, pencilling on my cuff,
“ Savoy, Tate, at 8 ; anyone else coming’” “No,” said he. “Ah,” I
remarked, “ tete-k-teste.” “ Yes,” he observed. “ You said that before.”
“ No,” I replied, “ I said Tate at 8 last time.” He smiled vaguely, and
we went our respective ways.
Punctually at 8 o’clock I turned up at the Savoy, but Tate was late,
so I had to wait. It so happened in fact that it was exactly eight minutes
past 8 when we started dinner. Tate was an excellent trencherman, like
Sir Lovelace, and I watched him with great satisfaction as he battled
through from hors d’oeuvres to chartreuse verte. And now when I think of
that dinner and of my friend Tate that little episode sums itself up in my
mind somewhat in this fashion :
“ There was a young fellow called Tate,
With whom I once dined at 8.8.,
But I blush to relate
What that fellow ate
At that tete-Ttete ate at 8.8.”


A little music was indulged in, but most of the party pre-
ferred to stroll upon the terraces and hear what the wild
waves were saying It must have been during this evening
that the minstrel (the “Soul-Stirrer”) found material for the
following song ;
Übe Silent System.
AN IDYLL OF JOY JOY.
There was a young maid of Joy Joy,
Who was terribly bashful and coy ;
She would tremble and blush
And painfully flush
Whenever she spoke to a boy.
And there was a young man of Joy Joy,
Who was a peculiar boy ;
He shivered and shook
If a girl gave a look,
And a smile would his balance destroy.
Now I met this young couple one day.
And I thought that I seemed in the way
As the French say de trap,
So I thought I would go,
And they didn’t press me to stay.
Yet this silly young couple, I’ve heard,
To each other said never a word ;
But just sat side by side
And looked out at the tide,
Which was, really, you know, quite absurd.
And yet, I can quite understand,
That a flame in their hearts might be fanned',.
By just sitting there
With no language to spare
But a shy little squeeze of the hand.
Oh, there’s sympathy deep in a sigh !
There is love in a glance of the eye !
There is rapturous bliss
In just one little kiss,
When you think there is nobody by !
And if you don't believe it just try


An early Wassail was arranged, as the Knights appeared
fatigued after the events of the last night. Quietness and
even an air of mystery pervaded the whole Castle, and before
leaving the Hall it was reported that the following ominous
writing had been discovered on the wall :
“ Midnight.”
“The Big Gum.”
“ Free Pubs —Guns.”
Instructions were promptly issued to the Captain of the
Guard to take all precautionary measures, but the matter was
otherwise kept secret by Ministers. When the Court retired
for the night everything was found quiet in the Dormitory,
though it was noticed that several of the Knights were
missing. The King was just about to retire, when, as the
clock struck twelve the absent Knights entered —Sir Robbo
leading the way, followed by Sir Juggins, Sir Lez and Sir
Merlin. At a secret signal these Knights seized and bound
the King and Ministers, and, before the Guard could be
summoned, a rebellion had broken out and the Great Dor-
mitory was in the hands of the rebels. The history of the
tragic events of that night, including the hanging of King
Arthur IT, The Lord Chamberlain, the jester and the Mayor
of Joy Joy have been commemorated in the following verses
by Sir Pard de Mac, the “ Blood-boiler. ’
Hbe Hale of a Ibunt anb a tmngeb IRtno
The King with a chosen band of knights
Set forth for the Royal Park,
To hunt by the moon, mid woodLnd sprites,
A buck, for a Royal lark.
They hunted the buck (or calf) with zest
Till noon, or about that time,
But fled when the cow, her horns in rest,
Charged full at Sir Juggins prime.
Yet homeward they brought of ducks a brace
Alive, and in good voice too,
Whose quacks soon resounded thro’ the place,
And roused the remaining few.


Then up from his couch leaped great Sir Bob,.
No longer his bugle rang—
No longer arose that roar and sob
That late to the rafters sang.
But as he assayed to speak his mind
In words of a foreign land,
Sir Walker the Great came up behind
And soon was the big Knight bland.
Anon, as the poet softly says,
The zephyr a-sighing swept,
And sweetly beneath the hov’ring fays
The castle of brave Knights slept.
Next eve the King and that same band
Of chosen Knights who’d lent a hand
The quacking ducks to homeward bear,
Were feeling much the worse for wear.
And so resolved to early hie
Them to their couches, and to lie
In peaceful quiet thro’ the night.
Alas for King, and Law, and Right !
Sir Bob the Mighty, thro’ that day
Had gained some wretches with his pry
To back him in rebellion bold
Against the King whom thus they sold.
A hangman’s rope had been procured,
Which o’er the rafters they secured,
And from the floor, as Bob cried “ Heave
The King was hoisted without leave.
There dangled Arthur overhead,
“ Successor to the Mighty dead,”
And ’mid their scurvy merriment
Sir Bob was named as President.
“ Uneasy sleeps the crowned head,”
’Tis true, with weight of care.
But ye who slew and made him dead
Beware, ye fools, beware ! ! !
Know ye not that it was writ
He could not die, our gentle King.
One night he sure will heavy sit
Upon your chests and make you sing.
The Chamberlain was victim next,
And much his latter hours were vext
By interviews Sir Leslie sought
To get —and in the News report.


A penalty for greatness this,
That in our hour of woe or bliss
We still must keenly pestered be
By scribblers, active as the flea.
Anon they dragged the Jester out
Amid the rabble’s noisy rout,
And as a shining light be went,
He smoked the weed Oh Cli had lent.
But when he reached the scaffold grim,,
Bob tore the weed away from him,
And to the test his wit to put
He had him hanged by the foot !
So bravely died the Jester bold—
And may his mem’ry ne’er grow cold !’
Yet not before he’d said his say,
Though brief, to Bob, he passed away.
Now through this direful melting scene
Sir Knightmayor long had silent been
A witness of the acts without;
But soon was heard a fearful shout
As Bob’s rough-riders dragged him round
From next a window, where they found
Him gloating o’er the others’ woe
In fancied safety from the foe.
Right hard he died, as nightmares do,
Which fill our dreams the whole night thro’,.
And horrid was the fiendish yell
He uttered as he sank to .
When all was o’er, the mighty Bob
And all the knaves who formed his mob,
Held noisy Wassail thro’ the night
With Walker, the Bed-collar hight.
And ever louder waxed the din
And tumult of those Men of Sin—
’Till one by one, upon the floor,
They sank to rest, and eke to snore.
While high above four shining lights,—
The King, and his brave martyred knights,—
Sped upward to a fairer clime
Where we shall leave them for a time.
The morning- meal on Monday was discussed in silence-
and the function dragged heavily. Sir Robbo del Thalloni,.
now styled “The President” occupied the head of the Board
surrounded by his accomplices ; and the presence of the ex-
King and his Ministers in custody, with ropes about their
necks, no doubt exercised a dispiriting influence on all
present. The enormity of last night’s proceedings evidently


assumed graver proportions in the eyes of the rebels with the
light of day, and a consideration of the heavy consequences of
his rash and hasty action must have decided the President on
his course of procedure. Be that as it may, a conference of
opposing parties was held during the day, at which it was
eventually agreed that The President, The Taster, The
Admiral and Sir Merlin should, for the present, withdraw
themselves from Camelot, and the few remaining malcontents
were bound over to keep the peace. To these latter His
Majesty agreed to extend the Royal pardon, and to show a
like clemency to the ringleaders on their return after the
specified term of exile.
The Company, during the morning, for the most part
lounged in hammocks on the terraces and on the verandahs
of the Ladyes’ Bower, listening to the soothing influences of
The Hereditary Grand Almoner’s Harp. The knights’
muster for a snack on the ramparts was remarkably well
attended this morning. After the mid-day meal the whole
Court appeared to have regained its accustomed energy, and
during the afternoon a great cricket match was played, of
which the Court Gazette gives the following spirited account:
Camelot, 3rd April, 1899.
An important Cricket Match was played this afternoon between teams
chosen from the Military and Naval Forces respectively, and excited the
profoundest attention. Never, might we say, has there been so much
interest centred in the issue of a contest of this description since Joy Joy
has been known to the inhabitants of Sydney, Neutral Ray, Balmain, Ryde,
and other remote parts. The fences which formed the boundaries of the
convincing ground were literally covered with spectators, who had come in
from all parts of the surrounding districts to witness this memorable
contest, and at an early hour a notice that there was but “standing room
only ” had to be posted by the Organising Committee. The reason for this,
it need hardly be stated, was the fact that a number of the fair sex had
intimated their intention to take part in the contest.
The sun shone brightly overhead, the birds sang love on every spray,
and all nature smiled, as beauty, seven in number, and clothed as Cricketers,
appeared upon the field.
Precisely as the clock struck 3.35 p.m., the rival captains entrusted
to the toss of a silver coin the determination which of the rival teams should
first take possession of wickets so carefully prepared (by telegraph) by the
caretaker of the Sydney Cricket Ground, the famous Ned Gregory.
Fortune favoured the Commander of the land forces, Major-General
Gritton, who, after some deliberation, decided to send his opponents, under
■Captain Colonel Admiral Sir Lez de Line, into the field.


The Duchess, taking strike, by a series of graceful glances raised the
score to three, which was quickly doubled by a powerful drive to the off.
Her Grace then devoted her attention to taking the sting out of the bowl-
ing, and a long period of uneventful but effective play resulted. Finally,
after neatly snicking another ball to leg, the Duchess drove one high to
the on, when her sister executed a magnificent catch amidst the thunderous
applause of the assembled multitude.
The Ladye Agatha followed, and made a single in splendid style, and
then devoted herself to tiring the fielding out. Before, however, she had
succeeded in this, a tricky bail, delivered by President Thalloni, caused a
row in her timber yard, which was followed by her departure for the
pavilion. The Ladye Louie then filled the breach. The first ball sent to
her she drove for a single, and then fairly brought down the gallery, or to
be correct, the fence, by driving three successive balls for three runs each.
Having thus reached the coveted double figures, she appeared to think she
had accomplished sufficient, and failed to prevent a rapid one from Sir
Hard Case (who had replaced the exhausted Sir Robbo) from displacing her
sticks. The Ladye Vere then stepped bravely forward, many wagering
that hers would be the highest score of the day. With a few masterly
strokes she rapidly added five to the score, but then the unerring Mayor
insinuated one of his tricky deliveries below her bat, and when the row
which followed had subsided, she returned to the pavilion and the comforts
of “champagne cup.” The male members of the team added twenty-five
to the score, but finally succumbed to the bowling of the sagacious Sir
Robbo (who had returned to the attack) and of the Captain-Colonel
Admiral, the grand total being 45.
After an interval of 15 minutes, during which the wicket was carefully
rolled, the opposing team commenced their attempt to wipe off the heavy
deficit. The Ladye Minugh stepped forth to lead the mighty venture
to success. X powerful hit to square leg gave great hope to the anxious
onlookers, but, alas, in attempting to hit for a five, her innings was brought
to a close by the Duchess, who, running in some fifty yards, in less time
than it takes to write this, secured a difficult catch with her left hand, low
down. Ladye Minugh’s play showed such dash and pi omise that we feel
sure she will be heard from again. Ladye Lily followed, but hard luck,
the enemy of cricketers, fishermen, and billiard-players, dogged her
footsteps, she almost immediately falling a victim to the deadly bowling
of the Royal hand. At this time the faces of the Naval supporters were as
long as the proverbial fiddle, but then the event of the day happened.
Ladye Ethel, who had caught out her sister, the Duchess, in such a
skilful manner, strolled to the wicket. What had previously appeared
difficult bowling at once seemed easy. Fours succeeded fours, soma
of them striking the fence with such force as to loosen several of the
handsome palings. Applause thundered from all parts of the ground—
the Navalites roared with delight, and invited their friends to many drinks.
Not until she had raised the score to twenty-five did Ladye Ethel retire,
clean bowled by the regal bowling of the King. It was a magnificent dis-
play. Oldest inhabitants say that they had never seen anything like it
before, and long will the memory yet remain with them. When the
applause had subsided a little, President Thalloni and the other Naval
officers stepped out and finished off the difficult task which had been sim-


.plified so much by Ladye Ethel. The shades of night were falling fast, as
the score of forty-five was slowly passed, and then a mighty shout pro-
claimed the fact that the Naval forces had triumphed over those of the
land. The contest has been almost the sole topic of conversation ever
since, and it is rumoured that some of the lady combatants intend to start
a Cricket Club of their own. We wish them every success and a visit to
England in due course.
After the Cricket Match was over, His Majesty received
some members of the Japanese Embassy, who were introduced
by Sir Lanshark. Over a glass of wine the King and the
President welcomed the visitors to Camelot.
As the shades of evening fell preparations for the
departure of the rebels were made. The guards were drawn
up before the Castle under a lowering sky, which heralded an
approaching thunderstorm, and all waited solemnly and
silently for the King. His Majesty shortly appeared and,
apparently much moved, spoke a few dignified but kindly
words to the departing insurgents, and concluded by expres-
sing a hope that he would soon see them again at Camelot
clothed in their right minds, and prepared to resume their
places as Knights of the Round Table. (It is on occasions of
this sort that one feels the lack of a brass band ) Involun-
tarily a cheer burst from the crowd, and the party set out.
The Mayor of Joy Joy reported that of the three Wells
in the Castle one of them was dry—very dry—and the King
misunderstanding his meaning called Sir Merlin back, and
bade him arrange for a shower of rain. Sir Merlin then left,
accompanied by Sir Pard de Mac, who was setting out upon
a grayling expedition, the details of which were kept secret.
Tuesday broke with that kind of weather that is all
running to water, and we bethought of us of our dry Wells,
and the King’s instructions to Sir Merlin. Sir Merlin had
gone, but indeed the rain had come, and with it a gale rose
of such strength and power that many times it was expected
that the Great Dormitory which to-day had been prepared as
a Library and Card-room would be swept away.
The ladyes spent the morning in the Great Dormitory,
as every other room in the Castle was saturated with water.
Meals were served a la aqua pura under the shelter of
umbrellas, beds were soaked and clothing wet, still the
spirits of the party suffered nothing from dampness, and


the day and evening were passed chiefly in listening to the
music of Sir Oh Cli’s harp, and the rendering of the anthem
entitled, There’ll be a hot time in old Joy Joy to-night.”
Sir Hard Case was entrusted with a mission to Sir Merlin,
to inform him of the of storm he had sent along, and
to request him to turn it off at the meter. The Mayor left
therefore in the forenoon for the City of the Beautiful Harbour,
and later for the Inland Dependency of Parkes, and the suc-
cess of his mission became apparent the following morning.
Sir Pa de Welsher accompanied Sir Hard Case, but he
returned to the King’s side before Curfew the same evening.
Sir Pa was received with manifestations of delight, and he
reported that Sir Merlin had removed the incubus, and would
provide fine weather in future until the Court removed from
Camelot. During this gale one of the vessels belonging to
the Japanese Navy in our waters was wrecked, and it was the
King himself who was instrumental in saving the valuable
cargo of the vessel.
The following- day, Wednesday, proved Sir Merlin to be
indeed a master of his craft King’s weather prevailed, and
an expedition to Kum Longmadline Beach was arranged
under Sir Lovelace and Sir Court Ax. Sir Oh Cli and Sir
Lanshark were engaged upon a joust in a far land, and con-
sequently did not embark with the remainder of the party.
It may be of interest to relate the following dream, which
His Majesty was over-heard recounting to the Ladyes Agatha
Louie and Madeline, who appeared to be intently interested
“Übc ipasslna of Hrtbur.”
“ Thou hast a sweet nap, Sir King,” said Sir Pa de Welsher as Arthur
opened his eye by the margin of the Mere.
“ Nay, good Knight, but where is Sir Lez and the Knave Sir Juggins ?”
said the King, gazing across the Mere, “lam passing, Sir Pa, I am passing.”
“ Passing art thou, Sir King,” said the Knight, briskly glancing at his
hand from force of habit, “then by my knighthood I go two.”
“ Thou wilt go too, wilt thou,” cried the King in anger. “So thou
shalt varlet, so thou shalt.”
And he arose and slew him with “ Wilcogbar.”
It is supposed that His Majesty had partaken of some-
thing since the absence of the Taster, which disagreed with
him, and this imagined game of cards with his Minstrel resulted.


On Thursday evening- Sir Pard returned, to the great joy
of the Court, but regret was expressed at the news contained
in a despatch from Sir Lanshark, which announced that he
was compelled to make pilgrimage to distant England, for
which he desired the Royal permission. As a special mark of
favour His Majesty was graciously pleased to forward certain
letters of introduction and credit to Her Majesty of England,
and from recent accounts of the Jester’s adventures abroad,
it is evident that full use was made of these credentials.
On Friday the King went fishing and secured a monster
of the deep. His Majesty exclaimed that he would have
caught many more, but upon arrival of the captive in the
boat the lines all became so confused and tangled that the
remainder of the day was spent in disentangling them.
At sunset the watch on the tower signalled a small band
of knights approaching. Quickly the news flew, and pre-
sently the whole castle was eagerly astir. Then to the gate
rode Sir Lez de Line, closely followed by Sir Merlin and Sir
Juggins. Sir Oh Cli arrived a little later, attired in the dis-
guise adopted by him on his journey in search of tournays and
jousts in the far countries. The small band met with a
hearty reception, and shouts of “ Ghee ! Ghee ! ! Ghee ! ! ! n
as it clattered into the courtyard, and eager knaves pressed
merrily forward to assist in the removal of the bulging saddle
bags and to see to the stabling of the weary beasts (the
horses not the knights). The returned knights were in jovial
spirits, though necessarily much travel-stained. Half-an-hour
later the wanderers were formally welcomed by the King, who
freely forgave them all, and invited them to a sumptuous
banquet specially prepared for the occasion of this glad re-
union. Sir Lez tendered the allegiance and greetings of Sir
Robbo del Thalloni, who craved leave to absent himself from
further attendance during the remainder of the Court’s Session
owing to weighty and pressing concerns at his knightly HalL
Much regret was expressed at his enforced absence, and the
fair faces of the ladies betrayed the disappointment they
experienced, for the Lord High Constable hath a pretty wit
and singeth with the soft and melting voice of an angel.
Then those who had recently returned told of matters
that were happening abroad, and gaily jested of the numerous


presents and messages with which they had been com-
missioned for the ladyes by city gallants The banquet was
indeed ajovial gathering.
After Wassail and when all had retired with the idea of
resting for the night, a display of fireworks took place. This
had been secretly arranged by Sir Juggins, the King’s Taster,
and took place in the Great Dormitory, to the consternation of
the neighbourhood. The display consisted of the sudden
-explosion of a number of certain new fangled pyrotechnics of
great dimensions and various colours, termed “ Hungers ”
which fused silently, and then burst with astounding uproar
in the vaulted building. The noise quickly aroused the whole
castle, and much alarm was manifested, but, as of yore, the
flowing bowl merrily passed from hand to hand, and in fair
time the warriors stretched themselves on their couches and
slept.
It was announced next morning - that a great review of the
whole fleet would take place that day to mark the return of
The High Admiral, Sir Lez de Line. Great preparation was
made, and the Lord Chamberlain appeared exceedingly
nervous and excited when it became known to him that the
King himself would sail with the fleet during the manoeuvres.
It was a magnificent day and a magnificent sight as the
whole squadron filed through the Rip and on to the Bay of
Broken. Sir Merlin, the Astrologer, secured some priceless
souvenirs of the occasion by means of his trusty camera. In
the afternoon Sir Lez proved his skill again in coaxing the
elusive flathead from his lair. Fine hauls were made, too, by
several of the ladies. The knights also did well, and the
result of the day was a catch of over seven dozen fish. Sir
Court Ax succeeded in navigating a most difficult and
dangerous passage in search of sport, and at one time it was
felt that the task he had undertaken was too great even for
his valour. But upon Dan announcing that there was a wild
man from the bush waving his arms round like windmills, we
knew that Sir Court Ax had done something to be proud of.
Sir Lovelace and several of the most powerful of the
Knights assisted Sir Court Ax to manoeuvre his craft across
the boisterous bar and back to placid waters, and many con-
gratulations were showered upon the intrepid knight as he
stepped ashore safe and sound.


The whole party returned a little earlier than usual in
order to prepare for the State Dinner and Ball to be held
that evening - at the castle.
At 6.30. the knights in their State robes waited on the
King in the Old Banqueting Hall, and presently led by the
Grand Duchess of Joy Joy, and with much rustling of silks,
the ladyes entered the Hall, looking magnificent in their Court
Costumes and powdered hair. The Knights stood momen-
tarily mute and spell-bound at the glorious spectacle, and
were only reminded of their duty on hearing the fine voice
of The Archbishop pronouncing grace. The Banquet con-
tinued for over an hour amid the greatest gaiety. It was
regretted that Dan had some trouble with his meat. He said
that it put him in mind of an old custom he had read of by
which, for the crime of lying, they used to drive a steak
through the victim’s heart. Dan said, “that was tough ; n
but what he referred to no one knew.
After the Banquet the Royal Party set out for the
Knig'ht’s Hall where the State Ball was to be held.
Lanterns and coloured lights, looking like glow-worms
(when you observed them closely), marked the way to the
Hall, along which fair ladyes and courtly gallants, in brave
attire, were now pressing in great numbers. At the portico
the arrival of each great lady and famous knight was
announced by lacqueys in stentorian tones till the Great Hall
was filled with a brilliant throng. Suddenly the well-known
strains of the Arthurian Anthem (“ There’ll be a hot time in
old Joy Joy to-night ”) announced the arrival of the King.
His Majesty was attended by the Lord Chamberlain and his
Court and Ministers, all of whom were clad in great state,
and during the Royal progress up the Hall, loud cries were
heard outside of “ Ghee ! Ghee ! ! Ghee ! ! ! ”
The numerous lights had been artistically shaded, and
the stately old hall appeared almost a conservatory, with its
plants and flowers bathed in the soft radiance. The band,
hidden in a thicket of beautiful palms, suggested an angelic
orchestra. To an onlooker it was a brilliant and glorious
sight. The magnificent costumes of the fair ladyes- and
knights, on each of which the scarlet ribbon and medal of the
N T.D.B.R, Order is conspicuous, the thousand reflections of
light and colour from the polished wainscotting, the lacqueys


moving - to and fro with ices and other refreshments, all
form a scene of gallant splendour never to be forgotten.
The garden and lawn outside had been specially moon-
lighted by Sir Merlin, and it was here that the knights and
ladyes promenaded between the dances.
The costume of Sir Pare! was a marvel of ingenuity, and
few knights recognised him as the charming - Gheisha who
danced so well. Sir Oh Cli and Sir Juggins were both
disguised, and the quality of their costly fabrics was com-
mented upon.
As supper was coming on, His Majesty was loudly called
for, and was finally found surrounded by some of the Ladyes
of his Court, to whom he was discoursing learnedly on the
peculiar pathological properties of moonlight. In the midst
of the lecture Dan interrupted the King and reported that
the State Ball could not proceed, as Sam, the musician, had
dropped his concertina behind one of the beds, and the candle
had gone out. The King kindly lent his own box of matches,
and the ball proceeded, but His Majesty was much annoyed
at the interruption.
Supper was served in a great marquee on one of the
terraces, in which, amid braveries of tapestry and old plate was
spread a sumptuous repast, replete with the delicacies of the
season. Dan took this occasion, of ail others, to apply to
the Lord Chamberlain, in the absence of Sir Robbo, for
increased remuneration, giving as his reason that was
not going to unpile all them beds in the shed where yer was
darncing.” Sir Pard immediately, with great tact, arranged
for an extra allowance to be paid. Afterwards the dancing
proceeded till midnight, when the noble and brilliant assem-
blage dispersed, after one of the most delightful evenings
spent at Camelot. And if any of the ladyes went to rest that
evening with cold feet, it is because Sam, in his haste, and
want of proper precaution, removed the plank from over the
gutter near the ball room before all the guests had departed.
Sunday was the last day of the Court at Joy Joy. The
morning meal was served at a late hour, and the great topic
of conversation was the ball of the previous evening. Many
conjectures were made as to the identity of the veiled ladye
who danced so attractively throughout the evening in the.


arms of Sir Oh Cli and Sir Juggins, but the mystery remained
unsolved. After packing had been completed, one of the
happiest incidents of the trip occurred. Dan at last met his
match with one of the knights, who had asked him about the
arrangements for transport to the great metropolis. Dan
explained, in his usual want-of-appreciation manner, that the
stone cart would leave the boarding-house at such a time, and
that it would pass the pub. in time to allow five minutes’ wait,
and that the train would start at 7.30 p.m., finishing up with
the remark : “Do I make myself plain?” “No necessity,”
said the knight, “ Providence has done that for you.” This
was the only occasion during the trip when Dan was success-
fully crushed, and it tends to show the value of reading the
comic papers. We had got home on him at last, and great
and many were the felicitations on all sides in consequence.
The party strolled through the grounds during the day,
and afterwards signed their names and affixed their seals to
the Great Act. At the final assemblage in the great banquet
hall farewell speeches were made. The Grand Duchess rose,
and extended the thanks of the ladies for the attention
bestowed upon them by the knights, and intimated that their
sojourn had been heartily enjoyed. The King had a few words
of love to say to the company, and concluded by stating that
it was a false idea that “uneasy lies a head that wears a
crown.” He found that he could lie as easily since he had
been wearing a crown as he could before. Sir Lez de Line
and others also grieved that the time had come for the removal
of the Couit, but the general gloom was relieved by the
following contribution of the King’s minstrel :
®ur Camp at Mop Mop
A Reminiscence.
Oh Heavenly muses, to whom poets cry ;
Oh lend me your aid, let assistance be nigh,
That a song I may sing, like a p:ean of joy,
Of the great expedition that went to Woy Woy.
The knights of King Arthur were sturdy and bold,
And the dames of his Court were full beauteous, and fair ;
But for valour unheard of. and beauty untold
No Court ever formed could with Woy Woy compare.


Oh ! Goldsmith may sing like a lark on the wing.
The charms of “ Sweet Auburn,” the Pride of the Plain ;
But where e’er we may roam, abroad or at home,
Our thoughts will turn fondly to Woy Woy again.
Though humble our cottage and frugal our fair,
Nor troubles nor worries could follow us there ;
For all happiness grows, and all weariness wanes,
When the best of good fun and good fellowship reigns.
’Tis sweet to recline in a shadowy spot
When the sun is blazing so fiercely hot;
While the insects’ soft hum, like the murmuring deep,
So drowsily lulls you to slumber and sleep.
’Tis pleasant to sit at a festive board,
With mirth and frolicsome fun well stored ;
While the flashing jest and jokes fly round,
And the echoing laughter and song resound.
But sweetest of all when at eventide
You wander homeward side by side ;
While the sun is dipping behind the hill,
And the voice of the world is hushed and still.
And perchance you may feel you would be content,
If all your remaining days were spent
In wandering still, with just one sweet maid,
In the gathering dusk of the twilight shade.
We danced and we sang, and we laughed and we talked,
We ran and we swam, and we rowed and w T e walked,
We ate and we drank, and we played and we smoked,
We flirted and fished, and we jested and joked.
Thus in innocent gaiety, frolicsome mirth.
We light up with joy the dark shadows of earth ;
We rejoice in our youth, and who recks of the day
When the eyes will g ow dim and the hair will grow gray,
Away with such thoughts ! It is holiday time !
The bells must ring out not a dirge but a chime ;
The earth is all smiling—the world full of joy,
There is nothing but fun in our camp at Woy Woy.
So pass round the bowl—once again “ Hip hooray !
Though parted to-morrow, we’re all here to-day ;
All friends here together —the time is too short
To harbour one moment such folly as thought.
But if think we needs must —why we’ll think of the time
When we wrote our ideas in ridiculous rhyme ;
When all that were round us were happy and bright,
With souls that were merry and hearts that were light.


Ah ! close to our hearts such remembrances cling—
No matter what troubles tbe future may bring ;
For tho’ life’s sun may wane and life’s pleasures may cloy,
We still will remember our camp at Woy Woy.
After this, the King rose, and thanked Sir Pa and Sir
Pard for their minstrelsy, which he assured them had added
much pleasure to the trip, and had been of a very high order.
As a set-off to the work of the two minstrels, “The Soul-
Stirrer” and “ The Blood-boiler,” he would read a short poem
of his Own, as follows :
A dark, tempestuous night,
A cat stood on our back fence ;
His ears stuck up, his tail stuck out —
The cat, he felt immense.
Rapturous applause greeted this noble effort on the part
of His Majesty.
The company was consumed with regret at their impend-
ing departure, but the drays (we mean drags) were announced,
and the whole Court left for the station amid the boom of a
salute fired from the castle walls.
As the train drew up, the party was conducted to the
royal saloon car, in which everything had been carefully
arranged for the comfort of the distinguished travellers, and
the train moved to the cheers of thousands of the natives..
The journey was much enlivened by a concert, and an amusing
and excellent display of tableaux vivants, arranged under the
personal direction of Sir Lez de Line.
Redfern was reached at about 9.30 p.m., where the party
was met by many persons of note, including Sir Robbo del
Thalloni, Directions having been given as to the disposal of
the luggage, the ladyes and knights took leave of the King,
and departed to their Halls, while His Majesty, attended by
Sir Pard, Sir Lez, the Ladye Agatha, and the Grand Duchess,
set out for his suburban seat, “ The Monastery.” And so,
amidst the greetings which brought to a close the great
expedition of King Arthur 11. and his Court at Joy Joy in the-
year 1899, the present historian raises his voice and shouts—
“GHEE! GHEE! GHEE! GHEE! *


L’Envoi,
It was during May, following our returm from Joy Joy,,
that the ladies of the Court of King Arthur 11. resolved upon'
a reunion of the party who had so successfully and pleasantly
carried out the excursion which is recorded above, and an
invitation to this gathering was extended to every knight, of
which the following is a copy :
The Court of King Arthur,. 10th May, 1899.
GHEE! GHEE! GHEE!' GHEE!
The Ladyes of the Court of King Arthur, recognising the very many
valiant deeds attempted on their behalf by the trusty Knights of the Table
Round, desire to express their appreciation of these mighty feats at all
times so nobly endeavoured.
To this end, we desire the attendance of your noble self at 6 p.m. on
Thursday, the Ist June, at our Bower at Balmoral, for the purpose of
personally receiving our gratitude, and assisting us to make war against,
and ultimately defeat that hideous monster, Quietness.
Quietness having been subdued, the remainder of the evening will
devoted to dancing on his prostrate form, so you had better bring y
shoes. R.S.V.P. to
Mrs. A. REDMOND BAR'
“ The Monastery,”
Neutral Bay.
The knights replied In verse and in prps
number of them had also tastefully illuminated th
with appropriate designs in black and. in white,
and it is indeed to be regretted that some of
re-produced. A few of the replies may, how'
From the Lord Chamberlain’s office,, i
Goose Rampant, these lines came :
Ghee ! Ghee !. Ghee !
Arthur, by the loving voice
Of all his people, making choice,
Of Joy Joy, and The Rip,, the Kinf
Defender of each living thing
On Land, or in the Sea profbund,
And Chief of all the Table Roun


'Greeting
Ye know full well how much he loves
Each one of you, his pretty doves ;
And how he and his knightly band
Would crush the desecrating hand
Of any stupid, awkward churl
Who disarranged one tiny curl
Of those which ever cluster bright
Upon your brows, for our delight !
And therefore am I charged to say
That he was deeply touched to-day
When handed your sweet invitation
For June the First’s gay jubilation ;
And, though ’tis not his custom quite
Such invites thusly to requite,
The loyal, kindly feeling shown
Has made His Majesty your own.
the Duchess Grand,
ig little band
nd eke by night,
ring Court so bright.
GOD HELP THE KING !
Your Grace, and lovely Ladyes all,
Whose dainty charms our minds enthral,
And like the tender ivy cling
About our foolish hearts, and bring
A sense of soft, delicious joy,
Which overcomes, and makes us coy,—
A message I am charged to sing
From Arthur, our most noble King !
Then on the eve of June the First
Our liege (attended by his Thirst).
Will join you with his Knights so true,
Who’ll have their Thirsts, and bring them too,
And quietness shall routed be,
And on his prostrate form will we
W ith Ladyes of the Bower dance,
Who must Balmoral’s Charms enhance.
(Signed)
Pard dk Mac.
Given this twenty-fourth of ’S '
In ninety-nine, on Woden’s JL»ay,
At our Lord Chamberlain’s Bui’eau,
That all whom it concerns may know
Lord Chamberlain


Other Knights wrote as follows :
Uo tbe (3ranb Bucbess of auO Iber Xat^es.
Sweet Duchess, need I say how much I bless
You and'your ladyes fair for so much kindness ;
For how could my poor faltering pen express
My thanks for vision after weeks of blindness.
Since on our Joy Joy trip the curtain fell,
My daily course has seemed all dark and dismal;
Only relieved by some brief transient spell,
When Joy Joy ladyes rend the gloom abysmal.
But now again, for one brief evening’s space,
The light of Friendship’s lamp shall sparkle clearly ;
Once more I’ll gaze my fill upon the face
Of those I’ve met—and learnt to love so dearly.
As hastes the hungry man unto his food,
As pcmrs the thirsty soul the deep libation,
As all men jump at anything that’s “ good,”
Thus—thus do I accept your invitation.
11th May, 1899.
Ghee ! Ghee ! Ghee ! Ghee ! Ghee !
The Captain of the Guard will have much pleasure in attending at
“ ye Bower of Balmoral” on the Ist June, to receive the personal tokene
of gratitude of the “Lydies” of your Court, and will render all possible
assistance to subdue and completely overcome the resurrected and con-
temptible monster mentioned in your invitation.
jfaire Xabse.
In days of olde,
Ye Knights so bolde,
For Ladyes foughte and diede :
In dayes of newe,
Ye Knights so fewe,
Hie to ye Ladye’s side.
So June’s first eve,
With sworde and greave,
To thy bowere I’ll wende ;
Where Beauty’s swaye,
And laughter gaye,
Dull quiet’s reign shall ende.
0


.Nor neede thou feare,
Ye ginger beere,
Is like to run to waste(r),
While guarded nigh,
And sampled by,
Thy Admiral and Taster.
“Ye Monkerie,”
Ye nineteenth daye of ye
merrye monthe of Maye,
A.D. 1899.
A fine picture in colours of a magnificent building with
Clock Tower and Carriage Porch headed one reply, and it
was at once apparent that this was the representation of the
Knight Mayor’s Palace, or Mayor’s Nest in the City of our
Beautiful Harbour.
The same sentiment of aversion to the g-im monster,
“Quietness,” was pourtrayed in all the replies received, while
a certain Knight who sent the following, felt so keenly on the
matter that he illuminated his reply with ma o/ designs show-
ing incidents of the last gathering of the Court at Joy Joy,
while the hideous leg of the grisly monster .vas seen walking
off the paper.
“With the greatest pleasure doth Sir Lovelace accept ye kind
invitation of ye Ladyes of ye Court of King Arthur to attend
“ on their Ladyships and with the goodliest fellowship of famous
“Knights of ye Table Round help defeat ye hideous monster
“ ‘ Quietness,’ on Thursday, Ist June, at ye Ladye’s Bower.”
At the gathering many pleasant recollections of the Court
at J°y Joy were renewed, and a merry and memorable evening
was spent, for which every knight expressed his congratula-
tions and his thanks. The graceful compliment bestowed by
the ladyes was fully appreciated by the King and the whole
body of his knights.
FINIS.


f
*
I ' „ .
T '


JAff
diduo
A/ ODfM
r’s P,
.tour,
sent
° the
-eplics recei
felt so 1
ma'oy
Civ 1
