

The Nama Sudras and other Addresses
by Dr.e.s.Alead.B.A.
INDIA'S CAPACITY.
The MISSIONARY PERSUASION.
PROBLEMS of the MISSION FIELD.
THE ROCK.




THE NAMA SUDRAS;
AND OTHER ADDRESSES.
BY
Dr. C. S. MEAD, B.A.,
OF THE
FURREEDPORE MISSION,
ORAKANDI, EAST BENGAL, INDIA.
ONE SHILLING.
191 1 :
South Australian Baptist Furreedpore Mission, Incorporated.
Hbelaibe :
Hussey & Gillingham, Printers and Publishers,
106 and 108, Currie Street,




PREFACE.
These addresses were delivered by Dr. Mead during
his furlough in South Australia last year.
Those who heard them were deeply stirred, and many
expressed the desire to have them in a permanent form.
It is further confidently hoped that they may be used to
a yet wider circle.
Any profits will go to the Society’s funds.
May He who so manifestly inspired the speaker of
these addresses be pleased to apply their message to all
who read them.
JOHN G. RAWS,
Hon. Sec. Furreedpore Mission, Incorporated.
High Street, Unley,
Adelaide, South Australia.
P.S.—For additional copies please apply to the Hon.
Secretary.




CONTENTS.
PAGE.
The Nama Sudras 7
The Uplifting of the Nama Sudras 27
India’s Capacity 47
The Missionary Persuasion ... ... ... ... ... 67
Problems of the Mission Field 81
A Visit to Orakandi ... ... ... ... ... ... 115
The Rock ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 119




The Nama Sudras.
“WILL YOU HELP US?”
This was the question asked me by a deputation of
Hama Sudras, who had come up from the rice-swamps of
the south to the mission house l in Faridpur. “We come,”
they said, “as representatives of a great, sad class—hated,
despised, downtrodden, treated like the dogs for centuries.
We have at last waked to the fact that we, too, are men ;
that the same great God who made the proud Brahmin
made us too, and we have it in our hearts to rise to a
better and a bigger life. Will you help us?”
“Yes,” I said, “I will help you. Missionaries every-
where as followers of the Jesus who ‘went about doing
good’ are ready to help the oppressed.”
“Some of us are thinking of becoming Christians,”
they continued.
“That is the only path of true uplift,” I replied.
“Well,” they said, “that is a question still un-
decided. Some of us say, ‘Let us all become
'Christians’; some say, Let us wait awhile’; others say,
‘Let us break away from Hinduism, and run a reformed
Hinduism of our own.’ We do not know what to do, only
this we know, we are determined somehow to rise to a
better life, to seek a nobler inheritance.”
This was the beginning of a contact which has caused
ns to see visions and to dream dreams.
There was obviously an urgent call to get into closer
contact with these people. We went to the southern part
of our district, and found a third of a million of them
living as rice farmers in country which for six months of
the year is under water.


ORAKANDI.
Orakandi is the most influential centre of the Nama
Sudra world, and, though it seemed foolish to try and live
in such a place, still it was felt that this was the heart
of things, and that this strategic centre should be occu-
pied. There are two millions of Nama Sudras altogether
living in East Bengal, but the section of the community
living in the Faridpur district is the largest and most
influential.
A Great Leader,
GURU CHARAN BABU.


The ancient patriarchal system still largely holds
sway. Guru Charan Babu is the head of the community
at Orakandi, and is a man of very great and far-reaching
influence. He frequently attends our Christian services,
has helped us in the matter of securing land, and is in
close touch with us in many matters. One of the last
things I did before leaving India was to give him, at his
request, a large-print Bengali Bible. Humanly speaking,
almost everything depends on what this man does. All
eyes are upon him. Pray for him.
Preaching.
PREACHING TO THE NAMA SUDRAS.
“Behold, I have set before thee an open door.”
In this picture one of our Victorian missionaries (Rev.
H. Sutton, M.A.) is seen preaching to a number of Nama
Sudra men and boys. We are cordially received every-
where, and it is a delight to preach in an atmosphere free


from the ordinary trying contentiousness of the bazaar.
This does not mean that there is no opposition. The older
men are strongly conservative, and the Nama Sudras have
their own Nama Sudra Brahmin priests. These are priests
who, for some offence against the laws of caste, have been
degraded from true Brahminhood, and have found refuge
and sphere of priestly service among the Nama Sudras.
These men are, of course, against us.
AT THE MISSIONARY’S TENT DOOR.
When the floods have dried up some tenting is pos-
sible, but owing to the absence of roads in the swamps this
is very limited. This picture is taken from the inside of
the tent, and shows the frontage of curious, questioning
faces that is always there, and always interested in “that
which entereth into the mouth” and that which “cometh
out of the mouth.” They would be driven away from the
tent-door of the travelling Government officer, but we are
there to represent Him who welcomed the multitudes, and


MISS TUCK PREACHING
MRS. MEAD TEACHING NAMA SUDRA
WOMEN.
many an hour is spent
in preaching and sing-
ing to these “eager,
anxious throngs.”
Miss Tuck is seen
standing on the slope
of one of the home-
stead-islands preaching
to a number of men,
women, and children.
This would not be
possible among the
upper classes.
The Zenana sys-
tem exists only to a
modified extent among
Nama Sudra women,
but those who are
better off than their
neighbours imitate the
upper classes in the


seclusion of their women. Among the women in the pic-
ture is the wife of Guru Charan Babu, the influential
leader referred to above.
Uplift Meetings.
AN “UPLIFT MEETING”; REV. H. SUTTON, M.A., STANDING.
In connection with the awakening among these people
great "uplift meetings” are held in many villages. The
missionary’s presence is always sought as president. The
call to awake to the new day, the need of education both
for boys and girls, the evils of early marriage, the plaint
and plea of the widow, the new ideal of the Fatherhood of
God and the Brotherhood of man, these are the subjects
that furnish material for several hours of speechmaking.
The missionary in the chair gives the Christian viewpoint
on every subject, and in addition has his innings, a free
hand, and a splendid opportunity for setting forth Christ
as the Great Uplifter, the Mighty Friend, through whom
is preached “good tidings to the poor, release to the cap-
tives, recovering of sight to the blind, liberty for them
that are bruised, and the acceptable year of the Lord.”
A great hope has risen over the Nama Sudra horizon,
and we preach to them through Christ the “bringing in of
a better hope.”


"LET ALL THE HOUSE" OF THE NAMA SUDRAS “KNOW ASSUREDLY
THAT GOD HATH MADE HIM BOTH LORD" AND LEADER.
Advantage is often taken of funeral feasts to hold
these meetings. On these occasions many hundreds of
people assemble. After the funeral ceremonies comes the
great funeral feast, when sometimes thousands of people
are fed. And nowadays it is customary to hold a great
uplift meeting before the people scatter again to their
villages. Last year a band of Nama Sudras took me across
the river into the Khulna district to the house of a wealthy
man named Ram Charan Poddar. lie was celebrating the
funeral ceremonies of his mother. A large meeting was
held, and I was put in the chair. I counted 2,000 men
present. The meeting be s'an at 3in the afternoon.
Speech followed speech, voicing their new-born hopes and
aspirations. Evening fell, and flickering oil-lamps were
hung around the great tent in which the meeting was
held.


It was nearly 9 o’clock before my turn came to speak.
"Listen,” I said ; “to-day Ram Charan Poddar calls to
memory the mother he loved. I, too, had a mother.
Thirty-five years ago she went to a fairer land, the golden
land, where the great Guru Jesus dwells. Before ever I
saw the light she dedicated me to the service of that great
Guru to tell of His name in this land. She knew
nothing of the JSTama Sudras. But God did. The Great
Father of us all was even then planning for my presence
in this great meeting to-night.”
And with that great throng closely packed under the
great canopy, seated on the ground, as the oil-lamps flick-
ered down and the bright moonlight bathed us round, I
pleaded with them to receive my mother’s God. A solemn
hush came over the assembly, while before their eyes “Jesus
Christ was openly set forth crucified.” Such magnificent
opportunities for preaching are unique in our experience.
Mission Schools.
The Nama Sudras are keen enough to see that if they
are to rise they must educate their sons, and the mis-
sionaries arc keen enough to see that if they can have a
hand in the schools they hold one of the keys to the situa-
tion. At Orakandi we found them eager about their
school. It was the handle sticking out. We laid hold of
it. The small elementary school was taken over by the
mission and raised to the status of a High School.
There are differences of opinion as to the wisdom of
spending mission money on schools and colleges among the
upper classes, but it is unanimously conceded in all mis-
sions that in low-caste work the school must be freely
used. The running of a High School is expensive. No
fewer than three of the masters are required by the Educa-
tion Department rules to be holders of the B.A. degree.
The Government are urging us strongly to place a Euro-
pean missionary with the B.A. degree at the head of the
school. This we are most eager to do, but we have neither
the man nor the money. Here is a splendid opportunity
for a young University graduate to lead the 200 lads of
this school towards Christ, and to impress upon their hearts
the witness of his life. Who will volunteer ?


MISSION HIGH SCHOOL, ORAKANDI.


SCHOOL COMMITTEE, ORAKANDI.
During the months when the country is under water
everybody has to go about by boat. The schoolboys also
have to come to school in this way. When they come to
school' in the morning they sink their little skiffs'under the
water, so that the wind may not blow them away. When
the dismissal bell rings at 4 o’clock there is an amusing
helter-skelter, and the next ten minutes are full of pranks
and jokes and merriment. It is a pretty sight to see these
200 boys sailing away to their village homes through the
rice-fields in the soft evening light.
What did the - Christian s want the little Nama Sudra
girls to go to school for ? Ah, there they were asking a ques-
tion the Christians were more than glad to answer. “With
whom does the future of your community rest ?” “Do


THE MISSION-SCHOOL FLEET.
you not understand what a new generation of intelligent
religious women can do to uplift the caste V’ And so they
came. A Christian lady, well trained, wise, and enthu-
siastic, was secured as teacher, and the progress of the
sixty odd girls has been one of the things that has most
gladdened the missionaries’ hearts.
It is not in accord with Naina Sudra ideas of pro-
priety that girls and boys should go about in the same
boats, and so separate boats have to be used for the girls.
The number of girls who come to the day- and Sunday-
schools is only limited by our boat accommodation. If we
had more money we should have more boats, and if we


MISSION-SCHOOL GIRLS, OEAKANDI.


SCHOOL GIRLS IN THEIR BOATS.


had more boats we could bring more girls from their island
homes to sit at the feet of Jesus, and learn of Him to
their eternal blessedness.
The Widows.
THE FIRST WIDOW.
The young men are eager ; the old men are wise.
Said the old men, "If you can do anything for the widows,


THE FIRST INMATES OF NURSE THOMSON’S WIDOWS’ HOME.


ONE OR THE ELDERS.
you may hope to do some-
thing to uplift us, but not
otherwise, for the widows are
the plague-spot in our
community.”
Our lady workers soon
came to the conclusion that
it was absolutely necessary
to have a Widows’ Home,
where women who desired,
if they could but get the
chance, to live good and
pure lives, might have that
chance afforded them.
A young widow, about
thirteen years old, was
brought to us before
we were ready to open
a home. Nurse Thom-
son has this for her sphere, and who could ask for a more
Christ-like work than to be “as the shadow of a great
rock’’ to these sad widows ?
The home will be conducted along the same lines as
the famous home of Pandita Ramabai on the other side
of India, and it is confidently hoped that from these
widows there will come the Biblewomen and teachers of
the future.
Medical Work.
Multitudes of the sick.” They, too, must be brought
by boat. The palsied man was brought to Jesus “borne of
four. Here it is “poled by one.” Standing on the top
of our island we can see the little boats as the sun rises
being poled through the rice from north and south, from
east and west. Soon a small fleet clusters all round the
island, and the sick are laid at our feet.
No patients are more grateful than the women, and
none are we more eager to help. Looking out from thesh
sad eves of our Eastern sisters we see souls which, when
they have learnt shall love, and when they have seen shall
go quickly and tell” the glad news of a Risen Saviour.


PATIENTS’ BOATS.
NAMA SUDRA WOMEN PATIENTS.


JOY CHAND PREACHING TO NAMA SUDRA PATIENTS.
Of even lower caste than the Nama Sudras themselves
was sprung Joy Chand, the evangelist. How he rejoices to
tell the waiting patients of the Waiting Physician ! His
bright face is itself a sermon.
The First Convert.
No Church of Nama Sudra converts has yet been
formed. But there are the droppings of the shower. Kali
Charan and his wife were the first to be baptized. “What
shall the harvest be ?” “Your young men shall see vis-
ions.” Are the visions true ones? Have we heard, or
have we only thought that we heard the Lord say, “I will
deliver them into thine hand” ?
A great conviction has come upon the Nama Sudras
themselves that it is God Himself who is leading them
forward by a path that they know not.


KALI CHARAN, THE FIRST KAMA SUDRA CONVERT.
We share their conviction. We believe that the high-
way is being cast up.
“The vision is yet for the appointed time, and it
hasteth toward the end, and shall not lie: though it
tarry, wait for it; because it will surely come.”


BAPTISM OF THE FIRST NAMA SUDRA CONVERT.


The Uplifting of the Nama
Sudras.
A PROBLEM IN MASS MOVEMENTS.
[Acknowledgment. —In the first part of this address
free use has been made of an address by the Bishop of
Madras on “Our Mission Policy.”]
My subject is Mass Movements, or God’s wtty of win-
ning India, and our way of winning the Nama Sudras.
Three Masses.
In India there are about three million Christians.
They are not equally distributed over the country, but
these three millions are found massed in three great
centres: —
1. The Telugu and Tamil Christians in the South,
above and below Madras.
2. In the centre of India, the Kol Christians of Cliota
Nagpur.
3. In the North-west, the mass of Cliamar Christians.
They are found massed in these three centres because
here large mass movements have occurred.
They are almost wholly converts from the low castes,
the ‘‘human debris of India.” “For this is the very mi-
racle and splendour of Christianity, that it can take hold
of the.classes which are the despair and scorn of civilisa-
tion and regenerate them. And in India there are fifty
million human beings sitting abject on the outskirts of
Hinduism, waiting for the vivifying message of the Chris-
tian faith.”
History of the Past.
This then is the history of the past. The Church
has been built up by people moving in masses, and to-


day the stream of the low castes entering the Church flows
on with increasing force.
In other words, this has been, is, and (it would seem)
is to be, God’s way of winning India.
Early Missionaries.
As the early missionaries landed in India, and saw
the many keen intellectual and influential high caste men,
it seemed to them “if only these can be won India will
be won. They will make Apostles and Evangelists by whose
ministry the Church will be gathered and built up.” They
were so obviously men who could understand.
It was a splendid vision, and for that they toiled. By
lectures and preachings, at temples and festivals, in halls,
and preeminently in colleges and high schools where they
gathered together high-class youths, and instructed them
daily in the Scriptures, they strove to win the high castes
for Christ.
But it has been like knocking at a fast-closed door.
Some few converts have been won, some splendid men who
have given up all and have shown what Christ’s power can
do. But they have been like a few stones dug out of a
thick solid wall of a fortress which is still left standing,
great and grim, and with scarcely a flaw.
The education given in our mission colleges has
proved to the high castes that Christianity cannot be
despised, and that it teaches a morality superior to any
thing they know. Christianity, by this means, has
helped to create a new moral tone throughout India,
nevertheless the high castes do not receive it.
It was a great and splendid conception to seek India’s
conversion through the intellectual high caste men. More-
over, it seemed in accordance with Paul’s concentrated
efforts in the great cities of the Roman Empire, where he
established great strategic positions in those centres of
commerce, government, and intellectual l,ife, from which
the church afterwards advanced to the conquest of the
villages, BUT it does not seem to be “God’s way for
India,”


Twenty Converts a. Year.
Says the Bishop of Madras:—“l very much doubt
whether the average for all India would amount to 20
converts a year from this particular class among all de-
nominations. For the last five years the Oxford Mission
to students and educated men in Calcutta has hardly
made six converts, and in the Cambridge University Mis-
sion to Delhi, strongly manned and enthusiastically
worked, there is not a single case of baptism to show for
25 years of College work.”
Last year you were cheered by news of the baptism
of a splendid convert in Pubna, the son of a lawyer. He
stands firm, and is now studying for his M.A. Degree, but
in Faridpur, out of all the dozens of students who have
come so near to the Kingdom we have never baptized one
since Panchanon Babu came out. They have studied the
Bible with us, seen the glory of the vision, and felt, deeply
felt, the spell of the Christ, but invariably, like Binode
the Brahmin, they have drawn back, dashed our hopes
to disappointment, and given, over and over again, illus-
tration of the fact that “a growing appreciation of the
truths of Christianity among educated Hindus is quite
compatible with a growing determination to abide by their
ancestral religion.”
The Jews.
To quote the Bishop of Madras again, he says:
‘‘Looking back to the experience of the past half-century,
facts compel us to admit that, so far as the building up
of the Christian Church in India is concerned, our mission
work among the higher castes and educated classes has
failed in the same way and in the same sense as the
work of the Apostolic Church failed among the Jews. For
over fifty years the gospel of Christianity has been put
before them in every conceivable form by philosophers and
teachers, by the simple teaching of Christ and the Cross,
through earnest moral appeals to the conscience, and the
powerful influence of saintly lives and noble characters.
And to the appeal of the gospel in every form and shape
they have as a body turned a deaf ear. It is true that
a few converts of great value to the Church have been
made, and that there has been a general diffusion of


Christian ideas, both moral and religious, among edu-
cated men, and without doubt the life and character of
Christ and the teachings of the Bible have been potent
and widespread influences for good throughout India.
But as far as I am able to discern the signs of the times,
I can see no evidence of any movement towards Christi-
anity in the higher ranks of Hindu society at present, nor
any hope of it in the immediate future; on the contrary,
the educated classes seem to me to be further off from
the definite acceptance of the Christian faith to-day than
they were when I first came to India twenty-three years
ago.
Dr. Duff.
Dr. Duff at the beginning of the 19th century, work-
ing with his College in Calcutta, made many notable
converts from the educated classes, men who have been
the pillars of the Church in Bengal. But the times are
changed. When Duff worked, Hinduism was at its lowest
ebb. There were no movements of thought in the Hindu
community. The alternatives were the gross superstition
and idolatry of Hinduism on the one hand and Christi-
anity on the other. The men who broke away, under the
influence of English education, from the worship of the
Hindu temples, inevitably became Christians; but it is
not so now. And for this there are three great reasons.
1. Education. —The establishment of Universities
with many affiliated colleges has taken much out of the
hands of the Christian colleges. Indian minds have be-
come secularized, and education which at first came in as
the handmaid of Christianity, has brought the Indian
mind into contact with the scepticism of the West, and
made them aware that Christianity is by no means univer-
sally accepted by all thinking men in Europe and America.
Thus there has sprung up a widespread material-
ism in strong antagonism to Christianity.
2. The Hindu Revival. —The advance of Christianity
and education awakened the dormant energies of Indian
thought. Various reform sects have sprung up offering
new refuges, other than Christianity, for minds that have
revolted from popular Hinduism. But stronger still is


a great and powerful revival of Hinduism with Vedantism
as its creed, and the Gita as its Bible. An immense re-
vival organization has covered the land, new defences have
been thrown up, new weapons forged, and the whole move-
ment has been further stimulated by such movements as
the Theosophical Society, America’s welcome to travel-
ling Swamis, and even by Mr. Campbell’s New Theology
movement, which strengtuens the attachment of educated
Indians to the old pantheistic philosophy which seems to
have its root so deep down in the Indian mind.
3. Swadeshi. —Thirdly, the concentration of thought
and aspiration on political aims has injuriously affected
the attitude of the educated classes towards Christianity,
and Avidened the gulf between Indians and Europeans,
thus setting the missionary in a very difficult position.
Summary.
The position of the educated classes to-day has been
well summed up in a missionary report thus:—‘There is
a great admiration for Jesus Christ as a Teacher, and a
considerable assimilation of Christian morality, for which
we ought to be devoutly thankful, but that is all; all their
aspirations seem to be political, and religion is pushed
into the background.”
Future.
What then of the future ? A survey of what has
happened and of what is happening seems to indicate
that the host which is to cross the Jordan, and enter
into the Promised Land is to be comprised of multitudes
of the poor and outcasts delivered out of the house of
bondage to Brahmin Pharaohs, at first, maybe, a some-
what disorderly host, needing teaching and discipline,
sorely hampered by the mixed multitude, their march
marked by falls and fears and failures, but ending in a
Church militant and a Church triumphant.
The richest promise lies before us in the lower classes,
and the most urgent call to service is the cry that arises
from their many-millioned mouth. It is the pariah com-
munity, and not the Brahmin, that occupies the position
of highest strategic value.


Cast the Net.
It seems as though the Lord is saying to us, “Cast
the net on the right side of the ship, and ye shall find.”
For while we have tried for a century to reach the high
castes by every means ingenuity could devise, the results
in actual converts have been very small. “Their stan-
dards of morals have been raised; but to Christianity
itself as a religion to be accepted by them, they remain
profoundly indifferent.”
On the other hand, wherever we have condescended
to “men of low degree,” and the gospel has been preached
to the outcasts by loving, sympathetic men and women,
there souls have been won in numbers to Christ.
A Flanking' Movement.
The policy of the past lias been a direct frontal at
tack on all classes, the policy of the future should be a
flanking movement to capture the masses.
The day of the low castes is dawning, and it is for
the Christian Church to take them by the hand. I seem
to hear the Lord saying to this great host: —“I have
taken out of thine hand the cup of staggering, even the
bowl of the cup of My fury; thou shalt no more drink
it again, and I will put it into the hand of them that
afflict thee, which have said to thy soul: ‘Bow down that
we may go over,’ and thou hast laid thy back as the
ground, and as the street, to them that go over. Awake,
awake, put on strength, put on thy beautiful garments.
Shake thyself from the dust, loose thyself from the bands
of thy neck, oh, captive daughter of Zion.”
Thus saith the Lord:—“The Brahmins have harden-
ed their necks against the Lord. These are they of
whom I tell you weeping, that they are the enemies of
Christ.”
“Let them alone,’ said Jesus, “Let them alone, they
are blind leaders of the blind.”
Lo, We Turn.
“Lo, we turn to the Gentiles.” From the Brahmin to
the Boona, from the University Students to the Nama


Sudras. Christ and the Apostles did not keep on preach-
ing the Gospel to people who showed plainly that they
had no wish to accept it. “Jesus turns rapidly from
Judea to Galilee, from Capernaum to the villages, from
the Scribes and the Pharisees to the common people. Paul
turns from Jew to Gentile with a startling rapidity, he
gave the Jews at Rome just one day to make up their
minds, and then announced that the salvation of God
was sent to the Gentiles.”
In striking contrast to the painful slowness of work
among the upper classes is tiie truly wonderful success
of the work among the lower castes and the aboriginal
tribes all over India. Whole races are roused and res-
cued. The Khasias of Assam, the Kols of Chota Nag-
pur, the Santals of W. Bengal, the Chamars of the United
Provinces, the Malas and Madigas of the Telugu country,
the Karens of Burmah, and many others have been press-
ing into the Kingdom and taking it by storm.
Statistics.
In the Telugu country the number of Christians rose
from 19,000 in 1871 to 222,000 in 1901, a gain of over
200,000 in 30 years.
In Chota Nagpur from 40,000 in 1881 to 144,000 in
1901, a gain of 100,000 in 20 years.
In the village districts of the United Provinces 50,000
have been gained in the last 20 years.
In 10 years the Karia district gained 20,000, and
the Ahmednagar district 17,000, and so on.
All these great gains represent mass movements among
the low castes.
Compare with these large figures the leading cities.
Madras has only 25,000 Christians, Calcutta 8,000, Bom-
bay 15,000, Delhi 2,000, Cawnpore 1,000. The total num-
ber of native Christians in all these great cities as the
result of earnest devoted work during 50 to 200 years,
does not amount to more than 50,000, which is con-
siderably less than the number of converts gathered in
during the last ten years in the Telugu villages alone;
B


and this in spite of the fact that the missions in the cities
have been better manned and equipped than the village
missions.
Where the Fishes are.
If all the missions would reconsider their policies,
retrench and withdraw, where such action is called for,
and push out into the deep where the fishes are there
is a reasonable certainty, says the Bishop of Madras, that
during the next fifty years we should gather into the
Church of Christ some ten million souls.
It is only through such mass movements that mission
work in India has attained to anything like numerical
success. In every district where a large and growing
Christian community is to be found, that community
has been formed and recruited by the reception of com-
munities, rather than by the slow ingathering of indi-
viduals.
Mass Movements in Bengal.
The only two large communities within hail of our
work are the English Baptist Backergunge field and the
Church of England Ivrishnager field. In Backergunge
the English Baptists have a community of about 6,000.
They are the fruit of a mass movement among Nama
Sudras. Their leader became a Christian, and a large
slice of the tribe followed him.
Half-way between Faridpur and Calcutta in the Krish-
nagar district a social reaction against the tyranny of
the Brahmins had already begun before the missionaries
settled there. A strange new sect (the Karta Bhajas —
the creator-worshippers) appeared, half Moslem and half
Hindu.
In 1833 a number of this sect were baptized, and
five years later a mass movement took place, in great
measure due to social unrest, and revolt from Brahman
dominance. It affected 55 villages, and in less than
two years 3,000 were added to the Church.
Points to be Grasped.
Grasp, then, these points:
1. There is a great low-caste lift going on all over
India.


2. This lift leads, sometimes, large masses of people
to join the Christian community.
3. The movement in some cases begins as a social
movement, and leads on to the embracing of
Christianity.
4. The movement in some cases has begun as a social
movement, and has not yet moved on to the em-
bracing of Christianity.
5. Behind it all there is “a great persuasion of God."
“Bruised and broken, these great masses of the low
castes, under the heel of the strong and mighty, lie low
down, they move in fear, they are driven under, beaten
down by the pride and force of the earthly power."
“They constantly liken their condition to that of pris-
oners in a dark deep well. ‘But wells/ we tell them,
‘are no part of the economy of nature. They are dug
by the hands and the tools of men. The question is,
who dug that well of yours and placed you in it ? In
whose courtyard is it, and for whose benefit was it dug?’
They are quick to responu, ‘lt is the Brahmins who dug it,
and it is for them we toil in darkness and die in gloom.’ "
Caste.
Caste, which is our chief enemy in dealing with the
higher ranks of society, is sometimes a great ally in work
among the outcasts, driving them en masse into the arms
of the Christians. When the front of a mass begins to
move, caste-cement holds the mass together, and the whole
of it rolls forward. The caste system thus acts as a
net in God’s hand to bring multitudes to land.
Objections.
Some may say, “But are these mass movements sat-
isfactory and a real gain to the cause of Christ ? Is not
the mass a sadly mixed multitude ?”
Yes, often it is, but note, first, we must yet the
people if we are to mould them. The sculptor can do
nothing with an unworked marble quarry; the goldsmith
b 2


cannot fashion gold while it is yet in the quartz reef.
He must get it, and these mass movements mean getting
it—His getting it.
The Conversion of Europe.
Note, secondly, that it was by means of mass
movements that Europe became Christian. The
king became a Christian, and the people followed
en masse. Sometimes a heathen prince took a
fancy to a Christian woman for his wife, the condition
of obtaining her was that he and his tribe should become
Christians, and Christians they became at the chieftain’s
command. “More kings were won to Christianity by
Christian wives than by Christian bishops.” The motives
were often far from spiritual, but the tribes declared for
Jesus, their idols were cast to the moles and the bats, and
the sweet sway of Jesus passed upon them.
Building- the Wall.
Long have we toiled in the Brahmin quarries seeking
to build the wall that is broken .down, we have with in-
finite pains been quarrying at the adamant rock of the
high castes. It is desperately slow work, albeit every
detached block is a thing of beauty and strength. But
the orders are to hasten the work, and, 10, we see bricks,
the humbler material, coming to us, springing to our
hands. Should we not lay eager hands upon them?
The mass movement may not be the highest ideal
method of building up the Kingdom of God, but it has
pleased God to largely use it through all the Christian
centuries, and it would be flying in the face of Provi-
dence to despise or discourage it.
Not that it is to be used exclusively. The two pro-
cesses go on side by side. “Some practise the hand-
picking process, while others are more ready to shake the
tree, and gather the aoples in quantities.”
Thirdly, note that the results add their own en-
dorsement. In India the Christian community, drawn
mainly from the depressed classes, is “the most progres-
sive body in the country, having risen to a position of
growing influence and conscious strength. Their new


career is abundantly proving that the religion of Christ
is a vital principle, a motive power, and a transforming
force. The universal law is finding fresh proof, viz.,
that those who come to Christ rise in the scale of hu-
manity.” As I have said to you before, “They polish at
the touch of Jesus.”
Hindu Alarm.
The Hindus themselves are beginning to see in it a
menace to their own religion. At public meetings they
are passing resolutions favouring the social elevation of
the outcasts. Such a resolution was passed at a recent
political conference in Pubna, but it gets no further than
resolutions, for a low-caste man, no matter how well
•educated, or clean, or self-respecting, remains an outcast,
whose touch to a Brahmin is pollution.
The Indian Press.
Listen to a few extracts from the Hindu Press:—“lf
our community will not receive the Untouchables, if it
even delays to do it, the golden opportunity will have been
lost; for the Untouchables sooner or later (sooner rather than
later), permeated with the growing idea of equality, and
resenting the sense of degradation inflicted upon them, will
bodily embrace that faith (the faith of Islam), where
every man has the right divine to be the equal of his
fellow man. This is the danger of the situation.”
Indeed! But that is just what they will not do.
The Nama Sudra, for example, heartily dislikes the Mo-
hammedan, and the Bengalee editor writes, “They will
embrace Islam,” when he means “they will embrace
Christianity,” only he hates to say it.
Another:—“lf we will not treat them with the con-
sideration which they deserve, they will cease to belong
to the Hindu community. We must lay aside ancient
prejudices, relax ancient restrictions, and make a definite
movement forward to incorporate them more closely into
the great brotherhood of the Hindu community.”
Indeed ! But the Hindu community has not got a
brotherhood!


Just one more —a Hindu editor, mark you:
"Christians are working among the Pariahs and Untouch-
ables; they have converted thousands of such people to
Christianity, and are every day bringing them under the
banner of Christ by hundreds and thousands. In order
to save these 50 millions of valuable souls from falling
victims to the wiles and machinations of the Christian
missionaries, to save the honour of the nation, we must
take up this question with all our might.”
Hindus know that the cause of Christ is going for-
ward, and they know in what direction it is prospering.
But Hinduism cannot touch the Untouchables without
giving up caste, and if it gives up caste Hinduism falls
to pieces.
It is not love of the outcasts that has prompted this
new attitude (and the outcast knows that full well), but
a confessed purpose to keep him from becoming a Chi is-
tian, and to secure the strength of the masses for a
political propaganda.
Our Share.
Now, what share have we in mission work of this
character? Actually little, potentially much. These
strong streams of low-caste converts have not yet begun,
to any extent, to flow in Bengal; but the Spirit of God
will not pass us by. And those of us who are convinced
that this is God’s way of winning India watch eagerly
for the morning, and are ever upon our watch toweis.
Mr. Nall, in the Victorian field, is shepherding _ over a
1,000 low-caste Garo Christians. Mr. Goldsack is seek-
ing to lay eager hands upon the Bunas, the despised
caste from which sprang Joy Chand, the Trumpeter, faith-
ful Nanda Lai, the Buna preacher, whom three years
ago I laid to rest in a Buna village he was seeking to
evangelize; and when the Nama Sudras sent a deputation
to me, asking for Christian leadership (though they did
not say they all wanted to become Christians), do you
wonder that, knowing all these things that I have just set
before you, a thrill and a surge swept through my heart,
and that I wrote home to you that the greatest oppor-
tunity of my life was opening before me ?


What is the Nama Sudra Movement?
The Nama Sudras are one of the lowest Hindu castes.
There are two millions of them, and one-third of a million
are in the Faridpur district. Fast hound in misery and
iron for probably 2,000 years, a sad people living a life in
which hope no more sang, they have been touched by the
spirit of the awakening East, and hope has kindled m
their hearts, and taught them that the Hinduism which
has treated them as brute beasts is false, while the Chris-
tians, whom the Brahmins have taught them to hate, are
their best friends, treat them like human beings, labour
for their well-being, and teach them that they are poten-
tial sons of God and heirs of eternal life. Downtrodden
and despised for centuries tliey are awaking to the fact
that they, too, are men, and have rights as men in God’s
free world.
A Social Movement.
At present it is a social movement almost entirely. But
this is the way many a movement has commenced in
India, which has subsequently switched on to a higher
plane, and led to the whole tribe embracing Christianity.
Great uplift meetings are being held everywhere, and
missionaries are eagerly sought after to preside over them.
They put us to march at their head, but in our hands is
.a banner, and if they march behind us they march behind
that banner. The task before us is to turn a social into
a religious movement; but we have One with us who has
power to turn water into wine, and in Jesus Christ and
His Cross we have “a spiritual dynamic powerful enough
to effect the transformation.”
A stream is flowing, and we have in our hands a
erimson dye which we are flinging in to incarnadine the
waters.
The cloud moves towards the village homes of the
despised low caste, and thither we press on.
Hindus say that Brahma created the Brahmins from
his head, the Kshattriyas from his arms, the Vasyas from
his thighs, and the Sudras (the low castes) from his feet.


An Indian preacher had in his house a picture of Christ
washing the disciples’ feet. Some Brahmins visiting
him, pointing to the picture, said scornfully, "You don’t
do lowly work like that.” “Why, that is just what we
are doing,” the preacher replied. “You claim that you
Brahmins are sprung from Brahma’s head, and the Sudras
from his feet; well, we are making the Sudra’s clean —
the Sudras, who are India’s feet. And one of these
days when the Hindus see how clean their feet are, they
will desire to be clean every whit, and with Peter will
say, ‘Lord, not my feet only, but also my hands and
my head.’ ”
Nebuchadnezzar’s Image.
To change the figure—the Hindu community may
be compared to Nebuchadnezzar’s great image with head
of Brahmin gold, breast and arms of Kshattriya silver,
legs of Vasya brass and Sudra feet, and it is on the feet
that the stone cut out of the mountain without hands
shall fall; the image shall be broken and scattered, and
the place thereof shall know it no more. (Dan. ii. 34.)
The Mine.
If this then is the most hopeful policy for our mis-
sion work, it is for us missionaries to deliberately work
for mass movements among some class or other. We are
to sink our shafts through all the strata, but when we
strike a soft vein, we are to commence to drive and to
crosscut in that vein with all possible energy and despatch.
Mr. Nall has struck a Garo vein, Mr. Goldsack a Buna
vein, and in this Nama Sudra work we have come across
a great soft bed with an inviting face, which has made us
send up a great hopeful shout to you at the pit’s mouth.
Wliat will it yield? We do not know. So far we
have only baptized two Nama Sudra families, and we
speak with carefully studied restraint, lest we unduly
raise unwarranted hopes, but our hopes run high, and
our hearts beat fast, as our picks strike into the soft
stuff and show mountains of hidden treasure.


There is Geld there.
God help us to get it out! You help us. We will
go to any depth; we will live in any darkness; we will
wash, we will crush, aye, we would crush ourselves, if only
the glitter of gold may gladden the heart of Him whose
claim it is.
A Dying Race.
Last year a series of articles in the Bengali papers
under the title “A Dying Race,” caused a great sensa-
tion in the Hindu community. Reproduced in the form
of a booklet these articles are still causing most anxious dis-
cussion. The writer maintains that the Bengali Hindus are
a dying race. The Mahommedans, lie asserts, are growing
in number, growing in strength, growing in wealth, grow-
ing in solidarity, while the Hindus are crumbling to pieces.
“They look forward to a united Maliomniedan world, me are
waiting fur our extinction.” “The wages of sin is death,” he
continues. “We Hindus have sinned deeply and dam-
nably against the laws of God and nature, and we are
paying the penalty.”
Coulson Kernahan, in his “A World without a Child,”
pictures the men of London gathered, praying under the
dome of St. Paul's, and using the very same words, “Lord
God, we ask Thee to give ear, for we are a dying race”;
dying because they also had sinned against God’s social
laws written in the make-up of humanity.
Statistics show that in 30 years from being half a mil-
lion behind the Hindus, the Mahommedans have got to be
two and a half millions ahead of them. This increase is due,
not to conversion of Hindus to Mahommedanism, but to
the greater virility and vigour, the religious unity and
brotherhood of the Mahommedans, assisted by the destruc-
tive social customs of the Hindus, such as child marriage
and forced widowhood. As an illustration of the latter,
he says that poor
Hindu widows sometimes become
Mahommedans.
“On enquiry it was generally found that the woman
was a member of the Nama Sudra class, and had recently
become a widow. Widow remarriage is not unknown


among the caste; but the men are often too poor to marry,
and as a rule never marry more than one wife. Who is
to look after the widow, with perhaps children ? She has
no other alternative but to marry a Mahommedan, who is
generally better off than Hindus of the cultivating class,
unless she takes to an immoral life."
In a scathing criticism of the Brahmin aristocracy,
he maintains that at their doors lies the responsibility for
the weak and the weakening condition of the Bengal Hindu
community. Not only have they kept all learning confined
to the high castes, but they have in a crassly suicidal policy
kept the great masses of the low castes, fully 50 per cent,
of the Hindu community, in ignorance, poverty, and cring-
ing degradation. “These Untouchables," he says, “are
at once our shame and our hope. They must be rescued
and received into the Hindu brotherhood or we are lost.
Nor is there any time to lose.” After showing how there
was a Hinduizing process going on whereby the aboriginal
tribes were being absorbed into Hinduism, he says, “This
Hinduizing has received a check. The whole of the Santal
Perganas, and the Chota Nagpur Division has been
earmarked by the Christian Missionaries
as their special field of action, and the vigorous proselytiz-
ing that is going on leaves little doubt that this entire
tract, larger than Assam, and nearly as large as three-
fourths of United Bengal, will at no distant date be en-
tirely a Christian community. Something, though on a
smaller scale, is happening in the east of Bengal. The
Garos and Nagas are daily coming under the influence
of the missionaries, and their conversion is not far off.”
His trumpet call of warning has reached many ears,
and in several recent political conferences, notably at the
Pubna District Conference, resolutions have been passed
demanding that the low castes be better treated. But
these paper resolutions lead to nothing further than offers
of better treatment, such as the service of barbers and
palki bearers, on condition that they join in the Swadeshi,
or Nationalist, agitation. But so far as the Nama Sudras
are concerned, the iron has eaten too deeply into their
souls to allow them to listen to these overtures from poli-


tical Brahmins. They resolutely refuse to be wooed back
to the old conditions. They have seen visions, and with
a bold cry of “Excelsior,” they are daring, in hundreds
of instances, to defy and deride the formerly feared Brah-
min despot. Here and there a Naina Sudra village, here
and there a few hundred poor ryots, succumb to the bribery
and pressure, but the mass of the people are
fast unhitching:
from Hinduism.
What will happen? We do not know. They do not
know. They have no definite ideal. If they unhitch
from Hinduism, they must hitch on somewhere. Mahom-
medans they cannot away with. Some say “Create a new
independent Hindu Nama Sudra community”; others say
“Join the Christians.” Others say “Let be. Let us
first feel our feet, and talk about that afterwards.” All
they see clearly is that the deeps are being broken up, and
the beacon fires of liberty are lit upon the mountain tops.
They profoundly believe that God is leading them out into
a new Canaan; and their hearts are full of eager hope.
The Japanese.
As the Japanese determined to seek a place among the
nations, so have the Nama Sudras determined to claim a
place among the men of their own nation. But as Japan
has first sought uplift, and held over, still pondering it,
their decision concerning the embracing of a new religion,
so are the Nama Sudras setting in the foreground ques-
tions of social uplift,
but there is a background,
and it is upon this that our brushes, dipped in heaven,
are busy. In the background there is a sacred Figure,
whose outlines faith can detect, moving among the shadows,
saying to the more thoughtful who will listen, “Come unto
Me, and I will make your destiny secure, interweave your
destiny with Mine, and all shall be well.”
Like the Prodigal Son, looking on their present sad
condition, they are saying, “This is not my destiny. I was
not born for this. I will get back somehow to my in


heritance, and to the true lines of development.” But of
the Father they have but dim glimmerings of knowledge,
and of the way back they know less; but we are at hand,
and into listening ears we are pouring eager words. Ah !
do you not envy us ? Could privilege rise higher, or taste
a richer wine ? “New shuttles are at work,” and a new
pattern, yet hidden, is weaving on the loom.
“Trodden down until the times of the Gentiles be ful-
filled,” are words they would not understand, but we un-
derstand, and we know that there is an UNTIL, and there
is “an end,” for every nation and for every tribe that will
hear the word of the Lord. They are a “stone rejected.”’
“Lay hold of it and lift it up” is the message. We have
laid hold of it—so far we have gone —and are attempting
to place it on the great Christ-foundation.
We are heeding a Macedonian call, “Come over the-
heels (swamps) and help us.”
We are following
a man with a pitcher.
He leads to an empty upper room. Empty, but we are
seeking to set it in order for One who is on His way to-
wards it, purposing to enter it, to fill it with the power of
His presence, and to speak in it the words of life and love
and lifting.
Yes, the Master is abroad in India. We attend Him..
He has compassion on the multitudes, for they are down,,
cast down, sheep shepherdless, distracted and distressed.
Cause them to sit down on the grass,” He says. This
is what we are busy about just now. There they are
facing Jesus, and we, His disciples, are busy among them,
and in touch with the source of supply and mercy.
There they are. Look at them. Love them.
You remember how the words run—“ And all the mul-
titude
stood on the beach.”
(Matt. xiii. 2.) That is the present position. Not yet
disciples, but standing on the beach, gathered near Him,,
listening, looking, thinking, wondering.


Our Opportunity.
Men and brethren, this is our opportunity. Christ-
ians to the front! Who says the romance of missions is
dead? This is a veritable romance of God’s own weav-
ing. Do you wonder that we tremble with eagerness at
the momentous issues before us ? Do you wondei that
having put on the helmet of salvation and the breastplate
of Christ’s righteousness, having shod our feet with hope,
gripped the cross-handle sword, and over all oui armour
girded on the pitiful passionate love of Christ, we fall on
our faces m awe and holy supplication, pleading that our
arms may prevail, and that the whole multitude may be
given into our hands? “The sword of the Lord and of
Gideon!” And may the Cross flash forth to glorious con-
quest !
Fall on your faces, brethren, and mingle your fervent
supplications'with ours, that so our swords may be “bathed
in Heaven.”
Give us cheerfully, give us freely, of your gold that
we be not hampered and hindered and held back.
Think of us, think of them, think of Him.
Toil for us; earn gold for us; dream of us.
God is my witness that this dream fills my eyes, wak-
ing by day and sleeping by night.
“Give me children or I die.” “Let Ishmael live before
Thee.” “Shall Igoup ?” the kings of Israel used to ask,
and for guidance they went to the High Priest, on whose
breast in the Ephod were the Urim and the Thummim,
that gave God’s answers to their questions.
Scholars can’t tell us just what the Urim and Thum-
mim were, but I like the suggestion that two special gems
in the High Priest’s breastplate either brightened to mean
Yes, or darkened to mean No.
“Shall I go up?” asked the king; and if the jewels
sparkled back their “Yes,” he girded on his sword and
went up.
Brethren, we, too, for this great enterprise, have en-
quired of the Lord. We have humbly knelt before our
Great High Priest and watched for the answer.


What have we seen? The Urim and Thummim grad-
ually grown brighter—
gleamed, sparkled, glittered, glistened, FLASHED,
and in that flashing we have read a mighty YES, GO UP !
Brothers, sisters, by the faith that has saved you, the
glory that has touched your home to beauty, the saints
we have laid to their rest, bid us fare forward, and make
it possible for us to fare forward, to triumph over all ob-
stacles, to snatch the widow from the Mohammedan, to win
for woman’s Saviour all those wayward, woeful, wistful,
witless widows, to set the name of Jesus on the lips of
every Nama Sudra child, to make the knowledge of the
Lord cover the land as the great green stretches of wav-
ing rice cover the face of the still waters of the heel, for in
His name shall the Nama Sudras hope.
God help us to realize the greatness of our opportun-
ity; and “with the love-light in our eyes, and unquenchable
purpose in our hearts” to push onwards and upwards to
the “distant sunlit uplands of triumphant achievement
that lie beyond the valleys of self-sacrifice.”


India's Capacity.
Carlyle said :—“That, one should die ignorant who had
a capacity for knowledge, this I call a tragedy. . Then
India is an empire of tragedy, a tragedy for which the
Church of Christ is responsible. For India has a capacity
for knowledge, for the knowledge of God, the knowledge
of the mountains of God’s holiness, God s justice, and God s
love, those heavenly Himalayas from which might flow
through her waiting plains such a Ganges of Grace as would
cause “everything to live whithersoever the river” should
come, were but the capacity for the knowledge turned into
the possession of the knowledge.
England’s Temple-Empire.
India is England’s Temple-Empire. As Empire she
is guarded, guided, and governed with a magnificence of
equipment, and an enthusiasm of zeal of which as English-
men we have good cause to be proud. As Temple she is
slighted and neglected, with a coldness and a callousness
of which as Christians we have good cause to be saddened
and ashamed. And yet, as God looks down upon the
Temple-Empire, how well we know how He relatively es-
teems India as Empire and India as Temple.
But, alas for the Temple-capacities compassed with
infirmity, for the Temple-courts defiled, and for the holy
things doing devil’s service in Durgas’ shrine.
“Cyrus the king brought forth the vessels of the house
of the Lord, which Nebuchadnezzar had brought forth out
of Jerusalem, and had put in the house of his gods.” (Ezra
i. 7.) And shall not we make bold inruption into the
“house of his gods,” and lay claiming hands on the ca-
pacity for devotion, the capacity for worship, the capacity
for religious ecstasy, which are holy things—His things,
His things in hell’s house, things to be brought out by


eager hands, your hands —brought out, cleansed and sanc-
tified, and laid at His feet Whose they are ?
For they are His, as the Temple-courts are His. “The
zeal of Thine house hath eaten Me up” was the word that
stirred the Great Cleanser that day when He stooped to
gather the handful of rushes from the temple-courts to
drive out the beasts, and the shameless, avaricious priests,
that so the bustle of the bazaar might give place to the
peacefulness of pure prayer.
"Thine house” ; your missionaries murmur it to-day as
they, too, move about among the beasts and the beastly
things in the heathen temples.
The courts are there, the place for prayer ; can we not
see what He saw ?
"The court of the Gentiles!” "My house shall be called
a house of prayer for all the nations,”
The zeal of Thine House shall eat me up.
The altar is broken down. Yes, but the stones are
there.
The fire is out. Yes, but the God of Elijah lives.
There is
capacity in the wood
even though it is drenched. God’s fire scorns the op-
posing water. It will lick up the water in the trenches,
and in the cracks of the wood, leaving it dry and ready to
leap out in crackling response to the touch of God’s sparks
that fly from the Cross, the burning cross. The wood is
there. It shall kindle again in the day that you call upon
Elijah’s God to send the fire.
Disgust.
Two of our ministers, Mr. Hughes and Mr. Taylor,
came out to see us two or three years ago. They travelled
in South India alone, and at first got into touch with no
missionaries. They saw Hinduism in all its naked loath-
someness, and Mr. Hughes told me how he was sick of
heart. He saw the country, through Hinduism, “damned,
drugged, and bedevilled.” He looked into his heart, and
found there a feeling perilously near to disgust with the
Hindu, even though he wanted to love him.


Listen to the advice James Martineau gives to a man
in such a position : —“Let him turn in his thought of the
wicked from what they are to what they might be, and the
turbid film of disgust will clear away from his heart, bro-
ken up and dispersed by lights of glorious capacity, gleam-
ing through the cloud of their ignorance and guilt. Know-
ing that the divine affinity of spirit with spirit is not dead
within them, but only sleepeth, he looks on them with
the prophetic eye of trust; and without the least recon-
cilement to what they now are, he is touched with antici-
patory reverence for what they are meant to be.
“The heathen are not
mere stuff for hell.”
When you have looked out over heathenism it has looked
to you (aye, and to us, too) as hopeless as Ezekiel’s Valley of
Dry Bones; you saw the heathen very many and very dry.
The Vision of Capacity did not come to Ezekiel at first.
Has it come to you ?
“See,” says Forsyth, “they are
bones not stones.
At least, they are relics; they are not mere remnants, mere
things. They are things with memories, things with tears
in them ; things once wedded to life, though now in tragic
divorce. They are bones, not stones.”
The Muckrake of Heathenism.
When Christ wept over the multitude it was not
merely because of their weakness and need, but also be-
cause there was in each a capacity for becoming a child of
God. He not only saw men with the muckrake in their
hands, and the rubbish at their feet, but with the crown
hung over the head of each. And with Him the tragedy
was not merely that they should be absorbed with the muck,
but that they .should not see the crown.
Any man who sees the muckrake of heathenism, and
yet fails to see the capacity for the crown in the lives of
the humblest, is not ready to awaken those latent aspira-
tions which, divinely given, belong to all.


Pinnaroo.
Pinnaroo is Home Missions. Pinnaroo is Foreign Mis-
sions, too, for is there not writ large across Pinnaroo the
lesson of ‘‘land rejected and nigh unto a curse, ”
found to have capacity undreamt of ? Men called it de-
sert and scrub, because they did not know and did not
understand. And we have thought too much of lands
across the water as being “desert and scrub,” not
knowing, and not understanding.
But we are learning better
If they are lands “rejected, and nigh unto a curse,”
it is because the Church has not settled her sturdy sons
upon them, to clear them, and to plough them, and to
scatter the golden seed of God.
There is capacity there —it isn’t desert, it isn’t scrub,
it is garden land neglected.
Mesopotamia..
Look at that wonderful land of Mesopotamia, lying
waste and ruined to-day. But men say it has all its ancient
wonderful capacity for fertility, and busy brains are at
work to turn capacity into reality. What matter if the
work of clearing be slow and toilsome ? Every acre cleared
is room made for harvests. The land is there—land in
good heart, and the very luxuriant jungle it is growing now
bears witness that it has power to grow, and power to grow
better things than jungle.
The Gold of that Land.
The river that went out of Eden was parted and be
came four heads. The first branch of the river “com-
passeth the land of Havilah, where there is gold, and the
gold of that land is good.” (Genesis ii. 11.) I don’t know
where the land of Havilah is, but I know of a land “where
there is gold, and that the gold of that land is good.”
There is “gold of character in Hindus and Mahomme-
dans; there is gold of truth in their Scriptures; and there
is gold even in some of their social customs.”
“There is rubbish, but there is gold.” And “ ‘The
silver is mine, and the gold is mine,’ saith the Lord of
Hosts.” (Haggai ii. 8.)


"To see the gold will engender reverence and faith,
reverence for the actual goodness, faith in the possible
goodness of non-Christian men.”
My purpose in this address is to show you some of
the gold, and having shown it to you, to seek to quicken
in you the gold-fever, that we may be more keen to win it,
and, having won it, to weave it into crowns for the head
of Him whose it is. "The silver and the gold are Mine,”
He says. Get them for Me.
Idolatry.
Let us start, then, to look for gold, the gold of cap-
acity waiting to be won. Let us go first to the idol temple.
To the idol temple ? Yes, there is gold there. Not the
gold girdle on the idol, not the golden altar of incense,
nor the golden candlestick. But the gold of worship;
gold in the heart of the prostrate idolator. But have not
the missionaries told us that idolatry is mud ? Yes, idol-
atry is mud, but mud that carries gold.
True, idolatry is unclean and deadly, and means moral
disease and death ; true, that the worship in the temples
gathers to itself all the worst passions of human nature,
and stamps on their indulgence the seal of a divine ap-
proval ; true, that idolatry is the result first of all of a
perverted will which refuses to recognize God, and then
of elaborate philosophies in which the natural idea of God
is left out.
True, that to imagine (as Indian idolaters do) the
existence of gods and goddesses whose immorality, cruelty,
and depravity so far surpass the crimes among men as the
supposed divine beings exceed them in power, and to wor-
ship them, leads to the grossest moral degradation.
True it is, that the best thought of modern India is sick
of the foulness of idolatry, that the idols get fewer, and
“not a day passes but some idol is split up to boil the pot
with.”
Still, I repeat, idolatry represents gold, for it repre-
sents capacity for worship.
Idolatry is capacity. Every altar speaks of the
capacity for God ; every little wayside shrine, and everv


rude stone daubed with gaudy paint which some super-
stitious labourer sets up under the tree by the roadside,,
is an altar to the unknown God.
“The Things of Idolatry demonstrate
Capacity.”
I have seen the Hindu mother take her sweet little
innocent child, just learning to toddle, and bow its fore-
head in the dust before the idol, thus setting its feet on
the first step of the staircase. I know (for I have seen it)
how that staircase will take it downwards, down towards
hell.
But this is what I want to know, and ever to remem-
ber, that it is because
the pitch of that staircase is wrong,
that those little steps grope downwards into the dark.
Alter the pitch of that staircase, make it slope upwards
to God, instead of downward to hell, and the same worship-
treading of the staircase will lead not to gloom, but to
glory.
Get your shoulder under that staircase, men, and alter
the pitch of it.
After the Franco-German war the villagers dug up
the cannon balls out of the fields and made them into
church bells. The metal was there, it only wanted cast-
ing. Idolatry is capacity, and the casting of that capacity
will ring the praises of our God.
“The Heathen in his Blindness bows down.”
Thank God for that bowing down. “There are worse
things than superstition. To see gods everywhere is better
than to see gods nowhere,” and as I have sat beside a
Hindu in the electric tramcar in Calcutta and watched
him make his obeisance as the car swept past an idol temple,
there has witnessed itself before me the spirit of reverence
which so profoundly possesses the Hindu, and I have
claimed in prayer the bowing of that head for Him who is
the true Idol —the Express Image of God’s person.
“Idolatry, foolish and degraded as it is, lays supreme
stress on a vital truth, a truth which the human heart will


never surrender, the Personality of God. It witnesses to
man’s natural craving, to have before him some manifesta-
tion of the Unseen, to see, in fact, a humanized God. And
nothing but a religion that offers a visible and divine ob-
ject for adoring reverence, a true and worthy Image of
the Divine (as does Christianity) can save, or has ever
saved, a people from idolatry.”
Idolatry has in it the hint of a great human longing.
And do we sujipose that God does not know that longing
in the human heart to feel His presence near ?
There are some who would put it this way: "Behind
the stocks and stones to which he bows down, there is not
the blindness of ignorance, but the distortion of inadequate
knowledge.”
That is partly true, but not all the truth. When
Paul wrote the first of Romans, he saw wilful wickedness
and perversion of will behind the stocks and stones; and
so there is.
But it is also true that there is many an idolater who
would worship Christ, the true Image of God, if this know-
ledge were his instead of the inadequate knowledge which
leads him to accept idolatry as right and true.
Bhakti.
Suddenly in South India there appeared a new doc-
trine. It was in the early years of the Christian era.
It was a wonderful doctrine of Salvation by Faith, or
Bhakti. “Bhakti.” You must learn that word. It is
a word which means to India what Luther’s “Justification
by Faith” meant to Germany. It means loving devotional
surrender. “Bhakti means faith, in the sense of absolute
devotion to a personal God. It is not belief. It must
be devoted to a person, not to a system of doctrine. It
is ‘abiding’ in Him.”
This faith must be directed to the Supreme or to one
of His incarnations ; in the north it is Ram, in Bengal it
is Krishna.
This faith will save.
1. The Philosophers teach that knowledge (or Wisdom)
is all, and will save.


2. Other more popular systems say ‘ Perform penance,
meditate, do good works, do something.” AVorks will
save.
3. The Bhakti school says —Trust Krishna.
The Christian defines Faith thus: —“Faith is the
movement of the whole man to Christ.” This Bhakti school
says: —“Faith is the movement of the whole man to
Krishna.”
I have not time to touch the interesting subject of the
source of this doctrine. I believe it was derived from
Christianity in South India; but you will realize the pro-
found importance of it (1) from this glimpse at its won-
derful similarity to Christian doctrine, and (2) from the
knowledge that this doctrine “is at the bottom of the Hin-
duism of a hundred millions of Indians.”
A great poet arose, Tulsi Das, a contemporary of
Shakespeare, and popularized the faith in North India,
while this work was done in Bengal by Chaitanya, a re-
former contemporary with Luther.
The philosophers and priests had made religion syn-
onymous with knowledge, but the reformers and poets of
the 15th century brought in the greatest revolution that
India has ever seen.
“Religion became no longer a question of knowledge,
but of emotion. To the poor the Gospel was now preached,”
and the preaching was in the vernacular, not in the
learned Sanskrit.
“The land was full of rapture, and the leading spirits
were akin, not to the schoolmen of Benares, but to the
poets and mystics of mediaeval Europe.”
“India re-discovered faith and love.”
The law was a schoolmaster to lead the Jew to Christ.
The doctrine of Bhakti will, I believe, be the school-
master for India.
Gold and Mud.
Here then is gold: the passionate love of the warm
religious nature of India.
Here is capacity for limitless love. True it
is, (ah, so terribly, sadly true), that the gold


is buried in mud. On Krishna, who was at best but a
“handsome, winning profligate,” Indian womanhood “has
poured itself forth in one mighty flood of Oriental pas
sion. Her faith is based on love, but the love is not that
of a child to its father, but that of a maid —of a maid ot
the East— for a man.” The wild, lawless, reckless love
which breaks all bounds, dares everything, and defies the
heavens, is taken to be a worthier type of passionate self-
sacrificing love than the ordered love of the Shulamite.
“The Hindu is first and foremost philosophical, but
he has also a profound capacity for religious emotion, and
this Bhakti-worship, the passionate love, and ardent at-
tachment of the devotee to an object regarded as Divine,
has swayed the minds of India's millions as no philosophy
has ever done.”
Closely associated with the doctrine of Bliakti is a
Doctrine of Love.
Listen to one of the Bhakti teachers—“ Small is the
door of bhakti as the tenth part of a mustard seed. The
heart of man is swollen with pride to the size of an ele-
phant, how can he pass within ? Only love can let him
in. But love grows not in the fields, nor is it on sale
in the bazaar; the man devoid of love will be bound and
cast into hell. A man may read many books before he
dies, and yet not be a pundit; he is a pundit who under-
stands the two and a half letters which form the key-word
Love.”
It is a terribly perverted view of the soul’s attitude
to the Infinite, and it may shock you that I should speak
of capacities illustrated by idolatry and bhakti as gold, but
“though bhakti is degraded into depths of sensuality, it
has in it the root of the matter,” for they say :
Faith in His name is a little boat,
The Holy Master Himself is the steersman.
Stretching out His loving arms He crieth—
“Come, I will ferry thee across.”
This being so, the faith of many millions in Bengal
being that by grace and by faith are ye saved, and that,
not of yourselves, it is the gift of Krishna, what a trumpet
call it is to us to give to this love a worthy object!


The missionaries are your speaking trumpet, and you
cry to them, as they cling to Krishna, “Not this man but
Christ.”
“When their warm Oriental religious nature, trans-
ferring its allegiance from Krishna, takes possession of
Christ for its very own, and finds in the Lord of Love
a new love-centre, it will lavish on Him its most fervent
devotion, and count no sacrifice too great to make,” for
Jesus, lover of their souls.
Then will they
sing- a. new song
(or, rather, the old song with a new name). For singing
is the great act of worship in the Bhakti faith; united,
long-continued, fervent, excited, ecstatic, intoxicating,
maddening, singing of the praises of Krishna.
I seem to hear them singing as I speak. Louder
and louder clash the drum and cymbals, more and more
rapidly rushes the music, more and more excited are the
swayings of the bodies and the gesticulations; while ever
and anon rises a united shout: —Hari 801, Call on the
Saviour. But who is He 1
Krishna, they say. No, we answer, not Krishna, but
Khrista, i.e., Christ.
The love is there, the passion is there, but
the siame is wrong.
In the olden days when Israel had smitten the Philis-
tines, the troops came home, and the streets were crowd-
ed; huzzahs rent the air, and bands of women with tab-
rets and stringed instruments danced and sang, but the
hero they hymned was David. “Saul hath slain his
thousands, and David his ten thousands.” The name was
wrong and the king was dishonoured, and a fire burned
in Saul’s heart. He would not have it! That hated
name, if lie could compass it, should perish and wither
on their lips. And a deep purpose rooted itself in his
heart. He, He the King, would brook no rival.
Friends, as those songs kindled in Saul’s heart a fierce
flame of jealousy, and set there a deep purpose of revenge,
shall not those Bhakti-songs in Bengal kindle a holy fire


in our hearts, and set there a deep, strong purpose that,
whatever be the cost in lives or treasure, in toil or self-
sacrifice, that name shall be altered, and His name, the
name, shall ring in joyful triumph throughout that great
land; and that in those hundreds of villages when the
singing circle is formed on the cool grass mats in the dark
shadows of the banyan trees, the theme of the song shall
be Jesus, our Jesus?
Is India capable of singing “Take my life and let it
be”—“Take piy hands”—“Take my lips” —“Take my silver
and my gold”—
Take my love, my Lord, I pour
At Thy feet its treasure store P
She has sung it, she is singing it to-day. But she
is singing it to the wrong person. God give her the new
name for her songs, and use us to do the giving!
India’s Spirituality.
Is not the spirituality of India’s nature a rich store
of capacity, a casket of immortal powers ? Bernard Lucas
writes in the Empire of Christ: —“No race in the world
has been so richly endowed with spiritual capacities as
the Hindu, but he has become the slave to a conception
of the universe evolved out of his own imagination, which
lias paralysed his whole being. The West is more or
less under the tyrannny of the material, and her religious
life is only won by the severest conflict. India, on the
other hand, is the firstborn of all the nations in her eman-
cipation from the slavery of the material, and her en-
thusiastic devotion to a spiritual view of the universe.
She has never mistaken the canvas, and the pigments, and
gilded frame for the reality of that Divine work of art
which confronts us in the universe, but has always felt
that beneath the eternal there was an inner meaning which
it was of priceless value to discover, and of utmost loss
to miss.”
A few months ago a famous Bengali tiger-tamer for-
sook the world to become an ascetic. This is how a
native Indian paper comments on it: —"11 ere was an In-
dian prospering in the world, in possession of the good
things of life; vet they fell away from him like dissolv-


BAPTISM OF THE YOUNG SALT MERCHANT AT FARTDPUR. (RBAPTISM OF THE YOUNG SALT MERCHANT AT FARTDPUR. (Rev.S. Mead standing behind Dr. Mead )


jng fetters when the call sounded for him in the prime
of life to go and join in the great search. At no stage of
her history has India lacked sons ready to renounce all
that mankind loves and lives for, in impassioned yearning
for the sight of Him who hides Himself behind the lu-
minous veil of the universe, in fevered quest of the Truth,
Goodness, and Beauty that lie above and beyond the life
that ceases, the love that owes allegiance to death, the
happiness that crumbles, the sorrow that has in it nothing
of eternity. This is the age-long pilgrimage for which
India has been world-famous, the true inwardness and in-
spiration of which the journeyings of devotees to shrines
and holy places, but faintly serve outwardly to symbo-
lize.”
It is for us to draw out that rich mysticism which is
so peculiarly the heritage of the East. We may be the
St. Paul or the St. Peter of the nations, but India will
be the St. John.
Within the Brahmo Somaj the innate spirituality of
the Indian finds freer scope. Here is an illustration.
In the Brahmo Bengali marriage service occurs this
beautiful passage:
Behold, 0 God, from this fair earth of Thine,
Two love-flowers cast at Thy dear feet.
Reach forth Thy hand, O King of kings,
Take them and thread them on one love<-string;
And that so firmly, that it ne’er may rend asunder,
Yet keep them in Thy hand.
Moisten them with the dews of Thy dear grace.
Lest haply in the fierce sunshine of the world.
These blossoms droop and fade.
But it is in the native Christian community that we
look for the rich fruit of pure spirituality. The son of
one of our Christian women in Faridpur had grown to
manhood, and gone into business as a salt merchant,
but had not yet become a Christian. His mother’s heart
was filled with anxiety, and much prayer was made for
him. Finally to our great joy the young salt merchant
decided for Christ. The day of his baptism came.
To give expression to her jov his mother invited the
Christians to partake in a love-feast.


CHRISTIANS SEATED AROUND BAPTISTRY, PARTAKING OF THE LOVE-FEAST.


And, further, the glad mother gave to her son a Ben-
gali poem she had written in the gladness of her heart.
This is what she said to him:
A TRIBUTE OF LOVE.
Son of my love, this day the priceless royal robe thou puttest on,
Thy mother bids thee keep it spotless white.
Pramode, thy brother, remember his last word—
“ Take careful heed lest sin your garment stain.”
Let not the dust-stains of the world, beloved one,
Soil this fair robe.
Beware, lest, evil company amongst, thou tear and soil it.
Spotless it is, I bid thee keep it so until the end.
In such fair garb alone can heaven’s gate be entered;
Take heed, lest sin besmirch it, and forbid thee entrance there.
The Sacred Name this day upon thy heart thou hast engraven,
That Name be ever on thy lips as in the path of life
Thou heavenward passest.
Son of my love, the name of Jesus, honey-sweet,
Forget it never.
In days of gladness and of gloom,
Cherish it ever.
—Your Mother.
Asceticism.
The story of India’s ascetics is a story of India’s ca-
pacity to endure and to suffer for the sake of the spirtual.
“Fullest acknowledgment being made of the gross hypocrisy,
idleness, and immorality of vast numbers of ascetics, still
we are face to face with the grandeur of the ideal, the
simple honesty of multitudes of good men, and the heroic
achievements of leaders such as Gautama the Buddha and
Mahavira the Jain.”
Who can measure the capacity for religious passion
•of the pilgrims chanting their hymns as they ascend the
hills, whose holy sides are furrowed so deep by the feet
of pilgrims who have come and gone through a thousand
years ? “These pilgrims with their cymbals and their
songs testify that hearts in India, in spite of priest and
ceremonial superstition, yet lift their longings to the
unknown God, and yearn to draw near and clasp His lotus
feet.”
Mahommedanism.
I must not stay to speak of the spiritual capacity
of Indian Mahommedans (Mr. Goldsack will tell you of
that).


India’s Intellect.
Nor must I speak of India’s wonderful intellectual
capacity, and the call to “refertilize the magnificent in-
tellect of India,” that so she may develop her capacity
to contribute to the fuller interpretation of Christianity
the richer harmony of the orchestra, and the nobler com
pletion of the Temple. They shall bring the wealth of
the Indians into it.
But bear with me while I speak one brief word of
India’s capacity for love.
Rich is the power to love of these Eastern men and
women. Some of you love me here, but you do not know
of the treasures of love that are mine yonder in India.
God has given them the power to love, because only
by it can they truly know or hear Him, and
Dwell in the Eternal Light
Through the Eternal Love.
In heathen hearts the alphabet of the Gospel of
Love has been learnt. Can we recognize it ? Can we
train the learners to put the letters together till they spell
out the name Christ Jesus ?
Among our Bengali Christians what pure love for the
Master we see and rejoice over! Faithful Joy Chand
was sorely ill with severe asthma and pneumonia. As
I walked away from his house, . after visiting him one
day, I heard him trying to cheer himself in his distress,
repeating aloud “The mercy of the Lord is everlasting.
The mercy of the Lord is everlasting.”
One of my preachers was apparently dying. I found
him praying. He entrusted his family to me, and said.
“I have no fear; it is all right for me.” Then he swooned
away, and then, in an interval of consciousness, he said,
“He that believeth on Me, though he die yet shall he live.
Wonderful life—wonderful life. Oh, Lord, that every-
body might have it!” He sang with me, “Safe in the
arms of Jesus,” and then said, “There have been many
faults in my work, forgive me.” I felt ashamed before
him, for his work had been more zealous and faithful than
mine. He had loved the Lord with his whole heart


And what of the love of India’s women, those daugh-
ters of the East who still break their alabaster boxes. The
king’s daughter is all beautiful within; some of them
still shut up with their love for Christ, within the zenana.
Who will fetch her out to the King that her beauty may
be seen and rejoiced in ? What but a chain of pure love
holds Miss Kamala Bose, a Christian Bengali young lady,
to her post at Gopalgunge, only 20 miles from Orakandi,
seeking to uplift Nama Sudra women? She obtained her
B.A. with honours in philosophy, winning the university
gold medal awarded to the first woman graduate of her
year, was offered handsomely-paid Government posts in
the Education Department, but counted it all but dross
that she might
flee away with her love
to the rice-swamps that she might pour it out for His dear
sake, on her sad and sinful countrywomen.
“Who will bring me water from Bethlehem’s well ?” the
water of love, fresh and sweet, water to be desired.
Ah, brethren, we have seen it brought by the hands
of our Bengali brothers and sisters.
Christ’s Observance of Capacity.
It was Christ’s observance of capacity that made Him
keen to have Peter and John and James as His disciples.
He saw the capacities for consecration to His service. So
does He (and so must we) observe the capacities of the
nations.
It is written of Asa, King of Judah, that lie took
away the stones of Ramah, and the timber thereof, and
built therewith Geba and Mizpah. Out of the dis-
mantled fortress of Israel he built cities of Judah. He
took old materials, and used them for a new and better
purpose.
So are we seeking out of the dismantled fortresses and
temples of India, with the gold of her bhakti, and the
timber of her idols to build the city of our God.
I have set before you India’s spiritual capacities. In
closing I give you
the war-cry
from Nahum’s prophecy:—“Take ye the spoil of


silver, take the spoil of gold, for there is none end of
the store, the wealth of all pleasant furniture” (Nahum
ii. 9).
True, much of the gold is dimned, and the pleasant
furniture in sad disrepair. Many of India’s rich capaci-
ties are in ruins and in captivity. ‘ There are in In-
dian spiritual prison houses blind Samsons, dead Laza-
ruses, and fallen Davids,” but these shall be recovered to
bear away the gates of heathen temples and to awake up
psaltery and harp with the praises of our Jesus from
Ganges’ streams to Himalayan heights.
Even though there be to-day in India “houses full
of lamps unlit, vessels unfilled, and songs unsung,” the
lamps are there, the vessels and the singers are there.
The capacities are there, but they must be planted in
Christ. “t saw
a bit of Edelweiss
the other day,” says Jowett, “growing in a garden, biit it
had to be labelled, it was so unlike its masculine kinsman,
gripping the desolate precipices of the lofty Alps. Ay,
you must see the Edelweiss at home! And if you want
to see,” he says, “what love really is, and will and con-
science and chivalry, you must see them at home in their
native clime, rooted and grounded in the life and love of
the Eternal Lord.”
In Christ shall all be made alive. And planted
and rooted in Christ, “gripping the desolate precipices of
the lofty Alps” of the great Son of God, these capacities
of India shall blossom into beauty, and perfect into
strength.
A company has been formed to search the sea for
two and a half millions of gold, the
lost treasure cf the Spanish Armada.
They know where it is within an area of 400 yards square.
It is there. Sand drifts have covered it,, and the work
of recovery is beset with immense difficulties; but it is
there, and they are determined to get it. Brethren, the
capacities for holy perception, for holy desire, for holy
sympathy and holy faculty for service, the capacities for
Christ are there. Let us get them.


“The Hindu religious nature is a
veritable River Nile,
which waits only for the skill which can direct and the
energy which can utilize, to transform India into the
richest promise of the Empire of Christ.”
Yes, the water is there, with all its wonderful capacity
for enriching the country, but you and I must toil hard
to cut Christ-cliannels for it.
With her capacities Christ-centred and Christ-con-
trolled, India will be as a polished shaft in the Saviour’s
quiver.
“Cannot Christ do with India what Buddha did ?
Japan may be the scientific brain of Asia, and China its
strong labouring hands, and burden-bowed back, but the
burning heart of Asia is India.
“Once already has India religiously conquered Asia.
Not only did she give Laotse, the philosophy of Taoism,
but when the young enthusiasm of Buddha overleaped
the mountains of the North she gave religion to China
and Japan, and one-half of the world to-day is thinking
the religious thoughts of India.” “India on fire means
Asia in conflagration.” Cannot Christ do with India
what Buddha did ?
That depends on what He can do with you and me.
Thou!
Jesus stepped down into the waters of baptism at the
Jordan, and the heavens flung open, and a Voice came
which said, “Thou. Thou art My Beloved Son— Thou.' 4
God marked the Man who had girded Himself with an
utterness of consecration to the winning of Judea’s multi-
tudes for God, and poured down upon Him the equip-
ment of Heaven’s grace, and the bliss of heaven’s benedic-
tion.
Has He marked you ?
' There came a Voice.” It comes still.
“Thou” art the one I want to burn in love for India.
“Thou” art the one I want to go and seek those
marred and misplaced capacities,
c


“Thou” art the one I want to pour out gold for me
with the same passion of love with which I poured out
blood for thee.
Will you stand with me within the baptismal waters
of consecration, and listen for that thou ?
Let us pray.
Prayer-
Master, behold us. Speak to us. Say to us "thou
art My beloved son in whom I am. well pleased." Canst
thou ? Darest thou say it ? Look upon our hearts and
measure their love. Look upon our gifts and measure
their value. And say to us what Thou wilt. Say to
us “Go” and we will go. Say to us "Give’ and we
will give. Say to us “Sell that thou hast” and we will
sell it. We are at Thy feet to command. Make us will-
ing to give more than the crumbs that fall from our
tables. We pray Thee take the splendid capacities of
India, and make them more splendid still with the splen-
dour of truth and holy love, of sacrifice and high service.
Let all her capacities be channels set end on to the foun-
tain of Thy cross. And to win the consecration of those
capacities, we here and now make before Thee, and unto
Thee, the utter consecration of ourselves and of our all.


The
Missionary Persuasion.
“This persuasion came.”
(Galatians v. 8.)
Our persuasions sweep us as in a chariot of fire, up-
wards to the very Throne of God, or grip us with devilish
clutch and fling us into hell. For we are ever sur-
rounded by a complexity of conflicting persuasions which
would have us for their own, and as we yield our lives
to the persuasions that are of the Holy One that calleth us
from above, or to the persuasions that are of the evil one
who calleth us from below, so shall they, in their course
and in their outcome, be lives swept upwards into light,
or lives swept downwards into the dark caverns of defeat
and despair.
A persuasion came upon the Galatian Christians,
which was persuading them into a life of narrowness, a
life with small and unworthy views of Christ’s work and
ability, a persuasion which came not from Him that called
them because it was so absolutely unlike Him, and a per-
suasion from which Paul would persuade them into per-
suasions which, instead of hindering their running well,
would help them and hasten them into a nobler and more
truly Christian life of running in the pursuit of per-
suasions sent from God.
We must scrutinize the persuasions that' are giving
bent and bias to our lives.
Spiritual Forces.
Persuasions are among the spiritual forces as elec-
tricity is among the physical forces, mighty and multi-
form, masterful and mysterious. The steam lays its per-
c2


suasion upon the engine, the electricity lays its persuasion
upon the tramway, and God lays His persuasions upon our
souls.
Persuasions, too, are capable of a downward, as well
as an upward, pull, servants of both God and devil. A
persuasion entered Eden, and Eve, persuaded, perished.
A persuasion fell on Saul outside Damascus, and he leaped
into light. Persuasions are wings, or they are chains;
they are pennons or they are pinions.
The history of the world
is the history of its persuasions. A persuasion came upon
Britain, and the sweet sway of Jesus passed upon our
forefathers. A passionate persuasion swept America and
slavery was swept away. A persuasion was welcomed in
Japan, and she flung her gates ojoen to the learning of the
enlightened nations, that, enlightened herself, she might
take her place among them. A persuasion has come upon
China that the curse of opium is sapping her strength,
she has sworn that it shall cease, and no nation, to-day,
dares wage an opium war to attempt to reverse that per-
suasion at the point of the bayonet.
Our poets have been persuaded of God to sing, and
our painters have seen visions—persuasions.
Democracy is a persuasion, and the lust of gold garbed
as persuasion leads the millionaire as her captive.
Spiritual Waves.
Persuasions are waves sweeping over us and sweeping
us on. The waves of good and evil persuasions ever sweep
about us.
Scientists tell us of the oscillations of the ions, and
the waves of energy in the ether which do the hidden
work of the universe. But there is a spiritual world as
well as a material world, and waves of sympathy and
love and prayer are as real as the waves caused by the
splash of a, pebble in a pool, or the waves of energy in the
ether.
Christian metaphysicians suggest that when God
'Thought creation and willed its dawn” He established
countless rhythms of His own design, each vibrating in


accord with His own mind and will, and all meant to
make harmonies, and rise to higher harmonies; they
suggest that goodness is the receiving of impulses
that go out from God to all life, which is “tuned
to receive the waves of His eternal energy.” They suggest
that “Evil is discord, caused by alien vibrations, out of
tune with God, and beating in a wrong rhythm; that
evil is that which opposes God in the rhythm of the
impulses that come from His will; while love is the har-
monious chord produced in man’s complex nature when
it thrills in tune with the nature of God.”
This beautiful and fascinating theory of moral vibra-
tions and waves of moral energy is the
Metaphysics of Missions.
Waves of love sweep out from our churches in Aus-
tralia, and beat against our mission houses in India. So
do waves of prayer; prayers go up and persuasions go out.
There are waves that wash the shores of others’ lives that
float many a wanderer home again.
Eternal Father,
A few days ago as T sat and pondered this wonderful
hidden and mysterious wave-world an old familiar hymn
sang itself over in a new guise to my spirit. This is how
it came to me :
Eternal Father, strong to save,
Whose arm hath bound the restless wave,
Who bidd’st the mighty ocean deep
Its own appointed limits keep,
O hear us when we cry that we
May learn the message of the sea.
Its waves foam forth at Thy behest
To wash far shores in east and west ;
Nor less Thy deeper waves of Love,
Break forth in blessing from above.
0 hear us when we cry that we
May learn this message of Love’s sea.
Thou Christ, Thou Wave of God, forth sent,
Didst lave our shores on mercy bent.
Where India wanders in distress,
Nor knows Thy love, Thy will to bless,.
0 hear us when we cry that we
May flow in love beyond the sea.


Persuasions from God.
“This persuasion came not from Him that calleth you/'
but there are persuasions wiiich are from Him that calleth
us. Indeed, the coming of all holy persuasions is God
putting forth energy upon us.
Whenever an appeal is made to us, whether to make
a choice for God, to give to His cause, or to fling our
strength into a great cause, there is a play of God's per-
suasions upon us.
His call is Ilis persuasion of us, and then our fol-
lowing of Him is the ever willingness to be persuaded of
all His precious persuasions. For in the nobler life our
ideals are accepted persuasions, and over every task ac-
cepted for Christ’s sake, and upon every spiritual height
scaled in pursuit of Him is written: —“This persuasion
came from Him who calleth me.”
“But of Him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is
made unto us” the persuasion.
Jesus is God’s Great Persuasion:
God’s great persuasion to goodness.
In the beginning was the Persuasion, and the Per-
suasion was with God, and the Persuasion was God. This
Persuasion came into the world, full of grace and truth, but
the world received Him not, but as many as were per-
suaded to them gave He the right to become sons of God.
This Persuasion came not of man, nor of the will of man,
but of God. And having come into the world He sought,
and is ever seeking, to persuade the sons of men, saying :
“Come unto Me all ye that are weak, and I will persuade
you into the paths of strength.” “Come unto Me all ye
that are selfish and self-centred, and I will persuade you
with the sweet suasions of My own self-sacrifice.” “Yea,
I, if I be lifted up, will persuade all men, and by this
shall all men know that ye are My disciples if ye yield
to My persuasions of love.” “If I (as God’s Great Per-
suasion) had not come, they had not known the sin of the
unpersuaded.” “Blessed are the persuaded, for they shall
be the persuaders of the earth.” “The Lord is my shep-
herd, I shall not want ; He leadeth me in the paths of
God’s persuasions.” “Persuade ye, persuade ye, my people


saith your God.” “And I saw a great Angel flying in
midheaven, having the Gospel of the Great Persuasion,
that the nations of the earth might be persuaded. And
one of the elders answered, saying unto me, ‘What are
these that are arrayed in white robes, and whence came
they V And I said unto him, ‘Sir, thou knowest.’ And he
said to me, ‘These are they which yielded to the Great
Persuasion, and have washed their robes.’ ” “Wherefore,
now unto Him who is able to persuade you, and to
present you persuaded (persuaded out of sin into holiness
—out of self into love) before the presence of His glory
with exceeding joy to Him be the glory.”
The Holy Ghost.
The Holy Ghost is God’s Great Persuasion, and the
saved are the persuaded. Pentecostal persuasions swept
3,000 into the Kingdom in a day in Jerusalem, and pen-
tecostal persuasions swept 2,222 Indians into the Kingdom
in a day in the Lone Star Mission near Madras. “How-
beit when He, the Spirit of Truth, is come He will per-
suade you.” “If ye love Me, keep My persuasions, and 1
will pray the Father, and He shall give you another
Persuader that Pie may abide with you for ever.”
Temptation.
What is temptation but the coming in of persuasions
as a flood ?
The evil pulsings of powerful persuasions came even
upon the life of Christ, but there came a voice out of
heaven strengthening Him. Persuasions broke out of the
heavens, and victory was His. So is it ever ours, if we
will yield ourselves to the waves of the eternal holy energy,
stand up in the strength of God, and fling off the evil
persuasions.
The Missionary Persuasion.
Now, let me unfold the missionary banner. Missions
represent one of God’s most potent and purposeful per-
suasions; a persuasion to enter with God Himself into the
great traffic of the Kingdom. Verily, indeed, this per-
suasion does come of Him that calleth you. It is a per-
suasion of love. This persuasion cometh and saith, “Rise


up, my love, and come away. Come, my beloved, let
us go forth into the field ; let us lodge in the villages.”
As spake the lover to the Shulamite, so speaks this per-
suasion of love to love listening: “My beloved put in
his hand by the hole of the door”; he came to visit me,
but not that we might linger in love’s languor, but we
might fare forth together upon love’s quest.
When I preached to you of the nations fallen by the
wayside, did I not tell you that the Good Samaritan must
walk that they may ride ? Did I not tell you that that
walking is missions, and that though the path is not al-
ways easy as it winds through thorny Indian jungles, did
I not tell you that it is the March of Love, and that,
therefore, love presses on, regardless and full of eager
joy because of the cheer of the companionship of Him
who put in His hand by the hole of the door, that day
when He called us ?
When it is my privilege to enter your churches, and
to stand face to face with your congregations, am I not
bringing them a persuasion that would lift their lives into
nobility ?
Alas! that some few see no beauty in this persuasion
that they should desire it, and will not have this per-
suasion to loving sacrifice to rule over them. But thank
God for the many hearts who go out with palm branches
to welcome it, while the children add their glad hosannas,
and swell the host of the persuaded.
Look at the lives into which this missionary persua-
sion is welcomed, are they not our best Christians? And
the homes that have received this persuasion to dwell
among them, they are beautifid with an added touch of
heaven’s beauty. These are the homes we are invited to,
for we, missionaries are the concretized expressions of a
precious persuasion.
Missionaries.
For what are our missionaries? They are persua-
sions sent abroad—your persuasions to persuade India
to kneel beside you at the foot of the Cross, and to trim
her lamp with you to go out to meet the Bridegroom when
He cometh.


As He ascended He flashed back His last persuasion-
command —“Go ye into all the world persuading men.'’
This persuasion comes to the missionary in the mo-
ment of surrender and high purpose, like the fire from
God upon Elijah’s sacrifice, licking up all the water in
the trenches of life, and He hastens down from the moun-
tain to the plain to persuade men.
There was a persuasion sent from God whose name
was Carey, and every missionary knows that he, too, goes
forth from the presence of the Persuasion of the Most
High. He has heard the voice of the Lord saying—
“ Whom shall I send, and who will go for us to be for
persuasions to the people ?” and he has answered “Here
am I, send me.”
Substitutions.
And when he stands among the heathen hosts of the
unpersuaded and the mispersuaded, he finds that his work
is to be just the compassing of a splendid substitution of
persuasions. A substitution of pure for pernicious per-
suasions, of persuasions from the pure blue sky for per-
suasions from the cesspools of perdition, of persuasions
coming like purest fragrance from the Cross for persua-
sions sweeping like scorching siroccos from the deserts of
heathenism, a substitution of the melodies of the great
host of The persuaded of God for the ribaldry of the great
host of the rebellious.
India's Persuasions.
Down through the centuries India has substituted one
persuasion for another, following now this, now that per-
suading voice, till to-day she stands confused and bewil-
dered, persuaded in her many contrary and conflicting
sects, unto many persuasions, but none of them per-
suaded into peace and reconciliation with her God. Per-
suaded first to worship with astonishing complexity of
sacrificial ceremonial the Vedic gods, she then lent her
ear to the persuasions of the philosophers. Puzzled and
perplexed with their pettifogging Vedantism, she was next
persuaded with the persuasions of Buddhism.
Then, again, while Luther was persuading Europe,
:arose Chaitanya to persuade Bengal that salvation was not to


be sought through works, but through faith; justified
through faith in Krishna, and intoxicated with love for
the licentious god, she should attain to the bliss of Baikun-
tha (heaven), and this persuasion of Yaisnabism dom-
inates millions of Hindus to-day. While, forced to bite
the dust and bend the knee at the point of the Mahcm-
medan sword, tens of thousands of Bengalis hold the
persuasions of Mahomed as the purest persuasions of God.
Mahommedanism.
Mahommedanism came as a great persuasion of God
to Arabia—at least so Arabia understood it. The idols
were swept out of the land, and he who dared to worship
other than the one true God was declared an infidel ac-
cursed. True it is that, after the early days, Islam seized
the sword, went out into the highways and hedges and
compelled them to come in, but in the first instance it
was a mighty persuasion that came to, and was welcomed
by, the Arabian prophet, and through him reached those
sturdy sons of Ham, who to-day hold up their heads so
proudly as the People of God, the Persuaded of God-
God’s own possession.
It is one of the saddest sights of the world that the
Christian Church has hardly stirred an inch by way of
advance to capture the fiery hosts of Mahommedanism for
Christ. It is true to say that Christendom has fought
shy of the difficult and dangerous task. The Crusaders
crossed swords with the Moslems and bit the dust. There
was immense enthusiasm in those days to wrest the empty
tomb of Christ from the Moslems, but Jerusalem still be-
longs to the Mahcmmedans, and on Mt. Moriah, in the
very temple courts where Jesus sat and taught, Ma-
hommedan teachers sit and declare him a blasphemous
infidel and an enemy of God, who says that Jesus the Son
of Mary has any more meaning or value than Solomon
the son of Bathsheba.
Oh, Church of God, when wilt thou arise to a new
and more Christlike crusade ?
Islam, that vast, violent, and vehement system, awaits
the day of the Great Persuasion, when the Son of God


as fie goes forth to war shall be followed by an army of
new crusaders—new Persuaders —who in love shall per-
suade the Moslem to look into that empty tomb (over
which their ancestors and ours shed so much vain blood),
and read its meaning, and know that of a surety God hath
raised Him from the dead to be a Prince and a Persuading
Saviour.
The kingdoms of this world (including the Mahomme-
dan kingdom) shall yet become the kingdoms of our God
and of His Christ, and some day a great pershasion will
pass over the Mahommedan world, and they shall turn
from following the man with the sword to follow the Man
with a Cross. And looking back, they will tell their
children how a great persuasion came over the Church of
Christ, and through this they themselves were persuaded to
look into the empty tomb and read its message, and to
follow the risen King.
Political Persuasions.
And now in these recent days in India an army of
political persuaders are fain to tell her that heaven’s per-
suasions for her to-day are identical with the political
persuasions of her demagogues.
Alas poor India! there is yet One to whose persuasions
thou hast not yet listened. “He that dwelleth in the
secret place of His persuasions shall abide under the sha-
dow of the Almighty.” “ But behold the days come,
saitli the Lord, ‘when I will take away the old persuasions,
and I will give them new persuasions, and on their
hearts I will write them; and they shall not
teach every man his fellow-citizen, and every man his
neighbour, saying—Be persuaded of the Lord, for all shall
be persuaded from the least to the greatest of them. 1
the Lord will hasten it in its day.’ ”
The Nama Sudras.
A great persuasion has come to that great mass of low-
caste despised Nama Sudras. “We, too, are men; this is
not the destiny we were meant to have; the great God
in the heavens has made the proud Brahmin men just


as we are, why should we be as the mire beneath their
feet, and as bond slaves to do their bidding ?
Let us break their bands asunder,
And cast away their cords from us.
He that sitteth in the heavens will not laugh, nor have
us in derision, for verily this persuasion cometh from
Him who calleth us to arise to a better morrow.”
And so it does.
This persuasion to lift up their heads is of God. But
it is not yet enough. It is not enough to lift up their
heads, the full persuasion from God is that they (1) lift
up their heads, then (2) turn their heads to behold the
Lamb of God, and (3) then to bow their heads in loving
and lowly homage at His pierced feet. And you will heljr
me persuade them ?
That persuasion will come, and we shall watch it
coming.
Have you ever watched persuasions growing upon a
character to melt and to mould it ? Certainly, those of
you who are parents have done so, for persuasions, either
pious or perverse, are always emanating from the parents’
lives. Our lives are persuasions. Who can adequately
picture the persuasions of the life of a holy mother?
As ministers of the Gospel, you have watched in
conversion the Great Persuasion rising like the full
moon out of the ocean of life, flooding the whole
life with beauty, or like the rising of the sun flood-
ing the life with strength. Let me picture for you the
coming of a persuasion upon a Mahommedan young man.
Giving a Cow to get to Heaven.
A Mahommedan youth named Meser came to the
Faridpur Mission Dispensary. He was about 20 years
of age, an orphan, friendless, and worn to a skeleton with
disease. Since his parents died he had been working as
a knockabout hand on a Mahommedan’s farm, ten miles
away, but when he grew too ill to work his employer drove
him away. With painful effort he dragged himself two
or three miles towards Faridnur, where he had heard
there was a Christian doctor who disnensed medicine and


mercy, and then a kind-hearted cab-driver gave him a
lift for the rest of the journey. The room which is
reserved for hospital use was not available when he came,
and it seemed doubtful whether we could take him in; but
one of the Christian women, from whose home death had
but recently removed a young fellow about the same age,
coveted an “Inasmuch” and took him into her home. For
a few days he was able to crawl about. He begged by
the roadside that he might get a few pence to help pay
for his food, and at the Sunday service, at which he was
present, a copper piece out of his beggings found its grate-
fill way into the collection box. But he grew worse
rapidly. He was sadly sick, and needed constant attend-
ance, and this was gladly and patiently given. It was
evident that he could not live —we told him so. He had
come to us, bringing with him a faint hope, but this had
to be gently taken from, his weak grasp ; he let it go, not
very sadly, for life was a burden, and when we asked him
if he would fear (being a Mahommedan) that his body
should be laid to rest by Christian hands, he said “No,”
for had he not found here, among Christians, the sym-
pathy and succour he had sought in vain amongst Ma-
hommedans ? But as the end grew nearer, and the way
sloped more steeply towards the edge,
his courage failed him,
and he asked to be sent back to his village. “We would
not wish to detain you against your will,” we said, “but
you would almost certainly die on the way.” “No,” he
replied, “let me go; call the carriers and put me into a
palanquin—time presses. In my village I have a cow
and a brass dish. I will give those as a present to the
priest, then he will read the Koran over me, and Mahom-
medans will bury me, and all will be well.”
Poor lad, a cow given to a priest and an entrance to
Paradise made sure ! But at last he had to admit that
he had not strength for such a long journey, and asked
if we could not compromise matters by getting a local
priest to come and see him. We respected the dying
lad’s wish, and sent for the leading Faridpur Mahom-
medan priest. He came quickly at my summons, for had he


not but a week before declared that I had snatched his wife
back from the gates of death for him ? He came clad in
his flowing robes, and heard the story, and saw the lad’s
anxiety for his future welfare.
“Yes, most certainly he would take the patient to his
own house, care for him himself, bear all necessary expense
and, when the end came, see that he was buried in such
fashion as became a faithful Mahommedan. In a couple
of hours he would send a conveyance to take him away.”
But a couple of days passed and no word or conveyance
came from the priest. Meanwhile, what he had seen and
what he had heard in this humble Christian home had,
almost unknown to himself, been laying gentle hands upon
his heart to persuade it to the light. Did not these
Christians speak the words of God ? Did they not do the
deeds of the kind God ? What was the meaning of the
joyful and triumphant deaths
of which he heard as having so recently happened in that
very house ? Whence this sure hope of Paradise ? Had the
great priest any such message on his lips ? Did not Ma-
liommedanism declare that there was no salvation for
those who failed to perform the appointed prayers and
fasts, and he, untaught orphan lad, had not even learnt
the Arabic prayer-formulas ? And what of the priest’s
promise to take him ? Had he not proved false ? And
these hymns ? And this Bible reading ? That story of
Lazarus which Aklioy Baku had read and explained to
him that morning ? And those Christian prayers ? And
their joy ? And the restfulness of this Christian home ?
Was his mind deceiving him? Was Satan leading him
astray ? W ere these persuasions, which seemed to be
sweeping him away, coming from God or from the devil ?
And what of the earnest testimony of the Mahommedan
convert, who had been telling him that because he had
found that Mahommed was bad, and Mahommed’s book
was bad, and that Mahommedan society was bad, he and
his wife had, with their eyes wide open, left Mahommed
for the Son of Mary ; a testimony repeated by the wife
herself in a subsequent visit.


Was it all true? Was this the rest his heart was
craving for ?
Was Jesus the Way to God?
His thoughts had wandered far from the village priest
with the cow and brass dish as the way to God, and his
eyes had seen strange things, not only here around him,
but on a green hill far away, whitherwards these Chris-
tians had turned his eyes, upon a Cross about which the
Christian woman loved to talk to him as she sat beside
him in the night watches.
Yes, surely it was true. His heart told him it must
be. The very hearing of it rested his weary and anxious
heart, as it looked across the flood. The haze was lifting
from the other side. He seemed to see hands stretched
out, mansions prepared, and, oh, Great Heart of Love, a
Lather.
And he was persuaded,
and said, “I will arise and go to my father ! ” And he
arose and went. I saw him go. The end drew near.
All night the Christians watched beside him. “Take
me across the river, Lord Jesus, to the Father’s home,”
they heard him praying in the night. But the morning
dawned, and he still lingered. I had to leave Faridpur
that morning, and as the sun rose I knelt beside him in
prayer, and took farewell of him. “We shall not meet,
again here,” I said, “but yonder there is the meeting,” and
he smiled and bent his head in assent. And as I left
him the thin weak hand was raised to the familiar “Sa-
laam,” the salutation that such a short time ago meant
so little, but which now passed between us as the saluta-
tion of peace between brothers in Christ Jesus.
As I returned to the mission house I passed the dis-
pensary, to seek whose succour Meser had come to us,
and under the shadow of which he had found the Great
Persuasion, and my heart bowed itself in a thanksgiving
of humbling which is deeper than the thanksgiving of up-
lifting. “Lord, lam not worthy.” “Behold I and the
children which God hath given me.”
Yes, the glorious cause of missions is neither more nor
less than the persuasion of love, and in it we live and


move and have our being. A minister’s business is the
presenting of God’s persuasions, and when the missionary
comes home and speaks to you, what he urges upon you
is a
persuasion to princeliness,
to nobility of thought, and to Godlike outreach of love,
to princely living patterned after the Prince of Life whcr
is the Prince of Love.
All addresses should end with a question. Let me
ask my question :
I have spoken to you in your churches and in your
homes, I have preached to you, I have lectured to you, I
have talked to you, I have brought to you anew the great
missionary persuasion, has it come to you as a persuasion
to princeliness, and, as such, have you yielded yourselves
to it? Is your missionary zeal a princely one? Is there
a princeliness in the sweep and scope of your sympathies
and your prayers ? Are your gifts princely gifts ?
“And He said, 'Of a truth I say unto you this poor
widow cast in more than they all,’ for she has followed a
precious persuasion, a princely persuasion.”
Is it in your life, a persuasion to princeliness, then
where are the alabaster boxes ?
“This persuasion cometh.”
Brothers, sisters, let it come. It lias been coming
to some of you. Let it into your homes. Open the door
wide. It cometh from Him that calleth you through
my lips to-day to let it come, as a persuasion to prince-
iiness. Will you ? Will you resolve that there shall be
a princeliness in your zeal and in your prayers, and in
your gifts that the past has never seen ? Is He not
worthy, the Prince of all Princeliness ?
“Almost Thou persuadest me.” Nay, Lord, utterly,
wholly, and for ever.


Problems of the Mission
Field.
[A Paper Read to a Meeting of Ministers .]
Before I get on to my proper subject may I just pass
on to you as fellow helpers, whose business it is in the
churches to help make missions prosper, one word from
Principal Forsyth: —“You will not prosper missions by
merely preaching missions, but by preaching a Gospel great
enough to make missions ; for special occasions, meetings,
and sermons will never keep a missionary faith alive. Its
roots are struck in the deep and secret place where we
ourselves are confident before God, and crucified with
Christ,” Christ who “added to the length and breadth of
universal love the height and depth of sacrifice.”
I suspect that every minister has felt that a “drill-
sergeant theology” teaching “mere obedience to the march-
ing orders” of the Great Commission is not a sufficient
motive to urge upon His people. “Compliance with mere
external command comes too near to that enforced obedi-
ence which is no obedience at all.” “If the great Com-
mission had never been spoken by our Lord, yet His
Divine Personality, which stands close behind the words
giving to them interpretation and sanction, would never-
theless compel the missionary service of the church.” And
it is the preaching of a Gospel which goes behind the com-
mand to the Commander, and calls for a love which “wakes
the oblations and obediences of faith” and love, that is
“the preaching of a Gospel great enough to make mis-
sions.”
Now to my subject.
(1.) THE PROBLEM OF THE MISSIONARY.
The first problem the missionary has to face on the
field is himself.
D


Before the missionary goes out he sits down to count
the cost and see “whether he be able” : after he has been
out a while, and the problems have marshalled them-
selves before him, he has to sit down again to consider
whether he be able. He invariably finds that he has
underestimated things. The giants of the land are bigger
than he thought, and he himself is smaller than he
thought. He finds that in order to equate things at all
he must grow. He must grow or perish. He must
adapt, himself to a new world, and that a world of dark-
ness and of sin. When Christ Himself flung downward
from the throne into a world of darkness and of sin, He
must needs grow unto a wisdom and a stature adequate
to the work of perfect revealing. And such a wisdom
and such a stature must the missionary attain to if he
would be in any wise adequate to his work of imperfect
revealing, of confounding the wisdom of the wise, and of
standing erect amid a gainsaying world.
The work can be no better than the workman, and
foremost among the problems stands the problem of com-
ing to be, and continuing to be, strong, rich, aspiring
souls, ever striving to keep close their connection with the
Eternal source of inspiration and strength. It is so easy
to become undevout, to grow insensible to and callous to
all the higher experiences. The spiritual passion, amid
chilling surroundings, fades away and fails.
Not long ago I sat and watched one of our
gorgeous Indian sunsets.
I revelled and rejoiced in “the streaming beauty
of the azure sky that slumbered behind the bars of gold
which encased the glory of the sunset.” It faded quickly,
and as I sat in the fading light, and watched it, someone
spoke to me loudly and abruptly. “Is that you?” The
voice was no outward one. My thoughts turned startled
from the fading glory to the tragedy of far sadder fading.
The green paint on the shutters outside our mission houses
fades. Would that the fading were always confined
to the shutters outside! Alas for the fact that
the fading of our shutters sometimes engrosses more at


tention than the fading of our souls. Pray for us,
brethren, lest we be
Left in God’s contempt apart,
With ghastly smooth life, dead at heart,
Tame in earth’s paddock as her prize.
For even missionaries are found “tame in earth’s pad-
dock.”
“Fill four barrels with water,” said Elijah, “and pour
it on the burnt offering, and on the wood. Do it the
second time. Do it the third time. And the fire of the
Lord fell and consumed the burnt offering, and the wood,
and the stones, and licked up the water.” (I. Kings xviii.
33). Elijah knew that neither four nor forty barrels of
earth’s water could quench the fire flung down from
heaven.
We missionaries believe that the fire from heaven has
fallen upon the altar of our hearts; yet it is sometimes
sadly true that the barrels of the muddy water of
Indian life have dangerously damped the holy flames.
You all know almost by heart the chapter in Smith’s
“Isaiah” on “A man shall be as a hiding place from the
wind.” I am perfectly certain that every man here has
preached from it. I wrote to Professor Smith once and
urged him to find an artist among his friends to put on
to canvas that
magnificent picture of a man.
I said that thousands of ministers would hang a copy
of it in their studies to feed on it. I got no reply, so
the other day I wrote to the Rev. Thomas Spurgeon, who
has lately turned from his pulpit to his palette, and asked
him to do it. You remember how Smith writes of the
terrible desert drifts, and I always like to think of the
missionary as a rock set up, with brow fronting to heaven,
to stop the dire drift of heathendom, and to give a chance
to seeds that are there to find their way out and up into
God’s light and sunshine; that from such sheltered plants
there may be gathered Indian flowers for God’s world
posy.
Texting from this picture, Jowett recently preached,
picturing a little hamlet beneath a cliff, and said, “A


man shall be as a headland protecting the village from the
blast. The greatest thing in the world,” he said, “is
love, and love can get in between the victim and the
wind.”
Yes, we knew before we landed in India that “the
greatest of these is love.” We knew that we were sent
to India to get “between the victim and the wind.” We
knew that our power to love, our power to mediate love,
would determine the worth of our service. Our hearts
were strong to love. But it is not every missionary that
can repeat Caleb’s words to Joshua, “I am
as strong as I was.” (Joshua xiv. 11.)
What happens to a missionary is this :
Take the matter of our religious beliefs. When we
were young we believed what we were taught. The be-
liefs were plastered on us. Then we grew to manhood,
and questions came rising up out of the depths of our own
minds. And then we went to India, and questions more
eager, and more determined, were sprung and pressed
upon us by others. And we found that we had to get
again for ourselves the beliefs that once we thought we
believed. They are ours now. We have won them back.
Just so is it in most missionary lives with love. As our
early beliefs fall away, so our early untaught and untested
love is apt to drop away, and there comes a time when the
missionary is miles away from being able to say “as strong
as I was.”
But then, if his life “takes the turn that swings up-
ward to victory,” the love comes back in a deeper, stronger
enmantling, and his one prayer is to be poured out upon
the service and the sacrifice of the faith of his people.
While if his life takes the turn that swings down towards
deadness and defeat the love does not come back in power.
The corpse of it is there, ugly and withered and cold.
And for that missionary the rest of life is a wearisome
wilderness.
This is the problem of our peril. It is your problem,
too. So we pass the watchword, for you and for us


together. ‘ The fire shall be kept burning on the altar
continually; it shall not go out” (Leviticus vi. 13).
Some of you have heard me say that my life's motto
is this: —“If they love me, they will listen to me.” For
the missionary it is the problem of Rescue by Love. “Go
wed a wife of whoredoms.” We live in the home of Hosea.
(2.) THE PROBLEM OF POLITICS.
No problem in India to-day occupies a bigger arc of
the horizon than the restless agitations that are causing
tremblings both of hope and of fear in many hearts. It
is a missionary problem as well as a political problem,
and it is about this that I am asked most questions when
India is the subject of conversation.
To us missionaries .it is a problem of absorbing interest,
and we “stand upon the watch, ready for the hint that
trembles on the confines of the hour,” knowing that God
stands within the shadows, and that India’s God works out
India’s good, with hands of love and lightening laid upon
India’s sons and India’s sorrows.
(3.) THE PROBLEM OF THE PRESENTATION OF
TRUTH.
It is as bearers of the lamp of truth that you send
us out to India, truth known to us and dear to us, truth
that when known to India shall be dear to India too. One
of the great problems that face us is the problem of the
presentation of truth, how to adapt it, how to focus it for
Indian eyes, how to clothe it, how to present the essence
of it, divesting that essence of unnecessary excrescences,
how to relate it to Indian lilies of the field and the birds
of the Indian air in aptness of Eastern illustration; how
to state its problems to the Indian thinking mind in terms
with which their mental furnishing has equipped them.
Right thoughts about God
regnant in Indian hearts would enable us to come home
for good_. These days are to come —for our children —but
for us it is to develop weeds into wheat.


It is just here that we have cause for deep thankful-
ness for the “Results of Missions,” in that Christian
thought about God has penetrated so deeply into the hearts
of the people.
Tens of thousands of orthodox Hindus are yet Chris-
tian theists. One can nowadays often talk to a Hindu about
God, and find him answering you in such wise as to show
that it is the Christian, and not the Hindu, conception of
God that is present to his thought. In their books, in
arguments, in conversation with pundits, the neuter philo-
sophical abstraction called Brahma comes to the surface,
but more often it is God , using the word in the ordinary
sense, that is thought and spoken of; God, conceived as
a person, endowed with power, wisdom, and, sometimes,
goodwill; a God of mercy, who takes thought for His
children. It cannot be called truly the Christians’ God,
for it is not the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
but it is an acceptance of so much of the Christian con-
ception that what is missing finds much pantheistic
rubbish cleared away, and many good foundation stones
laid.
Yet there is this sad fact to set over against it on the
opposite side, that the modern revival of Hinduism has
very generally led to the identification of God with Krishna,
the most popular god, who is in the Gita (the Hindu’s
Bible) set forth as God omnipotent. So that what we
often find is an acceptance of the tlieistic position, but the
acceptance made practically worthless by making the con-
tent of the word God to have no more of purity or
righteousness than is to be found in the name of that hor-
rible hero-god to whom the “love of holiness and the holi-
ness of love” are equally unknown.
In his Presidential address to the Baptist Union lasu
year Professor Marshall referred to the remarkable de-
velopment in the conception of the spirituality of God to
be found in the Old Testament. “Nowhere,” he says,
“is this more marked than in the documents into which
modern criticism partitions the Pentateuch.” “In the
Jehovistic document, God is conceived of very much after
the manner of men, walking in the garden, shutting the
door of the ark, and smelling the odour of Noah’s sacri


fice.” “In the Elohistic document such anthropomor-
phisms are never found. God ceases to be on terms of
equality and familiarity with men. He is invisible, but
not so far away but that He can speak to men out of
heaven (Genesis xxii. 11). He usually gives His reve-
lations through dreams in the night, or through the me-
diation of angels.’' “In the Priestly document God is
a Spirit who effects everything by the energy of His will
and word; who speaks and it is done, and whose word has
caused efficacy. He makes His word known to men by
words, commands, and promises, appealing to the ear and
heart rather than to the eye. There is no mention of
angels or dreams in the Priests’ document. God is far
exalted above mankind locally, and in the grandeur of
His attributes, and His sole connection with earth is
focalized in the sanctuary.”
Why do I make this long quotation ?
Because it brings before us, by contrast, the problem
of
the doctrine of God as we have it in India
to-day. Professor Marshall goes back to the Jehovistic
stratum, and finds the conception of God largely anthropo-
morphic. So in India’s earliest Vedas we find the gods
walking and talking with men, smelling their sacrifices,
and quaffing the sacrificial and exhilarating soma juice.
In the Elohistic stratum, we are told that the God so em-
phatically anthropomorphic has disappeared. This, too,
corresponds with the books of the philosophizing theolo-
gians the Upanishads, which follow the Vedas.
But what comes next ?
In the Christian Scriptures the conception of God
next rises to a sublime spirituality. It springs to a spirit-
ual throne. But with the Hindu it is smitten with
leprosy, it departs riotously to the far country, and fills its
belly with swine-stuff. For the Upanishads are succeeded
by the Epics, the books which alone are read to-day in
Hindu homes, where the conception of God is degraded
and demoralized amid a hideous tangle of lust, war, and
phallicism.
It is upon this dark tangle that the Christian light


lias fallen, and while theism wins its way, the degradation
and the darkness that had fallen on the minds of those
who ‘'thought themselves wise” dims the divine, and the
two conceptions struggle together in the womb, each seek-
ing for precedence, still closely entangled, but fore-or-
dained to a destiny when the elder shall serve the younger.
The problem presented is the task of uplifting Him
who is the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ to
the exclusion of both the barren pantheistic conception
of Brahma the Paramatma, and the hero-god Krishna,
exalted to the throne of the holy God by men who have
learnt from the Christians that there is a holy God, but
whose minds are too perverted and depraved to compre-
hend the holiness from whose revelation in Christ they
perversely turn away.
The way we address ourselves to the problem is an
illustration of
modern missionary methods.
Rarely do we attack the old pantheistic conception, but
we preach patiently and positively the knowledge of God
brought to us by our Lord, just as we rarely attack idolatry
but rather present Christ, who is “the image of God,”
knowing that the light must expel the darkness.
But since “unformed minds can learn but little, and
minds astray will learn amiss,” we have to go still further,
and, in a land where a knowledge which is mostly intellec-
tual is clothed with powers to which it can never pretend,
we strive to cause men to understand that “the knowing of
God is not school-knowledge, but life-knowledge; not in-
formation, but acquaintance, and that a man is to know
God as a child knows his parents, by experience.”
The doctrine of sonship by grace is a lesson hard to
teach. Newton Clarke in his delightful new book “The
Doctrine of God” quotes the text, “Ye received not the
spirit of bondage again to fear, but ye received the spiriu
of adoption whereby we cry Abba Father” (Romans viii.
14), and says, “This fine, enlightening stroke of Paul
portrays God as one who wants no slavish fear, but would
have His child look confidingly and joyfully into His
eyes.”


But, “a doctrine of God without Christ is a face with-
out an eye,” and the problem is how to secure the child’s
“looking confidently and joyfully” into God’s eyes, when
the child, perverse and sinful, refusing Christ, puts out
the very eye into which it should look.
All of which means, of course, that the problem is
not an intellectual one, requiring, on our part, power to
clearly put things that are true, but a moral one, requir-
ing, on their part, power to forsake things that are evil,
and on our part, power to prophesy unto the mind.
Presentation of Christ.
To dwell a little longer on the question of the pro-
blems of the missionary as a presenter of truth, what
shall I say as to the problem of worthily presenting our
Lord Himself ? Seeking to win a penitent and devout
faith which shall be “the flight of the soul to its rest, and
the rising of the soul to its strength,” we are confronted
with a state of mind to which you are no strangers here
at home.
The British Weekly, reviewing Principal Forsyth’s
book on “The Person and Place of Christ,” says:
"Throughout, the author’s eye is on the current mode of
thought which becomes sympathetic with a Christ it does
not worship, and praises a Christ to whom it does not
pray,” finding in Him the most inspired of the prophets
of God’s love, the most radical of social reformers, the
noblest of elder brothers, but beatifying, instead of deify-
ing Him.”
It is impossible (and unwise, were it possible) to force
things. What we aim at is to get a Hindu to accept
Christ first as the true Guru or Teacher, and a Mahomme-
dan to accept Him first as the true Prophet, much as the
Apostles came first to Christ, having far, very far, to go,
and many strange experiences to pass through, before they
attained to comprehension of His divinity.
If we can get them to touch the hem of the garment
that clothes the Teacher, the Friend, the Helper, the
teacher of the true Islam, we can afford to wait while the
blade becomes the corn, hopeful that Indian spiritual un


derstanding may even add something more of richness to
the fullness of the corn in the ear, and confident that
Thomas who entered India first will leave it last, exclaim-
ing, at last, "My Lord and my God/’
Salvation.
Mukti is the name of the wonderful Widows’ Home,
where Pundita Ramabai is Sheltering Rock for 1,500
widows, some of whom are, as we sit here, setting Greek
and Hebrew type for a new polyglot version of the Bible.
Mukti means salvation. For these widows the meaning of
Mukti needs no explanation. They eat and drink salva-
tion as their daily bread. But to the ordinary outsider
the meaning of "salvation” has to be interpreted. For
him it is a problem,
How shall we approach it ?
It may be approached up the gentle slope of the story
of the Life of Lives. But upon Areopagus this story is
not welcome, and the wise man is more easily held if an
Indian track can be struck.
Writing on the "Jesus or Christ” controversy Professor
James says:—“All you mean by conversion is the recog-
nition by man of a relationship that existed from the
beginning.”
This is, at the same time, both true and parallel in
form, if not in content, to the Hindu conception of sal-
vation as being recognition of a metaphysical relationship
between the Supreme and the created spirit which has ex-
isted from the beginning. And if it is justifiable to work
along the lines of Professor James’ definition (and I thinl?
it is), I anticipate an easier approach to the mind of a
Hindu thinking around the subject of salvation.
Atonement.
But it is when one seeks to take a Hindu or a Ma-
hommedan by the hand, and lead him up the "green hill
far away” that the problem of the presentation of Chris-
tianity’s central truth calls for all his stores of spiritual
wisdom, love, and forbearance. There is no doctrine so
misunderstood in India as the atonement. Plindus con


stantly assume that we preach that a sinner is forgiven
by God because of the atonement, quite apart from the
state of the sinner’s heart, and they urge that we are
preaching immoral doctrine. On the other hand the
Mahommedan urges that as God is all-powerful, and noth-
ing is impossible to Him, He can forgive by the fiat of
His will, and there is no need of any atonement.
But we have this encouragement. "The earnest and
thoughtful Hindu is profoundly moved by the passion and
cross of Christ. It is to him the noble end of a noble
life. As he contemplates the patience under injury, in-
sult, and pain; the love which intercedes for those who
have driven in the nails; the endurance which refuses to
accept alleviation of suffering; the tenderness which forgets
its own suffering and cares for the souls and bodies of
others; the final calmness of spirit, he offers the tribute
of unstinted admiration. He knows that if Christ had
been judged only by the moral precepts which His dis-
ciples have recorded; if His fame had rested only on His
spiritual teaching, He would, perhaps, not have occupied
the supreme place He has won in the estimation of man-
kind.”
“It is because He has been lifted up on the Cross that
He has been exalted to a unique place among men. The
death more than the life is the source of His power.”
All this would be gladly admitted by many an earnest
Hindu. But when we go on to say “He died for you,
“His death is our ransom,” “God for Christ’s sake forgives
us,” he stumbles and ceases to follow you.
“One for many.” “It is impossible arithmetic.”
“The chastisement of our sins.” “It is immoral, it
cannot be.”
“The lowly Nazarene.” “Nay, nay, you mock our
self-respect, and you lay the charge of poverty of means
at the door of the Most High.”
“Who died for me.” “Death has no such mystic
power.”
“Thus they speak, and Christ dying is made an open
scorn.” “The words, too, baffle us.”


''The very terms on which our whole appeal depends
for. its significance are under-spiritualized , while the frame-
work in which we set these terms are over-Christianized.”
''God is merciful/’ they say, “He will forgive. Is
He not love ? Does not the Bible contain the story of
the Prodigal Son ?”
The problem that is yours is ours, too, brethren. Tlow
shall we put it ? Have we satisfied ourselves ? Can we
satisfy others ?
This is not the place to discuss theories, but you will
want to know how we face the problem. What answers do
we give to objections ? What suggestions do we offer to
help the hesitating mind and halting will
We often use Forsyth’s words—“Do not say ‘God is
love, why atone V The New Testament says ‘God has
atoned.’ What love!”
Suffering. —Or we start with a common position read-
ily accepted by any Hindu, ‘Where there is sin there must
be suffering,” and talk of vicarious suffering, illustrated
by a mother’s love, a subject to which the Hindu heart
leaps in response.
Hand. —Or we paint an Indian Slough of Despond,
talk of Hinduism’s exhortations to toil and suffer, to give-
and go and get, all being the futile efforts of the human
hand to grasp the heavens; and then speak of Christ, the-
Hand of God stretched down into the Slough of Despond
to grasp us." “He - reached from above : He took me, He
drew me out of many waters.”
Penitence.- Or, taking them on their own ground, we
may accept the saving way of penitence; but go on to
show it to be “one of the deepest and most difficult of
states” to attain; the impossibility of that perfect peni-
tence which is called for, seeing sin as God sees it, and
abhorring it as He abhors it. Then we present the Christ
as
the only Perfect Penitent.
We tell of the pure Christ coming into close touch
with a sinful world, and show how, united with a race
like this, it is inconceivable that He would not feel the
shame and the horror of the sins of those whom He had


made His own; and I sometimes illustrate it to the Naina
Sudras (forgive the almost blasphemy of it) by showing
how, since I have become one of them, living amongst
them, and sharing their burden of hatred and sorrow,
I have lived with them and loved them, while yet ever
more deeply revolting against the loathsomeness of the
foul diseases I find devastating them. I talk of Christ’s
vicarious penitence (illustrating, perhaps, again by a
mother whose sorrow is proportionate first to her holiness
and secondly to her love), and preach that Christ’s vi-
carious penitence has the power to impart itself, and to
raise the real sinner to begin to share in it.
The practice of animal sacrifice as it exists in India
to-day does not help us much in the preaching of the
atonement. It is too far divorced from true conscious-
ness of sin, and the texts that abound, exalting the power
of sacrifice as the “true ferry-boat,” and so on, are from
the sastras of other days, remote from the conditions of the
thought of to-day.
There are other problems related to the presentation
of truth on which I must not linger : the problem of pain
and suffering so keenly present to Indian Jobs ; the problem
of the relative values of works of merit and trusting in
grace; the problem of woman’s place in God’s sight, whe-
ther her rightful place is in Canticles, in Proverbs, or in
Ephesians; and so on. But what I have said must suffice.
This word, however, must be added. The problem
goes deeper than the mere presentation of truth. Given
truth adequately and appropriately presented, there is
still left the problem of the response to the truth thus
presented. Some of you have heard me preach a sermon
from the text
“Truth is fallen in the street.”
In that sermon I explained how that Hinduism and
Mahommedanism have largely destroyed the moral pas-
sion for truth—the honest heart and the single eye with-
out which even heaven’s truth, and the brightness of the
Father’s face, fail to win entrance and acceptance. The
compulsion of truth is almost unknown. Set truth before
an Englishman, and he is bound to move in that direction;
E


but set truth before an Indian, and because the love of
truth —the pull of truth —is destroyed, he will admit and
admire, but will not move towards it.
(4.) THE PROBLEM OF THE ECLECTIC.
In the history of the Church the problem of the
eclectic is very ancient history, but on the Indian mission
field it is very modern history, too.
Are the religions to live together as a happy family,
or are they to fight to the death? The happy family
is what the Christian Government supports, what the news-
papers and reviews support, what the politicians support.
It is the easy path. It is the path for smooth government.
It is in the air in India. It is one of the courteous ex-
pressions used to the missionary visiting in Indian homes,
and is the very basis of that courtesy.
Here I have raised the whole problem of Compara-
tive Religions. That I must not touch. But just in
passing let me quote two prophecies by two of our most
thoughtful Indian missionaries:—Slater says: “The
leaven of Christianity will w T ork, and in its natural affinity
with certain pre-existing conditions of thought, will form
semi-Christianized philosophies, like the neo-Platonism of
Alexandria, which explained away the objectionable fea-
tures of the old mythology, and tried to fight Christianity
largely with its own weapons. And these eclectic systems
will, for a time at least, give a distinct support to the
old religions of the country, and even infuse new life into
them, presenting many features of the Gospel, though non-
Christian in their basis.” Farquhar, the very able
Y.M.C.A. secretary at Calcutta, says: —“What we are
destined to see in India is a genuine philosophic attempt
to build out of Hinduism a strong system to withstand the
inrush of Christianity.”
(5.) THE PROBLEM OF THE ATROPHY.
It would, perhaps, have been a better order to have
taken before the Problem of the Presentation of Truth,
the problem of the state of soul to which the truth has
to be presented.


It is a state of atrophy.. Is it not “the deadliest 'peril
of sin that it may cut away the possibility of return to
goodness,” that it may destroy the power to see or love
goodness ? Then what would you expect to find in a land
where religion itself has ministered to sin, and the rolling
ages have rolled and re-rolled over the land tidal waves
of sin against which the dams and dykes of Hinduism
were so pitifully frail and futile ? “The ox knoweth
but my people know not.” Brethren, it is the horrid
truth that the very loveliness of the face of Christ to
multitudes has no beauty that they should desire it. They
love their sin, they are joined to their idols, and their
idols are joined to the groves of sin. Eyes have they,
but they see not. The shadows of the groves are too
dark.
A people intensely religious ? Yes, true in part, but
muchness of religiousness can consist with atrophy of heart
and spiritual understanding. There is so little one can
appeal to, or get a hold on. You sew with good Gospel
thread, but the stitches don’t hold, they just tear out.
They brought you Holman Hunt’s picture “The Light
of the World,” and you flocked in your thousands to feast
your eyes upon it. They did not bring it to India. India
had not eyes to see it. The steps of the painter do not
tarry at the door of the blind man.
A Heathen.
Look you, he’s blind, this man; it seems born blind.
Methinks it is a trick of heathen birth
To give the children eyes that see not. Blind?
In truth. I stood before him—laughed in joy,
In very joy that it was given me
lo stand before him, he being heathen, I
What you call Christian—stood so close that he
Might miss no ray of light flashed from out
My own life,revelation. Then—“ God is this,
And this. Bflhold !” I said, and took and bent
My heavens down, that in their high-noon bliss
Of glory they might burn their splendour full
Into his face. A midday blaze of love,
A whitened gleam of strength—l gave what God
Is to me when He rides supreme above
The zenith of my being, when my eyes
Reel shut, so much they drink of glory they
e 2


Can bear no more, yet ever closed feel
His rays of light beat down the fullest day
Upon them. Thus I showed him God, my God,
Who burns my life into a pure white flame
Of adoration.
Think you that he saw
One ray of all that light which flooding came
In radiance of revelation full
Upon him? Not so much as one stray beam
Of glory did he catch the brightness of.
As eyes that lie with lids apart, yet dream
And see their night dreams only, so his eyes
Seemed fraught with some dark dream that held them filled
With shadows, midnight shadows.
In the presence of heathen Helen Kellers, of blinded
eyes and withered hands, the problem of winning them is
often reduced to the problem of your own personality.
One often has to substitute the attraction of his own per-
sonality for the attraction of truth. Through personal
contact you try to get your grappling irons aboard the
man, and hook his gratitude for kindness, or his power
to love a man whom he sees to love him disinterestedly.
One has to be patient and enduring, often amid much
discouragement, feeling sure that the influence of your
personality will appeal to something in him, and so give
you a place for leverage.
This atrophy of soul is accompanied by a perversity
of mind which finds its expression in fruitless argumenta-
tion, which is trying to endure. Love is courteous and
not quickly provoked, but when, under the guise of seeking
truth, men ‘‘drag wisps of truth through swamps of non-
sense, until, for all practical purposes, they become un-
truths,” the problem is one of pure patience, and the
exhibition of a love that beareth all things to confound
a perversity which is to be pitied rather than pitted
against.
(6.) THE PROBLEM OF THE BIBLE.
Another problem is the Bible.
We expose the hollowness of the pretensions of the
Brahmo Somaj by relating how in the early days they
took their stand on the infallibility of the Vedas: how,
when they had sent their wise men to Benares to study


them in the homes and haunts of the pundits, the position
was forthwith abandoned; how the foundation was then
stated to be Intuition; and, later, how the Light of Reason
was fixed on for rock. A shifting foundation, we say,
'cannot carry a steadfast superstructure.
Now, I know it is not a question of shifting foundations
at all, but when a man gets wind of the droppings of
•certain doctrines, of new explanations and new emphases,
he sees a shifting, and, perhaps not unnaturally, thinks
the shifting must extend down to the bottom of things.
It is not of much use to tell an opponent that it is
merely a temporary disarrangement, that ‘ the front win-
dows are being remodelled only with a view to the better
;and more adequate display of the goods, and that the
business is being carried on as usual, while the alterations
are in progress.” He opines that alterations are sus-
picious, and his confidence in the firm is shaken. Years
ago he read the early chapters of Genesis in a missionary
•college. They were treated as history. Now he reads
the English magazines, and wants to know if history has
■changed to myth and picture-story.
In three directions does this problem press heavily—
■(l.) the militant Mahommedan, (2.) the missionary himself,
(3.) the native church.
(1.) The angel Gabriel brought the Mahommedan
Koran piecemeal down to the prophet, every “t” crossed
and every “i” dotted; and no angel has since been des-
patched to alter either jot or tittle. He has no author-
ized and revised version of the Koran, leave alone a Twen-
tieth Century edition, and thinks mighty little of any
book religion that has. He knows Mahommedan Hafizes
who can recite the Koran from start to finish; and a
Mahommedan priest, with whom I once talked in Rajbari,
first thought I was joking when I told him that we had
no Christian Hafizes who made it their life work to me-
morize the Bible, and then poured the utterest scorn upon
me as the preacher of a religion with foundations of sand.
"The written word remains,” he said, "and it must remain
full and intact in the minds of men, as well as on the
holy page.” When the Mahommedan comes to hear of


J.E. and P. he will print the word '‘lnfidel” in bigger
letters than ever.
The recent generous treatment of Mahommedans by
the Government in the matter of Lord Morley’s Reforms
has doubled the number of men in Faridpur who now wear
fez caps so as to visually assert their faith, but this filip l
to the faith will be as nothing to the exultation that will
pervade the crescent ranks when the extreme critic sits
down under the big banyan tree that shades, the village
mosque, and chats about the Modern Readers’ Bible. We
have a hard time of it now, but we shall have a ten times
harder time soon, when the new boats that are building-
get off the stocks and open fire.
(2.) In his book “Sidelights on Religion” Brierly has
a chapter with the title “What of Missions ? In this
chapter he declares that the character of the teaching
being given on the mission field is one of the urgent
problems of the hour.
“This query,” he says, “is to many of us profoundly
disquieting.” “At home there has been a vast move-
ment, an immense enfranchisement, and liberation of
thought,” and he declares that a doubt as to whether this
“immense enfranchisement” has reached, or has been al-
lowed to reach, the mission field, “stays the hand, and
paralyses the will of many who would fain be supporters
of modern missions.”
He wants to know if we missionaries are “covering
Indian minds with glooms” by teaching them of a world
made in six days, a morality made to square with the
imprecatory psalms, and a view of natural law conditioned
by acceptance of the stories of Balaam’s ass, of the walls
of Jericho, of Jonah and the whale.”
Well, this certainly is one of the problems of the
mission field. Whether doubts concerning the mission-
aries’ teaching are tending to “stay the hand and paralyse
the wills of people at home,” you know better than I.
But if you are asked what the missionaries teach abroad,
you may say that they teach just what our ministers teach
at- home, and what that is, again, you know better than
I.
I have talked with you in your studies, and worried


■some of you with pertinacious questioning, with a view to my
own enlightenment ; and as a restilt of what I have learned
in your studies I am sure it is correct to say that the
teaching abroad is the same as that at home. If you
•are orthodox, we are orthodox; and that orthodoxy
with us, as with you, must be taken to cover a consider-
able latitude of view.
(3.) In the third place we have a difficult task in ex-
plaining to our native Christians what is happening. A few
years ago a Calcutta missionary gave an address to the
Bengali Christian Conference (composed of Bengali Chris-
tians of all denominations). It was a careful and guarded
address intended to help them to some comprehension of
modern view-points, and altered and altering Christian
ideas. It raised the inevitable storm. Conservative
■opinion would have none of it, and a book was written
meant to answer the Scotch missionary, and to defend the
-citadel. It was an ill-advised effort, and the end is not yet.
Native pulpits are occupied by those who have been
trained in the straitest sect of the Pharisees, and it is a
matter of far greater moment that men, strong, wise
men, "apt to teach,” be found to man Serampore College,
than that the quarter of a million pounds they are asking
for be found to endow it.
My Christians have not the balance of judgment, and
the power of discernment that yours have; and while
you will please make mental note that your missionaries
are perfectly orthodox and sound in the faith, and are
not to be recalled for heresy, please also make a note to
pray for us that our minds, less trained than many of
yours, may be enwisdomed by God’s Spirit that we may
understand aright for ourselves, and may rightly divide
the word to our people.
Talking of the Bible reminds me that since I landed
in Australia I received this letter from
a Hindu named Haribar,
for whom I have been fishing for some time:
Honoiired Sir—The keeping of the commands of the Lord
for a sinful man is most hard. Moreover, certain doubts about


the written word have waked in my heart. Be good enough to
write and clear them up. I lind it written, “God created the
herbs of the field to he food for man?” Then how is it that
I find flesh used for food? Again, I find it written that after
the Flood “every living thing was given for food, save only
the blood, which'is the life, of which if anyone eat, it shall be
required of him.” Yet, again, “In six days God created the
heavens and the earth and then rested.” If this was Saturday,
why do you worship on Sunday? Please write and tell me what
parts of the Bible to read concerning these matters so that I
may get rid of my doubts, because, since faith cannot live with-
doubt, doubt itself is irreligion.
You note that Haribar the Hindu feels that if he
is -to become a Christian, his faith must, be built upon
the impregnable rock of Holy Scripture, and he wants
to know what is rock and what isn’t. The Seventh-Day
Adventists are up in Faridpur intent on sheep-stealing,
and they have got hold of Haribar, and are unsettling
him even before he has become a Christian ! God forgive
them (and confound them).
(7.) THE PROBLEM OF THE AIM.
The Problem of the Aim seems a strange title. What
is the aim of missionary work surely goes without saying.
There is no “problem” about that. But I mention it
for this reason. Those of you who look at missionary
magazines will probably have noted that a year or two
ago there was a book published by a man named Bernard
Lucas, called “The Empire of Christ.” Bernard Lucas
is a Congregational missionary in the south of India, and,
in theology, is, I believe, a follower of R. J. Campbell.
The book provoked a great deal of adverse criticism, not
because of its Campbellism, but for its handling of the-
Problem of the Aim of mission work.
In our missionary work, broadly viewed, what is it
we are aiming at?
Most of the reviews quoted an illustration from the-
book which contains the gist of Lucas’ ideals. It runs as
follows: “To the older theology India was a ship on the
rocks, and the missionary was aAifeboatman engaged in the-
task of picking up the few survivors who were swept within
his reach, and who, if he failed to reach them were carried
away to eternal destruction. To the modern mind, on the


other hand, India is a ship which is salvable; not on the
rocks, but aground; and the real missionary enterprise is
not that of picking up a few survivors from a hopeless
wreck, but of bringing the ship into port with all on
board. The missionary who set off in his lifeboat has got on
board, examined the condition of the vessel, sounded the
depth of water in the hold, seen the crowded condition
of the decks, and been forced to the conclusion that the
lifeboat is inadequate to the task. If the people are to
be saved, the ship itself must be brought into port. Above
all, he has realized that
the people will not leave the ship.”
‘‘The great work among the outcaste population,” he
continues, ‘‘has been the pressing work of jhcking up those
who have been swept overboard, and of whose welfare
those who remained on board were callously indifferent. We
have landed them on sandbanks and desert islands, and
supplied them with as much of our stores as we could
give, but the question of their future is one of grave
anxiety. It has been a noble work, but it is not the
salvation of India. We must not shut our eyes to the
fact that the Tndia we have come to save is a ship which
is aground, and that the true task which confronts us is
that of getting her floated, her damages repaired, her
disorganized crew and distracted passengers organized and
encouraged, so that she may proceed on her way to the
port to which she is bound. Nothing short of that will
satisfy the soul of India, and nothing short of that will
fulfil the sacred obligation which rests upon the Church
of Christ.”
This illustration is used to set forth his idea that
we are to aim at Christianizing the thought of India, and
not to set so much store on the individual conversion. In
fact, he opposes to each other the two words Christianizing
and converting.
When he comes down to the practicalities of things
he tells us not to urge baptism, and not to resent the
continuance of caste. Baptism, as an initial step, “re-
volts and repels the Hindu community,” while caste should
be left to disappear as slavery disappeared, the slavery


which was not deliberately attacked by Christianity, but
which died off as a result of the propagation of implanted
Christian principles.
But we have not so learned Christ. An illustration
may or may not carry a freight of logic. We have heard
of an illustration about a man staggering down the street.
And ships sometimes stagger, too.
The Jewish ship was not merely aground, and Christ
did not get it off a harmless sandbank, and bring it into
port. He lifeboated her. Those who have been got off
—the Apostles in Christ’s case; the outcasts in India’s
case —are not in so desperate a plight as is suggested by
a picture of sailors starving on a desert island. They
are rather men who, with cheerful heart and valiant
vigour, have left the poor old stranded wreck, pulled for
the shore, and are hard at work
building another ship,
using in their task many a plank washed ashore from the
old bark.
It is, unfortunately, largely true that the Pharisee
Brahmins "will not leave the ship,’’ and their obstinacy
is in these days tenfold increased by the Swadeshi temper
which would even cast off the ropes of the lifeboat, and
"let her fall off.” But, even so, it is obvious to those
who have eyes to see that the Hindu ship (and the Ma-
hommedan one, too) has got into a place where two seas
meet, and is hopelessly aground, with her forepart stuck
fast, and the hinder part broken, or, at least, breaking
with the violence of the waves. It is no ship flying
either trident or crescent that shall cross the bar carrying
the Indian contingent to safety and to the gladness of
the landing, but a ship whose every yardarm flung across
to upright masts pictures a cross, and whose passengers see
the westering sun cast the shadow of crosses upon the
shore, so that they land in the shadow of the cross at
whose foot they have travelled in sure safety. In such
wise, rather, do we read the lesson of the ship.
(8.) THE PROBLEM OF THE MOTIVE.
The Problem of the Motive is ever with us. Hardly
a week passes without someone coming to me proposing:


to become a Christian. At first one receives them with
open arms; later on one receives them at the point of
the bayonet. What is the motive at work is the question
that first demands settlement on receiving enquiries; and
what motive can I get to work, is the question to be
settled in aggressive work.
Motives are things that move people. If we want
people to move we have to enquire into moving motives,
and if we want to move people we must learn to handle
these motives. When a man comes to us we commonly
set to work to search about in the man’s mind and life
for a motive that is at present operative, which is at that
time moving him to some action of a religious kind. We
try to belt on to some wheel already revolving.
If we find a man making a pilgrimage in search of
peace, then for him the desirableness in Christ we set
before him is the real lasting peace to be found in Christ.
If we find a man saying his prayers five times a day
because he is afraid of going to hell, we hitch on to fear.
Fear is now moving him, and our business is to harness
that fear.
Let me particularize a few motives to show how the
problem presents itself in everyday practice.
(1.) The Sense of Spiritual Need. —“What lack I yet?
I do lack something. My heart is not at rest.” From the
published account of Indian conversions, this seems to be
the most general motive that has moved men to move
Christwards. This is the most fluid of motives, and it
runs most readily towards Christ. Given such a motive,
it is easy to show a man that his heart, naturally Christian,
is craving for Christ, and none other can satisfy.
(2.) Longing for Pence. —This is really but a form of
the first. The heart is restless, and has learnt by sad
experience that real happiness cannot come to a life that
is a stranger to soul peace.
(3.) Desire for Pardon. —I have seen very little of
this as a motive actually at work. I think that, perhaps,
the desire for peace operates in the Indian heart where
the desire for pardon acts on the Englishman. One can
hardly expect to find a desire for pardon where the con


ception of a holy God against whom we sin is so dim
and distorted.
(4.) Desire for Holiness. —The desire to be good. This
is a very rare motive. It presupposes a conception of
the holy God. It may have worked to make some
Brahmos.
(5.) Desire for Truth. —This is a motive I constantly
seek to create, and to introduce as a lever under hesitant
hearts. The fulcrum is the knowledge that God, being a
God of Truth, must hate all untruth, untrue words, untrue
worship, untrue religions. I try to make men love the
truth, for the man who is “of the truth” will hear My
voice, says Christ. The man in whose heart an honest
desire for the knowledge of the truth and the doing of it
has found a place is bound to move Christwards.
(6.) The True Religion. —A motive that appeals to
Mahommedans is “the true religion” or “the true path.”
Tell an audience of Mahommedans that the purpose of your
preaching to them is that they may come into the true
path of God, and you will find that unconsciously some-
thing stirs in their hearts. What “the true Israel meant
to a Jew, “the true path” means to a Mahommedan.
(7.) Revulsion. —I think many a Hindu must become
a Christian solely from the motive of revulsion. The
same motive must make many Brahmos. Any heart that
has a little goodness, not “held down” in it, must revolt
from the abominations and follies of popular Hinduism.
We discreetly encourage this revulsion to turn the heart
to the Perfect Man.
(8.) Bhahti. —The doctrine of Bhakti, or enthusiastic
devotion to Krishna, is a current of religious feeling, flow-
ing strong, but in a wrong direction. It is one of the
warmest and most powerful motives operating around us,
where there is found any religious life and earnestness.
It is hot to melting point in many a Kama Sudra, and
our business is to run the molten fluid into the perfect
mould.
(9.1 Fear. —Dr. Parker said, “I would rather see men
flying in on the wings of faith and gratitude, but if they
crawl in through the door of fear they are still welcome.


A Mahommedan fears the Day of Judgment; he can be
made to bend under the fear of daring to oppose the
majesty and omnipotent purpose of God.
(10.) Fronting Christ. —One of the mightiest motives
springs spontaneously to birth when a man is made to
front Christ. This is, of couse, the motive we most or-
dinarily seek to kindle and fan.
I have but barely mentioned ten of the motives we
seek to handle. They may all be grouped under the head-
ing, “We 'persuade men.” And the heading is the heart
of it all. “My brother, Christ can give you the peace
you want. Cast yourself at His feet. DO. We all
of us out there have learned Bengali, but to say that DO
as it should be said, to speak the Bengali of persuasion,
is where the Englishman often sadly fails and falls short.
It requires the gift of tongues, rather the gift of the
tongue, His tongue, the tongue that spoke and imme-
diately there was with the speaker a multitude of the
heavenly host whispering persuasions into listening ears,
and through listening ears into the secret places of almost
persuaded hearts.
And it is not only that we cannot talk as we would
and as we should, the language of persuasiveness, but some
of us (and here I speak words it is hardly lawful to utter),
some of us feel ourselves absolutely empty of what we fain,
oh, so fain, would possess, the holy gift of a winsome
persuasiveness, an outgoing of our very selves to lay hold
with unseen hands of love to compel them to come in.
The Problem of the Motive requires some further
words.
I am pretty sure that you listened to me with some
misgiving when I spoke of my eagerness to fostei the
movement among the Nama Sudras, while yet freely ad-
mitting that the motives at work in the community are
largely social in character.
Now, there are very decided differences of opinion
among Indian missionaries as to the justifiability or other-
wise of encouraging masses of people to join the Christian
community. Some would support a shibboleth-censoi.
Others would pass through a whole shibboleth community,


confident of teaching them a better word when they have
crossed to the other side. Some will have it that one
by one is the way, and the only way. Others point to
Christian communities that after patient teaching and
nurturing have been built up out of material that was
years ago dumped in a rather irregular and unceremonious
way on the Christians’ ground.
The discussion turns on the question as to whether
we may or may not receive a man (or a village) who comes
to us either declaring or obviously showing that he is
influenced by motives that are not wholly, perhaps not at
all, spiritual. I pointed out that in parts of India mul-
titudes of outcasts and low castes have become outwardly
Christian because they saw it would enrich their life as
a community; because of just a vague desire for better-
ment. “They felt that materially, mentally, morally, and
in a dim way, spiritually, they would be lifted out of their
degradation as a community, and, as a community, they
accordingly embraced it.”
The Times of the Judges.
It often seems to me that, in dealing with these low-
caste people, I am back in the time of the Judges. Think
back to those times. Low motives determine action. The
ethics of the nation are crude and immature. The spiri-
tual sense is almost absent. The sky is murky and the
light is dim. The actions of those days are not to be
judged by the present-day Christian standards. Most men
followed the Lord with following of a character which
now-a-days would not admit to church fellowship. Motives
which were certainly not wholly spiritual were accepted
as worthy, and even religious. The stage, I repeat, is
that of the time of the Judges, when the community
regulated its actions and its loyalties by such standards
as were current. “To whom little is given, from him
little will be required.”
Take the question of leadership in the time of the
Judges, and this is my main point, the
Helper was the hero,
and him they followed in war and obeyed as judge. “They


were minded to follow Abimelech” (we read in Judges ix.
3), “for they said, ‘He is our brother.’ ” The Helper is
the man they understand, and it is largely as chief friend,
counsellor, and helper that I have won the confidence
and the affection of the Nama Sudras.
Martineau speaks of the case of minds (and it applies
also to tribes), that “out of the thought of self can do
nothing, but press the lever of their affections, and, though
it seems to have nothing whereon to rest, you will move
the world.”
We want to “move the world.” We believe God is
thrusting us together for this, and so to those under the
Law we become as under the Law, and to those under the
iJudges we become as under the Judges, if by any means
we may save some.
Their poverty and distress are no small factor in the
problem. It was in the days when “Israel was greatly
impoverished because of the sfidianites’ that the low level
of religion prevailed “when every man did that which
was right in his own eyes.” So, writing of the Jews in the
time of Haggai, Geo. Adam Smith says: —“The Jews
were too sodden with adversity, and too weighted with the
care of their own sustenance, to spring at higher in-
terests.” A life lived under virtual slavery conditions
dulls the power to appreciate, and the desire to attain to
the richer and the purer things of the spiritual realm.
These are the facts. This is the soil.
I don’t know whether you agree, I don’t know whether
I agree, with Rattenbury when he says: “Our age will
come back to Christ by realizing that He is One with the
sympathy and aspiration of all men everywhere when it is
upwards and Godwards”; but the thought appeals to me as
containing much truth as I stand in the position of leader
of a social movement.
As I have said, it .js often just a
vague desire for betterment
that is the root motive bringing people to the missionary,
and the problem is whether he is to keep them at arm’s
length outside the Christian community seeking to teach


them and fit them for entry, or whether he is to seek to
get- them inside the community, and teach them when
seated around the hearth.
Is not this your problem of the institutional church ?
The motives that do actually operate are in some
cases strange indeed. Listen to this:—“ln the Umballa
District the higli-caste people have been accustomed to
compel the low-caste people to bury their dead face down-
ward. This has been considered a hardship. When
some of these people became Christian they claimed it as
their right to be buried with their faces turned upward.
A short time ago a woman died, and the Christians buried
her with her face turned upward. After a week or so
the non-Christians opened the grave, and turned her face
downward. The theory is that if the low-caste people are
buried with their face upward their ghosts will come out
of the grave, and spread disease and trouble throughout
the villages. The Deputy-Commissioner has been appealed
to, and has given permission to the Christians to bury their
dead with their faces turned upwards. There is great
local excitement over this matter, and the Hindustani
pastor reports that there are hundreds, and perhaps thous-
ands, who will become Christians when this matter of
burial is settled in favour of the Christians.”
Eliphaz the Temanite promised Job as the last of seven
blessings that he should “come to his grave in a full age”
(Job v. 26), and it appears that if the Hindustani pastor
could promise these people that they should
come to their gfraves with upturned faces,
then they were prepared to say “Thy people shall be my
people, and thy God my God.”
Fanciful? Strange? Foolish? What is the adjective to
use ?
But what I say is “If they .want to come, let them
come, even if they crawl into the Kingdom through a
grave.” “Face upward” is a good motto to start with,
and if they begin with “Face upward” for the dead, they
may come to “Face upward” for the living, and that is
true conversion.


“Go out into the highways and hedges and compel
them to come in” —bundle them, in— does not suggest any
very searching scrutiny of motives. It is the willingness
to come that is wanted. Now in our present circum-
stances, when we are faced with great numbers of people
who are coming to us, and asking for guidance and leader-
ship, I am constantly reminded of Paul’s words about
the Corinthians (11. Corinthians viii. 5): —' They gave
their own selves to the Lord and to us.” I don t know
just what Paul means by the words “They gave themselves
to us,” but it suggests a hearty and whole acceptance
of him as leader, and a willingness to follow his leadership,
and to respond to his suggestions, such as, on the lower
plane, I find myself faced with in my dealings with the
Nama Sudras. “They gave their own selves to us.” I
am not just quietly dropping out the words “and to the
Lord,” or forgetting that they give a very definite mean-
ing to the words I have emphasized. Above all things I
would be honest. But may it not be that the giving of
themselves to the Lord’s servant may prelude a giving
of themselves to the servant’s Lord ?
Nor am I forgetting tnat our Lord’s third temptation
was, as Stalker puts it, “a temptation to seek a world-
wide external kingdom, and then to fill it with righteous-
ness, instead of beginning at the opposite end of the pro-
blem.” Christ’s course of action in refusing to become a
“bread king,” seems, at first, dead against me. But the
parallel is not as close as it appears to be, because for
Christ to have yielded to the popular demand meant the
immediate unsheathing of the sword, while our helping
of the submerged classes is rather covered by the expres-
sion,
“He went about doing good.”
But if you are still inclined to mark down the motive
as on© so low as to call for rejection, may I reply by asking
if you have ever analysed and weighed the motives that
were at work in the case of the flight of the Israelites from
Pharaoh’s oppression ? Is anyone here prepared to say
that they hustled out of Egypt to save their souls?—or
was it their skins ? Were the motives at work there
solely spiritual ? Was it really eagerness to secure op


portunity for undistracted spiritual worship that gave
Moses a host at his back ? I make bold to say that the
motive was social, not spiritual. But what was the
result? Just this, that
God grot them,
and when He got the people into His hand and into His
wilderness school, He was able to make them and to
mould them in such wise as was impossible so long as
Pharoah’s pressure rested so heavily on the Israelitisli clay.
I need not tell an audience like this that it was a potential
people of Jehovah worshippers, rather than an actual, that
fled across the Red Sea into conditions of chance, condi-
tions that gave potentialities a chance to grow into actua-
lities.
If that is so, may I not claim that we are thinking
God’s thoughts after Him in fronting Brahmin-Pharaohs
with the demand, “Let this people go ?”
For what the breaking of the yoke meant to the future
of Israel, in supplying them with a religious thought-
centre, and an ever-to-be-remembered assurance that Jeho-
vah had reached from above to lift them out of Egypt’s
mire, we all know. The memory of the mighty deliver-
ance was ever there to be appealed to to rally their
thoughts and their conduct to God’s side in the ups and
downs of the centuries that followed, during which God
turned His hand upon them to thoroughly purge them.
They were grateful to Jehovah who had delivered them
out of bondage.
Speaking of gratitude a Nama Sudra paper put it
thus:—“Someone one day planted a little sapling. But
an enemy put a great rock on its tender springing head,
and it could not rise. Then came a friend, and rolled
the rock away. Then did the sapling start skywards,
again, and though gratitude was thrilling through every
fibre of it, it could not speak to express it. So are the
Christians lifting the rock from off us, ana we are getting
a chance to rise, but we do not know how to express the
gratitude we so deeply feel.”
We believe that God’s Spirit is ever at work on the
hearts of men everywhere. “The wind bloweth where it


listeth,” and we believe that it everywhere and ever
bloweth. What music it awakens must depend on the
harp-strings that it strikes, their spiritual tune and ten-
sion. If there be but one or two low loose strings left
to vibrate
it is still God’s music.
The richer music is not yet possible, for the higher strings
are torn and fallen flaccid.
Are we justified (except in occasional and exceptional
cases) in expecting and demanding to hear the throbbing
deep minor chords of a true repentance sounding from a
tattered heathen harp ?
Mr. Henderson once read. you a paper on a book
called '‘Missions from the Modern View.” Let me quote
from this. “When Hindus become Christians it is rarely
from a strong sense of the need of forgiveness. They
have not inherited or developed sensitive consciences which
call for relief from ethical wrongdoing. They become Chris-
tians principally because by the teachings and example
of Christian leaders, they are satisfied that the Christian
way of living is the better way for time, and are assured
that it is better also for the unknown future. They are
drawn to become disciples of the Lord Jesus Christ by
His character and teachings, i.e., they feel Bhakti, or
trustful love for Jesus Christ. They are drawn towards
Him, and, therefore, become His disciples. According
to the direction of Jesus Christ Himself it is not until the
Holy Spirit takes of the things of Christ, and applies these
to the Indian adherents of Christ, that He convicts them
of sin for ethical shortcomings.”
True repentance for sin is a Christian virtue , and I am
satisfied, that, while the creation of a conviction of sin
should ever form a chief burden of our prayers, as indeed
it does, it should not be the cast-iron rule that it is with
some missionaries, to await evidence of a Christian repent-
ance for sin, before receiving a man as a Christian. “It
is as unhistorical and unpsychological as it is unbiblical
to expect from a man, before he has come to know Christ,
that he shall understand the fulness of his own need, and
the depravity of his own heart.”


As a last word on the subject of the Problem of the
Motive, let me quote the opinion of the
famous Chinese missionary,
Dr. Griffith John. He says: —“I would divide the can-
didates with whom I have to deal into three classes: those
who are actuated by good and pure motives wholly; those
who are actuated by bad and false motives wholly; and
those who are actuated by mixed motives, motives not bad
themselves, still not exclusively religious and spiritual.
Those who are actuated by good and pure motives solely,
and those actuated by bad motives solely, are easily dealt
with, but the great mass of candidates are to be found
among the third class, or those who are influenced by
mixed motives, and they are not so easily disposed of. In
what light shall we regard these men ? How shall we deal
with them? Shall we look upon them as so many hypo-
crites, and dismiss them on account of the imperfection of
the motive by which they are attracted ? Some would say
‘Yes.’ I say 'No/ a thousand times ‘No.’ I would say
‘Take them by the hand, pour more light into their souls,
and lead them on to higher and nobler things.’ Do this,
and in many cases the lower motive will die down, and the
higher motive will grow in strength, and become dominant.
Out of that mass of candidates, not very satisfactory, per-
haps, at the outset, you will get some of your brightest
converts, and most valuable helpers. And there is noth-
ing strange in this. The Apostles were actuated by very
mixed motives right up to the time of the crucifixion.
‘Who shall be greatest in the Kingdom ?’ was one of their
great ambitions. Yet our Lord did not reject them on
this account. He bore with them, and patiently led them
onward and upward. When the Holy Ghost came down
upon them at Pentecost, the low motive was burned up,
and the higher motive became regnant in their hearts and
lives. So will it be with these imperfect converts, at least,
with many of them, if we adopt the method of Christ in
dealing with them.”
CONCLUSION.
Thus, I have set before you a few thoughts on these
six problems—


1. The Problem of the Missionary himself;
2. The Problem of the Presentation of Truth;
3. The Problem of the Atrophy of the Indian Soul ;
4. The Problem of the Bible;
5. The Problem of the Aim;
6. The Problem of the Motive.
And now I have nothing left but headings—' The Pro-
blem of the Children,” “The Problem of Compassing Con-
tact,” “The Problem of our Attitude to other Religions,”
“The Problem of the Slow x\dvance,” “The Problem of
Union among the Churches” are headings I had put down
to write upon, but I feared to weary you if I wrote more.
What I have written will have shown you our great
need of watchfulness and wisdom, of conviction and of
courage. “Courage,” says Forsyth, "is our true spiritual
mien, not because of what our hands can do, but of what
has been done to our hand.” It is the passive voice that
is the hope and confidence of our active efforts.
Newton Clarke discourses in one of his books on the
“Problem of Sin,” but suddenly stops short to warn us
against the danger of taking an academic interest in the
Problem of Sin, at the expense of a vital interest in the
Problem of Saving the Sinner.
God forbid that I should merely interest you. I
am sure I am speaking to men who long to help us in
the solving of our problems. Some of them are beyond
your reach to touch, for you cannot sit where they sit,
but ever within touching distance is that first and foremost
problem of the missionaries’ own spiritual life. Touch it
often, brethren.
Touch it to wisdom, so that we, as mediators of a new
covenant, may worthily and winningly tell to a people
who by wisdom have not known God, that the Eternal
God is man’s refuge, that underneath are the everlasting
arms; that “God is love, and God so loved that He gave.”


Touch it to power of persuasion so that the overtones
of heaven may be in our voices.
Touch it to trembling awe , touch it to tears.
Touch it to blood.
For life must life be given. Heathen souls
Cannot be gained with flashing rays of light
Into their faces; nor a song that rolls
A\ ith fullest diapasons can ever bear
Them up from out their graves. For life must life
Be given.
Prophets learned that truth of old :
They took dead children, breathed their own nostrils’ life
Into the cold dead nostrils; laid their own
Warm flesh upon the lifeless flesh. And then
It was that life came back; it is well known.
Now that was yesterday. I learned this as
1 sat alone with God. To-day I gave
My life and laid it on the lifelessness
Of him, the heathen man’s. I felt no wave
Of quickening go through him. Yet when first
Elisha laid his body on the child’s
It did not live at once, and it had been
But one day dead, or two at most. A child’s
Form too would come again to breathing life
Much quicker than a man’s, and he long dead
For years. Because he did not live to-day
When first I gave my life, and bowed my head,
And cried aloud unto the Lord for him,
I fear not for the issue; for I know
Some day when I have breathed my nostrils’ breath
And prayed seven perfect times, or more, he’ll grow
At length warm-fleshed, will waken, raise his eyes—
Will see Thee, God, at last will see, O Christ!


A Visit to Orakandi.
By the REV. H. SUTTON, M.A., of the Victorian Baptist
Mission.
I have seen Orakandi and spent a few days there, and
have thought much on what I have seen. Let me tell
you what I saw.
I marked, first,
the new centre of life
at Orakandi. Central by its geographical position, the
mission house and what it stands for is also the centre with
which is knit up the new spirit abroad in Orakandi. That
bungalow, raised on its tiny hillock of earth in the midst
of fields that in a few months will be flooded with 10 ft.
of water, witnesses that Christian men and women have
come into that remote village. I write “men and women/’
not “missionaries.” There is a reason. These Nama
Sudras in Orakandi have felt, what we are often too back-
ward in letting people feel, the sympathy of a true man
and woman behind and within the missionary. We grow
too professional. We are so anxious to play the mission-
ary that we forget our part as men. The Hindu will yield
to personal influence as to nothing else. It runs in his
religious and social ancestry. He craves a guru, a leader
on whom he can depend unfalteringly. The Nama Sudras
in Orakandi have found in Dr. and Mrs. Mead and Miss
Tuck those who have shared their difficulties and made
broad their shoulders and firm their hearts to receive the
burden of their weaknesses. Believe me, this centrality
has been bought with a price.
More than that, I marked
the new order of life.
“The old order changeth, yielding place to new.” There is
education where formerly there was ignorance. Those wild
unbroken youngsters in the infant classes will be polished
and well-taught before they leave the school. Those girls,
who would have been doomed to a life of unrelieved


drudgery, are now conserving their early golden years
and laying up something that will move them on towards
true womanhood. I have seen few sights in India that
delighted me more than the Girls' School in Orakandi.
There is Christian teaching where formerly there was only
Hindu superstition. Every lad in the High School, every
lassie in the Girls’ School, and the majority of them again
in the Sunday-school, are being instructed in the moral and
spiritual teaching of Jesus. There is again, if not an open
bias towards Christianity, at any rate an admiration for
Christianity, which is many degrees removed from average
Hindu exclusiveness. The name of Jesus does not slam-to
the door of men’s hearts and bar it beyond all hope of
opening. They have the light, and some are walking towards
the light. Once more, there is a slackening of the iron grip
of custom. Courage to face hoary evils is coming to the
birth. Infant marriage and perpetual widowhood, sanc-
tioned by long tradition and fenced about with bitterest
prejudice, are being successfully assailed. There is resolu-
tion, purposefulness, endeavour.
Lastly, may be seen
the new promise of life.
The great question that arises again and again is—
Whither ? These men move, but what is the goal ? They grow,
but what shall the fruitage be ? Are they to become educated
and join the great mass of those who have been stripped
even of an average regard for God ? Are they to imbibe
just so much of the Christian spirit as will enable them to
forge ahead to a place of independence and respectability ?
Will they remain loyal to missionaries just so long as
it suits their own social plans, and then subside once more
into the rank and file of Hinduism ? Will they be cap-
tured by the Mussulmans ? We have not knowledge, but we
have faith. We feel there is another question that must
be asked: Will they come to worship Him whose Spirit
has touched them through His message and His messen-
gers? We hope, we pray, we have faith that they will.
While I was in Orakandi I joined in the dedication
service of the new church. The roomy building was full ;
many stood without and peered through the open windows.


Who are these met in a Christian church ? A handful of
Christians cannot fill the place ! They are Nama Sudras—
the lads on the floor, the grown men seated on forms run-
ning round the wall, the women and girls in the privacy
of “the court of the women.” They have come to see.
They sympathize with us. They feel that in some sense
the building is theirs. They listen reverently as the mean-
ing and purpose of the house of worship is explained to
them. They know not what manner of spirit they are of
as yet. May God speed the day when no longer in mere
sympathy, but in sincerity and in truth, they may gather
to worship at the feet of Christ! “Ye have need of pati-
ence, that ... ye might receive the promise.”


AMrn ski/k m fit dm/ov of o ’
* ' ffnr/f /fori .a * |
A ROCK IN A WEARY LAND.
“A man shall be as ... the shadow of a GREAT ROOK in a weary land.” Isaiah xxxiii. 2.


The Rock.
An address delivered to Young People (based upon the
exposition of Dr. G. A. Smith).
[On the wall of the church there was hung a large
coloured picture—see page opposite—depicting on the right-
hand side a stretch of arid desert, destitute of vegetation
and swept by swirling sand-drifts ; and on the left-hand
side an oasis, with rich green foliage, growing to leeward
of a great rock, which sheltered it from the desert drift.]
You young people know of Isaiah as one of the
prophets, and when you hear the word “prophet” you think
of a man of God who prophesied of Christ the Messiah, of
when and where and how the Messiah was to come, and of
what character He was to be.
But I want to speak of a prophecy of Isaiah that
relates to you, a description of what you should be, and
can be.
In this chapter Isaiah paints the earth as it shall be
when God’s will is done on earth: ' Behold a king shall
reign in righteousness, and princes shall rule in judgment.”
But you and I are not kings and princes, so that does not
concern us.
Let me read on : “And a man shall be.” That’s you.
Not a king, not a prince, a man.
“And a man shall be as an hiding place from the wind,
and a covert from the tempest, as rivers of water in a dry
place, as the shadow of a great rock in a weary land.”


The Desert Drift.
"In Africa and other countries in the East the following
phenomenon is often observed: —Where the desert touches
a river-valley or oasis, the sand is in a continual state of
drift from the wind, and it is this drift which is the real
cause of the barrenness of such portions of the desert (at
least) as abut upon the fertile land. For under the rain,
or by infiltration of the river, plants often spring up
through the sand, and there is sometimes promise of con-
siderable fertility. It never lasts. Down comes the drift,
and life is stunted or choked out.
"But set down a rock on the sand, and see the difference
its presence makes. After a few showers, to the leeward
side of this, some blades will spring up ; if you have pati-
ence, you will see in time a garden.
"How has the boulder produced this? Simply by
arresting the drift.
"Now, that is exactly how great men benefit human life.
A great man serves his generation, serves the whole race, by
arresting the drift. Deadly forces, blind and fatal as the
desert wind, sweep down human history. But a man
SHALL BE AS A ROCK!”
A Philosophy of History.
"We have in these words a philosophy of history.
Kings and great men (God’s kings and God’s great men, I
mean) have reared their strong great height towards
heaven, and men, in their shadow, have got a chance to
grow t-o something higher and nobler and better.”
Moses was such a man. Luther was another. These,
and men like them, have been God’s great rock men.
Christ, the Rock.
I said that this is a prophecy which relates to you ;
but what relates to you as a man relates also, of course, to
the Chief Man, our Master, Christ.
“It was He who alone, among all the rock men of the
past, has been big enough and high enough and strong
enough to stop the greatest drift in the history of the
world, the drift of sin.”


“A man shall be as the shadow of a great rock was
first fully fulfilled in Christ, and fulfilled in Him in
order that we might, in our turn, become great rocks to
give men a chance to grow in our shadows.
The Ideal Life.
This, then, is to be the ideal of life for you young
people. Yourselves fixed on the great foundation Rock,
which is Christ, you are to live high strong lives, holding
back from weaker lives the drifts of sin and temptation
and ignorance.
If you cannot hold back the drift entirely, you can
often stand between a man and the drift and break the
force of it. You know how you walk on the windy side
of your sister or your mother in a storm, and break the
force of it to help her to get on.
Brothers, be a rock to shelter your brothers in your
own home. That brother of yours is weaker than you are.
Don’t let the drift smother him by your failing to get be-
tween him and the drift. Keep back from him by the purity
and uprightness of your own life the rush of impurity and
temptation, and the pleasure-drift which smothers the life
of so many young Christians. Stand between him and the
dance and the gamble and all the mad rush of the pleasuie
drift which would so easily beset and smother him.
A Woman shall be.
A man shall be, yes, and a woman, too. There are
masculine rocks and feminine rocks, and some of the big-
gest, bravest rocks in the world are women.
You young women are in this text. You may have
weak bodies, but God never planned women to be weak. A
woman shall be as a rock.
Thank God for the drifts that our mothers have
stopped. You young women, get on the sheltering side of
lives of girls and young women whom you can see the
pleasure-drift and the temptation-drift are threatening to
smother.
One of the bravest rocks in India is a woman. You
have heard of Pandita Ramabai, that splendid, strong, in


tellectual, Christ-like, Christian Indian widow, under whose
shelter there are hiding at this very moment no fewer than
1,500 Indian women (mostly widows). Pandita Ramabai,
by the walls of her refuge homes and the great love-shield
of her wondreful life, keeps back the awful drift of sin and
ignorance that would smother out of sight the shooting
blades of beauty and purity that God has planted in every
woman’s life, be she black or be she white.
The Missionary Rock.
I chose this subject to speak to you about for two
reasons:—
(1.) Because here we have depicted one of the splen-
did Bible illustrations of what our Christian
life is, a picture which ought to be in every
young Christian’s mind.
(2.) Because this is one of the most beautiful illus-
trations of what our foreign mission work is,
and seeks to be.
There are no stones in Bengal, and there are no rocks.
So, also, for the weary and the wind-swept souls on the
great Bengal plains there are no great rock-shelters where,
sheltered from the dark drifts of heathenism and the
blighting olasts of Mahommedanism, men and women and
little children can get a chance to grow up into the purity
and strength of life that is the joy and privilege of the
Christian.
Let this picture which I have hung up to-night, not
only on the wall of the church, but also on the walls of the
chambers of imagery in your heart, ever speak to you of
that rock-building on Bengal’s plains which is the work
of our mission. The steadfastness and strength of the
rock may depend on us missionaries, but
the length of the shadow
depends on you.
Would you have the shadow broaden ?—then help to
make the rock higher.
Would you have the tender convert-blade grow into a


strong tree ?—then water it by your prayers and surround
it with an atmosphere of sympathy and love.
It was in the shadow of our rock (our mission) that
the lives of men like Panchan on Babu, Akhoy Babu, and
Joy Chand have been able to defy the drift and grow into
Christian manliness and strength.
It was in the shadow of our rock that there grew the
heart of that Christian woman whose poem, “A Tribute of
Love” (written when her son Nagen was baptized), has
touched the heart of so many of our women.
So learn to think of our mission in this noble soul-
inspiring way. God save us all from the miserable con-
ception of our mission as merely a society that wants a
subscription to support a missionary.
My Dispensary has been as the shelter of a great rock
in a weary land. And it is you who helped to raise the
rock.
The Widows’ Home at Orakandi for Nama Suclra
widows is another rock which we have reared with a splen-
did far-flung shadow, within which many and many a life
of those weary, wistful, witless widows shall be sheltered
from the dark drift which so cruelly sweeps upon their
lives, and be enabled to grow into Christian purity and
sweetness and strength.
A man shall be —
A woman shall be —
Pray for Nurse Thomson that, as she sets her back
and seeks to stop the sin-drift for these Nama Sudra
widows, she may be as the shadow of a great rock in India’s
weary widow-land.
The Cross.
Dear young friends, it is only as your lives and mine
are lived in the shadow of the Cross that we can thus
reproduce the sheltering power of Him who is our Rock and
Refuge.
“A man shall be” —God said this at creation, but sin
came in and marred the manhood that should have been
sheltering rock.
He said it again before the Cross. It is at the Cross


that a man learns to say not only “A man shall be,” but
“I shall be for my fellow-men as the shadow of a great rock
in a weary land.”
Thus shall your lives be full of holy gladness, for rocks
have hearts—God’s rocks. Let our lives grow to this splen-
did ideal, your life a shelter in Australia—my life a shelter
in Bengal ; and then after a life of gladness here we shall
be gladdened there, as we hear Him say to us, “Well done,
good and faithful servant , thou hast been —
A Hiding Place from the wind,
A Covert from the tempest,
As Rivers of Water in a dry place,
As the Shadow of a great Rock in a weary land —
Enter thou.”








