

The Laird O' Rossmere,
A STORY OF
A Sprig of White Heather
GORSE AND GRASS
AND HEATHER, WHERE HIS FOOTSTEPS PASS,
THE BRIGHTER SEEM. —LONGFELLOW.
BY THEODORA HOLLOWAY.
Tasmaia:
"THE MERCURY” OFFICE, HOBART.
1894.




The Laird o'Rossmere,
A STORY OF
A Sprig of White Heather
[IN ELEVEN LETTERS.]
Reprinted from “ The Tasmanian flail.”
Gorse and grass,
And heather, where his footsteps pass,
The brighter seem.— Longfellow.
BY THEODORA HOLLOWAY
[All Rights Reserved.]




THe Laird o'Rossmere
A Story of a Sprig of White Heather
(IN ELEVEN LETTERS).
By THEODORA HOLLOWAY
[ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.]
§ LETTER I.
21 Yilliers Terrace,
EAR May,—A most wonderful
thing has happened—l hardly
expect you to credit it. Do
you remember the old Scotch
gentleman, Mr. Ross, whom
we met at Hastings la3tyear,
and who took such a great
fancy to me, simply because I used to
read to him, walk beside his invalid-chair,
and try to brighten the tedious hours’
sickness for the poor old man ? And you
remember the day he returned to his
native country, how, when I went to his
hotel to take him a few flowers, and say
good-bye, he took my hands in his,
saying, “ God bless ye, lassie, ye’ve been
verra guid and kind to a puir frail auld
mon, an’ I’ll not forget ye by-an’-bye.”
How we puzzled over his words as to what
they could mean. The mystery is solved,
dear, and in a most wonderful way ; the
poor old man is dead, and has left all his
money to me—me—Olive Daner. Can
you believe it, May ? I found it hard to
do so. Fancy, I am an heiress, twenty
thousand pounds all mine—my very own,
is it not strange ? What could have in-
duced Mr. Ross to leave his fortune to me?
Perhaps some quarrel with his relations,
some sudden whim, some— —but, there,
it cannot be explained, only wondered and
rejoiced at.
In the midst of my good fortune I can-
not help thinking of and feeling sorry for'
Malcolm Ross, the nephew and supposed
heir of old Mr. Ross. Poor fellow, it
must have been a blow to him, after being
brought up with the idea that he would
inherit his uncle’s money, to find it left to
some unknown girl. I wonder if he quite
hates me—l’m afraid he has cause—but
no, I don’t think he does, though, for his
mother has sent an invitation for me to
spend a month with them in Scotland.
They live near a little village called
Airlie. The house is named ‘‘Rossmere.”
Of course I’m going. You know, dear,
how I have longed to visit the Highlands.
Oh ! how I shall revel in it; the hills—
the lakes—oh ! I shall be in paradise.
I hear that Mrs. Ross has two sons
besides Malcolm, namely, Dennis and
Ronald ; the latter is quite a small boy I
believe. I mean to be very, very nice to
Malcolm, I feel so, so dreadful, having all
this money that should be his by rights.
I really must say good-bye, dear. lam so
tired with packing all my pretty new
gowns, although, indeed, I have a maid to
help me now ; but I will confess to you,
May, that I’m just a little bit afraid
of her. For the present, adieu. Yours
ever,
Olive Danes,


LETTER 11.
“ Rossmere,” Airlie,
July 4.
Dearest May,—l will tell you every-
thing from the very beginning of my
journey. Dad put me into a first-elass
carriage at King’s Cross (I can afford that
now), with cushions, books, rugs, and
last, but not least, a dear little hamper,
containing sandwiches, strawberries, etc.
Then with final injunctions from dad not
to lose either myself or my belongings,
and a remark from my small brother,
Dick, to the effect that I was not to leave
“my heart in the Highlands,” off we
started. The journey was dreadfully
dull, so I took refuge in a Family Herald,
and was enjoying it very much, but Ford,
my new maid, looked so reprovingly at me
that I felt obliged to put it down and
tackle “ The manners and tones of good
Society,’’which Aunt Jane had put into my
hands at parting, as she assured me once
more that young people’s manners were
not what they were in her young days.
As far as Edinburgh the journey was
oh so dull and dreary. I thought it
would never end. Arrived there, Ford and
I drove at once to an hotel, and after a
good dinner I soon forgot my tired eyes
and aching limbs in sleep,
Early in the morning we started once
more. The scenery, after we got away
from the towns, was lovely, but I soon got
tired of gazing at it, for I am un-
fortunately one of those people who can-
not enjoy beautiful things alone. I
glanced at Ford, but her Cockney soul was
quite unmoved by all the grandeur we
were passing through. So for lack of a
better occupation I turned to criticise my
fellow passenger. I soon took in all his
points, good and bad, but when I had done
so I could not decide whether I liked his
face or no. A tall man, dark-haired,
clean 3haven, ugly, nothing at all remark-
able about him except his eyes, beautiful,
sad-looking brown eyes, and oh ! yes—
let me do him justice, he had a lovely
voice, I know, for ho spoke to me. Don’t
be shocked, dear, he only asked me if I
should like the window up or down. I
said “Down, please,” and once more
silence reigned supreme. And if there is
anything I dislike it is to be silent. I
stood it) for half an hour, and at last in
desperation said, “ Ford, I will have some
lunch, now, I think.”
“It isn’t one o’clock yet, miss,” re-
monstrated Ford.
“Oh! never mind,” I cried, “I’m
hungry ; I’ll have it now.”
“ Very well, miss,” she replied, with a
sniff that reminded me of aunt Jane.
“I don’t see that there hamper anywhere
about, miss,” she continued, “ I’m afraid
it’s not here.”
“Not here?” I said, aghast. “Oh!
nonsense, Ford, it must be here.”
Ford searched under the seats, whilst
I vainly scanned the racks.
“ It ain’t no manner of use looking for
it, miss,” said Ford, rising from her knees
with an injured air.
“Perhaps,” said I, with a sudden in-
spiration, “perhaps it’s in the luggage
van.”
Then as we glided into a station,
“ Jump out Ford; call a porter. Here’s
my purse—give him sixpence—and be
quick! I don’t expect we stop long.’
Ford went obediently, and I took off
my gloves, and waited in joyful anticipa-
tion of the coming feast. The horrid man
in the opposite corner of the carriage
smiled—l saw him—though he tried to
hide it behind his paper. As I said before,
I waited, but no Ford returned. I was
just getting out to see what had kept her,
when with a rush and a whirr the train
started, leaving Ford, the hamper, and
my purse behind. Here was a predica-
ment ! What should I do? Suppose they
came to collect tickets before reaching
Airlie. Dreadful visions of my being
dragged to the police court for travelling
without a ticket flashed through my mind.
I had never been a long journey alone
before. I was so hungry—and—don’t
laugh May, dear—l really couldn’t help
it—l felt two tears trickling down my
cheeks. I tried to wipe them away un-
observed, but my companion saw them,
and laying down his newspaper, he said
kindly, “ I see you have had the mis-
fortune to lose your maid, and ”
smiling—“your hamper. Will you per-
mit me to get you some refreshments at
the next stopping place ? ”
Of course I ought to have bowed and
said with dignity, “Thank you, I am not
in the least hungry.” But I didn’t. I
only furtively wiped away the last tear,


and said, “Yes, please.” Very brilliant
wasn’t it ? However, my companion
seemed to think it all right, for he got out
at the next station, and soon returned,
followed by a waiter carrying a most
delightful little luncheon.
“ If,” said my friend, as he proceeded
to assist me to some chicken, “If you
will tell me your destination, and your
maid’s name, I’ll telegraph to her to come
on by the next train.”
“ You are very kind,” I said, “ lam so
much obliged to you. I am going to
Airlie. I’m afraid poor Ford will be
dreadfully annoyed at being left alone
amongst a lot of savages, as she calls the
Scotch folk.”
“ You will admit,” he returned,smiling,
“that even a savage is useful at times.”
“ Oh, I was only quoting Ford,” I cried
reproachfully. “ Besides, how was I to
know that you were Scotch ? ”
“Didn’t you notice a wild, uncanny
look about me?” he said,smilingquizzically.
“You are unjust,” I retorted. “I
admire the Scotch immensely.”
“In the name of my country, I thank
you,” he said.
Soon we were on our way once more,
but not in silence this time—for the ice
once broken we became quite friendly—
indeed, I because so interested in my
companion’s description cf deer-stalking
that I was surprised to find myself at
Airlie—the end of my journey—in what
seemed a very short time. I commenced
collecting my various belongings, and, as
we glided into the station, held out my
hand to my companion, saying frankly,
“Good-bye, and thank you so much for
all your kindness.”
“It was a pleasure to be of service to
you,” he said, quietly, “And I hope we
shall meet again ! ”
“I am sure my mother would be
delighted to see you any time you are in
London, and my name is ”
“ Miss Olive Daner ? ” interrupted a gay
voice inquiringly. The speaker was a
young man in shooting costume, his
handsome clear-cut fea ures and deeply-
set dark blue ejes forming a type of
healthy, manly beauty,
“I am right, am I not ?” he went on,
“ You are Miss Olive Daner.”
“ Yes ” I assented, “ And you are ?”
“ Dennis Ross, at your service,” he
replied, taking possession of my travelling
bag and rugs.
“ I hope the journey has not tired you
too much, for we have rather a long
drive. Hullo, Malcolm, old fellow,” as
he caught sight of my fellow passenger,
“ Did you travel down with Miss Daner 1 ”
I turned in surprise, “Oh, I had no
idea—how strange.” But Malco'm Ross
interrupted me by saying, in the coldest
possible tones, “ I was until this moment
unaware that I had had that honour.”
I stared in amazement. What could be
the matter ? Why was my genial fellow-
traveller so changed, he had been so kind,
and now
“We didn’texpect you to-day Malcolm,”
said Dennis, “ But if you will drive the
dogcart, I’ll get up behind with Ronald,
and James can walk home,”
“ Thank you,” said Malcolm curtly,
“ but I nrefer to walk myself—l have the
honour,” with a slight sneer “ to wish
you good evening, Miss Daner,” and,
turning on his heel, he strode down the
platform, and was soon out of sight.
Oh, I thought indignantly, how could he
be so hurrid— so rude. I suppose he is
mercenary enough to hate me for having his
uncle’s money. I had meant to be so
nice to him, too. Well, I am saved -th§,t
trouble at any rate, and, laughing rather
unsteadily, I turned to Dennis Ross.
“ Your brother seems rather annoyed,”
I said.
“Oh, never mind old Malcolm,” he
rejoined cheerily, “he’s a bit out of sorts,
that’s all. I dare say Ronald and I can
take care of you without him, so come
along—l’ve got all your things, I think.”
“Ronald—that is your other brother,”
I said, as we made our way down the plat-
form.
“ Yes, he is a jolly little chap, though
he is lame, and can’c get about much.”
The “ tickets, please,” of the porter
recalled my ticketless condition to my
mind, so I told Dennis about losing Ford
and my purse,
“Oh, that’s all right,” he said, “We are
so well known here they won't mind
passing you. I’ll explain. ”
We found Ronald outside in the dog-
cart ; he raised his hat on seeing me, and
said gravely,
“ I’m delighted to make your acquaint-
ance, Miss Daner,” looking me ail over


with those beautiful solemn eyes that
seem to be a trait of the Ross family.
I felt inclined to laugh at the child’s
quaint grown-up manner, but the little
fellow looked so earnest that I refrained,
and taking my place beside Dennis, we
rattled through the little streets of Airlie
at what seemed to me a break-neck speed.
I was delighted with both Ronald and
Dennis. We soon got quite friendly as
we drove rapidly along in the fast-falling
dusk.
“Here we are at ‘Rossmere,’” cried
Ronald, as a long, low, rambling house
came in sight. We turned in at the gates,
and Dennis brought us up to the door in
fine style. A little dainty old lady stood
on the steps awaiting us. She took both
my hands in her own tiny jewelled
fingers saying,
“ Welcome to ‘Rossmere,’ my dear.
I hope you will be happy with us.”
“I know I shall,” I cried, enthusiasti-
cally, and bent to kiss her soft cheek.
Mr. Ross looked at Dennis, and smiled
in what seemed to me an enigmatical
way, but her son only shrugged his
shoulders as he threw open the drawing-
room door.
“Isn’t that a little bit rash, Miss
Daner ; you don’t know much about us
yet,” he said as I passed him. I only
laughed by way of answer, and then, after
a refreshing cup of tea in the delightful
old-fashioned drawing-room, I went up
stairs to rest before dressing for dinner.
Mrs. Ross sent her maid to help me
unpack, as poor Ford can’t get here be-
fore 10 o’clock. I put on a very simple
little French gown, and went downstairs,
Dennis was standing in the hall, looking
handsomer than ever in his evening
clothes. He had some lovely cream roses
in his hand, which he held out to me.
“ Will you wear these, Miss Daner—
do wear them.”
“ Thanks, how good of you,” I said,
smiling, and fastening the roses in the
lace at my neck.
Presently we went into dinner, and I
was wondering what had become of
Malcolm, when Dtnnis turned to his
mother saying, “ Malcolm travelled from
Edinburgh with Miss Daner. He insisted
on walking home, and sent Peters to me
about half an hour ago to say he intended
dining with the Stannards.”
“Oh ! ” cried Ronald, “ has Malcolm
come back ? ”
“ Ronald thinks there is no one in the
world like Malcolm,” said Dannis.
“ Neither is there,” said Malcolm’s
small champion stoutly. “Just wait till
you see Malcolm, Miss Daner ; he’s the
bravest man in the world. Oh, you’re
sure to love Malcolm,” he asserted con-
fidently.
“Miss Daner will doubtless do her
best if only to—to—well, to please you
Ronald,” said Dennis drily.
I buried my blushing cheeks in the
child’s golden curls.
“ I’ll love you instead, Ronald,” I said.
After dinner Dennis took me for a stroll
in the garden. It is I think the loveliest
garden in the world ; flowers and shrubs
everywhere in magnificent profusion,
queer little paths turning in and out
amongst the lawns, and flower beds here
and there. A little arbour half hidden
by honeysuckle and climbing roses. That
evening,” idling about in the moonlight, I
thought I had never seen anything more
beautiful.
Presently we heard Mrs. Ross’s gentle
voice calling to us that the dews were
falling, so we reluctantly went indoors,
and spent the rest of the evening listen-
ing to the sweet Scotch melodies Mrs.
Ross played. I went to my room about
eleven o’clock ; there I found Ford very
dishevelled, and railing bitterly against
the world in general, and Scotch porters
in particular. I fell asleep as soon as my
head touched the pillow, and dreamed of
the dark, stern face of Malcolm Ross.
Ever your loving,
Olive.
LETTER 111.
“ Rossmere,”
July 5.
Dear May, —ln spite of my fatigue,
I awakened very early this morning with
the glorious sunlight streaming in at
the open window. I sp»ang out of bed
and drew aside the dainty lace curtains.
The beauty of the scene almost daz-
zled me for a moment. You must
know, May, that “Rossmere” stands
on a slope, at the foot of which, I
now saw for the first time, is a great


lake, stretching right away to the dis-
tant hills, its waters sparkling, dancing,
in the morning sunlight, the vividness of
its colouring made all the more intense
by the neutral tints of the opposite shore.
As there seemed to be a path leading
right down to the water’s edge, I was
seized with a desire to explore the
unknown beauties of the lake. So I
hastily dressed, ran downstairs, and out
into the garden. After some difficulty I
succeeded in finding the path I had seen
from my window. A few minutes walk-
ing brought me to the water’s edge, and
sitting down on a fallen tree I proceeded
to drink in the beauty of the scene. How I
pityyou, poor dear, in dirty, dingy London,
whilst I am in a very paradise. How 1
should love such a home as this. Before
long I realised I was hungry, and looking
at my watch found it was past eight
o’clock, so picking up the wild flowers I
had gathered turned homewards. As I
neared the house I heard a man’s beauti-
ful tenor voice singing, “ Three fishers
went sailing out into the west; out into
the west as the sun went down.” And at
the bend of the path I came upon Malcolm
Robs, with little Bonald perched upon his
shoulder. He eagerly begged to be put
down, and hurried towards me as fast as
his poor lame fdot would allow.
“Have you been down to the lake ? ”
he cried. “ Do you like it ? ”
“ I think ‘ Rossmere ’ the loveliest
place I ever saw in my life, Ronald,” I
made answer a 3 I turned to greet Malcolm
Ross.
“Ah, well, money will buy everything
you know, even hearts and homes,” he
said with a slightly cynical smile. “ You
are up early for a traveller, Miss Daner.”
“ Yes,” I replied, “1 could not resist
the temptation to come out to explore.
Oh ! it is lovely. Why I feel quite another
girl to the Olive Daner of smoky
London.”
Ronald eyed me critically.
“ She looks very pretty this morning,
doesn’t she, Malcolm ? ” he said gravely.
Malcolm did not seem inclined to venture
an opinion on the subject. At that
moment Dennis most opportunely joinid
us.
“ This is too bad, Miss Diner,” he cried.
“ I’ve been waiting about the hall tor you
for half an hour. I wanted to take you to
the lake, and now Malcolm and that little
rogue Ronald found you first.” He looked
at me with such a reproachful expression
in his eyes that I couldn’t help laughing.
“ It's too unkind of you to laugh at
me,” he went on. “ However, I’ll forgive
you, on one condition.”
“ Well, and that is ?”
“ Let me take you for a sail.”
“ There’s a pretty strong breeze blow-
ing on the water this morning,” said
Malcolm, warningly.
“ Oh, I can manage the boat all right,”
Dennis rejoined carelessly.
Malcolm shrugged his shoulders and
turned away.
“ Surely,” said I, “ the water is never
very rough ; it is so sheltered by the hills.”
“ Oh, you should see it in the winter,”
cried little Ronald. “ Once a boat was
wrecked in a storm, and the man in it
would have been drowned if Malcolm
with a look of pride towards his eldest
brother —“ if Malcolm hadn’t swum out
and brought him ashore. I can tell you
Malcolm is a very brave man, he ”
“ That will do, youngster,” said the hero
of Ronald’s story, placing the boy on his
shoulders once more. Then, as he turned
away,
“ Once again, Miss Daner, let me advise
you net to go on the lake to-day—though,
of course, if you wish to do so it's no busi-
ness of mine.
“Poof,” cried Dennis, “ I can manage
the boat all right—besides, look at the sky,
there’s not a sign of a storm. Don’t let
Malcolm frighten you off coming, will you,
Miss Daner ? ”
“ Certainly not,” I replied, decidedly,
and thinking what a disagreeable way of
saying things Malcolm Ross had. Hearing
the gong at that moment we all trooped
into the breakfast-room, where we found
Mrs. Ross awaiting us.
“ Good morning, my dear, I hope you
had a good night, and are not over-tired,”
she said kindly.
“ Not a bit ” I returned gaily, “ and I
am more in love with ‘Rossmere’ than
ever. Why 1 feel quite at home already.”
At my words Malcolm dropped his fork
with a clash on to his plate, and the blood
rushed to his face under his dark skin.
Dennis laughed.
“We feel honoured, Miss Daner,” he
drawled, “especially” with a malicious


glance at Malcolm, “ especially the head
of the house.”
I looked from one brother to the other
in bewilderment, and racked my brains
as to what I had said to make Malcolm
Boss look so peculiar, almost as if—well
as if he despised me.
“ What are you young people going to
do with yourselves to-day 1 ” broke in Mrs.
Ross hastily.
“ Well, Miss Daner and I thought of
going on the water,” answered Dennis.
“I think it hardly safe began
Malcolm, when his mother interrupted
him, saying coldly,
“I am quite sure Dennis would net
propose going if there were the least
danger.”
Malcolm relapsed into silence.
Shall I go ? I thought I should like to
show him I don’t care one bit what he
thinks, and yet—and yet he was very
kind to me in the train after all. I wonder
now if I could make him look at me as he
did then. I’ll try.
“ I think,” I said slowly, “ I think, as
Mr. Ross says, there is a high wind
blowing, and as the wind always gives me
a headache —if you don’t mind, Mr.
Dennis, we will postpone our sail.” I
glanced at Malcolm as I spoke, and he
gave me a grateful smile—a smile that
lighted up his whole face, and made it
almost handsome. I felt glad I had
pleased him, glad because—well,because —
in spite of his queer abrupt ways, in spite
of his stern looks, I like him. Yours,
ever, Oxive.
LETTER IV.
“Rossmere,”
July 12.
Dear May,—l have neglected you, poor
dear, for a whole week. Oh ! it has been
such a happy, careless week. I have en-
joyed its every hour.
Two nice things are to happen tc-day.
We are having a tennis party, and
Malcolm is coming home ; he has been
away on business in Glasgow for three
whole days.
Evening.
As I came downstairs in my white
flannel dress this afternoon, I found the
rest of the tennis party congregated in the
quaint old hall. Dennis, Leo and Arthur
Stannard, wrangling about the distribu-
tion of partners.
It was eventually settle! that Arthur
Stannard and I should play together,
whilst Dennis and Brenda Stannard were
our opponents.
“ We shall have to play very carefully,’
said Arthur as we took our place", “ Boss
plays awfully well.”
“Yes, indeed,” Lughed Brenda glee-
fully, “ we shall win easily.”
“ Wait ” I cried, “ I mean to do wonders
this set.” With that J served a good swift
ball to Brenda, which she returned
splendidly, and which my partner, much
to his own chagrin, missed. After a great
struggle we lost the set by one game, aud
the victors and vanquished alike sought
the welcome shade of the elm trees to
enjoy much needed refreshment in the
way of afternoon tea.
I lay back in a basket chair, fanning my
flushed face. Arthur stretched his great
length at my feet, whilst the others
grouped themselves in various attitudes*
elegant, or the reverse.
“From an artistic point of view”
drawled Arthur Stannard, who aims at
being a poet, “ tennis is a mistake for
ladies, so few girls know how to run
gracefully—it’s an awful sight to see a
girl with her hair rumpled and her face
red,” and he gave a shudder—half real*
half affected.
“ Oh ! ” I said, “I suppose you object to
rowing then, and golf, and dancing.”
“Ah ! just fancy giving up dancing,”
sighed pretty Brenda.
“ Well, you will have to when you
are—say —fifty,” said Leo with the blunt-
ness of fifteen years.
“ Of all the horrid boys, Leo, you’re the
worst,” cried his sister indignantly.
“Fancy being fifty and possibly
fat —ugh!”
“ Never mind, Brenda,” I said, con-
solingly. “ From seventeen to fifty is a
long while.”
“ Oh, as to dancing,” said Arthur*
magnanimously, “ I don’t object to quad-
rilles.”
“ Quadrilles!” I echoed, “asif we were
wall-flowers, indeed. Besides, Mr. Stan-
nard, you must confess that some girls
dance gracefully. Come now.”
“ I’ve never seen one,” he persisted.


“ Really,” I cried, “your politeness
■quite overpowers me, Mr. Stannard.”
“ Oh, Miss Olive, I wasn’t thinking of
you, and besides— oh, really I—”
“ Pray, don’t apologise,” I said airily.
“ Brenda and I will try and survive your
disapproval. Won’t we, Brenda ? ”
“ Yes,” replied Dennis for her.
“ Besides, there are other peop’e in the
world to admire your dancing, without
that vandal of a poet.”
“ Arthur does tbink Miss Daner grace-
ful though,” declared Leo.
“ How do you know ? ” I demanded.
“ Well the other day I was just looking
through Arthur’s folio of—er—poems,”
with a malicious glance at his brother,
* l and I came across a little—er— ode is
the correct term I believe, it .”
“ You young wretch ! ” cried Arthur,
throwing a pillow at his brother’s head.
“ And,” continued Leo, skilfully evad-
ing the cushion, “ it was about you, Miss
Daner. It really does you great credit
Ar’ old fellow. 1 recognised Miss Daner
in every line. Let me see, how did it
go?” taking not the least notice of
Arthur, who was vainly signalling him to
be quiet.
“Oh, I know,” continued Leo the
irrepressible, assuming a melancholy air,
and turning up his eyes in a woe-begone
fashion.
“Draw it mild,” laughed Dennis” I
don’t think Arthur ever looks quite so
bad as that, even in his worst—l mean
his most poetic—moments.
“ Will you fellows be quiet ? ” queried
Arthur in ominously calm tones.
“No,” said Leo, “ I feel it my duty to
let your ode be heard, my most solemn
duty as your brother. The—er—poem is
far too sweet—far too ”
“ Too beautiful to waste its sweetness on
the desert air,” supplemented Dennis.
“ Just so,” said Leo politely. “ Now for
it. Attention please. Hem !
‘ She has eyes like a gazelle,
She walks like a sylph,
She whom I love so well,
She whom my soul ”
A roar of laughter, in which, I am
ashamed to confess, I joined, here inter-
rupted the ode.
The unfortunate poet struggled to his
feet, his face very red. “ I suppose you
fellows think you’re very funny ?” he cried
indignantly.
“ Look here, Arthur, ‘ she may be all
you say, but to have her at the beginning
of every line—it’s a little to much of a
good thing/’ This from Dennis.
“Be sure you send me a copy. I can’t
afford more than a guinea,” shouted his
tormentor after the retreating poet, who
had walked off with more speed than was
consistent with dignity.
“ I think you are both very unkind,” I
said, feeling bound to stand up for my
youthful admirer—especially after the
way I had laughed at his effusion. “ And
really, Mr. Dennis,” I went on severely,
“ you are old enough to know better. You
can’t plead ‘ youth and extenuating cir-
cumstances,’ for the first it is self-evident
you do not possess, and to plead the latter
would be as good as saying that my ‘ eyes
are not like a gazelle’s,’ and that I do not
‘ walk like a sylph.’ ”
“Forgive me,” he said, “ but,” with a
little ripple of laughter, “ Arthur is too
funny.”
I deigned no reply, but turned to
Brenda, saying,
“ Come, dear, we will leave these ill-
behaved people to their own devices and
go indoors.”
“ Oh, but Dennis said he would sing,*
she demurred.
“ Anything—anything to keep you here
—what shall it be ? ”
“ The three fishers,” suggested Leo.
“No, no,not that, anything but that,”
I cried hastily, and then flushed hotly,
conscious that I liked to think of Malcolm
only singing that song. “It—it—is too
bad for to-day,” I ended lamely.
So Dennis sang a pretty little Scotch
song, and when it was over Brenda rose,
saying regretfully,
“We must go now, Olive, or we shall
be late for dinner. Good-bye, dear.”
“ We shall see you on the sixteenth, I
suppose, Brenda ? ” said Dennis.
“ Oh, yes, I have not forgotten,” she
responded lightly over her shoulder, as
she walked towards the house.
“ What, forgotten!” echoed Leo, as he
prepared to follow his sister, “ I give you
my word, Ross, that she has thought of
nothing but her dress for that occasi >n for
the past week. Not a solitary room in the
house has been free from silk and—er—
er —tape, and such like rubbish. And as
for pins, they have been everywhere—


positively. Oh, all right—’ ’ breaking off as
his sister called to him to hurry, and with
a shout and a rush he was gone.
I must tell you, May, that on the six-
teenth Mrs. Ross is giving a ball in my
honour. Oh, she is so good, sparing no
pains—doing everything in her power to
make my visit as pleasant as possible.
And yet it is not the picnics, the dances,
or even Mrs. Ross’s kindness that makes
me so happy. What is it, I wonder ?
When Leo was out of sight Dennis
came and stood by my chair.
“What are you going to wear at the
dance, Olive 1 I may call you Olive !” he
asked.
“ Question number one,” I replied
laughingly. “I am going to wear white.
Question number two. You may call me
anything you please.”
“Anything ” he said, “anything.”
Then his voice changing to an indes-
cribably tender tone, “May I call you
Olive dar .”
“Oh ! Mr. Ross,” I interrupted hastily,
Ido so want some white heather to
wear at the ball ; do you know where any
is to be found ? I have made up my mind
to have heather, white heather, or noth-
ing.”
I stopped almost breathless, and gazed up
at him with anxious eyes, hoping I had
averted what I had feared was coming.
“ lam afraid not,” he answered con-
strainedly. “It is extremely rare, as you
know, and very little is ever found here-
abouts.”
“Well, I must needs be content without
it. Why,” taking out my watch, “it is
seven o’clock, and high time for me to go
in if I mean to be dressed for dinner.”
So saying I ran indoors and up to my
room, feeling rather conscience-stricken.
Oh, surely, surely I have not been more
than ordinarily polite and nice to him.
Besides I have only been here a little over
a week, and people can’t possibly get to—
to —like anyone in such a short time.
At this point my thoughts by some
strange coincidence reverted to Malcolm.
He must be home by this time, I no used.
Aloud I said to Ford, in a would-be
indifferent tone,
“I shall wear the cream silk empire
gown to-night, Ford.”
“ Lor’, Miss Olive”—in tones expressing
strong disapproval—“whatever fori
There’s not a soul coming to-night. You
ought to keep it for some dinner party, or
some ”
“ No," I said, decidedly, “I shall wear
it to-night.”
“ Not even Mr. Stannard to see it,"
grumbled Ford as she reluctantly took the
gown in question out of the wardrobe.
“ Mr. Malcolm would never notice the
difference if you had on a sack. There’s
Mr. Dennis, to be sure, but what’s
one mau. ” I let Ford ramble on unheeded.
Why was I feeling so unaccountably happy
to-night, as I fastened a knot of crimson
rosebuds at my neck and turned to view
the result, then smiling at my own reflec-
tion I picked up my fan and made my
way downstairs.
Malcolm Ross was alone in the drawing-
room when I entered. He stood by the
window, the bright radiance of the setting
sun throwing his dark stern features into
strong relief. Oh ! how glad I was he had
come back. Then, moving forward as he
turned and saw me, “ Safe home again, Mr.
Ross.”
“Yes,” giving me one of his strange
sudden smiles as he took my hand.
“ I know one person who will give you a
very hearty welcome—Ronald. He has
missed you dreadfully, Mr. Ross, He is very
fond of you,” I said, thinking how strange it
was that the child preferred Malcolm to his
gay, handsome brother, Dennis. I feared
he guessed my thoughts, for he answered in
the cynical way that hurts me so much.
“ Yes, odd isn’t it 1 ”
“ Oh, no, I don’t think so,” I hastened
to say. “ Why you devote yourself to him,
his lessons, and pleasures ; it’s only natural
he should care for you and miss you.”
“Did you miss me ? ” he asked, coming
a step nearer, and speaking eagerly.
“Oh, of course, I did,” I answered
lightly, though my heart was beating fast.
“But Mr. Dennis has been—l mean—
we—l—” flushing as I remembered what
had happened beneath the elm tree that
afternoon.
“ Yes, Dennis, I had forgotton Dennis,"
he said, relapsing into his former tone of
indifference, and moving over to the
piano he sat down and dashed into a
brilliant waltz. Before it was over Mrs.
Ross and Dennis entered. The latter
came up to me, speaking in his usual


gay, easy fashion, for which I was very
grateful.
“ I have been making inquiries about
the white heather you wished for, Miss
Daner,” he said, “ and I heard it is just
possible there may be some at Castle
Craggs.”
“ Castle Craggs,” I echoed, “ where and
what is that 1 ”
“ There is a cliff, whose high and bend-
ing head looks fearfully in the confined
deep,” quoted Malcolm.
“ Just so,” agreed Dennis, “ only in
this instance the ‘ confined deep ’ consists
of a lake, and the cliff has an old ruined
castle on its summit, which is supposed to
be haunted.”
“A ghos*-,” I cried gleefully. “Oh !do
tell me about it, please.”
“Well the ghost is one Katherine
Graeme, who, some hundred years ago,
threw herself from a window into the lake
below, because her lover proved faithless.”
“ Poor thing,” I said. “ I wonder if it’s
true. I should like to see the castle.”
“That’s very easily managed,” said
Dennis. “Butmind, I won’tanswer for the
ghost’s appearance,”
“You had better go by moonlight if
you want to see the castle at its best,”
said Malcolm, as he offered his arm to
take me into diriner.
“ A second Melrose,” I answered gaily.
“ That is a splendid idea of yours,
Malcolm, old fellow,” cried Dennis.
“ What do you say, Miss Olive, if we, the
Stannard boys, and Brenda go to morrow
evening 1 I suppose you wouldn’t come,
mater 1 ”
“Oh, no, dear,” replied Mrs. Ross.
“ Being such a large party you had better
take the waggonette. It holds six nicely.”
“ I dc not intend going,” said Malcolm
curtly.
“ I will not trust anyone to drive the
greys but you, Malcolm,” said his mother.
“That’s too bad, mater,” cried Dennis,
“ as if I couldn’t drive them.”
‘ ‘ I will not trust either Olive or Brenda
in the waggonette unless Malcolm drives,”
said Mrs. Boss decidedly.
“ Oh, do come Mr. Ross,” I cried
appealingly.
“Very well, I will go,” he returned
quietly, but without looking at me. And
so it is settled, May. Adieu, dearest, your
cousin Olive.
LETTER V.
“ Rossmere,” July 13.
Dearest May, —How impatiently I
waited all day for half-past seven, the
hour of starting to arrive, and in due
course it did arrive—naturally.
We all congregated on the front steps.
Then arose the question, how should we
sit in the waggonette ?
“Take my advice and have the box
seat ; it is by far the best,” said Leo.
“Perhaps Brenda would like it,” I
demurred.
“Oh, no,”she said, glancing shyly at
Dennis, “I have been to the Craggs be-
fore, you know.”
Dennis came towards me.
“ Will you have the box seat ? ” he
asked,half reluctantly. I looked atMalcolm
hoping he would second the invitation,
but he was stooping over some part of the
harness that required readjusting, and
took no notice.
“ Well, I don’t care,” I said, mentally,
“ at any rate he shall see I do not intend
to force my company upon him.” Aloud I
said to Dennis,
“ Oh, I much prefer to ride inside ;
besides, I want you to tell me more about
the ghost as we go along.”
Dennis smiled, and held out his hand to
assist me into the carriage.
“Thank you,” he almost whispered,
and before I could prevent it, bent and
kissed my hand as it lay on his. I felt the
colour rush to my face and glanced at
Malcolm. He had just risen from his
stooping posture, and I knew that he had
seen the action, for his features were set
and hard as iron, his lips curved in a
joyless smile.
“ T will come inside with you Olive, if I
may,” said Brenda.
“Do dear,” I replied, “ and that will
just make our happy party complete.” No
sooner had I spoken, than I would have
given the world to recall my words.
Malcolm was bending his whip about in
his fingers, and as I spoke it broke in two
w th a snap.
“ Now you’ve done it,” said Arthur
laughingly, settling himself next to me.
“It doesn’t matter, ” Malcolm
answered, quietly, “ I shall not need it.”
“ Well,” cried Leo, “ since none of you
care for the front seat, I’il have it myself.”


He mounted beside Malcolm, and in
another moment we were off.
I exerted myself to throw off the feeling
of depression that had come over me, and
tried to seem, at any rate, as gay and
happy as Brenda, Dennis, and the boys.
Malcolm was silent during the whole
drive, saying shortly in reply to a remark
of Leo’s, that the horses took all his
attention.
Dennis and Arthur vied with each other
in their efforts to entertain Brenda and
myself, and we were, to all appearances, a
merry party.
“ Hullo,” cried Leo, as we came in sight
of a little wayside inn, “ this is where we
put up the horses.”
“What, at the end of our journey!”
I said lightly. “ How short the drive has
seemed, to me at all events. I can’t
answer for anyone else.”
“It has been all too short for me,”
said Dennis, “ I should like it to go on for
ever.”
“ So should I,” said Brenda softly.
“ Well, if I we r e one of the party, you
would have to stop pretty frequently for
refreshments,” said, J flippantly.
Arthur shivered.
“Oh, Miss Daner, he cried, reproach-
fully, “ How can you think, much less
speak, of food on such a heavenly night as
this, why ”
“Allright, Ar’, reserve your effusion for
some other time,” said Dennis.
Arthur looked offended, and was about
to fling some scathing remark at Dennis.
“ Where is the cliff 1 ? ” I put in hastily.
“ Nearly a mile further on,” said Leo.
“ We have to walk it, though ; the path is
too narrow for the trap.”
We all alighted and walked gaily along,
Brenda and I gathering wild flowers as we
went, our laughing voices echoing and re-
echoing in the stillness of the night. When
at last we came in sight of the cliff, we
stood and gazed and held our breath
for very wonder at the beauty of the
scene. Castle Craggs rose almost from the
very edge of the Jake, perpendicularly it
seemed to me, and gleamed silvery white
in the bright moonlight. For a few
moments no one spoke, then the silence
was broken by Malcolm’s voice. “ Look,”
he said quietly, and pointed to where,
rolling and tumbling down the side of the
cliff was a huge piece of rock.
“ Whew! Pretty dangerous that if a
fellow happened to get it on his head,”
commented Leo.
By common impulse we moved forward
to examine the fallen rock.
“Did it fall from the very top I
wonder ? ” I queried.
“Yes, I should think by Jove ! if
there isn’t some white heather up there,”
cried Dennis.
“ Where, where 1 ” I exclaimed, gazing
eagerly upwards.
“ Oh ! I see it,” cried Arthur. “ Look,”
pointing, “ you see that piece of rock
jutting out a little more than half way
up, it’s just beneath that—see—there.”
‘‘Quite out of reach,” I said regretfully.
“Yes,” assented Leo, cheerfully, “it
would be just about as much as one’s life—
or at any rate legs—are worth to try and
climb to it.”
“ Only say the word and I’ll try and
get it for you,” whispered Dennis in my
ear.
“ No, no, you must not I should be
very angry,” I answered vehemently.
“ The castle looks rather ghostly in the
moonlight, doesn’t it ? ” said Brenda, with
a little shiver.
“I dare say the ghost will make her
appearance directly,” said Leo teasingly.
“Oh, don’t ! you horrid boy,” cried hie
sister.
“ Don’t tease, Leo,” I commanded.
“We all know there is no such thing
as ugh ! what’s that 1 ”
Hiding my face in my hands as a wild
unearthly shriek rent the air, Brenda
gave a little scream and caught hold of
Dennis’s arm.
“ Don’t be frightened, it’s only an owl,’
said Malcolm reassuringly.
“Oh-h—h—is that all ? It sounded
dreadfully uncanny,” I said, rather ner-
vously.
“ I expect our voices disturbed the old
fellow,” said Arthur.
“ You and Brenda look rather pale;
shall we make a move for home 1 ” asked
Dennis.
“Yes, oh yes, pleas’,” cried Brenda,
who was still trembling and clinging to
Dennis’s arm.
We all assented, and Brenda and Dennis
led the way. I turned to take a last look
at the coveted heather. Malcolm stand-
ing right beneath the projecting piece of


rock, was gazmg up at it also. 1 moved
to his side.
“ It is very beautiful,” I said.
“ Yes,” he agreed, looking at me in his
quiet inscrutable way. “ Yes, it is very
beautiful.”
I raised my eyes once more to the little
patch of white heather. Why, it seemed
to be coming nearer ! I thought how
strange. Then, with a sudden revulsion,
I understood what it meant. The rock was
loosened and falling —falling instinctively.
I moved a step backwards, then a wave of
horror rushing over me at the thought,
I realised that Malcolm stood just where
the great boulder must fall. I tried to cry
out —to warn him of the coming danger—
but could not, my tongue clove to the
roof of my mouth. With an inarticulate
cry I rushed forward, and stretching out
my arms pushed him backwards with all
my strength. Then I heard a great
rushing sound just above my head, and
felt something strike me violently on the
shoulder. After that I remembered no
more.
When I recovered consciousness I was
lying on the bed in my room at “ Ross-
mere,” feeling intensely weak. Mrs. Ross
was bending over me I tried to sit up.
“Malcolm ! ” I gasped.
“ Is safe and unhurt,” she replied, “ but
hush, dear, you must not talk.”
I lay back, closing my eyes with a
sigh of relief, and soon sleep, welcome
sleep, came to me. Yours,
Olive.
LETTER YI.
“ Rossmere,” July 15.
Dear Little Coz. —All yesterday I
stayed in my room, fee'ing very tired and
weak after my adventure at Castle Craggs.
I was not much hurt, only very bruised
and shaken. The extreme edge of the rock
just struck my shoulder as it fell. It was
a very narrow escape, though. The doctor
says had I been three inches nearer it
must have been fatal. As it is, I shall have
to wear my arm in a sling for some days ;
fortunately it is the left.
Mrs. Ross has been kindness itself, and
Dennis gave one of the maids ceaseless
employment, sending her up to my room
nearly every half hour with inquiries as to
how I was, and entreaties to come down,
if only for a few minutes, till at last
Ford got quite cross and told the maid to
tell Mr. Dennis that I “ was much better
for the rest of the day.”
Malcolm sent one message only, and a
handful of rosebuds tied with a queer
little straggly bow of ribbon. I wondered
if he had tied it himself ; it looked like a
man’s bow.
I lazily stayed upstairs to-day also, until
about four o’clock, when I went to
Ronald’s schoolroom. I found him curled
up in a corner of the window-seat reading
fairy tales. He was so entranced, ha
did not hear me enter. Going quietly over
I sat down beside him.
“ Oh, Miss Daner,” throwing down hisr
book wit,!} a little cry of joy. “Oh, are
you better 1 ”
“ Yes dear, and I have come to ask yon
to invite me to tea ? ”
“ You and me alone, here ? ” he asked.
“Oh, that will be jolly,” as I nodded
assent. “Jane” to his nurse, “Jane,
Miss Daner will have tea with me to-day.
Please go and ask for some nice cakes,
and some jam,and fruit, and some muffins,
and—”
“ That will be enough, I think, Rinald,’*
I interrupted. “ I don’t fancy we could
manage more than that. And now, dear,
show me what you were reading.”
“ Here it is, ‘Beauty and the Beast.*
I’ve just got to where Beauty is beginning
to like the poor beast.” I took the book
and sat down beside the boy.
“Is this the place 1 ?” I asked, “ And
sometimes Beauty would sit under the
trees in the lovely gardens, and the beast
would tell her strange tales of other lands,
and she, in the excitement of the moment,
wou'd forget how very ugly the beast
was.”
“ Yes,” said Ronald, “ that’s the place.
Go on please.”
“ One day,” I continued, “ Beauty was
sitting on soft, many-hued cushions, the
beast, as usual, reclining at her feet,
telling one of his wondrous tales. Sud-
denly he paused, and, raising himself,
seized her hand. ‘ Beauty,’ he cried,
‘I love you, I love you.’”
At that moment we were interrupted by
the door opening. Malcolm looked in.


“Miss Daner!” he cried, coming for-
ward, “ I did not know you were here.
Are you better ? Are you sure you are
well enough to be up ? ”
“ Oh, yes,” I said gaily, giving him my
hand, “ quite sure.”
“ I have wanted to see you so much,” he
said earnestly,” to thank you for risking
your life for mine. I am a blunt man,
Miss Daner, and my tongue cannot say
all my heart feels, but you will believe me
when I say I shall never forget your
bravery and goodness.”
“ Of course I believe you,” I said
gently. “ But, indeed, Mr. Ross, you think
far too much of what I did. Why, anyone
could have done it as well as I.”
“ But suppose it had been anyone else
that stood in danger, Olive ? ” he asked.
“ What then ? ”
“I—oh—l don’t—know,” I faltered,
feeling angry with myself for blushing.
“ What then 1 ” he repeated in a master-
ful fashion.
“ Well,” interrupted Ronald’s voice,
“you do take a long time to shake hands.”
We both laughed, and he dropped my
hand.
“ Ronald has asked me to take tea with
him,” I said.
“ I’ll invite you too, Malcolm,” cried
the boy importantly.
“If Miss Daner does not object, I
should like to stay,” returned Malcolm.
“ Oh, no,” I said. “ We shall be glad,
Ronald and I, if you will stay.”
“ Thank you,” he said with one of his
swift, sudden smiles. “But don’t let me
interrupt the story.”
“ Oh, no,” I demurred. “ You would
not care for it, Mr. Ross. We will finish
it another time.”
“ I should like it above all things,” he
declared. “ I know just where you left
off, too,” picking up the book.
“ I love you, I love you, with all my
heart and soul.”
“ Oh, Malcolm ! ” protested Ronald,
“ That’s not it. Besides, how can you read
if you look at Miss Daner instead of the
book.”
“ Give it to me, Ronald,” I said hastily.
And I read as fast as I could until JaDe
announced that tea was ready.
Ronald gleefully led the way to the
table.
“ You must pour out tea, Miss Daner,”
he cried. “ Can you do it, though, with
only one hand ? The teapot ia rather
heavy I’m afraid ” (anxiously). “ Shall I
help you ? ”
“I will help Miss Daner,” interposed
Malcolm. “You go on with your straw-
berries, you litt’e rascal.”
“I can do it quite well,” I protested.
But Malcolm took not the slightest haed.
“I do not think so,” he said in his
masterful fashion, and proceeded to pour
out the tea.
“ I am quite clever at this sort of
thing,” he went on gravely. “ Ronald
and I often have teat ogether, and pour-
ing out tea is one of my few accomplish-
ments.”
“He can tell beautiful tales, too,” said
Ronald admiringly.
“ Like the Beast in your fairy tale, eh,
Ronald ? ” Malcolm said with a tinge of
sadness in his tone.
“Ah ! but the Beast was really an en-
chanted prince you know,” I said
smilingly.
“I do not mind playing the Beast if you
will be the Beauty,” he returned.
“No,” cried Ronald. “ That won’t do
at all. The Beast has to love Beauty
very, very much.”
“ Ah!that is certainly agreat difficulty,”
said his brother gravely.
“If you and Ronald don’t take care I
shall have eaten all the strawberries
whilst you are talking,” I said severely.
“ Miss Daner is getting angry with us,
Ronald. What shall we do to pro-
pitiate her ? ” asked Malcolm.
“ Suppose you sing her a song ? ”
suggested Ronald.
“ But you ? What will you do, Ronald V
I said.
“ Oh, Malcolm must sing another song
for me,” he returned promptly.
Malcolm and I laughed. How happy
we were that evening. Nothing seemed
too trivial for us to enjoy.
“ You will be able to come downstairs
to-morrow night ? ” Malcolm questioned,
as we rose from the table.
“ Oh, yes, I shall come down. I shall
not be able to dance. My arm is still
very stiff, but I shall come down.”
“ You will give me some dances?” he
said, coming over to my side.
“ What would be the use when I am
unable to dance ; you would be so dull.”


“ Let me be judge of that,” he said.
“Very well, since you wish it,” I said
meekly.
“ How I wish I were old enough to
comedownand see it all,” sighed Ronald.
Tears came into my eyes as I thought of
all the pleasures the poor lame boy must
forego.
“ Never mind, darling,” I said. “ When
1 am dressed I will come in and see you
before I go downstairs.”
“ That will be nice,” he said, gratefully.
“And we can both pretend we are going
to dance and enjoy ourselves like Ihe
others.”
I sat down and drew the boy towards
me.
“ Were you always lame, dear ? ” I
asked gently.
He flushed crimson all over his pale
little face.
“ No,” heanswered. “No—a—a—horse
kicked me when I was about two years
old.”
“ Five years ago,” I said thoughtfully.
“ How did it happen, Ronald ? ”
He hesitated a moment.
“ It was an accident,” he said.
Malcolm rose abruptly.
“ It was my fault, through carelessness
on my part,” he said curtly, as he strode
over to the piano and sat down. Ronald
limped to his side and leant his head
against his brother’s shoulder.
“Sing ‘The three fishers,’” he said
softly. Malcolm bent his head and
kissed the boy’s bright curls, and then
commenced the prelude to his song.
I lay back in my chair and listened.
This, then, was the secret of the great love
that existed between the brothers despite
the disparity of their ages. And as I sat
and mused the light grew dim, and
Malcolm sang his song.
“ For men must work and women weep,
And the sooner ’tis over the sooner to sleep;
Then good-bye to the bar and its moaning.”
Olive.
LETTER VII.
“ Rossmere,” July 16.
Dear May, —How happy I felt as I
stood before my glass this evening in my
soft shimmering white gown. Yes, there
was no denying it, I really looked veiy
nice, not that I had the least desire to do
so. “I wonder if Malcolm will think sol’*
I mused, as I turned away from the re-
flection of my flushed cheeks and bright
eyes, and with a happy conscious smile I
picked up my gloves and fan, and made
my way to Ronald’s schoolroom. He was
waiting expectantly, and opened the door
as soon as he heard my footsteps.
“Oh!oh ! ” he cried. “ You look like
an angel, all white, pure white.”
“ Avery earthly angel, I fear, Ronald,”
I said, as he softly passed his hand over
the front of my dress.
“I am glad,” he said. “ I am glad
you did not put on any jewellery.”
“ Why ?” I asked.
“ I shouldu’c like to see a lily with a
golden chain around it,” he said quaintly.
“ You little flatterer,” I laughed.
“ I wish you were my sister, Miss
Daner. ”
“I will be your sister, darling,” I
answered. “ And, Ronald, call me Olive.”
“Olive,” he repeated. “My sister
Olive.” I stooped and kissed him.
“ I must go now, Ronald, or they will
be wondering where .”
“I thought I should find you here,”
said Malcolm’s voice. He came towards
me holding some sprays of white heather
in his hand.
“Will you wear these?” he asked in
his direct manner.
“ White heather,” I cried. “ Oh, how
lovely. Where did you get it Mr. Ross ? ”
fastening the dainty white blooms in my
frock as I spoke.
“ Castle Craggs,” he replied quietly.
“ Castle Craggs !” I echoed. “ Oh, Mr.
Ross, how could you be so rash as to climb
that dreadful cliff. You might have slipped,
and then Ah ! how could you do
it?”
“ I would risk a great deal more than
that for your sweet sake,” he returned in
an undertone, then gaily, “I did not
fall, however. There was no other place to
get it, and that I was determined to do.
But don’t you think,” smiling quizzically,
“ Don’t you think you might say thank
you for it, though ? ”
“Forgive me,” I said contritely.
“ Thank you a thousand times, and see, to
atone for my negligence I will give you a
buttonhole.”
I chose a red rosebud from a bowl oa


"the table and held ittowardshim. He took
oiy hand, flower, and all in both of his.
“ Won’t you put io in my coat for me ? ”
ihe asked.
“ Why don’t you call her Olive 1 ”
questioned Ronald. “I do. She said I
might, didn’t you ? And she said she
would be my sister too —my sister Olive.”
I glanced smilingly at Malcolm.
“ You—said—that ? ” he asked hoarsely,
-and his face was pale and set.
“Yes,” 18aid wonderingly.
He held my hand so tight as to hurt me.
“ And is it true ? ”
“Oh ! Mr. Ross, you hurt my hand.
ILet go,” I cried.
“ Is it true 1” he repeated.
“ Yes, but why not ? ”
“ Why not indeed,” he echoed bitterly.
And turning on his heel left the room
Without another word, not heeding
Ronald’s cry of “ Malcolm, Malcolm!”
“ Hush ! Ronald,” I said. “Do not
call him. ”
“Is he angry with me ? ” queried the
boy, raising his eyes inquiringly to my
face.
“ No, Ronald. Not with you,” I said,
as I stooped and picked up the poor
crushed little rosebud, and mechanically
straitened its petals.
“ With you then,” he said. “ I wonder
why ? He rather likes you, I think, Olive,”
condescendingly. “Though he was dread-
fully angry when he heard you were
coming. When mother showed him your
letter, he said, ‘ She may come if she likes,
but nothing Bhall induce me to marry
her.”’
“ Ronald ! what are you saying 1 ”
“Oh, you know,” he replied innocently,
%< because uncle Ross left all his money
to you instead of Malcolm. Mother wrote
to Mrs. Daner asking her to let you
come here to see if you that is if
Malcolm .”
“ Oh, hush Ronald, hush,” I cried,
my chest heaving with hard dry sobs.
“ How dared he think such a thing of
me. That I would come here upon such
an understanding. Oh, I hate him, I
hate him,” I said under my breath.
Then turning to the puzzled child,
“ Good night, Konald, I must go dear.”
I hastened along the passage, tearing
the white heather from my dress, and
trampling it under foot. How should I
get through the evening I wondered.
Dennis was standing disconsolately at the
door of the ballroom.
“At last,” he cried on seeing me. “ I
thought you were never coming.”
“ I have been to see Ronald in my
ballroom finery,” I said, forcing a smile.
“ And very lovely you look in it,” he
declared.
“Ah, I had a much more charming
compliment paid to me just now—quite
unique in fact.”
“ What was it ? ” he asked jealously.
“ No,” I said. “I do not think I can
tell even you. Besides the young man
might not like it, Mr. Ross,” as he turned
away. “ I am only teasing—it was
Ronald.”
“ Oh,” in a relieved tone. “ How
could you ? I’ve been awfully dull with-
out you these last two days. It’s a fact
I assure you,” seeing me smile. “Why,
I had serious thoughts of pitching myself
into the lake.”
“ I’m glad you didn’t, for I hear you
are an excellent waltzer,” I said flippantly.
“You are very unkind,” he returned,
and to atone for your unkindness you
must give me three or four dances at the
least.”
“ Must ! ” I cried gaily.
Malcolm drew near at the moment. He
shall see I do not care, I thought ; so,
handing my card to Dennis, I added
smilingly.
“Very well, I humbly obey. Take
what you wish.”
“That will be all,” he said, as he
scribbled his name several times. And
Malcolm passed on, frowning heavily.
I gazed after his retreating figure until
my partner roused me.
“ Come,” he said. “Our first dance is
beginning.”
Looking back on that evening I wonder
how I managed to keep up my forced
gaiety as I did.
“How happy you seem, Olive dear,”
said Brenda to me once, a little wistfully,
I thought.
“Yes,” I answered recklessly. “To
pursue the butterfly happiness is the sole
aim and object of my existence. What is
to be gained by taking life seriously ?
Why don’t you rouse yourself, you quiet
little mouse, and be as gay as I am.”
“ I can enjoy myself quietly,” she said.


“ Quiet ! I never want to be quiet
again,” I cried. “I wish this ball could
go on for ever. Oh, Mr. Moreton,” to
my partner who came up to claim his
dance. “ Our waltz ;I am quite ready.
And once more I whirled away in the
mazy throng of dancers.
Almost before it was over Dennis came
up.
“ Come,” he said with an air of pro-
prietorship, “ I’m going to take you for
a stroll in the grounds.”
“ Oh, thanks,” I said rather faintly, for
I was feeling very tired and dizzy. I lay
back in my chair on the terrace, enjoying
the cool fresh air that gently fanned my
heated brow. Dennis leaned against the
balustrade at my side.
“ By Jove, what a lovely night,” he said,
gazing up at the star-lit sky. “ Lord what
fools these mortals be, to shut themselves
up in a close ballroom on such a night.”
“ I like it,” I replied. “ I love waltzing.”
“ Then you should dance with Malcolm,
he cau waltz.”
“ Can he ? Well he doesn’t look it,” I
said in what I vainly strove to make an
indifferent tone. “But Mr. Boss has not
so far honoured me as to request a dance,”
twisting my fan about in my fingers in a
feverish way. With a snap the delicate
handle broke. I;
“ Let me see the extent of the damage,”
said Dennis,
I held the fan towards him. Instead of
taking it, he seized my hand.
“ Olive,” he cried. “Hove you with
all my heart and soul.”
I Bhivered as I remembered who had
said those words only last night. Last
night ! why it seemed years ago.
“My dearest,” cried Dennis. “ Answer
me. Say yes, you will be my wife?”
“ Ah ! don’t,” I half sobbed, trying to
draw away my hand. “ I cannot, indeed
I cannot, Mr. Ross.”
“Olive, what are you saying? You love
me, 1 know you love me. I have read it
in your eyes a thousand times.”
“ Oh, you are mistaken. We—we have
known each other euch a short time,” I
faltered.
“In days and hours, yes,” he said.
“But these two short weeks have been
more to me than all my life before. Ah,
it has been time enough for love’s awaken-
ing.”
“ Yes, that is true.” I said in the-
bitterness of my heart. Alas ! how true it
was. Ah, heaven, if Malcolm should gnesa
that I. No—no—l’ll prove to him that I
care no more than he does.
Then I turned to the man who loved
me, and spoke the words I would now-
give my life to unsay. “ Dennis, I will be
your wife.”
“My darling,” clasping me in his arms,
and bending his face tenderly toward*
mine. “ My queen, I knew you loved me.
You were trying your power over me,
that was all. It was very wrong though,,
and I must punish you.”
Putting his hand under my chin, and
raising my face, I tried to draw back.
“ No, no, Dennis,” then I stopped. It
was his right, I could not say him nay.
“Forgive me, Dennis, I am tired, ill*
and hardly know what I say.”
And I raised my lips to meet his kiss.
“ All right, dear, perhaps you had better-
go to your room, I’ll explain. Hu110,..
Malcolm ! ”
I looked up hastily. Malcolm had just
come up the steps from the garden, hist
face looking gloomier, uglier than ever.
“ I beg your pardon,” he said in a hard,
forced voice. I fear I have interrupted an
enjoyable tete a tete,”
He bowed and was about to move away.
“It’s all right, old fellow,” said Dennis
good humouredly. “ Don’t go ; give mo
your congratulations, I’m the happiest
fellow in the world. Miss Daner—Olive—
has consented to be my wife.”
Malcolm answered not a word.
With an effort I raised my eyes, forcing
myself to meet his gaze, and, calling all
my pride to my aid,l walked towards him,
my head proudly erect, but with an
agonising pain at my heart.
“Malcolm,” I said. “Will you not
wish us joy, I—I —,” and then my over-
taxed strength gave way, and I fell sense-
less at Malcolm’s feet
(f LIVE.
LETTER YIII.
“ Rossmere, ” July 23.
Dearest May, —lt is a whole week since
the night of the ball. I have been too ill
to do more than lie in the half stupor


which has so puzzled the doctor whom
Mrs. Ross called in. “Ah! yes,” he
said, “over-strained nerves; complete
rest and quiet is all you want.” Ah!
how thankfully I heard his words. For
some days, at least, I need not see either
Dennis or Malcolm. It must come sooner
or later, but I will put it off as long a 3
possible, though, heaven knows, it grows
harder every moment.
Dennis has sent every day gifts of
beautiful flowers, rare exotics, fruit and
books ; but the flowers died, the fruit I
could not touch, and the books tired me.
Only his gentle loving messages I could
not forget. Ah !if he had been less kind,
I think I could have found the courage to
tell him that I had made a mistake, and
beg his forgiveness. And yet, why should
I ? Why not do my best to make him
happy ? Malcolm was only amusing him-
self. He does not care for me, and yet
he seemed—oh, hush, I have no right to
think of him—and he will be my brother.
I laughed aloud at the mockery of the
thought, a harsh discordant laugh, but,
oh, the cruelty of it. I would give my
life to undo the past, but I am bound—
bound with fetters of my own forging. I
must try to forget. No, no, no, there is
nothing to forget. These and many other
like thoughts passed through my aching
head when I lay, with my eyes closed, and
Mrs. Ross fancied I was sleeping.
But to-day I was well enough to get up,
dress, and go into the little sittingroom
adjoining my bedroom. Presently Mrs.
Ross came in,with an urgent message from
Dennis. “He was so, so anxious to see
me, if only for a few minutes.”
“Tell him I shall be glad to see him,” I
said.
“ Yes, dear ; and is there anything you
want 1 I shall not be coming upstairs
again for some little time,” with a mean-
ing smile.
“ No, thank you, I have everything I
want,” and then I laughed at my own
words. “ Everything I want,” I repeated.
“Ah ! ” said Mrs. Ross complacently,
“you are better already, dear Dennis
said he knew it would do you good to see
him—so good-bye for the present,”
In a very few minutes Dennis was
knocking at the door.
‘ ‘ May I come in ? ” he cried gaily.
I nodded assent and he crossed over to
my side.
“ You are still looking pale as a lily, my
dearest.”
“Oh, I am much better ; I shall soon
be all right. Don’t worry about me. And
Dennis, thank you so much for ihe beauti-
ful flowers. You—you are too good to
me—”
“Am I?” he asked, raising my hand
to bis lips, “ am I, sweetheart ? ”
“Yes, indeed, Dennis,” forcing myself
to meet his eyes. “ You—you must not
love me too much—l am not worthy.”
“No,” he said, “you are not very
valuable. You are only more precious to
me than all the world beside. Life with-
out you, dear, is worth nothing to me.
You’ve no idea how I’ve missed you
this last week. I have been awfully
lonely—what with you ill and Malcolm
away.”
“ Malcolm away,” I echoed faintly.
“ Yes,” unconcernedly. “He and
Arthur Stannard have taken a little shoot-
ing box on the other side of the lake ;
rather a senseless thing to do 1 must say.
for they won’t get any shooting worth
naming at this time of year, but Malcolm
was a bit seedy, and bent on going. But
look here, darling,” with a change of tone,
“how do you like this ? ”
This was a beautiful ring composed of a
large pearl surrounded with diamonds.
“It is lovely. Oh, Dennis, how good
you are,” in spite of my efforts to prevent
it my voice trembled.
“ Why little girl, what’s the matter 1 ”
he asked tenderly.
“ Nothing, nothing,” I cried hastily.
He put his arm around me.
“Olive, how soon shall our wedding
be? You don’t knowhow I long to have
you for my own—my wife. Could you be
ready in a month ? ”
Oh, how shall I bear it ? I wondered.
“A month,” I echoed in dismay, “Oh,
no, Dennis, that is too soon, much too
soon.”
“ Well,” reflectively, “I suppose it
does take a good while to get all your
frocks and finery ready—not that I care
a bit about them—l think you would look
lovely in anything, and I should be very
unhappy if I thought you would love me
any the less in a shabby coat. Say you
wouldn't dear,” coaxingly.


“No,” I answered, “ I should h——”
I could not utter the lie. “ I should like
you just as well.”
Oh, if he would only go—l felt that
in another moment my self control would
give way, I laid my hand pleadingly on
his arm.
“Dennis, I am so tired ; please leave me
alone for a little while, dear,” bringing
out the word with an effort. He rewarded
me with a bright smile.
“ All right, darling,” he stooped, and
kissed me gently.
“ I’ll come up and see you again pre-
sently.”
“Yes, do,” I said with a wan smile.
Then as the door closed upon his happy
face, my pent-up misery gave way in a
torrent of scalding, blinding tears. Your
cousin, Olive.
—>'*
LETTER IX.
“ Rossmere,” July 26.
Dear May,— How I have managed to
keep up the farce of happiness these last
three days I don’t know. Malcolm is
still away, and Dennis has been so gentle
with me, so tender and considerate. I
cannot bear the thought that I am
deceiving him. He thinks lam happy,
thinks that I love him—and I—oh, I
know
Ah ! what have I written ? It is not
true—forget it, dear. Oh, May, May,
sometimes I think I must be going mad.
To-day I came down to dinner for the
first time since my illness.
“What will you wear, Miss ? ” asked
Ford in an important tone. “ The pink,
or your cream silk, or .”
“Anything, anything, Ford—the black
will do.”
‘ ‘ The black ! ” she echoed in dismay.
“ Whatever will Mr. Dennis think.”
“ The cream then,” I said wearily.
Mrs. Ross made the dinner quite a
little fete Ronald as a great treat was
allowed to come down, but he was rather
quiet. When I asked him what was the
matter he answered gravely,
“ Malcolm is not here.”
“ Speaking of Malcolm,” said Mrs. Ross.
“ He intended returning this evening.”
“ Oh,” I thought wildly, “ how shall
I face the meeting. With him here it will
be twenty times harder to bear. But I
answered Dennis with a gaiety equalising
his own. If I could help it the shadow of
my sorrow should not fall on him. He was
so good, so true, it should be easy to
learn to love him, I thought feverishly.
Presently he turned to me with a smile,
and raising his glass to his lips he cried,
“ I drink to the future Mrs. Dennis
Ross.”
The words were barely out of his
mouth, when a crash and a vivid flash of
lightning announced the coming storm.
In a few minutes it was raining in
torrents, the thunder boomed, the wind
howled and shook the very house in its
fury. Then for the first time I realised
what a storm in the Highlands could be.
We all crowded to the window to watch
it in its awiul grandeur.
“ I only hope,” said Mr 9. Ross
anxiously, ‘ ‘ Malcolm will not think of
crossing in this weather.”
“No fear of that mother,” said Dennis
cheerily.
“ But he is so reckless at times,”
replied his mother. “ I verily believe he
takes a pleasure in putting himself in
danger, and enjoys battling with the
wind and waves.”
“ Well, I for one wouldn’t care to
venture on the water to-night,” com-
mented Dennis. Thenin a whisper intended
for me alone, “ Of course its different with
Malcolm, he has no dear little lady-love to
think of.”
“ No,” I said dully, “he Oh ! look,
look, Dennis,” as one of the great elm
trees fell crashing to the ground, tearing
up the earth with its roots. And there it
lay—a fallen monarch —its fellows bend-
ing over it in the wind for very pity of
it’s broken pride.
“By Jove ! ” ejaculated Dennis. “ I do
believe its growing worse. I don’t
remember it being so bad as this even in
the winter.”
“ Oh, the poor tree,” said Ronald, who
was clinging to my hand, ‘ ‘ how sorry
Malcolm will be.”
“ Yes,” sighed Mrs. Ross. “Malcolm
is so proud of his trees.”
That night after I had gone to my
room, I paced up and down, thinking,


thinking. I could not rest, I could not
sleep.
At last unable to endure it longer, “ I
will get a book,” I said, “ and read my-
self to sleep.” .
So slipping and stumbling I groped my
way downstairs in the dark, and into the
library. Choosing a book at random I was
leaving the room, when a vivid flash of
lightning showed me that one side of the
long French window was open.
“ How careless,” I thought, and moved
forward to close it, and stood for a
moment watching the storm on the
waters. I noted mechanically a tiny
speck of light far out on the lake. For a
second or two I gazed at it idly, then with
* suddenness that made my heart stand
still it flashed across me that the light I
was watching so indifferently was ihe
lantern on the mast-head of some boat
battling with the elements.
“Ah, heaven, if—if it should be
Malcolm’s boat—if it should be he—out
there alone struggling against the storm.”
I stepped forward on to the balcony,
heedless of the rain that beat upon my
face and drenched my thin white gown,
heedless of the wind that tossed about my
unbound hair in wild confusion. I
thought only of him—the man I loved—
out there alone in the storm. I stood and
gazed at the tiny speck of light, now
rising, now falling, on the angry water’s
breast, and prayed for his safe return.
And as I clung to the cold iron railing,
I seemed to hear Malcolm’s voice—as I
had heard on that evening, which seemed
so long ago—singing,
“ Three fishers went sailing out into the west,
Out into the west as the sun went down,
Each thought of the woman who loved him
best.”
“ Yes the woman who loves him best,”
I said aloud. “ Ah, the light, where is it ?
Gone—gone—gone—ah! no,thank heaven,
it is there once more-nearer to shore.
He is safe still. Oh, the song, if only it
would not ring through my head—again—
again, ‘The sooner ’tis over the sooner to
sleep. Then good-bye
“No—no—no! —not good-bye,Malcolm.
You are so strong, so brave, you must
work, strive, and bring your boat to shore.
I am here watching for you. The light—
where is it now ? It is not gone, I know it
is not gone. The rain blinds me—l can-
not see—but it is there—it must be there.”
I dashed the water from my face, and
strained my eyes to see it.
“ No, it is gone, there is no light ; no
light at all.”
Then the howling wind seemed to shriek
with fiendish joy,
“ Three corpses lay out on the shining
sands.”
“ No, no.” I stood upright with an
effort, and stretched out my arms towards
the water.
“MalcJm! Malcolm! Come back, my
love.”
There came no answer save the raging
of the wind. I cried again,
“ Malcolm!”
And the hills gave back the echo*
“ Malcolm, Malcolm.”
“ Olive, Olive, you called me. My life*
my queen, I am here.”
Malcolm’s arms were around me.
Malcolm’s voice ringing in my ears.
“ Ah, my love,” I cried. “ You ar&
safe, safe. I thought—,” my voice break-
ing. *‘ I thought you were drowned.”
“ My poor darling,” pressing his lips to
my damp hair. “ And you would havo
cared V
“ Cared ! Ah, Malcolm, if you only
knew.”
“ Tell me,” he said, oh so gently, his
dark face bent tenderly towards m
transfigured with a great joy. And I, poor
fool, thought I was tasting heaven upon
earth.
“ Ah,” I said pressing my cheek against
his. “ I love you, I love you, and I was so
afraid for you, when Dennis told .”
“Dennis! I had forgotten Dennis,”'
his arm fa ling heavily to his side. And I*
I could not say a word, but stood gazing
mutely at him in dumb misery. I too had
forgotten, and now .
Malcolm came to my side, his face rigid
and marble white.
“ Olive,” he said hoarsely. “ Must it
be?”
“Yes,” I replied drearily. “It must
be good-bye.”
“Good-bye,” he echoed. “ Olive, I can-
not let you go ; you are mine, mine.”
“No, lam his. I have given my word*
Malcolm,” pleadingly. “Do not make it
harder for me to bear, heaven knows it i&
hard enough already.”


“ You are right,” his voice pain f ul in
its tension. “ We,” drawing a deep breath,
“ We must part; it is our duty.”
I raised my eyes to his in mute thanks,
and gave him my cold hand. He held it
for a moment in his.
“Good-bye,’ he said.
“ Good-bye.”
And then without another word he went
out into the storm once more. I slipped to
the ground gazing before me with blind
unseeing eyes. The storm dwindled and
sank, a faint red streak grew on the dis-
tant horizon,arousmg me to life and duty.
Another day had dawned.
I dragged myself to my feet and crept
up to my room, where, for a time at least,
I forgot my woes in sleep.
Olive Daner.
LETTER X.
“ Rossmere,” July 27.
Dearest May. —lt seemed to me that I
had hardly closed my eyes, when I was
aroused by Ford’s entrance with my hot
water.
“Lor, how ill you do look, Miss Olive !
Whatever is the matter ? ”
“Oh, nothing Ford,” I answered. “I
have had a bad night’s rest, that is all.”
“ You don’t look as if you had slept a
wink, and you’re as white as a ghost. You
had better rest a bit longer, and I’ll bring
your breakfast up.”
“Only some tea, please Ford ; I am not
hungry,” I said wearily.
“ All right, miss. You shall have it in a
very few minutes.”
Ford was as good as her word, for she
returned almost directly with a tray in her
hand. Setting it on the table by my side,
she proceeded to pour out a cup of tea.
“ Whatever do you think, miss? Mr.
Malcolm has met with an accident.”
“ An accident ! ” I cried, Bitting up
hastily.
“ Yes, Miss, he was found lying on the
lake path at seven o’clock this morning,
senseless, his head fearfully cut. It is
supposed he returned home late last
night, slipped in the dark, striking his
head against a stone.”
“Is—is—he much hurt?” I asked,
vainly trying to steady my voice.
“ I’m not sure, miss. The doctor is
still with him, though the footman who
found him says he looked for all the
world like one dead.”
With a crash my tea cup fell to the
ground. Ford stooped to collect the
fragments.
“ No, I won’t have any more,” I said
in answer to her inquiry, and springing
out of bed began hastily to dress myself.
It was rather a long process, for my
fingers were trembling, and cold as ice.
I was just dressed when, after a gentle
knock, Mrs. Ross entered.
“Oh, my dear, have you heard! My
poor boy. Only think, Oiive, he may have
been lying out there for hours and hours,
and I did not know. Oh! my son, my son.”
She was weeping bitterly. I tenderly
put my arm around her, leading her to a
seat, kneeling on the floor beside her.
“is he very ill ? ” Longing, yet dread-
ing to know the worst.
“It is brain fever, the doctor says. He
is delirious, and raves constantly about
Borne white heather. I cannot understand
it. I— but I must go to him.”
She left the room, and I stood gazing
out of the window. How fair the earth
looked after the s f orm, the sun shone
brightly, turning the rain drops still
hanging on the foliage into so many
diamonds; the soft wind sighed through
the tree-tops, where the little birds
twittered their morning hymn of praise. I
thought of Malcolm lying in that darkened
room. What a mockery the world’s fair
loveliness seemed. A carriage came up
the drive, it was the doctor’s returning for
him. I hastily wiped the tears from my
eyes and ran downstairs ; the doctor was
in the hall. I looked at him entreatingly.
“ Doctor, he will not die ?”
He took my hand, looking at me with
kindly eyes.
“My dear young lady, it is a very
Berious case. But we must hope for the
best.”
• Olive Danes.
«-»exe3-r-
---“ Rossmere,” Airlie.
LETTER XI.
May Dearie, —It is loDg since I have
written to you. For days and weeks
Malcolm has lain between life and death.
Most of the time he has been delirious.
To-day Mrs. Ross came to me.
“ Dear,” she said. “He calls con-




stantly for you, and the doctor thinks if
you would come ”
“ Yes,” I said. ‘ ‘ I will come.”
Swiftly I went down the passage. Then
pausing a moment tried to still my beating
heart, and collect my scattered senses.
At last I opened the door and entered.
Dennis was there. He came quickly to-
wards me and led me to the bedside
where Malcolm lay so still, so white, a
drawn weary look about his mouth. I bent
over him silently.
“ Is that you, Olive 1 ” he said.
“ Yes,” I answered my tears falling
fast.
“ Do you hear the wind, how it blows.”
“He is delirious,” said Dennis. “Do
not cry dearest.”
Malcolm moved restlessly.
“ Ah, the storm. What a wild night.
The boat will hardly live in such a sea.
But I must—you will dance with me to-
night, Olive. I cannot reach the heather.
Ah, how high it grows. I cannot see it.
Bah ! it is the rain blinds me. How the
wind howls. Why did you sayyou would be
his sister, Olive ? Have you forgotten—
forgotten. I found the heather all crushed
and broken on the ground. He does not
love you half so well as I. Olive, my life,
my queen ! I would die for you, but to
live without—ah, how bitter it is. You
said you loved me, dear. How happy—no—
no—no—you are his—his—you promised.
My brave darling, and I left you.—left
you—without one kiss. The storm raged.
Tell him it was all a mistake—he will
forgive. Ah ! it is good-bye—good-bye,
my love ” His voice died away in a
murmur of pain.
With a deep sob I buried my face in my
hands, and sank on to my knees, not
daring to look at Dennis
“ Olive,” he said, his voice deep,
beautiful, and sorrowful. “ Olive, is this
true 1 ”
“ Ah. forgive me,” I sobbed.
“ Child,” he said, “You should have
told me.”
“Dennis,” I cried. “I will keep my
word ! I will be your wife,l am your——”
“ Yes, you are mine,” he bent and
kissed my forehead. “ And now,” draw-
ing a deep breath, “ Now I give you to
him.” He laid my hand in Malcolm’s, who
at my touch smiled and closed his eyes.
Then Dennis turned away with a hard
dry sob. He crossed to the door, paused,
and looked back at me, his eyes beautiful
and intensely sorrowful. A ray of sunlight
crept in between the drawn curtains and
fell upon his head like a halo of gold ; he
smiled sadly.
“ Sweetheart, good-bye,” and then he
was gone. And 1 turned and pressed my
lips to Malcolm’s hand with a prayer that
God would give him back to life, to
happiness, and me.
Ab, May—ah, dearie, my heart is too
full for words. I can write no more.
Yours ever,
Olive Danek.
[The End.]
Printed at "The Mercury” Office, Hobart,






