

e»jK fe
(ftfoistum Jfltnistrg,
THE SUBSTANCE OP A SERMON
DELIVERED IN THE
WESLEYAN CHURCH, MELVILLE-ST., HOBARTON,
SUNDAY EVENING, JANUARY 31, 1858,
THE
REV, J. BULLED,
(OP WELLINGTON, NEW ZEALAND.)
PuMhtfjcrt bg r L cquesJt=
TASMANIA:
PRATT AND SON, PRINTERS, ELIZABETH STREET, HOBART TOWN.
1858.


ADVERTISEMENT.
The following Sermon is published at the requc..
and members of the Church, whose judgment claims the deference
of the writer. It was with much surprize that he received the
expression of such a wish. It has been prepared with unavoidable
haste; but, should it be productive of any good, the only end
designed by its publication will be answered. The author leaves
it as a memorial of a very pleasant visit to Tasmania, and of very
profitable intercourse with many Christian Friends.
Hobart Town ,
February 13 th, 1858.


S E R M 0 jS t •
11 Corinthians, iv. 5.
« For wc preach not ourselves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and ourselves
your servants, for Jesus’ sake.”
It is said by many that the power of the pulpit is departed.
From that opinion we beg to differ. Such persons are either
ignorant of, or they overlook the fact, that the power of the pul-
pit consists not in mere u excellency of speech,” nor in the
words which man’s wisdom teacheth, but which the Holy Ghost
teacheth.” It is in the faithful enunciation of “ the testimony
of God.” “We preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumb-
ling block, and unto the Greeks foolishness; but unto them that
arc called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ, the power of God and
the wisdom of God.” Apart from this living truth, any minis-
try must be utterly powerless for any saving or practical effect.
tl We have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency
of the power may be of God and not of us.” No pedigree of
ecclesiastical descent, however imposing and venerable; no
amount of erudition, however extensive and varied; no personal
endowments, however rich and diversified; no human authority,
however respectable and weighty, without ‘‘ the demonstration
of the Spirit,” can impart power to the pulpit. Was the minis-
try of the apostolic age attended with great success ? Hear what
they say, “ Our gospel came not unto you in word only, but also
in power and in the Holy Ghost.” Nor has the gospel lost its
efficiency. Still it is “ the power of God unto salvation to every
one that belicveth.” Now, as then, “ the preaching of the cross
is to them that perish foolishness, but unto us which arc saved it
is the power of God.” And “ therefore seeing we have received
this ministry, as we have obtained mercy, we faint not; but have
renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in crafti-
ness, nor handling the word of God deceitfully; but by manifes-
tation of the truth commending ourselves to every man’s consci-
ence in the sight of God. But if our gospel be hid it is hid to
them that are lost; in whom the god of this world hath blinded
the minds of them which believe not, lest the light of the glori-
ous gospel of Christ who is the image of God should shine unto
them. For we preach not ourselves, but Christ .Jesus the Lord,
and ourselves vour servants, for Jesus sake.


Confining our attention to the last verse in this passage, we
have before us the great theme of the Christian Ministry, and the
true relation of the Christian Ministry to the Church and to the
World. I will take the words in the order here presented
to us.
I. The Negative Assertion. —“ We preach not ourselves.’ 7
When a man makes himself the end of his ministry he may be
said to preach himself. If, for instance, he assume this office for
the sake of gain, or even for a maintenance; if it be for the pur-
pose of securing ease or leisure, or for the display of his talents ;
or if it be to make it subservient to any thing but “ the truth as
it is in Jesushe falls under the charge of preaching himself.
“ But we preach not ourselves.”
1. We 'preach not for gain.
A money loving ministry has ever been a curse. In the early
Jewish church there were Priests who made themselves “ fat
with the chiefest of all the offerings of Israel.” And those were
her days of the greatest spiritual leanness. In the time of our
Lord the Jewish teachers “were covetous and the people were
“ wicked and adulterous.” The apostles had no temptation to
seek gain, but they cautioned the future ministry against the love
of “ filthy lucre.” With how much reason, let the history of the
church testify ! I raise not now the question of an adequate
support for the Christian ministry. It is a New Testament prin-
ciple that they who “ preach the gospel, should live of the gospel.”
That they who are “ taught in the word ” should “ communicate
unto him that teacheth in all good things 77 was a rule of duty
enjoined by the apostles upon the churches. They claimed their
temporal support as a right, and would not accept of it as a
gratuity. They chose rather to work with their own hands in
order to minister to their necessities. This duty is practically
acknowledged. It is however well that little inducement can
offer itself to young men—at least in these colonies—to enter
the ministry forthe'sake of profit: such as have competent talent
for this work must engage in it at great sacrifice of worldly
prospects. Any other path might lead to affluence, but here
“having food and raiment” they must be “therewith content.”
If their hearts be set on the acquisition of worldly riches, they
will never seek it in the exercise of the ministry, but, like other
men, “ they will go—and buy and sell, and get gain. 77
2. We preach not for ease or popularity.
If we receive the office and work of the ministry it is that we
may “ labour in the word and doctrine, 77 No man can meet its
claims but with the most earnest application both of body and
mind. “ Instant in season and out of season 77 must be his motto,
“always abounding in the work of the Lord.” His mind must be
cultivated, lie must have time for study as well as for action ;
but this “ study is a weariness of the flesh.” Mental effort is


as necessaiy as energetic toil. “ Giv r e attendance to reading/'
is an apostolical direction. There must be “ study” in order to
“ rightly dividing the word of truth.” The Christian minister
needeth not only to be “mighty in the Scriptures” but in general
information he must keep pace with the times in which he
lives. As a public instructor he must be deprived of influence
if he fall behind his generation. But in his studious application
he is not the mere recluse, the man of science, or of philosophic
reseai’ch. His sole object is to be an “ able minister of the
New Testament—a workman that needeth not to be ashamed.”
He may, or may not, be a man of splendid eloquence, of polished
grace, of literary fame—he will neither decry them, nor glory in
them : nor will he envy others who possess them —but his great
concern is that “ Christ be preached.” To address assembled
crowds who hang with breathless attention on the preacher’s lips,
is an exciting scene —angels may gaze on it with delight—but he
will not be less intent on the salvation of the “ two or three—
gathered together” in the name of Jesus. “At all seasons —and
from house to house” as well as “publicly” will the servant of
Christ “ feed the church of God.” If he can be satisfied with
only the plaudits of the “ great congregation” he has reason
seriously to enquire whether he does not “ sacrifice unto his own
net and burn incense unto his own drag.” To be “pure from
the blood of all men” we are called to be “in labours more
abundant,” not “ seeking our own profit, but the profit of many
that they may be saved.”
3. We preach nothing hut the truth.
The pride of the human intellect is sometimes flattered by its
own coruscations. Men of daring speculation have often made
“the commandment of God of none effect.” Human philosophy
has usurped the place of divine truth. We repudiate these
“enticing words of man’s wisdom” and lay our own reason at
the foot of the cross. There is mystery —profound mystery
here —mystery which “the angels desire to look into.” Mystery
surrounds us everywhere, but especially here—“ without contro-
versy great is the mystery of godliness : God was manifest in
the flesh.” We receive this mystery on divine authority and
“ having the same spirit of faith, according as it is written, I
believed and therefore have I spoken ; we also believe, and there-
fore speak” “as the oracles of God’ and “of the ability which
God giveth : that God in all things may be glorified through
Jesus Christ.” To us “ thus saith the Lord” is the end of all
controversy. Every one will have his own views of the right
interpi-etation of God’s word : views deduced by a prayerful and
attentive examination, and his “ trumpet will give no uncertain
sound.” But for the soundness of these views his appeal is “to
the law and to the testimony.” He claims no “ dominion over the
faith” of his hearers. He stands not with sacerdotal pomp
between the conscience and God; he hides not the mercy seat by
his priestly vestments; he makes not the “ word of God of no


offect by his traditions' ’ ; but pointing the sinner to the cross be
cries, “ Behold the Lamb of God that taketh away the sin of
the world!” Brethren, those who preach to you “the gospel
of your salvation” may differ in many things. They possess
“ diversities of gifts” but they are of “ the same spirit.” You
know that they all “ walk by the same rule and mind the same
thing.” You are sure they preach nothing “ contrary to the doctrine
which ye have learned.” Though not with equal zeal, nor with
the same success ; yet in like sincerity with the apostle Paul do
we declare that “we preach not ourselves, but Christ Jesus the
Lord, and ourselves your servants for Jesus’ sake.”
11. The great theme of the Christian Ministry —“ Christ
Jesus the Lord.”
Christ Jesus is the sun in the system of evangelic truth. He
is the centre and the circumference, the first and the last; the
“ all and in all” of the plan of redemption. To “ preach
Christ” is the only “ way of salvation,” and to preach Him is a
blessed work. Angelic beings would be honoured by this em-
bassy. I envy not the man who can be cold on such a theme.
It is replete with
“ Thoughts that breathe, and words that burn.”
Tell us of tlib enthusiasm of the pulpit! If enthusiasm (I use
the word in its right sense) be justified any where, it is here!
We admire the enthusiasm of the poet. We applaud the enthu-
siasm of the man of science. We extol the enthusiasm of the
intrepid traveller. But what have these to kindle the fire of
their zeal like urfto the man who is put in trust with “ the glo-
rious gospel of the blessed God?” Here is the sure remedy for
the world’s diseases ! the sovereign balm for the world’s sorrows !
When we preach Christ our lips should be “ touched” with “a
live coal from off the altar.” We deal in words which arc spi-
rit and life—quick and powerful and sharper than a two-edged
sword ; and which are “ able to save your souls.”
We might preach ourselves “ with the tongues of men and of
angels,” but we should “ become as sounding brass or a tinkling
cymbal.” We might preach ourselves with “ the gift of prophe-
sy, and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge,” but it
would come to “ nothing.” We might preach ourselves with a
zeal worthy of a nobler cause, and “ bestow all our goods to feed
the pool-,” and even give our bodies “ to be burned,” but it would
“ profit nothing.” We should be but “wells without water,
clouds that are carried with a tempest.” Never did such preach-
ing “ save a soul from death” nor “convert a sinner from the er-
ror of his way.” Philosophy, science, ethics, all fail to do this.
They have their respective provinces. But “this is life eternal,
that they may know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ
whom thou hast sent.” For the purpose of salvation “ other
foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is Jesus


ulu ih," Let men preach Him, earnestly anil faithfully, and,
whether they be enriched with literary stores, or adorned with
external polish, or not, they shall not run in vain, neither labour
in vain.
Such was the preaching by which illiterate men*—but men
equal to their age and qualified and anointed of God—in the first
days “ turned the world upside down." A glorious Revolution !
“Mighty through God" they “ went everywhere preaching the
Word.” Pagan temples were deserted j churches were planted :
nations were converted —and all by the simple preaching of the
cross—“ by the name of Jesus Christ.”
“ Hence sprung the Apostles’ honour’d name,
Sacred beyond heroic fame.”
Those lowly but successful men could say “ Now thanks be unto
God, which always causeth us to triumph in Christ, and maketh
manifest the savour of bis knowledge by us in every place.”
And when in a later period a moral death had come upon the
church, when the spirit of life seemed departed, and a sepulchre
of souls only left } then God put His hand upon an obscure monk
and by His word and Spirit shined into his heart “ to give the
light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus
Christ.” Martin Luther thus knew the truth, the truth made
him free, and “ straightway he preached Christ.” It was that
preaching which shook the Papal kingdom to its centre, and
inflicted a stroke upon its dominion from which it can never rise.
Again when the spirit of slumber brooded o'er the churches of
our Fatherland, when “ Ichabod” was written on the temple-
gates of Britain, God snatched from the burning fire a little boy
in the village of Epworth; he became a man ; graduated at
Oxford ; received “ the knowledge of salvation by the remission
of his sins ;” with a few like minded with himself, he went forth
“preaching the Lord Jesus. And the hand of the Lord was
with them : and a great number believed, and turned unto the
Lord.” The fruits of those labours remain unto this day. In
these ends of the earth we partake of the rich blessings which
have resulted from the powerful ministry of the Wesleys and
their coadjutors, and to us is committed the sacred trust of faith-
fully prosecuting the great work which they were so eminently
instrumental in reviving. While this is done, there is hope for
the world. The powers of darkness may marshall their forces j
the surface of society may heave and swell; kingdoms may rise
and fall; sceptres may nod and crowns be dishonoured ; but if
Christ be preached, we hail the advent of a brighter day. The
simple doctrine of His cross, by its potent influence, shall bring
the world into subjection to his peaceful sway, “For it is written,
as I live saith the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every
tongue shall confess to God.” To this end “we preach not
ourselves but Christ Jesus the Lord.”
But how did the Apostles preach Christ ?


1. They preached Christ hi his two-fold nature, the God-man.
Merely to quote the passage in St. Paul’s epistles in which
the Redeemer is set forth in hi? complete character would occupy
more time than can now be allowed. Your familiarity with the
New Testament will readily suggest the many texts in which the
Saviour is invested with the attributes of Deity—where eternity,
omnipotence, and omniscience are ascribed to Him : —wherein ho
is represented as the object of worship to angels in heaven, and
men on earth : where he is descibed as engaged in the moral
administration of the world, declared to be equal with the Father,
and is explicitly called God —the great God ! You will as readily
refer to those numerous texts which speak of Him as “ made of a
woman as “a babe wrapped in swaddling clothes as a boy
who “ increased in wisdom and stature, and in favour with God
and man and as a man—“ a man of sorrows ” —toiling, fainting,
hungering, thirsting, enduring the physical infirmities of humanity:
suffering the agony of a troubled spirit, “ acquainted with grief”
—and finally “ humbling himself unto death even to the death of
the cross.” So palpable was the glory of the divinity enshrined
in his stainless humanity, that it could not be hid. “We beheld
his glory, ” said John. “We know thou art a teacher come from
God, ” said a ruler of the Jews ; and a Roman centurion and they
that were with him, exclaimed under the phenomena of his death
“ truly this was the son of God.” We attempt no explanation
of this profound mystery, but hold the Bible to be unintelligible
on any other principle of interpretation; the plan of salvation
divested of its suitability on any other doctrine : and the preach-
ing of the gospel utterly inefficient on any other foundation.
“ God forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ.”
2. They preached Christ as the final object and scope of the
types and prophecies of all preceding dispensations.
In the kingdom of grace, as well as of nature, God gradually
unfolds his purpose. “ First the blade, then the ear, after that
the full corn in the ear.” In the dispensations of his grace we
have the dawn of the Patriarchal age : the twilight of the Mosaic
institute, and the “ sun of righteousness ” in the gospel of Christ.
The outbearaing of His light irradiates the types and symbols of
former days :—“ To Him give all the prophets witness ” and He
is “ the end of the law for righteousness to every one that believeth.”
The epistles to the Galatians and the Hebrews are very luminous
on this point. Deny this, and the splendid and imposing rites of
the Jewish church, as well as the affecting symbols of Patriarchal
piety, are without point or meaning. On any other hypothesis
the predictions of the old Testament must have signally failed.
If Christ be not He of whom they spoke, then the scriptures are
not true; “ then is our preaching vain, and your faith is also vain.”
But this is not a subject of mere speculation : it rests not on the
niceties of verbal criticism : it is testified by the happy experience
of multitudes of renewed spirits who, with all the emphasis of a


heartfelt reality can say, as did Philip to Nathaniel; “we have
found Him of whom Moses in the law, and the prophets did write,
Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph.”
3. They preached Christ as the only and all-svfficient atone-
ment for the sins of the world.
On this topic the apostolical epistles arc replete. For the pre-
sent I must leave your well instructed memories to recall their
many and explicit declarations of this truth. It is this great
doctrine which invests with so much glory, displays the moral
beauty, and exhibits the divine wisdom, in the mysterious union
of the divine and human natures of our Lord—“ the glory of God
in the face of Jesus Christ.” It is this doctrine which vindicates
the divine character in the humiliation and sufferings and death,
to which the Son of God was submitted—“ For it became him,
for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing
many sons unto glory, to make the captain of their salvation
perfect through sufferings.” It is this doctrine which tran-
scendently manifests the benevolence of God towards his apostate
and ruined race —“ For God so loved the world, that he gave his
only begotten Son, that whosever believeth in Him should not
perish, but have everlasting life.” It is this doctrine which
authorizes the publication of a full, a free, and a present salvation
—“ To wit, that God was in Christ reconciling the world unto
himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them, and hath com-
mitted unto us the word of reconciliation. Now then, we are
ambassadors for Christ as though God did beseech you by us :
we pray you in Christ’s stead, be ye reconciled to God. For he
made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin ; that we might be
made the righteousness of God in Him.”
Thus the apostles preached Christ, and so woidd we preach.
But there is yet another aspect presented in our text—“ Christ
Jesus the Lord." This seems to have reference to his exaltation.
We have seen Him in the valley of humiliation—labouring ;
suffering; dying ; but he is now seated at the right hand of God
“a Prince and a Saviour.” It is a crucified Saviour that atones
for our sins ;itis a risen Saviour that justifies our hope. “It is
Christ that died.” The merits of that death are everlasting.
He is still “the Lamb newly slain.” But “ after he had offered
one sacrifice for sins for ever,” he “ sat down on the right hand
of God ” It is not a lifeless crucifix, but a living Saviour that
we exhibit. To the empty sepulchre we conduct you, and say
“ Come see the place where the Lord lay—He is not here, but
is risen.” He was the suffeidng victim :he is now the exalted
Saviour. “ For to this end, Christ both died, and rose and
revived that He might be the Lord both of the dead and living,”
In the Epistles to the Ephesians and Hebrews you will find a
sublime description of his inauguration to the mediatorial throne.
To this dignity he is entitled by : —l. His essential godhead , giv-
ing him an independent right to supreme and unlimited dominion.
2. His relation to the Father as the Son of God , involving a title


to universal Lordship, and was therefore “appointed heir of ali
things.” But especially, 3. As the reward of his obedience unto
death , for “ being found in fashion as a man, he humbled
himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the
cross. Wherefore God hath highly exalted Him, and given Him
a name which is above every name : that at the name of Jesus
every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth,
and things under the earth ; and that every tongue should confess
that Jesus Christ is Lord to the glory of God the Father.”
I. He is the Lord as enthroned in the affections of his people.
The various functions of the prophetical, sacerdotal, and regal
offices arc fulfilled in him. By “ the spirit of wisdom and reve-
lation in the knowledge of Him” he enlightens the understanding;
as the “high priest over the house of God” he continually pre-
sents his infinitely meritorious sacrifice—“making intercession
for us” : and in his kingly character be reigns in the hearts of
his pardoned and regenerated people. His kingdom of “ righteous-
ness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost” is established within
them, bringing “ every thought into captivity to the obedience of
Christ.” None are his, whom he does not govern. He is “ the
author of eternal salvation to all them that obey Him.” They
are conformed to His will, they are sanctified by His grace, they
are devoted to His service. For them to live is Christ. It is a
willing obedience. His service is freedom. “ Where the Spirit
of the Lord is there is liberty.” To glorify his name, to magnify
his word, to promote His purposes, is the supreme desire of all
■who are “ heirs of the kingdom.” Brethren, do you “so fulfil
the Law of Christ?” Ho you walk according to His will ? have
you the mind “ which was also in Christ Jesus” ? Arc all
your talents and opportunities consecrated to Him ? Without
this your profession is vain ; for “if any man have not the Spirit
of Christ, he is none of His.” Those who are His keep His
commandments. “ Grace reigns” in their hearts “ through
righteousness unto eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord.”
2. He is Lord as the supreme Head of His Church.
On no subject, perhaps, have the opinions of men, in general,
been more vague than on that of the church of Christ. It is not
an ecclesiasticism ; it is not a mere association ; it is not an
abstraction ! But it is “the household of God” comprising “ the
whole family in heaven and earth.” It consists of all God’s
children “ of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues,”
and by the “ Spirit of life” is vitally united and subordinate to
Him who is “ head over all things to the church, which is His
body, the fulness of Him that filleth all in all.” He is the foun-
dation on which it rests, the principle by which it lives, and the
end for which it exists. By His law, His church is governed;
by His word his people are fed ; by His ordinances they
are comforted. He pardons them through His merits, He
sanctifies them by His Spirit. He instructs them by His


servants. All temporal enactments, penal sanctions, and worldly
objects are impertinences here. His “ kingdom is not of this
world.” His subjects are spiritually minded ; they are united
for spiritual objects : they walk in the exercise and enjoyment of
spiritual life. They are “ budded together for an habitation of
God through the Spirit.” As, under a lower dispensation, he
was “King in Zion,” so now doth he preside “over his own
house.” Here is law, but it is the law of order; government,
but it is the government of love ; discipline, but it is that of the
family ; gradations, but they are those of mutual and harmonious
co-operation—“ every man in his own order”—growing up “unto
Him in all things, which is the head, even Christ.” It is for the
sake of His church that He sits upon His throne. For this the
world exists. It is the scaffolding by which the spiritual temple
is being built. When “ all the building fitly framed together”
shall be completed “ a holy temple in the Lord,” and “ He shall
bring forth the headstone thereof with shoutings, crying, grace,
grace unto it,” the world will have fulfilled its mission. “ Then
cometh the end when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to
God, even the Father: when he shall have put down all rule and
all authority and power. For he must reign until he hath put all
enemies under his feet.”
3. He is Lord of universal nature.
He is “ Lord of all,” the “ King of kings and Lord of Lords.”
To Him “ angels and authorities and powers” are subject. He
“hath all power both in heaven and in earth,” for “He hath
prepared His throne in the heavens and His kingdom ruleth over
all,” and “ of the increase of His government and peace there
shall be no end.” How grand and sublime is this thought! An
omnipotent Saviour ! An immoveable foundation !—an everlast-
ing kingdom !—“ His name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor,
the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace.”
(1.) Here is the security of the Church.
Hitherto hath she been in the minority, “a little flock.”
Powerful enemies have combined against her. Sometimes she
has been apparently overthrown. But she cannot fail. “ The
gates of hell shall not prevail against her.” Her head is
Almighty. “ The eternal God is her refuge, and underneath are
the everlasting arms.” See her typified by that frail bark on
the Galilean sea. It is tempest tossed. The heavens arc black :
the storm rages : the sea threatens to engulph the fragile vessel.
The Lord is in her, but He is asleep. He has for a while with-
drawn His active presence. The disciples are afraid: in vain
they seem to struggle against the danger: they are ready to
perish. Now their faith is tried : in their extremity they go to
the master : they “ awoke him, saying, Lord save us.” He rises
and utters His voice—“a mighty voice ;” “ He spake and it was
done—He commanded and it stood fast.” He said “ Peace, be
still. And the wind ceased and there was a great calm !” The


bark of His church is still crossing “the waves of this trouble-
some world.” Uproar, commotion, and conflict may sometimes
awaken alarm in his follower's. But, in answer to their prayers,
the voice of the Lord shall be heard; the tempest world shall be
silent before Him : the war of passions shall subside : and all
the kindreds of the earth shall fall before Him, saying “ What
manner of man is this ?” Did He not, upon earth, sufficiently
declare his Lordship? Angels ministered unto Him: Devils
fled before him : nature acknowledged Him : diseases retired at
His presence: death yielded its prey at His bidding : and when
He “ dismissed His own Spirit” the -sun hid his face—rocks
were rent by his sighs—and, having expiated by his blood the
sins of a guilty world, He rose triumphant from the grave—“ lie
ascended up on high, He led captivity captive, and gave gifts
unto men.” Thus “ Great is the Lord and greatly to be praised,
in the city of our God, in the mountain of His holiness;” and
“ therefore will not we fear, though the earth be removed, and
though the mountains be cai’ricd into the midst of the sea : though
the waters thereof roar and be troubled, though the mountains
shake with the swelling thereof.” For “ the Lord of hosts is
with us, the God of Jacob is our refuge.”
(2.) Here is the foundation for the faith of God's people.
Deep and solemn thoughts engage the reflections of the
Christian as he ponders the past and £hc present condition of
mankind in relation to eternity. Even to this hour to a great
extent “ darkness covers the earth, and gross darkness the
people.” Also “ the light shineth in darkness, and the darkness
comprehendeth it not.” Vice is triumphant, and crime unblush-
ing in the streets of our cities ; and within the precincts of the
church itself there is much of corruption, of worldliness, of sin.
It is a melancholy picture. We cannot think of the moral con-
dition of the world and the “ abounding” sin which everywhere
meets our eye, but with a feeling of deep concern. Seeing 1900
years have nearly passed since the Saviour died : that so little
comparatively has been done: that difficulties so potent arrest
the progress of the gospel on every hand, we arc almost ready
to ask while we survey the valley of death “ Can these dry bones
live?” Wherein our anguish and feebleness shall we find a
resting place for our faith ? It is here. In the unlimited power
and unfailing truthfulness of Him whose throes, whose sympathies,
whose agonies in behalf of a sinful world are infinitely beyond those
of the concentrated hearts of all his people. It is His infinite powt r
and fidelity and love that supports our souls. But for this our task
would be hopeless. We should relinquish our office in despair,
saying “ who is sufficient for these things?” But “we faint not, ’
because “ our sufficiency is of Cod.” It is His cause. “ lie
will work, and who shall let it?” Every enemy shall be van-
quished, every obstacle shall be removed, every mountain shall
be brought low', and “ his way shall be made known upon
the earth ; his saving health among all nations.” By the simple


preaching of Christ Jesus the Lord “ the kingdoms of this world
shall become the kingdoms of our Lord and of His Christ ; and He
shall reign for ever and ever.”
(3.) Here is the great source of consolation to his suffering
Saints.
Beligion does not save us from suffering. It, saves us from
sin. Still “ the body is dead because of sin, but the spirit is life
because of righteousness.” It supports, it sanctifies, it comforts
the righteous in their “ light afflictions, which are but for a
moment,” and which “ work out for them a far more exceeding
and eternal weight of glory.” God’s people are often greatly
tried. “ Many are the afflictions of the righteous.” But they
are all the tokens of a Father’s love ; for “whom he loveth he
chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom he receiveth.” The
immediate end of their trials may be involved in obscurity ; but
it is one of wisdom and mercy. “ Clouds and darkness are round
about Him, but justice and judgment are the habitation of His
throne.” If you are His, you have an interest in all the provisions
of His covenant, —“heirs according to the promise.” He is
“ able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think,”
and lie has declared that “ no good thing will He withhold from
them that walk uprightly.” Are you, my brethren, the subjects
of affliction, of sorrow, in your persons, your families, or in your
circumstances ; then “ cast your care upon Him, for lie careth
for you.” He will sustain you, for His “ grace is sufficient,”
and “ all things shall work together for good ” —for I reckon
that the sufferings of the present time are not worthy to be
compai’ed w ith the glory that shall be revealed in us.” It is but
a little while, and “ when Christ who is your life shall appear,
then ye shall appear with Him in glory.” There “sorrow and
sighing shall flee away,” and he will “ wipe away all tears from
your eyes,” and “ though now for a season, if need be, ye are in
heaviness through manifold temptations,—your life is hid with
Christ in God—ln whom, though now ye see him not, yet
believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory ;
receiving the end of your faith even the salvation of your souls.”
But where, in the day of His appearing,—“ where shall the
ungodly and the sinner appear?” When the “man Christ
Jesus ” shall come “ in the glory of his Father with his angels,”
and shall “ sit upon the throne of his glory,” then shall the
unbelieving “ perish from the way.” We dare not conceal this
fearful doom of the unconverted. “ Knowing therefore the
terrors of the Lord, we persuade men ; but we are made manifest
unto God, and I trust also are made manifest in your consciences,
—for we preach not ourselves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and
ourselves your servants for Jesus’ sake.”
111. The relation of the Christian ministry to the
church and the w'Orld. “ Ourselves your servants for Jesus’
sake.”


Oar time is gone, and on this topic I must be brief. There is
a dignity connected with the office of the Christian ministry, but
it is a moral dignity—the dignity of truth, of love, of worth.
Pompous titles, a haughty manner, an imperious bearing, are at
variance with the meekness and self denial which are implied in
the service of Him who was “meek and lowly in heart.” The
terra minister is expressive of the office. It signifies a servant.
“ The Son of Man came not to be ministered unto but to minister,”
and the “ servant is not above His master.” The man who is
devoted to this work is called to a life of sacred, but arduous and
affectionate toil. His talents, his time, and his energies, are all
the property of the church of God. Unenviable is that man
who does not feel his great delight to be in the work. Toilsome
drudgery it must prove to him who does not “ prefer it to his
chief joy.” Let the heart be in it, and he will “ gladly spend
and be spent” in his sacred calling. He will study the word of
God that he may “ bring out of his treasury things new and
old he will “ seek out acceptable words” that he may “ rightly
divide the word of truth he will give to each his “portion of
meat in due season alarming the careless ; warning the un-
steady ; instructing the ignorant ; guiding the enquirer ; and
comforting the mourner. He will “ weep with those who weep,
and rejoice with them who do rejoice.” He will be by the couch
of the sick, the bed of the dying, and the home of the destitute.
The “ lambs of the flock” will share his affectionate solicitude,
and among all he will be gentle, “ even as a nurse cherisheth her
children.” Sacred and tender is the relation subsisting between
the pastor and his flock, when, on the one hand, it is maintained
by faithfulness, and prayer, and zeal ; and, on the other, reci-
procated by affection, piety, and union. Nor will selflish views
influence his mind. The opulent may contribute to his personal
comfort: the refined and cultivated may gratify his taste : the
well informed and intelligent may enliven his social enjoyments.
But he is the servant of all, and his “ delight is with the excel-
lent of the earth, with them that excel in virtue.” Whether in
the ample mansion of the wealthy Philemon ; or in the model
cottage of the family of Bethany ; or in the lowly dwelling of
the “ seller of purple he seeks not theirs but them that they may
be “ the crown of his rejoicing in the day of the Lord Jesus.”
But this service is not subject to the controul of those to whom
it is rendered. It is “ for Jesus’ sake.” From him we receive
our commision, to Him we are responsible for its execution.
We are “your servants” as the steward is the servant of those
among whom he is to dispose of his master’s property, but is
amenable to his employer for the distribution of the same.
“ Let a man so account of us, as of ministers of Christ, and
stewards of the mysteries of God.” Or, as the shepherd is the
servant of the flock committed to his care, but subject to his
master by whom he is put In trust, so are we charged to “feed
the flock of God,” and when the “ chief shepherd shall appear” we
shall “ receive a crown of glory that fadeth not away.” We are


your servants as the ambassador is the servant of the public,
whose intei’ests he guards, but responsible to his monarch for
the faithful discharge of his duty, so “ we are ambassadors
for Christ,” to whom we “ must give account.” On the right
adjustment of the mutual relations of the minister and his
people w r ill their co-operation and their happiness depend. To
their interests his life is to be devoted ; but on their part no
interference can be allowed which -would violate his fidelity to
Christ. “ Not for that we have dominion over your faith, but
are helpers of your joy : for we preach not ourselves, but Christ
Jesus the Lord and ourselves your servants for Jesus’ sake.”
In conclusion allow me to exhort you ;
1. Entertain Scriptut al views of the Christian Ministry.
Man is the creature of extremes. In a superstitious age, or
viewed through the medium of a superstitious faith, the ministry
is placed upon a pedestal too sacred for vulgar gaze, he is invested
with a superhuman honour, and made the only authorised channel
of divine grace. In this latitudinarian day the danger is on the
other hand. The Christian ministry does not always receive that
measure of support without which its efficiency must be impaired.
You cannot, my brethren, disparage the ministry but at your own
loss. Nor must your respect be governed only by the personal
merits of your minister. There can indeed be no esteem in the
absence of personal worth. But God has bestowed a great variety of
gifts on His servants. It is not the value or measure of their
gifts which should regulate your conduct towards them. “Who
then is Paul, and who is Apollos, but rainistex’s by whom ye
believed, even as the Lord gave to every man ?” It is natural,
it is perhaps unavoidable, to have your preferences, but if your
thoughts and affections flow in the direction of God’s truth, you
will feel that your estimate of the office must rest on something
higher than mere personal considerations—that you should
“ esteem them vexy highly in love for their work’s sake.” Honour
then the office of the Chx-istian ministry ixx your families. Be
tender of their reputation. Avoid unkind, ungenerous remarks
on their infirmities or peculiarities in the presence of your
children, your domestics, or your friends. You cannot indulge
in dispax-aging observations but at the expense of their usefulness.
There is much reason to fear that the children of professing
Christians are often led to entertain unworthy thoughts of Christian
ministers to the great detriment of their own religious characters,
by reason of the freedom with which their talents or their cha-
racter have been canvassed at their parents’ board. Be careful,
my brethren. If you desire the salvation of your children : if
you wish to x’etain them in connexion with the church of your
choice : if your are anxious that the word which they hear from
week to week shall prove to them “ the savour of life unto life,”
then carefully cultivate in their early minds an enlightened
respect for the person and office of those who mixxister in holy
things'; and, that yoxx may do this, labour yourselves to entertain
right views and cherish proper feelings towards thos* who ax*e
“your servants for Jesus’ sake”


2. Look beyond the preacher to the Saviour.
There l;as always been much ci’eature idolatry in the church.
Men of commanding talents are sometimes raised up by God’s
providence, and it is right to magnify the grace of God in them.”
But \ye dare not glory in man, not even in such men. For this
the Corinthians were sharply rebuked by the apostle Paul. The
most honoured minister is but an instrument in the hand of His
master. If it be your privilege to enjoy a ministry especially
suited to your taste, and profitable to your soul, you may allow-
ably cherish a particular regard for him who is made a blessing
to you. But put him not in the place of the Saviour. Trust not
in an arm of flesh, “ that your faith may not stand in the wisdom
of man, but in the power of God.” It is a poor reward to the
Christian preacher if he gains only the personal regard of his
hearers : —if he be to them only as “ one that hath a pleasant
voice, and can play well upon an instrument.” He has failed
of his object, if they be not turned “ from darkness to light, and
from the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive for-
giveness of sins, and an inheritance among them which are
sanctified by faith that is in Christ.”
3. Pray that God may accompany the ministry of His word with
His blessing.
How formidable are the difficulties with which the ministry
must contend ! Not only the native enmity of the carnal mind,
but the seductions of an evil world, and the influence of invisible
spirits which “ hath blinded the minds of them that believe not.”
Nothing but a divine power can overcome opposition, and render
effectual the preaching of the G ospel. For this, God commands
us to pray. That greater effects are not produced, is because
prayer is not made continually to God. God has ever honoured
and answered prayer by the outpouring of His Spirit. This is
our calling, brethren. “ Pray for the peace of Jerusalem.”
Pray for the promised gift of the Holy Spirit, to awaken, to con-
vince, to convert, to save the people. How many in this congre-
gregation are yet unsaved ! many who have had the privilege
of religious training, who have long sat under the ministry of
God’s truth, whose minds arc in a great degree enlightened, but
whose hearts are yet estranged from God ! They know and feel
the importance of personal religion—they are sure if they die to
night—and they tremble while they acknowledge it—that they
are lost for ever—and yet they are putting off from them the day
of salvation. The very delay makes their condition the more
dangerous—their salvation more hopeless. The Spirit is grieved
-—the power of resistance is increased —the conscience is hardened,
and if God interpose not by His grace, they will have to say,
“ The harvest is past, the summer is ended, and we are not
saved.” Pray then, my brethren, that the “ word of the Lord
may have free course and be glorified”—that His kingdom may
ome with power and grace to every heart of man, and that He may
“ manifest the savour of His knowledge in every place.” —Amen.
