

The KALIBAPI
Worker’s Handbook
KAPISANAN SA PAGLILINGKOD SA
BAGONG PILIPINAS
(Association for Service to the New Philippines)
MANILA
BUREAU OF PRINTING
1943
4031




The KALIBAPI
Worker’s Handbook
KAPISANAN SA PAGLILINGKOD SA
BAGONG PILIPINAS
(Association for Service to the New Philippines)
MANILA
BUREAU OF PRINTING
1943
■lO2l




PREFACE
THE Kalihapi Worker’s Handbook is designed to give a
basic working notion of the KALIBAPI as a people’s
movement dedicated to national service. It is by no means
exhaustive but it is comprehensive enough to provide a fair
idea of the background and status of the movement to date,
its propelling and progressive ideas, its objectives, its organi-
zational set-up and leadership, and some of its plans and
projects.
The Handbook naturally will bear improvement and elab-
oration according as the KALIBAPI gains greater impetus,
expands its program, and works out its projects.
CAMILO OSIAS
July 12, 1943
4031—2
3




CONTENTS
Page
The Kalibapi Seal 6
Chapter I—lntroduction H
Chapter ll—Rizal and the KALIBAPI 16
Chapter lll—The KALIBAPI and Independence 25
Chapter IV —Orientation Through Independence 32
Chapter V—The KALIBAPI Charter 37
Chapter Vl—Primer of Objectives.. 44
Chapeer Vll—Organization, Program, and Projects 52
Appendices:
KALIBAPI Directory g 2
The KALIBAPI Decalogue 55


THE KALIBAPI SEAL
THE KALIBAPI seal is a circular field circumscribed by the
words “Kapisanan sa Paglilingkod sa Bagong Pilipinas•, Manila.”
Occupying the honor point (or center of the field) is a nipa hut
being carried by the menfolk to a destination. In the background
on the left is a typical Filipino rice field and in the foreground to
the right is a coconut palm. On the upper left side is the 8-rayed
sun “in rayonnant” or in full splendor. On the base is the word
“Kalibapi” in ancient Filipino characters.
The seal symbolizes the Filipino tradition of voluntary com-
munal cooperation whether it be in house-moving, house-building,
rice-planting, or rice-harvesting.
This cooperative practice is known as palusong, lusongan, paha-
yani, pintakasi, or gamal. Whatever the local variation in name,
the spirit and manifestation remain the same everywhere in the
Philippines; social cooperation and collective responsibility to ac-
complish a task that otherwise would be difficult, if not impossible,
of individual achievement. In its very essence, it immortalizes the
precious ideals of independence and interdependence—of individual
worth and neighborliness.
The KALIBAPI today is the continuation and national expres-
sion of this popular tradition, linking a heroic past to a great future.






THE KALIBAPI
WORKER’S HANDBOOK




CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION
MM HE KALIBAPI was born of a crucial need for creating a new
Philippines on the ruins of the old left in the wake of the
Greater East Asia War, The war itself arose out of an imperative
need to establish a new order that will guarantee justice and self-
respect to all peoples irrespective of geography, race, and culture.
The changes that have since come about now constitute definite
realities that must be squarely met. Survival under the present
circumstances depends upon a capacity and determination to dis-
play these qualities in the fullest measure. The KALIBAPI is
the concrete expression of the will of the Filipinos to meet the
changed and changing situation with courage and vision.
Accordingly on December 4, 1942, the Chairman of the Philip-
pine Executive Commission, with the approval of the Commander-
in-Chief of the Imperial Japanese Forces in the Philippines, pro-
mulgated Executive Order No. 109, now known as the Charter of
the Kapisanan sa Paglilingkod sa Bagong Pilipinas, or KALIBAPI
for short. Four days later, or on December 8, the KALIBAPI was
inaugurated. The date is indeed significant for it was on this day,
a year previous, that the Greater East Asia War was declared—a
war for the emancipation of Asian peoples from Occidental domi-
nation. On December 30, of the same year, the KALIBAPI was
formally launched at the New Luneta. This was the anniversary
of the sacrifice of Jose Rizal and as such was considered most ap-
propriate for launching an organization conceived in the ideal of
service and sacrifice which marked the life of the greatest Filipino
hero. On this occasion, the Honorable Jorge B. Vargas and the
Honorable Benigno S. Aquino, President and Vice-President, re-
spectively, of the KALIBAPI, delivered appropriate addresses in-
troducing the Association to the vast multitude gathered at the
New Luneta, and forthwith led the people present in a solemn
ceremony affirming adherence and pledging loyalty to the KALI-
BAPI by taking:
4031 3
11


THE KALIBAPI OATH
On my honor, i solemnly pledge to be loyal to the Japanese
Military Administration and the Philippine Executive Commis-
sion; never to disgrace the Philippines by my deeds; to place
the interests of the nation above those of the individual; to dis-
card all selfish considerations and past to develop
the native virtues that will give_ strength and happiness to the
Filipino people; to unite my mind, my heart and my extorts
with those of my countrymen in the establishment ot a Ba-
gong Pilipinas as a useful unit of the Greater East Asia o-
Prosperity Sphere; and to respect and obey the orders ot the
“KALIBAPI” and uphold the ideals for which it stands.
President Vargas, on this occasion, declared that due tribute
was paid to the memory of Rizal in the fact that Filipinos took
an oath to practice the truths that he preached and to bring into
realization the visions that he saw. Vice-President Aquino, who
is also Director-General of the KALIBAPI, pointed out that the
organization of the Association was the actual expression of the
earnest desire of the Filipino people to serve willingly in the cause
of all the peoples in Greater East Asia.
The first months of the existence of the KALIBAPI have been
largely taken up with organizational work and a series of informa-
tion tours to different parts of the Philippines to explain the ob-
jectives of the Association and enlist the support of the people.
Chapters in the provinces, cities, and towns have accordingly been
organized with the governors and mayors leading the movement
as official representatives of the KALIBAPI. The Director-Gen-
eral, aided by a staff of workers from the Central Office and with
the cooperation of national, provincial, and municipal officials, trav-
eled from one corner of the country to the other to rally the
people to the standard of the Association.
On May 18, 1943, Chairman Jorge B. Vargas of the Philippine
Executive Commission issued Executive Order No. 156 amending
the original KALIBAPI Charter in order to provide for the organ-
ization of the Junior KALIBAPI and the inclusion of the post of
Assistant Director-General in the central administrative organiza-
tion of the Association. It was felt that the youth of the land
should be mobilized with a view to preparing them for unified and
integrated service to the country and thus keep the work of the
Association continuous. Dr. Camilo Osias, then Assistant Com-
missioner of Education, Health, and Public Welfare, was named
Assistant Director-General and Director of Publicity. To him was


entrusted the responsibility of helping give greater impetus to the
movement and directing the program of public enlightenment.
On June 18 and 19, delegates of the KALIBAPI from chapters
in the provinces, cities, and towns met in a Special National Con-
vention, the first representative gathering ever called by the KA-
LIBAPI, to meet in Manila to consider various problems especially
the national problem of independence. For the first time, the KA-
LIBAPI was accorded formal recognition as a body representing
the popular will when it was asked by the Highest Commander
of the Imperial Japanese Forces in the Philippines to form a
Preparatory Commission for Philippine Independence, following
the assurance of Premier General Hideki Tozyo at the 82nd extra-
ordinary session of the Imperial Diet that independence would be
granted to the Philippines in the course of the current year. The
Convention accordingly chose a body of twenty men represent-
ing the different regions and major interests and the country's
highest intelligence, scholarship, wisdom, and record of service.
The Preparatory Commission for Philippine Independence as con-
stituted is composed of the following;
Hon. Jose P. Laurel, President of the Commission
Hon, Ramon Avancena, First Vice-President
Hon. Benigno S. Aquino, Second Vice-President
MEMBERS
Hon. Jorge B. Vargas
Hon. Antonio de las Alas
Hon. Teofilo Sison
Hon. Rafael R- Alunan
Hon. Claro M. Recto
Hon. Quintin Paredes
Hon. Jose Yulo
Gen. Emilio Aguinaldo
Hon. Miguel Unson
Hon. Camilo Osias
Hon. Vicente Madrigal
Hon. Manuel C, Briones
Hon. Emilio Tria Tirona
Hon. Manuel Roxas
Hon. Pedro Sabido
Hon. Alaoya Alonto Sultan Sa Ramain
Hon. Melecio Arranz
The Convention also passed four resolutions;
1. Resolution expressing gratitude for the categorical pledge
by the Imperial Japanese Government to grant Philippine
independence within this year.


2. Resolution pledging cooperation of the Special National
Convention of the KALIBAPI with Lieutenant-General Sige-
nori Kuroda, Highest Commander of the Imperial Japanese
Army in the Philippines.
3. Resolution expressing appreciation of the solicitude of
the Director-General of the Japanese Military Administration
for the interest and welfare of the Filipinos and pledging full
cooperation with him in his efforts to help the Filipinos to be
worthy of the honor of independence.
4. Resolution pledging unstinted cooperation of the Special
National Convention of the KALIBAPI to the Philippine Ex-
ecutive Commission.
On the same day, June 19, 1943, the KALIBAPI saw it fitting,
in reverence to the memory of Jose Rizal, whose 82nd birthday
anniversary fell on this day, to launch formally the Junior KALI-
BAPI, calling on all elements of the nation to support the move-
ment. With the launching of the Junior KALIBAPI and the
previous dissolution of the Association of Veterans of the Revolu-
tion to join the KALIBAPI, it was appropriately pointed out that
the KALIBAPI had thus proved to be the connecting link between
the old generation and the coming one.
The day following the close of the Convention, at a banquet
given by the Highest Commander of the Imperial Japanese Army
in the Philippines, in honor of the high officials of the KALIBAPI,
the delegates to the National Convention, and members of the
newly appointed Preparatory Commission for Philippine Indepen-
dence, Gen. Sigenori Kuroda found occasion to state the following;
. . your efforts have borne fruit in the form of the dis-
solution of all political parties in the Philippines. You have
rendered meritorious service to the cause of the construction
of the new Philippines by concentrating all Filipino activity
on the unity of the people and highly enhancing the noble spirit
of service in the interest of all.
“Now that the Philippines will be accorded the honor of in-
dependence within this year . . . the mission of the KALI-
BAPI has become increasingly important.
“The KALIBAPI represents a people’s movement on a large
scale dedicated to the cause of the new Philippines on the
basis of solid unity among social, cultural, and economic circles
in the Philippines.
“In this sense, I earnestly desire that, faithful to your self-
sacrificing spirit, all of you will further your efforts, in full
concert with the principle of service, to demonstrate the real
spirit of the KALIBAPI so that the aim of the organization
may be satisfactorily attained.”


A working illustration of the spirit of the KALIBAPI in helping
the people to understand the new order and find their proper place
in it is the Labor Institute which the KALIBAPI inaugurated on
May 3, 1943. The Institute was organized for the special benefit
of the workers from the different firms and factories operating
in Manila. Representative groups from these different establish-
ments take their turns in attending classes at the Institute for a
period of one month. During this period they are given courses
in Nippongo, Filipino language, Oriental and Philippine culture, and
such other subjects as are expected to help them in imbibing the
new spirit and becoming more loyal and more efficient workers.
Thus they are prepared, in accordance with their varying capacities,
to cooperate in creating a new Philippines.
The KALIBAPI has under contemplation various other projects
to be undertaken as fast as available facilities permit. They are
all designed to enable the Filipinos to become better fellow workers
in the common enterprise of nation-building.
How much success the KALIBAPI will achieve in the prosecu-
tion of its objectives will depend on the intelligence, enthusiasm,
and energy which its leaders and workers are willing to put into
the accomplishment of their duties and responsibilities. Nourished
on the invincible faith which our heroes and martyrs had shown in
the genius of their people, the KALIBAPI cannot fail because the
KALIBAPI is the people and from the people had arisen Jose Rizal,
the noblest representative of its immortal and unconquerable spirit.


CHAPTER II
RIZAL AND THE KALIBAPI
IT was not mere accident that the KALIBAPI was formally
launched on the 45th anniversary of Jose Eizal’s sacrifice at the
country’s altar of freedom. The KALIBAPI derived the inspi-
ration for its philosophy and organization from his heroic
martyrdom.
It was not mere coincidence that the Junior KALIBAPI was
launched on the 82nd birthday anniversary of Jose Rizal. It was
on the Filipino youth that the hero pinned his hope for the ultimate
redemption of the Fatherland.
The KALIBAPI as today’s repository and instrument of the
popular will owes its propelling force to the sacred memory of
Rizal’s supreme sacrifice. As such it constitutes the organ, as it
were, not only bridging two generations but also linking our
precious traditions to a vision of our future.
And so in this chapter are reproduced, for the careful study of
every KALIBAPI worker, three important statements which have
marked two historic occasions for the KALIBAPI and have rein-
forced the significance of two great anniversaries in the life of the
Filipino people.
The first one is the statement of the Honorable Jorge V. Var-
gas, President of the KALIBAPI, on the occasion of the formal
launching of the Association on December 30, 1942. His is a pas-
sionate plea for loyal service to the nation in accordance with the
life and teaching of Jose Rizal. He said:
“Every year it has been the public expression of our love
of country to honor Jose Rizal who, on this day forty-six
years ago and on this hallowed spot, died so that the Philip-
pines might live. In homage to his memory, and in the spirit
of his noble sacrifice, it has been the custom of the Filipino
people on this occasion to pledge loyalty and service to the
Philippines at whatever cost.
“Today we are gathered here in obedience to this popular
tradition, but the ritual of commemoration and renewed de-
dication which we have been accustomed to observe has an
added significance and grandeur. We meet amid rising hope


in the fulfillment of the dreams of Rizal and the Filipino
people. But we meet also in answer to a call for self-sacri-
fice, unity, and supreme efforts such as the country has not
demanded since the time of Rizal’s death.
“On this Rizal Day, the first we observe since the liberation
of the Philippines from the American regime, we are well on
the way to that final and long-delayed redemption from Oc-
cidental domination, which was the ardent aspiration of Rizal.
The mighty Japanese Empire, moved by the generous de-
sire of emancipating and protecting the nations of the Orient,
has accomplished what we ourselves sought for long without
success, in spite of the heroic sacrifice made by Rizal and our
other heroes. Western imperialism has been expelled from
Greater East Asia and to this date has been thwarted in all
its effort to return.
“But this tremendous event demands more than our passive
rejoicing. It calls for a mighty and unyielding resolve to
maintain the ground we have won, to advance and storm the
heights, to exert our united efforts and make every sacrifice
in order that the welfare and happiness of our people may
become forever secure under the guidance of the Japanese
Military Administration,
“We owe it to ourselves and our children, to the memory
of Rizal, and to our Japanese liberators, to dedicate ourselves
whole-heartedly, on this day and the days to come to com-
plete and unconditional service to the Philippines and to the
establishment of the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere.
We should observe this memorable day in a spirit fundamen-
tally different from that which prevailed in previous years.
Historic challenges have been made. The gravity of the crisis
that confronts us, the compelling need for the highest degree
of self-sacrifice and unity, the nearing culmination of our cen-
turies of struggle for emancipation from Anglo-American
countries —demand that we honor Rizal today, not with the
empty phrases of yore, but with a sincere and whole-hearted
revival of his spirit of service to the country.
“It is regrettable but true that on past Rizal days we
seemed to be more concerned with frivolous and meaningless
festivities. Today, we have neither time nor patience for
these superficialities. We must go beyond the mere appear-
ances of patriotism to its very marrow and substance. We
must go beyond mere lip-service to Rizal and instead consider
seriously his ideals and beliefs, understanding them, absorb-
ing them, and above all practising them.
“In this spirit we have chosen this day for the first mass
meeting of the National Service Association —the Kapisanan sa
Paglilingkod sa Bagong Pilipinas, an additional instrumen-
tality which the Japanese Military Administration, in its wis-
dom, magnanimity, and solicitous care for the welfare of the


Filipinos, has encouraged us to establish in the interest of
the New Philippines. It is an inspiring and fitting tribute to
the memory of Jose Rizal that we should today take an oath
to practice the truths that he preached and to bring into real-
ization the visions that he dreamed.
“The whole meaning of Rizal’s life can be found in his death.
When he fell here before the bullets of his executioners, he
was paying the price for his unshakable belief in the worth
and dignity of the Oriental. He was the symbol of the Fi-
lipino race, rebelling against Occidental tyranny and exploit-
ation, rising irresistibly to take its proper place in the world,
and resolved to secure it at whatever cost.
“Rizal dedicated his entire life to this ideal, and in the end
he gave his life for it. From the beginning of his public
career, he attacked the abuses of Western exploitation in
the Philippines; he exposed its hypocrisies; he destroyed its
false foundation of mythical superiority of race or color. At
the same time he planned, urged, and worked unceasingly for
the unification of his people, the economic rehabilitation of his
country, and the social regeneration of his race. Unsparing
in his criticism of Western oppression, he was equally honest
in observing and correcting our national defects. He decried
our frivolity and indolence; he deplored our tendency toward
disunion and petty rivalries; he despised those Filipinos who
slavishly imitated the civilization of the West, submerging our
genuine native culture in a futile suicide of the race.
“How scornful he would have been of those who, even in
the face of reality, continue to embrace the vanished phantom
of Western culture, haunted by a perpetual sense of inferior-
ity and dependence! How intolerant he would have been of
those who, in these times of decision, continue to doubt and
hesitate and do nothing, afraid to lift a finger or to say a word
that will commit them, as if the Philippines could solve its
problems by inaction.
“Rizal’s character was exactly the opposite. He was proud
of being what he was, a Filipino and an Oriental. He was
never afraid to act in accordance with his convictions, and
he sacrificed everything—honors, wealth, family, and even life
itself—in the service of his country. Such is the model that
he offers to all of us today.
“We who have pledged ourselves to the service of the new
Philippines in the ranks of the KALIBAPI should always keep
Rizal before our eyes. The aims of the KALIBAPI are the
ideals for which our national hero lived and died. It is with
pride and confidence in the justice of our cause that we can
say today that we are following in Rizal’s footsteps and prac-
tising Rizal’s teachings.
“The KALIBAPI is intended to bring into realization that
national unification which Rizal planned, marshalling all Fi


lipinos together into one compact and vigorous body, free from
partisan strife or regional division, animated by a common de-
sire to serve the Philippines with all the energy and devotion
at our command.
“The KALIBAPI is also designed to bring about those fun-
damental changes in our national character which Rizal con-
sidered necessary for our enduring welfare. It will strive to
inculcate pride in our native culture. It will seek the regen-
eration of our race through the eradication of useless fri-
volity and undue dependence on Western culture. It will
foster the prosperity and happiness of the people by helping the
economic rehabilitation of the Philippines on the bases of our
national needs and of mutual help and protection. It will
be dedicated to Rizal’s great humanitarian principle of peaceful
cooperation among all nations as brothers.
“We who have sworn to accomplish these ends must re-
member that only the highest degree of unity and self-sac-
rifice can make them possible. There is no room in the
KALlBAPl—indeed, there is no room in the New Philippines—
for time-servers and fence-sitters, for lip-servers or slack-
ers, Let no one join this great service movement if he is
moved only by the hope of personal profit. The KALIBAPI
was not organized to serve the ambitions of any one individual
or class. It is dedicated entirely to the service of the people
as a whole. It does not promise political preferment or ad-
vantage. It offers only an opportunity to serve the Philippines
as Rizal served it, without reservations, without hesitations,
without thought of self, ready to do everything, dare every-
thing, and sacrifice everything for the common good of all.
“It is in this spirit that we should observe Rizal Day today;
it is in this spirit that we should take our pledges in the
KALIBAPI. We should be moved by a pure and all-con-
suming love of country, consecrating ourselves to the sacred
duty of building a Philippines for the Filipinos, such as Rizal
envisioned, and which can now come true, a Philippines that,
under the wise leadership of the Japanese Empire, would play
an important role in the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity
Sphere.”
The second document deserving careful attention on the part of
every KALIBAPI worker is the statement of the Honorable Be-
nigno S. Aquino, Vice-President and Director-General of the KA-
LIBAPI, on the same occasion. His was an impassioned invitation
to the people for consecration to service in fitting tribute to the
memory of Jose Rizal. He said:
“The first popular manifestation of the ‘KALIBAPI’ coin-
cides with this date gloriously consecrated by the Filipino
4031 4


people to honor the memory of Jose Rizal, our supreme na-
tional hera the com memoration of our national heroes
may have a positive value and be productive of beneficent fruit,
it is necessary that those who have remained behind be ready
to pattern their conduct after the examples of abnegation
set by them for the realization of the sublime ideals which
they upheld, and for which they sacrificed not only the com-
forts of their well-ordered existence but also their very lives.
It is also necessary to bear always in mind that among the
sons of the country there exists a close relation of continuity
that makes of the present ones nothing more than prolonga-
tions of others that have disappeared, because all are parts ot
one single race which now looks for its place in the brother-
hood of nations, determined to form a sphere of common
prosperity whose value and whose significance shall acquire
preeminence and great importance through t e years, e
greater the aspirations of its founders, and the more deter-
mined they are to render all kinds of sacrifices. For this
reason, it is imperative that we forget selfishness which seeks
only the immediate personal reward; it is necessary that
we be ready to consecrate ourselves at all times to the ful-
fillment of our real duty, a duty which is disinterested and
patriotic, and to a sentiment that impels us to a complete
renunciation of self for the benefit of the community.
“In Rizal that patriotic sentiment was the flame which
lighted the path of his whole life. Love of country and the
fate of his brothers constantly engaged his thoughts. For
the welfare of all his countrymen, he dared to challenge even
death which he himself knew was hovering menacingly over
him. It is in this spirit of self-sacrifice that we see him ex-
pressing himself in the following letter which he wrote to his
parents from Hongkong on July 20, 1892, when he told them
of his decision to return to the Philippines:
«‘ . X am returning with pleasure to expose myself to
the danger not in expiation of my fault (for on this point I believe
that I have not committed any), but to wind up my work and prove
by my example what I have always preached. A man should die
for his duty and his convictions. I maintain all the ideas that I have
published concerning the present state and the future of my coun-
try, and I shall die gladly for them and specially to secure justice
and tranquillity for all of you.’
“The thought of sacrifice for his country, instead of causing
him moral torture, produced in him an ineffable assurance.
Thus in his ‘Last Thoughts’:
“ (‘Ensueho de mi vida, mi ardiente, vivo anhelo,
Salud! te grita el alma que pronto va a partir.
Salud! Oh! que es hermoso caer por darte vuelo,
Morir por darte vida, morir bajo tu cielo,
Y en tu encantada tierra la eternidad dormir.)


“ ‘Dream of my life, my living and burning desire,
All hail! cries the soul that is now to take flight;
All hail! and sweet it is for thee to expire!
To die for thy sake that thou mays’t aspire;
And sleep in thy bosom eternity’s long night.’
“If all pause to analyze the fundamental purposes of the
KALIBAPI, they would realize that these purposes have
been established to develop in the Filipino those very facul-
ties and qualities which notably distinguished Rizal.
“If on the one hand the Association advocates the rapid
reconstruction of the Philippines and the development of a
race more vigorous and strong through physical exercise and
other recreational activities in the open air, it also, on the
other hand, fosters the unity of all Filipinos, and instills in
them the conviction that the permanent security of their in-
dividual welfare and their happiness depends on the perma-
nent security of the Philippines; that to strengthen the solid
bases of a New Philippines we should promote its cultural,
moral, spiritual, and economic development and strengthen
in us the virtues of faith, of genuine confidence, of loyalty,
of bravery, of discipline, of abnegation, and love of work;
that the permanent security of the Philippines depends solely
on the permanent security of all Oriental nations in the Great-
er East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere; and that for this purpose
every nation should bend its efforts toward the maximum
exercise of all its powers to secure its rightful place in that
Sphere. Inasmuch as to perpetuate the present victory of the
Japanese Empire, the redeemer of all Oriental nations, it is
proposed that a Sphere of Co-Existence and Co-Prosperity
be established in Greater East Asia, it is the primordial duty
of all Filipinos to cooperate with the Japanese Empire in
this fundamental policy.
“The KALIBAPI aims to aid and guide the Filipinos in the
performance of this particular duty. Therefore, the organiza-
tion of the KALIPABI is the actual expression of the earnest
desire of the Filipino people to serve willingly the cause of all
the peoples of Greater East Asia.
“It is, therefore, our sincere wish that our people, for their
present well-being and security of their future, will enthusias-
tically join the KALIBAPI and make of it a truly militant,
alert, and useful institution of the Filipino people.”
The third statement was made by the Honorable Camilo Osias,
Assistant Director-General of the KALIBAPI, when he formally
launched the Junior KALIBAPI on June 19, 1943, which was the
82nd birthday anniversary of Rizal. This is an inspired affirma-
tion of the hope which Rizal had expressed with respect to the
part that the youth should play in service to the Fatherland,
Dr. Osias said:


“In the youth Rizal placed special trust calling them the
‘hope of the Fatherland 5 . In the youth the present Adminis-
tration, the Philippine Executive Commission, and the KALI-
-13 API repose much faith in the building of a New Philippines.
Young people do well to commemorate the birthday anniver-
sary of a Filipino good and great, one who embodied the
noblest and best in the Filipino race,
“All over this land of ours today young people everywhere
have gathered to honor a worthy exemplar of youth. Wher-
ever two or more Filipinos, in fact, are gathered together, they
should venerate his name and his memory. Better still they
should on this memorable day, resolve to dedicate their lives
to the service of our country and people and thus live the
Rizal way.
“When the JUNIOR KALIBAPI is organized in your school,
city, or municipality, you young citizens of the Philippines,
bright and ambitious, should qualify for membership. Young
Filipinos should be proud to become members of an organiza-
tion intended to produce likemindedness and to foster the spirit
of self-help and cooperation among the young people of today
who will become the leaders of tomorrow.
“The KALIBAPI stands for public enlightenment. It helps
train bbys and girls to become men and women of good char-
acter. ij
i; “One of the purposes of the KALIBAPI is to strengthen
such virtues as hard work, faith, self-reliance, loyalty, bravery,
discipline, and self-sacrifice. There is one Filipino, Jose Rizal,
who in youth developed in himself to a remarkable degree
these and other sterling qualities of character. Because he
did so, he became a great man respected and admired not
only in the land that gave him birth but in other lands.
“Rizal as a boy was frail but by regular exercise, by loving
the gteht' out-of-doors, tramping in the fields and the woods,
by hiking with his pet dog, and riding on his favorite pony, he
became healthy and strong. If the boys and girls of today
really want to follow the footsteps of Rizal, they should like-
wise build ; their bodies, harden themselves so that they can
■ stand the : heat of the tropical sun or the beatings of torrential
rains'. They will then be better able to face the rigors of
modern life; If we are to have a strong Philippines, we must
have I citizens who are strong in body and fit for sustained
effort.
/ “Rizal came of a thrifty and industrious family. In the
town of Calamba where he was born were people who live
by the Sweat of their faces. They were brave and sturdy,
not afraid to do hard work. Rizal while a boy learned to
: work, to love work, and to work hard. Acquiring good habits
of work as a boy he became a productive worker as a man.


“He intoned a beautiful hymn to labor the chorus of which
reads:
“ ‘For la patria en la guerra
por la patria en la paz,
velara el Filipino
vivira y morira.’
“This teaches that for his country in war and in peace the
Filipino should work, live and die.
“Rizal was a man of deep and abiding faith. He had faith
in his country, faith in his people, faith in God. He believed
that the Filipino could be at least as good as a Spaniard. His
later studies and observations deepened his faith in the poten-
tialities of his people. He became convinced that by education
and industry the Filipinos deserve to be independent, have an
individuality of their own, worthy to live in the community of
free nations.
“Rizal was self-reliant. He learned self-reliance from his
father and his brother who were farmers and who, by intel-
ligent and hard work, were self-supporting. His gifted mother
taught him to rely on his own exertions. Still young, he was
sent to school in another town, Bihan, and then to Manila.
Later he traveled in Japan, in the United States, in England,
and other countries of Europe. All these made him see the
importance of self-reliance.
“He was not only self-reliant but brave and loyal. Having
made himself strong in body, in mind, and in spirit, he was
unafraid. He showed courage as a little fellow fighting a
bigger fellow who tried to bully him. As a student in Manila
he led Filipino students to defend themselves against arrogant
boys of the ruling class. He felt no inferiority as a brown man
and an Oriental dealing with white boys and Westerners. He
showed that he could hold his own in physical combat and in
intellectual contests. His ratings as a student in the Ateneo
and Santo Tomas were invariably excellent. No wonder other
boys followed him and loved him as their leader.
“Rizal used his physical, mental, and spiritual powers in
loyal service to his people. Wherever he went he was think-
ing of the good he could do. He wrote poems and essays on
love of country. He wrote books which make us serve our
country better. He was a disciplined man. He obeyed the law
and loved order. He disciplined himself to study hard during
study hours, to work during working hours, and to play whole-
some games and to rest regularly. Because he had self-control,
because he observed discipline, he was able to learn much and
to serve his country fully.
“Rizal became a patriot. His love of country was not selfish;
it was of the sacrificial kind. He sacrificed good times when
it was necessary for him to do so in order to attend to his


studies and devote his time to serious work. He was always
thinking of others more than of himself. That is why we say
he was a man who knew the full meaning of self-sacrifice.
He showed the highest kind of spirit of sacrifice when he
was ready and willing to face death so that his country and
people might have abundant life.
“It is a blessed and glorious thing that we have a Rizal who
‘though dead yet speaketh*. His living spirit in very truth is
leading us. It was on December 30th last when the KALI-
BAPI was formally launched as an organization to labor for a
better and greater Philippines, to make the Filipino people solid
and united, to foster the cultural, moral, spiritual, and economic
advancement of the country, to strengthen in the people such
virtues as hard work, faith, self-reliance, loyalty, bravery,
discipline, and self-sacrifice, qualities that make boys and girls
good Orientals and true Filipinos.
“It is certainly fitting that the youth whom Rizal loved and
trusted so much should gather together to honor his memory
and to decide to live the Rizal way. All Filipinos, young and
old, do well to celebrate the Rizal birthday anniversary and
make the personality of Rizal the center of gravity in our
collective life. Rizal lived a victorious life. He could not be
defeated because he was determined to win. He made real
in his life the dream of the poet who said:
“ ‘lt takes a little courage
And a little self-control
And some grim determination
If you want to reach a goal.
It takes a deal of striving,
And a firm and stern-set chin,
No matter what the battle,
If you’re really out to win.’ ”
From these three statements, every KALIBAPI worker may
properly derive a lasting inspiration and constant reminder of the
place of Jose Rizal in the KALIBAPI as a popular movement de-
dicated to the building of a New Philippines.
Rizal’s position in the ideology of the KALIBAPI is something
that should be constantly kept in mind—a beacon, as it were, to
guide all Filipinos under its standard.


CHAPTER III
THE KALIBAPI AND INDEPENDENCE
WHILE Rizal is the personality around which the KALIBAPI
gravitates as a people’s movement, the ideal of independence
is the polestar that keeps its vision set on a definite destination.
Independence is the Filipino’s immemorial dream and age-long
aspiration. This rests on the conviction that independence is basic
to racial self-respect and fulfillment.
To every KALIBAPI worker, a perspective of his people s history
means a correct understanding of the historic landmarks on the
long road to freedom. It is necessary that he has this to appre-
ciate the heritage that he is to hand over with pride to posterity.
To review: ,
In 1521, a western adventurer named Magellan stumbled on the
Philippines in the name of Spain and found that the Filipinos had
self-respect. He set at once to disabuse them of it, on behalf of
the Spanish King and God. He got promptly punished on the
shores of Mactan. Lapulapu was the hero and symbol of native
resistance and pride.
From 1521 to 1896 was a long time. Superior western arms
and technique of subjugation put the Filipinos under the heel.
The years 1571, 1622,1763, 1813, and 1872, showed that that position
left much to be desired. ,
In 1896 the Filipinos said enough was enough and drenched the
fields freely with their blood. Jose Rizal gave up his life to live
forever in the hearts of his countrymen as the very earnest of the
glory of a people’s genius in freedom fulfilled.
In 1898 when freedom was in Filipino hands, America came upon
the scene’and took it upon herself to withold it while she took her
time to shape a policy rooted in the American dream of Manifest
Destiny in the Pacific. . _ ,
In 1935 after the Filipinos’ long campaign for independence,
America passed an Independence Act containing onerous economic
and other provisions and granting independence after a transitional
period of ten years.


On December 8, 1941, the second World War spread to the
Pacific area, Japan declared war on the United States of America
and the British Empire “to insure the stability of East Asia and
to contribute to world peace . . .” and “to enjoy prosperity in
common with all nations , . .”
On January 2, 1942, the Japanese Imperial Forces occupied Ma-
nila. On January 21, or nineteen days later, the Imperial Japanese
Empire, an Oriental power, assured the Filipinos that they would
be accorded the honor of independence.
What has developed since to date must be engraved in the mind
of every KALIBAPI worker.
On January 28, 1943, Premier General Hideki Tozyo declared
before the Imperial Diet:
Addressing this Diet last year, I made public the statement
that if the Filipinos will hereafter understand the real intentions
of Nippon and offer to cooperate with us as one of the partners
in the establishment of the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity
Sphere, Nippon will gladly enable them to enjoy the honor
of independence. I now take this occasion to reiterate last
year’s declaration.
It is to be observed with satisfaction that the Philippines
today are rendering sincere cooperation to Japan under the
new leadership of Chairman Vargas and that the restoration
of peace and order in the Philippines is steadily improving—
facts which augur well for the future of that country.
I sincerely expect that the Filipinos will further strengthen
their cooperation with Nippon and thus consummate at the
earliest possible opportunity the independence of their land.
The same day, the Director General of the Japanese Military
Administration in the Philippines issued the following communique:
Premier General Hideki Tozyo, in his address to the 81st
session of the Imperial Diet, now convened, has made the
following solemn and irrevocable statement concerning the
future political status of Burma, the Philippines, and India.
The context of the Premier’s statement is as follows:
On Burma—
1. In view of the magnificent and tangible evidence of sincere and
whole-hearted cooperation rendered by the entire population of
Burma acting in complete unison under the inspiring leadership
of Dr. U. Ba Maung, Burma will be granted independence not
later than the end of this year.
On the Philippines—
1. Substantial progress is being made in the degree of cooperation
rendered to the Japanese Empire by the people of the Philippines


as well as in the restoration of internal peace and security. Under
these circumstances and on condition that further tangible evidences
of cooperation are actively demonstrated, it is contemplated to put
into effect the statement made previously on the question of
Philippine independence in the shortest possible time.
On India—
1. Positive and whole-hearted support will be granted to the
Indian independence movement regardless of whether such move-
ment is carried on inside or outside of India proper.
Thus in accordance with the present official pronouncement
of the Imperial Japanese Government, the independence of
Burma is to be incontestably an accomplished fact by the
end of the present year. With this formal recognition of her
independence, Burma will be freed from her long years of
oppression and enslavement under the British and with the
powerful support of the Japanese Empire, she will proudly
assume her rightful role as an independent and worthy mem-
ber of the Co-Prosperity Sphere of Oriental peoples. This
glorious fulfillment of Burma’s national ambition is indeed a
matter of rejoicing for all the peoples of Asia.
That the independence of Burma has become a realized fact
at such an early date is attributable to the following reasons.
In the first place, it is none other than the practical manifesta-
tion of the sincerity and good faith of the Japanese Empire
in its avowed objective of prosecuting the War of Greater
East Asia for the purpose of liberating all oppressed Oriental
peoples and enabling them to assume their proper role and
place under the sun and establish among themselves a sphere
of permanent peace and lasting prosperity. The second funda-
mental reason for the rapid attainment of Burma to a status
of independence is the intensity and sincerity of the cooperation
rendered by the entire population of Burma, who, without one
single exception, have consistently shown unqualified and un-
conditional cooperation to the Japanese Empire ever since the
very first days of hostilities in that region. The people of
Burma, from the very beginning, rendered superlative and
ardent cooperation with the Imperial Japanese Forces in ef-
fectively eliminating all vestiges of British and Chungking
forces from that section of the battle front and subsequently,
when the Military Administration was set up in that country,
every individual, without a single exception, took an active and
progressive part in the task of rehabilitating Burma for the
Burmese, There was not a single recalcitrant element op-
posing this work of reconstruction and there has never existed
in Burma any lukewarm or half-hearted supporter of the new
regime and there was obtained, as a result, complete unity
and concerted effort among all elements of society.
4031 5


As to the important question of Philippine independence,
the policy of the Imperial Japanese Government as formally
announced on the present occasion, further clarifies and em-
phatically reaffirms the original statement made by the Imperial
Japanese Government at the outbreak of the present war.
Deep significance must be properly placed on the fact that
this statement concerning the independence of the Philippines
is being issued simultaneously with the declaration of the
independence of Burma,
Concerning the good faith and integrity of Japan, it must
be borne in mind that the Japanese Empire is ruled and gov-
erned by the August Virtue of His Imperial Majesty, the Em-
peror of Japan. Japan is a country of faith and honor; it
is the land of Bushido; and her proud history conclusively
proves that she has fulfilled with sincerity and good faith
every obligation and pledge she has entered into or made.
This is in distinct contrast to the action of the Americans with
respect to their promise to the Filipinos during the early days
of the Malolos Republic or the similar action of the British
with respect to their promises made to India during the first
World War.
It is contrary to the Japanese code of honor to break pledges
once made or treat international commitments as scraps of
paper and a fundamental and sharp distinction should be made
between the hypocritical actions of the Anglo-American powers
on the one hand and the actions dictated by sincerity and good
faith of Japan on the other. The people of the Philippines
will do well to reflect seriously on their experience over the
past one year of Japanese Military Administration. We are
confident that they will have come to a true understanding
and evaluation of the integrity and honor of the Japanese
nation and the sincerity of our intentions in the Philippines.
It is an established and immutable fact that the Philippines
is to be granted independence on condition that the people of
these Islands manifest further tangible proof of closer co-
operation and sincere collaboration with the Japanese Empire.
The only question that remains is that of the exact time
of recognition of that independence. This in turn is most
definitely a problem which is placed squarely before the Fili-
pinos themselves and one which must be solved through their
efforts. Categorically speaking, if the Filipinos desire complete
independence in the shortest possible time, it behooves them to
demonstrate by tangible evidence a more intensified degree
of cooperative attitude. It is a fact that outside of the few
bands of recalcitrant elements which continue to exist in
outlying provinces, most of the Filipinos are happily collabo-
rating with the Japanese Military Administration in building
up the New Philippines for the Filipinos.


Henceforth it must indeed be a matter of deep chagrin to
all loyal Filipinos that the independence of the Philippines
is being realized at a later date than the independence of
Burma, whose civil administration was inaugurated almost
four months after that of the Philippines. To us of the Im-
perial Japanese Forces stationed here in the Philippines, it
is also a matter of regret and disappointment.
It is therefore my keen desire and sincere entreaty to every
Filipino who wants to see this country win independence in
the shortest possible time, that he pay particular attention
to carrying out the following cardinal program.
Firstly, eradicate from among your midst of 18 million
Filipinos all entanglements and connections with the past
regime. Unify and harmonize your efforts into one compact
body and demonstrate to the best of your ability your sincere
and active cooperation with the Japanese Military Administra-
tion. Above all else, take vigorous and forceful measures of
your own initiative to eradicate the remnants of Americans
and the bandits from this country, thereby bringing about
complete peace and security throughout the length and breadth
of this land.
Secondly, not only work for the economic rehabilitation of
the country in close cooperation with the Japanese Military
Administration but initiate, through your own will and efforts,
effective ways and means of bringing about the much needed
economic self-sufficiency of the Philippines through the rapid
reconstruction and renovation of the economic structure of
this land.
Thirdly, work for the speedy reorientation of your people
both spiritually and intellectually, thereby regaining your
original Oriental souls and with this as the foundation, dras-
tically reorganize the social structure of the Philippines in
strict accordance with the ideals and standards of Oriental
peoples.
The above mentioned three-point program is clearly set
before you for active fulfillment. The basic policy of the
Japanese nation with regard to your independence is now
unmistakable and unequivocal. The problem is now definitely
up to the people of the Philippines. Every single individual
in the Philippines is called upon today to come to a stronger
and clearer conception of the real aims and objectives of Japan
in prosecuting the War of Greater East Asia and with renewed
vigor and enthusiasm demonstrate tangibly his wholehearted
cooperation with Japan in establishing the Co-Prosperity
Sphere of Oriental peoples.
It is fervently hoped that you will, by so doing, win for
yourselves the honor of independence in the shortest pos-
sible time.


On May 6, 1943, Premier General Tozyo, at a mammoth meeting
in Manila, told the Filipinos that he was well satisfied with their
collaboration and was convinced of the propriety of early inde-
pendence of the Philippines. He urged further and greater effort
to realize the honor of independence.
On June 16, 1943, the Illustrious Premier before the Imperial
Diet in its 82nd extraordinary session reported the following, among
other things:
The present trend in Greater East Asia reveals that the
confidence of the countries and people of this region in Japan
as well as their sincere and voluntary cooperation with us
for the successful prosecution of the war are becoming stronger
day by day. Having recently visited China, Manchoukuo, and
the Philippines and having had opportunities to witness per-
sonally actual conditions on the spot and carry on frank ex-
changes of views and opinions with the principal leaders there,
I have been further strengthened in my conviction regarding
this point.
It goes without saying that it is Japan’s immutable policy
to free Greater East Asia permanently from the age-long
x Anglo-Saxon domination and restore this region to its natural
and proper condition. Various measures which Japan has
taken have all been in perfect consistency with this funda-
mental policy.
With the passing of a year and a half since the outbreak
of the war the entire Greater East Asia, thoroughly under-
standing the real intention of Japan, is fully convinced that
there cannot be an emancipation of Greater East Asia without
the complete victory of Japan and that there can be no hap-
piness for these peoples without the inauguration of a new
era in Greater East Asia, This, indeed, is a matter for con-
gratulation for the whole of Greater East Asia. In view of
such situation, the government, in response to the enthusiastic
cooperation of these peoples, is considering at this time the
initiation of further measures.
With regard to the Philippines Jorge B. Vargas, Chairman
of the Executive Commission, and other leaders are earnestly
devoting their best efforts toward the reconstruction of the
islands as well as toward cooperation with Japan for the
prosecution of the war, while the people in general who have
come to understand our true intentions are extending us pos-
itive service.
Our attitude regarding the independence of the Philippines
has already been clarified in our repeated pronouncements
in the past. At this juncture we wish to go a step further


and declare that we will accord the honor of independence to
the Philippines in the course of the current year.
The people of the Philippines, who had been toiling under
the crafty American rule and who have long been violently
chasing after the mirage of independence, are now to attain
their long-cherished aspiration within less than two years of
the outbreak of the present war. We can well imagine the
feeling of gratification on the part of the Filipino people. This
indeed is a matter for sincere congratulation for the Philip-
pines in particular and for Greater East Asia in general.
In less than two years, the Filipinos have witnessed a series of
events leading to the great climax that is to put the Philippines
on her own before 1943 is done, to work out her own destiny
alongside free and cooperating sister Oriental states.
This is the fact, this is the truth that is stranger and more mar-
velous than any known fiction invented in any subtle imperialistic
mind distorted by an unhappy outlook of domination and exploita-
tion of less privileged races.


CHAPTER IV
ORIENTATION THROUGH INDEPENDENCE
GRATITUDE, as the Director-General of the KALIBAPI puts it,
is the most beautiful flower, the most precious and the most
sublime, of the native soul.
For the proper orientation of every KALIBAPI worker, the re-
sponse of the Filipino people to the categorical declarations of
the Imperial Japanese Government quoted in the preceding chap-
ter is here duly recorded. In its three forms, all products of three
related historic occasions, it has only one dominant theme: grati-
tude. It is evoked by the proffer of independence which is the
orientation of our life.
On February 26, 1943, the Philippine Council of State issued the
following Manifesto:
To the Filipino People:
Independence is finally within our reach! Japan is waging
a sacred war for the purpose of liberating the Orient from Oc-
cidental domination. In pursuance of that noble cause, now
happily on the point of attainment as a result of her brilliant
successes on air, land and sea, she offers us the honor of
independence and the blessings that it implies.
This generous and unparalleled offer, Japan has solemnly
made to the Philippines with the sincerity of a friend and
protector. Her friendship for us is traditional. As far back
as the sixteenth century, her samurai warriors offered to join
our ranks to smash the Spanish yoke. During the Philippine
Revolution a number of her sons volunteered to fight and die
side by side with the Filipino comrades-in-arms. Nor was
that all. Long before the outbreak of the current Greater
East Asia War, her Imperial Government freely and unre-
servedly declared that she had no territorial ambition in the
Philippines. This declaration the Imperial Japanese Forces re-
affirmed when they occupied Manila early last year. They had
come here, they announced, merely to fulfill Japan’s “sacred
Mission, the establishment of Asia for the Asians, the Philip-
pines for the Filipinos.”
Assurance Repeated
Time and again the highest Japanese representatives in the
Philippines—the Commander-in-Chief of the Imperial Japan


ese Army and the Director-General of the Japanese Military
Administration —repeated this inspiring assurance. True to
her lofty and ennobling mission, Japan went further. She
vowed through her Premier, General Hideki Tozyo, before the
Imperial Diet on January 21, 1942, that: “as regards the Phil-
ippines, if the people of these Islands will hereafter under-
stand the real intentions of Nippon and offer to cooperate with
us as one of the partners for the establishment of the Greater
East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere, Nippon will gladly enable
them to enjoy the honor of independence.”
Japan’s solemn promise, which brought new hope to all con-
quered and oppressed peoples in the Far East, Premier Tozyo
reiterated a year later. Speaking before the same distinguished
body, on January 28, 1948, he said: “Substantial progress is
being made in the degree of cooperation rendered to the Japan-
ese Empire by the people of the Philippines as well as in the
restoration of internal peace and security. Under these cir-
cumstances and on condition that further tangible evidence of
cooperation is actively demonstrated it is contemplated to put
into effect the statement made previously on the question of
Philippine independence in the shortest possible time.”
Exert Efforts
Firmly resolved as we are and have always been to attain
our independence, we would be unworthy indeed of our race
and that liberty which our martyrs and heroes have sanctified
with their blood if we did not exert our utmost to surmount
every obstacle placed in our path to freedom and nationhood.
But first of all let us be united. We have a common cause,
a common destiny. Let us all cooperate with our true libe-
rators to the limit of our capacity and ability. Let the mis-
guided remnants of the USAFFE who are still hiding in the
mountains abandon any futile resistance which at best can
only mean unnecessary sufferings and sacrifices of our people.
To normal life let everybody return as the rest of us have
done, certain that it is there, and not in the fastnesses of the
mountains, where we all can best strive for the peace, happiness,
and prosperity of our fatherland.
Why continue resisting those who have honestly, sincerely,
and bravely shown by deed that they are really doing their
best to make us free? Japan could have treated us as a con-
quered enemy, imprisoned our soldiers for the duration of the
war, and devastated our country. But this she did not choose
to do. Instead, she allowed us from the beginning to direct
our administration under the benevolent guidance of the
Japanese Military Administration. She freed our imprisoned
soldiers, and with her hands repaired the ravages of war. She
went beyond that. She taught us the value of discipline, in-
creased our national consciousness and showed us by precept


and example the meaning of racial dignity. By cooperating
with Japan actively and in full measure, we emancipate our-
selves from political domination and economic exploitation and
win for ourselves the honor and glory of independence.
We therefore appeal most earnestly to all our countrymen to
join and help us in the titanic task of reconstruction of our
country and in the complete reestablishment of peace and order
throughout the land. Let us avoid further suffering, blood-
shed and destruction. Let us build and reconstruct our country
and heal the wounds of the past, for it is only in this way that
we can realize within the shortest possible time our supreme
aspiration to be free and independent.
Manila
February 26, 1943
(Signed) Jorge B. Vargas, Jose P. Laurel, Antonio de las
Alas, Teofilo Sison, Rafael Alunan, Claro M. Recto, Quintin
Paredes, Jose Yulo, Benigno S. Aquino, Serafin Marabut,
Francisco Lavides, Jorge Bocobo, Leon G. Guinto, Emilio
Aguinaldo, Vicente Madrigal, Ramon Fernandez, Ramon
Avanceha, Miguel Unson, Alejandro Roces, Camilo Osias,
Arsenic Bonifacio, Pio Duran, and Jose Veloso.
On May 3, 1943, the Philippine Executive Commission issued the
following manifesto:
To the Filipino People;
We are a freedom-loving people, scions of a proud Malayan
race that once ruled a great Oriental empire and fought, time
and again, to keep inviolate its ancestral abode; we are inher-
itors of brave traditions that sprang from heroic achievements
and noble dreams of our sires who roamed these beautiful isles
and these tropic seas as free men, long ago; who were sover-
eigns of their destiny, and holders of title deeds to the rich
resources of these lands arid these waters that have known no
dearth since the birth of time. Very soon that ancient and
abundant inheritance shall be ours again, to hold and to enjoy.
The great and generous Empire of Nippon, in its relentless
course of redressing the grievances of Oriental nations, has
placed the destiny of the Fatherland in our own hands. It is
given to us, as it has seldom been given to any people, to
assume the unparalleled privilege of launching the epoch of
freedom and progress in our country’s history. In view of
this, less than our all, less than the full measure of sacrifice
that our forefathers knew how to make in their struggles
against enslavement would be unworthy of this dear homeland
bequeathed to us by our ancestors.
In a most solemn and sincere manner, and in the presence
of a vast assemblage of our people, the Premier of Japan, Gen


era! Hideki Tozyo, has renewed for the third time the pledge
of a noble people that the independence of the Philippines will
be granted in the shortest possible time if the Filipinos actively
and unreservedly cooperate with Japan in the establishment
of the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere.
Never before in our history has independence been so honestly
and generously offered us; never before has our independence
been so near to glorious realization as it is now.
Japan, after liberating us from American domination, im-
mediately placed independence within our reach even while the
conflagration of war still raged and in spite of the resistance of
a few misguided elements against the Imperial Japanese Forces.
Japan promises independence with sincere and generous invi-
tation to join our brother Oriental nations in a partnership that
will insure our co-prosperity on the stable and enduring basis
of reciprocal exchange of materials and spiritual resources for
the satisfaction of our common needs. She offers us inde-
pendence which shall ennoble and exalt our racial spirit and
restore our dignity as Filipinos and Orientals.
Therefore—
If in the past we were deluded into serving America with
our blood, sweat and treasure, we have infinitely more and
greater reason now to render to the Great Japanese Empire
our fullest measure of support and cooperation for the pros-
ecution to a victorious end of the Greater East Asia War and
for the final attainment of our highest racial ideals.
Inspired by a consuming love of country, profoundly con-
scious of our sacred obligations to the hallowed memory of our
heroes and martyrs in the past, and to the countless generations
yet unborn, let us, one and all, consecrate our thoughts, our
actions, and our lives to the cause of our independence.
Let us put an end, once and for all, to the disgraceful dis-
orders in our countrysides and to the futile disputes among
brother Filipinos. Let us pour all our united energies, our
material and spiritual resources into one immeasurable effort
to bring to completion our gigantic task of reconstruction. Let
us face the glorious future with profound confidence and with
the highest hopes, marching and advancing as one solid phalanx
into the blazing dawn of a New, Free, and Independent
Philippines.
On June 19, 1943, the Special National Convention of the KA-
LIBAPI passed the following resolution;
Whereas, the Illustrious Premier of Japan, General Hideki
Tozyo, made the solemn pronouncement before the Imperial
Diet on its 82nd extraordinary session that Japan “will accord
the honor of independence to the Philippines in the course of
the curent year”;


Whereas, the grant of independence “in the course of the
current year” would be the fruition of the immemorial and
unbroken struggle of the Filipinos for freedom and independ-
ence;
Whereas, it is blessed and glorious that the honor of inde-
pendence of the Philippines, Oriental geographically and ra-
cially, should be bestowed by an Oriental power; Now, there-
fore, be it
Resolved, That the Special National Convention of the KA-
LIBAPI (Association for Service to the New Philippines)
express, as it hereby expresses, its profoundest gratitude to the
Imperial Japanese Government for the grant of Philippine in-
dependence within this year; Be it also
Resolved, That the KALIBAPI show, as it hereby shows, in
the concrete its sincere appreciation by strengthening the uni-
fication of the people, by securing complete peace and order, by
laboring towards conomic self-sufficiency, and by hastening our
laboring towards economic self-sufficiency, and by hastening
our spiritual regeneration; and thus make the independent
Philippines a worthy member of the Greater East Asia Co-
Prosperity Sphere; and Be it finally
Resolved, That the KALIBAPI affirm, as it hereby affirms,
its determination to collaborate fully with Japan in the estab-
lishment of a new order of justice, peace, and prosperity in
Greater East Asia and the world.
These are three state documents the substance and spirit of which
reveal the Filipino soul itself grateful for, and alive to, the greatest
challenge and opportunity ever granted to it in history to seek its
self-realization.


CHAPTER V
THE KALIBAPI CHARTER
NEXT to knowing, revering, and following Eizal, every KALI-
BAPI leader, worker, or member owes it to the Association
and to himself to make the substance of the Charter an intimate
part of his moral and intellectual equipment.
This means a careful and thorough understanding of KALIBAPI
philosophy and purpose, its organizational arrangement, and its
power and potentialities.
The KALIBAPI Charter was promulgated originally on Decem-
ber 4, 1942, as Executive Order No. 109. With the need of strength-
ening the organizational leadership and broadening the scope of
its action, the Charter was subsequently amended on May 18, 1943.
It now runs as follows:
Executive Order No. 109
As amended by Executive Order No. 156
ESTABLISHING A NATIONAL SERVICE ASSOCIATION TO BE KNOWN
AS “KAPISANAN SA PAGLILINGKOD SA BAGONG
PILIPINAS” (KALIBAPI)
Pursuant to the authority conferred upon me as Head of the Central Ad-
ministrative Organization by Order No. 1 in connection with Order No. 3
of the Commander-in-Chief of the Imperial Japanese Forces in the Philip-
pines, and upon the recommendation of the Executive Commission, it is hereby
ordered that—
Article I .—Organization and Powers
Section 1. There is hereby created and established a non-political service
association which shall be called “Kapisanan sa Paglilingkod sa Bagong Pili-
pinas” (Association for Service to the New Philippines), This associa-
tion may likewise be referred to as “KALIBAPI”. The Association shall
have its principal office in the City of Manila, Philippines.
Sec. 2. The Association shall have the power to receive real and personal
property by gift, devise, or bequest; and to adopt a seal. It shall enjoy
the general powers mentioned in the Corporation Law and shall be subject
to the provisions thereof in so far as the same are compatible with the
terms of this Order; and, for the attainment of its purposes, may perform
any act which a corporation, copartnership or natural person may lawfully
do under the laws now in force or which may hereafter be enacted.


Article ll. — Purposes
Sec. 3. The Association is organized for the following purposes —
(1) To render such services as will bring about the rapid reconstruction
of the Philippines and the rehabilitation of its people, for which purpose,
it shall strive (o) to secure the unification of the Filipino people of all classes
through the development in them and among them of the conviction that
the permanent security well-being, and happiness of the Filipinos depends
on the permanent security of the Philippines; and (b) to coordinate all
activities and services of organizations or indiviuals that are or may
hereafter be concerned with the development or promotion of the welfare
of the people socially, spiritually, physically, culturally, economically or
otherwise;
(2) To insure a stable foundation for the New Philippines by fostering
(a) the cultural, moral, spiritual, and economic advancement of the people
by giving encouragement to the above-mentioned activities and by invigorat-
ing in them such oriental virtues as hard work, faith, self-reliance, loyalty,
bravery, discipline, and self-sacrifice; and (b) the development of a more
sturdy and vigorous race of Filipinos by attending to the physical development
of the people through a wise supervision of physical exercise and whole-
some recreational and outdoor activities, particularly sports, and athletic meets
and contests;
(3) To assist the Filipino people in fully comprehending the significance
of, and to strengthen their adherence to, the principles of the Greater East
Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere;
(4) To secure for the New Philippines its rightful place in the Greater
East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere as a worthy member thereof;
(5) To adhere strictly to the policies of the Imperial Japanese Forces in
the Philippines in their administration and to render service in the establish-
ment of the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere; and
(6) To do any and all acts which will facilitate the reconstruction of the
New Philippines, and contribute to the advancement of the Greater East
Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere.
Article lll.—Membership
Sec. 4. Any Filipino, not less than 18 years of age, who identifies himself
with the ideals, aims and purposes of the Association and who is of good
standing in the community may qualify as a member thereof, Provided , how-
ever, That any Filipino, less than 18 years of age, who likewise believes in
the ideals, aims and purposes of the Association and who is of good standing
in the community, may also qualify as a junior member thereof, and for this
purpose a Junior Kalibapi shall be established.
Sec. 5. Any qualified person who desires to join the association may be-
come a member by filing an application in accordance with the form to be
prescribed for the purpose, with the principal office or the local chapter of
the Association.
Sec. 6. A member shall observe and obey all the principles enunciated
herein or as may hereafter be promulgated by the proper authorities to
guide his norm of conduct and shall, at all times, strive to work for the


realization of the aims and purposes of the Association, subordinating himself
and his interests to those of his country, particularly in connection with
the building of the New Philippines. He shall be entitled to participate in
the general meetings of the Association, to seek the aid of the Association and
all the members thereof in case of necessity, and to enjoy all such privileges
as may be accorded him by virtue of his membership. Certificates of mem-
bership shall be issued to each member duly signed and attested by the
proper officials of the Association.
Sec. 7. No membership fee shall be collected from the members of the As-
sociation.
Sec. 8. Any member who shall commit any act or acts unworthy of a good
Filipino, or antagonistic to the aims and purposes of the Association, or who
in any way shall not follow strictly the principles prescribed in this Order
or any rules that may hereafter be promulgated by the duly constituted
authorities of the Association, may be expelled therefrom and shall forfeit
all rights and privileges inherent to membership therein.
Article IV. — Offices and Constituent Bodies
Sec. 9. The government of the affairs and promotion of the aims and
purposes of the Association shall be entrusted to the President with the
assistance of a Vice-President and Director-General, an Assistant Director-
General, an Advisory Board, and an Executive Staff.
Article V. — The President
Sec. 10. The Chairman of the Executive Commission shall ex-fficio be and
assume the duties of the President of the Association. He shall fix and
determine the policies of the Association, with the advice and assistance of
the Advisory Board. He shall appoint, with the approval of the Commander-
in-Chief of the Imperial Japanese Forces, the Vice-President and Director-
General, the Assistant Director-General, the Chiefs of the Bureaus or offices
of the Association, and four Directors-at-Large.
Sec. 11. The President shall have power; (1) to lay down the policies of
the Association with the advice of the Advisory Board and the approval of
the Commander-in-Chief of the Imperial Japanese Forces; (2) to initiate and
adopt all measures necessary to carry out the aims and purposes of the As-
sociation; (3) to exercise all powers pertaining to the business of the Asso-
ciation and to hold and control all property of the Association subject only
to existing laws, this Executive Order, and the orders of the Commander-in-
Chief of the Imperial Japenese Forces; (4) to pass upon all reports submitted
by the Executive Staff and all actions taken by the latter; (5) to appoint such
committees as he may deem necessary to study and report on certain matters
submitted to him for consideration; (6) to approve the budget of the Asso-
ciation with the approval of the Commander-in-Chief of the Imperial Japanese
Forces; (7) to make rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provi-
sions of this Order and the existing laws or with circumstances, and to
enforce obedience thereto; (8) to approve the “plantilla” of the personnel of
the Association; and (9) to exercise such other powers as may, according
to this Order and subsequent enactments, be properly exercised by him.


Sec. 12. The President shall preside at all regular and special meetings of
the Advisory Board.
Sec. 13. The President shall, from time to time or when so requested, sub-
mit a report on the activities of the Association to the Commander-in-Chief
of the Imperial Japanese Forces.
Article Vl.— Vice-President and Director-General
Sec. 14. The Director-General shall be the Vice-President of the Associa-
tion and shall be the head of the Executive Staff. He shall execute all the
measures adopted and decisions rendered by the President. For this pur-
pose he shall have executive supervision and control over the bureaus and
offices of the Association and shall be accountable for the exercise of such
powers directly to the President. He shall fix the salaries and appoint the
subordinate personnel of the Association in conformity with the approved
budget and “plantilla.” In the absence of the President, the Vice-President
and Director-General shall perform the duties of the President.
Sec. 14-A. The Assistant Director-General shall assist the Director-General
in the performance of his duties and the discharge of his responsibilities and
shall perform such other duties or functions as the President or the Vice-
President and Director-General may assign to him. He shall assume and
discharge the powers, duties and functions of the Director-General in the
absence or temporary incapacity of the latter.
Article Vll.— Advisory Board
Sec. 15. The members of the Philippine Executive Commission shall serve
ex-officio in the Advisory Board of the President with the end in view of
bringing about a better administration of the affairs of the Association
through a closer cooperation and coordination of its activities with those of
the Central Administrative Organization.
Sec. 16. The Advisory Board shall be composed of the Vice-President
and Director-General, the members of the Philippine Executive Commis-
sion, the Assistant Director-General, the Chiefs of bureaus or offices of the
Association, and four Directors-at-large, who shall serve for two years,
unless sooner relieved by the President.
Sec. 17. The meetings of the Advisory Board shall be presided over by the
President of the Association and shall be held at his call in his office or at
such other place as may be designated by him.
Article Vlll. — Executive Staff
Sec. 18. The executive and administrative powers of the Association shall be
vested in and discharged by the Executive Staff. At the head of the Staff
shall be the Vice-President and Director-General, who shall be assisted by
the Assistant Director-General, the Directors-at-large, and the Chiefs of
the bureaus and offices of the Association who shall be directly responsible
to him.
Article IX.— Bureaus and Offices
Sec. 19. There shall be a Bureau of General Affairs, a Research and Plan-
ning Bureau, a Bureau of Provincial and Municipal Branches, a Bureau of


Publicity, the Office of the Secretary-Treasurer, and such other bureaus and
offices as the President, after consultation with the Advisory Board, may
subsequently establish.
Sec. 20. The Bureau of General Affairs shall attend to all matters relating
to moral, physical, cultural, and economic rehabilitation, education, employ-
ment, and liaison services.
Sec. 21. The Research and Planning Bureau shall conduct researches, studies
and investigations and formulate plans and devise ways and means to carry
out the aims and purposes of the Association.
Sec. 22. The Bureau of Provincial and Municipal Branches shall take charge
of the organization and coordination of the activities of the Association in
the provinces, cities, and municipalities.
Sec, 23. The Bureau of Publicity shall take charge of the dissemination of
information on the aims and purposes of the Association through the press,
radio, cinema, stage, posters, meetings, rallies, and/or other appropriate means,
in coordination with the proper Japanese Military authorities.
Sec. 24. The Office of the Secretary-Treasurer shall look after the adminis-
trative affairs of the Association, and in addition, shall take charge of its
funds, assets, properties, personnel, records and general financing.
Sec. 24-A. The Directors-at-large shall assist the Vice-President and Di-
rector-General in the discharge of his executive and administrative functions
in such manner and on such matters as the President or the Vice-President
and Director-General may determine.
Article X. —Auditor
Sec. 25. The Auditor-General and Director of the Budget shall ex-officio
be the Auditor of the Association. His duties shall be to examine and inspect
the books, records and papers relating to the accounts of the Association,
to make a careful check and audit of a’il funds and properties, and to sub-
mit to the President the necessary reports regarding any anomalies or irregu-
larities that may be noted in the examination, inspection and audit of such
accounts.
Article Xl. —Local Chapters
Sec. 26. In each province, city, and municipality, there shall be organized
local chapters of the Association with a view to carrying out within its Ju-
risdiction the aims and purposes of the Association. The provincial governor
and city or municipal mayor shall ex-officio be the head of their respective
local chapters. The municipal chapters may also organize branches in its
barrios and sitios and designate them as subsidiary groups. The particular
duties and functions of local chapters as well as the governing bodies thereof
shall be in accordance with such rules and regulations as may be promulgated
by the President of the Association after consultation with the Advisory
Board. At all times these local chapters shall be under the immediate
supervision and control of the central office and none of their acts shall be
valid if, in the opinion of the President, the same are contrary to any of
the aims or purposes of the Association or to any provision of this Order or of
subsequent amendments or specific rules promulgated by him.


Article Xll.— General Assembly of Members
Sec. 27. There shall be a general assembly of members of the Association
which shall be composed of two duly accredited representatives from each
and every provincial or city chapter. It shall whenever possible meet once
a year on the second Monday of January.
Sec. 28. The general assembly of members may adopt such recommenda-
tions as may be necessary for the purpose of promoting the aims and
purposes of the Association.
Article XIII. — Funds of the Association
Sec. 29. The funds of the Association shall consist of the contributions made
by the Philippine Executive Commission or by entities and persons interested
in the aims and purposes of the Association.
Sec. 30. The expenditure of the Association’s funds shall be made in
accordance with a budget prepared by the Vice-President and Director-
General and approved by the President and the Commander-in-Chief of the
Imperial Japanese Forces.
Article XlV.— General Provisions
Sec. 31. The Association shall use an emblem to symbolize the ideals for
which the Association stands. Such emblem shall be in the form of a diamond
with a white circle in the center of a red field. The emblem may be printed
in the official correspondence of the Association.
Sec. 32. No person shall hereafter be employed in any department, bureau,
office, agency or instrumentality of the Central Administrative Organization,
including the judicial courts, the local governments and the government-
owned or controlled corporations, unless he is member of the Association:
Provided, That nothing herein shall be construed as dispensing with the civil
service and such other requirements as may be prescribed by existing laws
or regulations for employment in the government service.
Article XV.— Penal Provisions
Sec. 33. From and after the promulgation of this Executive Order, it shall
be unlawful for any Filipino or group of Filipinos to establish, organize or form
any association, union or corporation which is similar in character or name
to the Association herein established, and any violation of this provision
shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand pesos or impris-
onment of not more than one year, or by both such fine and imprisonment,
in the discretion of the court.
Sec. 34, Any person who shall falsely represent or induce others to believe
himself as a member of, or an agent for, the Association, or who shall
solicit, collect or receive money, material or property of any kind thereby
pretending to be a member, agent or representative of the Association, or
who shall wear or display the name, emblem or device of the said Asso-
ciation, or any imitation thereof, for any fraudulent purpose, shall be punished
by a fine of not more than five hundred pesos or imprisonment for not more
than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion
of the court.


Article XVl. —Amendments
Sec. 35. This Executive Order may be amended by the Chairman of the
Executive Commission after consultation with the Advisory Board. Such
amendments shall take effect upon their approval by the Commander-in-Chief
of the Imperial Japanese Forces.
Article XVU—Effectivity
■ 3 jf ‘ ThiS ° rder Shall take effect upon its a PP r o v al by the Commander-
m-Chief of the Imperial Japanese Forces in the Philippines.
Done in the City of Manila, Philippines, this 4th day of December, 1942.
(Sgd.) Jorge B. Vargas
Chairman of the Executive Commission
by ‘ he Commander -ta-Chief of the Imperial Japanese Forces in
the Philippines on December 4, 1942.


CHAPTER VI
PRIMER OF OBJECTIVES
main purposes of the Association are enumerated in Article
A II of the KALIBAPI Charter. They are there stated in
general terms. We shall in this chapter restate some in simpler
and more specific form although it is planned to develop them more
fully and at greater length in another publication.
Service to the Nation
The KALIBAPI is an association for service to the New Philip-
pines.
The general and basic purpose of service to the nation immediately
differentiates the KALIBAPI from any and all other associations
here.
With other associations, the service envisaged may be to in-
dividuals and stops there; or to groups of individuals as from a
village, town, province or region and stops there. Service under
the KALIBAPI is service to the nation, which means to any or
all individuals, to any or all groups constituting that nation.
With other associations, the service rendered may be limited
to one field or a number of specific fields. It may be in the field
of production and distribution, or of education and research, or of
transportation and communication, or of government and adminis-
tration, or of construction and reconstruction, or of professional
as well as simple domestic service. Under the KALIBAPI, service
is contemplated in all fields of activity that make up a nation’s
existence.
With other associations, service may be incidental and something
else, while profit or mutual aid or collective distraction is the
main motivation. Individuals usually bind themselves into asso-
ciations to make money, help one another or devise effective means
of group amusement. Under the KALIBAPI, service designed to
contribute to the collective welfare which is the nation’s is the
fundamental motive. Every member of the KALIBAPI is in it
primarily for what he can give to the nation in service and not
for what benefit he can derive for himself or his own.


Of, by, and for Filipinos
The KALIBAPI is an association of, by, and for Filipinos. Uni-
versal in scope of activity it is Filipino in inspiration, membership,
leadership, and service.
The dissolution of all political groups in order to integrate
service to the nation was an idea antedating the present era. Rizal
and his comrades had it in founding the Liga Filipina before the
outbreak of the Philippine Revolution in 1896. At the First Phil-
ippi ne Congress for Independence called in 1930, a speaker pleaded
for fusion of all Filipino groups into one cohesive and determined
body of citizens dedicated to national service. The Supreme Na-
tional Council in 1934, formed of the leaders of rival political
groups, was a sincere effort at national unity for service.
The Greater East Asia War destroyed the validity of political
factionalism, and in the interest of nation survival, our leaders have
found cause to organize a national association to uphold the ban-
ner of unity and service.
The members of the KALIBAPI, as its Charter provides, are
Filipinos. And so are its leaders and the increasing army of
workers now out to reach every corner of the land and rally
all Filipinos to the KALIBAPI standard.
Leaders, workers, members are all moved by one definite pas-
sion—service to the New Philippines. Every action, every activity,
every actuation that makes for increased efficiency, better self-
direction, and greater happiness is a distinct contribution to the
creation of a New Philippines. The KALIBAPI stands for more
dynamic Filipinism.
Reconstruction and Rehabilitation
The passage of war in the Philippines has been brief but drastic
and all-encompassing in the destruction wrought. Losses, material
and spiritual, make reconstruction and rehabilitation imperative.
The Filipinos are called upon to build a new nation.
The KALIBAPI is the answer to that challenge and responsibility.
The creation of a New Philippines means an immediate stock-taking
of the national resources both material and human.
On the material side, we have a country of rich but still hardly
developed natural resources. The people of this country, galvanized
by the KALIBAPI for unified action, face the task of husbanding
these resources and transforming them into effective instruments
of cooperative living under a new order, the uses and blessings of


which must find a more equitable distribution among the people.
In the conservation and development of our natural resources due
care must be given to the needs of the present and future genera-
tions.
The task of reconstruction assumed by the KALIBAPI is, to be
sure, gigantic. It is nothing, however, to frighten and paralyze the
people to inaction. They are on the contrary determined, under
the KALIBAPI, to create a new social order that is just to all who
work, cooperate, and sacrifice.
The country’s resources, on the human side, are no less con-
siderable. Eighteen million Filipinos imbued with loyalty to a
tradition of freedom constitute a tremendous asset in nation-build-
ing, The brief passage of war has touched them and taught them
a new sense of values, better discipline, loftier social outlook exalt-
ing the primacy of community over individual interest. What they
need now is an integrated and dynamic leadership—such as the
KALIBAPI provides—that can harness their potentialities to good
advantage in the nation’s service.
In their rehabilitation into productive work and purposeful living
lie the. redemption of the country itself and the speedy creation of
a New Philippines.
Unification
The KALIBAPI seeks to secure the unification of the Filipino
people. There are two main factors for this unification both of
which stem from the tayo concept or the Filipino way of life.
The first is a common tradition revolving around the struggle for
national emancipation. The history of the Filipino people is an
eloquent record of the continuous struggle of the people for the
right to work out their own destiny in accordance with the inspira-
tion of their native genius. This tradition is a precious heritage to
all Filipinos. It has made for a common sharing of pain in the past.
It should serve no less today in the common effort of nation-build-
ing. No true Filipino in the hour of need has ever, of his own
will, been disloyal to this tradition.
The other factor is the spirit of neighborliness or interdependence,
which is increasingly marking the life of individuals as well as of
nations in the course of the social progress achieved through mod-
ern science and technology. The total war which now engulfs the
world and divides it into the two fighting camps accentuates the
urgency of this spirit of interdependence.


A nation that is fighting for its very life presupposes a popula-
tion in which every individual recognizes that his own survival is
tied up with the survival of his countrymen; that he depends on the
common effort to face the exigencies of the crisis and to surmount
them. It is the same with communities of nations bound by loyalty
to a common ideal. No nation is sufficient unto itself.
Foi the KALIBAPI, the task of unification is a crucial one. But
guided by the tradition of a common struggle for freedom and in-
dependence and inspired by the spirit of neighborliness or inter-
dependence essential to individual as well as national survival, it
should find the task certain of accomplishment.
For the Filipinos to fail to see the urgent need of uniting together
in these epochal times is to forfeit their right to determine and
shape their own destiny.
Fortunately, the Filipinos in the past have always risen to the
occasion. Today the conviction is no less compelling than ever
that they can rise to their opportunity under the KALIBAPI
standard.
Coordination
The KALIBAPI is to coordinate all activities and services of or-
ganizations and individuals concerned with the material and spirit-
ual advancement of the nation.
To cooidinate does not mean to perform or duplicate the activities
and services of these organizations or individuals. It is to make
them conscious of working in one definite direction. It is to make
them conscious of the work of others to determine where they can
complement and where supplement so that the attainment of the
collective goal, which is the advancement of the nation’s interest
and welfare, will be more expeditious and less wasteful of energy,
time, and resources.
Again, to coordinate is to help, especially when such help is
needed and sought, such organizations or individuals know the
efficient, economical, and practical way of carrying out their work
as part of the common task.
Under the KALIBAPI, therefore, all organizations and individuals
imbued with the spirit of service may find a convenient and ready
source of inspiration and guidance that should help them not only
to perform their own specific tasks and achieve their own specific
objectives but also to aid others carry on with their own'activities.


Thus they all move together and forward in the collective task of
nation-building.
Under the KALIBAPI, organizations and individuals are free to
seek common counsel on their problems and find cooperation in
their solution. The KALIBAPI commands the facilities to help
these organizations and individuals to cooperate and achieve the
common purpose of exalting the nation to which they all in com-
mon owe, loyalty, obedience, and service.
Through the KALIBAPI, the nation may thus know the ready
resources in these organizations and individuals who have the or-
ganized means of prosecuting projects designed to advance the new
order.
A Stable Foundation
The KALIBAPI is to insure a stable foundation for the New Phil-
ippines. The KALIBAPI embraces all the useful, productive ele-
ments in the nation. It has the adherence of Filipino citizens who
are working honestly, conscientiously, and loyally in the common
task of nation-building.
The success of the KALIBAPI in laying a strong foundation for
the New Philippines depends on the men, women, and children
who comprise its eager workers.
A stable foundation excludes the prospect of dishonest work, for
dishonest work undermines the honest work of others. A stable
foundation excludes the prospect of sloppy work, for the sloppy
work of an individual organization nullifies the conscientious work
of others. A stable foundation excludes the prospect of disloyal
work, for disloyal work vitiates all the good work performed by
the rest of the community.
Under the KALIBAPI, all workers must be honest, conscientious,
and loyal; and, therefore, their service can be depended upon to
stand the test of time and the elements.
Progress and Character
The KALIBAPI is for progress—cultural progress as well as
moral and economic.
Progress in culture presupposes a number of things. It means
a constant reference to the valuable heritage from the past. It
means a constant appraisal of this heritage in the light of present-
day needs. Out of the Filipino past has come a body of ideals,
customs, and traditions constituting the very substance of our sur-
viving institutions.


Cultural progress under the KALIBAPI means creating the
New Philippines with reference to the basic wealth of our cultural
heritage. It also means the study and assimilation of such ideals,
traditions, and techniques that have made for the strength and
greatness of our neighbors in Asia as well as in the world at large.
Under the KALIBAPI there shall be cultural direction which
will involve the use of our own cultural heritage and that of our
neighbors in accordance with the needs of a New Philippines. But
one thing the KALIBAPI underlines and that is that Philippine
culture must be basically Filipino.
The KALIBAPI is for moral progress. It seeks the develop-
ment and acceptance of an ethical philosophy for the Filipinos
as individuals and as a nation that will insure not only self-respect
but the respect of neighbor nations as well. It is a standard of con-
duct founded ort truth and honor, and should make every Filipino
name a by-word for honesty and dependability as well as kindli-
ness, neighborliness, and fairness. Moral progress to be lasting
must be rooted in virtue.
The KALIBAPI is for economic progress. The challenge to
every member is for creativeness and productivity, destroying any
tendency to parasitism. A prosperous nation presumes the exist-
ence of a productive people, A prosperous Philippines depends
on a creative citizenry. We must seek to achieve economic self-
sufficiency.
The KALIBAPI is for character. Its emphasis must necessarily
be on such virtues as hard work, faith, self-reliance, loyalty, bravery,
discipline, efficiency, self-direction, and self-sacrifice. All pro-
gress whether cultural, moral, or physical is based on the full
development of these qualities and tested virtues in every true
Filipino finding inspiration and direction in the KALIBAPI.
Physical Culture
The KALIBAPI is for a sturdy and vigorous race. The basis of
all efficiency and effectiveness is physical health. No citizen can
contribute fully in building the New Philippines unless he has the
vigor and hardihood requisite in honest, dependable, and sustained
effort. The New Philippines demands the cooperation of Fili-
pinos who have stamina along with enlightened social vision.
Under the KALIBAPI every possible opportunity shall be
created to enable the Filipinos to live in health. This means
the coordination of all existing agencies dedicated to physical


culture. This means also the intelligent organization and use of
natural facilities for healthy and joyful living in the great outdoors.
Under the KALIBAPI there shall be a greater impulse given to
the appreciation of nature and all its uses for physical development.
Physical culture, therefore, under the KALIBAPI is more than
organized display of physical prowess for the edification of the
individual or of the multitude. Rather it means the active and
joyful participation of people in every organized form of physical
recreation.
Under the KALIBAPI there shall be a new national conscious-
ness and appreciation of the intimate relation between a healthy
race and national efficiency. A comprehensive program of health
and physical education is a basic step in the eventual and complete
elimination of indolence and moral sluggishness found in shirkers
and slackers. It will mean the infusion of the spirit of joy and
sense of fulfillment in the work of citizens in creative cooperation.
Co-Prosperity Sphere
The Filipinos must understand the significance of the Greater
East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere and the part that their country
should play in that Sphere. The Filipinos are faced with an ac-
complished fact that allows for neither argument nor evasion.
Even if the present war did not break out, geographical propin-
quity and biological factors would dictate the Filipinos’ being a
part of a great Asiatic system. Isolation or seclusion would be
illogical and impracticable. The Filipinos live in the midst of
other Oriental races. This situation creates special relations. The
association of sovereign Asiatic states is imperative for the main-
tenance of peace and the establishment of collective security.
To the KALIBAPI remains the great responsibility of adhering
strictly to the policies of the Administration and bringing about
a true understanding of the Co-Prosperity Sphere to all Filipinos.
The idea of Co-Prosperity in East Asia carries no thought of
domination but envisages universal concord on the basis of free-
dom, security, and mutual respect, Japan has avowed that she
does not desire to prosper at the expense of the rest of the Asiatic
countries but seeks to find in the common prosperity of the whole
of Asia her happiness and well-being.
Co-Prosperity carries with it no element of exploitation or ex-
clusiveness; and Japan, while occupying the place of leadership,
does not intend to monopolize its advantages. Co-Prosperity does


not involve absorption or annexation, nor does it rest upon a re-
lationship between conqueror and conquered. It means a federa-
tion of independent states for a common ideal, a combination
calculated to promote individual development for the members of
the Sphere as well as the harmony of the whole. It is with a
chivalrous spirit that Japan is now leading her sister nations in
Asia to a higher plane of political, social, and moral responsibility.
This, in brief, is the meaning of the Greater East Asia Co-Pros-
perity Sphere and this is what every Filipino under the KALIBAPI
should seek to understand. The Imperial War Rescript enun-
ciated a high ideal and a noble purpose by stating Japan’s war
aims “to insure the stability of East Asia and to contribute to
world peace . . and “to cultivate friendship among nations and
to enjoy prosperity in common with all nations. .
The Rightful Place
The KALIBAPI seeks to secure for the New Philippines its right-
ful place in the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere.
The solemn declarations of Japanese leaders on the significance
of the Co-Prosperity Sphere have brought no little hope to all
Filipinos. Within the Asiatic system envisaged by Japan and in
full cooperation with sister nations for the common welfare and
prosperity of the whole group, the Filipinos understand that they
shall be free to shape their own national destiny and develop their
individuality as a nation; that their sovereign and territorial integ-
rity will be respected; and that the wealth and natural resources
of the Philippines will be left to the enjoyment of the Filipino
people and their posterity.
To earn its rightful place in the community of free Oriental
nations, the people of the Philippines take it as their opportunity
and privilege to determine their own future and at the same time
recognize their own obligations under the new order, in which the
enjoyment of common prosperity is premised on the performance
of definite duties contributing to the enhancement of the common
welfare.
So that the Filipinos may thus achieve the rightful place of their
country in the Co-Prosperity Sphere they need complete dedica-
tion to the ideal of service and to a concrete program of cultural,
moral, and economic reconstruction. There is no other way to
condition themselves in creating a New Philippines and hastening
the establishment of a new world order.


CHAPTER VII
ORGANIZATION, PROGRAM, AND PROJECTS
THE KALIBAPI is headed by a President who is at the same
Chairman of the Philippine Executive Commission. He fixes
and determines the policies of the Association with the advice and
.assistance of an Advisory Board composed of the Vice-President
and Director-General of the KALIBAPI, the Assistant Director-
General, members of the Philippine Executive Commission, the
heads of the bureaus or offices of the Association, and the Directors-
at-Large.
Executive Staff and Bureaus
Next in rank to the President is the Vice-President who is also
the Director-General. The Director-General heads an executive
staff which includes the Assistant Director-General and the heads
of the different bureaus or offices of the Association, and the Di-
rector s-at-Large. He executes all the measures adopted and deci-
sions rendered by the President and has executive supervision and
control over all the bureaus and offices of the Association. Next
to the Director-General is the Assistant Director-General who
takes charge of the administrative supervision of the bureaus and
offices of the Association. The present Assistant Director-General
as also head of the Bureau of Publicity.
There are at present four bureaus and two offices in the Associa-
tion; namely, the Bureau of General Affairs, the Bureau of Re-
search and Planning, the Bureau of Provincial and Municipal
Branches, the Bureau of Publicity, and the Office oßhe Secretary-
Treasurer and the Office of the Auditor General.
The Bureau of General Affairs attends to all matters relating to
moral, physical, cultural, and economic rehabilitation, education,
employment, and liaison services. For convenience, its activities
are divided under the following heads; (a) Economic, (b) Cul-
tural, and (c) Public Relations.
The Bureau of Research and Planning conducts researches,
studies, and investigations on existing conditions in the Philip-
pines to provide factual basis for working out plans for the sys-
tematic prosecution of the objectives of the Association.


The Bureau of Provincial and Municipal Branches is in charge
of the organization and coordination of the activities of the KALI-
BAPI in the provinces, cities, and municipalities. It maintains
steady contact with the governors and mayors with respect to the
organization and functioning of local chapters. The Bureau distrib-
utes forms for membership, receives applications directly or
through local chapters, issues membership certificates, helps solve
difficulties of local chapters.
The Bureau of Publicity takes charge of the program of public
enlightenment. It disseminates information on the objectives and
activities of the Association through all available facilities such as
the press, public platform, cinema, and radio. It prepares litera-
ture on the KALIBAPI in the form of handbills, posters, and pam-
phlets for general distribution among KALIBAPI workers and
members.
The Office of the Secretary-Treasurer takes charge of the funds
of the KALIBAPI, its assets, properties, personnel, records, and
general financing, and other affairs concerning administration. It
keeps a register of local chapters and of all members of the
Association.
There are now four Directors-at-Large who assist the Vice-
President and Director-General in the discharge of his executive
and administrative functions in such manner and on such matters
as the President or the Vice-President and Director-General may
determine. Three of the Directors-at-Large have been assigned
respectively to the three principal regions of the Philippines, Luzon,
Visayas, and Mindanao, and the fourth helps and cooperates as
the President or the Director-General may decide.
Program
The program of the KALIBAPI is as varied as it is challenging.
It calls on everyone to work for the rapid reconstruction of the
Philippines and the rehabilitation of its people. This is to insure
the laying of a stable foundation for the New Philippines, cul-
turally, morally, and economically. This is also to help the Fili-
pino understand and consequently embrace the principles of the
Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere and thus make the New
Philippines a worthy member thereof. Towards this end, different
bureaus and offices of the KALIBAPI have planned a coordinated
program of work.
Pacification and unification being the immediate problems facing
the country, the KALIBAPI in conjuction with established agencies


within the Government and without brings to bear all its resources
in contribution to the successful resolution of these problems. For
this purpose, it cooperates in a systematic campaign of enlighten-
ment throughout the country with particular emphasis in areas
where misguided elements are known to be in hiding, withholding
their support from the common enterprise of creating a New
Philippines. The point of view in this campaign for pacification
is one of enlightenment rather than of suppression. At the same
time, whenever facilities permit, rehabilitation projects are carried
out to challenge the people to an active and positive participation
in activities designed to encourage self-direction and self-help. The
KALIBAPI pursues a program of rehabilitation.
On the cultural side, the KALIBAPI expects to organize cultural,
linguistic, and scientific conferences. It helps popularize the na-
tional language. It hopes to aid in providing a more systematic
way of preserving the national treasures for the edification of the
present and future generations. It contemplates the organization
of literary and art festivals and the sponsorship of activities for
developing literature and the other fields of art. It plans to co-
ordinate national activities for physical culture and, to this end,
give a boost to the systematic development of parks, playgrounds,
and natatoriums. It hopes to bring the welfare agencies together
into greater cooperation and coordination. It hopes to help mobi-
lize the youth for appropriate preparation for national service,
providing them suitable projects within which to have ample op-
portunities to develop self-reliance, self-direction, and initiative. It
expects to challenge the women of the nation into actively parti-
cipating and cooperating in organized projects towards nation-
building.
The KALIBAPI has outlined a broad program of studies and
investigations on various phases of Filipino life and culture with
special emphasis on the effects of war and the consequent problems
now facing the country as well as the opportunities that now exist
in creating a New Philippines, in keeping with the spirit of the
times and the requirements of responsible membership within the
Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere.
The KALIBAPI follows up the progress of its-program of pacifi-
cation, unification, reconstruction, and rehabilitation with respect
to the activities of the chapters in provinces, cities, and towns
throughout the Philippines.


The KALIBAPI prosecutes a coordinated program of enlighten-
ment through all known possible agencies for the dissemination
of information. It follows a system of educating the population
to the ideals of the KALIBAPI as well as the activities undertaken
to facilitate the country’s rebuilding in accordance with the de-
mands of the new order. For this purpose, it uses a corps of
writers, speakers, and artists.
Other Specific Projects
1. Labor Institute —This is for the moral and spiritual rejuvena-
tion of workers, men and women, in accordance with the ideals
of the New Philippines. It covers a series of courses of instruc-
tion lasting one month at a time. Laborers from different factories
and firms in Manila are duly selected to take turns at attending
this Institute. The course given includes Nippongo, the Philippine
language, Filipino and Oriental culture, and such other subjects
of practical interest to workers in becoming more loyal, efficient,
and industrious in contributing their share to nation-building. The
first institute was inaugurated on May 3rd with an enrollment of
217 students who were duly graduated after a period of 30 days
with appropriate instructions to carry on with what they have
learned in their respective places of work.
2. The Leaders' Institute. —This Institute is aimed at preparing
people for work and leadership in the KALIBAPI movement. It
is to rejuvenate them spiritually, morally, and physically; develop
the spirit of wholehearted cooperation with the present Adminis-
tration and its program of building the New Philippines which will
be independent in the course of the current year; train them in
the efficient and economical administration of the public service,
instill in them a high sense of honesty; develop the habit of simple
and frugal living and endurance for hard work; and strengthen
in them such virtues as hard work, faith, self-reliance, loyalty,
bravery, discipline, and self-sacrifice. Included in the courses to
be offered are; Physical Education —Radio Taiso, Vocational Edu-
cation, Japanese Culture, Filipino Culture, Nippongo, National
Language, Public Administration, and the KALIBAPI: Its Philo-
sophy, Work, and Service.
The Institute is for a period of three months and the appor-
tionment of delegates is based on the membership of the KALI-
BAPI in the different provinces and cities—each province or char-
tered city to be allotted not less than two delegates. Provinces


and cities with large membership in relation to population will be
given additional delegates.
3. The Junior KALIBAPI. —The organization of the Junior KA-
LIBAPI was authorized under Executive Order No. 156 amend-
atory to Executive Order No. 109, the original KALIBAPI charter.
The central organization of the KALIBAPI launched the Junior
KALIBAPI formally on June 19, 1943, coinciding with the 82nd
birthday anniversary of Rizal,
The Junior KALIBAPI enlists as members such Filipino boys
and girls below 18 years of age or over who are bright and indus-
trious and who show promise of usefulness and service to the
Philippines.
It is contemplated that Junior KALIBAPI members be trained
(1) to love and serve their country; (2) to venerate the spirit of
their ancestors especially the heroes and martyrs who have labored
and sacrificed for freedom and independence; (3) to build their
character, strengthening in them such virtues as hard work, faith,
self-reliance, loyalty, bravery, discipline, and self-sacrifice; (4) to
know Rizal, his life, his ideas, and ideals; (5) to undertake work
projects calculated to make the youth now and in their later life
efficient, self-directing, and happy citizens of an independent Phil-
ippines worthy as a member of the community of nations of Greater
East Asia and of the world.
Toward these ends material is being prepared by the central
organization of the KALIBAPI; this instructional material together
with suggested projects and activities are designed to synchronize
with the program of the Department of Education, Health, and
Public Welfare, especially the courses on Home and Community
Membership Activities, Health and Physical Education, and
Character Education.
4. The Women’s Auxiliary Service. —This is a proposed organi-
zation under the KALIBAPI composed—as its name indicates—
of the women of the country. This body is to help the KALIBAPI
bring home to all the Filipinos its idealism, so that the Association’s
ideas and ideals would become an intimate part of the Filipino
family life. It is aimed, in part, at getting memberships, broaden-
ing the function of the KALIBAPI in so far as it affects the women
and the girls. The necessity for this auxiliary service becomes
the more apparent in view of the fact that the KALIBAPI is going
to take in young people below the age of eighteen; that the Au-
xiliary Service will perform the important function of taking over


certain activities of the KALIBAPI and introduce them into the
very life of the Filipino home. Furthermore, the Women’s Auxil-
iary Service would act as an agency for coordinating women’s
organizations and activities.
With the growth and progress of the KALIBAPI movement there
will naturally arise a number of projects of a practical nature cal-
culated to help agriculture —such as vegetable and fruit raising,
poultry, goat, and pig raising—to help popularize fishing, pottery,
weaving, and other industries. The KALIBAPI is committed to
the cultural, moral, spiritual, and economic advancement of the
Filipino people.
The KALIBAPI hereby sounds the call of country soon to be
independent and free.
No one should be a slacker. Every good Filipino should be a
volunteer. He should volunteer to work and serve. By work and
service the independence of the Philippines shall become real,
effective, enduring.




APPENDICES




KALIBAPI DIRECTORY
Jorge B. Vargas, President. —Bom in Bago, Negros Occidental, August 24,
1890. Attended University of the Philippines. Was private secretary to
President of the Philippine Senate; assistant director of commerce; director of
lands; under-secretary of agriculture and commerce, then acting secretary
of same department; member of board of directors of various private and
semi-government corporations; secretary to former President of the Philip-
pine Commonwealth and member of the Cabinet. Now Chairman of the
Philippine Executive Commission and head, Committee on Executive Depart-
ment, member, Preparatory Commission for Philippine Independence.
Benigno S. Aquino, Vice-President and Director-General. —Born in Con-
cepcion, Tarlac, September 3, 1894. Attended San Juan de Letran and Uni-
versity of Santo Tomas. Elected representative and senator from Tarlac.
Was floor leader and later general campaign manager of the Nacionalista
Party; secretary of agriculture and commerce. Was appointed commissioner
of the interior from which position he was transferred to the KALIBAPI.
Member, Council of State and second Vice-President of the Preparatory Com-
mission for Philippine Independence.
Camilo Osias, Assistant Director-General and Director of Publicity. —Born
in Balaoan, La Union, March 23, 1889. Attended Western Illinois Normal
School, University of Chicago, and Columbia University. Senator for La
Union, Pangasinan, Zambales; resident commissioner at Washington; member,
Constitutional Convention; assemblyman for the first district of La Union;
president, National University; Chairman of the National Council of Educa-
cation. Assistant commissioner of education, health, and public welfare until
his appointment to the KALIBAPI. Member, Council of State, and member,
Preparatory Commission for Philippine Independence.
DIRECTORS
Pio Duran, Director of General Affairs. — Lawyer, educator, business exec-
utive; born on April 14, 1900, Guinobatan, Albay. Education: Manila High
School; U. P. 1919, A. 8.; 1923 bachelor of laws; 1926 master of laws. For-
merly associate professor of law, U. P.; president, Philippine Nippon Mining
Co., Inc.; president, Philippine Club; member, Council of State.
Dominador M. Tan, Director of Research and Planning. —Born in Ormoc,
Leyte, on March 21, 1905. Graduated from the Philippine Law School,
National University in 1926. Elected representative, second district of Leyte,
1934; re-elected, 1938, 1941. Appointed chief, division of games and amuse-
ments, Department of the Interior on August 16, 1942. Appointed director
of Research and Planning, KALIBAPI, on December 10, 1942.


Jose P. Laurel, Jr., Director of Provincial and Municipal Branches. —Born
on August 27, 1912, in Tanawan, Batangas. Bachelor of laws in 1936, U. P.;
master of laws in 1937 and D.C.L., 1939, with highest honors, U. S. T. Member
of the Philippine Bar; formerly legal consultant, Japanese Consulate, Manila,
and professor of political law in the Philippine Law School, and Institute
of Law, F. E. U. Elected representative of the third district of Batangas in
1941.
Arsenio N. Buz, Secretary-Treasurer. —Born in Lipa, Batangas, on Decem-
ber 12, 1888. A.B. degree from the Liceo de Manila. Editor and general
manager, Philippines Herald, 1920-1922; director-general, Philippine Carnival;
first Filipino president of Manila Rotary Club; and one-time president of
the Philippine Chamber of Commerce; general agent, National Life In-
surance Co.; Secretary, Philippine Red Cross. Editor of El Ideal, official
organ of the Nacionalista Party; professor of English and head of the
Spanish department, U. P.
DIRECTORS-AT-LARGE
Alfonso E. Mendoza.— Born June 2, 1887, Sta. Cruz, Manila. Studied in
Liceo de Manila and obtained his A.B. degree in 1904. Studied law at the
Escuela de Derecho and obtained his licentiate in juridical science in 1907.
Four times elected representative for Manila; one of the founders of the
National Democrata Party, Democrata Party, and Radical Party. Before
the dissolution of political parties in the Philippines, was president of the
National Democrata Party and of the Radical Party.
Oscar Ledesma,— Lawyer and agriculturist, born in Silay, Negros Occidental,
on April 2, 1902. A.B. and LL.B. Was city councilor, Iloilo City; mayor.
City of Iloilo; assemblyman for the second district of Iloilo in 1941; appointed
mayor, City of Iloilo, August 12, 1942. Was president of the Confederation
of the Sugar Planters’ Association of the Philippines from 1937 to 1940.
Juan S. Aland.— Born in Malolos, Bulacan, February 8, 1891. Attended
the Ateneo de Manila and the U. S. T. from which latter institution he ob-
tained A.B. degree in 1910. Was assistant attorney in the Department of
Mindanao and Sulu; member of the National Assembly, 1935-1941.
Benigno R. Ramos.— Born in Bulacan, Bulacan, February 10, 1894. At-
tended Malolos High School, Buencamino Law School, Sagrado Corazon
Spanish school, and Regeneration under Jocson. Was publicly declared poet
laureate in Tagalog in 1932; founder of weekly newspaper Sakdal, and Sak-
dalista Party which was later changed to Ganap Party.
Felino Neri, Private Secretary to the President. —LL.B. from the U. P.
College of Law, 1934. Formerly Tribune reporter; clerk, Office of the Pres-
ident; attorney, Domestic Sugar Administration; senior assistant, Office of
the Chairman.
Jose C. Londres, Private Secretary to the Director-General— Born in Fabia,
Iloilo, February 24, 1896. Attended Philippine Normal School and Escuela
de Derecho. Teacher pensionado, Bureau of Education; member, Municipal
Council, Oton, Iloilo; secretary to the speaker of the House of Representatives.
TECHNICAL ASSSISTANTS
MAURO Baradi, Assistant, Office of the Assistant Director-General— Born
in Bani, Pangasinan, August 22, 1899; graduated with the degree of LL.B.,


Philippine Law School, Manila; M.P.L., LL.M., and S.J.D., National Uni-
versity, Washington, D. C., U. S. A.; A.B. and M.A., School of Economies
and Government, National University, Washington, D. C., U. S, A.; publicity
officer, Office of the Resident Commissioner from the Philippines to Wash-
ington, D. C., 1939; private secretary to the Chairman of the National Council
of Education, July, 1941; chief clerk and later assistant administrative officer
in the Department of Education, Health, and Public Welfare, April 1, 1943,
Deogracias Dayao, Legal and Administrative Assistant, Secretary-Treasurer’s
Office. —Born on March 22, 1899, Sta. Isabel, Malolos, Bulacan. A.B. and
LL.B. from U. P. Was law clerk and land attorney of the Bureau of Lands.
Was land attorney, assistant chief of administrative division, and adminis-
trative officer, Department of Agriculture and Commerce.
Eduardo Quintero, Technical Assistant, Bureau of General Affairs. —Born on
May 29, 1900, Tacloban, Leyte. Graduated from the Philippine Law School,
National University. Was chief of section, Bureau of Lands; acting chief
clerk, Office of the Secretary of the Department of Agriculture and Com-
merce. Division chief in the Office of the President; senior assistant, Office
of the Chairman, 1942.
Teodoeo P. De Vera, Technical Assistant, Bureau of Provincial and Munic-
ipal Branches. —Born in Sorsogon, Sorsogon, July 1, 1905. LL.B. from U. S. T.,
1937. Formerly Governor of Sorsogon and assemblyman-elect.
Victorino N. Salazar, Technical Assistant, Bureau of Research and Plan-
ning—Born in Sugon, Leyte, December 1, 1897. A.B. from Ateneo de Manila,
1918, and LL.B. from U. S. T., 1922. Practising attorney until 1941 when he
was appointed district attorney of the ninth judicial district comprising Min-
danao and Sulu. Member, National Constitutional Convention from the third
district of Leyte, 1934.
Donato S. Conti, Technical Assistant, Bureau of Publicity. — Born in Ma-
lolos, Bulacan, on February 27, 1895. Graduated with honors from the College
of Law, National University. Member of the editorial staff of National
Weekly. Was assistant chief clerk and special attorney of the Bureau of
Lands; special attorney, Bureau of Justice; acting chief attorney, Department
of Agriculture and Commerce.
DIVISION CHIEFS
Vicente Lontok, Chief, Division of Economics, Bureau of General Affairs. —
Born in San Fernando, Pampanga, October 16, 1898. LL.B. and LL.M. from
the University of the Philippines. Was secretary to the U. P. President,
1923-1924; U. P. Secretary-Treasurer; U. P. Business Director; Faculty mem-
ber, professor of law, U. P.; secretary of the National Economic Council;
general-manager of the Publishers Printing Corporation of Don Ramon Roces.
Dionisio Rellosa, Chief, Statistics Division, Bureau of Research and Plan-
ning—Born on May 7, 1895, Siniloan, Laguna. Finished Business Admin-
istrative Course in La Salle Extension University of Chicago, U. S. A. Was
senior assistant in the Division of Public Works and Communications of the
former Office of the President of the Philippines; assistant secretary and
administrative officer, former Civilian Emergency Administration; secretary,
traffic commission.


Arturo M. Tolentino, Chief, Division of Luzon, Bureau of Provincial and
Municipal Branches. —Born September 19, 1910 in Manila. Studied in the
U. P. where he obtained his LL.B., and in the U. S, T. where he received
his D.C.L. degree in 1938; was assistant editor of La Opinion, counsel for the
DMHM newspapers and Pasay Transportation Co.; and professor in the
Philippine Law School.
Luis Moreno Salcedo, Chief, Division of Visayas and Mindanao, Bureau
of Provincial and Municipal Branches—Born in Sara, Iloilo, on February 5,
1918. Graduated with LL.B. degree (magna cum laude), U. S. T. in 1940.
Was third lieutenant, P, A., professor in the La Salle College and Ateneo
de Manila.
Federico Mangahas, Chief, Writers ’ Service. — Born in Hagonoy, Bulacan, on
September 6, 1904. Obtained his Ph.B. degree from the U. P. Feature
writer and columnist in The Tribune, taught English and Journalism in the
U. P., F. E. U., and U. M.; moderator of KZRH, Town Meeting; editor of
Philippines Herald Magazine; editor of The City Gazette, The National Review,
and The Leader.
Victorxo Edades, Chief, Illustrators’ Service. — Born in Dagupan, Pangasi-
nan, on December 23, 1895. Attended the University of Washington, U. S. A.
where he obtained his Bachelor of Arts and Master of Arts degrees. Received
his diploma in Architecture from Fontainebleau, France. Was director of
School of Architecture and Fine Arts, U. S. T. and instructor in Mapua
Institute of Technology; executive officer of the Philippine College of Design.
Jose M. Hernandez, Chief Researcher, Bureau of Research and Planning. —
Born on June 19, 1904, in Manila. M.A. degree (cum laude), University of
Notre Dame and Ph.D. degree (summa cum laude), from U. S. T. Was head,
department of English, U, S. T.; head, department of languages and social
arts, P, M. A.; English professor, Letran, San Beda, and Sta. Teresa College;
researcher, Department of Education, Health, and Public Welfare.


KALIBAPI DECALOGUE
1. The KALIBAPI is an association for service to the New Philip-
pines. It is ray duty to help it,
2. The KALIBAPI is an organization of, by, and for Filipinos. I
believe in its high and noble ideals, aims, and purposes. lam a member
of the KALIBAPI and proud of it.
3. The KALIBAPI is formed to bring about the rapid reconstruction
of the Philippines and the rehabilitation of the people. I will cooperate.
4. The KALIBAPI is to secure the unification of the Filipino people
of all classes, I must have the spirit of unity for in union there is
strength.
5. The KALIBAPI is to coordinate all activities and services of or-
ganizations or individuals concerned with promoting the welfare of
the people physically, economically, socially, culturally, spiritually, and
otherwise. I shall do my full part.
6. The KALIBAPI is to insure a stable basis for the New Philippines.
I must aid to make the foundation of an independent Philippines strong
and enduring.
7. The KALIBAPI fosters the cultural, moral, spiritual, and economic
advancement of the Filipino people by strengthening such virtues
as hard work, faith, self-reliance, loyalty, discipline, and self-sacrifice.
I shall strive to be a good Oriental and a true Filipino.
8. The KALIBAPI stands for the development of a more sturdy and
vigorous race of Filipinos. I must be healthy and strong.
9. The KALIBAPI aids the Filipinos to understand the significance
of the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere and the role that the
Philippines should play in the community of cooperating nations in the
Orient. I must know the principles of neighborliness and cooperation
and render service to make the Philippines a worthy member of the
Sphere.
10. The KALIBAPI is to do any and all acts that will advance the
ideals and causes of independence and interdependence. I must be
efficient and self-directing in sacrificial service to ideals and causes
which are more precious than property and life.










