

THE BIBLE:
ITS EVIDENCES, CHARACTERISTICS, AND
EFFECTS.
teulGiOU'j PAMS
>\OK C|
THE
EIGHT KEY, CHARLES PERRY, D.D.
BISHOP OP MELBOURNE.
MELBOURNE:
STILLWELL AND KNIGHT, 78 COLLINS STREET EAST.
1872.
PRICE SIXPENCE.




THE BIBLE:
ITS EVIDENCES,
Reprinted from “
A lecture was delivered last evening,
at the Independent Church, Collins street, in
aid of the funds of the Victorian auxiliary of
the British and Foreign Bible Society, by the
Right Rev. the Bishop of Melbourne, the
subject being “The Bible: its evidences,
characteristics, and effects.” In consequence
of the unfavourable state of the weather, the
attendance was only moderate. Owing to the
indisposition of his Honour Sir W. F. Stawell
and Judge Pohlman, the vice-presidents of
the Victorian branch of the society, the chair
was occupied by the Hon. G. Harker,
The Bishop said,— To deliver a lecture
on the Bible would be at any time a
task of great responsibility, but it is
especially so at the present day, when so
many are endeavouring in various ways to
undermine the authority of the sacred volume.
For this very reason, however, a servant of
Christ, when required to undertake it, may
the more confidently depend upon the help of
his Divine Master for its successful accom-
plishment. In dependence upon that help I
have prepared the essay which I am now going
to read ; and I trust that, notwithstanding its
defects, it will prove, by God’s blessing, con-
ducive to your firmer belief in, and higher
appreciation of, this most wonderful book.
As the subject admits of being treated in many
different ways, I would in the first instance
caution you against expecting what I do not
purpose to attempt, and so misapprehending
the nature and purport of my argument. It
is no part of my plan to explain or defend the
peculiar doctrines of Christianity. The fact of
those doctrines being derived from it is doubt-
less the cause of that repugnance to the Bible
which makes the rationalist use all manner of
sophistical artifices for persuading himself
and others that it is unworthy of belief; but
I shall not now try to dispel his prejudicies by
convincing him of their unreasonableness.
CHARACTERISTICS,
The Argus
!, AND EFFECTS.
” of August 20, 1872.
Neither shall I adduce any of the usual argu-
ments for proving the “ divine and miraculous
origin” of the Bible. Again, I shall not
discuss the question whether this or that
particular book ought to be included in the
Bible; for, if every book and portion of a
book, concerning whose genuineness there is
any, the least ground of doubt, were omitted,
the observations which I am going to make
would not need to be in the slightest degree
modified. Neither shall I concern myself
about the various readings—to the number, it
is asserted, of 150,000—which are found
in the existing manuscripts of the Bible.
The fact of their occurrence can be
easily explained; and they are of such
a kind as not to affect at all materially
the character of the volume or any of
the books which compose it. One other pre-
liminary remark I wish to make. While
desirous, as far as possible, to avoid giving
offence or causing pain to any of my hearers,
I must ask you to remember that, speaking
as a bishop of the Church of England, I must
state as they appear to me the facts to which
I refer, and therefore some of my statements
may probably be contrary to the conscientious
convictions of individuals among you. As,
however, I do not profess to be infallible, I
am quite willing to concede to every one what
I claim for myself—the free exercise of that
reason with which God has endowed us, and
for the right use of which we are severally
responsible to Him alone. Having told you
what you must not expect from me, I will
briefly state what I now propose to myself.
My purpose at present is to consider the Bible
simply as a volume of ancient writings—such
as those of Homer, or Herodotus, Plato,
Demosthenes, or any other classical author.
Regarding it in this character, I shall
first adduce some evidences of its authen-
ticity— i.e., reasons for believing that all


the books of which it consists are
really what they profess to be, and
worthy of credit. I shall next enumerate
some of its peculiar characteristics; and,
lastly, I shall remind you of the effects which
it has produced in the world. First, then,
regarding the Bible simply as a volume of
ancient writings, and therefore omitting all
consideration of that witness which the
believer “hath in himself” (1 John, v. 10),
I will adduce some evidences, which, although
far from including all that might be alleged,
appear to me conclusively to establish its
authenticity. The volume which we call the
Bible consists, as you know, of two parts, the
Old and New Testaments, each of which may
properly be regarded as a distinct volume,
and requires to have its evidences considered
separately. I will begin then with those
of the New Testament. This contains the
Scriptures, which belong exclusively to the
Christian Church, and are accounted sacred
only by that church. Among the evidences
of their authenticity are, first, the nume-
rous ancient manuscripts which have
been found in various countries very dis-
tant from, and having little or no inter-
course with, one another; some of them
as old as the fourth century of the Christian
era, and all substantially agreeing with one
another. Secondly, besides manuscripts,
there exist many ancient versions of these
Scriptures, such as the Ethiopic, the Arme-
nian, the Arabic, two Egyptian, quite distinct
from each other ; the Latin of Jerome, known
as the vulgate of the fourth century ; together
with one much older, of which Jerome’s was a
revision, and the Gothic. No such evidence
from manuscripts and versions can be adduced
for the authenticity of any other writings of
the same or nearly the same antiquity with
the New Testament. Thirdly, in addition
to that of manuscripts and ancient versions
is the evidence of quotations and allusions
made by a series of Christian authors, com-
mencing from the age of the Apostles, and
continuing onwards without any break
through all successive generations. Among
them may be enumerated Barnabas, Clement
of Rome, and Hermas, whose names occur
in the Acts of the Apostles or in St.
Paul’s Epistles; Ignatius, Polycarp, and
Papias. who were certainly contemporary with
St. John, and probably with others of the
Apostles; Justin Martyr, Hegesippus, and
Ireneus, who followed a few years afterwards ;
then, in the next generation, Clement of I
Alexandria, and Tertullian, and afterwards
Origin of Alexandria. Subsequently to him
is a host of writers, too many for me to name,
in whose works not only do quotations and
allusions occur, but the historical bonks—the i
four Gospels and the Acts—are distinctly
Ireneus in France, the second Clement and
Origin in Egypt, and Tertullian at Carthage.
No such testimony as this can be adduced for
the authenticity of any other ancient book.
Fourthly, and this is especially important, we
have not only the private opinions of indi-
viduals, indicated by quotations and allusions
in their writings, but also the judgment
of the whole early church—that church
which, despite of the most terrible per-
secutions, extended itself throughout all
parts of the world, and at length em-
braced the whole Roman empire. This
judgment is shown by the manner in which
these Scriptures are always spoken of “ as
books sui generis, possessing an authority
which belonged to none others, and conclu-
sive in all questions and controversies among
Christians.” “ They were in very early times
collected into a distinct volume. They were
distinguished by appropriate names and titles
of respect. They were publicly read and
expounded in the religious assemblies. Com-
mentaries were written on them, harmonies
formed out of them, different copies carefully
collated, and versions (as I have already
noticed) made into different languages.”
And, besides all this, when those heresies, of
the springing up of which we have indica-
tions in several of the Epistles, began to
disturb the peace of the church, not any of
their leaders ventured, so far as appears,
to dispute the authority of the Christian
Scriptures. On the contrary, they “ were
usually appealed to by both sides in their
controversies.” Even the early adversa-
ries of Christianity, by attacking the
Gospels as books containing the ac-
counts on which Christianity was founded,
have helped to confirm their authen-
ticity. These propositions, as remarked by
Paley (from whose admirable work on the
evidences of Christianity I have borrowed
the substance of this part of my argument),
cannot be affirmed of any other books besides
those which at present constitute the volume
of the New Testament. It may indeed be
alleged, and truly, that some books now in-
cluded in that volume—viz , the Epistle to the
Hebrews, the Epistle of James, the 2nd
Epistle of Peter, the 2nd and 3rd of John,
that of Jude, and the Book of Revelation—
were not universally received by the church
as canonical until some time after the rest.
But this fact, instead of invalidating, really
confirms the argument for the authenticity of
the whole; for it shows that great care was
taken by the early church in the formation of
what is called “ the Canon of Scripture,” i.e.,
the volume of writings which contain the
acknowledged rule of Christian faith and
practice. Such is the evidence which I would
now submit to you for the authenticity—
mentioned. The value of this testimony not, I repeat, the inspiration, but simply
also is greatly enhanced by the fact that the authenticity—of the volume of the
the several witnesses lived in different coun-
tries, very remote from one another. The
first Clement at Rome, Ignatius at Antioch,
Polycarp at Smyrna, Justin Martyr in Syria,
New Testament ; and I do not hesi-
tate to say, that if it be pronounced
insufficient, none of the ancient classics can
be proved genuine. 2. I proceed to adduce


evidences of the authenticity of the Old have likewise the independent evidence
Testament, containing the writings which, of a Septuagint version, which carries us
though regarded as sacred by Christians as
well as Jews, may properly be termed the
Jewish Scriptures. Considered in reference
to the periods of time to which they re-
spectively relate, they may be arranged in the
following divisions, viz., the Pentateuch;
Joshua and Judges ; the books of Samuel,
Kings, and Chronicles, with those of the
prophets who wrote before the taking of
Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar ; the Book of
Daniel; and the books of Ezra and Nehemiab,
with those of Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi,
who wrote after the return of the Jews from
Babylon. The Psalms were probably written
at different times throughout all these suc-
cessive periods ; but although the approximate
dates of some have been determined with toler-
able certainty, those of the greater number can
be only doubtfully conjectured. I have therefore
left them out of this arrangement. I have
also omitted from it Job, the Proverbs,
Ecclesiastes, Solomon’s Song, and the Book
of Esther; because I shall not notice them
in the argument which 1 propose to ground
upon it for the authenticity of the Scriptures
included in its several divisions. This
argument, which appears to me conclusive, 1
will now briefly state, (a) That the Old Testa-
ment Scriptures, as we now have them in
their original language, or rather languages
{for a small portion of them is in Chaldee),
are substantially the same with those in
possession of the Jews at the commencement
of the Christian era, is proved incontestably
by the ancient MSS., which have been
preserved by that people themselves in
different parts of the world, and likewise by
the Greek version, known as the Septuagint,
which was made of the whole volume not
less than 150 b.o. Starting, therefore, with
this admitted fact, I would lead you backward
through the several divisions under which I
have classified them, beginning with the
books relating to the period which followed
the return of the Jews from Babylon. Of
this period, extending from about 535 to
about 400 8.c., it is to be observed that the
whole comes within the recognised historic
age, and the authenticity of the Jewish
writings must be determined by the same evi-
dence as Greek, or any others professedly written
within it. What evidence, then, have we for
the authenticity of the histories of Ezra and
Nehemiab, and the prophetical writings of
Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi? We have
this, that they were accepted in the time of
Our Lord by the whole nation of the Jews—
not only by the inhabitants of Judea
and Galilee, but also by those Jews who
were dispersed abroad in every land,
“ Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites,
and dwellers in Mesopotamia and in Cappa-
docia, in Pontus and Asia, Phrygia and
Pamphylia, in Egypt,” and in all other
countries. Such universal acceptance of them
at that time might alone be esteemed con-
clusive proof of their authenticity, but we
back more than 150 years further. No
reasonable doubt, therefore, can exist as
to the genuineness and trustworthiness of
that portion of the Old Testament, which
belongs to the period after the return of the
Jews from Babylon, (b) Assuming this, I
would next point out the testimony which
these bear to the authenticity of those pre-
ceding them. The allusions which they con-
tain to what ‘‘is written in the law of Moses,”
to the praising of the Lord “after the
ordinance of David, King of Israel,” to the
re-peopling of Samaria by Esarhaddon, King
of Assyria, to the widely extended dominion
of Solomon, and to all the long series of God’s
judgments and mercies, as recorded in the
Pentateuch and the book of Judges ; clearly
show, as does yet more certainly the reading
of the book of the law in the presence of all
the people by Ezra, that the more ancient
Scriptures belonging to all the antecedent
periods of their history were then in the pos-
session of the priests and rulers, and were
regarded by the Jews of that age with the
same implicit belief and reverence as by the
Jews of the present day. Moreover, it is
to be remembered that, while a large
number of the Jews remained in the lands
to which Nebuchadnezzar had removed
them, some of the ten tribes who
had been carried away by Esarhaddon, or
had previously joined the two tribes of Judah
and Benjamin, returned with their brethren
and settled in the land of Judea. The testi-
mony, therefore, of Ezra and Nehemiab to
the earlier books of the Old Testament, shows
them to have been the sacred Scriptures, not
of the Jews only, but of the whole nation of
the Israelites at the expiration of the captivity
in Babylon. This is an important link in the
chain of evidence for their authenticity.
But that which I now wish you particularly
to observe is, that since the captivity lasted
only 70 years, and we are expressly told of old
men who lived through it, and remembered
the glory of Solomon’s Temple which Nebu-
chadnezzar destroyed, this acceptance by all
the Jews of the books of Daniel and Ezekiel,
who wrote during the captivity, and of the
book of Jeremiah, who for the latter years of
his life was contemporary with them, is
conclusive evidence of the authenticity of
those writings. In respect to them, at least,
the united testimony of r,he Jews who returned
from Babylon, and those who remained
behind, must be received as decisive evi-
dence of their general authenticity. I say
general authencity, because I am not con-
cerned now with the genuineness of each
particular portion, (c) We have thus advanced
another step in our progress, and may now
proceed upwards to the historical books of
Chronicles and Kings, and from them to the
two books of Samuel, and thence to Judges
and Joshua, until we come to the Pentateuch
or five books of Moses, observing as we go
along how, throughout the whole course,


each portion of the history bears testimony to two remarkable facts, which I believe cannot
that which precedes it, and how perfectly in
accordance with each are those prophetical
books which belong to it. The whole series
thus resembles a chain, all the several links
of which are inseparably connected with one
another. This connexion of the several por-
tions with one another, which I must leave
you to trace out, appears to me incontrover-
tibly to establish the authenticity of the Old
Testament Scriptures. But, in confirmation
hereof, the providence of God has furnished
us with two additional and perfectly distinct
proofs. As we ascend in the history, we
arrive at what we should call the disas-
trous division of the 12 tribes into the two
kingdoms of Israel and Judah. But, disas-
trous as it undoubtedly was to the nation,
that division has afforded the strongest pos-
sible confirmatory evidence of the genuine-
ness, both of the Scriptures which relate to
the period antecedent to it, and of those
relating to the subsequent period which inter-
vened between it and the carrying away of
the ten tribes by the King of Assyria. For
you will remember that, while the two king-
doms were always jealous of each other, and
often in a state of open warfare, there was
never wanting in that of Israel a remnant
who continued faithful worshippers of the
Lord God of their fathers. If, therefore, their
ancient Scriptures had been added to, or in
any way corrupted, by the tribes of Judah and
Benjamin, or if it had been attempted to
foist upon them forged writings as new
Scriptures, there must have been on their part
a determined resistance, and of this resistance
some indications must have remained. But,
iustead of there being an allusion to any-
thing of the kind either in the Jewish annals
or other ancient writings, all history and tra
dition concur in witnessing to the unanimous
consent of both kingdoms, during all the
period of their separation, to the authority of
their sacred books. This is our first con-
firmatory proof, and the second is of a
similar character. After the destruction of
the kingdom of Israel, when Esarhaddon had
caused the people whom he transported to
.Samaria to be instructed in the worship of
Jehovah, the new nation of Samaritans, a
mixed race, hut quite distinct from the Jews,
retained, and regarded with the highest
reverence, the oldest portion of the Jewish
Scriptures, the Pentateuch ; and it is an in-
teresting fact that there exists at the present
day a Samaritan manuscript of the first
five books of the Bible, which is quite
independent of, and yet in substantial
agreement with, all the Jewish manuscripts.
There is other confirmatory evidence of a
different kind which I must not altogether
pass over. My present plan does not allow
me to enter upon the argument, clear and
convincing as it is, from the fulfilment of
prophecy, because that implies the Divine
origin of the Old Testament; but regarding
its Scriptures, as I now am, simply in the
character of ancient writings, I may adduce
be disputed concerning them. The first is,
that the researches of critics, historians,
travellers, antiquarians, and other scientific
men, have all tended to confirm their
accuracy, so far at least (and this alone con-
cerns my present argument) as they refer to
facts which could be known by human obser-
vation or learnt from human testimony. The
second is, that, with respect to several portions
of them, their language, and the knowledge
of various countries and national customs
which they display, prove that they must
have been written nearly at the times
to which they are ascribed, and by persons
in the position of their reputed authors.
For example, the book of Exodus could only
have been written within a short period after
the children of Israel went out of Egypt, and
by some one who, like Moses, combined with
an intimate knowledge of the Egyptian lan-
guage and customs a perfect acquaintance
with the wilderness of Arabia ; and the book
of Daniel could only have been composed by
a writer of the age in which that prophet
lived, and who was thoroughly conversant both
with the Chaldean language and mode of
government and also with the usages of the
Medes and Persians. The testimony borne in
the New Testament to the truth of the Old,
which would alone suffice for a believer in
Christ, I have purposely omitted to notice.
The evidences which I have now adduced, and
the force of which every man of ordinary
intelligence and information is capable of
appreciating, appear to me conclusively to
establish the authenticity both of the Old and
New Testament Scriptures, ie., of the whole
Bible, I now proceed to the second branch
of my subject,
THE CHARACTERISTICS OF THE BIBLE,
The first which I shall mention appears to
me very greatly to conduce to its practical
value, viz., its historical framework. The one
subject of the Bible is religion; but the volume
does not consist of a number of religious
essays. It relates a series of events, beginning
with the creation of man after the image of
God, and proceeding onwards, through his
fall and its immediate consequences, to the
destruction of the whole human race except
Noah and his family by the deluge, the call
of Abraham, the establishment of his de-
scendants, the Israelites in the land of
Canaan, and the varied dealings of God in
the way of judgment and mercy with that
nation, during a period of 1,000 years ; then,
after 400 years, during which it is silent,
taking up the story again with the birth of
Our Lord Jesus Christ, and carrying on its
narrative through his life to his death, resur-
rection, and ascension into heaven ; and
thence onwards to the labours, sufferings, and
success of his apostles and their associates in the
evangelization of the world. All its doctrines
and precepts, all its promises and threaten-
ings, all it sublime visions and prophecies,
are interwoven with its historical records.


With the exception of the Proverbs and f e next notice, the completion of the volume
Song of Solomon, there is no book of the before the end of the first century after Christ.
Old Testament which has not its own histori-
cal origin and connexion. Isaiah, Jeremiah,
and the other ancient prophets, were all
messengers of God to his people Israel. The
Psalms contain the utterances of Israelites in
the various circumstances of their national
and personal life ; Ecclesiastes the experience
of the wisest of their kings. So, likewise, the
writings of the New Testament, besides those
which are directly historical, consist, with
the exception of the Revelation of St. John,
of letters addressed to existing churches ; and
the Book of Revelation is itself nothing else
than a prophetical history of events which
should befall the church. In consequence of
this peculiar construction of the Bible, it
conveys to us its lessons of Divine Wisdom,
not in the dry, dogmatic form which they
assume in human treatises, but simply and,
as it were, incidentally, so as to be
most easily understood by the unlearned
reader, and to find their way most readily
to the hearts and fix themselves
firmly in the memories of men. 2. This
historical framework of the Bible is
the cause of another of its characteristics,
which also deserves our special notice, viz.,
its gradual growth. Regarding the book of
Genesis with the four which follow (excepting
a few passages obviously inserted by way of
explanation or added afterwards), as written
by Moses, we date tbe first Scriptures of the
Old Testament at about 1 500 years before
the coming of Christ. To these were gradually
added the other historical books, the Psalms,
and the writings of Solomon and the prophets
Nothing is certainly known of the date of the
book of Job; but it has been conjectured to
be of an age not later than that of Moses.
It is possible, and perhaps not improbable,
that Moses introduced into the earlier portion
of his history passages taken from yet more
ancient writings, and he may even have en-
tirely compiled the book of Genesis from such
writings. But the question of his doing so
does not at all affect my present argument.
I am only concerned with the fact that
Genesis is one of those books of the Bible
which we call the Pentateuch, and which we
believe to have been written by Moses,
from whatever sources he derived his
information, more than 1,500 years before
the Christian era. Assuming this, what
I wish you to observe is, that from
the time of their commencement, the Old
Testament Scriptures received a series of
successive additions, until the volume was
closed with the book of Malachi at about
400 b c. The earliest book of the New
Testament was not written until about 430
years after Malachi, and the latest about 60
years afterwards. Hence the interval be-
tween the dates of the earliest and latest
books of the Bible was not much less than
1,600 years. 3. With this gradual formation
of the Bible during so long a period is
strikingly contrasted the fact which I would
As after a period of 1,100 years, during which
the Old Testament was in the course of
formation, there followed one of 430, in which
nothing was added to it, so since about the
year of Our Lord 90 no addition has been made
to the New Testament. During nearly 1,800
years the Bible has been, according to the
belief of the whole church of Christ, perfected.
In all these centuries no sect, no individual,
has ever ventured even to suggest the insertion
into it of any writings of confessedly later
date. If we bear in mind its previous gradual
growth—that it was not, like the Koran, com-
piled and published as a whole at once, but
was formed by the continual accretion of new
parts—this acceptance of it by the universal
Church as at a particular period completed, and
this abstinence, notwithstanding the manifold
heresies and schisms which so soon destroyed
the unity of Christendom, from any attempt
to add to it, must be regarded as an extraor-
dinary attestation to the peculiar nature of
the several books of which it consists. 4.
Another characteristic of the Bible is its mar-
vellous variety. This is observable, first, in
its language. Besides that, the Hebrew of
the later is very different from that of the
earlier books. A portion of the Old Testa-
ment is in Chaldee, and the whole of the New
Testament is in Greek. Again, what is more
remarkable, its authors, as we learn from
themselves, differed from one another in
almost every particular. Some were kings
and rulers, others priests ; one a herdsman,
others fishermen ; one a pharisee, another a
publican; some renowned for wisdom and
knowledge, others “unlearned, ignorant
men.” The Bible also contains almost every
sort of composition both in prose and verse;
plain, unadorned history, a code of laws, the
most sublime orations, tbe most touching
elegies, the most terse proverbs, the most
beautiful odes, a series of admirable letters,
together with prophetical visions, the
imagery of which is, I suppose, altogether un-
rivalled. 5. But while no collection of
writings in the world exhibits so great
variety as the Bible, one of its most won-
derful characteristics is the harmony which
subsists throughout the whole. Although the
Old Testament contains the sacred writings
of the Jews, who, as a people, have hitherto
denied the title of Jesus to be the Messiah, and
continued irreconcilable enemies to Christi-
anity ; although the several books of the Old
Testament are of such various kinds, and
were written in different ages by men so
diverse in station, education, and natural
character; although likewise the writings
of the New Testament are strongly marked
by the idiosyncrasies of their respective
authors ; although, above all, the law which
was given by Moses, and which remained in
force until Our Lord’s coming, is exhibited to
us in direct contrast with the grace and
truth which “came by Jesus Christyet
does there exist the most perfect harmony


on all subjects, both between the Old and renders this harmony of the Bible in its
New Testaments in general, and between the
several books of each in particular. In
saying this, I am well aware of the many
contradictions which, it has been asserted,
are to be found in the Bible. Of these, how-
ever, almost all are utterly insignificant, and
the few which are of any importance generally
admit of a satisfactory explanation. Many of
them occur in the same book, and sometimes
in the same chapter, so that they cannot have
escaped the observation of the Jews them-
selves as well as of the early Christians, none
of whom seem to have been at all perplexed
about them. Those, and there are some,
which the best expositors have failed to
reconcile, do not at all materially impugn the
substantial harmony of which I am speaking,
and of which many of the other characteristics
which I am about to notice are conspicuous
instances. It is remarkably seen in the two
which I shall next mention, the unique
representation which the Bible contains of
God and the unique representation which it
contains of man. 6. The unique representa-
tion which the Bible contains of God is one of
its most remarkable characteristics. In no
other book are the attributes of the one living
and true God, the Creator. Preserver, and
Governor of the universe, similarly set forth ;
and yet in all the various books whereof the
Bible consists, God is identically the same
divine Being—a Spirit whom no man hath
seen or can see ; infinite in power, wisdom,
and goodness ; holy and jealous, who will not
overlook iniquity, nor allow Himself to be
dishonoured with impunity; yet merciful and
gracious, long-suffering, forgiving iniquity,
transgression, and sin ; a just God, and yet a
Saviour. Moreover, this character of God is
not merely described, but also vividly dis-
played, in his actual dealings with mankind—
in the severity of his judgments and in the
multitude of his loving kindnesses. God,
who brought in the flood upon the multitude
of the ungodly, who turned the cities of Sodom
and Gomorrah into ashes, who commanded
the Israelites to exterminate the idolatrous
nations of Canaan, who slew the men of
Bethshemesh for looking into the ark and
Nyzah for touching it, who caused Herod to
be eaten ug of worms because of his self-
glorification, is the same God who, the Bible
tells us, so loved the world as to give his only
begotten Son to be a propitiation for sin, that
He might be just, and the justifier of him
that believeth in Jesus. The God of the
Pentateuch is the God of Joshua and Judges,
the God of Kings and Chronicles, the God of
the Psalms and all the prophets ; and He is
the God also of the Gospels and the Epistles.
He is “ light,” combining in himself all moral
excellence. He is ‘‘a consuming fire,” who
shall execute judgment upon the multitude of
theungodly. He is ‘Tove,”desiringtbatallmen
may be saved, and come unto the knowledge
of the truth That the attributes thus
ascribed to Him appear to the natural
reason inconsistent with one another only
representation of God the more remarkable.
7. Again, the unique representation which
the Bible contains of man is almost as re-
markable as the representation of God, and is
likewise throughout the volume perfectly
consistent with itself. According to the Bible,
God made Adam, the first man, in his own
image—a rational and moral being, holy and
happy, free from sin and not liable to death.
But Adam transgressed the commandment of
God, and so sin obtained dominion over him,
and over the whole race of mankind who
sprang from him ; and with sin death entered
and passed upon all men for that all have
sinned. Thus the Bible portrays man as a
fallen creature, born in sin, a child of wrath.
But it further represents him as an object of
divine mercy, for whom God has provided a
way of reconciliation unto Himself, deliver-
ance from the dominion of sin, and resurrec-
tion after death unto eternal life. This
representation of man is, as I have said,
unique. Nowhere else is to be found
any similar to it. But it is consistently
preserved throughout the whole volume. As
in every book of the Bible the same God, so
also is the same man portrayed—corrupt, but
retaining visible traces of the divine image in
which he was made ; guilty before God, but
not forsaken by his Creator; shapen in
iniquity, but capable of renewal in righteous-
ness and true holiness, suffering the evil
consequences of sin; but, when spiri-
tually renewed, able through divine grace
to rejoice always in the Lord. Such is the
wonderful picture which the Bible draws of
man. 8. Nor do we only find in the Bible a
unique representation of God and man
separately; it also contains, what is much
more wonderful, a representation of God and
man in union with each other—the Godhead
and manhood joined together in one person.
The God man, Jesus Christ, stands out alone
in the world’s history. Never was any man
like this man. Never did any historian, or
any poet, portray such a character as his—
the character of a perfect man, a man without
sin ; but not one of the world’s heroes, not a
mighty sovereign, nor a victorious general,
nor an eminent philosopher, nor a great
orator or poet, but a man despised and
rejected by his fellow-men, one in whom
they saw no beauty that they should desire
Him. In Jesus Christ we have exhibited to
us—not by a formal description, but by his
own words and works, his sufferings and
death, his resurrection and ascension into
Heaven—a man who, while He spoke and
acted with a divine authority, lived in poverty,
not having where to lay his head, submitted
to every kind of reproach and indignity, and
suffered an ignominious death, the death of a
malefactor; a man whom no outrage ever
irritated, no insidious question ever perplexed,
no danger ever alarmed ; a man who in all
companies was the same example of holiness,
the same teacher of divine truth, the same
reprover of sin, the same pardoner of the


penitent sinner ; a man, by whom no servile and other particulars of his conduct towards
office was deemed too humiliating for him to men does not affect the character of the
assume, and who yet did not hesitate, in the
presence of the High Priest and of all the
council of the Jews, to claim the dignity of the
Son of God, and to foretell his future sitting
on the right hand of power, and coming in
the clouds of heaven. To one who, in how-
ever imperfect a manner, has realised the
character of the Jesus of the Bible, the
attempt to substitute for him another Jesus,
stripped of all his distinctive features, as the
founder of Christianity, must appear the
most extraordinary instance of man’s infatua-
tion. 9. The next characteristic of the Bible
which I would mention is the silence observed
in it upon all those particulars which men so
eagerly desire to know concerning the nature
and attributes of spiritual beings, the place
and condition of the soul after its separation
from the body, and the possibility of living
men holding intercourse with spirits, or with
the dead. In the Bible is to be found
nothing to gratify our curiosity as to
any of these matters. We learn from
it that there are spirits—angels sent forth
by God to minister unto them who shall be
heirs of salvation; and devils, permitted by
Him for a time to exert a malignant influence
upon mankind, but destined hereafter to
receive the righteous retribution for their
wickedness. We learn also that of the dead
some sleep in Jesus awaiting the resurrection
of life, and others are reserved (in torments,
if we may draw such an inference from the
parable of the rich man and Lazarus) for the
resurrection of damnation. But this is all
that the Bible tells us concerning the one or
the other. As to the holding of intercourse
with the dead, or with spirits of any kind
who do not come tons as messengers from God,
the Bible does not tell us whether or not this
is possible; bat it repeatedly, in the most
emphatic manner, forbids the attempt. We
are not informed whether consulters with
familiar spirits and necromancers are im-
postors, or under a delusion, or actually
receive communications from beings of
another world ; but it is plainly declared that
every such person is an abomination unto the
Lord. In all this there is a perfect agree-
ment among the several books of the Bible.
10. I pass on to some characteristics of a
different kind. Among these is the pure
moral teaching of the Bible. This is
sometimes impugned, on the ground that the
Bible represents God as seemingly sanctioning
customs and practices that are clearly im-
moral, and as commanding, or commending,
actions which are abhorrent to the feelings of
every good man. But although the reasons
which we may be able to assign for God not
having prohibited slavery, or polygamy and
concubinage, or for his having commanded
the Israelites to exterminate the inhabitants
of Canaan, and, apparently, approved of the
slaying of Eglon by Ehud, and of Sisera by
Jael, may not be deemed satisfactory, yet our
failure to explain the motives of God in these
moral teaching which we find in the Bible.
The fact which I affirm to be patent to all
attentive readers is that the volume every-
where inculcates pure morality. The pre-
cepts of its earliest Scriptures are, “Thou
sbalt not kill ; Thou shalt not commit
adultery ; Thou shalt not steal ; Thou shalt
not bear false witness ; Thou shalt hot covet
and the language of a prophet 800 years after
is, “He hath showed thee, 0 man, what is
good: and what doth the Lord require of
thee but to do justly and to love mercy, and
to walk humbly with thy God ?” Herewith
agrees the teaching of all its several books ;
and what I would have you particularly
notice is, that not in any of them, from
the first to the last, can there be
found a single sentence incentive to
lasciviousness, or injustice, or covetousness,
or any evil passion or iniquitous practice.
All unrighteousness, deceit, malignity, and
whatever the enlightened conscience con-
demns, the Bible enjoins the people of God to
put away ; and all that the enlightened con-
science approves—whatever things are just,
honest, true, pure, lovely, and of good report
—it exhorts them to practice. Am I not,
therefore, right in adducing as a characteristic
of the Bible, its pure moral teaching ? 11. At
the same—and this is not inconsistent with
what I have just said—its teaching, as we
proceed through the volume, may be observed
to become of a progressively higher spiritual
character. Whatever explanation we may
give of the fact, it is certain that we may per-
ceive, in passing from the earlier to the later
books of the Old Testament, how the pro-
phets—and yet more clearly in passing from
the Old Testament to the New—how Our Lord
and his apostles, taking the law of Moses as
a foundation, have erected upon it their own
superstructure of spiritual doctrine. To quote
particular passages would occupy too much
time ; but in illustration of my meaning I
would refer you to Isaiah i. 10 20, where the
prophet declares that the offering up of
sacrifices and the observance of festivals
by the wicked are an abomination
unto the Lord ; and to the 55th chap-
ter of the same prophet, where he de-
scribes what kind of fast is acceptable to
God, and in what manner the Sabbath-day
should be kept holy. I would remind you
also of our blessed Lord’s sermon upon the
Mount, and of his summing up of all the
commandments in love to God and to our
neighbour. The increasingly clear prophetical
indication of the Divine plan for the redemp-
tion of mankind is yet more remarkable
than this progressively higher moral teaching;
but I refrain from insisting upon it, because
to do so would be to assume the existence of a
supernatural element in the Bible, which I
am desirous at present to avoid. 12. The
consideration of its moral teaching naturally
leads to the notice of another characteristic of
the Bible, viz., its constant appeal to a man’s


own conscience and reason. The Bible always
addresses naan on the principle that he is to
be convinced and persuaded, not to be coerced
into belief and obedience. Its language is,
I have set before you life and death, bless-
ing and cursing; therefore, choose life.” It
reproves the wicked for their folly: “ Do ye
thus requite the Lord? 0, foolish people
and unwise!” It describes God as re-
monstrating with his people : “ How long,
ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity,
and the scorners delight in their scorning
and fools hate knowledge? Turn ye at my
reproof.” To the same effect write all the
prophets of the Old Testament, In like
manner our blessed Lord appeals to the Jews,
“If I say the truth, why do ye not believe
me?’and declares the ground of their con-
demnation to be, that he had done among
them “the works which none other man did,”
and they had not believed on Him. So St.
Paul writes, “ I speak unto wise men ; judge
ye what I say,” and again, “Let every man
be fully persuaded in his own mind.” This
characteristic of the Bible will appear the
more remarkable by contrasting with it the
principles and practices prevalent for so
many centuries in Christendom. 13. The
Bible is characterised further by its un-
coloured narration of the bad deeds of good
men. It affords no encouragement for hero-
worship. The actions which it records of
some most eminent saints have given the
enemies of God in all ages occasion to
blaspheme. In many instances they were
such as we should have supposed those guilty
of them to have been from their general con-
duct least likely to commit. Abraham, who
was especially distinguished by his faith in
God, twice persuaded his wife to pass herself
off as his sister, that he might escape
a fancied danger to his own life. Moses,
who was renowned for his meekness, was on
one occasion provoked to speak and act so
unadvisedly that he was not permitted by
God to enter the land of Canaan, Solomon,
the wisest of men, was seduced into the folly
of idolatry. Elijah, one of the boldest of the
prophets, fled for his life at the threat of
Jezebel, and seems to have yielded himself
up for a season to despair. The good king
Hezekiah, wMn the Lord left him to try him,
manifested his natural pride and vain-
glory. David, the man after God’s heart,
perpetrated the two atrocious crimes of
adultery and murder; and Peter, one of
Christ’s most zealous followers, thrice denied
his Divine master. This characteristic also
belongs not only to one or more books, but to
the whole volume. 14. Together with its
faithful delineation of the faults of indivi-
duals, may be noted the absence throughout
the entire volume of any commendation,
or even recognition, of national virtues.
As having been chosen of God to be a peculiar
people unto Himself, and as having received
from Him statutes and judgments such as
none other people possessed, the Israelites
are addressed in the Bible as superior to all
the nations of the earth; but at the same
time they are told that the privileges they
enjoyed had not been bestowed upon them for
their righteousness, for they were “a stiff-
necked people.” In like manner, when their
heroic deeds, such as the conquest of Canaan,
the destruction of the army of the Midianites
by Gideon and his 300 men, and others, not
surpassed by any achievements of the Greeks
or Romans, are any where related, no glory is
attributed to them ; all is ascribed to God
alone. They might not say, “My power and
the might of mine hand hath” done this or
that. The only instance of commendation
that I remember is of Zebulun and Naphtali,
in the Song of Deborah, for jeopardising
“ their lives unto the death in the high
places of the field.” Other historians, such
as Thucydides and Tacitus, have impartially
related the mistakes and misdeeds, and other
poets, such as Juvenal and Johnson, have
held up to reprobation the vices of their
fellow countrymen; but of such persistent
silence by a long series of historians and poets
upon the virtues of the nation to which they
belonged, and for which they wrote, the world
has certainly never known another instance.
I have referred only to the Old Testament
Scriptures, but the same remark is applicable
to those of the New, only in them the fact is
not so surprising. 15. In connexion with this
last I would point out, as another charac-
teristic of the Bible, that, while its various
writings contain threatenings of God’s most
terrible judgments upon the Israelites for
their idolatry and other, wickednesses, the
same writings, often in the very same page,
proclaim the promise of his ultimate forgive-
ness of them as a people, and their future
unexampled prosperity and greatness. I need
not quote to you any of the numerous threa-
teniugs in Deuteronomy, and in almost every
prophetical book from that of Isaiah to that
of Malachi, but I would ask you to observe,
what you may perhaps have overlooked, how
theseare almost always followed by predictions
of future blessings. Not only Moses, but
Isaiah also, and Jeremiah, Hosea, Joel, Amos,
Obadiah, Micah, Habakkuk, and Zephaniah,
prophets who lived before the cap ivity in
Babylon; Ezekiel and Daniel, who lived
during it; and Haggai, Zechariah, and
Malachi, who lived after it—all declare in
one form of words or another, that
the Lord their God will bring again the
captivity of His people of Israel, and they
shall build the waste cities and inhabit them;
and they shall plant vineyards and drink the
wine thereof ; they shall also make gardens
and oat the fruit of them ; and He will plant
them upon their land, and they shall no more
be pulled up out of their land which He
hath given them. Of this characteristic also
we find, as was to be expected, the most nume-
rous instances in the Old Testament Scrip-
tures ; but it is to be observed also in the New,
e.g., in Our Lord’s lamentation over Jeru-
salem, when, after foretelling the approaching
desolation of the city, He added—“ I say unto


you, ye shall not see me henceforth till ye
shall say, blessed is he that cometh in the
name of the Lord thus intimating that
there would be a time when they, the Jewish
people, should see Him again and welcome
Him as their deliverer. Another instance
occurs in the Epistle to the Romans, where
the Apostle Paul, in reference to God’s deal-
ings with Israel, says that blindness in part
is happened to them until the fulness of the
Gentiles be come in, and so all Israel
shall be saved; quoting in confirmation
the words of the prophet Isaiah, “ There
shall come out of Zion the deliverer, and
shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob.” 16.
Two other characteristics I must not omit.
One is the Bible’s simple manner of relating
the manifold miraculous works which are re-
corded in it. Its writers, one and all, appear
to have been so thoroughly convinced, and
so constantly mindful of, God’s providential
government of the world, that any extraordi-
nary manifestation of His power was regarded
by them not as a matter of wonder or sceptical
disputation, but merely as a means used by
Him on special occasions for establishing His
authority, and making men to know and do
His will. Hence in the Bible we are quite
unable to separate the miraculous from other
historical events. The former are so inter-
woven with the latter that the two cannot be
disconnected, and therefore if the one be re-
ceived as authentic, the other also must be
acknowledged to be equally entitled to belief.
At the present day this seems to be often
strangely overlooked. 17. The last charac-
teristic of the Bible which I shall mention is
its uniform tone of Divine authority. I do
not mean that every book —or, indeed, any
entire book, except the Revelation of
St. John—claims to have been written
by inspiration of God; but in them
all is a tone which, unless they were
so written, would be unbecoming the writers.
It is not, perhaps, remarkable that the histo-
rical events should be related in a manner
which implies that the accuracy of the
narrative is not to be questioned ; but it is
very remarkable that all comments, wherever
introduced, should be made, not as expressing
an opinion which may be erroneous, but as
declarative of a judgment which cannot err ;
and yet more, that all references to God, all
statements concerning Him, all precepts,
promises, threatenings, should indicate a
conviction that they express the exact mind,
will, and purposes of Jehovah. This is a
characteristic of all the Old Testament
Scriptures, and in accordance therewith Our
Lord repeatedly spoke of them as possessing
a claim to the unhesitating belief and unre-
served obedience of the Jewish people. The
same tone also pervades the Scriptures of the
New Testament, although in some of the
letters to particular churches, of which a
large portion of these latter consists, the
sympathy of the writer with the persons
whom he is addressing, and his earnest desire
to conciliate them, have caused him to use a
tone of human persuasiveness which may
appear at the first reading inconsistent
with that of Divine authority. Upon an
attentive perusal, however, this latter
may always be perceived to underlie the
former, and he who—as Paul, the aged, and a
prisoner of Jesus Christ—beseeches, does not
himself forget, and would not have others
forget, that as an apostle, he might be much
bold in Christ to enjoin that which is conve-
nient. Even the very manner in which he
recommends, but does not enjoin, testifies to
the authority with which he writes. Such is
the Bible; a volume of religious writings
fitted, so to speak, into an historical frame-
work, and hence of gradual growth, but
received by the universal Church of Christ as
having been for nearly 1,800 years complete ; a
volume characterised by the marvellous variety
and perfect harmony of its several parts, by its
unique representation of God and man, and
by its yet more wonderfully unique represen-
tation of the God-man (Jesus Christ); charac-
terised also by its silence upon those particu-
lars concerning the spiritual world which
men desire to pry into, by its uniformly pure
and yet progressively higher moral teaching,
and by its constant appeal to the human
conscience and reason ; likewise by its un-
coloured narration of the bad deeds of good
men, and the absence in it of all commenda-
tion, or even recognition, of national virtues ;
and, lastly, by its quiet, simple, manner of
relating miraculous occurrences, and its
uniform tone of Divine authority. I
probably have omitted some particulars
which you may think I ought to have men-
tioned ; but these are sufficient to show the
singular nature of this volume of Scriptures;
that none other in the world is comparable
to it; that it stands by itself alone and un-
approachable by any rival. It remains for
me to speak of the effects of the Bible, which
form the third branch of my subject. They
may be considered under two heads —those
produced by the Old Testament Scriptures
alone, and those produced by the Old and
New Testament Scriptures together. I shall
first direct your attention to the former. The
effect of the Scriptures of the Old Testament
may be summed up in the forming of a pecu-
liar people, the people of Israel, and in the
preservation of that people in their identity
from the time of their settlement in the land
of Canaan until the destruction of Jerusalem
by the Romans, and thence unto the present
day. Reflect for a few minutes upon the
history, character, and influence in the world
of this people. Assuming the general authen-
ticity of the Bible to have been proved, we
learn from it that, after coming out of Egypt
and taking possession of the land of Canaan,
they experienced, during a period of 1,500
years, all manner of vicissitudes. Again and
again their country was invaded and laid
waste, their cities destroyed, themselves
subjected to the most cruel oppression,
and often reduced to a mere remnant.
Again and again, however, they were de


livered out of the power of their enemies,
recovered their independence, and became, as
before, numerous and prosperous. In the reigns
of David and Solomon they acquired the do-
minion over all thesurrounding nations; after-
wards they were divided into the two kingdoms
of Israel and Judah, of which the former was
uitimately destroyed, and the people carried
away captive by the Assyrians; and in like
manner the latter was subdued by Nebuchad-
nezzar, and its inhabitants taken to Babylon.
Of the 10 tribes which constituted the king-
dom of Israel there is no further mention ;
but the other two, Judah and Benjamin, or
rather a large proportion of them, returned
from Babylon, and settled again in Canaan,
where they remained until their final disper-
sion by the Romans. Throughout all these
centuries, under every change of condition,
in prosperity and in adversity, united in one
and divided into two kingdoms, before the
invasion of the Assyrian, the twelve tribes and
afterwards the remaining two, continued
always identically the same people, isolated
and diverse from other nations. And
what was their distinctive character during
this portion of their history ? The most re-
markable particular to be noticed in it is, that
of all the nations of the earth they only wor-
shipped one God as the Creator, Preserver, and
Governor of the Universe, the alone rightful
object of man’s adoration and service. Not-
withstanding their adoption at various times,
for longer or shorter periods, of the idolatrous
practices of their heathen neighbours, they
were, as a people, during those 1,500 years,
witnesses in the world to the unity of the
godhead and the vanity of all idol worship.
Again, it will, I think, appear evident from a
careful examination of the historical and
prophetical books of the Old Testament that
the Israelities were distinguished from other
nations by their superior morality, political
freedom, and social and domestic happiness.
From the frequent reproofs of them by the
prophets for their ungodliness and iniquity,
their covetousness, hypocrisy, and formality,
we are apt to form an unfavourable opinion
of them as a people, but if we observe the
manner in which the vices of the heathen are
referred to, and they are admonished not to
imitate those vices, we shall see reason to be-
lieve that they were not so bad as we might
at first suppose, and that the picture which
St. Paul has drawn in 1 Romans, of the
Gentiles, was never appropriate to them.
That they enjoyed great political freedom can
scarcely be disputed; and of their social and
domestic happiness during the many long
periods in which they were free from foreign
invasion, we may judge from the description
which is given of them during the reign
of Solomon, that they, “ dwelt safely every
man under his vine and under his fig tree.”
Nor were they characterised only by their
superior morality as a people. They were yet
more remarkable for the virtues of conspicuous
individuals among them. In what ancient
history do we read of rulers like Samuel and
Nehemiah, or of kings like Jehoshaphat,
Hezekiah, and Josiah, eminent for their
justice, their fear of God, and care for the
people whom they governed ; or of men like
Daniel and his three companions, willing to
expose themselves to a terrible death rather
than sin against God ; or of such men as the
Psalms teach us were to be found in every
generation, faithful servants of God, who
looked to Him in all dangers for deliverance,
and in all sorrows for consolation ; whose
great strength was in prayer, and whose
delight was in praise and thanksgiving ?
With respect to the influence of the
Israelites in the world, it is to be
remembered that in consequence of their
being brought successively into contact
with each of the chief nations of antiquity—
first the Egyptians, then the Assyrians and
Babylonians, and afterwards the Persians,
Greeks, and Romans—all these became in
turn acquainted with the peculiarity of their
religion, and the excellences of their national
and individual character. Of the influence
which they thus exercised we have two re-
markable instances in Nebuchadnezzar, king
of Babylon, and in Darius the king of the
Modes and Persians, recorded in the book of
Daniel. It is to be remembered, also, that
during the 1,400 years which elapsed between
the destruction of Jerusalem by Nebuchad-
nezzar, and the commencement of the
Christian era, a large number of them were
dispersed, as at present, over all the more
civilised countries of the earth, and
that, wherever they dwelt, they bore
the same testimony, as in their own land,
by their synagogue worship and otherwise,
to the unity of the Godhead and the vanity of
idol- worship. We have no means of deter-
mining the results of that testimony in each
particular country, but the facts incidentally
mentioned in the Book of Acts, with other
historical evidences, show that they were not
inconsiderable ; and we have good reason for
believing that it did much to prepare the
minds of the Gentiles for their reception of
Christianity. At the expiration of the 1,500
years of which I have been speaking, i e , about
the time of the birth of our Lord Jesus Christ,
there prevailed, as you will remember, among
them a general expectation that there would
shortly be born of the family of David one
who should become their king, and, as the
Messiah or Christ, i.e., the anointed of God,
raise their nation to all its former, and more
than its former, greatness and prosperity.
But when He in whom Christians believe that
expectation to have been fulfilled, Jesus of
Nazareth, came unto them, they rejected Him
and procured Him to be crucified. Within 70
years after this their temple and city were de-
stroyed, and thenceforward up to this day (i e.,
for more than 1,800 years) they have been scat-
tered over all the earth. Nevertheless, although
without a country which they could call their
own, without a tem pie in which to celebrate their
religious rites, without prophets or any other
miraculous aid, and often subjected to the


most cruel persecutions, they have still pre-
served their character as a distinct people,
and have lived—sometimes in possession of
enormous wealth, sometimes in the most
abject poverty—in the midst of and yet
separate from all other peoples. Under every
variety of climate, government, national
custom, and private circumstances—notwith-
standing the difficulty, often the impossibility,
of mutual intercourse—they have maintained
their identity, preserving all their recollec-
tions of the past, and, what is more remark-
able, continuing to cherish the expectation
of a future deliverer, and the gathering to-
gether of their whole nation under him.
Thus their truly marvellous history can
be traced backwards from the present day
through a period of 3,300 years, during which
they have retained all their distinctive pecu-
liarities, and in respect to their belief, their
religious rites (so far as is possible in their
present condition), their isolation from the
rest of mankind, and their relationship to
one another, are now essentially the same
people with those who, 33 centuries ago, under
the leadership of Joshua, entered and took
possession of the land of Canaan, and with
those who 18 centuries ago mocked at the
dying Jesus, saying, “If He be the King of
Israel, let Him now come down from the
cross, and we will believe Him. ’ To what,
then, is thefirstformationandcontinualsubse-
quent preservation of this so peculiar a
people to be ascribed? The answer must
surely be, to the Bible, i.e., to those portions
of the volume of Old Testament Scriptures
which their successive generations possessed.
The only possible explanation of all their
marvellous history, is their earnest, unshaken
belief in these Scriptures. The influence of
their religious rites and customs, their
sacrifices and festivals, in causing and main-
taining their distinctive nationality, is
not inconsistent with this explanation, for
those rites and customs were all pre-
scribed by the law, which was a part of
the Scriptures, and are therefore to be
included among their effects. Nor, again, is
the special providence which has been mani-
fested, and the miracles which have been
wrought from time to time on behalf of the
Israelites, inconsistent with it; for every such
special interposition of God, whether provi-
dential or miraculous, was designed to
enforce, not to impair, the authority of the
Scriptures. I repeat, therefore, that the
effect of the volume of the Old Testament
apart from that of the New has been to
form and preserve unto the present day a
peculiar people, altogether diverse from others,
who, during 1,600 years that they dwelt in
Canaan, were the sole witnesses in the world
to the truth that there is one God, and none
other besides Him ; and who since, during
another period of 1,800 years that they have
been dispersed over the earth, have main-
tained their identity, and, while bearing still
their testimony to the oneness of God, have
persistently refused to acknowledge Jesus of
Nazareth as their Messiah, holding fast the
expectation of another deliverer who shall re-
establish them in their old land, and reign
over them as their King for ever. I pass on
to the effects of the whole Bible, the volume
of the New in conjunction with that of the
Old Testament. These also may be summarily
described as consisting in the formation and
preservation during a long series of centuries
unto the present day, of a peculiar people,
diverse from all the rest of mankind—the
Church of Christ. Let us consider some par-
ticulars concerning this people. Reflect, first,
upon the origin of the church, how it sprung
up suddenly above 1,800 years ago, among the
Jews, a small and despised nation ; and
not among the higher class and ecclesiastical
rulers of that nation, but among the poor and
unlearned of the people. Reflect further
upon its rapid growth, how it extended itself
from Judea and Samaria to the neighbouring
countries, and thence, in a few years, through-
out all parts of the Roman world. Reflect
how everywhere it had to endure either
official opposition and ill-usage or popular
outrage; how one emperor of Rome after
another attempted to extirpate it; how,
nevertheless, it still lived and increased, and
became more and more powerful, until it
gained the imperial favour, and Christianity,
having supplanted heathenism, was recognised
as the established religion of the Roman
empire. So it continued, as you will remember,
except for the brief period of the reign of
Julian, while that empire lasted. Carry then
your thoughts onward to the overthrow of the
dominion of Rome by the barbarians, and
reflect how, during the revolution which fol-
lowed, the church still survived, and how it
gathered into itself, first, the hordes which
overran the Roman provinces, and after-
wards all the nations in the regions beyond,
even to the farthest extremities of Europe.
The circumstances which next attract our
attention are of a different character. Pre-
viously to the establishment of Christianity
by Constantine as the religion of the Roman
empire, much corruption both of doctrine and
practice had crept into and spread itself in
the church; and this increased more and
more afterwards, until it led in the seventh
century to the rise and triumphant progress
of Mohammedanism throughout the East, and
to the gradual establishment in that and the
following centuries of the usurped dominion
of the Bishop of Rome throughout the West.
Of the Eastern Church, which fell before
the arms of Mohammed and his followers,
I shall say no more than that, although
partially freed from the tyrannical oppression
to which it was formerly subjected, it still
remains in a corrupt and for the most part
very degraded condition, and, like the 10
tribes of Israel, has not yet been restored to
its ancient purity and prosperity. But on
behalf of the Western Church, as formerly
on behalf of the two tribes of Judah and
Benjamin, the providence of God has
graciously interposed. By the Reformation


in the 16th century, a large portion of the
church in Europe, including that in our
own fatherland, recovered the independence
which it has ever since retained. I might
proceed further, and ask you to follow me in
your minds to the extension of the church
since by means of the various missionary
societies, and the self-denying labours of the
devoted men employed by these societies in
all parts of the world. But merely to
have noticed this will suffice for my
E resent purpose. I will, therefore, stop
ere, and ask concerning this peculiar people,
the Church—as I asked just now concerning
the people of Israel —To what is its first
formation and subsequent preservation to
be ascribed ? Surely the answer in this case
also must be, to the Bible. It may indeed
be said that the origin and early growth of
the church cannot be ascribed to the Bible,
because, when the Gospel was first preached
by the Apostles and their associates, none of
the New Testament Scriptures were written ;
but this does not really affect my argument.
For these Scriptures, as I have already shown,
contain all those things which were believed
among Christians. In fact, the writers of
them were among the first preachers of the
Gospel, and wrote only what they themselves
had previously taught. Nor is the result of
the first preaching of Christianity to be
the less regarded as an effect of the Bible,
because of the miracles with which we
believe it to have been often accompanied ;
for they, like the signs and wonders
wrought at the introduction of the Mosaic
economy, were simply means of convincing
the people that the things spoken—which, I
repeat, were the same with the things now
written in the New Testament—had been
commanded the speaker of God. For the
preservation of the church after the destruc-
tion of the Roman empire, and its subse-
quent comprehension of all the European
nations, no adequate cause can he assigned
except doctrine taken out of the Bible. The
book itself may have been, and doubtless was,
little known ; but the truths contained in it,
and conveyed in some way or other to the
minds and hearts of the people, must have
been the means of converting them to
Christianity, 'i.e , bringing them into the
church. That the Reformation was the effect
of the Bible, is yet more plain. The men by
whose agency it was accomplished did not
claim to possess any miraculous powers. A
copy of the Bible, which bad then become
almost altogether an unknown volume, was
discovered by a monk in a German monastery,
and, like the copy of the Book of the Law
discovered in the Temple during the reign of
Josiah, wrought at once a religious revolution,
which spread not only through Germany but
over a large portion of the continent of
Europe. Thus the mighty work effected by
Luther and his coadjutors was the direct
and manifest effect of the Bible. In England,
also, the bringing of it to light by Wiclif, who
had translated the volume into his native
tongue more than a century before the time
of Luther, and the subsequent re-translation
and circulation of it during the reign of
Henry VIII., prepared the way for and really
effected the Reformation under Edward VI.
These effects of the Bible—the origin and
rapid growth of the church, its establishment
throughout the Roman empire, the surviving
of it after the downfal of that empire, the
gathering into it of barbarian conquerors
and of all the nations of Europe, and the
reformation of a large portion of its Western
branch—are facts patent on the pages of
history. But we shall not duly appreciate
their importance unless we observe the politi-
cal and social changes involved in them. I
would therefore ask you further to compare
in your minds the condition of the people
under all the great empires of the ancient
world previously to the time of Constantine,
and under the heathen dynasties of India and
China in modern times, with the condition
of the subjects of any, even the worst, govern-
ment in Christendom. Such a comparison
will show us—in the mitigation of despotic
tyranny, in the increased personal freedom,
in the greater domestic happiness, and in
the more friendly social intercourse which
characterise every Christian nation—the
ameliorating effect of the Bible. And if this
can be perceived in countries where the book
itself is little known by the people, and its
influence only indirectly and feebly felt, how
much more may it be seen in lands where
the volume may be listened to in public
assemblies for religious worship, and read in
their own private houses by all of every class
who desire to become acquainted with it.
There needs not that I should expatiate upon
the civil privileges, the moral virtues, the
social blessings, and the home comforts by
which our own favoured fatherland is distin-
guished. However much of vice, and misery
consequent upon vice, exists among the
people of Great Britain, and of this and other
provinces of the British empire, none can
deny that we are remarkable above almost all
others for our liberty, our independence of
thought, our sense of justice, our truthfulness,
our generosity, our observance of the duties
and enjoyment of the happiness of domestic
life. And, to what are we indebted for all
this ? Not to any natural superiority of the
Anglo-Saxon or Norman race ; for the Arab,
the Persian, the Turk, the Maori, is physically
by nature as fine a man in body and in mind
as the Englishman. Not to any law of pro-
gress observable in the history of the human
race, for no such law can be observed. What
evidence have we of growth, intellectual or
moral, in the transfer of empire from Babylon
to Persia, and from Persia to Greece, and from
Greece to Rome? What progress do we per-
ceive in the succession of Eastern dynasties,
or in the establishment of the Mohammedan
rule in Greece and Asia Minor ? The history
of the world refutes the hypothesis of such a
law. The only rational explanation of our
high position as a nation is, that we have been


raised to it by the Bible. To this we owe all
that distinguishes the British government
and the British people throughout the world.
We shall, however, greatly err if, in consider-
ing the effects produced by the Bible, we con-
fine our attention, as is too common at the
present day, to the beneficial influence which
it has exerted upon governments and
upon society. Far more remarkable than
these is its influence upon the consciences,
the hearts, and the lives of individuals.
1 speak, not of matters of faith,
but of facts concerning which there can
be no dispute, when I remind you how
in numberless cases the Bible has spoken
peace to the troubled conscience, and
enabled the contrite sinner to rejoice in
the assurance that his iniquities were for-
given and his sin pardoned ; how fornicators
and drunkards, thieves and extortioners, the
covetous and the selfish, the implacable and
the unmerciful, have been wholly trans-
formed by its teaching, and become in very
truth new creatures; how it has spoken
comfort to the mourner, quieted the restless
sufferer upon the bed of sickness, sustained
the spirits of the destitute, and enabled the
prisoner to sing for joy; how it has con-
strained men to make long and wearisome
journeys, expose themselves to all manner of
perils, suffer all kinds of privation, take up
their abode among the most barbarous
nations, endure mockery, and violence, and
death itself, for no other purpose than to
make known to their fellow men the book
which they had found to be so precious
to themselves; how it has made others,
rather than abjure their belief in it,
or deny any portion of its doctrine,
to submit to be torn in pieces by wild
beasts, or burnt at the stake; how it
has formed a Luther and a Melancthon, a
Wiclif, a Ridley, and a Latimer; a Carey, a
Swartz, and a Henry Martyn ; a Williams,
and a Moffat; an Ellis, and a Patteson ; with
a host of like minded heroes of faith—some
renowned in history, others known only to
God and to those who have themselves seen
their work and labour of love. And lastly
(for I must not, as I might, linger longer on
these, its infinitely most important effects),
how it has enabled the believer, in the
Erospect of death, to say with him of old, “ I
ave fought a good fight, I have finished my
course, I have kept the faith. Hence-
forth there is laid up for me a crown
of righteousness, which the Lord, the
righteous judge, shall give me at that day.”
I have now completed my task. I have
adduced evidences which 1 think must be
deemed by you conclusive for the authenti-
city of the Bible, regarded as a volume of
ancient writings, I have opened, as it were,
this volume before you, and pointed out some
of the characteristics which distinguish it
from all others extant in the world ; and I
have briefly noticed its effects in the forma-
tion and preservation of the people of Israel
during 3,300 years, and of the Christian
Church during 1,800 years, up to the present
day; also in the superior morals, freedom,
and social and domestic happiness of the
ancient Israelites, and of all existing Christian
nations, especially those by whom it is best
known ; and, above all, in the changed lives
and peaceful deaths of multitudes who have
believed in it. Here, then, I might conclude ;
but before doing so, I would ask whether you
who have patiently followed my argument
can help drawing from it the inference that
the Bible is not the product of man’s un-
assisted reason and knowledge. The fact
that the writings of a number of men, living
at times so remote from one another, of such
diverse natural characters, and in such
different positions and circumstances, should
exhibit such a perfect agreement upon so
great a variety of subjects, many of which
have always been and still are matters of
controversy among the most learned philoso-
phers and theologians ; and yet further, that
these writings should be distinguished from
all others by such peculiar characteristics,
and should have produced such wonderful
effects in the world—appears to me of itself,
an irrefragable proof that they had a “ divine
and miraculous origin.” Their composi-
tion without supernatural assistance would
be to my mind as inexplicable, as
without the exercise of divine power
the giving of sight to a blind man by
the anointing of his eyes with clay, or the
calling forth of a dead man from the
tomb. The only reasonable explanation of
their origin is that they were ‘‘given by inspi-
ration of God.” Believing, therefore, that
the Bible, and the Bible alone, contains a
revelation from God to man, and contem-
plating the effects which it has wrought, and
is now working in the world, what, I would
further ask, is the duty of the church of
Christ, and what the duty of private Christians
in respect to it? Surely it behoves every
particular church to make the Bible its one
standard of faith and duty; enjoining its
ministers that they teach nothing as re-
quired of necessity unto eternal salvation but
what may be concluded and proved by the
Holy Scriptures; and, further, to take care that
in its modes of prayer, rites, and ceremonies
which, not being prescribed by the Scriptures,
may be regulated at its own discretion, there
be nothing “repugnant to the Word of God.”
Moreover, it behoves every church to promote
as much as possible the reading of the Bible
by all its people, and especially to
provide for the training up of the young in
such a knowledge of the sacred volume that
they may be strengthened to resist the mani-
fold temptations to evil-doing to which they
will be exposed in after years, and enabled to
“ walk in the way of good men, and keep the
paths of the righteous.” In proportion as
particular churches distinctly recognise and
faithfully fulfil their duty herein, they will
severally maintain in themselves “ the faith
which was once (for all) delivered to the
saints,” and likewise “the holiness without


which no one shall see the Lord.” In the
same proportion also will they promote the
attainment of that true catholic unity for
which Oar Lord prayed, and which, therefore,
all who love and serve Him ought to pray for,
and confidently expect, and earnestly endea-
vour to hasten on. The desire now so gene-
rally, in various ways, expressed for it, may
not improperly be regarded as an indication
of God’s purpose at no distant time, in
answer to the prayer of our Divine
Mediator, to make all Christians to become
so manifestly one that the world may
again see, and acknowledge, and admire the
love which they have one towards another.
Again, turning from the consideration of
particular churches as organised bodies to
that of individuals, I would ask. What is the
duty of ministers of Christ with respect to the
Bible ? Surely it behoves each one of them to
remember that by no other means can he
“ compass the doing of so weighty a work as
that entrusted to him, pertaining to the sal-
vation of man, but with doctrine and exhor-
tation taken out of the Holy Scriptures.”
Vain are all the discoveries of science, vain
all the speculations of philosophy, vain all
the arguments and appeals of human' reason-
ing and human eloquence, except so far as
they illustrate, confirm, and set forth the
truths of the Bible, either for the conviction
and conversion of a sinner, or for the edifi-
cation or consolation of a saint. “To the
law and to the testimony ”—to the Bible in
its imperfect state—was the exhortation of
the prophet Isaiah; and to the Bible as we
now have it in its completeness, must every
faithful steward of the mysteries of God direct
his hearers ; for, if any speak not according to
this word, it is because there is no light in
them. Once more, what is the duty of
private Christians with respect to the Bible ?
Does it not behove each individual to “search
the Scriptures,” as knowing that in them we
“have eternal life” —to search them for
himself, not to take what they teach upon
trust Irom others ? While every Christian
should be willing and thankful, for the better
understanding and more profitable use of the
Bible, to receive instruction from the voice of
the living aqd from the writings of the dead,
no one who can read the Scriptures ought
to call any man “master,”or teacher, as not
to “prove all things” by them, and so, with
God’s help, certainly distinguish, and firmly
“hold fast that which is good.” To all who
have received an ordinary education, the
Bible ought to be the “lamp” unto their feet,
and the “light” unto their path. Out of it
they ought to draw arguments for be-
lief, motives for obedience, strength against
the day of temptation, and confidence
and joy for the hour of death. But
Christians have also another duty with
respect to the Bible. It teaches us that we
should “ look not every man on his own
things, but every man also on the things of
others.” Hence every Christian ought not
only to read the Bible himself, but also to
take care, so far as he is able, that it be read
by all the members of his family and house-
hold, and others under his personal in-
fluence ; and not only so, but likewise to help
his poor neighbours, who would otherwise be
unable, and persuade the ungodly who are
naturally unwilling, to procure and use the
sacred volume. Nor should he stop here.
He should endeavour to extend the blessings
which the Bible brings with! it over a wider
circle still—throughout the land he dwells in,
and further yet,(even to the uttermost regions
of the earth. And this, blessed be God, by
the agency of the British and Foreign Bible
Society, and other societies of a kindred nature,
each of us may help to do. By them we
can severally aid in circulating over all
the continent of Europe, among the English
speaking population of the world wide British
dominions, and among all the chief nations
of the earth—European and Asiatic, African
and American—in their own native languages,
that book which has made our fathers, and
will, we trust, make us and our posterity
throughout all generations, a free, intelligent,
and prosperous, and, comparatively at least, a
moral and religious people.
Throughout his remarks, the bishop was
listened to with the closest attention, and on
resuming his seat was loudly applauded.
On the motion of the Rev. H. M. Becheb,
hon. secretary of the Bible Society, a vote of
thanks to the bishop for the lecture he had
delivered, was carried by acclamation.
A collection was then made on behalf of
the Victorian branch of the society ; and
votes of thanks to the chairman for presiding,
and to the Rev. A. M. Henderson and the
deacons of the Independent Church, for allow-
ing the use of the building, were passed.
The Ven. the Dean of Melbourne pro-
nounced the Benediction, and the proceedings
terminated.
STILLWELL AND KNIGHT, PRINTERS, COLLINS STREET EAST.
