

I/*'
/] W
9 0 O p o o
tr.\ v jsyfa. . /r&sv „
A SERMON,
PREACHED ON THE 23rd NOVEMBER, 1858,
RIGHT REVEREND
AND METROPOLITAN OF THE PROVINCE OF AUSTRALASIA,
BY THE
REY. WILLIAM HODGSON, M.A.,
OP SIDNEY SUSSEX COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE, AND
PRINCIPAL OF MOORE COLLEGE, LIVERPOOL, N. S. W.
PUBLISHED BY REQUEST.
“ THE RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE
CHRISTIAN MINISTER.”
AT THE PRIMARY VISITATION OF THE
FREDERIC, LORD BISHOP OF SYDNEY
r/Oif^tO




“THE RESPONSIBILITIES OF TH E
CHRISTIAN MINISTER.”
A SERMON,
PREACHED ON THE 23rd NOVEMBER, 1858,
AT THE PRIMARY VISITATION OF THE
RIGHT REVEREND
FREDERIC, LORD BISHOP OF SYDNEY
AND METROPOLITAN OF THE PROVINCE OF AUSTRALASIA,
BY THE
RET. WILLIAM HODGSON, M.A.,
OF SIDNEY SUSSEX COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE, AND
PRINCIPAL OF MOORE COLLEGE, LIVERPOOL, N. S. W.
PUBLISHED BY REGUEST.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY READING AND WELLBANK-,
BRIDGE STREET.




SERMON.
“ Take heed therefore unto yourselves, and unto all the flock over the which
the Holy Ghost hath made you overseers, to feed the Church of God, which He
hath purchased with His own blood.”
Acts xx. 28.
There are peculiar occasions which scarcely seem to leave
any choice about the subject to which the minds of the
speaker and the hearers shall direct themselves. In case of
any sudden and appalling calamities, such as the occurrence
of a destructive fire in a vessel on the open sea, the topics of
thought and exhortation, while all available means of escape
were being resorted to, would be simple reliance upon the
mercy of God in Christ Jesus, and prayer in faith to Him,
“ who hath gathered the winds in his fists, and hath bound
the waters in a garment,” and without whom not even a
sparrow shall fall upon the ground. Beside the open grave
of a departed friend, solemn thoughts about death and
judgment and eternity present themselves, almost as if by
instinct, and then is the season for dwelling upon the
happiness of “ them that sleep in Jesus,” and for urging
upon those who desire to “ die the death of the righteous”
the necessity of living decidedly and entirely unto God. At
present there is another subject which appears to suggest
itself for our attention. According to Apostolic example and
primitive practice, ministers of Christ are now assembled at
the invitation of the chief Pastor of the Diocese. On such
an occasion it seems every way fitting that the thoughts should
revert to the celebrated instance in which the elders or
Presbyters of the Church at Ephesus were convened at


Miletus, for the purpose of hearing from their chief Minister,
the Apostle Paul, such words of counsel, caution, and
encouragement, as the Spirit of God supplied to him.
The address of the Apostle upon that memorable occasion
claims to be attentively pondered by every Christian student,
and has doubtless, my reverend brethren, received from every
one of you much careful, earnest, and prayerful consideration.
It is not, therefore, with the hope or with the desire of
proposing anything novel or unknown, but rather with the
wish of stirring up your minds and my own concerning things
already well known and understood, that I would beg you to
join me in meditating, with simple dependence upon the
enlightening and sanctifying power of the Holy Spirit, upon
some of the topics which are set before us in the words—
“ Take heed to yourselves, and to all the flock over which the
Holy Ghost hath made you overseers, to feed the Church of
God which He hath purchased with His own blood. 1 ’
1. The tone of earnest caution which breathes in these
words, and which we seem to feel in almost every other
passage in which ministers of the Gospel are addressed as
such, is of itself sufficient to indicate that the interests
involved in the due discharge of the ministerial office are
incalculably momentous. To Titus, the charge is, “ Take
heed to thyself and to the doctrine.” The message for
another who was called to this responsible office is, “ Say to
Archippus, Take heed to the ministry that thou hast received
of the Lord, that thou fulfil it.” Here, every word seems to
speak the overwhelming importance of the interests at stake.
Who can think of the terms in which those over whom he is
to take the oversight are spoken of, without feeling that the
preciousness of that which has been committed to his trust
cannot be overstated. The flock, of which he is the overseer,
comprises that which has been the subject of the counsels of
eternal love, “or ever the earth and the world were made.”
It includes that which the Holy Ghost has especially cared
for. It belongs to that Church of God which He who is God
purchased with his own blood.


I know that it is not unusual for men to speak of souls,
with the same thoughtless or reckless indifference to their real
worth, as staticians record “so many head of cattle, or so
many pounds of wool.” I am aware that the idea connected
with the word soul by the world at large has very little
reference to the soul’s actual value, and it becomes us to take
heed that we allow not ourselves to be influenced by an error
which, notwithstanding its extensive prevalence and general
acceptation, must paralyse all ministerial efficiency and
success. We must not forget that the soul of the meanest
wretch of the most degraded class is still a priceless gem. It
is an offspring of the Deity. It lives by reason of the fiat of
its Heavenly Father concerning it. We may accumulate in
our thoughts the countless waves of the mighty ocean, the
sands by which these proud waves are held in check, the
blades of grass that since the world’s creation have grown and
withered on the surface of the earth, we may add to these the
many many busy thoughts , which, with ceaseless activity,
have been thronging through the minds of the millions of
the earth’s present inhabitants; and even then, if, for each
separate wave, and grain, and blade, and thought, a full
century were told off as portion of the soul’s existence, there
would still remain in the fathomless eternity reserved for it a
continuance which baffles our power of conception. Who,
indeed, shall estimate the value of that soul which is to live
for ever ?
But the ministry which we have received not only deals
with souls which must live for ever ; there is, besides this,
the bearing of all that is done or left undone upon the
condition in which this eternity is to be spent by each of all
the flock entrusted to us. This, indeed, brings forcibly
before us the deep importance of our solemn and responsible
office. If the watchman fail to warn the wicked from his
wicked way, “ the wicked man will die in his iniquity.' I ''
The precious treasure will be lost—the immortal soul will be
“ punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of
the Lord.” If, in the place of the pure Gospel of our Lord


Jesus Christ, some spurious counterfeit is put forth, if the
superstitions of Apostate Rome, or the frivolities of semi-
popery or some system of more moderate and less offensive
Pharisaism be allowed to usurp the place of “ the truth as it
is in Jesus,” it is no slight, or single, or momentary injury
that is inflicted ! We can all of us be loud in our indignation
in denouncing the mismanagement which allows an incom-
petent captain to take the command of some noble vessel
which sails gaily on some summer’s day from the harbour, and
through the careless negligence, or the mere simple ignorance
of her commander, founders with all hands on board. It is
but a year or two back since every mouth was full of loud
and bitter complaints about the grievous fault of those, whose
want of care, or want of knowledge, or some similar deficiency,
allowed thousands of brave men to perish unnecessarily, and
through sheer incompetency prolonged a sanguinary struggle,
which in abler hands would have had a speedy as well as a
glorious termination. What, then, shall we say when the
treasure that is thrown away through the carelessness, or
ignorance, or incompetency of the minister, so far surpasses,
in value, any merchandize however costly, any earthly
victory however glorious, and even thousands of human lives,
viewed simply as regards the body ?
There is too, another and more cheering aspect in which
we may view the importance of the interests involved in the
work of the ministry,—lt is true that where the ministry is
decidedly erroneous or seriously defective or neutralized by
worldly conformity, immortal souls in great numbers are
hurried on to perdition ! But there is another and a
brighter picture ! Where the truths delivered have been
in accordance with “ the wisdom which the Holy Ghost
teacheth,” and where the power of the Lord has been present
to carry the truth home to the heart and conscience, there the
result which follows is that the soul is quickened, sanctified,
and saved ! The minister in such cases is really nothing.
The power is altogether of God. Still by the appointment of
God there is a bond established in every such instance, which


admits not of separation. Between the nearest and dearest of
earthly friends, there does arise from time to time, coolness,
estrangement, dissension, or some other similar sad conse-
quence of human infirmity. And even if these be avoided,
still the ties between parent and child, husband and wife,
brethren and sisters, friends and companions as such, all
terminate at death ; but it is different with that bond which
is formed, when one can say of another as his minister, “ He
was to me what Paul was to Philemon, 1 owe to his faithful
preaching of the word my soul's salvation.” There is
something; here as indestructible as the soul’s own eternal
existence. If those between whom this relation subsists are
taken from each other for a season it is “ in presence not in
heart,” and when earth and its concerns have passed away
from them for ever, it is then that the importance of the
interests involved in that ministry, which has united them to
each other by uniting each of them to Christ, begins to be
felt in all its reality. Even on earth we may see some little
of the benefit flowing from the blessing of the Lord upon his
own appointed ministry. Let a single case be taken. It
requires but little stretching of the imagination to conceive
the course of a young man void of spiritual understanding,
snared in succession by the various allurements of seductive
pleasure, or cold calculating infidelity, or mere indifferent
worldliness, ignorant of the precious truths of God’s word,
careless about the soul, wasting on empty trifles the time,
the abilities, and the opportunities afforded for nobler
objects, and at length lying down in sorrow and perishing
for ever. But how striking is the contrast when the young
man is arrested in his downward course, quickened, under the
influence of a gospel ministry, by the power of the Spirit and
giving by his life a clear exemplification of that path of the just
which is like the morning dawn that shineth more and more
unto the perfect day! It is matter of every day’s observation
that in cases of this description the whole man undergoes
an entire change. Ail the faculties of the mind, all the
feelings of the heart, all the powers of the body, are enlisted


in a new service. It is felt to be a pleasure to devote heart,
and soul, and mind, with all their strength, to the service of
Christ. The Scriptures are loved as a peculiar treasure; the
truths which they contain are referred to with undisguised
satisfaction ; every occupation that is engaged in, and every
company that is entered, is regarded as profitless unless a
sweet savour of Christ is diffused throughout it. The course,
as a whole may be described as Christian usefulness ; and
difficult as it may be to estimate the extent to which the rays
from one such centre may spread themselves, it is not on
earth that we can fully understand all that is included under
the term—a soul saved! It will not be until the faithful
minister has met, “in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ
at his coming,” the souls which God has given to be “ his
glory, and joy, and crown of rejoicing,” that he will fully
enter into the incalculable importance of the interests entrusted
to him while on earth. Then, but not till then, will he
rightly understand the value of immortal souls as belonging
to the flock of Christ, as numbered with the Church of God,
as purchased by the precious blood of the Redeemer, and
fitted for the enjoyment of heaven only by the Holy Ghost.
When such, my reverend brethren, is the overwhelming
importance of the interests upon which our efforts as Ministers
of Christ are to bear, who can avoid feeling the necessity of
giving earnest heed to the duties of the office to which we
have been called ? In such a business to be heedless,
careless, and indifferent, is, as far as in us lies, to resist the
will of the Father, to grieve the Holy Spirit, to render
ineffectual the precious blood-shedding of the Lamb of God,
and to secure the ruin of our own souls.
11. What then, is the work to which we are so sacredly
bound to give earnest and continual heed? It is a business
which, for the wide extent of particulars which it includes,
the patient and assiduous labour which it requires, and for
the delicacy and difficulty of the operations to be carried on,
exceeds all others to which the mind and heart of man can
apply themselves. We are “ overseers,” not of some small or


large estate, not of some important province, not as Daniel
was of the temporal interests of 120 provinces ; but of some-
thing far more important. Each of the souls committed to
our oversight is a treasure which “ outweighs the astonishing
magnificence of unintelligent creation and calls it poor.”
The only proper standard by which to estimate its value is
furnished by the fact that for it the Son of God expired in
shame and agony, enduring wrath for its salvation. It should
be remembered also that the souls entrusted to our care have
all by nature a strong and, humanly speaking, an invincible
disinclination to hear of or to care for those things to which
it is our office to win them over. What subject is there about
which men are more sensitive than the sins which are recorded
against them in the book of God’s remembrance ? and yet if
these are not felt and acknowledged before God, lamented with
genuine sorrow, cast in faith upon the Lord our righteousness,
and loathed and forsaken, how can sinners be delivered from
the guilt and power of their sins ? Who shall estimate the
difficulty of a minister’s being in these days what Jonah was
in Nineveh, what Nathan was to David, and what John the
Baptist was to Herod ? It is scarcely requisite to say that
before this can be done we must have learned something more
than the number or the names of our parishioners, or such
general facts concerning their circumstances as might be
gathered by the casual observation of an occasional visitor,
and might, for the information of ourselves and others, be
registered in a statistical table. More, far more than this, is
necessary; more, far more than this has been acquired by
every minister whose heart is in the work which his Lord has
given him to do. The acquaintance which we require with
the souls for whom we are set to watch is not to be gained
without frequent and friendly intercourse with our parishioners,
carried out according to some definite and well-ordered system.
The knowledge of individual character is imperatively de-
manded before we can discern what each requires, or be, in a
proper sense, able to “ give to each his portion of meat in due
season.” And how shall this be attained? Not, certainly,


without much earnest attention, much patient study, much
careful thought, much earnest prayer. The oversight of the
parochial minister includes all ranks in society, all varieties
of temporal circumstances, all the phases of constitutional
temper, all differences of age, all the diversities of prejudice
and error, and all the stages of religious progress from that of
profound ignorance or decided hostility, to that of the
established Christian who is ii an example of the believers in
word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity.”
And with all these his business is to feed the soul ; if he fail
to accomplish this end, all the efforts which he has put forth
must be regarded as altogether useless and unavailing.
However, much he may have done as a man, as a minister he
has done nothing !
It is no doubt true that the parochial minister in these
days has one great advantage arising from the extensive
circulation of the pure word of God. He is there provided
with ample materials from which to draw his supplies for
feeding that portion of the Church of God which is committed
to him. It is by the living truths of the sacred Scriptures
that his own soul is to be directed, animated, encouraged,
comforted, and sustained. It is here that he finds the bread
which he is to break for the food of others, and on which he
is to feed himself. It is here that he is furnished with the
sword of the Spirit, with which to drive away all erroneous
and strange doctrines. It is here that he is supplied with
an infallible standard of appeal by which all his teaching is to
be tried and tested on earth, and by which, on the day of
solemn account, all his proceedings will be weighed and
judged. He has also a further advantage, in the fact that
the Law of God has appointed one day in seven, on which it
is the duty of his people to hear at his mouth “the law of the
Spirit of life, in Christ Jesus.” It is then that he sees before
him those who are “ present before God to hear all the
things that are commanded him of God.” It is then that the
necessity laid upon him of preaching the Gospel should be
faithfully met; it is then that especial care should be exercised


that he should not render himself liable to the curse denounced
against the man that preacheth “ another Gospel, which is not
another, - ” but nothing else than a perversion of the Gospel of
Christ. Then is it particularly needful that the doctrine
should be sound, the language simple, the statements clear, the
application pointed and discriminating, and that love for souls
and love for Christ should be the animating principle of the
whole. The truth which we are commissioned to teach is so
simple that it is capable of penetrating the mind of early child-
hood, and yet so sublime in itself and in its consequences as
to furnish the ablest intellects with inexhaustible materials for
continued, sweet, pleasant, and profitable meditation. Into
these things “ the angels desire to look !” and oftentimes,
upon the withholding or the proclaiming of the truth con-
cerning these things, is suspended that repentance of a sinner
which occasions “joy amongst the angels of God. 1 ’ When,
then, the importance of the public preaching of the
word is duly estimated ; when it is remembered that this part
of the minister’s duty requires him to set forth with unhesi-
tating plainness, and with ever fresh variety of illustration
and application, the great truths of the Gospel so distasteful
to the unconverted, and so precious to every renewed soul—
who is there but must feel that the work to which he has
been called is indeed one of heavy responsibility, which
requires the energies of the whole man for securing any
approach towards its due performance ?
But it is not only in the pulpit, whether on the Sabbath
or during the week, it is not only in the preparation for
public work of this description, that the minister is charged
with the oversight of the flock. The souls of the young are
to be cared for. It rests with the minister to see that the
lambs of the flock are not neglected. It is his business to see
that the food which they require is abundantly supplied.
One of his earliest cares will be for the establishment of a
school where none previously existed, and where this necessary
portion of a parochial charge is already found, he will not be
satisfied unless, in addition to secular knowledge of a right


and profitable character, there is also imparted that dis-
tinctive religious teaching, which inculcates the misery, the
guilt, and the desert of sin, the sufficiency of the Saviour’s
atonement, the necessity for the quickening, illuminating
and sanctifying power of the Holy Spirit, and the willingness
of God to receive and bless all who come to Him through
Jesus Christ. In the furtherance of this object the Sabbath
School affords no inconsiderable assistance—but here again,
the care and attention, and oversight of the minister, are all
called into exercise. It is necessary that the doctrines, the
principles, and the practice of those who are engaged in
instructing others, should be sound and pure, and holy.
It is during childhood that the heart is most open to
impression, and it is then that oftentimes those principles
are imbibed, which, for good or evil, exercise a powerful
influence on the entire proceedings of a whole life time.
Here therefore the importance, not only of a wise selection
of teachers presents itself, but we see also another portion of
the minister’s business in regulating the Teachers’ meetings
and rendering them profitable, not only to the Teachers who
attend them, but also through them to the classes which they
are set to teach.
Then, again, there are peculiar seasons, which it becomes
the minister sedulously to improve. Such, for instance, is the
occasion of a Confirmation. Here an opportunity is afforded
of reaching those who may not have been savingly
influenced either in the school or from the pulpit At such
a season, when the young are about to declare in public that
they are in themselves, and desire to be by others regarded,
as members of Christ, children of God, and heirs of the
kingdom of heaven, it is imperative upon the minister to
see that the instruction afforded be sound and clear and
definite, and that the conscience in each case should be so
tenderly, kindly, and effectually dealt with, as to make each
candidate aware of the necessity for an enlightened under-
standing, a renewed heart, and along with simple trust in
Jesus, a determination by the grace of God to lead a godly


and a Christian life, in order to a profitable attendance upon
that interesting rite of our Church. “ Christ Jesus the
Lord ” must first of all have been “ received ” in the heart,
before a public profession of having received Christ can
be anything but a mockery, as regards those that make it.
And it is part of the duty of the minister to render this
evident to those with whom he has to do, lest that which
is taken as food should be like the deadly opiate rendering
the torpor of the soul only the more confirmed, and therefore
the more dangerous.
Nor is it only with regard to attendance at confirmation
that this truth requires to be clearly proclaimed. The
same principle comes into operation with regard to attendance
at the Lord’s Table. In the church, to which we belong,
we have what is called an open communion. All are invited
to come, and all are admitted except those whose lives show
openly by scandalous sin, that the profession which they
would make, cannot possibly be true. All are invited, and
the business of examining and deciding who is and who is
not to communicate, is made to rest not with the minister but
with the parishioner. The scriptural direction is that which
is adopted, “ Let a man examine himself , and so let him eat.”
With the minister, however, there does rest the duty of
instructing the congregation that this sacred ordinance was
designed, not for souls “ dead in trespasses and sins,” but for
souls alive unto God by faith in Christ Jesus; that it was
appointed, not for the world or the people of the world to
partake, but for the disciples of Christ—disciples who are
such not in name only or by profession, but “ disciples
indeed,” who know the truth, and who by the truth have
been made free.
There are numerous other particulars of the work assigned
to us as ministers, which time will scarcely allow me even to
name. There is, for instance, the attendance at the bed of
sickness and death, the regular round of pastoral visitation,
the calling into active exercise the sympathies and the
liberality of all classes in support of those institutions which


have for their object the diffusion of the pure word of God,
the maintaining of missionaries among the heathen or the
Jews, the building of churches and schools, and the support
of ministers and teachers in places which otherwise would be
left destitute, the circulation of books and tracts of decidedly
religious character, and similar useful and Christian designs.
We have scriptural authority for asserting that “ the liberal
soul shall be made fatand experience uniformly testifies
that under a ministry where associations such as those above
alluded to are in most vigorous operation, there also there is
most of vital godliness and personal holiness.
Enough, I think, has been said to show the wide extent,
the extreme delicacy, and some of the peculiar difficulties of
the work assigned to us; but we may not altogether omit that
which occupies so prominent a place in our text. The
minister is to take heed not only to all the flock, but especially
to himself. Personal inconsistency is a great barrier to minis-
terial success. And who is there but has found occasion to
observe how easily such inconsistency insinuates itself, where
it is by the individual himself least suspected, and how
difficult it is to attain to that standard which the Holy
Scriptures have established for those who are to be ministers
to others in the affairs of the soul. Who can read the
descriptions which are found in the epistles to Timothy
and Titus and not feel that in this particular alone there is
enough to call for continual diligence, untiring watchfulness,
unceasing prayer ?
111. Well indeed may we exclaim upon reviewing the
momentous interests involved in the ministry and the extent
and difficulty of the work assigned to us—well indeed may
we exclaim, “ Who is sufficient for these things V Man in
himself for such a business has no might or power at all.
But though man can of himself do nothing, there is all-
sufficiency with God, He is able out of weakness to bring
forth strength and to give the increase of strength to those
who have no might of their own. It is from Him that we
have our commission. It is the Holy Ghost who hath made


us overseers of the flock and feeders of the Church of God.
It is the same Holy Spirit who in the old time said
“ Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto
I have called them, ,, that at the present day awakens the
desire for ministry in the heart within, and overcoming all
outward obstacles, authorises and empowers men to become
really ministers of the Gospel of Christ. As Clergymen of
the Church of England, we have all solemnly declared, that
concerning ministering in the congregation, “we ought
to judge those lawfully called and sent, which be chosen and
called to this work by men who have public authority given
them in the congregation to call and send ministers into the
Lord’s vineyard.” As to our authority and commission
before men there is therefore no question, but there must be
something more than this before we can have our commission
acknowledged and sealed before God. The witness of the
Spirit, with the spirit of the believer, concerning the reality
of adoption, is necessary for the comfort of every Christian
as a child of God. It is necessary for him to know, that the
cry by which he calls upon God as Abba Father, arises from
the Spirit of Christ, which God has implanted in the heart,
because he is a son of God. And a similar witness of the
Spirit is what the minister requires for his comfort and for
his usefulness. It is doubtless for this reason that the
Apostle Paul so continually speaks of himself as being a
minister, or being made a minister, or having grace given
him to preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of
Christ. And it was in this same spirit that Henry Martyn,
the Evangelist of India, expressed his thankfulness, when he
said, “ Blessed be God I feel myself His minister.” The
comfort, the vigour, and the success of a ministry is
dependent, in a great degree, upon the clearness with which
this truth is realized. Where any doubt is felt on this
subject, there must necessarily be uncertainty and weakness,
and hesitancy about all that is attempted or done. There
is no feeling that the power of God is pledged for the
carrying of his work on the souls of men, and there is little


inclination to set in earnest about a business, of which the
issue is regarded as not sure to be attended with success. In
such a frame of heart we shall be ready to say with Mos&s,
“ O my Lord, I am not eloquent neither heretofore nor since
thou has spokeu unto thy servant, but I am slow of speech,
and of a slow tongue.” “O my Lord, send, I pray thee, by
the hand of him whom thou wilt send ;” or like Jonah, instead
of preaching the preaching which the Lord hath bidden us,
we shall be ready “to flee from the presence of the Lord,” and
give ourselves wholly to the world. It is widely different
from this, when the mind can realize the divine call to the
ministry, and the man can feel that the Spirit of the Lord
who made him an overseer of the flock is with him to give
him that knowledge, and wisdom, and grace, and strength,
that stedfast faith, that fervent love, that lively hope, which
as a minister of Christ he so greatly needs. Then it is a
happiness to feel that the man is nothing, the minister
nothing, hindrances nothing, difficulties nothing, perplexities
nothing, weakness nothing, but that God is all and in all.
He feels that the same Holy Spirit who brought Philip
to the Ethiopean treasurer and blessed the preaching which
He prompted in that evangelist; the same Spirit who bade the
Apostle Peter, go nothing doubting with the messengers of
Cornelius and blessed to the salvation of a whole household
the words in which the gospel was then preached; the same
Spirit who, forbidding Paul and his companions to turn to
the right hand or to the left, brought them to Philippi, when
there were hearts to be opened and souls to be saved, is
with him also to guide, to teach and to bless him in his
labours. He feels that the work is the work of God, the
power the power of God, and unto God alone would
he ascribe the glory.
Such, my reverend brethren, are some of the topics of
thought which our text has appeared to me to suggest for our
consideration. When we think of the work to which we have
been called, and remember the interests that have been perilled
or sacrificed by ignorance, or indolence, or carelessness in


times past, which of us is there but must humble himself for
negligence, defect, and short coming ? Which of us is there
but must feel that the blood of Christ is needed by the ablest
and most diligent, and most successful minister, for the sins
of which as minister he has been guilty ? Which of us but
must join with the Apostle Paul in declaring, “ this is a
faithful saying and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ
Jesus came into the world to save sinners of whom I am
chief r
Who, again, who surveys the work that is still before him,
and remembers his own inability and weakness, but must feel
his need of the continual supply of the Spirit of Christ, to
furnish with present strength, and to fit him for future emer-
gencies 2 At all times we need the out-pouring of the Spirit
upon ourselves and upon our people ; but how urgent is our
need at this time, when differences of opinion on important
subjects are firmly held and may be strongly expressed 2
How much reason have we to pray that the Spirit of the
Lord may rest upon us, as “ the Spirit of wisdom and under-
standing, the Spirit of counsel and might, the Spirit of know-
ledge and of the fear of the Lord,” that nothing may be done
to give offence or cause the ministry to be blamed. Let us
not think the voice of caution unnecessary for ourselves, for it
was of those to whom the words of the text were first addressed,
that the sure word of inspiration declared, “of your own
selves shall men arise speaking perverse, things; to draw away
disciples after them.'”
One other thought there is which I would wish to leave
with you. What abundant materials have we for thankful-
ness in reflecting that God has not only appointed divers
orders of men in his Church “ for the perfecting of the
saints, for the work of the ministry, and for edifying of the
body of Christbut that unto us it has been granted to take
part in this ministry, by which the Gospel of Christ is pro-
claimed to a lost world, immortal souls are saved and blessed
for evermore, and praise unceasing accrues unto the Lord our
God.


May He who has called us to so high and responsible an
office bestow upon us thankful hearts, that we may rightly
feel His mercy, may He pardon all that He has seen amiss
in us, may He bestow upon us abundantly the supply of His
Holy Spirit, may He give us in our ministry prosperity and
good success, and to His name for evermore be ascribed all
praise and glory.
.Heading and Wellbank, Printers, Bridge Street, Sydney,




