

FLOCKS a HERDS OF Q’LAND.




THE
FLOCKS & HERDS
OF
QUEENSLAND,
AND
Queensland Products
IN EUROPE.
BY ROBERT CHRISTISON.
Printed from “Brisbane Courier.”
Brisbane:
W. H. WENDT & Co., PRINTERS, LITHOGRAPIIERS &c., EDWARD STREET.
MDCCCXCVI.


The Flocks and Herds
of Queensland.
THE present prosperity of Queensland mainly depends upon the
successful rearing of sheep and cattle, which provide man’s two
,'rcatest necessities —namely, food and raiment. May it be understood
that Ito a great extent allude to Australia, as it is to be hoped for
many reasons that the confederation of the various colonies will soon
ho a reality. But in any matter to which I may draw particular atten-
tion, condemning much that I feel to be wrong, my arguments will be
directed against those whose duty it is to improve the docks and herds
of Queensland, and not against our neighbours. Having devoted
nearly all my life to the study of stock, and after a local experience in
North Queensland of thirty-three years, I think that I may be allowed
to write upon this subject as one having authority.
SHEEP FOR FLEECE AND MUTTON.
1 intended to treat the herds only, but as the Hocks are more im-
portant than the herds, I could not well leave them out of this paper.
Therefore, before treating of the cattle in Australia, I will briefly refer
to nur flocks, for it appears to me that we are running unwittingly into
dinger. This danger has been persistently avoided since the day when,
nearly one hundred years ago, Captain Waterhouse, Mr. Macarthur of
Camden Park, and others, imported the grand type of merino sheep.
It is doubtful who was the first importer, but we do know that Mr.
Macarthur has the distinction of being the first exporter of merino
wool in quantity. The introduction of merino sheep showed wonder-
ful judgment, and time has proved how admirably adapted the geogra-
phical and natural conditions of Australia are for the merino.
Before the discovery of gold, wool was our principal export, and
even without this discovery the golden fleece would, in time, have
brought this continent into prominence. Only think what the value of
our annual clip of wool is at this day for Australia alone ! I shall
not occupy space by quoting statistics ; we are all well aware that, both
individually and nationally, our wool returns to a certain extent com


prise our source of security and wealth. Its production adds a value
to our land, even greater than that of our gold resources, for when that
ore is extracted from the bowels of the earth, what is there left in the
land ? Fortunately for us, with the exception of a few localities, the
country where gold is found is not adapted to the rearing of sheep.
The drawback to the production of a fine type of wool is that
merino mutton is not at present in favour in our European markets.
The danger to which I have alluded is likely to accrue by those pos-
sessing a fine type of merino sheep rushing into a cross which must fie.
teriorate the Australian merino in order to produce a mutton sheep
which, to a great extent, is in demand now. But before rushing into
cross breeding we should pause and consider the circumstances and con-
ditions surrounding such a step, which in my mind, would lead us into
interminable blunders.
The taste of those in the British Isles has hitherto been for the
cross-bred mutton and for various other types, which, for convenience
sake, if you will allow me, I will call the cross-breds. Such a class of
sheep thrive and do well in Britain, whereas merinos do not. Hence,
as the natural issue, the community of flesh-eaters have habituated
themselves to its use. The class of mutton which is now in the grea-
test demand, and which brings the highest price, is the small-framed
sheep of Scotland and Wales. And why is it so? Simply because the
lean meat and the fat of Scotch and Welsh sheep is richer, more tender,
and more palatable, with less waste than any other breed of sheep,
except perhaps the Australian merino. Those who have watched the
various markets as I have must have seen the tendency of the British
consumer to secure small joints with little fat. The reasons are obvious
—there is. less waste, the whole carcase is profitably used, the lean
meat is richer and more nutritious, the fat is all edible, where;;-, in
heavier sheep the lean is coarse and the fat tallowy. Of course, it is
understood that to produce good meat of any kind the animals must !*•
reared on rich pastures, and must possess good quality, youth, and early
maturity. I am certain that if we but have patience, we shall find
that our Australian merino mutton will command fair, payable prices,
with a steadily increasing demand.
This is but one side of the question before us. The more momen-
tous question, in my mind, is, How far can we go, and how much coun-
try have we in Australia where other sheep than the merino type will
do as well and pay better? Coarse, long woolled sheep would doubtle-.*
do well on Darling Downs, and on the rich loamy flats on the eastern
watershed, but north of this I fear that they would not thrive, but, on
the contrary, deteriorate both in wool and carcass. Such sheep would
do well, especially for lamb, both for export and for local consumption.
Mr. Bruce, the Chief Inspector of Stock in Kew South Wales,
“ advises the resort to crossbreeds for frozen muttori, and he centrist*
the comparative value of such sheep with tljat of merinos, both with
respect to carcass and fleece.” In a table he shows the prices obtain


able for the different varieties, which sets forth that while “ the Lin-
coln cross yields 6s. in wool, and 19s. B|d. in mutton, together 255.
B|d., the merino yields only 3s. 9d. in wool, and 11s. s£d. in mutton,
together 15s. Mr. Bruce also admits “ that the crossbreeds need
topping off with turnips or other artificial food, which somewhat
reduces the apparent profit in this case.” From this we may infer that
crossbreeds might flourish aud pay in the valley of the Hunter ; but
the Western country, like Riverina, a country very similar to the
Western Downs in Queensland, should be devoted to the merino.
Although with the exception of Scotch and Welsh sheep, the
favourite mutton in Britain is a crossbreed, it is not so in France.
Small, young, not over fat sheep are acceptable ; six-tooth merino
wethers would take, especially in Paris, and the Parisian prices would
suit us admirably ; for the London “ Daily News” correspondent some
time ago telegraphed some startling figures in proof of the ruinous policy
of M. Miline and his brother Protectionists. “ They are starving the
poor, or to put it more accurately, are starving all but the rich. The
poor, however, are the worst off both relatively and collectively. The
tough meat sold at Clignau Court is actually dearer than the better
kind sold in the quarter of the Champs Elysees. With veal at Is. 6d.
per lb, mutton at Is. 5d., and beef at Is. Bd. in a poor neighbourhood,
there are absolutely no more errors to commit.” Victoria and Queens-
land cannot upbraid the French for their ruinons policy of
protection, for they are tarred with the same brush. The
following contains a table showing the weights of, and the whole-
sale prices for, meat consumed in Paris during 1894, namely : —-
148,637 tons of beef, veal, and mutton, and 26,324 tons of pork; also
23,186 horses, 383 donkeys, and 43 mules. This represents an average
price of 7d. per lb. for beef, Bd. for veal, for mutton, and 6d. per
lb. for pork ; whilst the prices obtained for horse, donkey, and mule
flesh range from 9d per lb. for the fillet to 3d. per lb. for the side.
In treating of the herds in Queensland, I have much to say regard-
ing the education which ought to be given in the colonies, qualifying
young men for the management of stock. I mention this now, for some
time ago I was very much surprised to see that Mr. Thomas Shaw, of
Victoria, in an article read at the pastoralists’ conversazione in Mel-
bourne, displayed such ignorance of history as to declare that it was
only 150 years ago that scientific sheep-breeding began. “ Lana,”
criticising this assertion in the “Pastoralists’ Review,” most justly
said : “ What authority has Mr. Shaw for this assumption 1 He quotes
none. Yet we can find plenty of authenticated evidence in the works
of the best writers on the merino that scientific-sheepbreeding, to the
highest degree then obtainable, was successfully carried on by the ancient
Greeks and Romans. And for all we know to the contrary, it may
have existed in the previous ages. When we bear iri mind' the splendid
achievements in painting, sculpture, pottery, and other arts in the
bygone past—achievements that have seldom been equalled, and never
excelled—we cannot reconcile Mr. Shaw’s assertion that sheep husban


dry, par excellence, only saw the light such a short time ago in the
world’s history.”
This paragraph which I have quoted contains much that I wish to
impress upon colonists—i. e., the necessity for a thorough training in
history, the better to enable them to further improve the flocks and
herds of Australia. Would not a student in elocution benefit by stu-
dying Demosthenes and Cicero 1 And would not a medical aspirant
be the better for knowing the history of his profession from the days
of Aristotle down to the time of the wonderful discoveries made by
M. Pasteur 1 ? We cannot afford to neglect the experience of one who
lived so long ago as 70 B. C. If we wish to benefit by such, let us
go back to a time 2000 years ago, and consult Rome’s greatest epic poet.
I feel it a privilege to finish what I have endeavoured to say upon the
flocks of New South Wales and Queensland with a quotation fropa
Virgil, who was a pastoralist as well as an artist and a poet, and whose
mighty genius was concentrated upon all these arts when he wrote—
Is wool thy care ?
Let not thy cattle go
Where bushes are, where burrs and thistles grow ;
Nor in too rank a pasture let them feed ;
Then of the purest white select thy breed.
Ev’n tho’ a snowy ram thou slialt I ehold,
Prefer him not in haste for, husband to thy fold,
But search his mouth, and if a swarthy tongue
Is underneath his humid palate hung.
Reject him, lest he darken all the flock,
And substitute another from thy stock.
—Virgil, Georgies, Vol. 11, page 28.
THE HERDS.
I may be pardoned if in treating the herds I express my views in
still stronger terms, as I have recently devoted much time to studying
the history of the various breeds of cattle in the British Isles. Then*
is no colony in Australia which has a more varied aspect of climate
and conditions than Queensland. The difference in temperature in
particularly notable, for whilst in some places the heat is humid, in
others it is dry. In some localities water is plentiful, in others scarce.
There are small areas of country almost at sea level, whilst large area*
exist at an altitude of 2000 ft above the sea, and yet greater area*
extend from the slope of the main dividing range extending away
westward to the extreme limits of our colony. The pasturage is
equally as diversified as the climate, according to geographical
localities, the soil acting in unison with the varied natural condition*
o e its surroundings. In coastal localities, where loamy flats are
interspersed with stony ranges, the grasses are coarse, and salt is
needed ; then there is the basalt tableland country, where the grasses
are naturally richer. Other areas—the great Western Downs, have a


soft rich soil, producing a variety of saline herbs and edible bushes.
Here before us lies a miscellaneous set of circumstances, ordained for
wise purposes, giving us opportunities to work the natural resources of
the country to the greatest advantage. Nature has been most
bountiful to us, for she has given us herds of cattle of various types
of different breeds, so formed physically and constitutionally that each
kind must thrive if the surroundings are but adapted to its natural
proclivities. We may mention the following breeds of cattle
Devons, Herefords, Durhams, Red-polled, Aberdeen-Angus, Sussex,
Galloways, Welsh, Highland, Kerrys, and Dexters. The question
now arises how are we to best utilise the country we possess and the
material at our command unless it be by finding out what breeds of
cattle will thrive best on the various classes of country we have
described, for the matter is one of pounds, shillings, and pence. If
we assist and work in hand with nature we shall succeed ; but go
against her laws and labor is lost.
This is leading up to a more important question. What are the
means we should adopt to improve our vast herds of cattle ? But first
we must get rid of the ignorant prejudices and fashions which. I
regret to say, are rampant in the colonies. We must teach our young
men that to produce good stock they must give their greatest attention
to this study ; also they must be guided by the experience of those
who have travelled' along the same path, and who have given to them
the benefit of their researches. A slight knowledge of anatomy would
help them in judging the frame of any animal, whilst a rudimentary
training in art would teach them to appreciate symmetry of form,
softness of touch and of color, and expression of features. Those who
wish to leave their sons their stations as a heritage should first see
them grounded thoroughly in this theoretical knowledge, so that when
called upon to reduce it to practice they may be fitted for their career.
I am as yet but a disciple of some of the most experienced men who
have written upon this subject in British stock journals and in books
relating to “animal biography.” I shall quote extracts from them
endorsing what I have to say upon this subject, and explaining how
necessary it is that this subject should be treated wiih more con-
sideration.
Mr. W. Housman, wilting in the “ Live Stock Journal,” London,
upon breeding to land and climate, says:
acquired territories, gradually develops new national peculiarities,
whilst retaining a general likeness to the parental type. Yet when he
imports live stock from other countries, or introduces within his own
district the breed of another district of his own country, he feels sur
prised and aggrieved when he observes that breed beginning to vary
from the standard recognised by its producers 1 in the district of its
origin. This or that breed, we sometimes hear, is no longer true to
type : it is degenerating. What must be done 1 The most obvious
course is to, go back to the source for a cross to restore the original
character, or at least to check the rate of departure from that


character. Now, if man would only take the meaning of his own
change of type, and the lesson afforded by the formation of his
national characteristics, under the influences of accustomed scenes and
new exigencies of daily life, he would perhaps allow the pasturage and
climate to do their part unhindered in modifying the breeds of his
live stock, and he would rather try to govern to the achievement of his
own purposes the changes wrought by new conditions, than think of
preventing or retarding those changes by crossing back to the source.
It may be the case sometimes that the land and climate are really
unfavorable to the development of the best and special capabilities of
a new breed which has been introduced; or, on the other hand, that
the land is rich in sustenance which the breed cannot profitably
appropriate. When either of these cases has been clearly proved, lot
the breed be changed, and one more nearly suited to the soil be tried
in its place. A man’s lifetime, or more than the lifetime of one man,
might be fruitlessly spent in battling against the constitutional unfit-
ness of a breed for the soil and climate of a district in which its
establishment had been desired ; or against the incompetency of the
breed to make the most of the capabilities of the land; or, on the
contrary, the insufficiency of the land to develop the capabilities of the
breed. A breed, however, is condemned sometimes as unsuited to a
district upon evidence very ill-chosen and insufficient. Take a breed
of cattle, for example. Its fame has reached the heart of a district
possessing already an established and distinct breed. The statistics of
productive power compare favorably with those of the established
breed of the district, aud some of the farmers or landowners, or both,
as the case may be, are impressed with the excellence of the strange
breed as seen in its specimens at the shows. They are inclined to
believe that they have found something better than they possess; and
one breeder, perhaps more enterprising than his neighbors, clears out
the bulk of his herd, and fills the vacant places with animals of the breed
which he regards as destined to hold the district. Of that breed lie
has previously known nothing but by report and from exhibited
specimens. In his choice of individuals and families he is led away by
the fashion which happens to prevail at the time of purchase, and the
comparatively high prices of animals of certain strains of blood ; or
he may like the looks of animals of one strain better than those of
another, and so, without an opportunity of learning enough about
constitutional differences to guide him in his choice, he launches into
unfathomed depths. To his immense disappointment, the new comers,
with all their brilliant testimonials, cannot compete with the fag-end
lingerers of his old herd as profitable stock. He again clears out, Ibis
time the new instead of the old breed, and, returning to his former
allegiance, pledges himself to unchanging fidelity for the future . .
In choosing a breed for the land, and then so applying it to the
breeder’s art as to extract from it the greatest possible profit, we have
to consider, on the one side, what the land, and on the other side what
the breed, can do. Some land, for instance, with certain climatic
accessories, happens to be specially good for the growth of wool ; other


land, under a different climate, much less favorable to the abundance
and quality of that product, yet particularly favorable to the growth of
mutton. Then there is the land which is classed as grazing land for
cattle, and there is land less favorable to the rearing and ripening of
steers than to the maintenance of dairy cows. The land which comes
under the head of ‘ grazing ’ has many varieties and gradations of
quality. Some gives great substance of lean flesh, some fattens. Some
land has a tendency to refine the animals reared upon it, by reducing
the strength and weight of the bone; and there is land, again, which
grows big bone. It is unneccessary here, and undesirable, to diverge
to the scientific reasons for, or causes of, these differences in the feed-
ing qualities of the herbage grown upon the soil. . . . All breeds
of domesticated animals are so much subject to variation, under
altered conditions, and occasionally under conditions in which we find
no recognisable change, but we can always reckon upon the possibility
of evolving the capabilities and qualities we particularly want from
almost any source. But the evolution is ,i work of time and of skill.
‘ Art is long, and time is fleeting,’ and in the short lifetime of a single
breeder, even if he live to a good old age, it is usually wisdom to seize
the accomplished results of the breeder’s arts rather than attempt a
new structure from the foundation of the ridge of the roof.”
I do not wish to occupy too much space with quotations, but the
following extract from the same writer, Mr. Housman, touches upon
so important a subject —namely, “ Constitution and Quality” —that I
should like to cite it;—“The words ‘constitution’ and ‘quality’ are
commonly used by breeders of cattle as technical terms, to convey
meanings which a reader, ignorant of farm phraseology, and taking
only the definitions of standard lexicons, might not find in them. The
meaning of ‘ constitution ’ as recognised by the educated classes in its
application to the bodies of men or of brutes, is, as Richardson gives
it, the ‘ whole state or condition of bodily health or strength ’ The
word has, of course, political and other meanings which do not concern
us here, but it has no other legitimate meaning for our present subject.
‘ Quality’ is applied to anything pertaining or belonging to, constituting
or forming a constituent part or portion of, appropriated to ! It is
also, says the same authority (Richardson), applied ‘to the kind or
sort, degree or rank, manner, state, condition, property ; and also
emphatically to high degree or rank, as people of quality.’ In none of
these definitions, given with numerous illustrative examples from the
best authors, do we find the meaning, or any of the several meanings,
intended by writers and speakers on live stock subjects when they
describe animals as having ‘ rare quality,’ ‘ good’ or ‘ excellent ’ or
‘ middling quality,’ .or as having ‘ quality’ without an adjective. The
idea, perhaps, most frequently in the writer’s or speaker’s mind when
he thus uses the term, is mellowness to the touch; sometimes it is
refinement of shape, in opposition to coarseness. ‘ Size and consti-
tution in the female, quality and style in the male,’ is a rule widely
received with assent; yet it cannot apply to continuous breeding, for
if the proportionate size of the male and his constitutional strength


were inferior to the size and constitutional strength of the female in
each of many successive generations, and in each of those generations
the shape and style of the male more refined and elegant than the
shape and style of the female, the result would be gradual and con-
tinued diminution of the size and constitutional strength of the breed,
with increased elegance and refinement of form. . . . ‘ Consti-
tution ’ and ‘ quality,’ in the technical sense of each term, are l>oth
quite compatible with either great or small size. We may find
little animals which are extremely coarse, uneven, and mis-shapen, and
big animals of refined form and exquisite beauty of style. We may
likewise find large, strongly built, coarse animals, which would l*>
classed with animals possessing great constitution, yet all, in fact,
thoroughly tainted with constitutional and hereditary disease ; and,
on the other hand, small, neatly shaped animals, of perfectly sound
constitution, and quite hardy. The want of constitutional strength is
most readily detected by the eye, in the external characteristics, where
the space occupied by vital organs is obviously insufficient, as when the
chest is proportionately small and narrow. The quick eye of a prac-
tised breeder will often detect little signs of delicacy elsewhere than
in the structural deficiency, as, for example, in the breathing, even
without the sore, tell-tale cough. It is well to insist upon strength and
soundness of constitution, but to take a big rough frame as a guarantee
that the constitution is right is to rely upon a very uncertain guide.
Very few of even the more successful breeders of live stock seem to
have the habit of communicating adequately the views upon -which they
act. Detached remarks, in the course of conversation, will often indi-
cate to the perceptive listener how much more they know than they
tell; how deep, indeed, is their acquaintance with their subject. Although
they have never reduced their knowledge to any definite system, they
are prepared to do the right thing at tbe right time. The judgment
thus at their command may seem instinctive, intuitive, but it is really
the outcome of long and intelligent observation. They may not have
systematically classed their facts in the pigeonholes of the mind, hut
they have digested and assimilated the knowledge that observation gave
them.”
Now, when master minds in Britain, who are not only breeders
themselves, but who are sprung from families who for generations hack
have handed down the traditions of their trials, failures, and successes,
offer us valuable lessons, we in the colonies ought to gratefully avail
ourselves of such important information.
The management of stock is, with us, styled -an occupation, hut I
have found it to be more ; it is a scientific pursuit; hence the neces-
sity for an education which would lay a foundation for inculcating a
thorough grasp of this branch of science. And here it is opportune to
propose the institution of agricultural and pastoral colleges for the
training of our youths in Australia ; the interest at ,stake being incal-
culable.


I have already said that numerous prejudices exist in the colonies ;
what can be more misleading than this extract from a letter which
appeared in the “ Australian Pastoralists and Breeders’ Gazette,” some
time ago:—“ I contend that it is abundantly proved that in all climates
and in all lands the Shorthorn or Durham cattle are unapproachable.”
The preceding quotations which I have used, refute such a sweeping
assertion. It is quite possible that if he who penned these lines had
stocked his run with “ rubies,” the handsome Devons, instead of his
“ unapproachable ” Shorthorns, he would have suffered less loss in
time of drought, and he would have found that the beam tipped more
to the right side of the ledger.
I condem i no breed of cattle ; all breeds are valuable and profit-
able if bred and reared upon suitable countay. Durhams do well on
on rich pasturage, and on small, well-watered, sheltered areas, where
the temperature is not too high. Devons and Red-polled cattle thrive
admirably on mixed country with loamy flats and stony hills, for their
good feet and activity lead them to browse upon country inaccessible to
Shorthorns. Herefords, with their robust constitution, good feet, and
docile manners, are peculiarly adapted to the tablelands and Western
Downs, where they often have to travel long distances to forage out
food and water. I have mentioned other breeds which, if the influences
of locality are duly considered, by their peculiar natural construction
flourish on country where other kinds would not. For instance, I tried
Durhams on Lammermoor. They did well, but were not, in my mind,
quite satisfactory. I changed to Herefords, which did better, and I
have found that they are more prolific, less prone to disease, that they
mature earlier, and travel better than Durhams ; consequently they pay
better, for the reason that their surroundings arc better adapted to this
particular breed than to Shorthorns. And what is even more impoatant,
the preponderance in weight of their hind-quarters produces a greater
quantity of high-priced beef. Unfortunately this noteworthy matter
has hitherto received little attention in the colonies ; but now that
science enables us to compete in the markets of the world, we should
give this point our careful study. Especially in order to acquire further
improvement in my herds, I went to England to procure an impress to
produce desired results. I had my choice of animals which had been
fattened up for exhibition, but I preferred to select those which had
not received much attention.
It was midwinter, and I made my selections from cattle which
were scraping away the snow in order to reach the short grass, and
which camped in open sheds in fields at night. These had received no
artificial feeding which tends to cover defects, and they showed unmis-
takeable vigour of constitution. I found what I felt to be a w;ant in
my stud herd, and I think that I have achieved my purpose by making
purchases from the herds of Mr. Ranken, M.P., of Mr. Judge
and of Lord Coventry.
The prejudices existing in Australia are numerous ; they are found
inherent principally in those who have not studied the nature of other


breeds of cattle than their own. For instance, Herefords are objected
to as being wild ; whereas we find that when ploughing was done by
oxen in the counties of England, the breed most in demand was the
Hereford, on account of its docility. Again, butchers in the colonics
are accustomed to treat old, heavy bullocks, from which they imagine
that they secure the greatest profit, not having benefited by that keen
competition prevailing in older countries, and which teaches mnturcr
judgment. Devons, Red-polled, &c., are objected to as being apparently
small, but low, thick-set, animals with light bone and wealth of flesh,
multum in parvo, are now considered by our greatest authorities in
Britain, the United States, and Canada the breeds most profitable to
cultivate, as they produce the small joints now in demand. Early
maturity and the development of those portions which command the
highest prices are sought after. Needless bone, muscle, and patchy fat
are not profitable.
A brief account of one breed may be interesting, and I take the
Herefords, as one of the pure breeds.
We know not how long ago Herefords were habitants of Britain,
but we’ learn from Cuyp’s fine pictures of Flemish cattle that “ they
show the Hereford colour, with white faces.” Mr. Thomas Andrew
Knight, of Downton Castle (1790), who was a famous breeder, and who
in the field of research was one of the most distinguished men of his
time, says “ that Hereford cattle in England were greatly improved by
the importation of Flemish cattle by Lord Scudamore.” My friend,
the late Sir Charles Newton, who was keeper of Greek and Roman
antiquities in the British Museum, told me that Lord Scudamore im-
ported white-faced cattle from Pomerania during the reign of Charles
11., the records being preserved in the British Museum. I have derived
much benefit from studying the “History of Hereford Cattle,” by
James MacDonald and James Sinclair. (Published by Vinton and Co.,
Ludgate Circus, London.) To these authors I beg to offer my sincere
thanks. I have given the publisher’s address, for I should like this
book and others upon the various breeds of cattle to have a place in
every station library. Chapter VI. alone in this book would be a reve-
lation to prejudiced minds. It furnishes information showing how our
forefathers, unbiassed, worked out experiments by which they gave us
established tables proved by actual results. How valuable would
similar experience be if we could induce our colonial breeders, who have
reared cattle of various breeds side by side, to follow the example given
by such men as the Reynolds of Tocal, father and sons, Messrs. Barnes,
Smith, Clarke, Irving, Rouse, Wondham, W. H. Walker, and other
famous breeders of New South Wales ; and in Queensland given by the
owners of Gracemere, Glengallan, Canning Downs, Braeside, Durundur,
and further north, of Mount Cornish, Tower Hill, Lyndhurst, and of
other stud herds.
Crossing herds which bear the impress of purity with other breeds
is becoming fashionable ; but the remarks which I have made on cross-
ing whilst treating the flocks, are applicable to cattle also. Crossing


may be carried on in areas where the paddocks are small; and where
watchful care and observation can be given to the accomplishment of
this purpose ; but amongst the large herds in the interior the field is so
vast that the strict attention which is necessary to command success
cannot be given. Doubtless many herds can be improved by judicious
mingling of fresh blood, but in crossing large herds, the difficulty is to
know how far to go, when and where to stop ; but this is too intricate
a problem to be discussed in this paper, lam inclined myself to adhere
to the pure breed whose impress has given me so much satisfaction ;
and as yet I have not learned how I can introduce other blood to im-
prove them.
DAIRY CATTLE.
In order to produce good results, dairy stock should be carefully
selected. Breeds are to be found suitable for almost any of our varied
pastures. I have not time to dwell upon this subject now, but I may
repeat advice given before the Christian era, which is applicable to the
treatment of all the breeds of cattle which have been mentioned in this
paper:—
If milk be thy design, with plenteous hand
Bring clover grass ; and from the marshy land
Salt herbage for the foddering rack provide,
To fill their bags and swell the milky tide ;
These raise their thirst, and to the taste restore
The savour of the salt on which they fed before.
—Virgil, Georgies, vol. 11., page 28.
Regarding the number of our stock from the annual returns, a
large number is put down as marketable cattle, but until the bulk of
our herds is improved, and until they receive better treatment and more
careful management, it will be found that we are far short of the number
estimated as suitable for the European markets. My friend Mr. Edward
Cunningham, of Woodhouse, wrote a letter to the “ Australian Pastoral-
ists and Breeders’ Gazette ” of 15th November, 1894, on “ The Pastoral
Outlook.” This letter gives a graphic description of the bad manage-
ment existing upon many cattle stations in this colony. I regret to say
that I am forced to admit that his statements are only too true ; and
in Mr. Cunningham’s letter there is but one word, “ over-driving,”
from which I dissent. In my mind, cattle should be led, not driven.
Mr. Cunningham says; “ Young men trained on stations where the
pace is fast and furious when mustering is done, cannot easily be
steadied, any more than the half-wild cattle they have been accustomed
to work, and oxoopt whin the boss ”is present, overdrive and over-
heat cattle far beyond the bounds of necessity, owing to which usage
the animals soon get wild, 'and certainly never get fat.” , ,
And here I wish to raise my voice against the great cruelty to
which our stock are subjected. In Queensland the offspring of j many
dairy herds are actually killed by starvation; calves from a day old
being kept simply to induce i their dams to yield all their milk into the


pail. Let those who have pity for the sufferings of the dumb animals
of creation placed under man’s control watch and see how these helpless
creatures are treated, and come to their rescue. It is a lasting disgrace
to the colony that such things should be permitted. I feel sure that if
this subject were laid before the Colonial Secretary he would give it
full consideration. Or departmental authority might be given by the
Chief Inspector of Stock, instructing his subordinates to inquire into
.the matter, and in bad cases to make examples by working in unison
with the various organisations for the prevention of cruelty to animals.
I am afraid that pastoralists, as a rule, do not sufficiently support
those journals which treat on stock matters; neither do they assist
those who are willing and anxious to form and keep up stud-books,
wherein the pure-bred herds of our colonies should be recorded. I have
endeavoured to show that we must pay greater attention to the manage-
ment of our herds and cattle, in order to be able to compete on favour-
able terms with other countries. Also, it is absolutely necessary that
our youth should be trained for agricultural and pastoral pursuits; the
only apparent means by which this end might be accomplished being
the institution of agricultural and pastoral colleges. Likewise, in each
colony more attention should be given to the study of the natural con-
ditions of the soil and climate ; only those products for use in the colony
and for exchange being reared and grown ; for a nation’s wealth does
not consist in the money it possesses, but in the products which aro
available for use and for export. We must not expect to gather grapes
from thorns or figs from thistles.
I cannot allow this opportunity to pass without commenting upon a
subject of even greater importance, and I think that the exigencies of
our time permit me to do so in this paper.
Admitting that our products are equal to those of the United
States, Canada, and Argentina, the question arises, How can we com-
pete with them with profit to ourselves, the disadvantages of distance
being taken into consideration ? At present the shipping arrangements
for our produce are most unsatisfactory. When produce of a perish-
able nature is put on board, it should go by the shortest and quickest
route to its destination ; and ships carrying Australian produce should
not lose time going via New Zealand. But this obstacle can be over-
come. Our greatest difficulty lies in the distribution of our products in
Europe, which has hitherto been confined, with unfavourable results.
With meat selling at unprofitable prices, and with steamers unable to
discharge through want of refrigerating depots, it is now time either to
give up our export trade—and we all know what that- would entail—or
we must pay more attention to the distribution of our products at home.
We mush take the current when it serves,
Or lose our ventures.
We all know what prices consumers pay for our meat in Europe. I
have shown in the columns of the “ Brisbane Courier” how the dis-
tribution of our products can receive Government support without clash-


ing with the recognised rules of political economy. If it is the duty of
a State to encourage the growth of its products, surely it is not incon-
sistent for it to protect them in distribution.
Late events show that England, according to the now historic
phrase of a Canadian statesman, stands “ splendidly isolated.” The
Eight Hon. Mr. Chamberlain, attending the banquet given to Lord
Lamington, the newly appointed Governor of Queensland, said, “ Let
us do all in our power, by improving our communications, by develop-
ing our commercial relations, by co-operating in mutual defence, and
none of us will ever feel isolated. . . . And in the time to come,
the time that must come, when these colonies of ours have grown in
stature, in population, and in strength, this league of kindred nations,
this federation of Greater Britain, will not only provide for its own
security, but will be a potent factor in maintaining the peace of the
world."
How significant are the utterances from the Secretary of State for
the Colonies! In them is a deeper meaning than many of us can
fathom, but we may rightly gather from recent events that England
stands without a friend; and that those nations, which at one time we
thought would become our allies, would now not even remain neutral;
but the loyal expressions of sympathy and aid cabled to England from
United Australia were more to her than any ally, for they encouraged
her to maintain her just and righteous isolation, “ Out of evil cometh
good." The experience gained is invaluable, for Great Britain has
learned that in future she must rely upon her Empire, a united Empire,
alone. Let us in Australia help in this consummation by becoming
stronger through the confederation of our colonies. England is now
without an ally; her position compels her to look to foreign countries
for the greater part of her food supplies, chiefly to those countries which
were recently almost her foes. The Government of Great Britain is
evidently collecting colonial statistics, to find if she can rely upon her
possessions over the sea for her food supplies. England’s outlying colonies
and India could soon supply all requirements. Let Britain give but a
stimulus to colonial production, and her subjects will rise to the occa-
sion. With a United Empire, and with the command of the sea,
England would be independent of all doubtful alliances, and could glory
in her greater safety by isolation, if that were again forced upon her.
If the empire must depend on the empire for food supplies, England’s
fiscal policy must be revised. The people of England dread any policy
which would raise the price of food ; but circumstances may arise which
will compel them to insure their own vitality by encouraging the pro-
ducts of the Empire by placing a small impost upon imported foreign
products. When England accepted free-trade, it was thought that all
countries would adopt that policy. Now we find that that is just what
has not happened. It is here opportune to remark that during the last
fifty years the discoveries in science and in art have completely altered
and revolutionised our intercourse with man. We have progressed in
everything but political economy. Circumstances have arisen through


our progressive march in the creation of our Greater Britain, littU
dreamt of by the author of the “ Wealth of Nations.” Surely oxigrn-
cies demand that special attention should be given to this subject.
Commercial men know that the preponderance of British food supplj. ,
come from foreign countries. Had the United States rushed recklessly
into war against her kith and kin, or had Germany by her insolent ton*
brought about war against her best friend, England could doubt
have repelled invasion; but might not she have suffered from a wor=*
enemy—Starvation ?
With free-trade throughout the empire, with a minimum impr.s*,
upon all products from foreign countries, the Empire would grow an l
expand, commerce would increase, and England possessing such %
unique position, would remain secure within herself and, without doubt-
ful alliances, she would feel strong, and be strong enough to maintain
an independent and dignified isolation.
I have been led into this digression, for I felt that I could not well
have treated the subject of this article—namely, the improvements in
our flocks and herds—if I had neglected to mention the apparently near
prospects of an improved and extended sale for our exported products.
If what I have endeavoured to say upon our flocks and henl«
proves the necessity for an education to prepare our youths for entering
the intricate paths of stock raising, I shall feel amply repaid at seeing
agricultural and pastoral colleges established in all the colonies.
In an article of this kind I feel that I have not been able to crew*
even the threshold of that important subject designated by Goldsmith
“ Animal Biography.”
R. CHRISTISON,
Lanmermoor.


Queensland Products in
Europe.
[To the Editor Brisbane Courier.]
Sir, —With beef selling at 2£d., and mutton at 2£d. per lb. in the
London market, and with steamers unable to discharge through want
of refrigerating depots, thereby increasing the charges thereon, it is
now time either to give up our export trade—and we all know what
that would entail—or we must pay more attention to the distribution of
onr products at home. Assuming that our beef, mutton, and dairy pro-
duce are equal to that of the United States, Canada, and Argentina, the
question arises, How can we compete with them with profit to ourselves,
the disadvantage of distance being taken into consideration ? I think
that Argentina will be our greatest rival, because she is nearet us in the
cost of production; and that republic is now preparing for the trade by
making large purchases of stud stock in England. Argentina has a dis-
advantage in not being “under the flag;” still, this may not be against
her if Malta, a British possession, is allowed to put a prohibitory tax
upon the frozen meat that we ought to send there. However, it is not
politic for a country like ours to remain inactive; for although we have
produce for export, what security have we that when it reaches the home
markets it will return a profit on the transaction ? We cannot continue
commerce resulting in loss. If we take the average receipts for the last
three years, for instance for beef, we shall find that the account sales do
not reach the boiling prices given in the colony.
At the present the shipping arrangements for our produce are most
unsatisfactory. When produce of a perishable nature is put on board,
it should go by the shortest and quickest route to its destination, and
should not lose time in the ports of the Southern colonies en route to
New Zealand. Doubtless better arrangements have hitherto not been
possible, but the time has now arrived when a different line of action is
absolutely necessary. Surely the various factories along our coast are
equal to filling the space of large and speedy cargo-boats, via Torres
Straits, monthly. Wool, tallow, hides, ores, and other products should
Ik* a sufficient inducement for engaging the prompt attention of an influ-
ential shipping firm. Objections have been raised that sufficient cargo
cannot be obtained for the outward passage, aud that vessels have to


come via the Southern colonies; but if a Torres Straits route *(•*
patronised by all our importers in Queensland, as it should lx?, this G-
jection would be overcome.
Being in London at the time when the first Torres Straits sen;-;*
was in embryo, I was consulted by the late Mr. William Mnckinnr-.,
afterwards Sir William Mackinnon, as to what prospects there wen* f. *
an increased export trade. I replied that I thought that before t*,
years were over the proposed monthly service would require supplt nu r,
tary steamers to carry the increase in wool alone. I attach the utuu*i
importance to shortening the distance between our ports and then.-. f
our depots in Europe. The advance which science may make is Ik-v,.;, ?
our most daring dreams. At any time science may discover aimth >!
by which we may send our beef and mutton to Europe in a chilled st.v,.
In this method lies, so far as I can see at present, our only j,-..
compete successfully with other producing countries. To attain tL*»
object by hastening the discovery of a method by which we may r |
home chilled meat, would it not be diplomatic to offer a
reward to anyone who would practically give us a system wherein-
chilled would remain sound for a certain time to be named ? The
vernment may do this, for it would not make an objectionable precedin'.,
as a simular stimulus is offered in order to promote the discovery of «
new goldfield in our colony.
This all important subject demands that we should lose sight n*
individuals, and appeal to our national interests, upon which hang* o-.t
national prosperity. The Government of Canada is leading the way hi
taking measures to protect her people in the sale of their products und.?
Government control in Europe. The colonies of the British Kiupir*
are offered every inducement by its Government to bind our columns
interests together by a stronger cord than has hitherto existed. Tin-
Eight Hon. Mr. Chamberlain, on his advent to the Colonial Office, i\*
sures us of his aid by suggesting that colonial statistics relating to
trade and commerce should be forwarded to him; he also urges ih*
development of commercial routes and of unity for mutual defence,
realising, as we ought, that
“ There is a tide in the affairs of men,
Which, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune.
And we must take the current when it serves,
Or lose our ventures.”
We find united interests and efforts in the colonies also, all Ih*
Governors of the Australian colonies having accepted the invitation < f
Lord Hampden, of the Government, and of the Royal Agriculture
Society, to attend the society’s show in Sydney at Easter.
Queensland has prepared the way for delivering her produce ex •hip
in Europe, but she cannot-continue to trade at a loss. The distribute
at home is most unsatisfactory; and improvement cannot be made eith* t
individually or even by a strong company without Governmental sup
port and control; a line of action similar to that taken by the existing
Meat and Dairy Board should be adopted.


The stock and dairy produce tax has enabled us to complete and
carry on factories sufficient for our present requirements. As a large
contributor to this tax, I advise that it should be continued for the pur-
pose of securing depots in London and elsewhere, and I propose that
ibis tax shall be levied until we shall have attained our object, a distri-
bution of our products at reasonable prices, even .though it be by a
process of retailing. The country cannot object to such a policy, for
the tax for raising capital would be paid by stockowners only; thus the
general revenue would not be affected, and national prosperity would
follow individual effort.
A board similar to the Moat and Dairy Board, residing in London,
might be formed, possessing the right of free and untrammelled action,
and in no way connected with any colonial working companies. I pro-
pose that it should consist of two or three practical men on this side,
and of a similar number on the other side, experts with a thorough
knowledge obtained by practice in the distribution of our various pro-
ducts, a system which should be carried out upon strictly commercial
lines. When I was last in London I spent fully, twelve months seeking
and gaining information in the trade, and I then came to the conclusion
that a radical change imist be made by the formation of an organisation
which would give our producers and exporters a fair return for their
produce. It is absolutely necessary to take action, and now is the time.
If something is not done in this matter, there will be no inducement for
stockowners to export any more produce. But lam hopeful that by
united efforts we shall realise a similar attainment and success in dis-
posing of our products as we have arrived at the successful treatment of
them in our colony.
We all know how the Civil Service Supply Association, the Army
and Navy Association, the Aerated Bread Company, and many kindred
associations and companies in London, were formed and developed as
soon as the necessity for them arose. Similar necessities have arisen
now; and if we avail ourselves of the experience that has already been
gained, and act as necessity dictates, we should carry this great industry
to a similarly successful issue. Let shrewd, practical men approach the
Government with a provisionally formulated plan of operations, showing
how the many, but not insurmountable obstacles to the successful deve-
lopment of this industry may be grappled with and overcome. I am,
sir, &c.,
ROBERT CHRIBTLSON.
Hobart, 22nd February, 1896.






