

T2TH-
OliMu C.&-M. f 7^°'-J°' A t,_!r '' a
SjVMCu At. 2
JUi, I^CVT.






2* Colt.- i-aUjgr.j.u'f, 124:Jiniirr?Lm 6>st


THE FAILURE
OF THE
YAN YEAN RESERVOIR.
BEING
A PAPER READ BEFORE THE PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETY
OF VICTORIA.
DAVID E. WILKIE, M.D.
MELBOURNE:
JAMES J. BLUNDELL & CO., U, COLLINS STREET, WEST.
Price Is. Gd.


PRINTED AT " THE AGE ” OFFICIO, MELHOriINK.


ON THE FAILURE OF THE YAN YEAN
RESERVOIR
A PAPER READ BEFORE THE PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETY, BY DR. WILKIE
ON THE 20TH FEBRUARY AND 13TH MARCH, 1855.
Whether we regard the magnitude of the works of
now in progress at Yan Yean, for the supply of the *” SU,J '
City of Melbourne with water, or the great im-
portance of the interests involved in the probable
success or failure of this undertaking, the subject, I
think, is one which merits the attention of the mem-
bers of the Philosophical Society.
The gravitation system has of late years been very
much adopted wherever it has been found practica-
ble ; because, although the first cost may be great,
it possesses the advantage of a constant supply of
water, at a high pressure, and at a comparatively
small annual expenditure.
It becomes a matter of important calculation,
therefore, in every case, to determine whether it is
bettor in a pecuniary point of view to obtain river
water in the immediate neighbourhood of a town
by steam power, or to bring it from a distant and
higher level by gravitation.
Accordingly, about six years ago, the late Mr. Mr. Blackburn.
Blackburn, at that time city surveyor, directed his
attention to the problem of procuring water for the
city by gravitation, and it is to that gentleman that-
we are indebted for pointing out the natural adapta-
tion of Yan Yean for a large reservoir.
In recommending his favorite scheme to the public, His gravitation
there is no doubt that Mr. Blackburn had satisfied schemu-
himself that there would be an ample supply of water
for the reservoir. In his calculations, however,
he placed great dependence on the natural advan-
tages of the Yan Yean basin, in supplying a large
supplemental amount of wat?r from surface drainage, Floo;i water-
and in storing the Hood water of the Plenty, inde-
pendent of its ordinary discharge.
He also calculated that his gravitation scheme in
1851 would cost, including distribution pipes for the


Cost of gravita. city, only £84,700 to supply a population of 70.000,
j'® n at 40 gallons per head per day ; while the lowest cost
li'si. 1 S for supplying the same population at the same rate
River Yarra.
Commissioners
of Water Sup-
ply.
Letter Profes-
sor Smith.
City of
Edinburgh.
Simple Scheme
for supplying
Melbourne.
l>y steam power, from the Yarra, he estimated at
£76,700. The annual current expenses attending
the gravitation scheme, he estimated at £B5B, against
£3,894, as the expenses attending the pumping
scheme.
It must be regarded as a singular fact in the history
of Melbourne, that with the River Yarra so easy of
access, and so peculiarly adapted by nature to fur-
nish an unlimited supply of the purest water, no
steps were taken to supply this large city until
February, 1853.
At that date, four Commissioners of Sewerage and
Water Supply, were appointed under an Act of
Council, and their engineer having reported very
favorably of Mr. Blackburn’s gravitation scheme,
and having condemned all other plans for supplying
the city from the Yarra, they determined forthwith
to commence the works at Yan Yean.
I have always regretted the step taken by the
commissioners in adopting the Yan Yean scheme.
In the month of February, last year, I published a
letter for the purpose of vindicating Professor
Smith’s preference of the Yarra scheme, and I en-
deavored to shew that the Yarra water was neces-
sarily purer than the Plenty water, and that the
latter would be very much deteriorated by being
transferred into the Yau Yean swamp, and being
there deprived of that constant and continuous
motion which is its very life, it would become in-
curably infected with microscopic animal and
vegetable productions, which no filtration could
remedy.
I described the plan adopted by the city of Edin-
burgh, which obtains its supply direct from the
Crawley Springs, without subjecting the water to the
injurious influences of exposure in a large open re-
servoir. And I urged the great advantage of possess-
ing an unlimited supply of this necessary of life which
the Plenty could not afford, and, as objections
had been taken to all other Yarra schemes, on the
ground of their impracticability, and the annual
expenses attending them, I ventured to propose a
simple scheme for bringing the Yarra water into
Melbourne, on the gravitation principle, by means
of a tunnel carried to the base of a shaft to be sunk
alongside the Eastern Hill reservoir ; which would
thus have the effect of diminishing as far as possible
the expense of pumping and management ; and I
shewed that the annual expense of a pumping scheme
for 100,000 inhabitants would cost a half-penny pet-
week, per head ; and that any expense was of trifling


importance when the health and comfort of a popu- Public health.
lons city were involved.
I regret that I did not further prosecute my in-
quiries at that time, but the truth is that my letter
having received no attention or sympathy in any
quarter, I saw no prospect of warding off the evil
which I believed to be impending over the city.
1 still object to the Yaa Yean scheme —1. Because Objections to
of the enormous expense. In consequence of the aean
discovery of the gold-fields, labor is now at a much “ c ILmc-
higher rate than when it was first projected by Mr.
Blackburn. The commissioners’ estimate for the
works is £050.000, of which £400,000 have already
been expended ; but it is the opinion of many that
they will more probably cost £'1,000,000. 2. Because Enormous Cost.
the commissioners, in erecting temporary works for
supplying the city from the Yarra, have shown that,
for the comparatively small sum of £30,000, the
same object can, to a certain extent, be accomplished;
and, indeed, if they had erected their temporary Temporary
works at the right place, viz., near the junction of the Works.
Merri Creek with the Yarra, about a mile and a half
from the reservoir at St. Peter’s Church, the tempo-
rary works being distant half a mile from the
same reservoir, and, so as to have avoided the surface
drainage and sewerage of ColUiigvvoodandßichmond, sewerage ofcol-
we could have dispensed wilh the Yan Yean water- Hugwood and
works altogether. The expense of the additional ,u 1 110,1
horse-power required for the increased distance of
one mile, which would be about six horses added to
forty, and the saving in the carriage of coal, are
trilling advantages to be purchased at a sacrifice of
the public health, in a populous and wealthy city,
which this measure really involves, as it has been
clearly shewn, by chemical analysis, that the water
at Prince’s Bridge contains four times more of im- lmpi!r iti es
purities and matters prejudicial to health than the Yarra at
water at the junction of the 1 Merri Creek with the Prince's Bridge.
Yarra.
But let us suppose that it would have been necessary Expense or p -r
to expend £30,000 in the erection of permanent* maneut Works
works for raising water from the Yarra into the
reservoir at St. Peter’s Church, this would have been
decidedly preferable as a commercial enterprise,
when we contrast the interest of £60,000 at 10 per
cent, with that of £600,000.
The Commissioners have thus altogether sacrificed
the pecuniary interests of the public in their selec-
tion of the gravitation scheme, and have ignored the Principle of
principle upon which a selection of either schema is Selection,
always based, namely, its adaptation to afford an
ample supply of water at the lowed possible cost.
3. I object to the Commissioners’ scheme because I
do not think that in this climate a large swamp


Tii® Van Yean covering 7,000,000 square yards of surface is a suita-
Svvamp. i)le place for storing water for the consumption of a
large city. It has been the natural receptacle for
the surface drainage of the surrounding ranges, with
only a very small natural outlet or water course.
The consequence has been a vast accumulation of
green slimy mud, the result of decaying organic
Deterioraiion of ma tters, which will greatly alter and deteriorate the
the W liter. water 0 f the Plenty, which, within its own banks,
is exceedingly pure. And I find, on referring
to the able report of the Select Committee
of the Legislative Council on Sewerage
and Water Supply, that those gentlemen
who were best qualified to give an opinion
on the subject were unanimous in describing the de-
terioration which the water would undergo by being
stored in the Yan Yean reservoir. The language
Opinions of used )>y one physician was that the water would be
I’liysioid.ns. almost incurably contaminated ;by another, that he
should not like to use the water himself.
As regards the purity of the water, therefore, I
think the Commissioners have disregarded the best
interests of the public in a sanitary point of view.
4. I object to the choice of the Commissioners, be-
cause it was based on insufficient data. The Select
onr Meteoroiogi- Committee, in their report, say “our meteoroh-
cal experience, gical experience in these colonies by no means jus-
tifies the sanguine anticipations of Mr. Blackburn,
who himself admits that a continued drought tor two
years, or even eight months, would render the whole
Failure of scheme afailure ; ’ and they state'the following very
from Drought . g rave objections to the reservoir scheme.
1. “That it would seem to be against all experience
that any of the sources of the Plenty should be con-
stant in all reasons.
Evaporation 2. “That sufficient allowance has not been made for
the effect of evaporation over so large a surface as
12()i) acres, the proposed superficies of the reservoir.”
And while they were of opinion that the advan-
tages upon the whole preponderated in lavor of the
gravitation scheme, they preferred to adopt the
Opinion of Select Colll .g e taken by Mr. Hodgkinson in Ms evidence,
Committee. a , ld d eC i} Qe( i giving a positive opinion on the sub-
ject.
It is difficult to see what peculiar advantages the
Select Committee had in view, without referring to
the estimates of the two rival schemes they were
Mvantn-os of contl . ast i n g. The advantages which one scheme of
J nEruiUchemes gupply possesses o ver another, ace always re-
ducible to a money value.
The following are the estimates for the two
schemes, which were under the consideration of the
Select Committee in January, 1853.


First Cost. Expense.
Modified Gravitation Scheme £162,713 £1,450
Mr. Hodgkinson's Yarra Scheme 93,632 7,600 objecti(ms t 0 Mr.
The objections, which in the opinion of the Select HodgkinsmV’s
Committee, applied to Mr. llodgkiiison’s plan, had scheme,
reference exclusively to the annual expenditure foi
coal and supervision, amounting to £'7,000. A sin-
gular objection, when it was admitted that the people
of Melbourne had hitherto been compelled to pay at
the rate of * 150,000 a year for a miserable supply
of water—£lo,ooo a year for a population of 100,000
is a halfpenny per week for each individual. 11 we
add to this £lO,OOO as interest for the lirst cost of
Mr. Hodgkinson’s scheme, the cost of an efficient its efficiency and
water supply from the Yarra, with all the advau- c ,st.
tages of purity, certainty, and high service, would
have been a peuny a week per head.
It is a singular fact, and worthy of being recorded, u s a „ e .
that the modified gravitation scheme, under the
p, tronage of the commissioners, so expanded itself in
less than twelve months, as to re-appear under the
new estimate of £050,000.
. A good deal has been said of the that
the Yau Yean scheme possesses over its rival in its est“imate-
powers of indefinite extension. Perhaps this remark-
able increase in the estimated cost is to bo regarded
as an illustration of this principle.
4. My chief objection to the Yau Yean scheme is g elect committee
the very limited supply of water for so colossal an
undertaking, aud this serious objection did not
escape the notice of the Select Committee,who admit
that it is “accompanied with the drawbacks that the
quality and quantity of water might by possibility and
fall short of the standard, aud that in the execution
quantity of
of the work some unforeseen difficulties might have water,
to bo encountered.” And the chief object of this
paper is to place before you certain data by which
you may be enabled to judge lor yourselves on this
all-important point. . .
Having long entertained the opinion that the Visit t 0 Yau
Plenty, from its limited size, was quite unsuited to- Yean,
supply the city with water, I resolved, in December
last, to visit the Yau Yean Water Works, and obtain
all the information I could respecting them. And as
Dr. Mackenna h id expressed himself much interested
in the result of my inquiries, I invited him to
accompany me, which ho very kindly did.
Mr. Taylor, the resident overseer of the works,
politely shewed us every attention, aud gave us
every information we desired.
It is proper here to mention, that when I sub- First Per-
mitted my first paper to you last mouth, it was ne-
cessarily based upon very limited data; but I was
so impressed with the importance ol the subject, and


Appointment of the result of my own inquiries, that I suggested the
a Committee, appointment of a committee for the purpose of in-
vestigating the whole subject in a scientific manner,
and reporting to the Society. I should also add, that
1 had the honor of accompanying your committee on
their scientific tour,and I shall not soon forget the plea-
sure and instruction it afforded mo, and through their
kindness in furnishing me with their measurements
Their measure- and calculations lam enabled to submit to you this
cuTatious evening my opinions on the prospects of the Yau
Yean reservoir based on more correct data and more
extensive enquiry.
There is a considerable discrepancy in the pub-
lished accounts of the amount of water consumed by
different cities.
It appears that London and some other cities in
, England are supplied with 30 gallons per head per
' V S er <Sr da y> Glasgow is supplied with 30 ga lons
Cities. per head, by steam-power, Nottingham con-
sumes 40 gallons per head, and the Croton
aqueduct at New York is calculated
to discharge 60,000,000 gallons in 24 hours, which
for a population of 500,000 gives 120 gallons per
head. ■
Great credit is due to the City Council for having
city Council from the first laid it down as a settled principle that
have fixed 40 Melbourne should be supplied at the rate of 40 gal-
gallons for lons per head. At the same time I cannot regard
Melbourne. this amount as adequate in a sanitary point of view
to our t ctual requirements. Melbourne and New
York are in similar latitudes, and considering the h«t
winds and dust storms, and the very dry atmosphere
and long droughts that are peculiar to Australia, a
more liberal supply of water would be required here
than in New York. "
For public baths and fountains, for thoroughly
Necessity of a wateriu g the streets, cleansing the gutters, and flush-
more liberal ing the sewers, for extinguishing fires, and limiting
supply. their rapid and destructive progress, the water
supply of this city should not be measured by so
many gallons per head, the supply should at all
times and under all circumstances, be amply sufficient
for any increased or unforeseen demand that might
arise ; but it will be shewn in this inquiry that there
is no such ample supply at Yan Yean to satisfy such
luxurious anticipations, and we must be contented
to limit our wants to the supply we can command.
And in the event of a drought, to use the words of
Committee" GCt Select Committee, “it is incontestable, that the
most careful provisions would be necessary to guard
against any unnecessary waste of water.”
1 shall, therefore, assume 40 gallons per head as
the amount it will be necessary to provide for this
city ; and this is the amount upon which Mr. Black-


burn and Mr. Hodgkinson based all their calcula-
tions, in their evidence before the Select Committee.
There is one important point in which I must differ
from the Select Committee,and that is in limiting the
amount of population to be provided for. Mr. Black- Error of Select
bum declined giving an opinion on this head, and I Committee,
think the Select Committee were wrong in
limiting the number to 100,000 for the
modified gravitation scheme that was to cost£l62,ooo,
but they are in no way identified with the more
costly scheme of the Commissioners. A gravitation
scheme involving an outlay of £650,000 ot public
money should not be limited to any amount of popu-
lation short of 500,000. In other words it should
not be commenced at all until an ample supply ot
water for 500,000 be secured.
The population of Melbourne with its suburban
towns and villages is little short of 100,000, and the " necessary ; ’ vt
amount required for this number at the rate of 40 present,
gallons per head, per day, would be equal to
8,690,476 cubic yards. Now, as the area of the
reservoir is 7,000,000 square yards, this amount of
water would give a depth of 3 feet 8 inches in the
reservoir, and a population of 500,000 would re-
quire a depth of 18 feet 4 inches.
Let us now inquire what amount of water can be
supplied to the reservoir.
The main feature of the Yan Yean scheme is the Area of Reservoir
large reservoir, or natural basin, which has an area
of about 1450 acres, and a surface of about 7,000,000
square yai’ds, and into which it is intended to direct
the greater part, if not the whole of the water-shed
of the Plenty basin.
For this purpose an aqueduct of about two miles 11116 aqueduct,
in length is being now formed to lead the river into
the reservoir, and a large embankment is being
raised at the lower end to the height of thirty
f et; and as it is expected that the river will more
than fill the reservoir, and that it will maintain a The Waste w»sk
current through it, there is a waste wash at the,
height of twenty-five feet to lead back the surplus
water to the Plenty. And the main pipes for supply-
ing the city are permanently fixed in the embankment Main pipes lixed
at' the height of ten feet from the bottom of the 1,1 feet "L'h.
reservoir.
The Plenty takes its rise in Mount Disappointment sources of the
by two main branches, the eastern and the western. River Plenty.
The latter, according to Mr. Hodgkinson, takes its
source from a considerable stream which gushes
direct from a fissure in the granite. The eastern
branch, as we had lately an opportunity of witness-
ing, takes its rise from the table land at the very top
of the mountain, and, from the smallest possible be-
ginning, is gradually augmented by innumerable


rills and streams, issuing from the moist rotten soil
and from the fissures and crevices of the rocks.
Both branches, at the base of the mountain are dis-
charged into large swamps ; and it is not until they
The Swamps. issue again from these that they unite to form the
Plenty River, about four miles above Yan Yean.
The area of the western swamp, according to the esti-
mate of your committee, is 787,000 square yards,
Tii, i -area. that of the eastern, 3,080,000 square yards.
These streams have been measured at different
times and under different circumstances, with the
following results.
The late Mr. Blackburn, in his first report on the
water supply of Melbourne, dated 9th January. 1851,
states that he had measui’ed two of the branches of
Mr Blackburn’s l ' ie Plenty, above the marshes, and found them to
" Measurements discharge respectively 2000 and 1700 gallons per
minute, and he estimated that the whole discharge
of the tributaries amounted to 5000 gallons per
minute, which is equal to 0 feet 7 inches in the re-
servoir, while the united stream below the marshes
scarcely gave 2700 gallons per minute, or 3 feet 7
inches. There was thus a loss by evaporation of
2300 gallons per minute, which would give 3 feet
in the reservoir, in twelve months.
There being an unusual drought in the summer of
Drought of lest. 1851, Blackburn, on two separate occasions, re-
vised his former measurements; on the latter occa-
sion, (he 14th February, he found the discharge of
all the streams above the swamps amount to 4040
gallons per minute, which equals 5 feet 4 inches in the
BCS gallons per reservoir, and in the river below the swamps he found
mmute. o nly 865 gallons per minute, or at the rate of 1 foot
finch in the reservoir, showing a loss by evapora-
tion of 3175 gallons per minute, which would give 4
feet 1$ inch in the reservoir
Mr. Hodgkinson, on the 9th December, 1852, after
W so!i' l( y fel; ' n ' fifteen hours rain, measured the western arm,
merits. oasure " where it issues from the granite rock, and estimated
the discharge at 1180 gallons per minute, or 1 foot
7 inches in the reservoir; ho also measured the
same stream where it enters the swamps, and found
it to give 1700 gallons per minute, or 2 feet 3 inches.
On the following day he measured the eastern arm,
below the first waterfall, and found it to discharge
1980 gallons per minute, or at the rate of 2 feet
inches in the reservoir.
Their compara- The first of Mr. Hodgkinson’s measurements is the
live value. one 0 f rao st value iu this inquiry, as we may pre-
sume that the stream, where it issued from the rocks,
was little effected by tiie previous rain. The second
measurement was taken at a situation where it could
not fail to be considerably augmented by the rain-


full of fifteen hours. The measurement of the east- Ersiern Ann.
era arm, which was obtained the following day,
could not give any certain result, as it was taken
above the junction of three small tributaries. In
one point of view, however, it is very important, as
the object of the measurement was to illustrate the Constancy of the
constancy of the supply. All the other tributaries supply.
of the Plenty have been known to fail on several
occasions.
The measurement of the main eastern branch,
therefore, shows an approximation to the amount of Supply in
water supply that would be available above the droughts,
swamps in a severe drought, but it is only an ap-
proximation, as it too, may also fail ; there is cer-
tainly no guarantee in the height of Mount Disap-
pointment, which is only 1500 feet, to warrant a more
favorable opinion,
All the tributaries of the Plenty equally depend
on the rain-fall of the mountain ranges, and it is The supply tie-
simply because the main eastern branch rises from tlie
the highest point, where there is most rain and least ram ‘ “
evaporation, that it holds out the longest when the
ordinary supply of rain is cut off.
I come now to mention the measurements which
were made by the committee who were appointed to
investigate this subject at the last meeting of the
society.
The river, at its junction with the aqueduct, with
a velocity of half-a-mile an hour, gave a discharge of
2,537 gallons per minute, or an equivalent to three Measurements of
feet four inches in the reservoir. The eastern arm tht ‘ Committee
above the swamps yielded 4,450 gallons per minute,
or an equivalent to five feet eleven inches. If we
take Mr. Hodgkinson’s measurement of the western
arm, where it issues from the rocks, namely, 1,180
gallons per minute, and add it to the committee’s Eastern Arm.
measurement of the eastern arm, We shall have 5,630
gallons as the discharge o#all the streams above the
swamps, and if we take into consideration that one
week before their visit to Yan Yean there were-
nearly three days of heavy rain, which is an unpre- Threed aV sheavv
cedented occurrence in January, the 630 gallons may rain- ‘ y 3
bo regarded as due to this source, and the balance
of 5,000 gallons per minute will exactly correspond
with Mr. Blackburn’s estimate.
From these measurements, it would also appear
that the eastern arm bears the proportion to the „ r . ,
, j. e a i i ioa 11 , . Western Arm.
western arm of 4.450 to 1,180, or very nearly four to
one. By this estimate wo shall find that the dis-
charge of the western arm was 1,340 gallons per
minute, at the time when the committee measured
the eastern arm. The whole discharge above the
swamps was therefore 5,790 gallons per minute, and
below the swamps 2,537 gallons.


Loss in Swamps In this maimer we ascertain that the loss by eva-
from Evapora. po ration in the swamps amounted to 3253 gallons
tl<m - per minute, which is at the rate of 4 feet 4 inches
in the reservoir ; and as the area of the swamps is
one half less than the area of the reservoir, 8 feet 8
inches will represent the rate of evaporation in the
swamps during the summer months.
It is thus easy to understand why Mr. Blackburn
and Mr. Ilodgkinson so strongly urged the necessity
A'hfici il w a ter * 0 f ma ijing artificial water courses, in order to with-
com-ses. the twQ tenches 0 f the river from the intiu-
ence of the swamps.
It does not appear that the Commissioners of
Knt , Pr „i Sewerage and Water Supply have any present in-
neces!«ry by tention of doing this, and lam not sufficiently ac-
the Commis- quainted with the levels and depths of the swamps
sioners. to give any opinion as to the best mode, but it is
quite clear that some steps must be taken to save the
immense loss that is at present occasioned by them.
And in estimating the quantity of water that will be
available for the reservoir I shall assume tlmt some
effectual means will be adopted to accomplish this
very desirable object, and that the whole of the 5000
gallons may be transferred into the reservoir without
loss.
f The measurements would not be complete without
the U p™nty at mentioning that Dr. Mackenna and myself, on our visit
the Bridge. to Yan Yean, measured the Plenty where it
passes under the bridge, about three miles below
the reservoir, aud obtained a discharge of 900
gallons per minute, which would give a depth in the
reservoir of 1 foot 3 inches. The measurement of the
committee at the same place, on their late visit, gave
475 gallons per minute, which is equal to 8 inches in
12 months.
Very small re- These small results compared with the measure-
suits. ment above Yan Yean from the quantity of
water that is abstracted by a cut for the purpose of
puddling the embankment.
I have thus assumed Mr. Blackburn’s highest esti-
Mr. Blackburn’s ma te of 5000 gallons per minute as the average of
blithest esu- tlie w hole discharge of the tributaries of the Plenty.
inale - In the drought of the summer of 1851, however, Mr.
Blackburn found this amount reduced to 4040 gal-
lons, and therefore it is to be presumed that _ 5000
gallons are only to be depended on in ordinary
seasons.
The important question now arises what proportion
of the 5000 gallons can be abstracted from the river
hi without inflicting serious or irreparable injury upon
left the inhabitants of the district through which the
Plenty takes its course. One witness who was ex-
amined before the select committee gravely proposed
that a half-inch pipe from the reservoir should be
given to the inhabitants on the banks, in lieu of the


river itself; but to be serious, lam most decidedly of injury to the
opinion that it would inflict irreparable injury upon inhabitants,
the inhabitants of the Plenty district to abstract
more than two-thirds of their river from them.
Even with this loss they will suffer enough in the
permanent closing of all the mills ; and I have closing of the
no hesitation in saying that the good sense of mills,
the public of Melbourne would neither expcot
nor demand more. If the Yan Yean scheme cannot
afford to do this it had better be abandoned at once.
Nor do I think that the public interests would suffer
much thereby.
In ordinary seasons, as already shewn, the dis-
charge of the Plenty above Yan Yean, is 2700 gal-
lons per minute in December, and deducting l-3rd 900 gallons, or
there will remain 1800 gallons, or an equivalent to one-third left
2 feet 5 inches; this, added to 2300 gallons, which is for the 13 rK
the amount at present lost in the swamps, but which
I take for granted will be saved, gives 4100 gallons
per minute as the average amount of water available
from the river for the supply of the reservoir, and
this will give a depth of 5 feet 6 inches.
It is more difficult to calculate the amount that Floods, their un-
might be obtained from the river in time of floods certainty,
from the uncertainty of their occurrence, volume, and
duration. Had the reservoir been in close proximity
to the river with a sufficient fall, a large amount .of
flood-water might easily have been secured ; but in
order to obtain 25 feet of dqpth for the reservoir it
is necessary to bring in the river from a higher level
by moans of an aqueduct of about 2 miles in length,
which winds round the base of tie range which
separates the river from the reservoir, and which
will enter the latter by a tunnel which is being cut
through this dividing range. Uoless, therefore, a
very strong embankment be constructed for Necessity of an
the purpose of damming the flood-water, which embankment,
would be a very difficult and expensive
operation, owing to the level character of the right
or opposite bank, it is difficult to see how the floods
can be taken advantage of to any great extent. On
such occasions the water is widely extended over a
large surface, and will naturally prefer the lower
level of the river to the higher level of the canal or
aqueduct.
Assuming, however, that the aqueduct can be 60hours* floods,
filled from the xiver in time of floods, and assuming
that the Plenty will be in a flooded condition for 60
hours in each year, the sectional area of the aqueduct,
which is 127 feet, with a velocity of one mile per
hour, will give 1,494,000 cubic yards, which would
add a depth of seven and a-half inches to the rcser- Add inches
voir, or at the rate of three inches each day. This tothe reservoir,
result, however, could only be obtained with a dam,


Height of dam. 'so constructed as to raise the surface of the flood
water to the height of eight feet above the present
level of the river, and at the entrance of the aque-
duct, the right bank is only one and a-half feet above
this level.
In order to do every justice to the resources
of the Yan Yean reservoir, I think, during the three
winter months, we may assume that the river is
larger than in the summer months, during which
season the above measurements have been all made ;
increase of river and I shall take this opportunity of urging how im-
in winter portant it would have been to have had accurate
months. measurements of all the tributaries of the Plenty for
each month of the year. As there is one-third more
rain in the winter months, I propose to allow two-
thirds more water-shed, independent of floods. This
will be equal to one-sixth of 5000 gallons per minute,
or its equivalent, six feet seven inches, which will
give an addition of one foot one inch to the reser-
voir.
Duration of It may appear to some that I have allowed too
flood*. little for floods. It may be thought that sixty hours
will not accurately represent their duration for
twelve months. It must be remembered, however,
that the entrance of the aqueduct is only eight miles
from the source of the eastern or main branch of the
Plenty. With such a short and limited water-shed,
Distance from therefore, in a few hours after any heavy fall of rain,
the source s the river will have returned within its own banks.
ro l ' 6B. It must also be remembered 4hat we may possibly
have no floods at all in twelve months ; and I feel
quite certain that in the last twelve months the river
has not been flooded for more than twelve hours at
Yan Yean.
Annual rain. As a source of supply for the reservoir, the next in
importance is the annual fall of rain. The metereo-
logical tables which have been kept in Melbourne
for a period of six years, give 30 inches as the fall of
rain for twelve months, and 18 inches for the six
winter months ; but as Yan Yean is 600 feet above
the level of the sea, I propose to allow 6 inches on
that account, and, therefore, 36 inches, or 3 feet,
may be set down as an addition to the reservoir
from this source, and in the same proportion, 22
iaches will represent the rain-fall for the six winter
months.
The water-shed. Having ascertained the rain-fall of the Plenty
basin it would be of great importance to determine
the whole amount of the water-shed. The only cer-
tain method of obtaining this result would be to
Measurements take accurate measurements of all the tributaries,
each month, at least once in each month, and to make a careful
survt y of the floods that may occur during the year.
In the absence of such measurements it becomes
important to estimate the amount from data that are


recognised in England, making due allowance for English data,
the difference in the mean temperature and the
physical peculiarities of the drainage area.
If we could ascertain the amount of rain in any Contents of the
district, and the proportion of the rain that is cva- nvers-
porated from the surface of the ground, the differ-
ence would exactly equal the contents of the
rivers. _ _
On this principle, the late Dr. Thomsom, the Pro- Dr. Thomson’s
fessor of Chemistry ia the University of Glasgow, es * ma v "
estimated the water-shed of Great Britain at 4 inches
of the rain-fall.
From the meteorological tables, he calculated the One-ninth of the
rain, including 4 inches of dew at 36 inches, and ram-
from experiments and observations he calculated the
amount of evaporation from the ground at 32 inches.
He therefore computed the water-shed at 4 inches, or
one-ninth-part of the rain.
Although Dr. Thomson considered his estimate of Great difference
4 inches too high, from a calculation which ho made m estimates-
of the contents of the river Clyde compared with its
drainage area, yet it differs so greatly from other
estimates which are as high as 11 and 13 inches, that
the only inference we can draw is that the whole
subject is still enveloped in so much obscurity and
uncertainty that no correct practical results can be No practical re-
obtained by this method. 8U ts ‘
It would, therefore, be altogether a visionary Danger of trust-
speculation, to make the water supply of a large city estimates. 11
depend upon the correctness of either of the higher
estimates. It would be unworthy of modern en-
gineering science, and could only lead to failure and
disappointment.
The most correct view of the subject is probably Dr. Front's
that entertained by Dr. Prout, who thinks that the °P imon *
truth lies somewhere between the extremes, and I
therefore feel disposed to determine the water shed
of England, in accordance with the experiments of
Messrs. Hoyle and Dalton, who found, with a mean Experiments of
rain of 33-55 inches for 3 years, that the evaporation '
from the ground equalled 25-14 inches; therefore
8-41 inches, or one-fourth of the rain, may be pre-
sumed as the amount available for springs and rivers
in England.
I am not aware that any experiments have yet
been conducted in this colony to determine the pro-
portion of the rain that is evaporated.
The physical character of the country, however, Physical charac-
shows that there are comparatively few rivers, and L 0 ona-
that these are very scantily supplied with water,
and that floods are not of frequent or regular occur-
rence. The absence of high mountains, and the arid
and desert condition of the interior, while they
greatly diminish the rain fall, contribute to render


tbc atmosphere peculiarly dry, and evaporation very
rapid.
Hirers * creeks In the summer months many rivers and creeks
become dry. are dried U p ; an d the ground becomes so parched
that it is capable of quickly absorbing a large quan-
tity of rain, so that it is rare to find rivers much
increased during this season, and the water shed is
very trifling indeed.
Much greater I think, therefore, that with nearly the same
evaporation, amount of rain as in England, and with a much
smaller proportion of rivers and fewer floods, there
must be a much larger proportion of the rain eva-
porated from the surface.
I' may thus on very strong grounds assume
that the water-shed in this colony is one half less in
proportion than in England, and therefore amounts
very nearly to Dr. Thomson’s estimate, which is
one-ninth of the rain.
difference in But it is more satisfactory, and certainly more
’”® a " e tempe ‘ correct, to deduce the water-shed of this colony,
from that of England, by making adequate allowance
for the difference in the force of evaporation due to
our higher mean temperature, and as it is admitted
by scientific men here that the evaporation from the
surface of water is nearly double that of England, it
is strictly correct to assume that the proportion of
rain evaporated here will also be nearly double.
Water shed of 1 Thus, I think no valid objections can be offered to
,a1•«A » I . a a
Victoria. m y asgum i n g 41 inches instead of Bi, as the best ap-
proximation that can be made of the water-shed of
this colony, until the mean discharge of the different
rivers is ascertained by actual measurement.
The Plenty In mountainous districts, the water-shed is greater
Hanges ; in proportion than in the low country, and the ab-
sorption and evaporation less, and therefore it might
be thought that Dr. Thomson’s estimate cannot ap-
Their geological Pty to I* l6 Plenty Ranges, but their geological form-
formation. ation, and the tropical vegetation with which they
are covered, are singularly adapted to absorb and
retain a large proportion of the rain that would
otherwise flow direct into the water-courses, and it is
to this beneficent provision of nature in this dry cli-
Source of the mate that-all the rivers that take their rise in the pri-
rivers. maryand granitic formations owe their permanency,
and not to springs of the ordinary kind that are met
with in the secondary and tertiary formations,
which are almost entirely absent; and were it not for
this provision the river Plenty, and other similar
streams, would cease to flow altogether in-the sum-
mer months. The winter rain which is now stored
The winter rain, up in the spongy soil and in the caverns and fissures
of the rock, maintains a more or less constant stream
during the whole summer, and it is in this manner
that we explain the otherwise singular, fact, that the..


5000 gallons per minute
6
7
60 hours’ floods .
0
Two-thirds increase in winter months
1
1
Total .
8
3i
Whole water-shed .
9
9
giver Plenty is so little increased in size, during the
winter months, in ordinary seasons. In my estimate
of the discharge of the river, I have allowed an in-
crease of two-thirds. . ,
But it is not to be supposed that the water thus jj ie rat) g eg
stored is altogether removed from the influence of always wet.
evaporation. On the contrary, from its universal
tendency to find a lower level it is constantly oozing
out over the whole surface of the ranges, andleadmg
gullies, which is thus always in a wet condition, and
always evaporating, and the surface is so wet even
near the summit, that we found abundance of small
leeches several hundred yards from the stream.
The water-shed of the Plenty ranges, therefore, Evaporation,
differs essentially from the water-shed of ordinary
mountainous country, and thus the evaporation from
tl e ranges is, probably, fully equal to that from the
plains, because, while evaporation from the level
country is one-third more rapid than from the ranges,
it ceases nearly altogether for three months in the
former, while in the latter it is constant throughout
the year. , ,
The drainage area of the river above Area of Plenty
the aqueduct, according to the Survey Maps, a9in-
may be computed at about 60 square miles. Ihe
ratio of this surface to the of the reservoir is
as 26 to 1, therefore the whole rain-fall, including 4
inches of dew, would give a depth of 88 feet in the
reservoir and one-ninth part of this, or 9 teet 9
inches, would give the water-shed.
It may be interesting here to contrast the whole
discharge of the Plenty, as I have already estimated with the dio _
it, with the whole amount of the water-shed as dedu- C h ar g e of the
eible by Dr. Thomson’s method. Plenty.
J ft. in.
Balance unaccounted for . 1 54
The only other important source of supply is the Basin of the re-
drainage area of the reservoir itself. Mr. llodgkm-
son was kind enough to measure this area for your
Committee, and his estimate is 3000 acres, or about
twice the surface of the reservoir.
During the winter months there has generally its history,
been more or less water in the reservoir but during
the summer it has almost always been quite dry.
In 1851 there was no water in it during the whole
year ; and this fact is not only important as regards


in 1851 dry dur- the water-shed of the reservoir, but it has a far more 1
the ' vhole extensive and significant importance as regards the
water-shed of the Plenty. I have estimated the rain-
fall for the basin of the Plenty at 3C inches ; but in
185Pthere was so little rain in that district, that
even during the winter monthsno water was collected
in the reservoir, from a d 'ainage area, including the
reservoir, of nearly 7 square miles, or nearly one-
eighth part of the drainage area of the Plenty.
It can hardly therefore be alleged that I have
underrated the average water-shed of the Plenty.
Effect of heavy After heavy rains and floods, the reservoir has
rains. sometimes had as much as 2 feet of water at the
lower end, and then it overflows into a small water-
course or rather swamp, which skirts the ranges for
about 2 miles, and then enters the river by a creek,
which has a sectional area of about twelve feet. At
the upper end, the reservoir receives a larger creek,
which has a length of about 3 miles, and contains a
large quantity of water after heavy rains ; but
wdien there is no rain it is quite dry.
rlvaporation According to the best information which I have
during six received, the reservoir has, on an average, been dry
winter months. f°r six months in the year, evaporation, therefore,
must be constant during the six winter months ; now
from other data we can estimate the amount of water
thus evaporated, which is equal to 3 feet 8 inches,
and the rain-fall, for the same period, is 22 inches,
leaving a balance of 1 foot 10 inches to represent the
surface drainage that is evaporated, but this 1
foot 10 inches being only sufficient to cover the lower
end, or one third of the reservoir, it will only give
7 inches of depth for the whole area. If the water-
shed, therefore, exceeds 7 inches it must escape by
The small creek, the small creek at the lower end, and may be approx-
imativcly ascertained. This water-course has been
generally observed to run after heavy rain, but not
otherwise. If, therefore, we assume that there are,
during the winter months, 40 days of heavy rain, and
that the creek is, on an average, half full, and that
its velocity is about £ a mile per hour, the contents
would amount to 1,900,800 cubicyards which would
give 7 inches in the reservoir. By this estimate the
water-shed cannot exceed 14 inches.
Amount of is important, also, in this enquiry to estimate
water-shed. the water-shed according to Dr. Thomson’s method.
'1 he ratio of-the drainage area to the reservoir being
as 2 to 1, the whole rain-fall would give a depth
of 6 feet, and one-ninth w r ou!d give a water-shed of
8 inches; but as there is no water-shed in the G sum-
mer months, and as the rain-fall of these months is
less than that of the winter months in the projiortiou
of 2 to 3, the rain-fall of the drainage area must be
taken at 3 feet 7 inches, lor the winter months, and -as


the aroa is chiefly composed of. ranges of clay slate, According to Dr,
which arc much less favorable for absorption than Thomson's
the level country, three-ninths or one-third instead niet 10(i-
-of one-ninth of the rain-fall may be estimated as the ”
water-shed, and this will give Id inches, which ex-
actly corresponds -with the former estimate.
I shall here notice some considerations which -its correctness,
would seem to prove the correctness of Dr. Thomson's
estimate, in its application to the basin of the
Plenty.
Mr. Blackburn’s highest estimate of all the tribn- -Summer dis-
tarics is 5,000 gallons per minute, or G feet 7 inches charge and
in the reservoir. One half of this amount, therefore, water-shed
or 3 feet 3j inches, will represent the absolute quau- com i’‘ iru •
tity of the water shed for the six summer months.
Now, as there is one-third less rain, two-fifths of 88
feet, or 33. feet in the reservoir, will represent the
whole of the rain-fall for this period. Therefore,
the water-shed is equal to one-tenth of the rain-fail,
and the remaining nine-deaths are evaporated.
In the six winter months there is one-third more Wint- r discharge
rain, and, therefore, there will be one third more water and water-shed
shed ; but evaporation is also one-third less rapid, compared,
so that if we add two-thirds to Mr. Blackburn’s esti-
mate for the six winter months, we shall have the
water shed for that period. To 3 feet 3£ inches add
2 feet 2| inches, which give 5 feet G inches. Now,
55 feet represent the whole rain-fall for the six
winter mouths; therefore, 55 divided by s £, or one-
tenth of the rain, gives the whole water-shed.
This result may be regarded as a near approxima- Much larger
tion in ordinary seasons, with no heavy falls of rain, water-shed in
but oil such-occasions, there is too little time for ab-
sorption, and a much larger proportion of the rain-fall
is quickly conveyed to the rivers. But most people
have very exaggerated notions respecting floods, and
many people fancy that one flood would fill the Yan
Yean reservoir, if it could be secured.
The following considerations will show the very The small pro-
small proportion of the rain-fall that can be contained portion of the
in any ordinary flood. floods* 1^
The velocity of the river, at its junction with the
aqueduct, is half a mile per hour, and its present dis-
charge gives 3 feet 4 inches in 12 months ; therefore
88 feet, or the whole rain fall of one year, would
require 26 years to pass down the river. The aque-
duct has Oj times the sectional area of the river, yet
with this volume and ths same velocity, the whole
rain-fall would require 985 days, or more than 2£ years
to be conveyed into the reservoir, while such floods
as would fill the aqueduct, do not last more than
2 or 3 days.
The mean rain-fall of the different months here xhe mean
fs 2i inches, which.can readily be disposed of by ab- monthly rain.


The highest sorption and evaporation in mild seasons. The
mean rain. highest mean rain fall is H inches; and in No-
vember 1849, there was a fall of 12 inches, in conse-
quence of which we had a very high flood in the
Yarra which lasted about a week.
I possess no information with regard to the du-
ration of the flood in the Plenty at Yan Yean, but
with so short and limited a water-shed, I consider it
impossible that the river could have been flooded at
that time for more than 3 days. The sectional area
of the highest flood line, as determined by your com-
mittee, is 200 feet. Now, with a velocity of 2 h
miles per hour, which is the velocity adopted by
them, 3 days or 72 hours would give a discharge of
7,040,000 cubic yards, which is equal to 3 feet in
the reservoir, or 1 foot per day ; and such a flood
Flood of Novem- as that of November 1849, probably does not occur
ber 1849. m ire than once in 10 years.
But how could such a flood be secured for the re-
servoir ? The same amount of water would take 12
days to pass through the aqueduct at 1 mile an hour,
which is the highest velocity that it be either
Great difficulty gafe or prudent to allow. A higher than this, in such
Of securing a w i n ding canal cut out of the clay-slate, would
' UI aOO ' convert the water into mud, and break up the sides,
and wash away the artificial banks ; and lor the
sake of such a flood, which may possibly occur once
in 10 years, would it be reasonable to spend £30,000
in enlarging the aqueduct to 4 times its present size ?
and without suitable embankments raised at an
enormous cost, to dam up such a flood, one hall
would not enter the aqueduct at all.
As 12 inches of rain fell during the month, in-
stead of 4, we may safely conclude that this flood
resulted from a rain-fall of at least 6 inches, which
Less than one- would give 13 feet in the reservoir, so that out of
fourth of the 13 f ee t 0 f rain-fall in one of the heaviest floods on
ra the f rive r r ached record, only 3 feet reaches the rivers, or less than
one-fourth. . .
The only other source of supply to be noticed is
dew. In England from 4to 5 inches has been com-
puted as the amount of dew deposited on the ground,
but I am not aware of any experiments to show the
Amount of dew. amount deposited on water. I feel persuaded that
the atmosphere is generally so dry here, that the
amount of dew must be very small ; and unless in
the case of very shallow pools, and lakes, there can
be very little deposited on water. A depth of 2or
3 feet will, in a great measure, prevent the forma-
tion of dew, because as the upper particles become
cooled, they at the same time descend, from their in-
creased density, to make way for the warmer
and lighter particles underneath, and until the
whole depth of water has Attained a considerably


Floods in do.
0
7*
Increase from winter rain
1
1
Rain-fall in reservoir
3
0
Drainage area of do
1
2
Dew
0
2
Total amount
. 11
6i
lower temperature than the atmosphere with which
it is in contact, no deposition of dew can take place.
As it is possible that there may be some dew, when Two inches al-
there is very little water in the reservoir, I shall on lowea-
this account allow an increase of two inches for the
whole surface, which is equal to 16$ days supply for
the city.
The whole amount will stand thus: —
From the River Plenty
The total avail-
ft. in- able supply of
5 6 water.
I come next to determine the amount of loss from
evaporation and absorption.
In large reservoirs the annual evaporation from Evaporation in
the surface is a very important element to be com the reservoir,
eidered, and, as it increases nearly in a geometrical
ratio, with an arithmetical increase of temperature, a
comparatively small difference in the mean tempera-
ture might give double the amount of evaporation.
It is therefore especially important in warm climates
that its actual amount should be ascertained by a
careful series of experiments, before any work of
magnitude is undertaken, whose success or failure
might entirely depend on the result.
In my first paper, which I only regarded as a Dr. Dalton’s
preliminary inquiry, 1 computed the evaporation for tables,
this colony from the tables of Dr. Dalton, who gives
44 inches as the evaporation for England. I took
the mean temperature of the different months in
Melbourne, and assumed for each month the amount
of evaporation corresponding to the month of the
same mean temperature in England. I also esti-
mated the increased evaporation proportionate to
the increased mean temperature and, to . hot winds,
to which I allowed a mean temperature of 87 ®, and Estimate of eva-
a duration of fifteen days, and I thus determined the pauer 1
evaporation to be 72 inches, or six feet. I stated, ' p
however, that I felt satisfied that a careful series of
experiments would show a still higher result, as, in-
dependent altogether of the the temperature, the
much drier condition of the atmosphere in Australia
exercises a powerful influence in promoting evapo-
ration.
Since our last meeting I have ascertained that
Mr. Glaisher, whp is the highest authority op, Mr, Glaisher.
meteorological subjects, has estimated the evapora-


Evaporation at tion at Greenwich at 60 inches, or five feet, annu-
Greenwich. ally. Proceeding upon this higher estimate, the
evaporation, calculated in the same way, would be
equal to eight feet two inches; and making due
allowance for the dry condition of the atmosphere,
nine feet may be safely assumed as the mean evapo-
ration for this colony.
Dr. Davy. j h av<> a j go i earn t that Dr. Davy, a member of this
Society, has devoted a great deal of attention to this
subject, and he has furnished me with the result of
his experiments. He is quite confident that the
mean evaporation is not under 9 feet, but he is in-
His estimate. clined to believe that it is more probably 10 feet.
This summer having been remarkably cool, with a
great deal of rain, and few hot winds, is not to be
regarded as an average season.
Evaporation on a Being anxious to ascertain the rate of evaporation,
large surface. over a j ar g e sur f ace fully exposed to the influences
of the weather, I lately selected a sheet of water of
about 300 yards long, with an average depth of
18 inches and width of 11 feet, and by fixing a mark
in a perpendicular part of the bank, I made careful
measurements several times during fourteen days,
and found that the amount lost exactly equalled 6
its amount. inches in that time, which gives 5 lines per day, and,
for the three summer months, 3 feet 2 inches. The
weather throughout was cool, excepting one day,
and the winds southerly and easterly, so that this
may be regarded as the lowest rate at this season.
By computing the evaporation ‘of the other months
according to their mean temperature, this rate would
give 9 feet for the twelve months.
Mr Laidlaw’s I Q farther illustration of this subject, I may men-
estimate for Cal. tion that Mr. Laidlaw has computed the evaporation
cutta. in Calcutta at 15 feet, and he also found that it
averaged nearly | of an inch a day between the
Cape of Good Hope and Calcutta, and between 10 °
One inch daily in and 20 ° in the Bay of Bengal, he found it to exceed
the Bay of 1 inch daily, or at the rate of 30 feet in the year.
Bengal. Dr. Milner mentions there are many lakes in the
steppes of Northern Asia, which have no natural out-
Dr. Milner. let. Some of them are many miles in circumference,
and have a depth of 6 and 7 feet, from the winter
rain, but are entirely evaporated during the summer
mouths.
And, according to Irby and Mangles, who describe
Very rapid eva- the effects of evaporation in the Dead Sea, it must be
P ora^“ n in very rapid indeed, notwithstanding the strong saline
ea sa- impregnation of the water. During the rainy season,
the increase of the Jordan and other streams, is suffi-
cient to raise the level 10 or even 15 feet; but under
the influence of a burning sun and a dry atmosphere
the lake, in a few months, resumes its former level.
It remains to consider the loss from absorption.


At the last meeting of the society I expressed great Absorption,
fears that a serious loss might he sustained in the
reservoir from this cause ; but I have since seen the
evidence which Mr. Hodgkinson gave on the subject
before the Select Committee, which I consider per-
fectly satisfactory.
To determine the exact amount of water that will
be available for the use of the city, I have now to
deduct the loss from evaporation.
ft. in. Evaporation
Total . . . .11 6 i deducted.
Deduct evaporation . .90
Balance . . . .2 6}
Required for present wants . 3 8
Balance deficiency.
1 li Deficiency.
This is indeed an unfortunate result of the gigan-
tic operations and large expenditure already incurred
at Yan Yean. And it seems not a little extraordinary
that such unlimited confidence should have been Unlimited con-
placed in the abundant supply of water ; and it is no fidence-
less extraordinary that Mr. Blackburn, with a know-
ledge of the immense loss sustained from evaporation
in the marshes, should have urged the necessity of Loss in the
rescuing the river from this slough of despond only marshes,
to plunge it into an abyss of greater magnitude,
where it would be scattered, contaminated, and ra-
pidly dissipated.
But it will probably be said, that as I .have only Amount of de-
shewn a deficiency of 1 foot 1} inches, which is ra- ficiency.
ther less than one-third of the amount required, I
may be in error in my estimate, and perhaps the
winter rains may furnish this amount. Now I shall
admit that in some seasons even double this amount
may possibly be added to the reservoir from this
source, but Ido not think that this need be regarded
as a subject of congratulation. With a stream of pure .
water, encircling the city like a horse shoe, the
inhabitants will not willingly pay £650,000 to be The chances of
subjected to the chances of the seasons, to be depen- the seasons,
dant on the casualties of rain for the first necessary
of existence; and, if we must speculate on chances,
how often do we have summers remarkable
for droughts, and the prevalence of hot winds?
And, what we gain from the casualties of
rain, we shall certainly lose by the casualties of h,* wind*"* 1
evaporation. An inch a day for hot winds, which as
we have seen is a small allowance for a temperature
of 96 ° , would make short work with two feet in the
reservoir, and this is the greatest addition which
could reasonably be expected from the ordinary rain
fall of the winter months.


Advantage of flt will be readily admitted that m estimating the
taking a low available discharge of a river for the supply of a
average dis- i ar o- e c ity, it is necessary to take a low average
eharge. instead of the mean of a number of years, because
it is essential to know what amount can really be
depended upon for each year, as the water supply of
a city should be placed beyond the teach of
casual ties* . „ . , ...
Mr Blackburn’s The late Mr. Blackburn was fully impressed with
estimate the importance of this principle, hence he assumed
his measurement of 5000 gallons per minute in
• December as ateliable average. . .
« Mv own estimate, on the same principle, is 5833
My own estimate. minu te, allowing 2-Srds of increase for
the three winter months ; but this is again reduced
by 900 gallons, which I allow as a minimum and
■very scanty supply for the inhabitants of the district.
The available discharge is, therefore, 4933 gallons
per minute, independent of floods, or six feet seven
inches in the reservoir.
I do not say that the discharge does not frequently
exceed this; but I am strongly of opinion that in
some seasons it does not do so.
I shall now, however, consider what may be rc-
The highest ave- warded as the highest average, and I shall deduce the
rage. amount from the sectional measurements ot the
river. , .
It may be considered as an axiom, that when a
Rivers confined deflned banks, these indicate its ordinary
banks! limits, which it only exceeds in time of floods In
other words, every river may be regarded as ha ™g
excavated for itself a bed sufficiently large to hold
its ordinary stream. The ordinary stream, therefore,
will be confined within the ordinary banks, and the
highest average in the winter, unless in floods, will
not overflow the banks. _ .
The sections of Let us examine the sections of the bed of the ru cr
the river. a t the entrance of the aqueduct. The mean of the
sections gives 28 feet within the banks, and 13-2 feet
under the water line. Therefore, with the same
velocity of half a mile per hour, the section could
contain no more than 5,381 gallons per minute, with-
out flooding the right bank. With double the volume,
the velocity would not be increased, according to
*O7l gallons the the usual formula, by i llierefore, I consider it
highest dis- to be demonstrated, that 8071 gallons per minute,
charge. or three times the January measurement, is the
highest discharge of the river, except in floods ;am
it is exceedingly rare to find any river in Australia
Australian river? level with its banks for six months in the year,
rarely level This discharge will give five leet four and a nan
with their ; nc hes in the reservoir for the six winter months;
but it will be observed that it does not include the
amount at present lost in the swamps, which I have


calculated at 1,830 gallons per minute for the whole toss iu the
year, or two feet five inches in the reservoir. swamps 2 feet
The loss in January, as we have seen, is 3,253 gal- omc us ‘
lons per minute, or at the rate of four feet four
inches in the reservoir.
This estimate is of great importance, as shewing
the exact amount that may be saved by effectually-
withdrawing the tributaries from the evaporation, and
it may be absorption of the swamps.
If the two feet five inches, therefore, can be saved,
it may be added to the five feet four and a half
inches.
The highest ordinary discharge may be computed Highest ordinary
thus—the six summer months being taken at 2,537 discharge,
gallons per minute, or three feet four inches as
measured by the committee in January.
ft. in.
Six summer months . - i 8
•Six winter months . . 5 4J
■Amount lost in swamps . .25
Total . . .. 9 5k
Deduct 900 gallons for district . 1 2
Highest discharge of river . 8 3£
First estimate . .. .67
Balance in favor of 2nd estimate 1 B'j
Thus my first estimate amounted to six feet seven Compared with
inches as the ordinary discharge of the river, so that first estimate,
this second or highest estimate has an advantage of
one foot eight and a half inches over the first. It
will therefore be seen that, even allowing the river
to be level with its banks for six months in the year,
for which we have no measurements to guide us, still
the result is very little more favorable than the first,
and cannot with any certainty be depended on ; and Very little more
if one-third of the wfiiole, instead of the scanty allow 1 - favorable,
ance of 900 gallons per minute, were left for the use
of the district, this highest average discharge would
be reduced below my former estimate.
The Committee, who were appointed by the society The Committee ;
to investigate the whole subject in a scientific man- t |' eir «mclu-
ner, have arrived at results very different from ray s,on!, ‘
own. They do not base their conclusions on the
measurements at all, which they profess to disregard,
but on theoretical principles, and on certaiu calcula-
tions quite original, and apparently adapted to supply
any amount of water that may be required in this dry
climate; and they have determined that the dis
charge is three times greater than my estimate of
eight feet.
Thus, although Mr. Blackburn, who was ignorant Mr - Blackburn.


Kot aware of the of the enormous evaporation in this colony, silp-
enormons eva- posing it to be about 3 feet, only calculated upon a
poration. cer tain supply for 150.000 individuals, they, admitting
9 feet of evaporation, which is equal to an annual
loss of water that would supply 327,000 at 30 gal-
lons per head per day, find that there is still suffi-
cient left for a population of 666,000, and very gene-
The generosity of rously leaving one half of this enormous amount for
the Committee the use of the district, they regard the reservoir
scheme as adequate to supply 333,000. Had Mr.
Blackburn been spared, how rejoiced he would have
been to find his favorite scheme so’ singularly deve-
loped in so short a time. This appears to be another
illustration of the wonderful powers of unlimited ex-
tension attributed to the Yan Yean scheme.
Their enormous The proportions of the Committee’s estimate would
estimate, stand thus; 3000 gallons per minute for the six
summer months, 15,000 gallons per minute for three
of the winter months, and 48,000 gallons per minute
for the other three winter months.
These large amounts are of course intended to
include floods, hut as I have elsewhere shown that in
some seasons we may have no floods at all, and that
the very highest flood, supposing it to last for 72
hours, would only amount to 8 feet in the reservoir,
or less than one-eighth of the whole, the above
figures may be regarded as substantially correct.
. It is a source of great regret to me that my esti-
oreat regie. mate ; s s 0 muc h a t variance with that of the Com-
mittee appointed by the society, but a thorough con-
viction that they are in error compels me to call in
question the result of their investigations, and to
discuss at some length their mode of reasoning on the
subject.
Messrs. Christy And, here, it is necessary to state that the corn-
ami Acheson. rnittee at present consists of only two members, Mr
Christy, civil engineer, and Mr. Acheson, of the
Survey Department.
Ori ’inai Com- As originally appointed, the Committee contained
rnittee. the names of Mr Wekey, the honorary secretary of
the society, and Mr. Hodgkinson, of the Survey De-
partment, who, from his great practical knowledge,
and long experience in the’colony, and having al-
ready devoted much attention to the whole subject of
the water supply of the city, was peculiarly fitted to
aid their labours.
Mr, Wekey. The former withdrew on finding, after mature
deliberation, that he could not reconcile his own
opinions and calculations with those of his col-
leagues.
The latter writes to the society, “ that although pre-
cluded, from want of time, from affording his assis-
tance in the calculations of the Committee, yet, if he
Mr. ifodgVinson could have agreed with the conclusions arrived at


by them, he would have appended his name to their His lett ” to tUe
report, but he differed very materially from some of "
their views.”
It is much to be regretted, that the Committee Serious loss,
thus lost the co-operation of two of the members,
and especially on the grounds above stated, as
it is evident, that they, as originally constituted,
would have arrived at very different conclusions,
and although I entertain the highest opinion of the Messrs. Christy
professional abilities of Messrs. Christy and Acheson, and Acheson.
I have to state, on public grounds, that however com-
petent they may be to draw up a report on the water
shed of English rivers, with the aid of English tables,
they cannot be supposed to have much practical
knowledge of the rivers of this country, from their
•comparatively short colonial experience, and they
have never actually seen the river Plenty in the Have never seen
winter months, although their calculations shew that £ lenty m
they expect nine-tenths of the whole supply from the
winter rains. The report, therefore, has lost much of
that practical value that would otherwise have at-
tached to any document emanating from a Committee Their report,
of the Philosophical Society.
Finding such an enormous difference between my Hodckin-
estimate of the water-shed of the Plenty basin, and gon > s p ap cr.
that arrived at by the committee, Mr. Hodgkinson
was induced to read a very interesting and valu-
able paper on the subject, before the Society;
and the result at which he has arrived
strongly corroborates all my calculations and con- Corroborates n i y
elusions with respect to the water-shed, which is the estimate,
fulcrum upon which the sufficiency of the supply for
a rapidly increasing population will depend. At 40
gallons, per head, per day,Mr.Hodgkinson calculates
that there will be water for 190,000, _so long as there
is no drought like that of 1837-38 ; in such a contin- brought 0 t issv-
gency, he thinks the supply of water would fail. as.
But, it is to be noticed, that this estimate _ for
190,000 is based on a very important consideration, ,
about which there is at present some difference of
opinion. He has taken measurements of the evapo-
ration from a pond which supplies his house, and
calculates that it does not amount to more than 6
feet 2 inches in the year. Dr. Davy, on the other His estimate of
hand, who is our highest meteorological authority, the evapora-
regards 10 feet as the probable evaporation. Now, tlou-
at 40 gallons per head, the difference between these
estimates of evaporation would supply 105,000 :
deduct this from 190,000, and we have 85,000 as Mr. ,
Hodgkinson’s estimate, according to this higher rate r> 8
of evaporation.
My own estimate, deducting the same evaporation,
would supply 43,000.
Regarding these estimates as mere approxima-


Mr. Hodgkin- tions, it will thus be seen that the difference between
aaamyown 16 Mr - Ho(l S kin son’s and my own is very small, being
equal to only 1 foot 6 inches in the reservoir.
Now, while the greatest importance is to be at-
tached to Mr. Hodgkinson’s estimate of the water
Importance of ske< * tke Pl ent 7, as it is founded on a thorough,
his estimate, knowledge of the river, and much practical experi-
ence both here and in England, I feel inclined to pre-
fer Dr. Davy’s estimate of the evaporation, and
from measurements which I recently made on a
larger sheet of water than Mr. Hodgkinson’s pond,
I found that in 28 days the evaporation exactly
equalled 11 inches, or, 39 inches per day,which would
give very nearly 9 feet in 12 months.
But, after all, no scientific result can be obtained
from ponds and water holes, unless they are water-
tight, which it is impossible to ascertain.
©r. Davy*Mr. Thus, with Dr. Davy’s lowest estimate of evapo-
Hodgkinson. ration, Mr. Hodgkinson’s estimate of the water-shed
would supply 112,000, so long, as there are no
droughts ; but Dr. Davy gives us very little hope of
escaping from such calamitous visitations.
Mr. Hodgkinson likewise expresses a very unfa-
ftuality Of the vourable opinion with respect to the quality of the
water, water, when stored in the reservoir, and thinks that
the Plenty is more likely to suffer deterioration from
a resident population than the Yarra.
It is interesting, and highly important in this
inquiry to know that Mr. Hodgkinson’s estimate
Dr, Davy. of the water shed and my own are still further cor-
roborated by the investigations of Dr. Davy.
He is not sufficiently acquainted with the geo-
logical character of the Plenty basin to give any
exact estimate of the water-shed, but, from observa-
tions and calculations which he has made respecting
the force of evaporation from, the surface of the
He estimates ground, in this colony, he regards one-eighth of the
one-eighth of rain, over any large area of surface, as the most that
the rain as the can reach the rivers, under any conditions of slope
shed est water ' or geological formation, and he thinks that in many
districts the proportion of rain that reaches the rivers
is much less than one-eighth.
Thus, Mr. Hodgkinson, Dr. Davy, and myself,,
seem to have all arrived, by different and inde-
pendent modes of investigation, at very nearly the
Same result. Bamfi result. For all practical purposes, our different
estimates will produce the same result.
I attach very little importance to the determina-
tion, on theoretical principles, of the water-shed of
the Plenty.
The aqueduct. The only certain way, as stated above, of finding
the amount, is to measure the streams at least once
a month, in order to get the mean discharge for the
year. But, if the aqueduct could be finished, within,


the next two months, we should then have the very Winter rains,
best means of practically testing how much water
can be obtained from the winter rains.
I have availed myself of all the measurements
already made, and without deducting the immense
loss from evaporation in the swamps, have allowed
an increase of two-thirds for the greater water-shed
of the winter months.
The members of the Committee have disregarded The committee
all these measurements, because they were taken in have disregard-
the summer months, and have calculated the amount ed the mea-
of water-shed, in accordance with the evaporation surements.
tables of Mr. Dempsey, which profess to show the
evaporation due to the mean temperature of the
different months in England, and I should have
thought that it required no great amount of scientific
knowledge to see that if these tables give a correct Mr - Dempsey's
result for the mean temperature of England, they are tables give very
totally inapplicable to the mean temperature of this re "
colony, and would give a very incorrect result.
The Committee, in their report, admit that the
evaporation from the surface of water is nine feet,
which is nearly double the evaporation in England.
It seems, therefore, a singular oversight on their
part, not to see that the force of evaporation from
the surface of the ground here must bear at least the-
same increased proportion, and, in point of fact, the Evaporation very
evaporation is far greater than double. great.
That portion of the drainage area of the Plenty T he clay slate
which is of the clay slate formation, and which may formation,
be estimated at fifteen square miles, or one-fourth
of the whole, is so much more destitute of vegetation
than the cultivated soil in England, that the surface
of the ground becomes intensely heated under the
influence of the solar rays, and.evaporationis exceed-
ingly rapid.
Thus, the reasoning upon which the Committee rely,
to account for their enormous water-shed, is the same T 11? reasoning of
which has led all other scientific men to the very 10 omu ‘ lttee
opposite conclusion.
If, according to their, view, cultivation of the soil Cultivation of
diminishes the rivers, England of all other countries 'he soil,
ought to have the fewest and the smallest in propor-
tion to the rain-fall, and the extent of surface,
whereas, it is exactly the reverse, and, in these respects
Australia is the very antithesis of England.
A barren, uncultivated, and impenetrable soil, Uncultivated
absorbs no moisture from the atmosphere, and is la nd.
veryunfavorable for the deposition of dew.
Luxuriant vegetation absorbs large quantities of
moisture during the day, and is most favorable for Luxuriant vege-
the deposition of dew in the night, and the surface, Nation,
being protected from the direct rays of the sun, is


always cool and moist, and the rain readily pertrfr
lates through the soil to supply springs and rivers.
Surface -water! Mere surface water adds little to rivers, except in
floods : it is that which percolates through the soil,
and traverses either the superficial, or deep strata,
that forms the principal and permanent supply of
rivers.
A compact and impenetrable soil, such as the Com-
mittee believe to be most favorable for river supply,
is in reality the worst adapted for that purpose, and
it is only in the immediate vicinity of rivers that
mere surface water can reach them.
Capillary attrac- The capillary attraction of the soil is too great to
allow the rain water to travel over any extent of
surface. The varying inclination of the surface also,
and numerous other obstacles, oppose its motion.
Their illustration of the great water-shed
of the Dandenong ranges is worthy of notice.
Because the surface soil is ankle deep with water in
wet weather, they conclude that the water-shed
must be very abundant, whereas, the opposite con-
clusion is the more legitimate deduction. The rain,
which is so firmly held in the surface soil as to con
1 vert it into swampy or boggy ground; cannot reach
the rivers at all. It remains there only to be eva-
porated and lost, It is the geological formation of
the ranges, and the close structure of the granite
rocks which prevents tne rain from draining through
the soil, and gives rise to swampy and marshy
ground, even on the sides anfhsummits of the moun-
• tain, and the same condition occurs in the slate for-
mation, as for example in the swamps above Yan
Yean, where the water cannot readily percolate
through the fissures, or where there is a subsoil of
heavy stiff clay.
Mr. De/npsey himself entertains the same views on
this subject, as I have now expressed, and thus the
fhvorite authority of the Committee would be the first
to detect their illogical reasoning, and he would be
especially astonished, that on such reasoning they re-
lied for justification of their unwarrantable adoption
of his evaporation tables, to determine the very im-
portant question of the water-shed of the Plenty
basin, with a totally different temperature from that
of England.
I have said that about one-fourth of the drainage
area of the Plenty is clay slate, and I may add the
whole of that of Ihe reservoir, and it is the opinion
of Mr. BlandowSki, who has made a careful geologi-
cal survey of the whole colony, that the clay-slate
formation is entirely destitute of rivers.
The rain water quickly disappears through the sur-
face soil, which is composed of the detritus of the
slate, and is lost chiefly by evaporation from the sur-
Dandenong
ranges.
Swampy ground
The' close struc
tion of the
rocks.
Mr. Dempsey’s
views.
Clay slate desti-
tute of rivers.


face, which becomes intensely heated by the solar
rays, and partly by absorption through the seams . in wa(er
and Assures of the strata, to re-appear as springs, at op ilol f 3i
some lower level, either in the ocean or in the beds
of rivers ; or, as frequently happens, in the water-
holes of the dry creeks and water-courses which have
no other permanent supply in the summer months ;
and this circumstance has led some to entertain very
false notions with regard to the evaporation from
the surface of water iu this colony. Finding that
their water-holes, on which they depend for their
domestic consumption, suffer little diminution in
the heat of summer, they conclude that the evapo-
ration is very trifling.
Artificial water-holes, sunk in any locality, where Artificial water-
the close structure of the underlying rocks prevents holes-
the escape of the surface water, will lead to the
same erroneous conclusions.
With, scarcely any exception, the slate strata are slate strata
vertical, running north and south. Hence, they pre- vertical,
sent the most favorable conditions for absorption ;
and it is very common to find rivers originating in
the granite formation, gradually losing themselves loss of rivers,
iu the districts of the slate formation.
I have said that the Committee have calculated The Committee
the amount of water-shed in accordance with Mr. and Mr. Demp
Dempsey’s tables. Ido not say that their calcula- se y' B taWe **
tions are based on these tables ; but, to use their own
expression, they check their calculations by them.
By a method which has never before been applied to
determine the water-shed of any other country, they
find that 57-6 per cent, of the rain in the Plenty
basin is evaporated* and 42-4 per cent, goes to the
river, and then, in order to check this result, they
consult Mr. Dempsey’s tables, and find that exactly
57-6 per cent, of the rain in England is evaporated,
and 42-4 per cent, goes to the rivers ; and, forgetting
that this colony is not England, and that our tem-
perature is much higher, and that the evaporation
from the surface of our uncultivated lands is vastly
greater, they regard this coincidence as a proof of
the correctness of their theory, aud forthwith apply
Mr. Dempsey’s English evaporation to determine the
discharge of the Plenty river in the winter months.
This extraordinary* coincidence between their singular eoinci .
calculations and Mr. Dempsey’s tables, even to a deuce,
decimal fraction, might at first sight be supposed to
prove the mathematical accuracy of both, but a mere
coincidence is not to be regarded as a proof of the
correctness of either, it is necessary that one or other
should first be established on a firm scientific basis
before such a coincidence could prove anything at
all, I shall not attempt to explaiu this singular co- Prove* nothing.


incidence, though, doubtless, it would form an inter-
esting subject in an essay on probabilities.
M n D n P,cy & ■ I have already shewn that Mr. Dempsey’s tables
r. omson. gj ye iree times the amount of water-shed that Dr.
Thomson calculated for Great Britain, and I am pre-
pared to shew that they give a very erroneous and
incorrect result of the proportion ot the rain that is
evaporated here, for, when corrected for the differ-
ence of temperature, they give only one-fourth of
the water-shed calculated by the Committee, and
therefore the data upon which they rely to check
their own calculations will prove that they are alto-
gether unworthy of confidence, and must be divided
. by four to give a truthful result.
The Committee a pp earg) from the report, that the committee
arm.° n eaS Un chiefly rely on the eastern arm of the Plenty for the
supply of the reservoir.
Taking their own measurement in January, as the
summer discharge, although in consequence of rain
it considerably exceeded Mr. Blackburn’s measure-
ment in December, with a velocity of one and one-
third mile per hour, it only gives 4,450 gallons per
its discharge in m i nu t e , which for the six summer months is equal to
3 feet in the reservoir ; their whole discharge for the
Plenty they calculate at 24 feet Sin. in the reservoir,
therefore the winter discharge for six months will be
8 times the amount of the summer discharge; but
the section of the river will only contain three times
the volume, supposing the stream to be level with
the banks, with the same velocity, and they do not
calculate for an increased velocity, as, according to
the usual formula) it would be very small or difficult
to compute.
It- is thus very important to notice that they
assume the six winter months discharge at
times larger, eight times the amount of the six summer months,
while the river, when level with its banks, can only
contain three times the amount.
They also assume that the river is really level
with its banks, although they have never seen it in
the winter months ; but they are quite satisfied on
this point from the evidence of a resident farmer.
This, it will be observed, is not very scientific or
reliable evidence to check their calculations, or to
justify the expenditure of £650,000 of public money,
Contradictory an d accordingly the farmer’s son, an intelligent lad
of nineteen, in his father’s absence, told Mr. Wekey
and Mr George Wilkie, that the river was only half
full during the winter months, except in floods,
which, with the same velocity, exactly accords with
my own estimate of the winter discharge.
Mr - Da,ton aml The principle upon which Mr. Dempsey’s tables
r. lomson. are p ase( j ; s p rec i se ]y the same as that adopted by
Dr. Dalton and Dr. Thomson, for ascertaining the


MEAN RAIN.
MEAN TEMP.
EVAPORATION.
Inches.
Degrees.
Per cent.
Inches,
January -
1-847
36-1
29-3.
0 540
February
1-971
38-0
21 6
0 424
March - -
1-617
43 9
33 4
0 540
April - -
1-456
49 9
79 0
1 150
May
1-856
64 0
94 2
;1 748
June - - -
2-213
58 7
93 3
2 174
July
2 287
61 0
98 2.
2 245
August -
2427
61-6
83 6
2 391
September
2 639
57 8
80 1
2 270
October -
2-823
489
5:i 5
1 423
November
3 837
42 9
15 1
0-579,
December
1-L41
39 3
04 3
0 164
water-shed. He calculated that 67-6 per cent, of the Mr. Dempsey,
rain is evaporated, and 42-4 remains to supply springs
and rivers.
Whether Mr. Dempsey’s tables are the result of
his own experiments, or those of others, ho does not
say, but he clearly states that the evaporation
mainly depends upon the temperature, heat promo-
ting it, cold retarding it, and therefore I cannot con- pendTonVnt
Clive that he would commit such an egregious blun- perature.
der as to apply his tables, without correction for the
great difference of temperature, to determine the
proportion of the rain evaporated in this colony.
In calculating the evaporation from the surface of
water here from English tables, I assumed for each
month the evaporation of a corresponding month in
England, with the same or a less mean temperature, English, tables,
and I thus obtained 8 feet 2 inehes, which is suffi-
ciently near to Dr. Davy’s estimate of 9 feet to show,
the correctness of the method.
I therefore hold it to bo scientifically correct to
adopt the same method with Mr. Dempsey’s tables in Evaporation,
order to determine the proportion of rain that is
evaporated from the ground.
I have drawn up 3. tables for the purpose of illus- Victoria con.
trating the contrast between the proportion of rain
evaporated here and in England, allowing the same an
pro portion to the same mean temperature in both
countries, and the result is 2-51 inches, or 1-12 as the
proportion of the rain that reaches the rivers in this
colony.
Table I.—Showing the Mean Rain, and the Mean Byapora'ion ;
Temperature, and the proportion of Rain evapo- England,
rated in the different mouths in England, according
to Mr. Dempsey :• —
Total rain 26 616
otal evaporated 17-648


Degrees.
Per cent.
Inches.
67-94
98-6
1-34
C7-31-
98-6
0-93
63 92
98-6
1-57
60-56
98-3
3-07
54-91
94-2
3-45
51 00
79-0
1-90
49 34
79-0
1-71
50 66
79 0
2-85
55.08
94-2
3-08
58-97
98-3
2-36
62-25
986
4 21
66‘29?
986
1-83
MEAN RAIN.
EVAPORATION,
WATER-SHED.
January - -
1-36
1'34
0-02.
February -
0'95
093
0,02
March ...
1-60
1-57
0 03
April - -
3-13
3-07
006
May - -
3-67
3-45
0-22
June -
2-41
1 90
0.51
July
2T8
1*71
0-47
August - -
861
2*85
0 76
September
3-27
3-08
01 9
October - -
2-54
2-36
0T8
November -
4 27
4-21
006
December -
1-86
1-83
0-03
Total
30-81
28 30
2-51
Evaporation Table ll. — Showing the Mean Rain and the Mean
Temperature of the different months in Victoria,
and the proportion of the Rain evaporated, allow-
ing the same per centage to the same Mean Tem-
perature in both Countries:—
MEAN RAW.
Inches.
January - 1-36
February - 095
March - - ICO
April 313
I. ay 3-67
June - - - 241
July 2.18
August - - 3-61
September 3-27
October . 2-59
November 4-27
December . 1-86
Total 30-81.
MEAN TEMP. EVAPORATION.
Total evaporated 28-30
W victoria d ’ Table lll. — Showing the Mean Rain and the amount
of Rain evaporated, and the Water Shed, or that
portion of the Rain that escapes evaporation in
Victoria, deduced from Mr. Dempsey’s Tables.
illustration of Tn illustration of this method I shall take our
method. month of January, which has a mean tempera-
ture of 670.94. On referring to Mr. Dempsey’s
tables I find that August in England has a mean
temperature of G 10.6. Now, what can be more
just or more in accordance with scientific accu-
racy, than to conclude that the proportion of the
rain evaporated in our January is at least as great
as that in the August of England ?
In the same way I shall take our July which
has a mean temperature of 490.34, and I find
that April in England has a mean temperature of
r n f 49u.9. Am I not then warranted on scientific
principles UeC grounds to assume that the proportion of the rain
evaporated here in July is equal to that of April in


England? Now it is precisely in this way that I have Result—one.
deduced from Mr. Dempsey’s tables that 2-51 inches, or twelfth of the
one-twelfth of the rain-fall adopted by the committee, ram ‘
represents the proportion that reaches the Plenty.
I do not insist that Mr. Dempsey’s tables are cor-
rect ; but if they are so, then it would appear that
the water-shed of the Plenty is much less than I made
it. His tables give 2-51 inches; I estimated
4-50 inches as the nearest approximation, and
there is a vast difference between 2-51 inches and
10-69 inches when multiplied by sixty square
miles of surface; and this is the water-shed tee’s estimate,
adopted by your Committee for eight months of the
year. And as every point is of importance in this
inquiry, it may be asked why the Committee allow
no water-shed for the four summer months ; their owm
reason is that they thiuk there is none ; this admis-
sion, therefore, is not to be regarded as a set-off for
their assuming 10.69 inches as the water-shed of the
eight months.
According to Mr. Dempsey’s tables, the proportion Four summer
of the rain that reaches the rivers in the 4 summer mor’tlls-
mouths in England is equal only to one-fifth of an
inch. Now, without any correction for the higher
mean temperature here, one-fifth of an inch for our
four summer months is too trifling to be noticed.
This extraordinary error of the Committee in Iheir Extraordinary
misapplication of Mr. Dempsey’s tables, leads, as results." ' ts
might be expected, to very extraordinary results, and
it is necessary to follow out their reasoning to its
legitimate conclusion.
Above Yan Yean, in January, the river gave 3 feet River above Van
4 inches in the reservoir in 12 months, and 1 foot 1* Yean-
inches in 4 months, or 2 feet 2.f inches in 8 months.
The whole rain-fall for 12 months, at 31 inches is 68-2
feet in the reservoir. Deduct the rain of the 4 sum-
mer months, which is equal to 5.77 inches, or 12 feet
6 inches in the reservoir, and we have 55 feet 8 inche s
as the rain-fall of eight winter months. Take 42.4
per cent of this which gives 23j feet in the reservoir
as the water-shed of the Plenty in 8 winter months,
according to the calculations of the Committee. Add Total discharge
to this 1 foot 2 inches, or one-third of 3 feet 4 inches, of river-
to represent the discharge of the river for four sum-
mer months, and we have 24 feet 8 inches as the total
amount that comes dow r n the river.
Their enormous
Of this enormous amount of water, they gene- estimate and
rously propose to bestow one-half on the district, generosity,
which will be sufficient, as we shall presently see, to
flood the river during the whole year, and may there-
fore prove a source of great inconvenience to the
inhabitants. And it is their intention to appropriate
the other half for the reservoir.


Total -----
24
8
Deduct one-lialf for district -
12
4
Balance for reservoir -
12
4
Bain in reservoir ■ - - :
4‘> 4 per cent., or of rain o ver drainage
area of ditto -
4
Total in reservoir *
17
3
Deduct evaporation . - - -
Xho Committee. Their calculations may be represented as follows:
■From the river during eight months 23 6
Do. four summer months 1 2
Total for the use of the City - - 8 3
Tliis amount will exactly supply, at 30 gallons per
head, 333,000 ; at 100 gallons per head, 100,000.
r .. Now, let us contras* 23 ft. 6 in. with 2 ft. 2 3 in., the
In f f or e 8 moniSl- r discharge for 8 months according to the measurement
of the Committee. Thus they make the 1 lenty for
the 8 winter months contain ten times the volume
of water that it does in January, or according
to Mr. Blackburn’s measurement in December.
It will perhaps he said that this actually takes
place in the Merri Creek, but such reasoning,
if it proves anything, proves too much. Hus
Merri Creek. creek ig not a r ; ver . a nd only runs after wet
weather, and does not always run in winter ; or the
stream is so small that it can scarcely be saia to run
in very dry winters. After a heavy fall of ram the
creek is flooded for two or three days, but if the flood
water were divided over 365 days, it would be mise-
rably small amount.
If any argument could be extracted from this, it
would prove that, because the Merri Creek is at one
season many million times larger than it is at another,
therefore the Plenty may be so_ also, which is
Not analagous. absurd ; besides this sort of reasoning has its(incon-
veniences as well as its advantages. If we take the
highest flood in the Plenty, and reduce it by a few
million times, it would cease running altogether like
the Merri Creek, and the' city would stand a poor
chance of a permanent supply of water from this
scarce.
Perhaps it may be thought that the Yarra is an
The river Yarra. analogous case, and if it can be shewn
that it contains ten times the volume of
water during the eight winter months that it
does in December, so may the Plenty. The arra
differs in many essential points from the I lenty, and
ohiefly in this important particular, that it takes its
Its sources. rise in very high mountains compared with Mount
Disappointment, j*nd these are covered with snow
during the winter months. But, it has yet to be


proved, that the Yarra undergoes so remarkable an l« «»e Yami ten
increase in volume, for a period of eight months iu the f “"| niol f ths
year*. This river has an average depth ol 40 feet, the year
for a distance of two miles above Prince’s Bridge, than it is in
and I need scarcely say, that it only overflows its December.
banks in floods which may not occur once in two
years. Its level, in the beginning of December, is
not more than three or four feet below the average of
the winter months, or below the level of many por-
tions of the banks, with any reasonable increase in
the velocity, therefore, how is it possible for the
Yarra, with an increase of only one-tenth in its depth
or sectional measurement, to carry 10 times the
volume of water for 8 months ?
We have only then to compare, in the drawings This increase in
furnished by the Committee, the sectional area of the „® d ££ nty 1,1 *
Plenty, at one or more points, in order to see how
impossible it is to believe that the river, during 8
months of the year, could contain 10 times the -
volume of water that it does in December. The
drawings show that the stream occupies
in Jannary one half of the sectional
measurement, that is, one half of the depth where
the banks are perpendicular.
Now, as above-stated, it may be regarded as an In JP«?fc® • infrr-
axiom, that when a river has defined banks these re !* iden t s .
indicate its ordinary limits, which it only exceeds in
time of floods. Thus, without actual measurements
for the winter months, important information as to
the volume of water may be gathered from those
that are resident on the spot. Dr. M'Kenna and
myself put the question to Mr. Bear, who has long
resided on his own property at Yan Yean, if a mea-
surement of the Plenty, on the 12th of December,
would give a fair average for the year. He replied,
that he thought it would. Now, the meteorological
tables show that November is our wettest month,
and Mr. Blackburn’s measurement of 2700 gallons Mr. Bear's
per minute was taken in December, therefore, it is opinion,
not unreasonable to suppose, that Mr. Bear's opinion
may be very nearly correct.
But let us examine the section of the river, at the
entrance of the aqueduct, not very distant from Mr.
Bear’s house. With a discharges January of 2537
gallons per minute, and a velocity of half a mile per
hour, the section could not contain more than twice
the present volume, with the same velocity, without
The river cannot
spreading widely over its right bank, which is nearly contain 3 times
level. With double the volume, the velocity would its December
be very little increased. Thus the section could volume,
not carry three times its present volume without
flooding its right bank.
Such a state of things could scarcely escape the
notice of an intelligent resident gentleman, if it


The Conniiittee were to go on for eight mouths in every year, and
t'-H us that'it yet the Committee of the Society tell us that there
thliMthis 6 " is not onl 7 three times but ten times the above
contains ten
times tills
volume. ’ measurement during eight months in the year. Nor
is there the slightest water-worn appearance on the
banks to indicate that they form the ordinary chan-
nel of the river for any portion of the year.
I cannot at present furnish, on reliable authority,
the average increase of rivers-in floods ; besides, this
increase must bear a constant relation to the rain-
fall, and therefore to the latitude.
The Committee entertain the opinion that, during
1 ropica I*rains,1 *rains, the eight winter months, the rain falls very heavily
here, and that, in consequence, the water-shed is
very great. lam not aware of this fact, but, on the
contrary, during the four summer months, when
they say there is no water-shed, we have some-
times, in consequence of the tropical heat, very
sudden and tropical rains.
Increase of The increase of our Australian rivers during floods
rivers in floods, probably ranges from 50 to 100 times the volume of
the ordinary streams, and this accords with the opin-
ion of Mr. Blandowski, who possesses a great practical
knowledge of the physical peculiarities of the col-
ony. The highest flood lines of the Plenty, with
the velocity assumed by the Committee of 2£ miles
per hour, give 75 times the volume of water that
passes Yan Yean in December.
Increase accord- How very different is the result of their singular
ing to Com. and elaborate calculations. Having found ac-
mittee. cording to these, aided by the evaporation tables of
Mr Dempsey, that the ordinary stream of the Plenty
for 8 mouths out o/the 12, is 10 times larger than it is
in December, the highest flood lines which they them-
selves could discover will only permit of a remark-
ably small increase during floods, the greatest being
7i times the volume of the ordinary stream.
Rejection of their ~g uc h a result is so startling and incredible, that it
calculations. ig su jp c } en t ? j n m y opinion, to warrant the rejection,
by the’Philosophical Society, both of their calculations
and Mr Dempsey’s tables.
Nor is this result more incredible than that the ordi-
nary stream of the Plenty is not confined within its or-
dinary banks, but for 8 months of the year is widely
extended over their level surface; a condition of
things which was never witnessed by any of the
settlers or residents on the river with whom I have
conversed.
Better to disre- How much better it would have been for the Com-
feoird theory. m ittee of a Philosophical society to have disregarded
theory altogether, and to have rigidly adhered to
their own "measurements, as well as those of Mr.
Blackburn and Mr. Hodgkinson, and to have made
these the basis of their calculations.


Theory, based upon experiments conducted in Theory based
this colony, would possess a scientific interest uponcxperi-
and value, but otherwise it is practically valueless. inenls '
Speculative philosophers, who embark in abstruse speculative
scientific investigations with incorrect or inappli- Philosophers,
cable data for their guide, will soon find themselves
lost in a pathless ocean, without a compass and with-
out a chart.
Dr. Prout, one of the ablest writers on -Me- Dr - I>rout-
teorology, thus expresses himself with reference to
the different estimates that have been made of the
water-shed of England :
These statements of the water that is condensed and evapo-
rated in Great Britain, can only be viewed as rude approxima-
tions ; and even admitting them to be correct, they could
scarcely be applied with any advantage to an inquiry into the
actual condensation and evaporation in other countries or cli-
mates, which in all instances must be determined by observa-
tion and experiment.
Before taking leave of Mr. Dempsey, I wish to Mr. Dempsey's
state my entire concurrence in the liberal views he liberal vi(iWS-
expresses with reference to the amount of water re-
quired for a city of 100,000 inhabitants.
Although, he says, 20 gallons per head might be
sufficient for domestic and manufacturing purposes,
and for the extinction of fires, yet he advocates a Extravagance in
constant service of 30 gallons per head, and is of water should
opinion that extravagance in water should always fitted. 6 I,er ~
be permitted ; and for the purpose of cleansing and
watering the streets and thoroughfares, for the sup-
ply of fountains, public gardens, and pleasure
grounds, and other miscellaneous and occasional
purposes, he considers that one-tenth of an inch per
day, should be allowed for the whole area. Part of
this is supplied from rain, so that for a city cover-
ing 1000 acres, he allows 15 gallons per head ad- 45 gallons per
ditional, making in all 45 gallons, and if he were con- head f or a cit y
suited about the proper supply for Melbourne, he e e s rin ° 1000
would allow 30 gallons instead of 15, as it
covers more than 2000 acres ; and as the In victoria oo
evaporation from the surface is more than double gallons for
that of England, I am satisfied that he would on 2uoo acres,
this account allow another 30 gallons, or 90 gallons
in all, and this is precisely what is frequently used in
New York on the constant service principle.
The Committee, it appears, hold Mr. Dempsey in
high estimation as an authority. lam surprised,
therefore, that they do not follow him in his liberal
views on the water supply of cities. They only allow Guard against
30 gallons, but if his views are correct this amount “" I s *®f essiiry
will leave no water for the numerous important pur-
poses which he enumerates ; so that we shall have
carefully to guard against any unnecessary waste in
order that a little may be saved to allay the dust in
our streets and thoroughfares.


Highest theoreti- When the object is to obtain a very large water-
cal estimate. s i ie ,i f rom the Plenty basin, they adopt Mr. Dempsey’s
evaporation tables, which give nearly the highest
theoretical estimate of the water-shed for the mean
temperature of England, or about three times the
amount of Dr. Thomson’s estimate, who was at least
equally well qualified with Mr. Dempsey to prosecute
any scientific investigation ; but when the object is to
make the most of the limited supply at Yan Yean,
they forget Mr. Dempsey and his water-tables, and,
r cm- knowing that New York frequently consumes 90 gal-
vly at Yau lons per head, they tell us that Melbourne, which is
Yean. nearly in the same latitude, and has much more
need of a plentiful supply, ought only to have 30
gallons. ...
It is singularly illustrative of the peculiarities ot
this reservoir scheme, to glance at the results arrived
at by the Committee.
Peculiarities of At 30 gallons per head per day, 1 foot 11 inches
reservoir j n the reservoir, will suffice for the city for twelve
scheme. months. Taking their own estimate of the evapo-
ration at nine feet, it will thus be necessary, in order
to store and preserve 1 foot 11 inches for the city,
to put into the reservoir each year 10 feet 11 inches,
or about six times the amount required.
Consumption of Thus, for every gallon of water that will be con-
water sumed by the citizens for domestic purposes, and for
watering the streets, five will be consumed by evap-
oration at Yan Yean.
The contents of the River Plenty represent that
small fraction of the rain that nature has rescued for
the use of man from the powerful influence of evapo-
ration, under an Australian sun. It does seem cxtia-
ordinary, therefore, with so little to lose, that we
should be solicitous, at an immense sacrifice of
Fvanoralin* money, to provide an evaporating basin m the
basin ° vicinity of the river, sufficiently large to swallow up-
nine-tenths of the small supply which nature has thus
provided for our use. _
I confess to have some impatience for the publica-
tion of the full report of the Committee, in order to
learn what they recommend to be done with this
large evaporating basin. A few more such basins
of a size proportioned to our larger rivers, would
effectually secure the loss of all our river water,
and convert this beautiful province of Australia
The loss of all j n^0 an Australian desert,
oui river It bo gaid that> in commenting upon the opin-
ions of the two civil engineers who form the com-
mittee, it is very unlikely that I should be right, as
« m, mipatious suc h questions belong to engineering, and are there-
thou'ht to be- fore strictly professional. An attentive considera-
long to tion of this paper, however, will show that there are
engineeriug. no questions involved which any person of ordinary


education may not clearly understand and appre- Novel method of
date, and therefore, simply as a member of the investigation,
philosophical society, it is perfectly competent for
me to call in question any novel methods of investi-
gation adopted by the Committee, and to say whether,
in my opinion, these are legitimate and scientific, or
the reverse.
But the great and important points upon which
the success or failure of the Yan Yean scheme de-
pends, do not belong more to the province of the
civil engineer than to the medical profession.
I have heard of civil engineers bridging the Menai civil Engineers.
Straits, with a stupendous tube of iron, and tunnel-
ling the river Thames, and building a leviathan
steam ship of 25,009 tons, to perform the voyage to
Australia in 30 days ; and if the Goulburn river and
the King Parrot Creek are to be brought through
granite mountains into the Yan Yean reservoir,
there are still higher and greater laurels Colonial laurels,
in store for our colonial engineers-. But, I
am not aware of any civil engineer who
has published original researches on the subject
of Heat and Evaporation. Hitherto this department ration evapo ‘
of science has been chiefly cultivated by members of
the medical profession.
I never heard of any civil engineer who had pub- Meteorology,
lished original investigations on Meteorology. This
subject also owes more to the medical profession than
to the civil engineer.
I know of no civil engineer who has added any- Water shed,
thing to our knowledge of the water-shed of different
countries. Original experiments and observations
on this subject have been principally contributed by
medical men. Perhaps Mr. Dempsey may be cited as Mr ‘ Dem J ,se J'-
an exception ; but I think the less that is said about
his evaporation tables the better.
I need scarcely add that it is not to civil engineers, i mpur i t i eB 0l
but to members of the medical profession that we water,
owe all our knowledge of the impurities of water,
and their injurious effects on health, as well as the
best and most effectual means of removing and
counteracting them. And we are especially indebted
to Dr. Hassall, of London, for his laborious micro- Dr nassall
scopic examination of the impurities of all kinds that
abound in the water that is supplied to the city.
Dr. Clarke, Professor of Chemistry in the Maris-
chal College, Aberdeen, is acknowledged to be the Dr- Clarke-
highest authority in England, in all questions con-
nected with the water supply of cities; and Dr.
Smith, Professor of Chemistry in the University of
Sydney, who for some years conducted all Dr. Clarke's
practical investigations, is the highest authority on Dr - Smith-
such questions in the Australian Colonies.
I think it will be admitted, therefore, that the


Scientific scientific subjects considered in this paper come
subjects. strictly within my own province, as a member of the
medical profession, and that there is no reason why I
should be disqualified to discuss them in a scientific
manner; and I think I have sufficiently demonstrated,
by legitimate reasoning, that the calculations of the
Calculations of Committee are not based on any correct or scientific
the Committee q a ta at all, but purely on speculations and assump-
tions of their own, and that the results to which they
lead, when thoroughly investigated, are so incredible,
as to carry with them their own condemnation.
j justice I Q m y estimate of the water available for the re-
servoir, I consider that ample justice has been done
to all the sources of supply.
Loss in the I have shown that, at the time of our late visit to
swamps. Yan Yean, the whole discharge above the swamps was
5,790 gallons per minute, and, that of this amount,
3,253 gallons per minute were lost by evaporation in
the swamps, or at the rate of 4 feet 4 inches in the
reservoir ; and I have taken for granted that effectual
means will be adopted to prevent this loss, which. I
have before stated, amounts to 2 feet 5 inches in the
reservoir in twelve months. The total amount of
supply for the reservoir I have estimated at 11 feet
6s inches: so that, deducting 2 feet 5 inches, there
will only remain 9 feet 1£ inch, or just sufficient to
cover the evaporation from the surface.
n Mtprfnrtbe In the meantime, therefore, until such means arc
" ity . e adopted, it may safely be asserted, that there will be
no water for the city at all: and it is rather a singu-
lar circumstance, that if we are to get any supply for
the city, it must be by saving the 2 feet 5 inches that
is at present lost by evaporation, and very probable
also by absorption in the swamps, and if this can be
done, there will be a supply for 71,500, at 40 gallons
per head per day.
... To bring both arms of the Plenty to Yan Yean,
course* clear of all loss from tsie swamps, would be a very
difficult undertaking The swamps are only to be
likened to large sponges, and simply to cut a water-
course through them and lower their level, would
have very little effect in w ithdrawing the stream from
their influence.
Length of The evaporation would continue nearly the same,
swamps. and would be fed from the current. The Eastern
swamps are about three miles in length, the Western
five miles ; and I am strongly of opinion, that the
loss from evaporation and absorption, could be
saved in no other way than by conveying both
branches in iron pipes.
Mr. Christy has kindly favored me with an esti-
iron pipes. mate of the cost of laying suitable pipes for this pur
Their cost. pose, w'hich would amount to £14,000 per mile, or to
£42,000 for the Eastern branch, and £74,000 for the


Western. So that, after all, it may become a grave A grave question
question, whether it be really worth while to go to
any expense at all to save either branch from the
evaporation of the swamps.
I have also taken for granted that we shall have Floods and win-
-60 hours of floods each year at Yan Yean, while it is ter rain-
not unusual to have no floods at all; and I have al-
lowed an increase in the Plenty of two-thirds during
the three winter months for rain, although we some-
times, as last year, have very little rain in winter :
and I have allowed a rain-fall of 36 inches for the
reservoir, although it is very doubtful whether there
really is that average at Yan Yean. And I may well Average rain,
ask what became of the 36 inches of rain-fall in 1851 ?
I have no doubt that there is a larger and more con-
stant rain-fall at the Dandenong Ranges j but they Dandenong
are much nearer the Bay than Mount Disappointment, ranges.,
and therefore attract and intercept the rain-clouds’
and it is well known that there is a greater rain-fall
near the coast than further inland. This is well ex-
emplified in Melbourne, where we have many
showers of rain which do not extend 10 miles out of
town.
I have allowed 4 inches for dew over the whole Dew.
basin of the Plenty, an amount of water which
would give 8 feet 8 inches in the reservoir ; although
it is very probable, in this dry climate, that there
may not be 2 inches ; and I have allowed 2 inches
for the reservoir, without any scientific data to show
that dew would be deposited at all ; and, from an
estimate which I have made of the whole water-shed Estimate of
of the Plenty, based on scientific data, it appears water-shed,
that X have given the reservoir the advantage of
nearly the whole amount.
And, what is of greater importance than all else, Droughts.
I have deducted nothing from the supply of ordinary
seasons on account of droughts, of which we have had
ample and painful experience in other parts of Aus-
tralia ; and a gentleman, who has recently returned bouth Australia-
from Adelaide, has told me that they have scarcely
had any rain there for the last eighteen months.
I must not omit to mention here, that it is intended Reservoirs at
to have two intermediate reservoirs betwixt Mel- Fentridgc and
bourne and Yan Yean, —the one at Pentridge, the HU!i;i nn ‘
other near the Plough Inn. Your Committee
requested information respecting their extent of
surface, with a view to determine the amount of loss
from evaporation, but they were refused all infor-
mation on the subject. I have, therefore, been Tw ..
unable in my estimate to make the necessary deduc- e ' ’ r '' ion
tion for their evaporation.
I shall only further add, in support of my state-
ment that ample justice has been done to all the
Sources of supply, that while I place implicit con-


The bottom of fidence in Mr. Hodgkinson’s opinion respecting the
the reservoir. re t e ntive nature of the bottom of the reservoir, there
are not wanting others, who have had great expe-
rience in this colony, who think that the chances
are very great indeed that in some parts of the vast
extent of the reservoir the water will find its way
through the fissures of the clay slate to a lower
level. I need not say that there is no remedy in
Puddling. s UC h a case. £2,000.000 would not suffice to puddle
a surface of 7,000,000 square yards.
First proposal of When this scheme was first proposed, I felt aston-
Scheme. ished to think that the Plenty could supply so much
water as was alleged. I imagined, that
the deficiency might probably be made up by the
winter rains over an extensive district. And although
I considered this a very objectionable source, I enter-
tained the hope, that with a depth of 25 feet, and a
current established through the reservoir by means of
Great expecta- the river, and with a perfect system of filtration, the
tions. water might be rendered comparatively pure, and
that its inferiority might, to a certain, extent, be com-
pensated for by its superabundance.
Visit to Yan It was only lately, in consequence of my visit to
Yean. Yan Yean in company with Dr. Mackenna,. that
I was enabled to obtain the information necessary to.
arrive at more correct conclusions, and our astonish-
ment and surprise can be better imagined than
described, when we compared the diminutive stream
of the Plenty with the wide extent of the reservoir
intended for its reception ; and, indeed, while con-
cur astonish- templating from one of the heights the grandeur and
raent, singular beauty of this vast plain, the conviction
forced itself upon our minds that the whole volume
of the river would not suffice during the heat of
summer, to wet the surface ; and this my subsequent
investigations have proved to be literally true.
Evaporation. The evaporation from the surface of the reservoir
is equal to 1 foot per month for the three summer
months. Now, the river, at the entrance of the
aqueduct, gave 2537 gallons per minute in January,
or 3 feet 4 inches in twelve months and this is
above the average for the summer months, as Mr.
Blackburn, in the dry summer of 1851, found it re-
duced in February t0 '865 gallons per minute, or to.
nearly h Let us, however, take 3 feet to represent
the discharge; this would give three inches for
Four rivers equal each of the summer months. Thus, with 12 inches
to the Plenty. evaporation, it would take four rivers equal in
size to the Plenty to keep the reservoir wet. And
if we take Mr. Blackburn’s lowest measurement of
865. gallons per minute, it would require exactly
eleven such rivers to give even an appearance of
moisture to the surface of the reservoir.
According to the d ata which I have submitted to


you, there is no difficulty in predicting the com* Fdlure of the
plete failure of the Yan Yean Waterworks for want WJrks>
of water ; and it is important to notice here, that
the amount of water in the reservoir, after deducting
the evaporation, is far short of the amount that
seems confidently to have been calculated upon.
2 feet 6i inches, as measured for the whole surface,
would give 5 feet of depth at the lower end, and
this is the very lowest point at which it would be
practicable to draw off the water. Below this point Water unfit for
I consider that it would be altogether unfit for use, «se.
and it has never been contemplated to draw it off at
so low a level for the use of the city, as the main
pipes have been permanently fixed in their places at
the height of 10 feet from the bottom.
It also appears that the immense extent of the Extent of the
reservoir, which has always been regarded as its reservoir,
greatest advantage, is in reality so serious an evil as
to involve the failure of the whole scheme.
It is quite clear that the difference between the Amount of loss
amount of rain and evaporation will represent the f r om evapora
amount of loss depending upon the wide extent of tion>
the surface exposed. This difference is 6 feet, and
is equal to nearly twice the whole discharge of the
river, as measured by your Committee, above Yan
Yean, and is nearly equal to Mr. Blackburn’s estimate
of all the tributaries above the swamps. The whole
amount thus lost by evaporation in the reservoir, or
9 feet, being sufficient to supply a population of 9,820,000 gallons
245,500, at the rate of 40 gallons per head per day, ’ per day.
or 491,000 at 20 gallons, which is equal to a loss of
9,820,000 gallons of water per day.
With an unlimited supply of water this immense
loss would have signified little, but when the sources
of supply are so remarkably inadequate, the case
presents a very different aspect.
The foregoing considerations afford no prospect jj- 0 I>roS p ect of
whatever of success to the Yan Yean scheme with success,
the existing sources of supply, but it has always been
regarded as capable of indefinite extension from
other sources. It becomes necessary, therefore, to
consider this part of the subject, in order to ascer-
tain how far it may be possible, or practicable, to
supplement the reservoir, and thus render it equal
to supply, not only the present wants of the city, but
a large prospective increase of population.
For this purpose it has been proposed to bring the Additions to the
Merri Creek, the Diamond Creek, the King Parrot reservoir.
Creek, and even the Goulburn River itself, into the
reservoir.
With regard to the Goulburn River, if it were Goulburn River,
practicable to bring it into the reservoir, by means
of an aqueduct, and if the expense of such an under-
taking would not be beyond the means of the colony,


Eminently suc-
cessful.
there cannot be a doubt that this would render the
Yan Yean scheme eminently successful, and MeL
bourne might then boast of being better supplied on
the grayitation principle than any other city in the
world.
I feel incompetent to give an opinion in a case
involving so many difficult questions, and' that
could only be determined by experienced engineers,,
after complete surveys of the intermediate country ;
but it appears to me—independent of the expense,
which would be enormous, —to be altogether chi-
merical. The great dividing granite ranges, which
must have a very considerable elevation above the
bed of the Goulburn, without mentioning other
difficulties, would render such an amount of cutting
and tunnelling necessary, that I fear the idea must
be altogether abandoned.
Similar difficulties would attend’ the proposal to
bring the King Parrot Creek, which is a tributary
of the Goulburn, into the reservoir. The same
dividing ranges would have to be tunnelled, and
much broken country bridged by aqueducts ; but a
scientific survey by competent engineers could; alone
determine the question of its practicability and cost..
And after all, would it be worth while to expend a
very large sum in conveying so small a stream from,
so great a distance? Such a scheme, ! apprehend,
must be entirely laid aside until it is shown that
there is no other cheaper plan of supplying the city
with water.
The Diamond Creek .claims our next consideration.
It is a tributary of the Yarra, and in its upper
course is not more than six miles distant from Yan
Yean. It is more easy, therefore, to form an estimate
of the probable cost of bringing this creek into the
reservoir. An, engineer, of great practical know-
iege, assured me that he would, not undertake the
work.for 50,0002. Besides, unfortunately it is a very
diminutive stream, even compared.with the Plenty ;
and, according tp my judgment, is barely sufficient
to supply the wants of the village of Elthain and the
increasing population of this important district.
This proposal, therefore, merits no further notice.
It only remains to consider the Merri Creek as a
source ofsupply. It rises in a swamp of 1280 acres,
which is said to have 30 square miles of drainage
area, but there is not a single creek or watercourse of
any description, leading into it, which shows the
very small proportion of the rain that drains into ;t
from an area of surface equal to one-half of the
Plenty basin. It is proposed to dam up this marsh,
and to lead the water by an aqueduct into the reser-
voir. Let us suppose, therefore, that this marsh
really does receive the water-shed of 30 square miles,
Altogether chi-
merical.
King Parrot
Creek.
Cheaper plans.
The Diamond
Creek.
Very diminutive
stream.
Merri Creek.


the area of the swamp being two square miles: a Merri Creek
rain-fall of 30 inches would give a depth of 37 feet swamp.
6 inches, apd one-ninth, or 4 feet 2 inches would re-
present the water-shed. This, added to the rain-fall
of the swamjo, would give altogether 6 feet 8 Dry for two
inches, which is not sufficient to cover the evapora- months,
tion ; and it would, therefore, be dry for two months
in the year.
It is useless, therefore, to look to this marsh as a Robbing the dis-
source of supply; and even were it otherwise, I triot-
could never sanction the principle of robbing
a thickly-settled district of the fountain-head on
which, they chiefly depend, for their supply of water,
which at best is very small in ordinary seasons. Reservoir cam ot
So much importance has always been attached' to be extend'd! 0
the supposed facilities that existed for indefinitely
extending the reservoir, when occasion should re-
quire, that I have thought it necessary to consider
the subject under its different heads; ancLlthink l
have said enough to show that the Yan Yean scheme
has nothing to hope for from the principle of indefi-
nite extension ; —that, indeed, it cannot be extended,
at all.
I forget, however, that there is one direction in Mr. Hodgkin-
which it can be extended, and I owe it to Mr. Hodg- s ? n ’ s conclu ‘
kinson for pointing it out. He has given his atten- bloni-
tion to all the different methods proposed for
extending the reservoir, scheme, and he has come to
the conclusion that by far the cheapest plan of doing p aill|lin „ f
so is by pumping from the Yarra; and I readily tueVarra! '*
admit that there is no limit to the amount that may
be obtained in this direction.
I have thus shown that the sources of supply for Sources of sup
the Yan Yean Reservoir are insufficient to make up ply insufficient
for the immense loss sustained from evaporation.
I have also shown that there is no hope whatever of
extending the resources of the reservoir in any
direction, unless by pumping from the Yarra.
I have also shown that if tlie 2 feet 5 inches that
are now lost in the swamps could be saved, this
would only supply 71,500, whereas we require a
supply at present for at least 100,000.
I have also shewn that the medical profession here The medical pro-
are strongly opposed to the principle of storing water fession strong-
in a large swamp in this climate ; and they entertain !? ° l)p 9 s f <l to
the worst fears that the pure waters of tlie Plenty sc ieme.
will be rendered perfectly unfit for use by being
transferred into the reservoir. And I may add, that
while it is found necessary in England to clean out
such reservoirs once in five years, on account of the
immense quantities of decaying organic matters that
accumulate in them, and render the water offensive
and unwholesome, it will be utterly impossible to
clean out the Yan Yean Reservoir. At ss. per


Cost of cleaning square yard, it would cost 1,750,000?. ; and how
outthereser- W ould the city he supplied during the twelve
voir - months that would be required for cleaning and
refilling the reservoir? It remains to be considered
what steps are now to be adopted.
It must be It is quite clear that the reservoir must be aban-
abandoned. doned altogether.
From the data which I have presented to you, it
will be observed that there is a sufficient supply in
Eastern Arm the eastern arm of the Plenty for the present popu-
lation of the city. The discharge of this main
branch in January, was 4450 gallons per minute, and
deducting 630 gallons, which I have done to compen-
sate for the previous heavy rains, and to assimilate
the amount to Mr. Blackburn’s estimate for ordinary
seasons, we l*ive 3820 gallons per minute, which is
equal to 5 feet 1 inch in the reservoir, and would,
therefore, suffice for a population of 138,600, sup-
Snfncrent water. pog ; ng the wbole to be conveyed in iron pipes with-
out loss. Here, then, is one source of supply, and
the water is pure and unexceptionable.
But there are certain considerations of great mo-
ment connected with this source.
Effect of In a dry summer, such as that of 1851, the supply
droughts. would, according to the measurements of Mr. Black-
burn, be reduced by one-fifth, therefore this source
can only be depended on to afford a constant supply
for a population of 110,000. And, according to Mr.
Blackburn and Mr. Hodgkinson, a drought of eight
months, or of one year’s duration would diminish it
still further, if not dry it up altogether, as the
western arm has been more than once.
Another very weighty consideration is, that the
present stream of the Plenty is entirely dependent on
the eastern branch for its supply, the western being
evaporated and lost in the marshes. If this supply
therefore is cut off the Plenty will cease to run alto-
f Srmat gether, unless the western arm be conveyed for a
present lost, distance of 5 miles clear of the swamps, which I fear
will be found a difficult and expensive operation. It
could be done without any loss by laying a 36-inch
pipe; but the cost, according to Mr. Christy’s esti-
mate, would be £70,000.
By adopting efficient means to save the western
* savinVit! arm from evaporation, and to restore it to the natural
channel below the swamps, the stream might be
maintained, notwithstanding the appropriation of the
eastern arm for the use of the city.
The Government and Legislative Council have
T SIS- therefore seriously to consider if it be right or pro-
tive Council, per that this rapidly increasing city should be de-
pendent on a source which is only equal to supply a
population of 138,500 in ordinary seasons, and
110,000 in very dry summers, and in severe droughts


perhaps nothing at all. And it is very important to Gravitation 25
bear in mind, that if we are to pay for bringing water Iriles-
by gravitation from a distance of 25 miles, we are
not necessarily restricted to the eastern arm of the
Plenty, even supposing this source to be one on
which we could at all times depend.
In the report of the Select Committee already re- Mr Blackburn,
ferred to, I find that Mr. Blackburn, after a careful
survey of the Yarra, ascertained that at a distance
of 25 miles from Melbourne there is a sufficient head R ' lTer arra
in the river to supply the city on the gravitation
principle. Mr. Christy has kindly estimated for me
the cost of laying a 36-iuch pipe for a distance of 25
miles, and it amounts to the enormous sum of
£369,900. If therefore we are to bring our water
into the city from this great distance, I think it will
not be denied that it is far better to leave the eastern
arm of the Plenty altogether, and go at once to the
Yarra, where we shall have as much water as a 36-
inch pipe can deliver, which I have no doubt would
suffice for a population of at least 50,0,000.
And it is also most important to bear in mind that
a work of such magnitude would never have been
thought of for a moment if it could have reached no
further than the present wants of the city. The pre-
ference of the gravitation scheme was entirely based The preference
by the Commissioners on its supposed capability of scheme* 131 ' 0 "
supplying at least four times the present population
of Melbourne, and on the facility with which it was
believed that the works could at any time be inde-
finitely extended ; and it was only very lately that
Mr. Jackson, the engineer of the works, is reported Mr. Jackson’s
to have made similar statements in a paper which he paper,
read before the Victorian Institute of Science. I
shall take the liberty of quoting a paragraph from
the newspaper report : —“ The numerous advantages
of the Yan Yean Reservoir Scheme were pointed out;
several interesting particulars yyere stated in the Indefinite exten-
paper. The Yan Yean scheme it appears can be ex- sion-
tended indefinitely, without any addition to the re-
servoip, so, as to supply Melbourne with water even if r , nlan ...
it attained the population of London. It was sug- supplying
gested that the cheapest plan of supplying Geelong Geelong. 0
might be from the same source which is intended to
supply Melbourne.”
It is foreign to my purpose to discuss, in this paper,
the opinions which Mr. Jackson has published on the Jackson
subjects of which I have treated ; but, as it eminently
concerns the public to know the kina of data upon Tlie Commis-
which the Commissioners base their extraordinary ex-; taifons exi ’ ec "
pectations of success, I shall add a few illustrations
of the scientific views entertained by their engineer. j) ifferent
Having disposed of Mr. Hodgkinsou’s pumping schemes dis-
scheme, and all other plans for supplying Melbourne posed oir.


Merri Creek and Williamstown from the Yarra, as impracticable
swamp suited an( j absurd, Mr. Jackson considers that the Merri
city. UPP y e Creek swamp, were it not for its distance, would be
a very eligible site for a store reservoir for the city ;
and says, that it receives the drainage of about 30
square miles.
Evidence of set- He says, also, “ the necesssity of constructing a
tiers. store reservoir would not be manifest to a casual ob-
server, but, as it would appear from the evidence of
those settlers who have been established on the banks
The Plenty has °f ie River Plenty for the longest period of time,
ceased to run that at a ford known as the Bridge Inn Ford, the
several times. Plenty has been known, on several occasions, to
cease to flow, the necessity becomes more obvious.”
The reservoir He further says, “X found that the Yan Yean re-
sufficient to servoir would receive the drainage of 18 square
supply Mel- miles, (Mr. Hodgkinson’s measurement is 4| square
™j th ' miles) an area which, in my belief, is sufficient in
ou ic en y. j a jf or( j an ample supply of water for the city,
n f , without looking to any other source; but, as
oreven three° droughts of two or three years standing have been
years have known to occur, I consider it advisable to lead in the
occurred. Plenty River.”
patent nfthp He further adds, “ that the reservoir can be made
Plenty basin to receive, in addition to the Plenty River, the drain-
according to age of upwards of 120 square miles of surface.”
Mr. Jackson. The Survey maps give 60 square miles as the area of
the Plenty basin.
Advantages of a It needs no additional arguments, as it appears
Yarra gravlta- to me, to show the great advantages which a
tion scheme. Yarra gravitation scheme would possess over a gra-
vitation scheme having the eastern arm of the
Plenty as its only source of supply ; but if these are
wanted, they will be found in the fact that if we are
to be satisfied with the supply of our present wants
only, at the enormous cost of £369,900, and if we
are to depend upon the eastern arm of the Plenty
Disadvantages of f or this supply on the constant service principle, we
s C heme y have no guarantee whatever that our wants will
really be supplied after all, or that the supply will be
equal to the actual demand. At 40 gallons per head
per day, the eastern arm is no doubt fitted to sup-
ply 100,000 inhabitants, if we are prepared to chance
the droughts; but it has been practically found that
there is no way of limiting each individual to his 40
gallons, if the distribution is on the constant-service
principle. And the Commissioners of Sewerage and
Water Supply, backed by the opinion of the Select
Antiquated Committee, have, very properly, from the first, de-
niethod of termined to supply the city on this principle, and it
intermittent would be a sad retrogression in sanitary economy to
supply. i evert to the antiquated method of intermittent sup-
ply, with its cumbrous machinery of dirty and ill-
conditioned cisterns.


The constant-service principle therefore is not at Constant service
all adapted for a limited supply of water, and this principle not
important fact has .been clearly demonstrated by the united supply
experience of other cities. Croydon, which is sup- of w*ter.
plied on this principle, consumes 500 gall ms per
house per day which, making the usual allowance of
five individuals to each house, is equal to 100 gallons
per head instead of 40. Hitchin consumes 235 gal-
lons per house, or 47 gallons per head. Whitehav.en
250 gallons, or 50 gallons per head ; and New York,
which is nearly in the same latitude as Melbourne* Large consump-
and is therefore our best guide in regard to the tion, 90 gallons
amount that may probably be required, on some days P er head-
consumes 90 gallons per head instead of 40.
At Rugby, Sandgate, and Barnard Castle, the sup-
plies have been found inadequate from waste ; and
the Bristol company have been forced to abandon the
constant-service principle altogether.
With such important facts before us, can we look important facts,
with any confidence to a source which, under the
most favorable circumstances, is only fitted to supply
the present population of Melbourne, with its subur-
ban towns and villages. And what is there so very
repulsive in the Yarra that we should not at once re-
sort to it for our water supply ?
After giving my best attention to the whole sub- The Yarra, the
ject, I would in the strongest manner recommend on] y reliable
that we should abandon all hopes of supplying the p°y. rce 0 sup "
city from any other source than the Yarra, where at
all times, and under all circumstances, we shall ob-
tain an unlimited supply of the purest water.
I am aware that there is a very strong feeling on
the part of the public that the works ought to be Ought the works
completed now, as the money is nearly all expended. p° e tedT m '
But more mature consideration will show that if any p e
confidence is to be placed in the estimates of Mr.
Hodgkinson, Dr. Davy, and myself, the available
amount of water, after deducting the evaporation, Insufficient sup-
will not suffice even for the present wants of the P ] r for present
city ; and with so limited a supply the water would " ants>
be unfit for use, were it possible to run it into the
pipes.
Where is the object, then, in laying 20 miles of
pipes, even under existing contracts?
If the pipes had been laid, it might have been Main pipes not
argued that it would be cheaper to carry them five yet laid,
miles further to the eastern arm, at an additional
cost of 70,000?., than to remove them to the Yarra.
But the main pipes are not yet laid, except for
a very short distance ; and, therefore, I do not see
that it is too late to lay them in another direction, No object in lay-
where we shall find at all times the purest water in i! 'g them.
the most unlimited abundance.


The reservoir
should he
tested.
Works not con-
tracted for.
Importance of
scientific socie-
ties.
Reasons for in.
vestigating
this subject.
Probability of
failure.
Loss of reputa
tion.
But, while I am of opinion that the pipes ought
not to be laid, I am most anxious that the capabili-
ties of the reservoir should be tested before finally
abandoning it; and, for this purpose I hope that the
aqueduct will be completed in time to take advan-
tage of the winter rains.
I may also notice that no steps have yet been
taken to convey the two branches Of the river
through the swamps. This will cost a very large
sum, and of course is not yet contracted for.
It is deeply to be regretted that a work of such
magnitude and importance as that which forms the
subject of this paper should be found to be based on
incorrect scientific principles ; and it shows the vast
importance of cultivating the sciences, even in this
remote corner of the globe.
Had there been a scientific society in this city two
years ago, the Commissioners might have obtained
more correct information respecting the rate of
evaporation in this colony, and more certain and
reliable data with respect to the water-shed of the
Plenty basin ; which were so necessary to ensure the
success of their scheme.
It was ] u rely on scientific grounds that I was
induced to undertake the investigation of this sub-
ject ; and it was the conviction of its great impor-
tance, in a scientific as well as in a sanitary point of
view, that has led me to submit to you the result of
my inqgiries.
If there is any probability of the Yan Yean Reser-
voir scheme failing for want of water, the sooner
this unfortunate result is discovered the better.
It would surely add little to the scientific reputa-
tion of Victoria, that a work of such magnitude
should be allowed to be completed, at a ruinous
sacrifice of public money, before its failure is even
suspected.
ERRATUM :
28th page, 13th line, for “39 inches” read '39 inches.








