





BULWARKS OF OUR FAITH.
TS m
REV. GEORGE GRIMM, M. A.,
Minister of St- Paul's , Balmain West, Sydney:
TUTOR IN APOLOGETICS AND SYSTEMATIC THEOLOGY TO THE PRESBY-
TERIAN CHURCH OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
AUTHOR OF “THE AUSTRALIAN EXPLORERS,” “THE SABBATH,”
“ THE MEMORY AND HOW TO IMPROVE IT,”
“ A CONCISE HISTORY OP AUSTRALIA,” “ THE UNVEILING OP AFRICA,”
AND “ TWELVE LECTURES ON THE IMMORTALITY OP THE SOUL
AND THE LIFE EVERLASTING.”
Angus and Robertson,
89, Castlereagh Street.




PREFACE.
*
f 0 f *llj 03 !Li . Ugq •, « 0J < , -UOJ! i b
box 9 lm«I to . v;‘»cpw lo edi ol 1.
Afi3SS/ r/o/a7
0 <= T 7
The following treatise has not been designed for a text-book to supply the
wants of a class in the study of Apologetics ; but rather to serve for general
use. Had it been my purpose to write for Theological Students only, the
method of treatment would have been less excursive, and the arrangement of the
materials more rigorously systematic. But the plan I have followed will, per-
haps, be preferred by the circle of readers I have had principally in view.
Books that are prepared for distinct Academic use are apt to assume a hard
and repulsive aspect to the general reader. These uninviting features I have
sought to avoid ; and, while aiming at a complete skeleton, have endeavoured
to cover it with a decent exterior of flesh and blood. The arrangement of the
subjects which have come under treatment will, I trust, be found to be suf-
ficiently exact for popular use. The first section, comprehending the depart-
ment of Natural Theology, includes four chapters which deal with the evidence
for the existence of an All-wise God, as furnished respectively by External
Nature, by the Human Intellect, by the Phenomena of Conscience, and by the
Capacities and the Yearnings of the Immortal Soul. The second section treats
of Revealed Religion in its general aspects ; and comprises five chapters on the
Need of Revelation, Inspiration, Miracles, Prophecy, and the Divine Authority
of the Sacred Scriptures as the credentials of our faith. The third section has
for its definite subject the final and perfected phase of revelation as manifested
in Christ and Christianity. It contains seven .chapters, on Christ as the true
Messiah, the Argument derived from the Character of Christ: the Testimony of
the Four Evangelists, Christianity in Conflict with Heathenism, Christianity
and Civilisation, Christianity and Culture, and Christianity considered as the
Religion of the Future. This is an extensive survey of the field of Apologetics ;
and I sincerely wish the quality had been in keeping with the quantity. At
the commencement of the treatise, the reader will meet with this statement;
“ The present undertaking is meant as a humble attempt to discharge what is
felt to be a very arduous duty. Probably the most powerful arguments may
not be brought forward ; and it is only too certain that such as are adduced
will not be stated or enforced with that precision of thought and eloquence of
style which the dignity of the subject so justly demands.” This misgiving
deepened as the work advanced; and at the close lessened the satisfaction which
a more competent man would have experienced. Its defects must, therefore,
be ascribed to the writer, and by no means to the subject. The reader who will


be good enough to accompany me to the end of the book should thereafter
proceed to the perusal of works of standard excellence in this department of
literature; nor will it be a small reward for me to have created in any one
a taste for this line of study. Yet it is only just to myself to say, that I have
honestly done what I could, according to the measure of my ability and oppor-
tunities ; for to this work hare been devoted not a few of the most laborious
hours of a sufficiently laborious life. While I have been careful to consult the
best authorities, —and for access to some of the highest value I have to express
my obligation to the Rev. Dr. Steel of Sydney,—l have also conscientiously
endeavoured to think out each subject for myself; nor have I laid anything before
the reader without being fully convinced of its being the truth of God. That
He may seal this work with His gracious approval, notwithstanding all its
imperfections, and bless the perusal of it to every reader, is the fervent
prayer of
THE AUTHOR.
The Manse ,
Balmain West.
Ist August , 1893.
A A


Section First.—Natural Theology.
I. The Witness of Nature to the Being and Attributes of God - 3
11. The Human Mind as Testifying for an All-wise and Benevolent Creator 11
111. The Witness of Conscience - - 15
IV. The Immortality of the Soul and its Capacities for a Higher State of Ex-
istence in a Future World --------- 20
Section Second,—Revealed Religion.
I. Necessity and Probability of a Divine Revelation 27
11. Inspiration 31
111. Miracles 37
IV. Prophecy and its Fulfilment 43
V. The Bible in the Fires of Criticism- ------- 50
»
Section Third.—Christ and Christianity.
I. Christ in Relation to Messianic Hopes and Messianic Functions - - 61
11. The Character of Christ, an Argument for Christianity 66
*
HI, The Testimony of the Four Evangelists 73
.
IV. Christianity in Conflict with Heathenism 78
\T onrl i 1 1 StQ 1 1 nn - -- -- -- -- 8 A
V. Christianity and Civilisation 84
VI. Christianity and Culture, —Systems of Doctrine 90
VII. Christianity, the Religion of the Future 100




THE
By The Rev. George Grimm, M.A.
The Witness of Nature to the Being
and Attributes of God.
There is no attempt made in the sacred
Scriptures to demonstrate the existence of
God. It is everywhere assumed as a fact
which ought to be readily granted by rea-
sonable men. The marks of design being
so profusely scattered over the face of
creation, and the mind of man, by reason
of its divine-like intelligence, being so
well able to draw the correct inference, it
was evidently regarded as a work of super-
fluity, if not an insult to the human under-
standing, to offer a demonstration of the
self-evident proposition, that God exists,
Occasionally, indeed, we find an implied,
sometimes even a direct, allusion to the
argument from design as in the psalmist’s
question, “ He that planted the ear, shall
He not hear; He that forms the eye shall
He not see.” But all such references are
designed not so much to prove the exis-
tence of God as to invite the believing
mind to devout and pious meditation.
From this circumstance as well as from
the result of observation and experience,
there is good reason to conclude, that a
conviction of the Divine existence is innate
or bom in the human soul, and that men
become Atheists, partly from a dislike to
retain God in their minds, and partly
through the deceitfulness of sin. Among
the heathen nations of antiquity, who had
no other guide than the light of nature, it
is remarkable how few discarded the belief
in a Supreme Being. Charnock, who
seems to have thoroughly studied this sub-
BULWARKS OF OUR FAITH.
ject, states, in his Discourses on the
Divine Attributes, that “ history doth not
reckon more than twenty professed
Atheists.” “ Whatever disputes/' says he,
“ there may hare been in the ancient world,
this of the existence of God was never
the subject of contention, All other things
have been questioned. What jarrings
there have been among philosophers about
natural things; into how many parties
they were split; with what animosities did
they maintain their several judgments!
But we hear no solemn controversies about
the existence of a Supreme Being. This
never met with any considerable contradic-
tion. No nation that had put other things
to question would ever suffer this to be dis-
paraged so much as by a public doubt.
We find among the heathen contentions
about the nature of God and the number
of Gods. Yet they unanimously concurred
in this as the judgment of universal rea-
son, that there was such a Sovereign Being.
And those who were sceptical in everything
else and asserted that the greatest cer-
tainty was ‘ nothing certain,’ professed a
certainty in this. The question was not
whether there was a First Cause but what
it was.” On this interesting subject it
will be worth while to hear some of the an-
cients speaking for themselves. Let us
take Cicero first. This representative man
observes : —“ There is no nation so wild
and savage whose minds are not imbued
with the opinion of the Gods ; many enter-
tain wrong notions of them; but all suppose
and acknowledge the divine power and
nature.” “It is the sense of all mankind
that it is innate in all and is as it were en-
graven on the mind that there is a God, but


what he is in that they vary, but that he have to be omitted; but this one argument
exists none denies.” “ There never was a
nation,” says Seneca, “so dissolute and
abandoned, so lawless and immoral, as to
believe there was no God.” Aelian de-
clares that “None of the barbarous nations
ever fell into Atheism, or doubted of the
Gods whether they existed or not or whe-
ther they took care of human affairs or
not.” Once more, let us hear the follow-
ing from Plutarch. “If you go over the
whole earth,” says he, “ you may find
cities without walls, letters, kings, houses,
wealth and money, devoid of theatres and
schools; but a city without temples and
Gods, and where there is no use of prayers,
oaths and oracles, nor sacrifices to obtain
good or avert evil, no man ever saw.”
But, however rare Atheism may have been
among the ancients, it assuredly prevails to
an alarming extent in the present genera-
tion. The poison has already circulated
through all the members of the body poli-
tic and it cannot be sufficiently deplored
that the most cultivated classes are becom-
ing more infected every day. If the time
should ever come when men shall surren-
der their belief in the existence of God, re-
ligion will then be found to be impossible,
and every system of morality that is worth
contending for must perish with it. In
these menacing circumstances it is surely
incumbent on every loyal believer to make
a stand against the enemy who is coming in
like a flood. The present undertaking is
meant as a humble attempt to discharge what
is felt to be a very onerous duty. Probably
the most powerful arguments may not be
brought forward, and it is only too certain
that such as are adduced will not be stated
or enforced with that precision of thought
and eloquence of style which the dignity
of the subject so justly demands. Never-
theless this well meant effort with all its
deficiencies, may, under the blessing of
God, be instrumental in preserving un-
stable minds from specious error, and in
confirming the faithful in those things
which ought to be most surely believed
among us.
It being necessary to confine the discus-
sion of this particular subject to a short
compass it will perhaps be most expedient
to take up only one line of argument.
Many other important considerations will
—the evidence of design—will be abun-
dantly sufficient to demonstrate the -exis-
t once of the Supreme Being and illustrate
His leading attributes.
It is reported that a famous Greek sculp-
tor so cunningly inscribed his name on one
of his statues, that it could not be erased
without destroying the workmanship alto-
gether. So it is with this fair world
which God has made. You cannot efface
the impression of design without demolish-
ing, if that were possible, the very frame-
work of Nature. This witness of Nature
for the Creator is understood wherever
man has an ear to hear, be he civilized or
savage. An untutored Greenlander is re-
ported to have reasoned as follows:—“ It is
true,” said he to a missionary, “ that we
were ignorant heathens and knew nothing
of God or a Saviour and, indeed, who
could tellus of him till you came. But
you must not imagine that no Greenlander
thinks about these things. I myself have
often thought that a boat with all its tackle
and implements does not grow into exis-
tence of itself; but must be made by the
labour and ingenuity of man, and one that
does not understand it would directly spoil
it. Now the meanest bird has far more
skill displayed in its structure than the
best boat, and no man can make a bird ; but
there is far more art shewn in the forma-
tion of a man. Who was it that made
him?’’ With man, therefore, we may
properly begin this argument, for it is to-
wards him that the principal lines of this
argument most certainly converge.
Man’s intercourse with the physical
world outside of him is carried on through
five different channels which are known
under the name of the five senses. “The city
of Man-soul,” said John Bunyan, “had five
gates = eye-gate, nose-gate, ear-gate, mouth-
gate, and feel-gate.” Each of these gate-
ways of knowledge is thickly strewed with
marks of design. The wisest man never
made a piece of mechanism to equal the
human eye for skill and successful contri-
vance. There is a perfect correspondence
between the properties of light and the
structure of the eye. If this adjustment
were altered ever so little, blindness would
be inevitable. Sturm held the examina-
tion of the human eye to be a cure for


Atheism. And well he might. In this ad- these air-beats, or pulsations, and the
mirable piece of mechanism there were not
only many ends to be secured, but also
many accidental evils to be shunned.
When men began to construct telescopes
one difficulty after another was found to
disappear in proportion as they applied
themselves to the study and became ac-
quainted with the structure of the human eye
One of the most persistent of all ob-
stacles was the presence of a false colour-
ing which the instrument threw over its
object. But this difficulty was got rid of
in the same way ; for an eminent optician,
Dollond, after a painstaking examination
of the eye, discovered there a special con-
trivance inserted by its Maker to avoid so
great an inconvenience. This discovery
being applied to the construction of achro-
matic telescopes, it was at once found to
have the desired effect. So far, then, there
was a correspondence between the natural
organ and the object of art; but there was
one contrivance more which the optician
could not imitate. Both the eye and the
telescope, to be useful, must be kept clean
and in good order. The optician can
never provide a contrivance which will ac-
complish this result; but He who formed
the eye has nowhere given a more eminent
example of beautiful design and benevo-
lent purpose than here. In order to keep
this delicate organ moist and clean He has
provided an eyewash which is introduced
into the socket by a duct or gland and, the
end having been accomplished, the super-
fluous moisture is carried off into the nos-
trils, and this too, wonderful to say, by
means of a channel which consists of a hole
pierced through the solid bone. Well
may we exclaim with David, “ O Lord,
how manifold are thy works, in wisdom
hast thou made them all.”
Scarcely less matter for astonishment do
we find when we examine the human ear
as an instrument of hearing. Hot more
skilfully is the eye adapted to the nature
of light than the ear is to the properties of
sound. It is now well-known that sound is
propagated by means of pulsations in the
air. In order to receive these and trans-
mit a knowledge of them to the brain,
there is a skilful contrivance in the ear
called a drum. A beautiful adjustment
again is observed between the force of
covering of this organ. It is, as we know,
so sensitive that a sound originating miles
away may be distinctly heard, and that
painful feeling of irritation, which is so
difficult to be got rid of in a sensitive
organ, is here completely obviated ; for Ho
who made the aspect of nature beauty to
man’s eye has not less made its sound to be
music to his ear.
So too in the sense of touch we find
abundant evidence of intelligent design.
Anatomists have discovered that the sense
of touch, and indeed all sensation whether
of pleasure or pain, lies almost wholly on
the surface of the body. It was just here
where it was needed, and had it been
placed deeply in the flesh and the bones, it
would have been the occasion of much suffer-
ing in the case of bodily accidents —an evil
which is lovingly avoided. It is the skin
only that is alive to the slightest impres-
sion made upon it, and the more delicate
the organ, as for example the eye, the more
keen is the sense of touch, and therefore
the less danger of injury being inflicted.
But had the same degree of sensibility been
universally diffused over the body we
would have been racked with pain even by
the slightest motion of a limb or an arm.
Smelling is another of the senses by
which man converses with the world around
him. Benevolent design cannot but be ap-
parent here if we reflect for a moment how
greatly agreeable odours exceed in number
those that are offensive. The former are
the rule, the latter the exception. The
former prevail everywhere in the natural
and normal state of things ; the latter are
scarcely ever found except when ob-
jects are in a state of putrefaction or de-
cay. To understand the goodness of Grod
in so ordering things we have only to
imagine what sort of a world it would have
been if this rule had been inverted. Had
this been the case man could have lived
nowhere without finding life to be an un-
utterable punishment.
We have still left one remaining sensa-
tion —the sense of touch. The food by
which G-od has ordained our bodies shall be
nourished might have been destitute of any
taste whatever, and then our meals would
have been consumed without any pleasur-
able sensation —simply as a duty to sus-


tain this mortal life. Or what would have ordered it. He has commanded every one
been infinitely worse, man’s food might
have been as bitter as his medicine; and
then he would have been sickened of his
very life. Those who believe that the
world is produced and governed by chance
or necessity, can give no intelligent reason
why this latter alternative might not have
happened as likely as the other. But, as
the matter stands, we find that the Creator
has not only wisely instituted the appetite
of hunger to prompt us to recruit the
animal system; but in His goodness has
superadded a delicious taste, and with so
pleasing an effect, that many, to their con-
demnation, live only to eat. And let it
further be observed that God has annexed
this relish only to such food as is fitted to
sustain human life and withheld it from
such as would be useless and injurious.
So far we have considered man in his
physical relation to the outer world. Let us
now direct our attention to those moral and
social relations which he sustains to his
fellow-men. Here, too, we shall find the
same wise arrangement and benevolent de-
sign. We have
1. Man as an individual and yet an
organic member of the great human family.
In this relation what provision has been
made to preserve him in being and well-
being ? We observe at the outset that his
own happiness, being a matter of so great
importance, is made a first object to him-
self. This is the principle which figures so
much in metaphysical writings under the
name of self-love—a different thing alto-
gether from selfishness, though often con-
founded with it. It means simply that
God has placed in the breast of every man
an uppermost desire for his own well-being,
We can conceive this vital concern to have
been laid not upon himself but upon his
neighbour. In this case it would have
been my part to look after your well-being
to the neglect of my own, and your part to
attend to my well-being neglecting yours.
Would this have been a wise arrangement ?
Most certainly not. Success here must de-
pend on a thorough knowledge of indivi-
dual circumstances and as these can be ac-
curately known only to the individual
himself, it is evident that he is the proper
party to be entrusted with his own well-
being. And so the wisdom of God has
“to be diligent to know the state of his
flocks and to look well to his herds.” And
thus the first and fundamental step in the
prosperity of the great community is ade-
quately secured. So again, man has indi-
vidual rights as a member of the common-
wealth, and he needs to be on his guard to
protect his person and property. Now in
the emotion of anger which puts him im-
mediately on the defensive when attacked,
we see a wise provision against this com-
mon source of danger. It is true that it
may degenerate into a settled passion and
become a sin, but when it exists in man,
as it does in the lower animals, as a defence
against injury, it is evidently a wise pro-
vision on the part of our Almighty Maker.
2. Take man now in his domestic rela-
tion. The family is a divine institute,
“ God setteth the solitary in families, He
maketh him families like a flock.” At-
tempts have been made to supersede the
family institution by some so-called im-
provements on a larger scale, but they have
inevitably broken down; and this is only
another testimony to the divine origin of
the family and the wisdom of God therein
displayed. We see here especially a
benevolent purpose in providing for help-
less infancy. JNo creature comes into the
world so destitute as man or stands in need
of so long and such watchful care. But God
has implanted an affection in the parents
which is amply sufficient for this necessity.
Without it the species would soon cease to
exist, for we find that very few children
who are left to the care of others reach the
age of maturity. In the case of weakling
and imbecile children, who would be most
likely to suffer in this cold world, we find
an additional provision ; for the attach-
ment of the mother is invariably stronger
for these than for her more vigorous off-
spring. We might notice here, too, how in
the filial affection provision has been made
for the parents in their old age. The bur-
den of maintaining the children has been
laid on the parents, but there is also a cor-
responding affection in the children in
virtue of which the parents are supported
when oppressed with age and decreptitude
Surely we cannot fail to see here the work,
ing of design. Prospective
as clearly aimed at and as certainly secured


as in any of the arrangements of the ma- flesh and blood is hungry and ready to
terial world.
3. We have still to consider man in the
relation he stands to the commonwealth at
large, or as a member of the body politic.
Here we have to deal with him not as an
individual or as a constituent of the family
circle, but in his capacity of a cosmopolite.
What further evidence do we now discern
of a plan and purpose to secure the well-
being of the whole community P We shall
find them again scattered far and wide.
Let us notice
(I). The Love of Society.—By a propen-
sity to mutual intercourse the whole bro-
therhood are drawn into close and continual
fellowship. Were this affection wanting,
the whole mass would be like a heap of
sand, each a distinct and independent unit,
but having no connection one with another.
But happily in man there is an insuppres-
sible love of society, and a genuine desire
to promote the general well-being. It was
a heathen actor who stood upon the stage
and exclaimed, “ I am a man and nothing
pertaining to humanity is indifferent to
me.’’ It is hardly necessary to be in-
formed that the expression of so genuine a
sentiment brought down the applause of a
crowded Homan theatre.
(2) The feeling of compassion for the
distressed is another provision for the well-
being of society, which bears unmistakable
marks of intelligent purpose coming from a
higher source. Is a fellow-creature enve-
loped in devouring flames, or lying mangled
and bleeding through some inevitable
calamity, or struggling in the ocean waves
ready to sink into a watery grave; then no
man, be he friend or foe, can resist the spur
of compassion, but will rush to the rescue
at the peril of his own life. To act other-
wise would inflict violence on one’s own
nature, and produce intolerable pain and
anguish. This emotion of sympathy for
the distressed is beyond all question im-
planted in our constitution, and declares
the purpose of a higher power to insure the
well-being of the race.
(3) Look next at the pleasure which is
attached to the performance of those duties
which have for their end the good of our
fellow-creatures, as compared with the feel-
ings of pain inseparable from the opposite
course of conduct. A creature of our own
perish, as perish he must were there not
some friendly hand to interpose. The case
is brought under your notice. You hasten
to deal your bread to the hungry sufferer
and so rescue the pauper from a miserable
death. You have filled his heart with
gladness and gratitude. But this is not
the whole matter. Look at your own feel-
ings while you perform such an act of
mercy. Your experience has been a hea-
venly state of enjoyment in your own
bosom. You have had an indescrib-
able satisfaction and enjoyed a perfect
luxury in the very act of doing good. It
is only in such moments that we under-
stand ho v thoroughly true were our
Saviour’s words when He said: “It is
more blessed to give than to receive.”
But, on the other hand, he who is. base
enough to inflict an injury upon his brother
man, experiences the very opposite feelings,
disguise them as he may. Malice and re-
venge, which aim at the ruin of other men,
create a savage tumult in the human
breast. Conscience lashes its victim with-
out pity. A war of raging passions agi-
tates him all day long, while the ghastly
visions of the night scare away that peace-
ful and calm repose which loves to descend
on the virtuous man. No other circum-
stance is needed to convince us that such
passions are not from above, but lie con-
tinually under God’s frown and are the
objects of his righteous wrath even here.
Viewed as a whole, then, the framework
of society, like the mechanism of nature,
bears ample evidence of purpose and con-
trivance. We find everywhere appeten-
cies and tendencies which have a continual
respect to the general well-being without
so much as the intention of the individual.
Every man proceeds on his own course seek-
ing bis own interest, often, too, with a sin-
ful selfishness; and yet without anyone
seeming to intend it, the final result is the
common weal. And, as we found the
mechanism of external nature to eventuate
in a cosmos, so, too, the structure of society
at last proves itself to be an optimism.
Hitherto we have confined our observa-
tions to man and some of his more impor-
tant relations. But we cannot do justice
to this great argument unless we take) a
far wider survey of the province of natur


Let us descend then to the lower animals backward to catch the sound of their pur-
and see what we can gather from their suer. Again they are endowed with a
structure, habits, and instincts. As in
man, so we.find in these animals a remark-
able adaptation to the circumstances in
which they are placed. Take, first,
the fowls of the air. Some persons, per-
haps, imagine that a bird, in order to fly,
needs nothing but wings. But a great deal
more than these is required. The specific
gravity of the body must be lessened be-
fore it can leave the ground. Here again
a higher power has interposed with a spe-
cial contrivance. To this end a departure
has been made from the usual make and
manner of the bones. The cavities of these
bones are much larger in proportion to
their weight than in those of quadrupeds,
and these cavities are empty, while the
shell is of a firmer texture than in the sub-
stance of other bones. Here we have
lightness and strength combined by special
contrivance, so as to enable the bird to
rise in the air.
We observe, further, that every bird has
been gifted in an eminent degree with that
particular organ which is most useful to it
in obtaining its food. The eagle having to
spy its prey while on the wing, has been
endowed with an extraordinary power of
vision, so that it can rise to an immense
height and thus embrace within its field of
view a correspondingly large portion of the
earth’s surface from which to gather its
quarry. Waterfowls, the food of which
must be found in that element, are pro-
vided with web-feet so as to enable them
to swim and secure their prey. There is a
class of birds intermediate between these
two which feed in shallow pools and
marshes. What has been done in their
case ? Another very remarkable adapta-
tion which exactly meets their necessity.
They have been provided with long legs
and bills by the former of which they
wade in the shallow waters and thus ob-
tain their food. If we come to the land
animals next, we shall meet with the same
indications of wisdom and intelligence. In
such animals as hunt their prey we observe
a long series of contrivances conspiring to
one end —the well-being of the animal.
These have the cavities of the ears bent
forward to catch the sound of their retreat-
ing prey, whilst the latter have them bent
keen scent which enables them to follow
when the animal is out of sight. The prey
being caught, we perceive also the neces-
sary provision of claws to hold and teeth
to devour it. Over and above all these,
there is the unfailing accompanying stomach
of the particular formation which is re-
quired by animals that live on flesh. This
whole series, then, of adaptations and com-
binations is found in one and the same ani-
mal, no intelligent account of which can be
given by anyone who asserts that these
animals were brought into being by chance
or necessity. Perhaps a still more astonish-
ing proof of design can be adduced in what
have been called compensative organs. Here
and there an animal may be met with
whose structure is apparently complete,
yet were it not for some additional organ,
after the manner of a compensation, the
animal would have been unable to obtain
its food and so must have perished. Such
a case is found in the elephant. By reason
of its singularly short neck it cannot reach
the ground and gather the herbage on
which it feeds. But to meet this deficiency
it has received a compensation in its well-
known trunk, and so the inconvenience is
completely removed. One example of an
opposite kind we find in the giraffe. This
creature lives on the leaves of tall trees
whichare far beyond the reach of an ani-
mal of ordinary form. But here, again, we
meet with a compensation in the extraordi-
nary and almost ridiculous length of neck
which has been given to this strange look-
ing creature.
In the covering of animals, too, there
occurs abundant evidence of wise and
provident design. Here, as elsewhere,
no mistakes are made. Every ani-
mal has precisely that kind of
clothing which is best adapted to
its nature and circumstances. This cover-
ing, also, is regulated according to the
severity of the climate and the seasons.
At the approach of winter an affectionate
mother will take care that her children are
sufficiently protected from the biting blasts.
So has the Almighty Power provided for
His creatures. The clothing of all animals
becomes thicker as winter approaches, and
again lessens with the return of summer


heat. Every dealer in furs knows well
that such articles are much more valuable
when procured in winter than in summer.
Even in the colour of the clothing of ani-
mals there is seen a designed adaptation to
their circumstances. It is well-known that
the mountain hare which is gray in summer
while it lurks among the heather, turns to
white in winter when it requires to be con-
cealed from its enemies among the moun-
tain snow.
One more word remains to be said on the
geographical distribution of animals as an
evidence of design. A remarkable instance
of this arrangement is found in the camel.
Its home is in the sandy desert, and there
is a wonderful correspondence between this
strange creature and its circumstances.
The desert has often been compared to the
sea with its waves of moving sand; and,
carrying out the figure, not less fitly has
the camel been termed the ship of the
desert. Having to make long journeys
day after day without obtaining water, this
animal has been provided with a capacity
of storing this element which is possessed
by no other creature. Were it not for this
beneficial contrivance it would be impos-
sible to traverse those African deserts. In
the feet of this animal, too, there is a spe-
cial adaptation to its wants. Having to
travel over loose sand usually with a
heavy burden on its back it is in danger of
sinking at every step. To avoid this incon-
venience it has been endowed with a power
of expanding its hoofs as it plants them on
the sand.
Before leaving the animal kingdom some
notice should be taken of that mysterious
something known under the name of in-
stinct. Here, more than ever, do we find
evidence of a presiding intelligence. In-
stinct has been well-defined to be “ an im-
mediate impression from the first mover
and the divine energy acting in the crea-
ture.” We shall take but two or three
illustrations, and these from the insect
orders. Often must every one have been
surprised to see the butterfly leading the
flowers on which she fed to settle on the
leaves of the cabbage plants. Her object
was to deposit her eggs on the leaves
which, while they were no food for herself
yet were the only nourishment suited to
her offspring in their caterpillar stage for
which she was providing. In all this- fore
thought we must surely seek for a higher
intelligence than can be found in a puny
insect. Again, the solitary wasp prepares a
nest every suitable way for its young which
it is never to see. Having deposited its eggs
in the place so prepared, it next lays up a
certain number of grubs as food for its
young until they are able to provide for
themselves. The marvel is that she should
prepare a store for an offspring she is never
to see and that food of a kind totally dif-
ferent from what the creature itself feeds
upon. But the greatest of all wonders is
discovered in the instinct of the honey bee.
Many years ago the question was raised as
to what was the absolutely perfect form of
a cell, material, strength, and economy of
space being taken into account. A very
eminent mathematician set himself, by
means of a most elaborate calculus, to de-
termine this problem. The result was, ac-
cording to his finding, that the cell formed by
the bee came within two or three seconds
of being an absolutely perfect piece of
architecture. Some other equally eminent
men, however, were not satisfied and so the
whole investigation was gone into afresh. It
was now satisfactorily proved that a slight
error had been made; but it was not by
the bee but by the mathematician. Hence-
forth it was settled that the bee constructs
a perfect piece of mechanism of so scienti-
fic a character that the greatest mathema-
ticians with their most intricate calculus
can scarcely resolve it. Here then is a
dilemma for the Atheist. He must give up
his denial of a higher power, or accept the
conclusion that the humble bee possesses a
faculty of reason and contrivance superior
to the foremost mathematicians.
It is now time to turn to another pro-
vince of nature —that, namely, which is
known under the name of the vegetable
kingdom. The examples of design here,
being found in objects that are destitute of
animal life, one would think, ought to be
all the more convincing. One very impor-
tant fact that meets our eye in this survey
is the striking adaptation of the life of
plants to the length of the year. The author
of the one must have been the author of the
other; for they are arranged to keep the
same time like two clocks. The four sea-
sons, as every one knows, form a complete


Cycle and the life of plants is found alsdl
to accomplish its period within the same
time. If this harmonious adjustment were
wanting the vegetable year v> ould be a
scene of perpetual confusion and only a few
plants perhaps, would be able long to
maintain a struggling existence. If we
pass next to the ripening and dispersion of
the seeds of plants, we shall perceive also
singular evidence of wise contrivance.
Those who have taken the trouble to notice
the blossoms of the pea cannot have failed
to observe that when the gale blows strong
enough to endanger the delicate parts on
which the seed depends, the same blossoms
by a kind of instinct, turn iheir backs to the
wind and are thus preserved. Is there no
sign of a Supreme Intelligence here? For
the purpose of dispersing the seed when
ripened, we find a whole array of varying
expedients. Sometimes the seed is shot
forth from the pod as by the force of a
spring ; at another time it is elevated upon
a stalk which, being shaken by the wind,
the seed is thus scattered to a convenient
distance from the parent plant; or, again,
the seed is found to be enveloped in a light
feathery down by which it rises in the air
and is carried away on the wings of the
wind.
There still lies before us the mineral
kingdom with its wealth of wonders ex-
hibiting design upon design. Space re-
mains for only one illustration. This,
however, is an exceedingly striking one
and ought to be eminently convincing. It
is a law of nature that heat expands bodies
and cold contracts them. This law is in
perfect harmony with the order established
in the world, and nowhere so far as we
know does it cause any inconvenience.
There is one case, however, in which, if it
prevailed, it would be productive of the most
disastrous consequences. Let us apply the
law to the congelation of water. If cold
were to contract it, then when it passed
into the state of ice, the mass becoming
heavier than the water, would sink to the
bottom. One layer would form ipon an-
other until rivers and lakes would be con-
verted into one solid mass of ice. Every
living creature in the water wouh perish ;
while the inhabitants of the land would be
exposed to infinite trouble and inconveni-
ence. How, then, has such a calamity
been averted P The law—that cold con-
tracts bodies—has been altered, nay, pre-
cisely reversed in the case of water. And
so ice suffering expansion becomes speci-
fically lighter than water and floats upon
its surface. Could we have a more strik-
ing proof of the interposition of a Power
who is above nature and who rules it for
the good of his creatures. It is like a
prince making a law for his subjects, but
finding it will lie oppressively on the poorer
orders he grants an exception in their
favour, thereby showing that he possesses
a wise understanding and a benevolent
heart.
Such, then, has been our rapid survey of
the field of nature. How now are we to
account for this beautiful world studded
with the footprints of design more thickly
than the winter’s sky is bespangled with
stars P Some have told us it arose from
chance, and that this fair cosmos, which
even the heathens have worshipped, has
been formed by nothing else than the
fortuitous concourse of atoms. Have we
known chance to produce anything that
possessed the marks of design? Let us
suppose a boy to enter a printer’s office.
Conceive him to take all the types into his
hands and throws them into the air. Will
chance make them all fall into the same
order and in the same positions as
shall be required for next morning’s
paper P I would infinitely rather be-
lieve that chance would do this
than make a world. I can conceive no
greater insult to an intelligent man than
to ask him to believe that the world was
made by chance. Others, again, tell us the
world is the result of necessary law. But
design convinces us that this is just the
thing that could not have been. The
Maker of the world was a free agent other-
wise He would not have contrived as He
has done for the good of His creatures.
The only possible conclusion from an im-
partial investigation of the parts of Nature
is that the world was produced by an Al-
mighty Power. That this Supreme Being
is & person and not a principle is proved
by the endless display of forethought and
successful contrivance. The ancients, in-
deed, believed there were “ gods many,”
but science has now rendered such a belief
impossible, for as there is but one funda-


mental law —gravitation— so the lawgiver
must be one. That this God is supremely
wise is equally incontrovertible, for if the
medians u of the world is characterized
by one thing more than another it is wis-
dom. Tl e goodness of the Creator has al-
ready b< en repeatedly noticed. Every-
where it is manifest that the balance is im-
mensejy in favour of pleasure rather of than
pain. 'He who made all these creatures
beyond all question or cavil, intended them
to be happy and so gave a testimony of his
own goodness. These things being so,
surely Atheism must be the sin of sins.
Other sins cast dishonour upon God but
this one seeks, if it were possible, to blot
out Hi* very existence. It is high treason
against the majesty of heaven.
The Huhan Mind as Testifying foe an
All-wise and Benevolent Ceeatoe.
That the external world with its wealth
of wonders should have been the first to
attract the attention of students of Na-
tural Theology is only what was to be ex-
pected. Its marvellous exhibition of de-
sign accompanied with never-ending indi-
cations or power, wisdom, and benevolence,
lies spret d out before the eyes of all men.
Of all departments of evidence it is the
first to arrest the attention of the writer
and the most capable of being demonstra-
ted to the reader. In the great awakening
to the importance of this argument from
the phenomena of Nature which is so
characteristic of the first Quarter of the pre-
sent century, it need cause little surprise,
considering its all-absorbing interest, if the
studies of Natural Theologians were too ex-
clusively confined to the external world.
But it is nevertheless true that there is a
world within which contains still greater
marvels and yields even richer materials
wherewith to build up the structure of
Natural Theology. The old philosopher
Phavorirus gave utterance to an un-
doubted truth, although he expressed it in
these strong and striking words —“On
earth there is nothing great but man, in
man there is nothing great but mind.”
God is said to have created him in his own
image, after his own likeness ; but this de-
scription must apply to his mental rather
than to his physical nature, for God Him-
self is a spirit and possesses no bodily parts.
The human mind being therefore in its
measure a reflex of God, it may be ex-
pected to yield many valuable proofs of
His own being and attributes. The follow-
ing observations on this subject are from
Pearson’s excellent work on Infidelity:
“ This argument has received increasingly
rich contributions from a closer study of
the constitution of the mind, and a more
perfect analysis of its various phenomena.
To reason upwards from the laws of our
own mental constitution to the Infinite
Mind, who is the Parent Source of the
whole, is just as experimental as to reason
from material nature up to nature’s God.
Some of our popular writers on Natural
Theology have either entirely overlooked
the evidences of design presented by our
mental constitution, or have satisfied them-
selves with merely adverting to them.
Paley, who has written so admirably on
the material phenomena, never once ex-
tends his argument to the intellectual and
moral. This omission has been accounted
for by the astonishing discoveries of
physical science, which, bringing palpably
into view a vast, assemblage of material
evidences have, for the time, thrown into
the shade the proofs of the divine existence
and character derived from the mind. And
yet the field of man’s inner nature is as
legitimate a province of the inductive
philosophy as the external world with its
manifold organizations, and furnishes no
less numerous and greatly more influential
evidences of an intelligent cause. Lord
Brougham and Hr. Chalmers have libe-
rally supplied what, in this department, was
lacking in some of our older writers. The
mind is a created effect, and, like matter,
is a proper subject of observation. It has
its own peculiar phenomena and laws,
which we can examine, and, from them,
gather proofs of the Infinite Mind, which
is the source of all. Between it and matter
there is a great gulf fixed. The properties
of the one are wholly different from the
properties of the other. No combination
of mechanical forces could ever produce
an intelligent and moral being. That mind
is a modification of matter, is no less at
variance with the inductive philosophy


than is the exploded dogma of the trans-
mutation of the species. Here, then, is an
effect endowed with intelligence, reason,
and moral sentiment. This effect must
have had a cause. And on the principle
that no effect can possess any perfection
which was not in the cause, we naturally
infer that the creator of the human spirit
is a moral and intelligent being. This is
as much an inductive process of reasoning
as the step we take in advancing from
material nature up to Him who designed
it. Men have reasoned ia this simple way
from the beginning. ‘ He that planted the
ear, shall he not hear? he that formed
the eye shall he not see ? he that teacheth
man knowledge, shall he not know P’ And
since there is an intellectual necessity for a
First Cause, Himself uncaused, and the
cause of all, His seeing must be all-seeing;
His knowledge must be omniscience ; His
moral nature must be absolutely perfect.
The most striking phenomenon in our
mental constitution is conscience, the man
within the breast as it has been called. It
sits enthroned amid the other principles of
our nature, and is invested with a rightful
authority over them. Its voice—the voice
of a sovereign judge—is heard above the
tumult of passion, and the rebellious up-
roar of the less noble propensities. And
though its high behests are not always
obeyed, yet its right to rule is everywhere
acknowledged. It is sovereign de jure
even where it is not sovereign de facto.
How let it be observed, that all the autho-
rity of this faculty is on the side of righte-
ousness and truth ; that it has sanctions for
the enforcement of its utterances ; that it
approves the good, and denounces the evil:
and in the righteous supremacy of this part
of our nature, we have a strong proof for
the existence of a holy and just God. The
authority of a law of right and wrong
in our inward constitution implies a law-
giver, the setting up of a tribunal within
the breast points to a yet higher tribunal
in the heavens, and from the felt presence
of a judge within us, denouncing wrong
and sanctioning right, we infer the exist-
ence of a righteous Judge over us, who is
at once its Author and Lord. In the supre-
macy of this moral principle we have
strong evidence not only of an intelligent
Creator, but of one who is just and true in
all His ways, and holy in all his works.
Hr. Chalmers says, this theology of con-
science has done more to uphold a sense of
God in the world than all the theology of
academic demons! ration. Conscience, how-
ever, though the chief, is only part of our
mental phenomena. The mind is replete
with other evidences for the being
and character of God. Suffice it to say
here, that in the intellectual powers of man
and their adaptation to external nature —an
amazing assemblage of brilliant and mag-
nificent phenomena—in the emotional
part of his nature, with the hallowed
pleasure inseparable from the indulgence
of good affections, and the wretched dis-
quietude attendant on evil ones, speak-
ing loudly, as they do, for a God who loves
righteousness, and hates iniquity—and in
the supremacy of conscience, enthroned, as
it were, above the whole, and ever uttering
her voice on the side of whatsoever things
are true and lovely, and of good report, and
against their opposites ; and not only so,
but rewarding well-doing, and punishing
wrong-doing—in such mental departments
of natural theology as these, we gather no
less contributions to the evidence of a God,
than from the field of external nature.
Indeed, in man himself, we have an em-
bodiment of the whole argument. He is
fearfully and wonderfully made. The
human frame is the noblest structure be-
neath the heavens. In the exquisite
mechanism of his body, and in the
primitive judgments and wondrous oper-
ations of his mind, we have the clearest
indications of the Creator that lie within
the range of natural theology; “If you
want an argument from design,” says Mr.
Morell, “ then you see in the human frame
the most perfect of all known organization.
If you want the argument from being, then
man in his conscious dependence has the
conviction of that independent and abso-
lute One on which his own being reposes.
If you want the argument from reason and
morals, then the human mind is the only
known repository of both. Man is, in fact,
a microcosm—a universe in himself; and
whatever proof the whole universe affords,
is involved in principle in man himself.
With the image of God before us, who
can doubt of the divine type P”
Lord Brougham, who is mentioned in the


preceding extract, has thus expressed
himself to the same effect. Hitherto our
argument has rested upon a comparison of
the Truths of Natural Theology with those
of Physical Science. But the evidences of
design presented by the universe are not
merely those which the material world
affords ; the intellectual system is equally
fruitful in proofs of an intelligent cause,
although these have occupied little of the
philosopher’s attention, and may indeed
be said never to have found a place among
the speculations of the theologian. No-
thing is more remarkable than the care
with which all the writers upon this subject,
at least among the moderns, have confined
themselves to the proofs afforded by the
visible and sensible works of nature while
the evidence furnished by the mind and
its operations has been wholly neglected.
The celebrated book of Bay on the
“ Wonders of the Creation,” seems to as-
sume that the human soul has no separate
eyiHence —that it forms no part of the
created system. Derham has written upon
Astro-theology and Physico-theology as if
the heavens alone proclaimed the glory of
God, and the earth only showed forth His
handy-work, for his only mention of intel-
lectual nature is in the single chapter of
the Physico-theology on the soul, in which
he is content with two observations, one on
the variety of man’s inclinations, and
another on his inventive powers —giving
nothing which precisely proves design.
Dr. Paley, whose work is chiefly taken from
the writings of Derham, deriving from them
its whole plan and much of its substance,
but clothing the harsher statements of his
original in an attractive and popular style,
had so little of scientific habits, so moderate
a power of generalising, that he never once
mentions the mind or any of the intel-
lectual phenomena, nor ever appears to con-
sider them as forming a portion of the
works or operations of nature. Thus all
these authors view the revolutions of the
heavenly bodies, the structure of animals,
the organization of plants, and the various
operations of the material world which we
see carried on around us, as indicating the
existence of design, and leading to a know-
ledge of the Creator. But they pass over
in silence, unaccountably enough, by far
the most singular work of divine wisdom
and power —the mind itself. Is there any
reason whatever to draw this line ; to nar-
row within these circles the field of Na-
tural Theology ; to draw from the consti-
tution and habits of matter alone the proof
that one Intelligent Cause formed and
supports the universe ? We ought rather
to consider the phenomena of mind as more
peculiarly adapted to help this inquiry.”—
Thus far by way of introduction.
It is the human mind, as the object of
consciousness, that suggests the idea of the
spirituality and personality of the Divine
Being. Otherwise this knowledge would
have been no more possible for man than it
is for the beasts that perish. Even with
this monitor, which is really the man him-
self to whom the body is the frame-work
and the minister, it is very easy to over-
look the fundamental fact and exalt phy-
sical law to the throne of God. But the
error is wholly inexcusable. “It is never
to be forgotten,” says Dr. McCosh, “ that
apart from a reflex contemplation of the
human soul, it is impossible to rise to the
conception of a living and intelligent God.
It is in the human soul, small though it be,
when compared with the object reflected,
that we are to discover most distinctly re-
presented the image of a spiritual God.
Without taking human consciousness and
intelligence and feeling into view, God
could be conceived of only as a mere principle
of mechanism or order in nature-or a power
of fate—or a law of development above
nature (as with Schelling), rather than a
real and living Agent. It is the possession
of consciousness and intelligent purpose by
man that suggests the idea of a conscious
and personal God. From what we have
ourselves experienced, we know that intel-
ligence is needful in order to produce such
effects as exist in nature around us ; and
thence we rise in our conceptions to a
living Soul, presiding over the universe,
and regulating it, not according to a mere
law of mechanism, or development but by
the wisdom of spiritual intelligence and
love. The very existence of the human
soul as a created object, which it evidently
is, implies an intelligent Soul in its Cre-
ator, and that a soul of prodigious com
pass of power and intelligence. If th
creation of the beautiful forms of matte
argues an extraordinary power and skil


does not the creation of spiritual intelligent
beings impress us still more with the know-
edge and wisdom of the Creator ?”
The most fundamental elements in man’s
constitution are to be found in what have
been termed first principles, primary truths,
intuitive beliefs, or original instincts —all
signifying certain native endowments which
so far from being generated by experience
must themselves exist before experience is
possible. They lie at the foundation of all
knowledge and all science. Apart from
their existence reason could not commence
its operations. They are the common inhe-
ritance of the race and here for once all men
may be said to be equal. The Great
Father thus bears witness to Himself and
His paternal love in that He has sent His
children into the world with such a patri-
mony as to enable them to make their way
through life though cast among the rudest
circumstances, and so endowed as to render
possible an education which may be ex-
tended to indefinite limits.
The appetites though belonging quite as
much to the body as to the soul bear no less
the stamp of wisdom from a higher source,
as they are clearly designed and adapted to
the preservation of man’s existence. Had
the cares of nature been left to mere pru-
dence unsupported by an inward monitor,
it is but too certain they would have been
run down in the world’s exciting race. If
the Author of our being had not placed
within our constitution the appetite of hun-
ger to admonish us, with a voice not to be
hushed, that the time had come to supply
the wants of the body, the engagements of
high-pressure life would have engrossed
the attention and caused starvation, de-
bility, and death as the certain conse-
quence. It is true, indeed, that the appe-
tites may become the instruments of much
evil, and sometimes bring ruin to their pos-
sessor ; but it can be only through wilful
perversity. Their use comes from the
beneficence of God; their abuse from the
folly of man.
A review of all the mental faculties as
original elements in the human constitu-
tion would conduct us to the same conclu-
sion ; but space will admit of nothing more
than a brief notice of a few of the most
prominent. Of these it is only just to give
a foremost place to the Memory. Without
this faculty improvement in knowledge
would be impossible. Here, as in a trea-
sure-house, the ideas are stored up for
future use. To hear some men talk on
this subject one would think they had very
little of this blessing for which to give
thanks to their Maker. But the fault lies
with themselves, for their memory fails
them for want of attention when impres-
sions are being made and from a failure to
submit this faculty to a reasonable course
of discipline. Few persons fail to remem-
ber that which has really engaged their
interest, Cicero observed that he never
knew an old man forget where he had hid
his money ; although it is well known that
memory is one of the first faculties which
age begins to impair. But be the idea easy,
or difficult, or impossible to recall, it may be
accepted as a fact that the impression is
stored up somewhere in the mind, for it is
now the settled opinion of metaphysicians
that no one is ever lost and that all will
some day rise into consciousness for weal
to the good, and for woe to the wicked.
The Imagination is another of the intel-
lectual faculties which contribute in a
wonderful degree to the happiness of the
individual. A rich imagination creates a
world of delight within the mind itself.
Unlike memory it is not confined to the
past, but can build up for itself a fairy-
land in the future; so that with the aid of
memory it has for its empire the past, the
present, and the future. How much we
owe to this creative faculty may be seen
finely illustrated in .Akenside’s “ Pleasures
of the Imagination.” Such pleasures are
all the more our own that they are in no
way dependent upon outward circum-
stances, but are to most men a refuge from
trouble. What better evidence could we
have that He who made us has provided
for our happiness in the endowments of
the mind which is the best natural image
of Himself P
Closely connected with the two last is the
principle of the Association of ideas which
is not less remarkable for simplicity than
for utility. In virtue of this mental
faculty it happens that after two ideas
have been conjoined in thought the recur-
rence of the one is very apt to bring the
other to remembrance, although many
years or, it may be, almost a life-time has


intervened between the two presentations.
It is thus that the train of thought in the
mind is guided ; and it may be laid down
as a safe rule that no idea arises in the
mind without the mediation of another,
that is to say, in the process of recollection
or reminiscence. In those rare cases when
a thought flashes across the mental view,
like a meteor in the sky, it may still be
regarded as having been called up by ano-
ther idea, which has not, however, risen
into the sphere of consciousness. It is to
the association of ideas that we are in-
debted for the company that may be en-
joyed abundantly in solitude. It was the
observation of one of the wise ancients
that he was never less alone than when
alone. This company in solitude is usually
found in large store when the haunts of
youth are revisited in after-life. When
an old road is thus re-travelled every way-
side object that has survived from youth-
ful days brings back some long forgotten
association which floods the mind with
memories of the past and youth is, in
some sort, renewed. Carlyle confessed
that to his dying day he could not revisit
his native home among the Scottish hills
without finding his bosom heave “ with
thoughts unutterable.” The intellectual
powers taken together, Dr. Crombie ob-
serves, “ constitute a chain of faculties
whose intimate connection one with ano-
ther, and whose common subserviency to
one great end, display the ordination of
intelligence and wisdom. Nothing in the
system is redundant, nor is any faculty want-
ing, which is necessasy to the utility, or to
the exercise of the other powers. The con-
gruity of the parts, and their harmonious
concurrence, as a whole, to the purposes of
intellectual improvement, displaying
their united energies in the cultivation of
art and science, justify us in inferring a
wise and designing Author.”
The Witness of Conscience.
Among the Apostles of our Lord Jesus
Christ there was one who has gained for
all time a most unenviable notoriety. He
was duly called to the Apostolic ofiice and
numbered with the twelve. For the space
of three years he had been favoured with
the blessed fellowship of the Saviour of the
world, and had listened to the gracious
words that proceeded out of His mouth. A
special honour had been assigned to him,
for he was entrusted with the common
purse of the Apostolic company. Yet all
these privileges and all this training ripened
into black ingratitude and culminated in
base treachery. From that very feast
which the Saviour instituted in commemo-
ration of His unchangeable love, Judas
went forth and sold his Master for the
price of a slave. To make sure that the
right person would be seized, he proffered
to give a sign of recognition, and that sign
was a kiss.
Now let us suppose this conduct of Judas
Iscariot to be simply related in plain lan-
guage, for the first time, to any sane man,
and let him be required to say whether he
could pronounce an opinion upon the action
as right or wrong. We venture to assert,
that there is not to be found even a naked
savage, who would not treat such a ques-
tion as an insult to his capacity of discern-
ment. Be who he may, he would to a cer-
tainty employ the most reproachful terms
in his language to express his moral indig-
nation against so vile an act of treachery.
There is, therefore, a faculty in man by
virtue of which the mind decides immedi-
diately, intuitively, and instinctively on
the moral quality of an action. The soul
possesses within itself a criterion of right
and wrong by which it tries all actions,
and estimates their moral worth. This
faculty has received the name of the con-
science, because it is conscious of a con-
junct or simultaneous knowledge both of a
law within and an action without the mind.
It is not to be confounded with the reason
or the understanding, although many wise
men have fallen into this mistake. The
conscience is one of the original principles
of our mental constitution, created in the
first man and ever since inborn in all his
descendants. Of a certainty it is not the


child of custom, neither is it implanted by
education, for we see how the youngest,
before they can judge of anything else,
will correctly distinguish between right
and wrong. Being thus a natural prin-
ciple, we shall also expect it to be universal
in its operation, and so to prevail, with
more or less incidental variations, among all
the nations of the earth. Those who have
been long subject to the quickening in-
fluence of a healthy moral discipline may
reasonably be expected to exhibit its act-
ings in a higher degree of development,
but we do not find it altogether wanting in
the lowest barbarians. Human language,
one of the most trustworthy of all wit-
nesses, puts in very valuablo evidence
here ; for in every dialect we meet with
such words as “ ought,” “ duty," “ moral
obligation,” “ desert,” “ guilt,” and f ’ re-
morse.” But ideas always exist before the
words which are formed to express them.
Men are averse to frame new terms except
under the pressure of necessity, and then
only for the purpose of expressing the
thoughts that are struggling in the mind
for birth. The use of such words in all
languages is, therefore, conclusive evidence
that the notions of merit and demerit, as
generated by the conscience, are common
to all mankind. On this aspect of the
question we cannot do better than quote
the words of Cicero, the great Koman
moralist, “ Eight reason,” says he, mean-
ing the conscience, “is itself a law con-
genial to the feelings of nature, diffused
among all men, uniform, eternal, calling us
imperiously to our duty, and peremptorily
prohibiting every violation of it. Nor
does it speak one language at Eome and
another at Athens, varying from place to
place and time to time; but it addresses
itself to all nations, and to all ages, deriv-
ing its authority from the common
sovereign of the universe, and carrying
home its sanctions to every breast by the
•nevitable punishment which it inflicts on
transgressors.”
The only plausible objections which
have been offered against the universality
of conscience are found in the apparent di-
versities of moral sentiments which have
prevailed in different nations. But these
variations have often been exaggerated.
At the worst, we do not observe a failure
to discern a moral principle, or a set pur-
pose to frustrate its otligation. It is
rather a temporary aberration caused by
another object of desire which has obtained
an undue ascendancy. If the Spartans
legalised theft on the part of their boys, on
certain conditions, it was owing to the fact
that this military State put so high a value
on youthful dexterity as to be willing to
submit to the loss of a portion of its effects
as the price of obtaining this advantage.
If Greek and Eoman parents exposed their
weakly offspring to perish, or to be de-
voured by wild beasts, it was still from
love rather than cruelty, for it was be-
lieved that such children would have to
suffer a life-long misery in the struggle for
existence. If the Hindus lay down their
decrepit parents to die on the banks of the
Ganges, it is not done from the absence of
filial affection; but with a view to deliver
them from the increasing infirmities of age,
and so hasten their entrance upon a state
of future blessedness. In ail doubtful
cases, some allowance should be made for
changing times and circumstances, and also
for the necessity for enlightening and
training this faculty; but after every
legitimate concession is made, the great
facts of conscience remain intact all the
world over. The authority of this noble
faculty, notwithstanding many remarkable
aberrations, has been thus vindicated in-
cidentally by the late Dr. J. H. Newman:
—“ We do not dispense with clocks be-
cause from time to time they go wrong,
and tell untruly. A clock, organically con-
sidered, may be perfect, yet it may require
regulating. Till that needful work is done
the moment-hand maj mark the half-
minute, when the minute-hand is at the
quarter past and the hour-hand at noon,
and the quarter-bell striker the three-quar-
ters, and the hour-bell strikes four, while
the sun-dial again tells two o’clock. The
sense of certitude may be called the bell
of the intellect; and that it strikes when it
should not is a proof that the clock is out
of order, no proof that the bell will be un-
trustworthy and useless, when it comes to
us adjusted and regulated from the hands
of the clockmaker. Our conscience too
may be said to strike the hours, and will
strike them wrongly, unless it be duly
regulated for the performance of its proper


function. It is the loud announcement of
the principle of right in the details of con-
duct, as the sense of certitude is the clear
witness to what is true. Both certitude
and conscience have a place in the normal
condition of the mind. As a human being,
I am unable, if I were to try, to live with-
out some kind of conscience; and I am as
little able to live without those land-marks
of thought which certitude secures
for me ; still as the hammer of a clock may
tell untruly, so may my conscience and my
sense of certitude be attached to mental
acts, whether of consent or assent, which
have no claim to be sanctioned. Both the
moral and the intellectual sanctions are
liable to be biassed by personal inclina-
tions and motives ; both require and admit
of discipline ; and it is no disproof of the
authority of conscience that false con-
sciences abound, neither does it destroy the
importance and the uses of certitude, be-
cause even educated minds, who are earnest
in their inquiries after the truth, in many
cases remain under the power of prejudice
or delusion.’’
This principle which the Creator has im-
planted in our nature, in a way never to
be completely eradicated, reveals itself in
our experience under various aspects and
offices. It is only by examining these in
detail that we can arrive at a competent
understanding of the nature and signifi-
cance of the moral faculty. In one of its
most common manifestations, it is declared
to be a law. “ For the Gentiles,” says the
Apostle Paul, “ which have not the law do
by nature the things contained in the law,
these having not the law are a Jaw unto
themselves, which show the works of the law
written in their hearts.” The meaning
evidently is, that, whether they followed it
or not, the Gentiles, who were without a
written revelation, possessed within their
own breast a guide sufficient to direct them
to chose the good and refuse the evil. This
natural law within is described as corres-
ponding substantially to the written law
without; for the parties are said to
show the works of the law written in
their hearts. This law is nothing
else than the will of God engraven in the
mind of man, so as to enable him to judge
spontaneously concerning the moral quality
of any action, whether performed by him-
self or others. It is antecedent to revela-
tion, which assumes its existence and ap-
peals to its sanction. Even when a com-
mand is given, there is a reference always
implied, and sometimes expressed, to the
inward law of right and wrong written
upon the heart. The allusion is found
where it is least expected, as when children
are addressed in these words: —“Children
obey your parents in the Lord, for this is
right." In expostulations and complaints,
also, an appeal in the same direction is by
no means uncommon: —“ O inhabitants of
Jerusalem, and men of Judah, judge , I
pray you, betwixt me and my vineyard.”
Hence it will be seen how fully the sacred
Scriptures recognise this remarkable
faculty of the human mind. The con-
science, moreover, is also entitled to be re-
garded as a sense, by which is meant that
it possesses the power of perceiving the
distinction between right and wrong by
direct intuition, and for this reason
it has received the name of the
“ moral sense.” Thus when we exercise
the sense of taste, we perceive sweet and
bitter as qualities in bodies without any
formal reasoning; so when actions are sub-
mitted to the moral sense, there is a direct
and immediate perception of their charac-
ter as good or bad. Herein consists its
surpassing value, for it is not only ever pre-
sent in the human breast —which is of
itself a matter of immense importance—
but it is, at the same time, a principle of
easy and certain application. It is for this
reason that we often meet with men
who possess little argumentative ability,
but yet give evidence of a very keen and
correct estimate of their own and other
men’s conduct. The conscience still fur-
ther, is to be regarded in the character of
a judge. It acts as the deputy of a higher
authority, and so condemns or acquits, ac-
cording to the powers with which it is in-
vested, and as the necessity of the case de-
mands. Even in circumstances where it
cannot enforce its sentence, it none the less
goes on to pronounce judgment. Hence
St. Paul affirms regarding the Gentiles of
the old world, that in all their conduct
their thoughts, or judgments of conscience,
either accused or excused them. The con-
science, once more, acts the part of its own
executioner. It inflicts its own sentence
with more or less effect, as the circum-
stances may determine. With one hand it


holds forth a reward to the virtuous;
but in the other it carries a scourge
wherewith to lash the transgressor. On
the performance of an action which is
morally good, the mind is filled with an
indescribable satisfaction, a kind of hea-
venly tranquillity which forms the chief
ingredient in the happiness of a virtuous
man. But this same executioner of the
judgments of conscience pursues the evil-
doer to the most distant lands, haunting his
mind with such appalling terrors as render
life a burden too heavy to be borne. It is
by no means uncommon for an outraged
conscience to deliver up the transgressor to
the hands of justice after he had escaped
the vigilance of his fellow men and had
gone far beyond their reach. Even when
there was an absolute certainty of the dun-
geon or the scaffold, this righteous power
within the breast has compelled some of
the most depraved of men to deliver them-
selves up to the ministers of vengeance.
If anyone should think this power of con-
science to be largely due to the Christian
influence with which modern society is
leavened in all civilised countries, he would
be undeceived by the perusal of what hea-
then moralists have written of their own
times. The following words from Seneca
will illustrate this point. “ Wickedness,”
says he, “ may escape the law, but not the
conscience. For a private conviction is the
first and greatest punishment of offenders ;
so that sin plagues itself, and the fear of
vengeance pursues even those that escape
its stroke. It were ill for good men, that
iniquity may so easily evade the law, the
judge, and the executioner, if nature had
not set up torments and gibbets in the con-
sciences of transgressors. He that is
guilty lives in perpetual terror, and while
he expects to be punished he punishes
himself; and whoever deserves it ex-
pects it. What if he be not detectedl?
He is still in apprehension that he may be
so. His sleep is painful and never secure ;
and he cannot speak of another man’s
wickedness without thinking of his
own.”
Let us next inquire what relation the
conscience sustains to the other faculties
of the human constitution. Being, as al-
ready noticed, both a law and a judge,
its place, if it has any, must be superior to
all the rest, for, were it otherwise, it would
be a means without an end. If we ex-
amine, in succession, the other principles
of our nature, we shall find that each has a
peculiar object which it seeks to attain and
so fulfils its purpose. Thus hunger craves
after food ; the benevolent affections seek
the well-being of the persons beloved ; and
the desire of society impels us to the fel-
lowship of our kind. But the proper object
of the conscience is superintendence and
the government of the other faculties. It
claims in the name of its Author, a right to
control all the powers of the understand-
ing, all the affections of the heart, and all
the appetites of the body. Nothing short
of absolute supremacy will satisfy the pur-
pose for which it was implanted in man.
As for the other propensities, a person may
sometimes be under the sway of one, and
sometimes of another, as circumstances
may rule ; but it is just the peculiarity of
conscience, that a man must always be
under its influence in a supreme degree.
The very essence of conscience is sove-
reignty. If this supremacy is curtailed,
partially or temporally, this faculty is just
so far frustrated for the purpose for which
it was appointed. The only rightful posi-
tion it can hold in the human breast, is the
place of command. This truth has been
set forth by Hr. Chalmers with his usual
eloquence and perspicacity: “ By the
supremacy of conscience,’’ says he, “ we
affirm a truth which respects not the nature
of virtue, but the nature of man. It is,
that in every breast there is a faculty—
not it may be having the actual power, but
having the jnst and rightful pretension to
sit as judge and master over the whole of
human conduct. Other propensities may
have too much sway, but the moral pro-
pensity, if I may so term it, never can ;
for to have the presiding sway in all our
concerns, is just that which properly and
legitimately belongs to it. A man under
anger .may be too strongly prompted to
deeds of retaliation, or under sensuality
be too strongly prompted to indulgence, or
under avarice be too closely addicted to
the pursuit of wealth, or even under
friendship be too strongly inclined to par-
tiality ; but he never can, under conscience
be too strongly inclined to be as he ought
and to do as he ought. We may say of a


watch that its mainspring is too powerful,
but we would never say that its regulator
is too powerful. We may complain of
each of its other parts that it has too much
power over the rest; but not that the part
whose office it is to regulate and fix the
rate of going has too much influence. And
just as a watch cannot move too regularly
man cannot walk too conscientiously. The
one cannot too much obey its regulator, nor
the other too much obey his conscience.
In other words, conscience is the rightful
sovereign in man —and if any other, in the
character of a ruling passion be the actual
sovereign—it is a usurper. In the former
case, the mind is felt to be in its proper
and well conditioned state; in the latter
case, it is felt to be in a state of anarchy.
Yet even in that anarchy, conscience,
though despoiled of its authority, still lifts
its remonstrating claims. Though de-
prived of its rights, it still continues
to assert them. Long after being stripped
of its dominion over man, it has its dwell-
ing-place in his bosom; and even when in
practice most disregarded, then it makes it-
self to be felt and heard.”
Such, then, is a brief account of the con-
science considered in its nature, its office,
and the relation it bears to the other prin-
ciples of our constitution. It is now time
to turn our attention to the direct inferences
which are clearly deducible from this mas-
ter faculty. Those who deny the existence
of God find here a fatal stumbling-block.
That there should appear in the human
breast, with the dawn of consciousness, a
ruling power in the name of rectitude—a
power which not even a long life of pro-
fligacy is able wholly to destroy—can assu-
redly be accounted for in no other way than
upon the assumption of an Almighty Cre-
ator, who placed it there as a witness for
Himself. Strong as the argument is from
external nature, there can be little doubt
that the conscience first suggests to the
mind the being of God, which idea is after-
wards strengthened and extended by the
observation of- design' in creation.lt is
this faculty that explains the fact, that a
belief in the existence of God is innate in
the human mind. Were it not so, there is
great reason to fear, ;that the ’natural
light, of which the world is so full, would
fail to convince men of this truth, espe-
cially in its ethical bearings; just because
he would then be without a moral basis on
which to raise the superstructure. The
special value, however, of the argument
from man’s moral nature is the testimony
it affords for the moral character of the
Deity, Strong as it undoubtedly is for as-
serting His natural existence, as the
Author of man’s constitution, it is vastly
more powerful in establishing the fact,
that He is a God of righteousness, good-
ness, and truth. Had He been of a con-
trary character, with reverence be it
spoken, can any sane man believe, that He
would have placed this master faculty in
the human breast to impel men to the
practice of righteousness, and afflict them
with “ the slings and arrows of outrageous ”
conscience, as often as they did wrong?
The reverse of this supposition holds good
even in this lower world. Is it wicked
and depraved men who labour to promote
the cause of religion and morality ?Do
infidels send Christian missions to the hea-
then P Is it drunkards who travel over
the country lecturing on the duty of tem-
perance and the sin of drunkenness ? Is
it murderers who endow our hospitals and
submit to hardship for the relief of suffer-
ing humanity? Assuredly no. As cer-
tainly as a tree is known by its fruit so is
character revealed in conduct. If a tra-
veller were to enter a province of a great
empire which is ruled by a viceroy, exer-
cising a strictly delegated authority,
he would have no difficulty in ascertaining
the character of the absent sovereign from
a study of the actions of the deputy, the
spirit of the laws, and the mode of gov-
ernment. These things would show un-
mistakably, whether the supreme ruler was
an autocrat or a constitutional monarch, a
cruel tyrant or the father of his people. It
would be a simple process of reasoning
from the effect to the cause, which of all
kinds of argumentation is the least exposed
to fallacy. From the acknowledged fact,
that all the decisions and acts of conscience
are on the side of righteousness in direct
opposition to whatever is wrong, we are
compelled even by common-sense, to as-
cribe the same qualities to its Almighty
Author. If it had been otherwise He
would have committed the greatest act of
folly the world has ever seen. For an un-
righteous being to have appointed as his
deputy such a power of righteousness, as


the conscience is acknowledged to be, would
hare been to defeat his purpose and bring
to pass that which is its direct antagonist.
If he who is a friend to vice had put with-
in the human breast the best advocate
that virtue has ever known, for the
Eurpose of being his vicegerent, he would
ave inscribed his own condemnation on
on the very crown of all his mundane
works.
We turn now to an operation of con-
science in which it bears unmistakable
witness to a future state of retribu-
tion. This state of mind is called
remorse. The most fearful forebod-
ings then harass the soul. This
terrible agony of the soul is often strong-
est in the hour of death when there is no-
thing to be feared in this present world.
The instances which occur to the mind are
innumerable. Belshazzar’s terror is graphi-
cally described in the Book of Daniel,
where it is made manifest that his alarm
could not have proceeded from the fear of
man, for he was then surrounded by his
defenders, nor from the writing on the
wall, for he was ignorant of its meaning
till the Hebrew prophet gave the interpre-
tation. His mental agony could have
arisen from nothing else than a foreboding
of future retribution. The Emperor
Tiberius confessed that the distress of
mind, which he is well-known to have en-
dured, was the consequence of his own
wickedness. Antiochus Epiphanes was
haunted with spectres during his last ill-
ness, and, no wonder, for he was the worst
of all men. It is related of Charles the
Ninth of France, who ordered the massacre
of St. Bartholomew, and assisted in that
diabolical tragedy; that ever afterwards
he had a fierceness in his looks and a
colour in his cheeks which he never had
before; that he slept little and never
soundly, and waked frequently in great
agonies requiring soft music to compose
him to rest; and at length died of a linger-
ing disorder after having undergone the
most exquisite torments both of body and
mind. Such pangs of conscience are the
most unbearable of all agonies which a hu-
man being can suffer on this side of the
grave. An English poet, who could speak
from experience only too well, has said :
“ Trust me, no tortures which the poets feign
Can match the fierce unutterable pain
He fee’s, who, night and day, devoid of rest,
Carries his own accuser in his breast.”
What, then, can be the meaning of all this
mental anguish on the part of evil-doers in
circumstances which place them far beyond
the fear of any punishment that man can
inflict upon them ? It can be nothing else
than the dread of woe which is coming on
the soul after the death of the body. This
agony of mind is produced by the voice of
(rod within summoning the soul to a future
tribunal.
The Immortality of the Soul and its
Capacities foe a Higher State of
Existence in a Future World.
In the Scripture record of the creation of
man there is a clear distinction made be-
tween the body and the soul in respect
alike of their substance and origin. The
matter of which the body is formed is iden-
tified with the dust we tread under foot;
but the soul is described as being the very
inbreathing of the living God. The dis-
tinction thus early instituted never seems
to have been altogether lost sight of, for
even the heathen have been accustomed to
regard the human spirit as containing some-
thing divine, and those who taught the
contempt of the body professedly acted in
the interests of the soul. This divine spark,
dwelling in a frail tabernacle of flesh, has
secured for itself the study and admiration
of the wise and good in every age. How
have philosophers vied with each other in
describing its godlike powers, and poets
sung the praise of its immortal deeds. By
this unseen power have been gained ail
those splendid triumphs which have adorned
humanity with all that it contains of great-
ness and nobility. It is that very thing
which links man to angelic natures, and
gives rise to so much that is godlike in his
aspirations and achievements. Corrupt and
wretched, as fallen man unquestionably is,
this ethereal spark shining in the midst of
the darkness reveals how great he is even
in his ruins. In the pursuit of knowledge
it leads him as with enchantment’s spell to
“ scorn delights and live laborious days,”
and is abundantly satisfied with its own
labour for its reward ; it kindles a glowing
ardour in the patriot’s bosom which carries
him into the field of battle and suffers him
not to feel his mortal wound till life is


ebbing away with his precious blood; it
binds the heart so firm to the cause of
truth that the martyr will brave the scaf-
fold or the flames and laugh at the tor-
ments of death. Shall we believe that this
spirit, so immeasurably superior to the
body, is equally brief in the span of its
existence and is doomed to perish with its
dissolution? If we do so we shall run
counter to the general belief of mankind
and act in defiance of nature’s most power-
ful testimony.
The argument for the immortality of the
soul is a most varied one and consists of
many parts drawn from different sources.
It is properly a cumulative argument, and
its great force can be perceived only when
all its parts are considered as forming one
consistent body of evidence.
We shall proceed then to bring together
these several proofs and, as is proper, shall
commence with the least important first,
gradually ascending to those which seem to
contain the fullest evidence.
The first consideration is one derived
from the analogy of nature, and is well
known to every observer under the name of
the transformation of insects. It cannot
indeed be brought forward as a positive
proof; but it invests our subject with a
high degree of probability, and therefore
affords a presumptive evidence of its truth
of n® mean value. From the butterfly’s
egg hatched by the influence of the sun,
there comes forth a larva or caterpillar
which is in reality a creeping worm. Hav-
ing run its allotted span of existence as a
caterpillar it does not die, in the proper
sense of the term, but passes into another
state of being. It is now found in a dor-
mant state under the form of a chrysalis,
in which it passes the season of winter.
But this second stage is only a preparation
for a third. In due time it emerges from
its prison-house, and with the return of
Spring appears as the brilliant butterfly to
sport in the glorious sunshine. From such
an analogy we are warranted in asserting
that there is nothing unnatural, that is to
say, nothing out of the ordinary course of
things in expecting a series of specifically
different and successively higher stages of
existence for man. He existed in one state
before his birth; he enters upon another
when he is born ; and if he is destined for a
third and more perfect state after suffering
that mysterious event which we call death;
all this would only be in conformity with
that order of nature with which he stands
connected, and of which he really forms a
part. An argument of this sort would not
be of much value if it were the only one
which can be alleged in favour of a future
state, just because there are so many other
creatures which do not pass through similar
stages of existence; but it is, nevertheless,
of great use in showing the probability of
the doctrine to be proved by stronger evi-
dence, and it is certainly decisive in repel-
ling objections against the possibility of a
future state of existence. If a man were
foolish enough to assert that it would be
contrary to nature for the human soul to
subsist after the dissolution of the body, it
would be sufficient to overthrow such an
objection to produce the instance we have
now been considering.
The next argument is derived from the
indestructibility of matter, and deserves to
be credited with much more urgency
than the preceding. Nothing is more
common, or seemingly more reasonable
than to speak of a thing being destroyed.
But if by destruction is meant annihilation
or putting a substance out of existence, we
speak of something which never happened.
We find indeed in the operations of nature
and art continual change of form, a per-
petual dissolution of elements, and a con-
sequent redistribution of parts, but nothing
more. It is beyond the power of man to
bring any substance into existence or when
such comes under his hand to reduce it to
absolute nothingness. Both the one act
and the other pertain to the Supreme
Power alone. Common appliances, indeed,
not unnaturally lead us into this mistake.
We lay a piece of wood upon the blazing
fire and it is forthwith consumed. What
has really happened ? The article has
indeed disappeared and ceased to exist as a
piece of wood, but not a particle of its
essence has been driven out of existence.
One part has ascended in smoke, another
has been radiated in heat, something has
escaped unperceived into the air in a
gaseous state, and a very considerable re-
sidue may still be found in the ashes upon
the hearth. Had we the necessary appli-
ances to collect into one all these diffused
elements, and could we then weigh them in
a balance, they would form an exact equi-


valent to the original body. But we can
point to a still more remarkable circum-
stance. What has now been said of a body
that may be handled and weighed in a
balance is, strange to say, equally true of
those subtle forces of nature which no man
has ever seen or can see. The modern doc-
trine, universally received under the name
of the conservation of energy and the con-
vertibility of forces, teaches us the astonish-
ing fact that not even the power put forth
in an impulse is lost or ceases to exist after
the action is over. Every workman must
have observed that the effect of constant
beating upon a hard surface is a very
perceptible degree of heat in the body
which has received the blows. The ex-
planation is to be found in the fact that the
force which was applied has been trans-
muted into heat. What we found to be
true of gross matter is shown to hold
good even of mechanical force that not one
iota ever perishes. We are bound then to
maintain that no substance in nature is
ever lost. Everywhere there is observed
continual change of form and relation of
parts ; but absolute destruction is certainly
no part of that economy under which we
live.
Any man of reflection will readily see
that this consideration has indirectly great
value in its bearing on our present subject.
Let it be granted for the moment that we
are ignorant of the state of the soul after
death, that it may perhaps cease to exist.
But now we do know that no other sub-
stance perishes, and if this should happen
to the soul it would be a singular instance
in the course of things. By all the laws
of argument the burden of proof ought to
lie on those who deny the soul’s immor-
tality. All we know of death is the disso-
lution of the body. The materials of which
it is composed return to the kindred ele-
ments. Destruction, in the proper sense of
the term, we find none. Death is best
defined to be the separation of soul and
body. But this separation does not annihi-
late even the substance of the body and we
have no reason to believe it should be so
with the soul.
It has thus been shown that what is popu-
larly called destruction means nothing
more than a dissolution of the elements of
which a body is composed. But there are
certain substances in nature which are
purely elementary, and so are incapable of
resolution or disintegration. Now it is of
great importance in the present argument
to bear in mind that the human soul is
precisely of this character. If it were
compound like most bodies then we know
of nothing worse that could happen to it
than decomposition. But there can be no
doubt whatever, that the soul is an absolute
unit not consisting of parts, and therefore
incapable of being dissolved. If it were
otherwise the soul must be material or
composed of matter like the body. The
bare mention of the absurdities which flow
from this doctrine are sufficient for its
refutation. Is it possible that any sober
man will affirm that the mind is simply a
different arrangement of the particles of
matter? It was a saying of one of the
ancients that there was no absurdity too
great for a philosopher to believe. This
witness is true ; for some who boast of this
honoured name have gravely told the world
that thought is produced by no other
agency than the motion of atoms. A strange
doctrine surely, and yet it is accepted by
some who would think it a weakness to
believe the Bible. After the house-maid
has swept the room we can see millions of
atoms dancing in the golden sunbeams.
They are infinitely small and very active.
But are we to suppose they have made any
nearer approach to the art of thinking than
when they lay at rest on the unswept floor?
We would rather not, but it is a conclusion
which can hardly be avoided by those who
hold the doctrine we are now attempting to
refute. Unfortunately for them material-
ism is burdened with such a load of absur-
dities that it can only be compared to
Atlas of old, who was said to bear the
world upon his shoulders. But it is time
to throw aside materialism with its untold
absurdities. We must accept as a logical
necessity the spirituality of the soul with
its necessary consequence—an incomposite
essence. To repeat what has been said
before, this incomposite essence cannot be
disintegrated, and therefore that destruc-
tion, improperly so called, which is applic-
able to the body, can find no place here. So
far as we have proceeded, then, we find
every indication pointing to the immortality
of the soul.—We turn with pleasure from
these metaphysical disquisitions about the
nature of the soul to other arguments which


are more palpable, and therefore likely to In the poems of Homer, the most ancient
be more intelligible to the popular mind, of all the heathen writings, we perceive it
It has usually been admitted that the con- continually recurring with all the marks of
sent of all nations affords a strong pre-
sumptive evidence in favour of an opinion,
if not an ultimate criterion of its truth.
The great Homan sage Cicero affirmed that
the consent of all nations was to be rec-
koned a law of Nature; and we must all
have heard of the famous criterion of
Yincentius of Lerins, which declares that
to be true which is believed always, every-
where, and by everybody. Now it may
fairly be claimed for the opinion of the
soul’s immortality that it has received the
general consent of mankind. It is a per-
suasion which has prevailed, with some
insignificant exceptions, among all people.
It is well known that the leading spirits of
Greece and Rome gave an emphatic testi-
mony to the immortality of the soul. This
persuasion was not derived from the sacred
Scriptures, but was suggested and sup-
ported by such arguments as we have had
under our notice. These illustrious men,
who had no other guide than the light of
nature, may well put to shame the sceptics
of the present day who have the hardihood
to reject as insufficient the testimony both
of nature and revelation. After Plato, the
wisest of them all, had lectured on the
immortality of the soul, one of his most
intelligent students lept into the sea that he
might enter forthwith upon that happy
state. The philosopher’s own words are
eminently clear and decisive. “In truth
each of us,” says he, “ that is to say, each
soul is immortal and departs to the gods in
another world to render an account as the
laws of the State declare. This to the good
is matter of confidence, but to the wicked
of terror.” Seneca, the Homan moralist,
speaks again in his usual clear and deci-
sive terms. “I am very much influenced,”
says he, “by the general consent to the
opinion of future rewards and punishments;
and this meditation raises me to the con-
tempt of this life in the hopes of a better,”
Again, “We maintain the immortality of
the soul on the consent of all nations; it
is only necessary to discuss where it re-
sides and what is its nature.” Even the
earliest literature of these nations is filled
with the practical consequences of this
belief.
a primitive persuasion. In the Iliad no-
thing is more common than a return to this
world of the departed spirits of the mighty
dead. In short, the whole system of future
rewards and punishments which formed so
essential an element in the religion of an-
tiquity, rested on the belief of the soul's
immortality as an indispensable foundation.
It can scarcely be said that the ancient or
modern nations of heathendom have had
even a glimmering belief in the resurrec-
tion of the body; but this circumstance
only tells all the more powerfully in favor
of their belief in the immortality of the
soul, for it was the only support they had
for the anticipated joys and sorrows of the
world to come. The faith of these ancient
nations has been produced only as a speci-
men for the sake of illustration. An
equally strong argument might be gathered
from the religious persuasion of the bar-
barous tribes of the present day. Hardly
any are to be found so degraded as to be
destitute of a belief in a future state and an
existence for the soul after death. A
Tongan, it is stated, on meeting a traveller
for the first time, took him by the hand
and said, “ This must die, but the spirit
which lives within shall never die.” It
must be admitted that most of the heathen
nations, both ancient and modern, have
held most erroneous opinions regarding the
state of the soul after death, some believing
that it passed into other bodies through an
endless series of migrations, while others
have even maintained its pre-existence in a
past state; but these aberrations do not
.weaken their testimony to its immortality.
It will be proper, next in order, to take
up man’s inborn desire of immortality, and
consider what weight it carries in the pre-
sent question. If this longing were a mere
wish for a better state of existence it would
not bear to be pressed into the service at
all, for it is evident that man wishes every
day for many things which he was never
intended to have. But an attentive study
of this aspiration will evidence it to be one
of the original desires implanted in the
human breast by the All-wise Creator. It
absolutely refuses to be suppressed, and if
a man attempt to destroy it as a hope there


is great probability of its springing up as a
fear. This aspiration is so universal in its
diffusion, and so constant in its operation
as fairly to entitle itj to rank among our
inborn propensities. It is as much a part
of our constitution as the desire of food or
drink. It is in this connection that it
becomes valuable as an argument for man’s
immortality. For all our implanted desires
there are to be found corresponding objects
without the mind. The one answers to the
other and satisfies it. In the cases of
hunger and thirst already instanced we
find food provided for the one and water
for the other. It would be a reflection on
the wisdom of our Maker if this provision
didijnot exist; for the implanted desire
would not only be useless were there no
corresponding object, but it would be a
cause of needless uneasiness to him in
whom it has been placed. To this conclu-
sion, however, we are inevitably shut up if
for the desire of immortality there is no
corresponding future existence for the soul.
Thus man, the crown of this lower world,
would be the only creature in which such a
mistake has been made, for nothing similar
can be produced among the beasts that
perish. Those then who believe death to
be the extinction of the soul will find here
a difficulty which has never yet been suffi-
ciently answered.
There is much in our present state of
existence to beget the conviction that the
present is but a preparation for the future.
We are conscious of faculties now which
are capable of indefinite improvement.
There is a capacity for progress which the
present life, with its limited term and op-
gnrtunities, can never sufficiently call forth,
ven in those who have made the greatest
advance, it is clearly seen how infinitely
greater progress might be made if time
were converted into eternity. As youth is
the period of training for manhood, the
time when habits of industry are formed
and the faculties disciplined for the duties
and conflicts of after life, in such a sense,
that this preparatory training can only be
understood when viewed in the light of
what is to follow ; in like manner does this
present life clearly stand as a probation for
eternity. If you remove the one term the
other becomes inexplicable. These obser-
vations hold good apparently of intellectual
as well as of moral qualities. It would be
surely unaccountably strange if our Maker
had implanted a passion for knowledge in
our nature, and that, too, with an unlimited
capacity for improvement, only for the
purpose of extinguishing them in eternal
night, just at the moment when they
reached their highest development. Had
this been so God would have “ made all
men in vain’’ in a very different sense from
which the words are used by the Psalmist.
It would be instructive, in this line of
thought, if we were to compare, or rather
contrast, the case of the lower animals.
They were designed for this present state
and this alone. We find, then, that such
capabilities as they have are just suited to
this present state. There is no deficiency,
neither is there any superfluity. If you
examine them one by one you will find no
faculty or capacity that is, or can be, deve-
loped beyond its present requirements.
This fact will perhaps be seen to the best
advantage in such animals as are subser-
vient to the use of man, and were evidently
designed to be so. These have been the
most gifted in respect of capacity, some of
them seemingly coming near to the exer-
cise of reason. But even so, whatever they
do possess is taxed to the utmost to answer
the end intended. No man ever yet found
the horse or the dog possessing one more
faculty or instinct than was requisite for
the purpose for which it was employed.
How different is it with man! What a
potentiality lies in the mental background
of the meanest slave! Of the great mass
of mankind it is not too much to affirm that
not one thousandth part of their conscious
intellectual power is ever called into exer-
cise, In almost every occupation do we
not find that it is mainly man’s bodily
organs which are brought into operation in
a purely mechanical manner, while his god-
like intellectual powers remain in a semi-
dormant condition. The present age has
shown that the products of human industry
can be effected, (often, too, in a more satis-
factory manner) by mere mechanical con-
trivances. What, then, means this mighty
residue of intellectual power which is
hardly ever touched upon in this world.
We can hardly err in accepting it as another
of those instances of creative design which
belong to the class so well described under


the name of prospective contrivances. We
never could understand, as Paley observes,
why the gums of a sucking child are filled
with rudimentary teeth, on the supposition
of its always remaining an infant at its
mother’s breast. But when the child has
advanced to maturer years and requires to
masticate the food by which its life is sup-
ported, we then perceive why the rudi-
ments of teeth should exist before they
were required for actual use. The two
periods of life thus seem to be the counter-
parts of one another, and both must be
taken into account before the facts of either
can be fully understood. If for these two
terms of life we now substitute time and
eternity, the same reasoning will hold
equally good. Man has been endowed
with faculties in excess of his present
requirement; but they may be useless only
in the sense that the rudiments of teeth are
so to the sucking child. And the analogy
of nature compels us to conclude that there
awaits him a higher state of existence in
which every one of them, if that soul is not
lost, will be called into the fullest exercise
and enjoyment.—There is yet a variety of
other considerations which strongly confirm
the conclusion we are seeking to establish.
Prom the testimony of conscience and the
moral order which everywhere appears we
are compelled to believe our world to be
under the government of a righteous God.
The principle obviously is a purpose to
reward virtue and punish vice. At the
same time there are many perplexing excep-
tions which amount to insuperable difficul-
ties if the present is to be the final state of
man. How often do we see virtue perse-
cuted and vice triumphant. A friend of
humanity whose heart is yearning to relieve
a brother struggling with poverty sets out
for his home to aid him with a purse of
money. But a robber assails him on the
way, murders him for his gold and hides
his lifeless body where no man shall ever
find it. And yet the murderer lives in
plenty, and when he dies there are no
bands in his death. Is there to be no after
reckoning, and shall there be no righteous
judgment? Nature itself cries out there
must be. Look, again, at the youthful
pair arrayed in the gay attire of bridegroom
and bride, pledging their mutual faith to
seek each other’s weal. Quickly the first
love disappears and the husband is trans-
formed into a domestic demon, rewarding
the devotion of a faithful wife with brutal
wounds and bruises till he brings her to an
untimely grave. How then shall justice
be vindicated if death is the end of all!
It must ever be borne in mind, however,
that these are only exceptions to a clearly
observed moral order in the -world. But
they affect the system so largely that it can
only be seen as a consistent whole, when
we take into account a future state of
rewards and punishments in which these
irregularities shall be rectified. The one,
again, is necessary to the intelligent com-
prehension of the other. If a person, who
is an absolute stranger to machinery, were
to enter one of the factories of our large
towns, he would observe a wheel on the one
hand and a roller on the other, a belt here
and a lever there. He would see enough
to convince him that a system of mechanism
was at work; but he would be satisfied
that all the parts were not under his eye;
and he would rightly infer that certain
essential portions were out of sight. His
curiosity would be satisfied and his judg-
ment confirmed, if he were taken into the
engine room and shown the real source of
power which had formerly been concealed.
We may take another illustration and one
which perhaps will be still more suitable.
Astronomers have from time immemorial
believed in a solar system, and explained
its admirable laws. During the last cen-
tury, which made so great progress in this
science, many observed that the outside
planet of the system, as then known, was
occasionally subject to unaccountable dis-
turbances and aberrations. Sometimes it
was unduly hastened in its progress, some-
times as much retarded. At one time it
was deflected from its path on one side, and
at another time upon the other. How were
these variations to be accounted for P The
question was a hard one to answer, for there
was incontestably a solar system, and this
planet was one of its members ; yet there
was nothing in the system as yet known to
explain these irregularities. Happily the
thought began to dawn upon the minds of
the most advanced thinkers that there
might yet be an undiscovered planet out-
side which, by the force of gravitation, was
creating these disturbances upon its neigh-


hour. Forthwith two eminent astronomers, and a future state of reward and punish-
one in Scotland and the other in England,
quite unknown to one another, set them-
selves by a rigid mathematical problem to
find its situation. This being done, and the
telescope pointed to the spot indicated, the
new planet Neptune was discovered and all
these difficulties and perplexities were re-
moved. So must it be with these present
exceptions to the moral order in the world.
There must be an immortality for the soul
ment. There remains at the moment of
death, what Dr. Chalmers has well termed,
many “ unfinished questions" between G-od
and man. It cannot be that these are
for ever broken off at death. The very
imperfection of the system as experienced,
is itself a proof that the system ex-
tends over both worlds, and is under the
administration of a Being who is infinitely
just, and wise, and good.


Section lI.—REVEALED RELIGION.
Necessity and Probability of a Divine
Revelation.
At the outset it will be well to indicate
wherein this necessity lies. It certainly
cannot apply to God who is under no sort
of obligation to a creature that has cast
away the original knowledge of his Maker
and, by becoming a sinner, has taken up
the position of a rebel. If necessity in
any qualified sense could at all be predi-
cated of God, it must be solely on the
principle that goodness is diffusive of it-
self, and yearns for the well-being of
others. But the case is altogether different
on the human side where there is no claim,
but every necessity. It is vain to argue
to the contrary that man could have rea-
soned from the works of Nature to a cor-
rect knowledge of God and a sense of his
duty to Him. This has never been done
in his fallen condition ; and it is futile to
expect that it will ever be. The Bible,
while laying the blame of this moral help-
lessness upon man’s sin, is careful to point
out the need of something higher than the
light of Nature. This teaching is apparent
in the nineteenth psalm in which the in-
spired singer of Israel describes the glory
of God as revealed both in Nature and
Scripture. The former he shows to be un-
utterably great, but an ominous silence is
{reserved regarding its moral effect, thus
eaving on the mind the impression that it is
practically nothing. But it is altogether
different with the revealed will of God as
contained in the written word. This
higher revelation is viewed in every one of
its manifold aspects, not one of which is
found to be destitute of a transforming in-
fluence on the mind of him who is open to
its instruction. It is, “ perfect, converting
the soul ” —“ sure, making the wise
simple ” —right, rejoicing the heart ”
“ pure, enlightening the eyes ” —“ clean,
enduring for ever ” —“ true, and righteous
altogether.” Equally true is it that the
wisest of the ancients, who have written to
the best effect on the subject of religion
and the nature of the gods, never laid
claim to any discoveries in this department
of knowledge; but always professed that
such truths as they had been taught had
been handed down to them from the Golden
Age in remote antiquity—a time when
their fathers conversed with heaven and
drew thence the knowledge of truths be-
yond the reach of mortals. And, indeed,
after all that tradition and philosophy
could do for them, the ancient nations
were fain to erect altars to Him whom they
could describe in no other terms than the
Unknown God.
The necessity of a revelation of the
nature of God becomes painfully evident
from the briefest glance at the errors
which have been committed by the wisest
of men who have speculated on this subject.
Of all the nations of the old world Greece
was by far the most famous in culture and
philosophy; and yet on the subject of
theology the light to which she attained
was but Egyptian darkness, as compared
with what we now know. Although this
country was one of the smallest of any in
the ancient times, we have the testimony of
one of the oldest writers, Hesiod, that it
contained no fewer than 30,000 gods. As
for its capital, Athens, the much-vaunted
“ eye of Greece,” it came to be a proverb
that it was much more easy to find a god
there than a man. Every object of Na-
ture was deified—cities, mountains, lakes,
rivers, and seas ; there being nothing, as
has been well observed, which was not
worshipped except God Himself. Nor
was Rome, which subdued all other
nations, one whit better in this respect,
but, if possible, still worse. Augustine, in
his immortal work, the “City of Go<J,' r
thus describes the bewildering multitude
of the Roman deities, and their helpless-
ness withal: —“ Who can number the
deities to whom the guardianship of Rome
was entrusted ? Indigenous and imported,
both of heaven, earth, hell, seas, fountains,
rivers ; and, as Yarro says, gods certain
and uncertain, male and female; for as
among animals, so among all kinds of gods
are there these distinctions. Rome, then,
enjoying the protection of such a host of
deities, might surely have been preserved
from some of those great and horrible
calamities, of which I can mention but a
few. For by the smoke of her altars she
summoned to her protection, as by a
beacon-fire, a host of gods for whom she
appointed and maintained temples, altars,


sacrifices, priests, and thus offended the
true and most high God, to whom all this
ceremonial is lawfully due. And, indeed,
she was more prosperous when she had
fewer gods ; but the greater she became the
more gods she thought she should have, as
the larger ship needs to be manned by a
larger crew Next let us ask,
if they please, out of so great a crowd of
gods which the Romans worshipped, whom
in special, or what gods they believe to
have extended and preserved that empire.
Now, surely of this work, which is so ex-
cellent and so very full of the highest
dignity, they dare not ascribe any part to
the goddess Cloacina ; or to Yolupia, who
has her name from voluptuousness; or
Libentina, who has her name from lust; or
to Cunino, who rules over their cradles.
But how is it possible to recount all the
names of gods and goddesses, which they
could scarcely comprise in great volumes,
distributing among these divinities their
peculiar offices about single things ?
They have not even thought that the
charge of their lands should be committed
to any one god; but they have entrusted
their farms to Rusina ; the ridges of the
mountains to Jugatinus; over the downs
they have set the goddess Collatina; over
the valleys, Yallonia, Nor could they
find one Segetia so competent, that they
could recommend to her care all their corn
crops at once; but so long as their seed
corn was still under the ground they would
have the goddess Seia set over it; then,
whenever it was above ground and formed
straw, they set over it the goddess Segetia;
and when the grain was collected and
stored, they set over it the goddess Tuti-
lina, that it might kept safe. Who
would not have thought that goddess
Segetia would be sufficient to take care of
the standing corn until it had passed from
the first green blades to the dry ears ?
Yet she was not enough for men, who
loved a multitude of gods, that the miser-
able soul, despising the chaste embrace of
the one true God, should be prostituted to
a crowd of demons. Therefore they set
Proserpina over the germinating seeds;
over the joints and knots of the stems,
the god Nodotus ; over the sheaths enfold-
ing the ears the goddess Volutina; when
the sheaths opened that the spike might
shoot forth, it was ascribed to the goddess
Patelana; when the stems stood all equal
with new ears, because the ancients de-
scribed this equalising by the term “ hos-
tire ” it was ascribed to the goddess Hosti-
lina ; when the grain was in flower, it was
dedicated to the goddess Flora; when
full of milk, to the god Lacturnus ; when
maturing, to the goddess Matuta; when
the crop was runcated—that is, removed
from the soil —to the goddess Runcina. Nor
do I yet recount them all, for lam sick of
this, though it gives them no shame.” So
then, this wearisome catalogue of gods and
and goddesses included only a portion of
the “ gods many” that were worshipped by
the ancient Romans who claimed, and with
reason, to be the lords of the world. What
has thus been shown to be true of G-reece
and Rome, holds equally well of all other
nations who have not enjoyed the light of
revelation. It proves unmistakably that a
craving after God is one of the natural in-
stincts of humanity. It would seem that
Calvin, after all, only gave expression to a
sober truth when he affirmed that man
would sooner worship his walking-stick
than be without a God. Against this
polytheism of the whole heathen world the
Jewish nation was designed to be both a
protest and the means of preserving the
knowledge of the unity of God. For this
purpose the Israelites were set apart from
the rest of the world, and fenced off from
all other nations by a ceremonial ritual
which would not suffer a Jew to hold inter-
course with a Gentile even in eating and
drinking. The revelation made to this
people secured, first of all, the unity
of God, —“ Hear, O Israel, the Lord our
God is one Lord.”
The necessity of a supernatural revelation
will become further evident from a con-
sideration of the character of the gods that
were worshipped throughout the heathen
world. In the case of not a few, it was
the apotheosis of vice. The best poems of
the classical poets are saturated with dis-
gusting details of the licentious amours of
gods and goddesses. They were repre-
sented as delighting in blood and human
sacrifices were at one time the shame of all
nations. The records of idolatry do not
present a single case of an object of wor-
ship that was free from every foul stain, if


judged by the pure standard of the divine
word. Not one of them all could offer
himself as a perfect example for the imita-
tion for his devotees. Even the very best
of the multitude of deities, whom the an-
cient or modern heathens worshipped,
never inculcated holiness of life as a re-
quirement of his followers; no one ever
said or could say, “Be ye holy for I am
holy.” If divine revelation had done no-
thing more than make known a perfect
God, it would justify every claim that
it has made, and be worthy of all the
blood which the martyrs have shed in its
defence, for, in the manifestation of this
truth, it has presented humanity with an
ideal after which it should always aspire
and can never surpass.
The effect of the worship of immoral
deities upon the character of their devotees
is shown to have been just what might
have been expected. If there is any truth
in the old proverb, “ Like priest, like
people ’’; there can hardly be less in what
might pass for another, “Like god, like
worshipper.” A man can scarcely avoid
becoming assimilated, in some degree, to
the being whom he adores. This principle
is fully recognised in Scripture and in the
case of idolatry its deteriorating conse-
quences are distinctly pointed out. The
inspired psalmist of Israel must have had
this truth present to his mind when he
wrote the cxvth Psalm : —“ Their idols are
silver and gold, the work of men’s hands.
They have mouths, but they speak not;
they have ears, but they hear not. . .
They that make them are like unto them;
so is every one that trusteth in them. 5 ’ The
immorality of the ancient world before the
dawn of Christianity is too evident to stand
in need of proof ; and, indeed, the subj ect
is anything but a savoury one. Nobody
who possesses even the slightest knowledge
of antiquity can be ignorant of the fact
that the temples of the gods, where sanc-
tity should have been found if it existed
anywhere, were often the most scandalous
scenes of vice and profligacy. Corinth, the
seat of the worship of Venus, the most
popular goddess of antiquity, became the
sink of all that was evil, and that too in
direct connection with her worship. “ Her
shrine,” says Albert Barnes, “ appeared
above those of the other gods ; and it was
enjoined by law, that one thousand beauti-
ful females should officiate as courtesans,
or public prostitutes, before the altar of the
godde» of love. In a time of public cala-
mity and imminent danger, these women
attended at the sacrifices, and walked with
the other citizens singing sacred hymns.
When Xerxes invaded Greece, recourse
was had to their intercession to avert the
impending calamity. They were supported
chiefly by foreigners ; and from the avails
of their vice a copious revenue was derived
to the city. Individuals, in order to insure
success in their undertakings, vowed to
present to Venus a certain number of
courtesans, which they obtained by send-
ing to distant countries. Foreign mer-
chants were attracted in this way to
Corinth; and in a few days would be
stripped of all their property. It thus be-
came a proverb, 4 It is not for every one to
go to Corinth.’ The effect of this on the
morals of the city can easily be understood.
It became the most gay, dissipated, cor-
rupt, and ultimately the most effeminate
and feeble portion of Greece.” Under such
a religious system it was inevitable that
general morality would stand at a low
level. And it was even so. Truth, or the
love of truth, has always been a rare
quality with idolaters. The wisest among
the ancients, to whom the populace natu-
rally looked up for guidance, held very
lax ’Hews regarding the duty of telling the
truth. Such maxims as the following
were common in all the schools : —That a
lie is better than a hurtful truth; that good
or advancement is better than truth ; that
when telling a lie will be profitable, it
ought to be told ; that a man may lie who
knows how to do it in a suitable time ; and
that truth is hurtful and lying is profitable
to men. Theft, also, was a common vice ;
and when condemned at all was looked
upon as a very trivial matter. It was
even legalised by the Spartans as some-
thing that might be done innocently, if
committed secretly. The inhuman crime
of slavery was so prevalent that at some
periods the servile population exceeded
the free both in Rome and Athens. Sui-
cide was not only permitted on all hands
but even lauded as the mark of a brave
spirit. Marcus Aurelius, who is reckoned
to have made the nearest approach to the


Christian teacher, has left it in writing
that no one need complain of his lot,
for if dissatisfied with life he is at liberty
to give it the slip.
But, after all, the subjects on which
man most imperatively needed a revelation
from on high are sin, eternal salvation,
and the great purpose of his being. The
ancient philosophy taught nothing of the
evil of sin, nor would it regard it as any-
thing worse than a human infirmity. It is
the Bible that tells us that the wages of
sin is death. As little can nature or reason
inform a sinner of the way of escape from
its penalty either here or hereafter. The
question : “ What shall I do to be saved ?”
never has or can be answered apart from
super-natural revelation. The same affirma-
tion is true of the chief end of existence.
The question was, indeed, far from being
overlooked; for, in truth, no subject was
more agitated in the ancient schools.
Under the designation of the tummum
honum it was threshed out to wearisome-
ness by philosophers of every name. On
no subject did they so egregiously fail in
obtaining even a show of unanimity. On
this all-important question, What is the
chief end of man P—during the pending of
which even the course of nature might have
paused,—the result of inquiry led to no-
thing but confusion of opinion. One of
most learned of their number, the Homan
Philosopher, Yarro, has recorded that the
answers given by the schools, the seats of
j
n
the wisdom of antiquity, amounted to
nearly three hundred in number. With
the light which we now enjoy from revela-
tion, this life-and-death question] can be
correctly answered by any child in our
Sunday schools.
A revelation of religious truth having
been thus shown to be necessary, it may
be safely inferred that it would reauire
to be embodied in a permanent record in
order to be preserved for perpetual use.
In primitive times when the periods of
human life were measured by centuries,
it was neither difficult nor unsafe to hand
down divine communications from sire to
son ; but after the centuries had shrunk
into decades, this mode of preserving reve-
lation could no longer be relied upon. A
written record of divine truth has not only
reason upon its side, but it is sanctioned
also by God Himself who wrote the
law of the ten commandments on
tables of stone and delivered them to
the custody of Israel. So, too, Moses
was directed to commit;'tor.writing** all
the rest of the statutes and preserve them
for the use of posterity. This is the
wisdom of God ; but it is the’folly of man
to find fault with so beneficent an arrange-
ment. Those who dislike a “ book revela-
tion ” are bound to show, what they have
never yet done, how the river of the water
of life could otherwise have been preserved
uncontaminated with the polluted streams
of this wicked world.


Inspiration.
In the present age there seems to be a
growing desire to have the Bible accepted
and explained on precisely the same prin-
ciple as any other book. By many it is
deemed sufficient that the writers were
honest witnesses and well-meaning men,
doing their best to instruct their
generation, as well as the ages to come, so
far as they might stand in need of such
teaching, and find it profitable. To agree
to such«a view of the case would be a sur-
render of the whole question at issue. If
the Bible be the work of man only, were
they never so good or wise, it can have
nothing more that human authority, and,
therefore, no ruling place in our religious
life. God alone is the Lord of the con-
science ; to Him only religion is due; and
unless the Scriptures have something in
them divine, they have no claim or title to
be the supreme authority in faith and
practice. If, therefore, inspiration cannot
be retained the Bible fails in the very pur-
pose for which it was given.
Those persons who advocate the opinion
now noticed must admit that a very un-
happy selection of writers was made, if
their qualifications consisted in their cul-
ture and intellectual attainments. Had
such been the case one would have sup-
posed that for the preparation of a book
which was destined to rule the world for
all time, its authors would have been
brought from the most renowned halls of
learning and schools of philosophy. But
we find, instead of so necessary a measure
being taken, the cuosen writers were mostly
uneducated men, who followed their flocks
in the remote wilderness, or fishermen who
had lately left their boats and nets on the
Lake of Galilee. Surely these were, of all
men, the most unlikely to succeed in the
work for which they were chosen. For us
who maintain the belief in divine inspira-
tion there is no difficulty whatever, there
is in fact a very good reason why it should
have been so —it was putting the treasure
in earthern vessels that the excellency of
the power might bo of God, and not of
men.
But if the difficulty is great when we
consider the qualifications of the men, it
will become infinitely more so if we take
into account the nature of the materials
with which they had to deal. The truths
they had to communicate to the world were
of such a kind as lay far beyond the ken
of the most gifted intellect, not to mention
rhe poor comprehension of uncultured men.
They were dealing with matters which eye
had not seen nor ear heard. At one time
they were required to describe an action or
event which perhaps, unknown to them-
selves, was purposely designed to be a type
or symbol of the most impenetrable of all
mysteries ; at another, in the character of
prophets, they foretold a leading event
which was to be fulfilled in some distant
country many centuries after they were in
their graves. When we consider how dull
the minds of men usually are in comparing
spiritual things with spiritual, and how
egregiously the wisest men err in fore-
casting even the things of to-morrow, we may
well marvel at the bare idea of such men
being the authors of a book which, incom-
parably more than any other, still rules
the world.
To those who believe in a supernatural
revelation in any sense it need not seem a
strange thing that God should have inspired
holy men in the work of communicating it
to the world. The twin acts are but the
two sides of one whole purpose, the manifi-
festation of the Divine will to men. He
who thought fit to vouchsafe the greater
blessing of revelation, need not surely be
supposed to withhold the properly conse-
quent act of divinely guiding chosen men
to commit it to writing. There was evi-
dently quite as much of the marvellous
element in the former as there could be in
the latter.
After these preliminary observations we
shall now proceed to exhibit what may
be considered adequate proofs of the in-
inspiration of the Scriptures. Let us look
in the first place to those truths which the
Bible contains, in their bearing especially on
the wants of humanity. The existence of
God is justly argued from the evidence of
design displayed in creation ; and may we
not by a parity of reasoning conclude that
the Scriptures are divine, if we find a


similar adaptation of their truths and prin-
ciples to the requirements of man’s spiritual
nature. That there is such a correspon-
dence will not be difficult to prove.
Wherever individuals and communities
have surrendered themselves to the autho-
rity of the Bible we find the development
of all that is good in humanity, and the
suppression, if not the extinction, of its
corruptions. Individual purity, moral
culture, civil freedom, and national pros-
perity, have all flourished under its shade;
while corruption of morals, and the bon-
dage of the human spirit have as certainly
followed where priestcraft, or any other
authority, has been set up in its stead.
This argument would appear with much
greater force if we took into account the
little progress made by the wise men of
antiquity in making provision for man’s
spiritual wants. A code of naked morality
was the most they produced. Philosophy
has achieved wonders in the intellectual
domain, but it has accomplished next to
nothing for man’s spiritual nature. It
gave the most vague and hesitating answers
to the great questions concerning man’s
origin, object, and end. How different is
it with the Bible ! On every page it amply
supplies that much-desired knowledge
which could not elsewhere be found, and
answers well the mystery of man’s ex-
istence. It alone furnishes the proper
object for his affections in proposing God
for his chief end. If the Bible were per-
mitted to rule supreme in any heart, and
the whole conduct fashioned in accordance
with its principles, there would certainly
be produced, what has been so long sought
for but never found—a “ perfect” man.
We can account for such a book wield-
ing so mighty an influence only on the
principle set forth in its own words,
“ Holy men of God spake as they were
moved by the Holy Ghost.”
Another very important branch of this
evidence is to be found in the consistent
system of doctrine, and the organic unity
which pervade the whole of the Sacred
Scriptures. We have really two facts here
and they deserve separate consideration.
The various books from Genesis to Revela-
tions extend over a period of some 1500
years. The writers consisted of men of
every class and condition from the
king upon the throne to the lowly herds-
man of the wilderness. The books were
written in the most diverse situations and
distant places, in Jerusalem, Babylon,
Ephesus, Corinth, and Rome; sometimes
in palaces, and sometimes in prisons.
Such unusual circumstances of time and
place rendered concert or confederacy
utterly out of the question. Had such a
motley array of writers, extending over so
long a period, and scattered in almost
every land, been left individually to their
own wit and wisdom, it is inconceivable
how repugnant and contradictory their
productions must have been. But instead
of this we do find a beautifully harmonious
and complete system of doctrine. No one
writer ever gave forth a dogma which
another repudiated, or which did not form
a harmonious member of the system. The
perfect holiness of God, the original in-
nocence of man, the fall into sin, the
deliverance by means of au incarnate and
suffering Saviour, the resurrection of the
body, and the life everlasting, are what
may be called the warp and the woof of
the texture of Scripture. And yet we
meet not with a single line from a solitary
writer which reverses any one of them.
But not only is there a consistent system—
a system so complete that divines have had
no difficulty in compiling, what they have
called, “ bodies” of divinity; there is to
be found at the same time a gradual de-
velopment of doctrine running through all
the books of Scripture. As the full-grown
tree is but the unfolding of what was
virtually contained in the seed, so, in the
Scriptures we find the development from
first to last of a preconceived plan, more
particularly in the scheme of redemption,
which was virtually contained in the
promise made in the Garden of Eden, re-
specting the seed of the woman. There was
no writer who did not contribute something
towards this development, and yet, pro-
bably, he himself knew little or nothing of
the relation his particular work bore to the
general plan. Can we account for such
facts as these on merely human grounds ?
Surely it could have been nothing else but
the Spirit of God who guided these men
in the performance of a work for which,


in themselves, they were altogether unfit.
The fulfilment of the prophecies con-
tained in the Scriptures is another con-
vincing evidence of their inspiration. These
prophecies stand forth in bold contrast to
the vague guesses and ambiguous surmises
of the heathen oracles. The predictions
were definite, even to the most minute
particulars, and most of them related to
events many centuries distant. Had they
been treating of events whose forecast
shadows were then beginning to appear,
the predictions might in most cases be ex-
plained in natural principles. But all the
facts are of the most opposite character.
The causes, which in many cases brought
about the fulfilment of prophecy, were not
in existence at the time of the predictions,
and consequently, could not be foreseen.
The fulfilment of the prophecy upon Tyre,
for example, was brought about by the in-
fluence of Alexandria, which took away
its trade, and yet the prophecy was uttered
ages before the latter city was founded.
A stronger instance, perhaps, can be found
in the present state of the Jewish people.
Their present dispersion which exists,
without destroying their distinctness as a
race, was fully described by Moses 3000
years ago, with as much accuracy as if he
had been an eye-witness. Such facts are
inexplicable on any supposition which
denies the inspiration of the sacred books.
The influence which the Bible has
exerted ever since it appeared is also worthy
of serious consideration. Whether we
look to the individual or the community
we are struck with the power which it
wields. In the case of any man who sub-
mits to its influence we soon observe a
marked change in the character—a change
which would not be produced by any other
books, or, indeed, by all books together.
It possesses an unparalleled power of pene-
tration, which goes to the very sources of
what is good and evil in the heart of man.
"The Word of God is quick and powerful
and sharper than any two-edged sword,
piercing even to the dividing asunder of
soul and spirit, and of the joints and
marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts
and intents of the heart.” It is the self-
evidencing power of the Scriptures that
carries home the most powerful persuasion
to the mind. But it arises from an ex-
perimental acquaintance with the word,
and cannot be expected to have much
weight with those to whom it is yet a
strange book. It is remarkable that the re-
formers and succeeding divines, who were
so “ mighty in the Scriptures,” gave the
foremost place to this experimental evi-
dence, considering all others as secondary
and subordinate. So will it always be.
Those who have experienced its power
will set the highest value on this kind of
evidence. And this very circumstance
ought to commend it in no small degree to
those who have not had such experience.
Again, let us notice a little more fully the
effect the Bible has had on society at large.
Here, too, we shall see much to evidence
its divine origin. No other book, as every
one knows, is iu such antagonism to all
that is evil in man, and, in consequence,
no book has been so furiously and per-
sistently suppressed. For ages the perse-
cuting heathen powers used every means
to destroy it utterly, and from that time
to the present day the papacy has raged
against it. The martyrs often had their
choice of delivering up the Scriptures or
laying down their lives in its defence. On
special occasions a persecution arose for
the express and avowed purpose of ex-
terminating the Word of God. Had it
been anything else but the very Word of
God it is impossible to conceive how it
could have survived so many and
so determined efforts to destroy it. It
is remarkable how few ancient books
have come down to the present day,
even with great efforts made not
to destroy but to preserve them. The
great mass have perished, notwithstanding.
But how different has it been with the
sacred Scriptures. To them we may well
apply the words of the historian in refer-
ence to the Israelites under the Egyptian
persecution, “ The more they were afflicted,
the more they multiplied and grew.” Not
only has the Bible survived every fiery
ordeal, but it is at the present time incom-
parably, the book of books. It is now
translated into more than 250 different
tongues, and is more read and studied
than the most noble work of genius which
the pen of man ever produced.


There is, moreover, something in the “ Wherefore the Holy Ghost is a witness
manner and expression of the writers,
which can be explained in no other way
than a belief in their inspiration. Every
reader must have observed how truthful
they are in relating the facts they have to
communicate, even when these involve an
acknowledgment of their own failings.
Moses records his own infirmities at the
rock of Eephidim, with their merited con-
sequences. David pours forth without re-
serve his confession of blood guiltiness in
the 51st Psalm ; and Mark, the evangelist,
who is known to have written specially
under the direction of Peter, gives a de-
tailed account of the melancholy fall of
that impetuous apostle. How shall we ac-
count for these exposures of personal fail-
ings ? Certainly it is not the manner of
men to write books in which they publish
their own faults to the world. This is done
only in one book—the Bible. Josephus
wrote a history of the Jewish wars, and the
part he played in them, but he is silent
about his own faults, and is continually
trumpeting the praises of his deeds.
Caesar compiled a narrative of his Gallic
campaigns, but every reader knows that he
claims every victory to himself and throws
the blame of every miscarriage upon his
lieutenants. So it is always. Human na-
ture will not suffer it to be otherwise.
When we find it so different, then, in the
case of the writers of the Bible, we must
plainly infer that they were moved by an-
other spirit than their own.
It will now be proper to inquire how the
question appeared to these writers them-
selves, and whether or not they claimed to
be inspired. This question is easily an-
swered. In the case of the Old Testament
writers it is brought to a practical issue by
their successors of the New Testament in
the treatment of quotations. Whatever
they said the Spirit of God is declared to
have said. Christ Himself said that David
by the Spirit called the Messiah Lord.
David in the 95th Psalm said, “ To-day if
ye will hear his voice harden not your
hearts,” but the apostle, quoting these
words in the Hebrews, introduced them
in this manner, wherefore as the Holy
Ghost saith, to-day if ye will hear His
voice.’’ Again in the same epistle he says,
to us, for after that he had said before,
‘ this is the covenant that I will make with
them after those days, saith the Lord.’ ”
The words are Jeremiah’s, yet it is not the
prophet but the Holy Ghost that is said
to bear this testimony. So we read of the
assembled apostles lifting up their voice,
and saying with one accord, “ Lord, thou
art God, who by the mouth of thy servant
David hast said, Why do the heathen
rageP” And not less to the purpose are
those words of Paul to the Jews, “ Well
spake the Holy Ghost by Esaias the pro-
phet unto our fathers.” The inspiration of
the New Testament writers is, if possible,
still more evident. Christ promised his
disciples the Holy Spirit, who should bring
all things to their remembrance. This
Spirit was given on the great day of Pente-
cost, and the disciples were forthwith de-
clared to be full of the Holy Ghost, and
began to speak as the Spirit gave them
utterance. Henceforth they taught as the
infallible organs of the Spirit. Through-
out the New Testament this prerogative is
everywhere asserted or implied. The very
opening words of the Epistle to the He-
brews make good this claim, and assert in-
spiration in its widest sense, “ God, who at
sundry times, and divers manners, spake
in time past by the fathers, hath in these
last days spoken unto us by his Son.”
The voice of Scripture is everywhere re-
garded as the voice of God. The apostles
would not allow that their words were
their own, or rested on mere human autho-
rity. They set forth their doctrines, “ not
in words which man’s wisdom teacheth,
but which the Holy Ghost teacheth.” Paul
thanked God on behalf of the Thessalo-
nians because they had received his mes-
sage, “ not as the word of man, but as it is
in the truth the word of God.” No words can
be plainer than these. The apostles them-
selves as well as the prophets declared it
was God who was speaking in them and
by them, and they regarded disobedience
to their message as rebellion against God.
We now come to the important
question of the “ mode” or “ manner”
of inspiration. There is, of course,
an inscrutable mystery wrapped up
hero as in all the other operations of


the Divine Spirit. It is vain for us to ex-
pect to comprehend how that Divine Spirit
acted upon the human agents in guiding
them to write infallibly the Word of God
for our salvation. We cannot even under-
stand his agency upon our spirits in the
operation of his grace. The wind
bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest
the sound thereof, but caust not tell whence
it cometh, nor whither it goeth. So is every
one that is born of the Spirit.” But while
we cannot hope to learn what this action is
in itself, we may yet, perhaps, get to under-
stand something of its manner and circum-
stances. The most important consideration
here is the degree or extent to which the
holy men were employed as agents of the
Spirit. There can be no doubt that
a view altogether too mechanical has
long prevailed on this subject. It
should never be forgotten that when
God employs any of His creatures
as His agent He does so in a way
agreeably to their own nature. He uses
angels as angels, men as men, and the ele-
ments as elements. This fact has often
been forgotten by writers on inspiration,
for they have spoken of inspired men as
if they had been mere machines in the
hand of the Spirit. This has been done
when they have been compared to a harp
or some other musical instrument to be
touched, in a merely passive condition, by
the Spirit, or vhen they have been de-
scribed as mere penmen, scribes, or secre-
taries of the Spirit, little more than their
hands being used in the mechanical opera-
tion of writing; or, when the whole
theory of inspiration has been reduced
to a process of verbal dictation. All
those narrow views are happily now
being abandoned for a much more
liberal, and not less accurate, principle of
inspiration. When God uses a man for
his agent He will use him as a man, and
not as a machine. It was not the mere
hands, or the memory, or any single faculty
that was called into requisition when the
sacred writers were inspired to indite the
Holy Scriptures, but the whole man with
all his faculties, which would ordinarily be
employed in writing, were brought into
play. Instead of the Divine Will being
communicated through the mere hand, as
the mechanical view would imply, it came,
so to speak, through the whole man, in the
exercise of his memory, understanding,
imagination, and every other faculty which
would have been employed had there been
no inspiration. At the same time there
was no human infirmity, no alloy of sin
permitted to escape the writer. The very
fact of inspiration was a safeguard against
such an occurrence. In one sense the
Scriptures are wholly of God, because all
came by the Spirit’s guidance ; in another
sense they are wholly of man, because the
man was wholly and consciously active
when he wrote them. There is thus an
admirable and most harmonious blending
of the human and Divine elements in the
sacred Scriptures. The heavenly things
have in this way received an eartldy form
and aspect, which makes them more intelli-
gible to the human understanding.
The advantages of this view of inspira-
tion will be at once apparent, and it alone
renders explicable that endless variety of
style and manner of expression which runs
through the whole Bible. We find that
every writer retains his peculiar way of
writing, just because the whole man with
all his sinless peculiarities was employed as
the agent of the Spirit. Do we find in
Isaiah a man whose sentiment of the sub-
lime was the predominant characteristic of
his mind, then this very faculty of the sub-
lime was sanctified and employed by the
Spirit in the composition of his magnificent
book of prophecy. Or do we find in Paul
a dialectic turn of mind which casts
every truth which passes through it into
a stately logical form; then this
very quality is brought into requisi-
tion by the Guiding Spirit; or,
do we find in John an intuitive cast of
mind which is ever bent on contemplation
and meditation, then the Spirit uses this
peculiarity, too, in conveying the truth of
God in a very inviting and delightful form.
Thus we see that while all the writers were
filled with the self-same Spirit, who guided
them into all truth, that Spirit destroyed
nothing that was genuinely human. The
consequence is seen in that admirable
variety of style and composition which dis-
tinguishes the Bible above all other books.
As when a traveller is passing through a


strange country he finds a new aspect
greeting his eye at every turn of the road,
and this never-ending variety it is that
constitutes the bewitching charm of
travel. In like manner he who reads
through the word of God finds a new
style in) every one of the many
writers, and his interest is thus kept awake
till he reaches the close of the inspired
volume. Those who have attempted to
read through the History of Josephus, or
the Koran of Mahomet, will not be slow to
appreciate this advantage, and thank God
that all the books of the Sacred Scriptures
are not cast intone iron mould. In the
two works referred to we find the same
dull monotony, and the same dead uni-
formity filling them from beginning to end,
which make the task of reading through
them feel like a penal sentence. In the
Sacred Scriptures this evil has been
avoided, and an enchanting variety substi-
tuted in its place, and all this through the
very simple method we have now ex-
plained.
The subject of inspiration cannot be
satisfactorily discussed without giving
some answer to the objections which are
advanced by its numerous'opponents. Of
these there are two principal classes—al-
leged contradictions to the modern dis-
coveries in science, and offences of a moral
kind, which shock the common feelings of
humanity. In regard to the first it should
ever be borne in mind that the writers were
inspired as teachers of religion, and not of
science. This latter character they never
assume. They were supernaturally en-
lightened in respect of the truths of re-
ligion, and not the facts of science. In
their private opinions they may have been,
and doubtless were, very much at fault
regarding the secrets of the sciences, but
surely this circumstance need not interfere
with their public character and qualifica-
tions as teachers of religion. It would
be monstrous to suppose they required to
be taught the whole circle of the sciences
before they could be fit teachers of the will
of God for our salvation. This distinction
is one of great importance, and it will help
us through many difficulties. It may be
true that these writers in their private
opinions believed the earth to be the centre
of our system, and that the heavenly bodies
moved round it. But the real question is,
do they ever teach this doctrine. No one
will maintain that they do. The inspiring
Spirit prevented them from such error, and
this was all that was necessary for the
question in hand. Inspiration has nothing
to do with these men except in their public
capacity as writers of the Word of God.
In their private capacities they doubtless
err both in opinion and conduct, but this
in no respect weakens their testimony when
they wrote or spoke as they were “ moved
by the Spirit of God.”
In regard to the objections which are ad-
vanced on the score of morality we should
also bear in mind the very obvious dis-
tinction between what is simply related in
the Word of God, and what is stamped
with its authority. Many things are re-
corded for the very purpose of being
avoided whether they are expressly con-
demned or not. The father of lies
and his multitudinous agents are often
simply introduced as speaking and
acting, without any comment on the wicked-
ness of the persons or their conduct. These
incidents are true as a matter of history,
however much to be reprobated on the
principles of morality. It is the most
puerile of all objections to condemn the
Bible or impugn inspiration on such
grounds as these.
Of the rest it is not too much to
expect that difficulties will be cleared
up whenever a better knowledge of
the circumstances, or a more satisfac-
tory explanation of the text can be
arrived at. Of this class of difficulties
there is no one so frequently alleged, or
persisted in with a greater degree of ssur-
ance, than the conduct of David towards
the conquered Ammonites. The words of
the historian are these: “ And David
brought forth the people that were there-
in, and put them under saws, and under
harrows of iron, and under axes of iron,
and made them pass through the brick-
kiln.” The objectors explain the passage
as meaning that David sawed the people
asunder, tore them under harrows of iron,
and burnt them m the brick-kiln. But the
more sensible and grammatical interpreta-
tion is simply this, that he made slaves of


servile work. So we speak of laying people
under tribute. It is a common mode of
speecli in most languages. To put the
people under saws, harrows, axes, and the
brick-kiln, means no more than to employ
them as slaves in the most menial and
laborious offices, such as sawing, making
iron harrows, hewing wood, and making
bricks. To treat a vanquished people after
this manner is only to exercise the right
of the conqueror, and can be impugned
only by those who hold that war is not al-
lowable under any circumstances.
Thus briefly have we considered the Word
of God in one of its most interesting
aspects. Such thoughts should lead us to
set a very high value upon this time-
honoured volume. If it is, as we believe,
the very Word of God, which is able to
make us wise unto salvation, it is surely in
every way worthy of our constant study
and meditation. It is the most precious
boon the world has ever received. Never
will the individual or society prosper until
the Word of God shall have free course
and be glorified.
Miracles.
The miracles of Scripture are expressed
under various names, as they are designed
to be represented in different aspects.
They are declared to be “ signs,” “ won-
ders,” and “ mighty works.” It is not
meant that one class of miracles are signs,
another wonders, and a third mighty
works ; but all these designations apply to
every individual miracle, and each one ex-
presses a distinct peculiarity. In so far
as they struck the beholders with astonish-
ment they were properly termed wonders
or marvels, and this effect appears to have
been continually produced insomuch that
the people “ marvelled,” were “ filled with
amazement,” and “ said one to another we
have seen strange things to-day.” Con-
sidered again in their evidential character
as being the credentials authenticating a
messenger of the Most High, they properly
received the name of “ signs.” So when
Moses was sent to Pharaoh with the power
of working miracles as the seals of his
mission, he was commanded to take the
rod in his hand wherewith he should do
signs. In like manner the Pharisees and
Sadducees came to Jesus and demanded a
sign from heaven in attestation of His
divine mission. For this purpose they
were often appealed to by Christ in His
public ministry; and also by Paul when
he characterised miracles as the “signs” of
an Apostle. Furthermore, when miracles
are considered in respect of that almighty
power by whicli they are wrought they are
entitled to the name of “ mighty works.’’
Hence we read of the whole multitude
praising God for all the mighty works
which they had seen. On the admission
alike of friends and foes these wonders
were done by a supernatural power of some
sort and so they were universally accepted
as mighty works.
The contention which in modern times
has raged so fiercely round the miracles has
taken its rise in the very definition of the
term. Our wily opponents have sought
to impose upon us by defining a miracle
to be “ a violation of the laws of nature.'
This cannot for a moment be admitted.
Miracles are by no means a violation of
the laws of nature ; but are in strict har-
mony with her highest and noblest ten-
dencies. It ought to be carefully observed
that we nowhere find any such thing as a
miracle wrought to alter an original prin-
ciple in the constitution of nature, or to
supply an imagined deficiency. The ob-
ject rather is to relieve nature of those
embarrassments and burdens under which
she now groans because of man’s sin. It
is sin which has marred the harmony and
beauty of nature, and the tendency of a
miracle always is to remove these
and restore the primitive order. Can such
an interposition be called a “ violation of
nature ?’’ Take first that largest class of
miracles which consist in healing the
sick. Do not the very names given to
the maladies express the important truth
we are now dealing with ? They are
termed disorders and diseases, implying
that nature is out of order and ill-at-ease
by reason of these maladies. An act of
healing, then, must be in sweet accord
with the profoundest harmony in nature,
for it is doing in a moment the very thing
which nature is striving to accomplish, and


usually does accomplish, in a longer or
shorter period of time. Every medical
man knows well that there is great healing
power in nature by which she seeks to
throw off every disorder and restore a
a sound and vigorous state of bodily
health. Much of the progress of medical
science is due to the clear understanding
and just appreciation of this important
principle. The most successful physicians,
it is well known, are those who, to use
their own words, endeavour to “ help
nature” by removing obstacles which stand
in the way of her healing virtue. All
miracles of healing, instead of being a
“ violation of nature,” must be in harmony
with the object after which she is striving.
A second group of miracles, which are
very closely connected with the former, are
usually explained on the principle of a has-
tened process. Of these the miracle of the
water turned into wine forms a remarkable
instance. There is no violation of the
laws of nature here; for, as Augustine long
ago observed, this is just what is done
every year in the vine. G-od in the coarse
of His ordinary providence year by year
converts the juices of the earth into wine
by means of the vine, just as he turned the
water into wine at Cana. In the former
case the process is extended over a whole
year while the vine is running its natural
cycle; in the other there is a hastened
process and the water is turned into wine
by an instantaneous act. In nature, the
process is extended over a lengthened
period, while God gives the fertilising rain,
the quickening sunbeams, and vitality to
the mediating vine ; in the miracle the end
is accomplished in a moment at the word of
command. The two acts differ only in
time and manner, and it is impossible to see
any natural opposition of the one to the
other.
There is still a third class of miracles
which call for a passing notice as it is on
them more especially that the outcry
about “ a violation of nature” has been
founded. In this indeed we find a lower
law neutralised or kept in check by a
higher ; but this is only what we observe
happening around us every day. There is a
law in nature which will cause a pin to fall
to the ground; but if we hold a magnet over
it, the pin, on the contrary, will rise from
the ground. But will anyone affirm that
we see here a “ violation of the law of
gravitation That same law still con-
tinues to operate while the magnet is rais-
ing the pin and the artificial force brought
to bear upon it is just the difference be-
tween the power exerted by gravitation on
the one hand, and that of the magnet on
the other. In this case the surplus is on
the side of the magnet and for this reason
the pin rises from the ground. Precisely
so is it with third class of miracles which
we have now in hand. If the head of an
axe falls into the water and by a miracle
swims when it would otherwise sink, there
is not any violation of the law of gravita-
tion ; for the iron swims just in virtue of
the introduction of a supernatural power
which overbalances this natural force. It
swims not because gravitation is reversed
and made a repulsive instead of an attrac-
tive force, but because another and greater
power is supernaturally interposed.
This groundless objection which accuses
miracles of being a “violation of natural
laws” or causing “ a rent in nature” might
have been avoided had a little more atten-
tion been given to the circumstances in
which they have usually been performed.
Wherever possible the miracle began with a
natural basis and on this the superstruc-
ture was rais-d. If the Bed Sea was tube
divided to let Israel pass through, God
caused an east wind to blow all night that
the waters might be dried up. Or, if five
thousand famished men and women were
to be fed in the wilderness,- Christ first
made use of five loaves and two fishes so far
as the supply would go, thus making them
the basis of the miracle. The God of the
natural and the supernatural being one and
the same, He unites the two as if to teach
us that they find their complete harmony
in Him. So little contrariety is there be-
tween a miracle and nature that they are
both conjoined in the same act, as if to put
honour upon nature Natural means are em-
ployed so far as they will extend, and then
a higher power is introduced to accomplish
the desired result.
In this sceptical age we are often asked,
“ Are miracles possible ?” From an atheist
such a question may naturally be expected.


but when it conies from one who believes
in God as the Maker and Euler of the
world, it does appear beyond measure
strange. Why should a miracle be impos-
sible with God P Some will reply, because
it would be an interference with the estab-
lished course of nature. Suppose it were,
would this render such interference im-
possible or improbable P Are the laws of
nature really laws for God as well as laws
of God ? If so, He must be bound down
in the chains of an iron necessity in a sense
as absolute as the works of His hands.
This were to bring God down to a level
with His works and, with reverence be it
spoken, would make Him something less
than man. We, puny creatures as we
are, can make laws which are our servants,
not our masters; and we can suspend,
alter or annul them at pleasure. But it
appears there are men who are unwilling
to concede so much power to Almighty
God. Having created the world in the
beginning and imposed his laws upon it,
He is not allowed to interfere with it any
further; for such an interposition would
be a miracle, and miracles are declared on
a forgone conclusion to be impossible.
This impious phase of unbelief, strange to
say, is sometimes put in a very plausible
and seductive form. The frame-work of
nature is falsely compared to a machine,
which is fashioned by the art of man. In
the instrument made by man, the skill of
the maker is very properly said to consist
in its being so perfect that it can operate
for a long period without any interference
on his part. The art of the watchmaker,
for example, is shown in the construction
of a watch, which will keep correct time
for many years without the necessity of
being repaired or re-adjusted. By a most
fallacious mode of reasoning the same
argument is applied to God and this
world which he has made. As the work-
man, in the diligent use of his skill and
craft, finishes an elaborate piece of
mechanism and hands it over once for all
to the purchaser; or as the shipbuilder
constructs a vessel and sends it to sea in
a thoroughly efficient state with the design
that he is to have no further control over
it; so the Creator is supposed to have made
the world, to have bestowed upon it the
so-called laws of nature, showing Himself
possessed of infinite wisdom and power, in
such order that it required no further
interference on His part to accomplish the
purpose of its existence. How it cannot
be denied that this is a very specious
argument and one which readily imposes on
superficial minds. Many persons who have
accepted it as satisfactory would perhaps
be surprised to learn that it rests on the
crudest of all fallacies and derives all its
plausibility from the comparison of things
which ought never to have been
compared' Man is compelled to con-
struct self-acting machines to save him-
self the trouble of superintendence and
labour. The builder cannot go to sea
with the ship he has made, and as it
cannot have the benefit of his presence and
superintendence he is under the necessity
of making it as efficient as possible to
remedy this defect. The watchmaker
cannot always be present with the watch
to put it right when it goes out of order,
and he is therefore compelled to make
the mechanism as perfect as possible
to avoid future inconvenience. Thus it
is the very imperfection of man that
lays him under the necessity of making
his instruments perfect in respect to
their working. But it would be impious
to affirm that God lay under the same
necessity. Who could be so infatuated
as to say that He made the world per-
fect and imposed laws upon it in order
to save further labour and trouble; He
is everywhere present in His almighty
power. The relation which He sustains
to His works is of the most intimate
kind. “Of Him and through Him and
to Him are all things.” It is “in Him
that we live and move and have our
being.” There cannot, therefore, be any
parallel between man’s connection with
his works and the relation which God
sustains to the world, and no argument
which rests upon this deceptive re-
semblance can be true, God’s works
have a perfection to which man’s can
never approach; but it is not a perfec-
tion which consists in making them
automatic or self-acting machines.
But we must add a few words further on
this objection which is brought against


miracles on the ground of their being an
interference with the course of nature.
For such an objection to have any force
one would require to know a little better
what the course of nature is, both in its
extent and limitations. For aught we know
to the contrary, this very course of nature
may, by virtue of an original provision, and
by reason of a higher law, include these
same miracles which are pronounced to be
a violation of its sacred order. It is a
strong presumption in favour of this sur-
mise that miracles have appeared only at
the great turning points and the most
pressing crises of the world’s history.
They are in some sort the birth-throes that
introduce new periods and dispensations
of the development of the Kingdom of God
upon earth. Not only have miracles been
extraordinary in their own character ; but
moreover, they have appeared only at ex-
traordinary times. At the exodus of Israel
from Egypt, in the times of Ahab and Elijah
when idolatry reached it culmination, dur-
ing the period of the manifestation of the
Son of God in the flesh, and also when He
shall appear the “ second time with power
and great glory these, and these only,
are the great centres around which mira-
culous operations have revolved. If we
are then tied down, as some will have it, to
an iron course of nature why may not
these specialities and extraordinary mani-
festations have been taken I into account at
the first, and provision made for them ac-
cordingly ? To take an illustration from a
machine as our opponents are fond of
doing. We find that an ordinary clock
marks the flight of the seconds and also
strikes the hours. But it would be nothing
very wonderful if one were made which
would also give some sign that would an-
nounce the close of months and years. If
this were so, these extraordinary intima-
tions of the measurements of months and
years, although occurring at so long
intervals, would still have to be reckoned
as part of the course of the clock properly
so-called. It might very well happen, in-
deed, that a person who had been only a
few hours in the presence of the time-piece,
would imagine that its course was com-
pleted in the marking of the seconds and
the hours. But the error would arise from
nothing else than too limited knowledge
and it would be strange if such a person
were to contradict the testimony of others
who had been present when he was absent;
and this, too, on the ground that it would
be an interference with the course of the
clock. After the same manner it often
happens that we mistake the course of
nature, and take a part for the whole.
During our brief lifetime we have not wit-
nessed any miracles and we have good rea-
son to believe that none have been per-
formed during that period. But it would
be substituting arrogance for argument, to
make our experience the rule of history
and assert that miracles never could have
had a place or possibility in the course of
nature.
Thus far we have considered the nature
and possibility of miracles. It is time now
to turn to the more important question of
their proof. We begin here with the em-
phatic statement that miracles never have
been historically disproved. For the space
of 1600 years their reality remained un-
questioned. It was not till the 17th century
that men began to doubt whether miracles
were ever wrought and their scepticism
did not arise from any flaw which they
had discovered in the historical proof. It
was the great prominence which was then
given to natural law which led men to con-
ceive of an established order of nature
with which miracles were presumed to be
incompatible. In still more recent times
other objections have been raised, but the
historical ground on which miracles rest
has never yet been successfully assailed.
If we go back to the earliest times we are
struck, in the first place, with the fact that
the contemporaries of our Lord and His
Apostles, who were eye witnesses of the mir-
acles, never dared to call them in question.
There was no difference of opinion as to the
fact that miracles of power were wrought.
Both friends and foes admitted their
reality, as they well might; for they were
not done in a corner, but openly before
many witnesses—in the temple, by the
wayside, and On the open sea. They were
purposely of the most varied character,
giving sight to the blind, healing to the
sick, causing the lame to walk, and raising
the dead. On certain occasions we can


plainly discern certain measures being
taken to prevent any possible collusion or
sleight of hand, as in the miracle at Cana
of Galilee, where the servants, and not the
disciples, were commanded to fill the water-
pots with water up to the brim, so that
there could be no possibility of wine being
surreptitiously introduced. We may be
very sure that an impostor would have had
this done by his own associates who were
in possession of his secret, and we can only
account for this circumstance in the way
already indicated. It is not surprising then
that our Lord’s contemporaries accepted
these mighty works as miraculous and
confessed, as in the case of the Apostles’
work, that “ indeed a notable miracle had
been wrought by them which it would be
impossible to deny.” That many of them
ascribed this power, not to God, but to
devils, does not lessen, but rather increases
the value of their testimony. It showed
how hopeless they considered the attempt to
deny them when they were compelled to
resort to such an alternative.
It is perhaps of still greater moment to
ascertain how the belief in miracles was
treated by the enemies of Christianity in
the times immediately succeeding the mini-
stry of our Lord and his Apostles. From
the first there were men not wanting in
learning or ability who undertook the task
of refuting and overthrowing the new re-
ligion. In the second century there were
Trypho, the Jewish Rabbi, and the well-
known Celsus ; in the third century the
famous Platonic philosopher Porphyry; and
in the fourth century the Emperor Julian,
all of whom, in company with many others,
made vigorous assaults upon Christianity
with the avowed purpose of overthrowing
it by the power of argument, as the Roman
Empire sought to do with the sword. But
none of these assailants attempted to deny
the miracles of our Lord and His Apostles.
They could have abstained from this
only because they deemed it a hopeless
task. Had it been feasible they had every-
thing to gain by such an attack. If they
could have done away with the miracles
the whole superstructure would have fallen
as a necessary consequence. These were
the men who were the most favourably situ-
ated for rendering this service to the cause
of infidelity for they were almost abreast
of the source of Christianity, and popular
opinion was so strong against the new re-
ligion that every facility and the utmost
sympathy, would have been afforded them
in trying to expose a fraud. But they at-
tempted nothing of the sort. The earliest
assailants of Christianity admitted the
reality of the miracles; but ascribed the
power by which they were wrought to sup-
posed intermediate beings called demons.
And thus the question rested until modern
times. It was not till men began to exalt
law into the place of God, that they
doubted the reality of miracles or ques-
tioned their possibility. During the past
and present century there have been many
attempts made to soften down or explain
away the miracles of Scripture. First
came Rationalism with its merely natural
interpretations—a theory which found its
birth in Germany, and after travelling over
many countries, has there also found its
grave. It undertook the desperate task of
explaining all the miracles as merely natu-
ral events which had been misunderstood
and exaggerated. Christ’s walking on the
sea was expounded as meaning His walk-
ing on the shore of the sea; just as we
speak of a city being built upon the sea
when we mean that it stands on the sea-
side. Christians were told they made a
mistake in supposing that Peter, at the
command of his Master, found a piece of
money in the mouth of the fish he had
brought from the sea, for the true meaning
of the so-called miracle just amounted to
this, that Peter having caught a fish took
it to the market and sold it for a piece of
money ; so that in a figurative and poetical
way of speaking—truly Oriental—he might
be said to have found a coin in the fish’s
mouth. At the Pool of Bethesda Christ, it
was said, wrought no real miracle, but only
detected an impostor who pretended to
have an infirmity. So in the raising of
Lazarus, it is affirmed, there was no
miracle of giving life to the dead. Christ,
it seems, found out that his friend was only
in a swoon and came to awake him out of
his sleep. It is simply amazing that men
who claimed to be theologians and who, in
some sort, held by the authority of the
Word of God, could ever have given to the


world such interpretations of the miracles
of the Saviour ; and it shows how severely
they felt the attacks of the scepticism of
their day. It would have been better to
have given up the miracles altogether than
retain them by a species of defence which
made them ridiculous.
Another view of the miracles which has
been accepted in the presept age demands
a passing notice. According to this scheme
they are regarded as miracles only in a
relative sense. Such they were to the
people among whom they were performed,
but the time will come when such works
will be seen to be the ordinary operations
of natural laws. When the Spaniards in
America imposed upon the natives by
threatening to take away the light of the
sun at a specified time, they doubtless ap-
peared to the savages to work miracles;
but in reality they only foretold an eclipse
in virtue of their superior knowledge of
natural laws. So it is said that Christ
availed himself of his perfect knowledge of
the secrets of nature, and in doing so ap-
peared to the ignorant men of his time to
be working miracles ; but the day will yet
come when men generally having a pro-
found knowledge of the secrets of nature
will perform similar operations by purely
natural means. Now, there is no doubt but
this scheme exalts Christ far above the
wisest men in ascribing to Him such know-
ledge ; but in another sense, it is to be
feared, it sinks Him below the level of an
honest man. A miracle of this kind is
really an imposture. A certain result is
accomplished professedly by divine power
which in reality is brought about by
natural means. The whole affair would
thus be a clever deception, and that moral
end which miracles are designed to accom-
plish would be completely frustrated.
We have still another and that too, per-
haps, the most popular scheme, not of ex-
plaining the miracles, but of explaining
them away. According to this theory no
miracle was wrought or pretended to be
wrought; the life of Christ was in all re-
spects natural and understood to be so by
the men of His generation. But the gener-
ations following through their heated
imagination and excited enthusiasm spring-
ing out of the Messianic conception of the
Old Testament unconsciously mistook natu-
ral for supernatural events, and in this way
the miracles grew up step by step in a sub-
sequent age. To this it may be replied,
first, that the time allowed for these crea-
tures of the imagination to attain a definite
form and be mistaken for realities is pre-
posterously inadequate. We find, indeed,
that myths have grown up among all primi-
tive nations during prehistoric periods.
But they have required ages of time and
many generations of men before they could
appear in such a form as to be mistaken
for facts. But in the case of the miracles
of the New Testament the intervening
period is so short as to render it a sheer
absurdity to expect such a result. We
know from other sources than the
Scriptures that a belief in miracles was
universal among friends and foes within a
very few years after the ascension of
Christ. But to this scheme we reply, in
the second place, that it leaves the origin of
Christianity unaccounted for. The Mes-
siah was expected to work miracles when
he appeared ; if then Christ wrought no
miracles how did it happen that he was
accepted as the Messiah ? We know that
He was so accepted and that too by men
who testified their sincerity by laying
down their lives.
It would be impossible to discuss the
subject of miracles in a satisfactory man-
ner, without tak : ng some account of Hume’s
famous argument on the other side. His
objection turns entirely on the credit due
to human testimony. He affirms that, as we
have had no experience of a miracle being
performed, we can know it to be a fact only
lay the testimony of others. But as we have
often experienced testimony to be false
without once experiencing a miracle to be
true, it is always more probable for testi-
mony to be false than a miracle to be true.
It is thus declared that a miracle cannot be
proved because it is contrary to our ex-
perience. But this kind of arguing would
prove a great deal too much. It would
apply to every kind of testimony and to
every thing borne witness to which is con-
trary to our experience. It was precisely
on the same principle that a King of Siam
is recorded to have reasoned with an Eng-
lish traveller. He was delighted with the


wrought in the land of Egypt in the sight
of Pharaoh and his magicians were de-
signed to give a divine attestation to the
messenger and his message. And, in like
manner, God by His prophet Isaiah chal-
lenges the gods of the heathen to prove
their divinity by the prediction of things
to come. Produce your cause, saith the
Lord let them bring them forth
description the stranger gave of his distant
country until he happened to tell him that
in winter the water in England became so
hard that people could walk upon it. This
testimony was contrary to the experience
of the Indian King, who thereupon put an
end to the interview and dismissed his
visitor as an impostor.
There still remains the important ques-
tion regarding the evidential value of
miracles in the Christian revelation. Many
have placed this value too high as not a
few also have rated it too low. Miracles
should never be taken apart from the con-
nection in which they originally stood.
They are like seals to a document, of great
value so long as they remain on the paper,
for they authenticate its contents ; but of
very little worth if torn away and esti-
mated in connection with nothing but
themselves. The miracles thus have great
value when considered as credentials of a
divinely commissioned messenger. So Christ
appealed to them in these words, “ The
works that I do they testify of me.” As
He wrought them by His own power,
merely speaking the word and the result
followed, they were, morever, proofs of His
divine nature. They were justly regarded,
then, as laying men under an obligation to
believe and obey Him. These are His own
words, “ Believe me for the very works’
sake.” And so of His own city Capernaum,
in which most of His mighty works were
done, it was foretold that it would be more
tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the
Day of Judgment than for that impenitent
city. It is to be feared that many of the
present generation will not escape a similar
condemnation. There are no facts of the an-
cient world so well attested as the miracles
of Christ; and yet many turn awav from
them declaring that they are either impos-
sible or cannot be proved if ever they did
happen. It is a false philosophy that is
beguiling these men and leading them to
their ruin.—“ My soul come not thou
unto their secret; mine honour be not thou
united unto them.”
P KOPHECY AND ITS FULFILMENT.
The evidence for a supernatural revela-
tion arising from prophecy is very similar
to the argument from miracles. The two
modes of proof are very closely connected
at bottom, for the one as well as the other
must proceed from a divine influence. The
miracle is a work of power and is | compe-
tent only to the Almighty; the other is a
prediction of the future of so transcendent
a kind that it can be ascribed to none
but the Omniscient. Hence both are ap-
pealed to for the very same purpose in the
Word of God. The miracles which Moses
and shew us what shall happen. . . .
Shew the things that are to come hereafter,
that we may know that ye are gods.”
The obscurity of language in which the
prophecies are usually expressed has often
been censured by unbelievers. But had
the prophecies been as clearly expressed as
matters of history are, it is evident that the
whole purpose would have been frustrated.
In common with other parts of revelation
prophecy was designed to stimulate and
exercise faith ; but it is never the pur-
pose of God to compel faith by making
evidence so overpowering that it would be
impossible to disbelieve or deny it. Such
a proceeding would be at variance with
that moral character of His government
of which we are the subjects. There is light
enough,” said the great Pascal, for those
that love the light, and darkness enough for
those that love the darkness.” We are to
remember, too, that a particular prophecy
was designed to apply to different events
very unlike one another in time and cir-
cumstances ; whilst the language in which
the prediction found expression was in-
tended to cover both events. It is evident
that in such a case perfectly definite lan-
guage was not admissible, for the more


closely it was made to agree with the for-
mer fulfilment, by so much the less would
it apply to the latter. This double sense
of prophecy will require a more precise
statement farther on; in the meantime it is
referred to only as it necessarily affects the
greater or less definiteness of prophetic
language. Once more, bad the prediction
of things to come been expressed in lan-
guage as clear as the facts of history are re-
lated, unprincipled men would have has-
tened or frustrated their accomplishment.
With all the obscurity that is now com-
plained of, we do find that something of
this kind has been attempted, or at least
parties have been blamed for attempting it.
In the Old Testament we find the pro-
phecies concerning the Messiah so indis-
tinct to the unbelieving mind that the
Jewish nation, as a whole, failed to apply
them to Jesus Christ. But notwithstand-
ing this indisputable fact, one notable in-
fidel, the talented Lord Bolingbroke, had
the hardihood to affirm that Christ, whom
he regarded as an impostor, purposely con-
formed himself in the circumstances of his
life and death to the Old Testament pro-
phecies of the Messiah that his followers
might be able to appeal to them while they
proclaimed to all nations that Jesus was the
Messiah! What, then, would have been
the case with the prophecies gene-
rally, had they been as clearly ex-
pressed as matters of history ? Many
unscrupulous men would have evaded
their fulfilment or have sought to
bring it to pass in their own persons ; for
it must never be forgotten that the truth of
prophecy still leaves men free agents. It
was necessary, therefore, that the language
of prophecy should at first be obscure,
then gradually be explained by circum-
stances as its accomplishment drew near,
and be fully understood only when the
fulfilment was completely realised.
In regard to the double sense of pro-
phecy, which has been so much misunder-
stood, it is necessary to make a few further
remarks. Often when a prediction was
made, two or more distant events seem to
have been present to the prophet’s eye and
the words which he was called to utter
were designed to apply in part to either and
to find their complete fulfilment in both.
After Noah came forth from the Ark he
uttered a remarkable prophecy in which
he said, “ God shall enlarge Japheth and
he shall dwell in the tents of Shem,” —a
prophecy which was, of course, to be ful-
filled in the descendants of these patri-
archs. We find, first, a political fulfil-
ment when the offspring of Japheth—the
Greeks, Homans, and Tartars—success-
fully invaded the territories of the descen-
dants of Shem and remained there ;
secondly, a commercial fulfilment when
the nations of western Europe established
their trading settlements in India which
they continue to hold till the present day ;
thirdly, a religious fulfilment, inasmuch as
the church to which most of the Japhetic
nations belong had its rise with the children
of Shem ; the church in conformity with
ancient usage being spoken of under the
symbol of a tent or tabernacle which has
been so enlarged as to afford room for the
families of Japheth as well as of Shem.
The seventy-second psalm also furnishes a
striking instance of the double sense of
prophecy. It was composed by David,
and is entitled A psalm for Solomon.”
To a superficial reader it might seem to end
withhimandtohavebeendesigned merely to
describe his prosperous and peaceful reign.
But when we look below the surface we
see plainly that the language is such as
cannot be fully realized in any mortal
man. And so there is suggested the
thought, which is elsewhere abundantly
confirmed, that the psalm was meant to
have a typical fulfilment in Solomon, and
a real one in the “ Greater than Solomon,”
the Lord Jesus Christ. So, too, the pre-
diction of the destruction of Jerusalem was
intended also to be a prophecy of the end
of the world. The two events are blended
together and the language applies some-
times to the one and sometimes to the
other. Until we recognize this truth, it is
but labouring in the fire to attempt an
interpretation of the 24th chapter of
Matthew in which the prophecy is con-
tained. Now this double sense or this
gradual process of accomplishment, which
is so evident in many predictions gives to
prophecy that peculiar effect which is,
perhaps, best explained by the terra per-
spective. Every one must have noticed


how a long straight road lined on both
sides with trees comes to a close much
sooner in appearance that it does in
reality. The traveller imagines the trees
to converge only a short distance a-head,
but as he advances, the meeting-point
keeps receding, and, contrary to expecta-
tion, he requires to travel, perhaps for
miles before he reaches the end of the
road. Such, too, has been the effect of
prophecy on men’s minds. They have
been subjected to an allusion similar to
perspective, and have been ever imagining
the great lines to converge before their
time, and have persisted in dating the end
of the world too soon. Nevertheless, the
truth of prophecy stands sure and the end
will come in God’s appointed time. If
men would only understand that the
design of prophecy is not to make them
prophets, but rather to stir up the minds
of the faithful to a pious watchfulness for
the great events of Providence, they would
then find this important study as profit-
able as it is delightful.
The great writers on this subject have
laid down three tests which sceptics have
a right to apply to every prediction as
compared with its fulfilment. Ist. “ The
known promulgation of the prophecy
prior to the event." 2nd. “ The clear and
palpable fulfilment of it,’’ and 3rd.
The nature of the event itself, if when
the prediction of it was given, it lay
remote from human view, and was such as
could not be foreseen by any supposable
effort of reason, or be deduced upon
principles of calculation derived from
probability and experience.’’
As to the first, Have we sufficient reason
to believe that the books of Scripture
were written before the destruction of
these cities and nations which they pro-
fess to predict P It is known, for one
thing, that the Bible is the most ancient of
all books. We can hardly have a better
witness in a case of this kind than language
itself. These ancient Scriptures were
written in the Hebrew language for this
reason evidently that it was then the
language of the people at the time of the
writing. But every one knows that this
ceased to be the case after the Babylonish
Captivity, for the people then began to
speak the language of their conquerors,
and continued to do so until they were
scattered over the world. Now the captivity
of the Ten Tribes took place, 721 years
b c., and Jerusalem was destroyed and
its inhabitants carried captive by Nebucha-
dnezzar, 588 n.c., at both of which dates
the prophecies were just beginning to be
fulfilled. The testimony of ancient trans-
lations of the Bible all point the same way.
We have one version of the whole of the
Scriptures into G-reek, which is known for
certain to have been made in Egypt
nearly 300 years b.c. In this translation
commonly called the Septuagint, we have
the same prophecies precisely as in the
original Hebrew Bible. With regard to
the first Five Books of Moses, called the
Pentateuch, we have the advantage of a
duplicate copy, the Samaritan Pentateuch,
which was in the hands of the most viru-
lent enemies of the Jews. There is good
reason to believe that the written Penta-
teuch was in existence, if not before the
revolt of the ten tribes under Jeroboam,
at any rate previously to the Assyrian
captivity of these tribes. It need only
be further added under this head, that the
recent discoveries at Nineveh and Babylon
have abundantly proved that these
cities perished long after the known publi-
cation of the books which contained their
predicted overthrow.
The second test of prophecy, already
mentioned, desiderates “ the clear and
palpable fulfilment of the prediction.”
No one has attempted to throw discredit
on the Scripture prophecies for any want
of correspondence between the prophecy
and its accomplishment. The harmony is
everywhere incontestible. No better hom-
age could be rendered to this correspon-
dence than the involuntary testimony of
the heathen Porphyry. The harmony
between the predictions of Daniel and
their fulfilment to the minutest particulars
was so manifest that this acute infidel was
driven to the conclusion of denying its
prophetic character altogether. He could
account for the Book of Daniel only on the
assumption that it was written after the
accomplishment of those events which it
professed to predict.
The third test requires the events pre-


dieted to be of such a cuaracter as to lie
beyond the forecast of unaided human
sagacity. And truly these with which we
are now dealing were of such a kind. The
distance in time, the complication of events,
and the minuteness of detail, placed the
things predicted far beyond the keenest
foresight. If we can suppose it possible
for a sagacious mind to have foretold
ages before, the appearance of a divine
teacher in Israel who would be put to
death by his unbelieving generation, can
we conceive the same sagacity to have
predicted that he would be born at Beth-
lehem ; that he would be brought up at
Nazareth; that he would exercise his
ministry in Galilee, and that he would
be put to death at Jerusalem ? The
truth is, that the fulfilment of the prophe-
cies was in most cases to be brought
about by means and instrumentalities
which had no existence at the time of the
prediction and doubtless were not dreamed
of by the prophet himself.
After these preliminary remarks we
must now proceed to take up some of the
prophecies in detail and compare, with
some minuteness, the prediction with the
fulfilment. Formerly interpreters thought
themselves happy in being able to appeal
for proof to the treatise of a well-known
sceptic—“Yolney’s Enins of Ancient Em-
pires ” —a kind of testimony which could
not be easily disputed. But in more recent
times the works of travel have become so
abundant as to throw into the shade nearly
all the older narratives. The gain to
the interpretation of prophecy has been
immense. Every fresh discovery tends to
establish the truth of prophecy and leave
unbelief a fit subject for ridicule.
We shall commence with the prophecy
against Tyre. It has already been stated
that the fulfilment of the prediction was
usually brought about through causes
which did not then exist. It was especi-
ally so with Tyre, This was the great
commercial city of the ancient world. It
owed its prominence to the advantages of
its situation. But, notwithstanding its
prosperity and favourable circumstances,
the prophet foretold its complete over-
throw and perpetual desolation. Tyre re-
ceived its real death-blow by the founding
of Alexandria which took away its trade
and necessarily made its ruin perpetual.
But Alexander founded his city 250 years
after the prophet uttered his prediction ;
and what human sagacity could have fore-
told the career of Alexander, much less the
founding of his city in that particular spot.
In the prophecies of Ezekiel we find the
following predictions: “ Thus saith the
Lord God, behold I am against thee, O
Tyrus, and will cause many nations to
come up against thee, as the sea causeth
her waves to come up. And they shall de-
stroy the walls of Tyrus and break down
her towers; and I will scrape her dust from
her, and make her like the top of a rock.
It shall be a place for the spreading of nets
in the midst of the sea, for I have spoken
it saith the Lord.” Such was the prophecy,
let us now look to the fulfilment. Tyre
was visited by the traveller Mandeville,
in the first half of the fourteenth century,
and he characterised it as being jealously
guarded by the Saracens who had de-
stroyed a great part of the city they had
found there. About the year 1610, it was
visited by Sandys, who said of it: “ But
this once famous Tyre is now no other
than a heap of ruins,-—yet they have a
reverent aspect, and do instruct the pensive
beholder with their exemplary frailty. It
hath two harbours, that in the north side
the fairest and best throughout the Levant
(which the corsairs enter at pleasure); the
other is choked with the decays of the city.”
Towards the close of the same century in
1697, Maundrell says of it: “ On the north
side it has an old Turkish castle, besides
which there is nothing here but a mere
Babel of broken walls, pillars, vaults, &c.,
there being not so much as an entire house
left. Its present inhabitants are only a
few poor wretches that harbour in vaults
and subsist on fishing.” A Swedish natural-
ist visited the place in 1751 and thus de-
scribes it: “ Tyre now can scarcely be
called a miserable village though
it was formerly the Queen of the
sea. Here are about ten inhabitants,
Turks and Christians, who live by
fishing.” “No traveller,” says one
who was there, “ can visit this city
without being completely convinced
that net a single word which the


Lord hath said concerning Tyre
has fallen to the ground.” “ Even of the
more modern Tyre of the middle ages what
has become of her double and triple walls,
her lofty towers, her largo and massive
mansions P Not only have these structures
been overthrown, but their very materials
have in great measure disappeared. Tyre
has been used as a quarry for the repair of
the fortifications of Akka and the construc-
tion of the modern houses of Beyrout; her
stately columns, whose size and material
place them beyond the reach of modern
architects, have been left where they were
cast in the midst of the water ? The sites
once occupied by her palaces have been
made bare as the top of a rock ; the fisher-
men spread their nets upon the prostrate
ruins of her ramparts, her harbours are
filled up by drifting sand, her commerce
and her wealth have long deserted her ;
‘ what city is like unto Tyrus, like the de-
serted in the midst of the sea P’ ”
We shall take next the prophecies con-
cerning Nineveh, the most renowned city
of its time. Its walls are said by secular
historians to have been a hundred feet in
height, sixty miles in compass, and to have
been defended by fifteen hundred towers
two hundred feet high. But notwith-
standing those prodigious defences it was
predicted by the prophet Nahum that the
great city would be completely and finally
overthrown. The manner of its destruc-
tion was expressly mentioned, “ The gates
of the river,” said he, “ shall be opened
and the palace shall be dissolved.”
“ Nineveh of old, like a pool of water with
an overflowing flood, he will make an utter
end of the place thereof.’’ Now it is a re-
markable fact that a heathen historian,
describing its capture and destruction, re-
peatedly makes mention of an ancient pre-
diction concerning it. The King of
Assyria, it is related, after the defeat of
his army, confided in an old prophecy that
Nineveh could not be taken unless the
river Tigris, on which it was built, should
become its enemy ; that after an ineffec-
tual siege of two years, the liver, swollen
with long continued rain, inundated part
of the city and threw down the wall for
the space of twenty furlongs ; and that the
king, deeming the prediction to be
accomplished, despaired of his safety
and erected an immense funeral,'pile
on which he leaped with his wealth, and
thus himself, his household, and palace
were consumed. According to the testi-
mony of the historian, the prediction of
Nahum was literally fulfilled. The pro-
phet further described the state of the de-
fenders of Nineveh in the very crisis of
the siege, “ While they be folded together
as thorns, and while they are drunken to-
gether as drunkards, they shall be de-
voured as stubble fully dry.” The same
historian already quoted, relates that the
King of Assyria, elated with his former
victories, had abandoned himself to scan-
dalous inaction ; had appointed a time of
festivity and supplied his soldiers with
abundance of wine, and that the general of
the enemy having learned from deserters
their negligence and drunkenness, attacked
the Assyrian army while the whole of
them were fearlessly giving way to indul-
gence, and having destroyed the greater
part of them drove the rest into the city.
These predictions, so literally realised, were
uttered 115 years before the destruction of
the city by the Medes and Babylonians, and
at a time when there was no human probabi-
lity of the event taking place. But the pro-
phet also described the future state of the
city for all time, “ The Lord,’’ said he,
“ will make an utter end of the place there-
of. Affliction shall not rise up the second
time. She is empty and void and waste.
The Lord will stretch out his hand against
the north, and destroy Assyria, and will
make Nineveh a desolation, a place for
beasts to lie down in.’’ Nineveh is be-
lieved to have been taken in the year 606
b.c., and soon afterwards to have become a
complete ruin as described by the prophet.
In the year 401 Xenophon encamped with
his 10,boo G-reeks on, or very near, its
site, seemingly unaware that a great city
had once stood there ; and in 333 Alex-
ander led his army within three miles of
its buried ruins quite unconscious that he
was treading on historic ground. In the
second century of the Christian era Lucian,
a native of Mesopotamia, testified that
Nineveh had utterly perished, that there
was no vestige of it remaining, and that
none could tell where it had stood. In the


last century the historian Gibbon could
speak in the following terms of the site of
the ancient city when describing one of the
Roman battlefields. “ Eastward of the
Tigris, at the end of the bridge of Mosul,
the great city of Nineveh had formerly
been erected ; the city and even the ruins
of the city had long since disappeared ; the
vacant space afforded a spacious field for
the operations of the two armies.” So
vile was Nineveh that the Lord declared
he would turn the site of the city into its
grave. This threatening has literally been
accomplished, and for more than twenty-
five centuries this first mistress of the an-
cient world has been entombed in her own
sepulchre. But now at last the mighty
city has been disinterred, and the magni-
tude of her ruins has been the wonder of
our age. So completely and so hopelessly
had the site of Nineveh been lost that its
discovery was made only by the sinking of
a well which happened to bottom upon the
ruins. From that day to this discoveries
have continued to be made of so gigantic a
character as well-nigh to surpass human
credence. It has now been proved to have
been truly a city of palaces, such as might
have been expected in the mistress of the
ancient world. And as former centuries
have fully proved the truth of the prophet
Nahum who predicted that it would be a
perpetual desolation ; so the discoveries of
the present age have abundantly confirmed
the description of the prophet Jonah who
declared it to be “ a great city wherein
were more than six score thousand persons
that could not discern between their right
hand and their left.”
Let us take next the case of Babylon.
Of all the cities in the ancient world there
was none that could be compared to Baby-
lon in the strength of its defences. All
that art and labour could accomplish as a
bulwark against an assailing foe was real-
ised here. The walls of Babylon were rec-
koned among the seven wonders of the
world, and are said to have looked more
like the bulwarks of nature than the work-
manship of man. And yet, while the
mighty city stood decked like a queen in
her peerless glory and, as it appears, 160
years before the foot of an enemy had
entered it, the voice of prophecy pronounced
its doom. The following passage from
Isaiah is as clear and precise in its details
as it is majestic in style—“ The burden of
Babylon which Isaiah, the son of Amoz,
did see —The noise of a multitude in the
mountains, like as of a great people ; a tu-
multuous noise of the kingdoms of nations
gathered together; the Lord of Hosts
mustereth the hosts of the battle. They
come from a far country from the end of
heaven, even the Lord and the weapons of
his indignation to destroy the whole land.
Behold I will stir up the Medes against
them that shall not regard silver, and as
for gold they shall not delight in it. Their
bows also shall dash the young men to
pieces, and they shall have no pity on the
fruit of the womb; their eye shall not
spare children, and Babylon the glory of
kingdoms, the beauty of Chaldee’s excel-
lency, shall be as when God overthrew
Sodom and Gomorrah. It shall never be
inhabited, neither shall it be dwelt in from
generation to generation; neither shall the
Arabian pitch tent there; neither shall
the shepherds make their folds there ; but
wild beasts of the desert shall lie there ;
and their houses shall be full of doleful
creatures ; and owls shall dwell there and
satyrs shall dance there; and wild beasts
of the islands shall cry in their desolate
houses, and dragons in their pleasant
palaces. Thou shalt take up this proverb
against the king of Babylon and say,—
How hath the oppressor ceased! the
golden city ceased ! Thy pomp is brought
down to the grave and the noise of thy
viols ; the worm is spread under thee, and
the worms cover thee. Thou shalt be
brought down to hell to the sides of the
pit. Thou art cast out of thy grave like an
abominable branch. I will cut off from
Babylon the name, and the remnant, and
the son, and the nephew, saith the Lord.
I also will make it a possession for the
bitttern, and pools of water, and I will
sweep it with the besom of destruction,
saith the Lord of Hosts.” Such is the
prophecy. Let us now look to its fulfil-
ment. Unlike Nineveh the ruin of Baby-
lon was to be gradual and every step in its
declension the fulfilment of a prophecy.
The city was captured in the y r ear 538 by
Cyrus, King of the Medes and Persians, as


had been predicted by Isaiah 170 years
before. Babylon then ceased to be a
metropolis and its decay speedily followed.
Its defences were laid in ruins. The
people rebelled several times against their
foreign masters ; but each rebellion left
them weaker than before. Alexander con-
templated the re-construction of the city in
its former grandeur ; but the spirit of pro-
phecy was against him and death called
him away before his work was well begun.
In the year 293 b.c. the finishing blow was
given to Babylon by the founding of the
city of Seleucia which drew away the popu-
lation and left it a desolation, for even the
houses of the new city were built with the
materials of ancient Babylon. So literally
has the beauty of Chaldee’s excellency be-
come a heap of ruins. For ages afterwards
the ruined city was the quarry from which
the neighbouring cities were built. Isaiah
predicted that no man should dwell there,
and history bears witness to the fact that
for many ages there has not been a single
inhabitant in ancient Babylon. In the
ruins of most ancient cities, however di-
lapidated they may be, it is usual for some
of the wandering sons of the desert to take
up their abode there, at least for a tem-
porary period, and their mouldering ruins
are commonly resorted to as offering con-
venient shelter for the shepherd and his
dock. But Isaiah, who lived 700 years
before Christ, declared the case of Baby-
lon would be an exception to this common
practice. This may well be called a crucial
experiment in the matter of prophecy. No
sane man depending on his sagacious fore-
sight would have ventured on so precise a
statement which was to find its confirma-
tion thousands of years after he
had gone to his grave. Yet the prophet
boldly predicted that the Arabian would
not pitch his tent there, neither would the
shepherds make their folds there. The
prophecy, however, turns out to be a literal
fact. The inhabitants of the country be-
lieve the site of ancient Babylon to be
haunted by by evil spirits, and they shun
it as they would a pestilence. No con-
sideration will prevail with the
Arabian to pitch his tent or the shep-
herd to make his fold there. Its desola-
tion was further depicted by Isaiah when
he declared it would be made “ a posses-
sion for the bittern and pools of water.”
The bittern is a bird which belongs to the
class called waders and is, therefore, an
inhabitant of marshy places. Its presence
would be sufficient proof that Chaldee’s
excellency had become pools of water.
But the bittern is never found near the
habitations of man. Its dwelling is al-
ways remote from human settlements and
here again the habits of this bird shew
how completely the site of Babylon has
been deserted by mankind. A short
quotation from a modern traveller will
prove that the words of the prophet have
here, also, been literally fulfilled. Capt.
Keppel, who visited the ruins of Babylon
in the year 1824, thus describes the scene,
—“ As far as the eye could reach, the
horizon presented a broken line of mounds,
the whole of this place was a desert flat,
the only vegetation was a small prickly
shrub thinly scattered over the plain and
some patches of grass where the water had
lodged in pools occupied by immense fiocTcs
of bitterns.” So literally has the pro-
phecy of Isaiah been fulfilled respecting
devoted Babylon, that it should be swept
with the besom of destruction, that it
should be made a possession for the bittern
and pools of water.”
Had space permitted we might have con-
tinued at great length to show how other
prophecies of Scripture have been literally
fulfilled or are in the course of being so.
But the foregoing examples must suffice.
They are sufficient to vindicate this great
argument and to prove the value of pro-
phecy as an evidence of revelation. Pro-
phecy is especially valuable for the later
ages of Christianity as miracles were for
the earlier. As time runs on a kind of
inverse ratio has been fixed between the
values of miracles and prophecy. It is
said that miracles gradually lose their evi-
dential value in the lapse of ages ; whereas
prophecy, continually increasing in its ful-
filment, is ever accumulating greater force
and evidence. The statement is scarcely
correct in respect of miracles for when an
event once becomes a fact it always re-
mains so, and time can never destroy its
certainty. At the same time distance of
any kind causes an event to have less im-


pressiveness for the mind than it would
have if observed at the present moment;
just as material objects seem to grow
smaller when, like mountains, they are left
behind us in travel. There can be no
doubt that the miracles for this reason
have lost much of their force for these
latter days, although we must remember
that this is not the fault of the miracles,
but our infirmity. In regard to prophecy,
however, the case stands quite different.
Every century is adding to the roll of ful-
filled prophecies and as time runs on the
evidence from this source is continually in-
creasing. Let us value this testimony,
then, for it is precious. It proves the
operation of the Almighty both in revela-
tion and providence. And this assurance
may w r ell keep them in perfect peace
whose mind is stayed upon the Lord and
who put their trust in Him.
The Bible in the Fires or Criticism :
A Bush Burning but not Consumed.
Part First, —The Pentateuch.
A spirit of rational inquiry has the
sanction of Scripture as well as of common
sense. It was an inspired Apostle who
laid down the rule, “ Prove all things;
hold fast that which is good.” In the pre-
sent age it is manifest that the first half is
more popular than the second, for men are
far more willing to question every opinion
than to stand by that which is true at all
hazards. This spirit of insatiable inquiry
began with the revival of letters and has
rapidly increased till the present time. At
the beginning, and subsequently for a
considerable period, it confined itself to
secular subjects; but more recently it
broke in like a flood upon the domain of
sacred literature. Far be it from us to in-
terdict from the Scriptures any exercise of
honest investigation if only it is legiti-
mately applied ; but we cannot concede to
irreverent critics the principle that the
Bible is to be treated precisely as any other
book. The demand commonly made is
that it is to be handled in the school of
criticism just in the same way as other
literary works. Such a concession cannot
be made simply for this reason that the
Bible is like no other book. On its own
part it claims to have God for its Author,
who infallibly guided the sacred writers
into all truth; and it declares the in-
fluence of the Holy Spirit to be
necessary to understand its deep
spiritual meaning. And, further, the
history of the Bible is of a character
sufficiently extraordinary to substantiate
this claim. It is absurd to say that the
Bible is like any other book. As a matter
of fact it stand immeasurably above all
competitors and forms a genus by itself.
It has stood the test of time as none else
ever did. No other book has been trans-
lated into a tithe of the number of
languages, or has reached the hun-
dredth part of its circulation. Few
other books can be read with pleasure a
second or a third time, but, as Hr.
Chalmers well observed, if a man has read
the Bible a thousand times he will still
find it fresh and profitable for further
perusal. Most publications are ephemeral
in their effect, and the best of them only
enjoy a temporary popularity, but
the Bible keeps a permanent hold
of the heart and conscience of the
civilised portion of mankind in all
countries. These are surely good rea-
sons for regarding the Bible as an ex-
ceptional book and claiming for it an ex-
ceptional treatment, if its proper meaning
and purposes are to be clearly ascertained.
Modern critics may repudiate this demand
and insist on handling the Sacred Scrip-
tures as they would do any other work ;
but an ancient saint who knew far better
did not forget to pray: “Open thou mine
ejes that I may behold wondrous things
out of thy law.”
The modern destructive criticism com-
menced its attacks with the opening books
of the Old Testament commonly called the
Five Books of Moses or the Pentateuch —
for they originally formed but one roll or
volume. The unity of this work will be
readily seen from the following summary
of its contents as given by Keil:—“Genesis
relates the preparations for the theocracy.
Starting from the creation, in the first half
of the book (Ch. I-XI, 25) we are informed
of the primitive condition of the earth and


man, of the fall, of the early patriarchs
till the flood, then of the earth being
peopled by the descendants of Noah, and of
their being divided into various nations ;
and of the patriarchal genealogy from
Shem to Abraham. The other half
(ch. xi, 26,) begins with an account of
Abraham’s kindred, of his call to be the
father of the covenant people and the
depositary of the revelation of grace ; and
then it relates how he and his decendants
were guided in Canaan until their migra-
tion into Egypt, and the death of Jacob
and Joseph.—The three middle books
give the history of the foundation of the
theocracy, and of the legislation for it in
uninterrupted connection. —The second
book, Exodus, relates how Israel was
brought out of the bondage of Egypt, was
led to Sinai, and was brought completely
into covenant by being solemnly ac-
cepted as God’s people by having the
fundamental laws and rites of this covenant
promulgated, and of having the tabernacle
erected. —The third, Leviticus, contains
the laws relating to offerings, purifications,
sacred seasons, and various offences irre-
concilable with the destination of Israel
to be God’s holy people.—The fourth,
Numbers, gives the history of the departure
from Sinai, and of the march through the
wilderness, from the second year of the
Exodus to the beginning of the fortieth;
and the principal events of this period,
especially the repeated revolts of the people,
which led to the rejection of that refractory
generation, and the conquest and the pos-
session of the territory East of Jordan,
also the laws and ordinances published
during this interval of time. —The fifth
book, Deuteronomy, contains three ad-
dresses to the Israelites by Moses, in the
plains of Moab, over against Jericho, in the
eleventh month of the forteith year
after the Exodus from Egypt. In these
discourses he exhorts them willingly to obey
tbe Divine Commandments ; and he ex-
pounds, and supplements, and inculcates
the law. It then relates how the book of
the law was solemnly handed over to the
Levites ; and it gives the words which ac-
companied this act, and the song of Moses,
closing with three appendices; the
announcement of his death made to Moses :
his blessing: and the narrative of his
death itself.”
A unity of subject bespeaks a unity of
authorship; and for this reason among
others these five books, a few verses ex-
cepted, passed for the writings of Moses
up to a very recent period. Only here and
there, at rare intervals, was there heard a
dissentient voice. This disagreement with
the common belief was first accentuated in
1753 when Astruc, a French physician,
published certain conjectures on the sub-
ject and propounded a theory which was
incompatible with a unity of authorship.
He called particular attention to a remark-
able passage (Ex. vi. 2,3) where we read—
“ And God spake unto Moses, and said
unto him I am the Lord ; and I appeared
unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob
by the name of God Almighty, but by my
name Jehovah was I not known to them.”
It was presumed that the historian who
wrote these verses would have been careful
as to his use of these two names and would
not have used them promiscuously, previ-
ously to this revelation. A single glance,
however, sufficed to show that this distinc-
tion had not been observed ; and Astruc,
therefore, came to the conclusion that
Moses was not the original author, but
had made use of two previously existing
documents by different writers one of
whom had employed the name Jehovah
and the other Elohim. Nor was this all,
for this remarkable critic imagined that
Moses had availed himself of ten other
documents and that these were arranged in
twelve columns which, through the care-
lessness of transcribers, became promiscu-
ously mingled ; and that to this cause is to
be ascribed the alleged repetitions and dislo-
cations in the narrative. The new theory
slept for a considerable time; but ulti-
mately it commanded the attention and
secured the services of not a few of the
most scholarly critics in Germany, who
were zealously assisted, also, by an En-
glish colonial Bishop, Dr. Colenso. During
this fierce conflict the authorship, the
unity, and integrity of the Penta-
teuch were assailed most unmerci-
fully. The writers were multiplied
without limit according to the fancy
of the critics. In the most arbitrary


and dogmatic fashion it was pointed out
what part of the contents belonged to this
writer, and what to that; and it was shown
where one had left off and another begun
at the same place. “Ewald,” says Eeil,
“ has carried the resolution of the Penta-
teuch into atoms. Not only in the pre-
tended fundamental document, or ‘ Book
of Origins,’ has he traced fragments of
three historical works ; in the remaining
part of the Pentateuch he discovers what
is peculiar to each of the three ‘propheti-
cal narrators of the early history,’ and a
purely artistic elaboration of that history
by the Deuteronomist, together with a
larger interpolation, so that the great
‘ Book of Origins ’ owes its existence to
the contributions of at least eight or nine
different writers.” Another equally emi-
nent author has said : “If anyone wishes to
study the subject in his Hebrew Bible for
himself, perhaps no way will be found at
once so easy and so thorough as to con-
ceive of the existing Pentateuch as if it
were the result of successive deposits or
strata, and to paint them with different
colours on the map. For instance, let him
leave the fundamental document un-
touched with the natural whiteness of the
paper. Let him give a blue tint to the
Jehovist, and a yellow tint to the Yer-
elohist of Yaihinger, or the Younger
Elohist of Davidson ; and let him reserve
the red, which is sorer on the eyes, for the
rarer work of the Redactor. Immediately
the composition of the Pentateuch, accord-
ing to the critical school, will stand out dis-
tinctly before him.” Such, then, is the
unsatisfactory result that has been reached
by the recent school of criticism which
claims to be the most advanced. Before
giving up the old time-honoured view of the
Mosaic authorship we are tempted to ask
by what kind of evidence it has been sup-
planted. One thing is certain that it
does not rest upon a shred of proof outside
of the Pentateuch itself. The process is,
therefore, purely critical and is grounded
on a fancied significance in the use of the
divine names Jehovah and Elohim, on pre-
sumed difference of style, and, in the case
of Colenso, on certain impossibilities in
numbers and figures. The latter objection
should be considered as finally disposed of
by the Bishop’s literary opponents, parti-
cularly by Birks in his “ Exodus of Israel.”
As for the rest, it should not be forgotten
that every conclusion is exceedingly preca-
rious which is drawn from peculiarities of
style which one man thinks he sees but
another cannot, for in any proceeding of
this sort a critic is very apt to import his
own subjectivity and mistake it for some-
thing inherent in the document. Cobbett
has amused his readers by relating how
some literary experts of his day who
imagined themselves great judges of
Shakespeare’s style, were completely
deceived by certain spurious plajs
which were foisted upon them in
the name of the great dramatist
by writers who were their contempories.
Such mistakes are indeed of common oc-
currence. Not so long ago a more remark-
able case of mistaken criticism occurred in
the now famous “Amber Witch ” of Ger-
many. “ Dr. Meinbold, a clergyman in
Usedom,” says the Rev. W. Boyce, “ com-
posed this fiction in 1843, the subject
being a trial for witchcraft, said to have
taken place soon after the Thirty Years
War in 1643. The attractive character of
the bock, and the Royal patronage, se-
cured for it a wide and rapid circulation.
It was everywhere read and praised as an
authentic history. None of the neologi-
cal critics impugned its authenticity. The
Tiibingen reviewers (the Bentleys of Ra-
tionalism) pronounced their infallible sen-
tence, grounded on their unerring skill in
discriminating the character of any compo-
sition, in favour of the book as a genuine
ancient chronicle. When the matter had
gone so far, and the infallible critics had
fairly committed themselves, the author
at once owned the book to be a fiction, got
up and carried through solely by himself.
The critics refused to believe him, assert-
ing that the evidences of its antiquity
were sooner to be believed than his decla-
rations. After this proof of the fallibility
of the higher criticism, how can we rely
upon it in respect to its power of making
out the authorship of a series of books
more than three thousand years old.”
Another error of the critical faculty re-
cently occurred nearer home and is equally
significant, although it happened within


the province of the line arts. A high-class
picture, well known as the roll call of the
Crimean Army by Miss Thompson, having
arrived in Sydney for the Picture Gallery,
a question arose whether the work was
original or a replica, that is to say, a copy
made by the same hand as the original.
Some of our best judges of pictures were
as confident that it was no copy as they
were of their own existence. Put the
question was ultimately settled on the
best possible authority, for the gifted lady-
painter answered that it was a copy of the
original made by her own hand. Such
aberrations of the critical faculty when it
is exercised solely on internal evidence
should make us hesitate in accepting its
sweeping conclusions regarding the author-
ship of the books of Holy Scripture.
Notwithstanding all that has been said to
the contrary by the new school of critics a
very formidable defence may be set up for
the Mosaic authorship of the Pentateuch.
There is no reason to show that Moses
would not or could not have written the
books that have usually passed under his
name. The recent discoveries which
have been made among the ruins
of Nineveh show that, even be-
fore the time of Abraham, four hun-
dred years before Moses, the art of
writing was well known and largely prac-
tised. It is proved also from other sources
that the Egyptians were by this time a
literary people, and the record testifies
that Moses was learned, or educated, in
all the wisdom of the Egyptians. More-
over, the Pentateuch itself is redolent of
Egypt with its manners and customs.
This characteristic is easily explained on
the supposition that these five books were
written by Moses in the wilderness within
forty years after the Exodus ; but is quite
incompatible with the supposition of a
late date when the remembrance of Egypt
must have faded from the minds of "the
people, and of an author who belonged to an
equally remote period. There is nothing,
therefore, to render the idea of the Mosaic
authorship an improbability, but much
that points altogether the other way.
Then, in the second place, full justice
must be done to the fact that these books
in many parts at least, claim to have been
written by Moses ; or to express it from
another point of view the Lord is said to
have commanded Moses to commit, at any
rate the main facts, to writing. The fol-
lowing passages are expressly to the
point. “ And Moses wrote this law, and
delivered it unto the priests the sons of
Levi, which bore the ark of the covenant of
the Lord your God, that it may be there
for a witness against thee.” “ And the
Lord said unto Moses; Write this fora
memorial in a book, and rehearse it in the
ears of Joshua ; for I will utterly put out
the remembrance of Amalek from under
heaven.” “ These are the journeys of tho
children of Israel. . . . And Moses
wrote their goings out according to their
journeys by the commandment of the
Lord.” Such is the testimony of the Pen-
tateuch itself, and yet there are critics of
the day who are trying to persuade us that
not one word of these five books was
written for centuries after Moses had gone
to his grave !
The language in which the Pentateuch
is written, being the oldest and purest
Hebrew, is another powerful argument
against its origin in the later history of the
nation. Ail languages are subject to varia-
tion in the course of ages. They have
their youth, their manhood, and their de-
cay ; a thousand years, it is said, is the
longest lease of life than any spoken lan-
guage has yet enjoyed. Generally speak-
ing, the slate of the language—as rudimen-
tary, developed, or corrupted—in which a
book is written, is a safe guide for the age
in which the author lived, at least the rule
is sufficiently trust-worthy for long periods.
No one acquainted with the works of
Chaucer and Tennyson could doubt for a
moment that the one lived in the 14th and
the other in the 19th century. And if any
eccentric critic, who had gone mad through
too much learning, were to make the two
poets exchange places, their language itself
would triumphantly prove that Tennyson
could not have lived and written in the
14th nor Chaucer in the 19th century.
The test applies to the origin of
the Pentateuch and should of itself decide
the question whether it is the product of
the 10th or of the sth century B.C. The
fact that the English language has gone


on steadily improving, whereas the Hebrew
as certainly degenerated, in no way inter-
feres with the applicability of the linguisti-
cal test.
As another and distinct evidence of the
truth it cannot be too strenuously asserted
that the five books of Moses are neces-
sarily implied in all the succeeding books
of Scripture, which would be, to a large
extent, meaningless without them. “ It
is a historical fact,” says Kurtz, “ better
established than any other in antiquarian
research, that the Pentateuch is the basis
and the necessary preliminary of all Old
Testament history and literature both of
which and with them Christianity as their
fruit and perfection—would resemble a
tree without roots, a river without
a source, or a building in the air, if the
composition of the Pentateuch were rele-
gated to a later period in J ewish history ”
Last, but not least, we have the testi-
mony of history in confirmation of the
same conclusion. Under this head we
must confine our attention to the witness
of Christ and His Apostles which is very
ample and should be absolutely final with
with every consistent Christian. Let the
the following express or incidental testi-
monies be carefully considered. Matt,
xix, 7-8 : —“ They say unto Him (Christ) :
Why did Moses then command to give a
writing of divorcement and to put her
away ? He saith unto them, Moses, be-
cause of the hardness of your hearts suf-
fered you to put away your wives, but
from the beginniug it was not so.” John
i, 17, “ The law was given by Moses,
but grace and truth came by Jesus
Christ.” (i. 45) “Philip findeth Nathanael
and saith unto to him. We have found
Him of Whom Moses in the law, and
the prophets did write, Jesus of Nazareth,
the son of Joseph.” Still stronger are
the following confirmations. (John v.
45-47.) “ Do not think that I will accuse
you unto the Father; there is one that
accuseth you, even Moses in whom you
trust. For had you believed Moses, ye
would have believed me for he wrote of
me. But if you believe not his writings,
how shall ye believe my words ?” (Luke
xxiv. 27.) “ And beginning at Moses and
all the prophets, He expounded unto them
in all the Scriptures the things concerning
Himself.” (Mark xii. 26.) “And as
touching the dead, that they rise ; have ye
not read in the book of Moses how in the
bush God spake unto him, saying, I am
the God of Abraham, the) God of Isaac
and the God of Jacob” (Romans x. 5.)”
“For Moses describeth the righteousness
which of the law, That the man which
doeth these things shall live by them.”
(Acts xv. 21.) “For Moses of old time
hath in every city them that preach him,
being read in the synagogues every
Sabbath day.’’ These testimonies have
proved a terrible stumbling-block to the
critics who deny the Mosaic authorship of
the Pentateuch, and the only way they
have sought to evade them is by asserting
that Christ and His Apostles did not come
into the world to teach the Jews criticism.
This miserable subterfuge has been well
exposed by Herman Witsius who replied :
“It is true, indeed, that Christ and His
Apostles were not teachers of criticism
such as these men claim to be reckoned who
now arrogate to themselves the realms of
learning in every department of knowledge;
nevertheless, they were teachers of the truth
who did not suffer themselves to be im-
posed upon by prevailing ignorance or the
pride of leaders. Most certainly they did
not come into the world to foster common
errors and bolster them up by their autho-
rity, and spread them far and wide not
only by the Jews but also by all other
people connected with them.”
Paet Second— The Levitical Code and
WHEN IT ObIGINATED.
Before the days of irreverent and reck-
less criticism commenced its destructive
career Martin Luther gave it as his opinion
that nothing could be more beautiful than
the Book of Genesis. The great divines of
the land of Luther have by no means fallen
in with the judgment of their leader on the
unity and beauty of the opening book of
Scripture. According as the fancy of each
one has predominated the authorship of
Genesis has been partitioned among two,
three, four, or even a dozen writers. As al-
ready noticed this oldest history of our world
has been compared to a portion of the earth’s


crust where one deposit rises above another
and marks the successive ages that have
elapsed. But the Book of Deuteronomy
has received a yst more unmerciful hand-
ling in the school of modern criticism. It
consists, for the most part, of three long ad-
dresses by Moses just before his death.
His work was now over, but his eye was
not yet dim, nor his natural force abated.
All the circumstances would lead us to ex-
pect that its composition would be marked,
as it really is, by a more flowing and
oratorical style than that in which the
earlier books were delivered. But from
this time-honoured view of the Mosaic
authorship modern criticism in Ger-
many has broken loose and run fran-
tically to the opposite extreme. Moses
died, according to the received chronolgy,
in 1451 8.C., but we are now asked to be-
lieve that the Book of Deuteronomy did
not appear till 625 8.C., a date which falls
within the reign of Josiah. The last book
of the Pentateuch, we are told, was first
brought to light by the following incident
which is related in II Kings xxii, 8, “ And
Hilkiah, the high priest, said unto Shap-
han the scribe, I have found the book of
the law in the house of the Lord.’’ We
read in the Pentateuch that Moses caused
the book of the law to be laid up in the
sanctuary, and it has generally been be-
lieved that the book which Hilkiah found
was the Temple copy that had been
utterly neglected at that time of universal
declension. But the new school of critics
will have it that Deuteronomy was then
written for the first time and palmed upon
a credulous generation. An immense dif-
ficulty was found at once in the fact that
the composition purports to be the work of
Moses who speaks throughout the book.
But this has proved no bar to the new
school of critics. Some have bluntly de-
clared the book to be a forgery or pious
fraud committed by Hilkiah, Jeremiah, or
some unknown person among their con-
temporaries, while others have thought it
safer to characterize it as the effort of a
well-meaning writer, who personated
Moses. The objections which lie against
both theories are simply insuperable. It
is impossible to hold by either explanation
without surrendering the inspiration of
Scripture in every sense whatever. None
but a maniac could believe a good man to
be divinely inspired to tell a lie.
We must now pass on to the considera-
tion of the middle books of the Pentateuch
and particularly that major portion of them
which contains the Levitical Legislation.
Up to a very recent date it has always been
received as an uncontrovertible fact that
the laws relating to worship and sacrifice
were given by God to Moses at Sinai to be
delivered to the people. So little doubt
has been entertained on this point that
they have always been popularly quoted
as the laws of Moses. But a revolutionary
idea was suggested by Yatke in 1835 and
elaborated by Graf in 1864 It bol lly de-
clared that the Levitical Legislation, or the
priestly code, was not known before the
Babylonish captivity, that it was formu-
lated by Ezekiel in Babylon and imposed
upon the nation by Ezra after the return
from captivity. The real question, as it
has been put by Wellhausen, a principal
figure in this newer criticism, stands thus:
“ Is the Mosaic law the starting point for
the history of ancient Israel, or for the
sect which survived the annihilation of the
nation by the Assyrians and Chaldaeans ?”
Let us see, then, what this new doctrine
is as expounded by its originators and de-
fenders. Among its advocates three
names stand out with commanding promi-
nence —Wellhausen, Kuenen, and Profes-
sor .Robertson Smith. Their works are all
marked by great learning and laborious
research; but, with the exception of the
last, I found them very dry and tiresome
reading. Nevertheless, in order to do jus-
tice to their views I have attempted the
following summaries which I will quote
notwithstanding the risk of some repetition
and also some dryness of detail. Well-
hausen maintains, in his Prolegomena, that
the Pentateuch, in its main portions, is
post-exilian. It is compared to successive
strata in a geological section. There are
three principal deposits discernible which,
taken in the order of time, are the Jeho-
vistic history, Deuteronomy, and the
priestly code. The Jehovistic portion has
has been revised by the Elohist, Deutero-
nomy contains later additions, and the
priestly code had the law for its nucleus.


The Jehovistic history is the most ancient,
and Deuteronomy was the book of the law
discovered in the Temple in the 18th year of
Josiah. The priestly code worked into the
Pentateuch as the standard legislative ele-
ment in it, was published and introduced
in the year 444 B.C. by Ezra after he was
joined by Nehemiah. Ezekiel was the
mediating factor between Deuteronomy and
the priestly code. The state of things was
a hierocracy rather than a theocracy. As
fully completed it appeared in a purely
ecclesiastical form wholly independent of
the State, The only time in the history
of the nation when such a constitution
could possibly have been formed was the
period which succeeded the return from
captivity when they were under the
dominion of the Persians, and were yet
free in their religious affairs. The hiero-
cracy was idealised and then projected into
the remote past. For this reason the
Tabernacle in the wilderness must not be
regarded as the prototype of the Temple,
but its copy. Dp to the building of the
Temple it was lawful to sacrifice in all
places; but the practice afterwards came to
be 'regarded with disfavour, in the inte-
rests of centralisation, and was expressly
prohibited by the reformation of Josiah.
So, too, priesthood belonged originally to
the whole tribe of Levi, indifferently;
but latterly became more and more
limited to the sons of Aaron and the sons
of Zadok. Ezekiel in his 44th chapter
gives a reason far this restriction, and it
may be assumed that the change now took
place. The sacrifices were at first simple
offerings to God on the occasion of a feast.
On a simple anthropomorphic view He
was supposed to partake of the food, and
so the flesh of the earliest sacrifices was
cooked. The doctrine of atonement, it is
alleged, did not appear till after the cap-
tivity. So, too, the annual festivals had
originally a natural basis and were con-
nected with important occasions such as
the harvest. By later developments they
were converted into national memorials and
so lost their primitive significance.
Professor Eobertson Smith, now occupy-
ing the chair of Arabic at Cambridge, has
made his principal contribution to this
novel theory in a scholarly book under the
title of the “ Old Testament in the Jewish
Church.” It was intended for popular use
and is therefore written in a very readable
style. The traditional view of the origin of
the Pentateuch is vigorously assailed as
being inconsistent with the method in
which God dispenses his grace, and also
with the general tenor of prophetic teach-
ing. The fragmentary hypothesis of
Genesis is dwelt upon at some length.
Two Elohists are assumed, but are treated
as practically one for the main purpose of
the history. The creation and the flood
are taken as typical cases. It is shown
especially in regard to the latter, that two
independent narratives can be made out by
arranging the Jehovistic and the Elohistic
sections in parallel columns. It is the
blending of these together that has pro-
duced the confused and obscure history we
now have. A threefold legislation is
recognised and assigned to widely different
periods in the nation’s history. The first
legislation is contained in Exodus
from the xxi-st to the xxiii-rd chapter.
It is a simple and independent sys-
tem of civil and religious polity be-
longing to the first period of the national
history. The second legislation is con-
tained in Deuteronomy. This is positively
asserted to have been the book of the law
which was found in the Temple by Hilkiah
in the 18th year of the reign of Josiah and
then made public for the first time. It
formed the basis of the memorable reforma-
tion of that date. Hitherto it had been law-
ful and customary to worship at the high
places; but these having previously been
associated with Baal, the transition to idol
worship was easy and inevitable. Hence-
forth the worship of the nation was centra-
lised in Jerusalem. The priests who had
officiated at the high places were now
brought to the capital, and had inferior
positions assigned to them in the Temple,
the ritual of which had hitherto been under
the auspices of the king, who also provided
the sacrifices which were irregularly
offered. The third was the Levitical
Legislation. This is alleged to have
grown up by degrees during the century
that intervened between the reformations
of Josiah and Ezra. The reshapement
must have been accomplished in large


measure by Ezekiel during the exile. It
was felt that something more was needed
to put an end to the sins and follies of
the nation which had in such signal man-
ner brought down the wrath of God.
Henceforth the code became more ideal
and abstract which removed it farther
away from the affairs of every-day life.
Ezra, it is contended brought the new
code with him from Babylon. The Levites,
who had been assigned a very inferior
position, do not play a conspicuous part
in the second Temple,
The foregoing summaries will have
given a tolerably correct apprehension of
this latest development of Biblical criti-
cism which usually passes under the name
of Graf’s hypothesis. We are therefore in
a position to consider how it can possibly
reconcile itself with leading facts which are
absolutely indisputable.
In the first place, we may well
ask how the Levitical Legislation could be
called the Law of Moses, if it was the in-
vention of an interested priesthood during
the captivity in Babylon or some time after
it P Or if it be said that this was part of
the trick to ascribe it to Moses, how can we
explain the numerous references to the law,
to public worship, and to sacrifices in the
psalms and the oldest of the prophets P
The Book of Psalms has, from the earliest
times, been arranged into five sections, of
which the first, numbering from one to
forty-one, has been reckoned, on every
moderate estimate, as being exclusively
written by David. Look then at the first
psalm. It is in praise of the godly man
who loves the law and makes it his con-
tinual study. “ Blessed is the man that
walketh not in the counsel of the ungodly,
nor standeth in the way of sinners, nor
sitteth in the seat of the scornful. But
his delight is in the law of the Lord, and in
his law doth he meditate day and
night.” Could all this refer to something
that had no existence except in the fancy
of the psalmist. Turn next to the 19th
psalm and see in what way the godly men
of that age did meditate on the law. “ The
law of the Lord is perfect, converting the
soul; the testimony of the Lord is sure,
making wise the simple. The statutes of
the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart; the
commandment of the Lord is pure en-
lightening the eyes; the fear of the Lord
is clean, enduring for ever; the judgments
of the Lord are true and righteous alto-
gether. More to be desired are they than
gold; yea, than much fine gold ; sweeter
also than honey and the honeycomb.
Moreover by them is thy servant warned
and in keeping of them is great reward."
The first chapter of Isaiah, one of the older
prophets, gives a picture of worship and
sacrifice not as developing into an ideal per-
fection in the future, but as a woeful de-
generation from a high standard of bygone
days, (10-15.) Again let it be noticed
that the Pentateuch, the 'middle books as
well as the first and last, could only have
been written when both the writer and the
people were in close connection with
Egypt. There are oft-occurring allusions
which could have had little force with the
people just returned from Babylon. The
author shows an intimate acquaintance
with Egyptian manners and customs and a
knowledge of the great desert which would
be very natural to Moses; but would be
very improbable to anyone who had re-
turned from the exile of Babylon, and may
well be reckoned an impossibility if a num-
ber of writers were occupied with the Pen-
tateuch as these critics will have us to
believe.
In the second place, the Pentateuch
throughout is written in the purest and
best Hebrew such as it existed in the
earliest period of the nation’s history. The
only trace of foreign words is not from the
language of Babylon, but from that of
Egypt. Graf felt the force of this objec-
tion press so heavily upon him that he
found it necessary to offer some sort of ex-
planation. But the only way he could find
out of the difficulty was to allege that the
post-exilian author, or authors, imitated the
style of the earliest writers in order to con-
ceal the fraud. Nothing surely could b§
more damaging to the theory than such an
attempt to support it.
Another witness to the antiquity of the
law of Moses, as it has been commonly ac-
cepted, is found in the Samaritan Penta-
teuch, which has been mentioned pre-
viously, but may be adverted to more par-
ticularly in the present connection. If


Moses delivered the law to the people as a
nation it must have been known to the Ten
Tribes prior to the revolt under Eehoboam.
But after this schism we can well under-
stand why they would refuse to accept the
later books which were produced in the
Kingdom of Judah. After the deportation of
the Ten Tribes the country was occupied
by a colony, partly Israelite and partly
heathen in composition. It is fair to pre-
sume that they fell heir to the five books of
Moses which must have been in possession
of the Ten Tribes. If this were so it
would give the death blow to the post-
exilian origin of the Levitical Legislation.
This view is vigorously maintained by
Dr. Wilson in the Church Eclectic : —
“ I call attention to what seems to me to
be a controlling fact, thongh I do not re-
member to have seen it, so much as re-
ferred to on either side of the controversy.
The fact to which I refer is the existence
of the Samaritan Pentateuch. I suppose
that every scholar knows of the existence
of this document. Now, when came it into
existence ? Surely not at the time of
Ezra, when most af the writers of the ex-
treme school supposed the Pentateuch to
be written ; for then, as in the times of
our Saviour, the Jews would have no deal-
ings with the Samaritans (see Ezra iv.)
The Samaritans wpuld no more have
received the Scriptures from the Jews at
that time than we would now receive the
Koran from the Mahometans, the new
Bible of the Mormons, or the forged
Decretals of the Eomanists, as a part of our
Bible. Of course, therefore, the Pentate-
uch must have been in existence before
that time, in Samaria at least, if not in
Judea and among the Jews. Nor does
there seem to have been any possibility of
the Samaritans having received it from the
Jews at any time after the separation under
Jeroboam: that is, just at tne close of
Solomon’s reign (b.c. 950.) The Samaritans
not only had a copy of the Pentateuch at
that time, but it must have been old enough
to have secured for itself a reception as the
Word of Grod. The Samaritans did not
dare to reject it, though they did alter it
in some respects, so as to make it less
severe and explicit in condemning just such
things as they were doing. But if it not
onlv existed at that time (b.c. 950) some 400
years before the time when our critics
claim that it was produced, but had at
that early date come into such reverent
estimation as is shown by the use they
made of it, it must have been written by
Moses, or at least in his time and under
his direction. The Samaritans did receive
the Pentateuch, but they did not receive
the Scriptures that were written after the
Separation, and which were received by
the Jews, and are now received by us as
part of the Old Testament Scriptures, such
as the Psalms, the later history books,
and the Prophets. Now we have this copy
of the Pentateuch, and can compare it
with the Hebrew copy from which our
translation is made. And this Samaritan
Pentateuch differs from the Hebrew
scarcely, if at all, more than the different
copies of the early New Testament manu-
scripts, as the Sinaitic and the Alex-
andrian, differ from each other; not enough
to raise the slightest doubt that they all
originated from one source and are copies
of an early copy. As I said I have never
seen this point stated, and I do not see how
it can be answered or evaded.”
If this early origin of the Samaritan Pen-
tateuch be given up there is another pos-
sible occasion afforded somewhat later in
the history. It is upon record that the
Assyrian King Esarhaddon pitying the
ignorance of the new colonists sent back a
Jewish priest to instruct them in religious
knowledge. This was long before the cap-
tivity of Judah commenced and if the
Jewish priest took the Pentateuch with
him to Samaria it is equally fatal to its post-
exilian authorship. There is still a third
view of the origin of this famous Samari-
tan document and there can scarcely be
said to be any more. It makes it co-eval
with the commencement of the schism be-
tween the Jews and the Samaritans which
originated in the refusal to allow them to
take part in the rebuilding of the second
Temple which they surely would not have
desired to do unless already possessed of
the knowledge contained in the five books
of Moses and their directions pertaining to
divine worship. During the reformation
under Nehemiah some of the priests had to
flee to Samaria on account of their mar-


riage with heathen wives, and the last sup-
position that remains is that they carried
with them the Pentateuch, for ever
afterwards the Jews and Samaritans bad
no intercourse with each other. But this
very Pentateuch condemned those mixed
marriages for which they had to leave
Jerusalem and can we suppose they would
have taken with them for use in Samaria
this book which condemned their conduct,
unless they regarded it as having a higher
authority than that of the priests of Jeru-
salem who had become their enemies ? And
further can we conceive of the Samaritans
submitting to its authority unless they be-
lieved it came from God rather than from
man ?
Another argument which bears with
fatal effect against the Babylonian origin of
the five books of Moses is found in the very
peculiar circumstances of the times. This
case has been well put by Bev. W. B.
Boyce in his “ Higher Criticism
“ Within fifty years after the destruction
of the first Temple (B.C. 586), the second
temple began to be rebuilt under Zerub-
babel, 536 8.C., there were then living,
‘ Many of the priests and Levites, and
chiefs of the fathers, who were ancient
men, that had seen the first house,
when the foundation of this house was laid
before their eyes, wept with a loud voice
and many shouted for joy.’ (Ezra iii, 12.)
Surely these ancient men, priests, Levites,
and the chiefs of the fathers, knew tho-
roughly the old Temple service, its whole
ritual, and the general laws of the old
Jewish state; and when Zerubbabel, the
prince of the family of David, and Joshua,
the high priest, began to establish again
the Temple service, and carry out in detail
the Mosaic legislation as to worship, the
priesthood and other matters, they must
have recognised in these re-establishments,
the order and usages of their earlier days
in Jerusalem. The vessels of gold and of
silver (Ezra i, 11) restored by Cyrus for the
use of the Temple, and the reference to
the altar, the burnt sacrifice, money, and
ivory, offered by number according
to the custom as the duty of every
day required, the feast of Taber-
nacles, and all the set feasts of the law in
the third chapter of Ezra, are proofs of the
continuity of the old law of Moses, well-
known and in practical use before the cap-
tivity. So also when the Temple was com-
pleted and dedicated seventeen yeai s
afterwards, the sacrifices were offered, tl e
priests set in their divisions, and the
Levites in their courses, for the service of
God, ‘as it is written in the book of
Moses.’ The passover and the feast of
unleavened bread were also observed (chap,
yi). It is obvious that these Jews, when
in Babylon, had learned to value the law
of Moses contained in the Pentateuch, and
that all these ritual observances must have
been in accordance with that law, the same
law known before the captivity—and the
disobedience to which had been the occa-
sion of their bondage. Hence this law,
studied in Babylon with greater earnest-
ness, was especially dear to the little com-
pany now brought back to the land of their
fathers. Is it possible that under such
circumstances, any one ruler as Ezra, or
any company of priests, could introduce a
new ritual, and a new law different from
what they had read in the law at Babylon,
and recognised by the older returned cap-
tives as that practised by their fathers be-
fore the captivity ? How could any body
of men manage to introduce into the Pen-
tateuch additions which doubled its bulk,
and which totally changed the character of
the Temple service ? And is it possible to
suppose that such alterations would be ac-
cepted without opposition P Ezra was sent
to Jerusalem in 457 8.C., and JNehemiah
followed in 444 B.C, The history of the
administration of these zealous reformers
is in itself a sufficient proof of the impossi-
bility of the introduction of any novelties
in the laws and ceremonial observances,
which had been hitherto received on the
authority of the law of Moses. There was
much in the law which went counter to the
interests and wishes of many of the rulers,
of the priests, and of the influential classes
among the general population. The astrin-
gent carrying out of the law against mar-
riages with the heathen, especially in the
case of priests and rulers ; the sacrifices
required from the wealthier class in the
abandonment of their usurious interest due
to them by the poorer brethren; the com-
pelling one in ten of the population to
build in Jerusalem; the offence given to
influential persons (including the high


priests) by the expulsion of their foreign
friends and relations from their occupancy
of lodgings in the out-chambers of the
Temple ; the enforcement of the law of the
Sabbath—all these reforms, carried out
strictly by Ezra and Nehemiah, naturally
excited enmity and opposition ; and had
there been any ground for the supposition
that the laws or Moses appealed to by Ezra
and Nehemiah in defence of their reforms
were but recent novelties unknown to their
fathers, there would have been a contest
and successful resistance, and the novelties
exposed to ridicule and contempt. But
when Manasseh (the son of Joiada, the
high priest) had married the daughter of
Sanballat, the Horonite, and refused to put
away his wife, yet unable to resist the re-
forming ordinances, fled to Samaria of
which Sanballat was governor (409 8.C.)
he took with him the Pentateuch, the book
which the higher critics think had been so
thoroughly changed by Ezra and Ne-
hemiah."
We must still find room for another short
extract on the same side of the question
from a writer in the “ London Quarterly
Review.” “The theory of the attack,"
says he, “ is one of the wildest and most
improbable kind. It amounts to this, that
at the most solemn time of the national his-
tory, when they had recovered from the
heaviest chastisement ever inflicted upon
them, there was a general conspiracy of the
leaders of Judaism, prophets, and scribes,
and men of God, to palm off upon the
people the most gigantic figment ever con-
ceived. . . . The result was that the
Mosaic legislation, with its Pentateuch,
was invented in the name of God, and
woven around a small thread of early
legends. . . . But here we have a
strange inconsistency in the destructive
hypothesis. Long before these dishonest
removers of the old landmarks, or forgers
of landmarks that never existed, had pur-
sued their secret labours, the way haa been
paved for them by Jeremiah himself, who
is supposed to be mainly responsible for
Deuteronomy and had much to do with the
Book of Kings. So, then, it really appears
that, just before the hand of the Lord was
turned against His people, or, at any rate,
is supposed to have been turned against
them, to send them into captivity, their
Bible and ours was forged and preserved
to be the nucleus of still more forgeries.
It is certainly more difficult to believe this,
than to accept the plain and consistent tra-
ditional account of the 'canon as preserved
by the churches.”


Section 111-CHRIST AKD CHRIS-
TIANITY.
Christ in Relation to Messianic Hopes
and Messianic Functions. — |
The appearance of the Son of God in
1 uman flesh, however marvellous, was not
an event that took the world by surprise.
The better part of the Israelitish people, of
v in rn Simeon may be taken as a type, were
anxiously waiting for the consolation of
Imact ; and almost the whole nation, how r-
evi r wide of the mark in their conceptions,
were enthusiastically expecting one to be
born who was to come, by way of eminence,
as the King of the Jews. Even the heathen
wor!d, as represented by the leading Ro-
man authors, was giving utterance to a
v ague belief that an illustrious personage
was about to appear in the East and obtain
wide-spread dominion over the children of
men. These ideas were not new or had
grown up within one generation. It is uni-
versally admitted that the Messianic hope,
no matter on what grounds it rested, had
been the common possession of the Jewish
nation for at least eight centuries preceding.
In the time of Isaiah this expectation was
cherished with peculiar ardour. One of
the beautiful utterances of this prophet
—“ Behold my servant, whom I uphold,—
mine elect in whom my soul delighteth,”
has recently been turned into a battlefield
on which the old and the new school of
Messianic prophecy have met in conflict.
Formerly it was held that these were the
words of the Father spoken in reference to
His only begotten Son who in the fulness
of time was to appear as man and for man.
A more recent school of theologians, who
look askance at everything which implies
the supernatural, have challenged this ex-
position and characterised it as a gross
misapplication of the text. The servant of
God, they assert, is to be understood in a
collective sense, that it is not to be applied
to any prospective individual, but to the
Jewish nation as a whole, and that the
idea of a personal Messiah was a subse-
quent product of the pious Hebrew mind
weighed down under suffering and yearn-
ing for a deliverer. But if the older
divines erred in applying this text to a
personal Saviour they certainly did so in
excellent company, for the evangelist
Matthew, writing under the guidance of
the inspiring Spirit, does the same thing in
describing Christ’s victory over tlie Phaii-
sees, “ Thatit might be fulfilled which was
spoken by Isaiah the prophet, saying, be-
hold my servant, whom I have chosen, my
beloved in whom my soul is well pleased.”
It being thus proved, on the highest autho-
rity, to be a Messianic prophecy, it is im-
possible to consider it as the first of the
series or standing as an isolated prediction.
On the contrary, it forms one link of the
chain of Christological prophecy which,
with more or less clearness, runs the whole
length of the Old Testament history.
The first and deepest line of prediction
deals with the constitution of the person of
the coming Deliverer. It is incumbent
upon us, therefore, to inquire what these
pre-intimations were, and how they reached
their fulfilment. These promises began
even before our first parents were banished
from Paradise. Hardly was the curse pro-
nounced on the serpent, when God said, “I
will put enmity between thee and the wo-
man; and between thy seed and her seed ;
it shall bruise thy head and thou shall
bruise his heel.” This much was here
made evident that the Saviour would be
born of woman and bo truly human. This
first characteristic was fulfilled when Jesus
was born at Bethlehem, and fully certified
during His after-life when He was faint
and weary, suffered hunger and thirst,
groaned with pain and expired upon the
cross. To Abraham it was announced that
the Saviour would appear among his
descendants as distinguished from the
Gentiles. So the event proved that Christ
was born, as He also lived and died, among
the Jews only. The dying Jacob, filled
with the spirit of prophecy, declared to the
heads of the twelve tribes gathered round
his death-bed that the sceptre should not
depart from Judah nor a law-giver from
between his feet until Shiloh should come
and to him would the gathering of the
people be. The simple meaning seems to be
that the source of government would
remain with the tribe of Judah till the
birth of Christ. It was so pre-eminently in


the time of David and for generations after.
In the times following the captivity the
supremacy predominated with this tribe,
and from its families also the members of
the Sanhedrim were mostly chosen as late
as the appearing of Christ. But soon after,
the sceptre departed to the Eomans, and
the tribe of Judah after the destruction of
Jerusalem became merged and lost in the
indiscriminate mass of the nation. One
more designation of the coming Saviour in
respect of His human nature is given in
connection with David tfie King of Israel.
The promise was that He should be of his
seed according to the flesh. The family of
David became so much reduced in later
times that it was likened to a tree that had
been hewn down. Nevertheless, the pro-
mise was not imagined to fail, but the
Messiah was now spoken of as a branch or
sprout from the root still left in the ground.
In the opening parts of two of the gospels,
pains is taken to show how the promise
made to David, “ The sure mercies of
David,” were literally fulfilled. The
Messiah was to be born in Bethlehem, the
city of David, and Mary, perhaps the most
pious descendant of the man after God’s
own heart, was to be the most highly
favoured among women. But though she
was then living in Nazareth at the opposite
extremity of the country Caesar’s decree
for enrolment brought it about, under the
providence of God, that the Saviour was
born in Bethlehem. The other element in
the constitution of the Messiah’s person
was clearly prefigured to be divine. If
this one should seem to be less frequently
intimated in express terms than the other,
it should by no means be forgotten that in
all the divine appearances made to the Old
Testament Church, it was the second and
not the first person of the Trinity that be-
came manifest ; and usually with some re-
ference to His promised coming in the
flesh. Very commonly it is under the
name of the Angel of the Covenant by
which designation the Lord Jesus is cer-
tainly to be understood. In the one in-
stance, the descent on Sinai, where the un-
discerning mind is most likely to decide for
the first person rather than the second, He
who was manifested is, in the 68th Psalm,
identified by implication with the Lord
Jesus Christ as further interpreted in the
New Testament. But the Messianic pre-
diction is not exhausted when both the
human and the divine side are elucidated
in detail. The combination of the two, or
the God-Man in one person is beautifully
foreshadowed in quite a number of pas-
sages. Jacob, beside the waters of the Jab-
bok, wrestled during the night with a man
whom he seems to have mistaken for an
emissary from the hostile Esau, and dis-
covered only at the breaking of the day
that the combatant was divine, in remem-
brance of which he called the place Peniel,
or the Face of God, and he himself received
the name of Israel because as a prince he
had power with God and prevailed. The
bush that was burned but not consumed
furnished another illustration of the co-ex-
istence of the divine and the human in the
coming Messiah. The frail shrub repre-
sented the human nature "and the fire
which enveloped it the divine, but the lat-
ter did not destroy the former. The bush
burned, but it was not consumed. A third
instance to the same purpose may be found
in the Captain of the Lord’s host who ap-
peared to Joshua under the walls of Jericho.
Mistaken at first for a mere man, the com-
mander of the Israelites asked whether he
was a friend or an enemy ; and was taught
by the answer that in the stranger the
mighty God had appeared to Joshua. Once
more so great an assurance did Isaiah re-
ceive regarding the co-existence of the
divine aud the human in the person of the
Messiah that he was told He would, for
this reason, be called Emmanuel, God
with us.
The next maitter for consideration is the
personal functions which the Old Testa-
ment ascribed to the coming Deliverer.
Foremost among these stood the office of
teacher. He was to be a prophet like unto
Moses, to open the eyes of the mentally
blind, a Light to lighten the Gentiles ; and
the isles were to wait for His law. This
character was abundantly sustained by
Christ after he appeared. One of His
names was the Word of God in a highly
significant sense. Just as the word or
speech is the means of communication
among men, making known to another
person the inmost thoughts of the speaker ;
so Christ the Word of God, reveals the
thoughts, the mind, and the will of the


Father for man’s salvation. In this
character Christ was readily received by
the diffident Nicodemus who could see his
way to nothing else, “We know that thou
art a Teacher come from God.” In such
wise, also was he expected by the Samari-
tan woman who said, “ I know that
Messias corneth, which is called Christ,
when He is come He will tell us all things.”
And in the same capacity also He was
received by her, for she ran into the city
saying “ Come see a man which told me all
things that ever I did, is not this the
Christ P’ A higher character still did the
Old Testament ascribe to the coming
Messiah, when it pointed Him out as a
Mediator between God and Man. Many
in the present day will receive Christ as a
teacher, but nothing more. This is to
overlook much of the most valuable Mes-
sianic instruction of the ancient Scriptures.
All the functions of priesthood are ascribed
to Christ and in such a sense as to super-
sede all other priests in the gospel times.
All of these predictions were accomplished
when He offered Himself in sacrifice and
made intercession for the transgressors.
Inseparably connected with this function
was the lot of suffering. More than any-
thing else has the prediction of suffering
proved to be the stumbling-block of the
Jewish nation. Before Christ’s appearing
the ipost noted of the Babbis interpreted
the fifty-third chapter of Isaiah in the
sense most usually put upon it by orthodox
believers. In the time of Christ the doc-
trine of suffering in connection with the
Messiah seems to have been almost wholly
rejected. In a still later period it was
frankly acknowledged that the famous
chapter in Isaiah and the kindred passages
could not be explained away; but the
Jewish expositors then resorted to the
extraordinary expedient of two Messiahs—
Ben-David, and Ben-Joseph, in one of
whom all the predictions of glory were to
be fulfilled, and in the other all that spoke
of suffering and humiliation. All men who
are free from prejudice and bow to the
teaching of the Old Testament Scriptures
will have no difficulty in reconciling two
things which the Jews have so obstinately
held to be contradictory. It was necessary
that Christ should suffer these things and
enter upon His glory. The kingly character
of the promised Messiah was also graphic-
ally described by the prophets. The 72nd
Psalm stands in the fore-front of its class.
It is a hopeless task to interpret that psalm
of Solomon, only, as some have attempted to
do; although it need not be denied that
prophecy has sometimes a double sense in
which there are both a near and a remote
fulfilment. Solomon being himself a type
of Christ answers in part to the description
of the predicted King of Glory ; but only
to a very small part for the terms that are
used stretch out to infinity. In Christ only
and in His everlasting kingdom can they
be fully realised.
The purposes to be accomplished in the
Messiah and His work were particularly
foretold by the prophet Daniel towards the
close of the 9th chapter. The first was to
put an end to transgression. The expres-
sion properly means to restrain or coerce
evil, to shut it up from overflowing the
world as it had done before. The Jews
vainly believed the law would accomplish
this purpose. But it was quite the oppo-
site : “ The law entered that the offence
might abound.” The more it crossed men’s
evil desires the more was the passion for
transgression aroused, unless grace inter-
vened. It is Christ by His gospel that has
repressed transgression, and it will be
completely ended when His kingdom of
righteousness shall obtain universal sway.
The second purpose was “ to make an end
of sins.” Under the Old Testament there
was a remembrance made of sin every year
by the offering of animal sacrifices which
brought it to mind, but could not take it
away. It is clearly the doctrine of Scrip-
ture that although believers under the Old
Testament obtained through their offerings,
all the benefits of pardon, yet their sins in
themselves remained to be expiated in the
sacrifice of Christ which, in the only true
and proper sense, put an end once and for
ever to those sins. The third purpose, “to
make reconciliation for iniquity,” explains
the grounds of this complete and final
forgiveness of sins. The death of Christ
was of infinite value, the humanity only
suffered, but the divine nature, which was
in union with the human, gave inconceiv-
able efficacy to the suffering. Hence his
death, as it respected sin, was an expiation,
but as it respected God a propitiation. The


fourth purpose was “ to bring in everlast-
ing righteousness.” Such righteousness as
had been obtained by the deeds of the law
was but temporary, and availed only for
certain outward privileges ; but one of the
chief ends of Christ’s appearing was to
provide a righteousness which would abide
for ever, because absolute and perfect.
This righteousness He wrought out in His
life and death, by acting and suffering, and
it is imputed by faith to all believers. The
fifth purpose was “to seal up the vision
and prophecy.” “The law and the pro-
phets were until John.” In Christ they
found their consummation and conclusion,
for the Jews themselves confess that the
voice of prophecy has ever since been silent.
Jesus Christ having been Himself the
spirit of prophecy, and having fulfilled in
His person and work all Messianic predic-
tions, thus sealed up the vision and pro-
phecy, thereby putting an end to the old
dispensation, and introducing the new.
This latter being final, it is usually spoken
of in Scripture as “ the latter days” or
“ the last times.”
It will thus be seen how abundantly the
coming of the Messiah was foretold and it
has previously been noticed how general
was the expectation which prevailed about
the time of His appearing. The pre-inti-
mations were so numerous, so various, and
so particular that one would think serious
misapprehension regarding His person and
work utterly inexcusable. And yet such
appears to have been the rule rather than
the exception. Even the Apostles of the
Lord up to the last hour of their inter-
course with Him seem to have entertained
sadly defective views of His work and mis-
sion to this world. If those who were
most interested in Christ’s first coming
were so far out in their reckoning, the
questie n may well be asked are we sure it
will be wholly different with His second
coming ? In any case there is enough con-
nected with the misapprehension of the
first advent to chasten presumption and
rebuke the spirit of dogmatism which pre-
tends to know the whole truth on this sub-
ject. We shall reach surer ground if we
return to Christ’s first appearing as the
Saviour and ask how He was received.
There is no question but He was embraced
with gladsome welcome by as many as
looked for redemption in Israel. But
it is unhappily true that these were but a
few individuals as compared with the mass
of the nation. The statement of the case
as a whole runs in these sad terms : —“ He
came unto His ow r n and His own received
Him not.” He was rejected by the civil
rulers, by the priesthood, by the Phari-
sees, by the Sadducees, by His own towns-
men of Nazareth, and by the assembled
populace who cried out His blood be upon
us and upon our children. It is a startling
fact that Jesus Christ whom Christendom
has accepted as the long-promised Messiah
was rejected by His own nation and has
been disowned by them till the present
day. Nevertheless this strange and un-
looked for perverseness has been too well
explained to exercise a disquieting in-
fluence on the grounds of our confidence
who have accepted Jesus of Nazareth as
the true Messiah promised unto the fathers.
It will be necessary to indicate only a few
of the causes which brought about the
apostacy of the nation of Israel. The first
and most fundamental one was their un-
spiritual conceptions of Christ and the
Kingdom which He came to establish in
this world. Being more alive to their tem-
poral calamities than to their eternal inte-
rests, they degraded the Messianic hope to
little more than a deliverance from poli-
tical bondage which was to be accom-
plished by one who w'ould be a King
with the pomp and splendour of a court
and at the same time a conqueror who
could cover the field of battle with the
carnage of the enemies of Israel, With
views like these it is manifest that to
them He could be no Messiah who declared
that His Kingdom w 7 as not of this world
and taught as His distinctive doctrine the
forgiveness of injuries, and showed that
the way to overcome an enemy was to feed
him when he was hungry and give him
drink when thirsty. Another cause which
contributed to the Jewish rejection of the
Messiah was his abolition of the ceremonial
law with its rites and ordinances. This
was the proud boast of the Jews who
imagined it would continue for all time to
be the distinguishing badge of their nation.
How sensitive they were on this point and
to what a degree their fanaticism could be
raised by tne least encroachment on their


prejudice, was shown by their stoning
Stephen to death for hinting that Jesus of
Nazareth would change the customs which
Moses had delivered to them. But all this
followed as naturally as the day succeeds
the night. Christ intended Christianity to
be a universal religion ; and as the law of
Moses could never be anything but local in
its operation, it was necessary for this rea-
son, to say nothing of others equally press-
ing, to set it aside in order to make way
for something better. The Jews could not
have both their law and the Messiah. They
had to choose between the two and in their
infatuation they clung to the law and lost
the Gospel. A scond cause which Jed to
this deplorable result was the extension of
Christian privileges to the other nations of
the earth. These Israelites believed that
the God of Abraham would continue to be
the God of the Jews only. They did not
doubt that in the time of the Messiah there
would be an extension of religious privi-
leges to the Gentiles, but not as Gentiles,
for they would first have to submit to the
law of Moses and become to all intents and
purposes Jews like themselves. This pre-
judice was so inveterate that it retained its
hold on the Jewish Christians Jong after
the commencement of Christianity and was
at last driven from their minds only with
the greatest difficulty. In some cases it
probably held its ground till the hour of
death. With the mass of the people, from
first to last, the prejudice was as immov-
able as a rock. They preferred to perish
by themselves rather than be saved with
the Gentiles. In addition to the foregoing
causes they also erred in expecting the
fulfilment of all the prophecies concerning
the Messiah in the commencement of His
Kingdom. As a moral force introduced
into humanity it could reach perfection in
no other way than by slow and gradual, it
might be, by imperceptible degrees. The
Kingdom of heaven upon earth, as shown
in the parable, was to grow like the corn in
the field, first the blade, then the ear, after
that the full corn in the ear. The carnal
Jewish mind had not sufficient patience for
this slow, if steady, progress, and because
all the glowing imagery of the prophets
was not realised at once, they declared that
Jesus of Nazareth could not be the Mes-
siah promised to the fathers and thus was
rejected by Israel as a nation; which casting
off led in the retributive justice of God to
the destruction of their own nationality and
the dispersion of the people over the face
of the whole earth.
It sometimes happens those who
perversely reject the truth are given over
to strong delusion, so that they believe a
lie. This was eminently true of the Jewish
people in their subsequent history. Christ
forewarned them of the coming of many
false Christs who would deceive them.
No prophecy was ever more amply ful-
filled. After the destruction of Jerusalem
onward for some centuries, no fewer than
thirty false Messiahs are reckoned up by
historians. On another occasion Christ
spoke more definitely, as if alluding to one
particular impostor who would exceed all
others in his delusions and their conse-
quences. “ I am come in My Father’s name
and ye receive Me not; if another shall
come in his own name, him ye will receive.”
Our Lord probably alluded to the appear-
ance of the notorious pretender who took
the name of Bar-Cocheba, the Son of a
Star, to connect himself with the famous
prediction uttered by Balaam ; but which
the Jews, smarting under a bitter experi-
ence, willingly changed to Bar-Coziba, the
Son of a Lie. He professed to have been
born on the day of the destruction of
Jerusalem as it had been expected by many
that the true Messiah would then come
into the world. Habbi Akiba, who was
the Gamaliel of his age, oracularly declared
the pretender to be the true Messiah, and
thereafter he was supported with all the
influence the Jewish people could com-
mand. They had at last found a Messiah
who would lead them to battle against
their Homan masters with such results as
a sober mind might have expected. The
contest, though long protracted by the
obstinacy of the subject race, ended in
their complete overthrow and the death of
all the leaders. The last shadow of their
nationality now ceased to exist.
The practical lesson to be gathered from
the study of this whole subject is one
which most intimately concerns our own
eternal welfare. A truly awful warning
stands up before us. Jesus was rejected
by those whom he came to save before all
others. Let us take heed lest we fall after


the same example of unbelief. Here we
are not (o be guided by the rule but by the
exception. We are to be followers, not of the
many, but of the few that waited for the
consolation of Israel, and looked for
redemption in Jerusalem. The offer of
the Messiah as the Saviour from sin and
death is made to all men at this present
time just as it was to the Jewish nation
individually and collectively. Happy is
he who finds the Messiah and becomes His
follower like Andrew, who was one of the
first disciples. He who finds this treasure
is in possession of the pearl of great price,
which yet becomes all the more his own by
the generous endeavour to extend the same
benefits to others. To be a true mis-
sionary, one does not need to proceed to
the ends of the earth and preach to the
heathen. It finds its prototype in Andrew,
who sought out his brother Simon and said
unto him, “We have found the Messiah,
which is being interpreted the Christ.”
This mode of action proceeds on the
principle of the leaven which, beginning
inwardly, works its way outwards. One of
the main reasons for the present lack of
spiritual life is to be found in the low ebb
of missionary zeal. The greatest of our
modern historians of Christianity has made
the suggestive remark that mighty empires
have usually been best maintained through
the same means by which they were
founded, some by commerce and others by
conquest. This principle applies in a very
eminent degree to Christianity. It was
established not by the sword, but by
missionary zeal. Our Lord gave the
command to begin at Jerusalem and pro-
ceed thence to the ends of the earth with
His gospel. Such was the apostles’ zeal
and so great their success that St. Paul,
long before he sealed his testimony with
his blood could say, “ Have they not
heard? Yes, verily, their sound is gone
into all the earth, and their words unto the
world’s end.” All ecclesiastical history
bears witness to this double truth that the
Church is always hide-bound and impover-
ished when she, in a spirit of selfishness,
seeks to confine the blessing to herself,
and is satisfied with being conservative;
whereas she never fails to be prosperous,
in the best sense, when her members*follow
the example of Andrew and proclaim to
others the glad tidings of the Messiah.
The Chaeactee of Cheist —An Aegu-
MENT FOE CheISTIANITY.
It is often objected to modern Christ-
ianity that it busies itself too much with
the doctrine, and dwells far too little on the
life and person of Christ. This undesirable
peculiarity, it is alleged, has a tendency to
lead theological speculation into abstract
and metaphysical channels, and develope
Christian life on Pharisaic models. In so
far as the objection proceeds on a covert
dislike to mere doctrine and puts forth a
claim for what is called “ undogmatic
religion,” it is deserving of little sympathy,
for, most certainly, there can be no belief
without something believed, and therefore
no faith without a creed. But while it
cannot be admitted that there has been too
much study of the doctrine, since the truth
of God is inexhaustible it need not be de-
nied that for a long period there has been a
partial obscuration of the great facts of our
Lord’s life and person, at least, as a dis-
tinct department of religious thought and
special study. It may therefore be accepted
as an omen for good that a re-action is now
unmistakably setting in. Formerly every
theologian of eminence addressed himself
to the task of writing a Body of Divinity ;
but it is fast becoming the custom rather
to write a Life of Christ, Modern scholar-
ship, together with the recent antiquarian
and other researches in the Holy Land,
has given a powerful impulse to this
branch of study. As a necessary conse-
quence, the press now teems with publica-
tions bearing on the life, the work, and
the character of the Lord Jesus Christ.
Christianity has everything to hope and no-
thing to fear from these scholarly investi-
gations. It has ever courted inquiry, and
its motto remains the same as at the begin-
ning, “Prove all things, hold fast that
which is good.” There is every reason to
believe that one main practical outcome
will be a better appreciation of the charac-
ter and example of Christ as a distinct
argument for the truth of the Christian
religion. It is a species of evidence
capable of a very close, direct and forcible
application.
The first impression which a perusal
of the gospel narratives makes upon an in-
genuious mind.is an intense conviction of


the reality of the person and character
therein recorded. No unprejudiced reader
could mistake this fact. Those who hold
an opposite opinion have, for the most part,
reached this conclusion by way of inference
from the application of an unsound philo-
sophy. Many persuade themselves that
the Almighty has never made a revelation
of Himself to man otherwise than through
the works of nature ; and the life of Christ
being inexplicable on mere natural prin-
ciples, they have come to the conclusion
that the gospel history cannot be anything
else but a fiction. But all the facts are
dead against this solution of the question.
There is a transparent naturalness pervad-
ing this whole history which places it quite
beyond the range of imitation. It is in-
deed the perfection of art to conceal art;
but in this accomplishment very few suc-
ceed even tolerably well; and none to the
extent that makes it pass for nature. Be-
yond all question the evangelists bring us
into real scenes and place us in contact
with living persons. We conceive our-
selves to be passing through real cities with
crowded thoroughfares, or carried away
into the lone and barren wilderness, or
standing beside the Sea of Galilee, the
waters of which are now sleeping in peace-
ful repose, or again lashed into foam by
the fitful tempest. We behold the
despised King of the Jews overturning the
tables of the money-changers, while with a
scourge of cords the mercenary traffickers
are driven from the precincts of the temple.
The Son of Man stands before us in lifelike
reality laying His hands upon the infirm,
and giving health to the sick, the halt and
the withered ; or with His Almighty word
banishing legions of devils from the bodies
of their miserable victims. We hear the
Great Teacher from the Mount of Beati-
tudes instructing His followers in words of
matchless wisdom; or exposing the subtle
craft of Pharisees and Sadducees who
thought to entrap Him with their captious
questions ; or unfolding the sublime prin-
ciples of truth and righteousness to an
immoral woman at Jacob’s well. Or again,
we behold the Lamb of God staggering
under the burden of the world’s woes in
dark Gethsemane; fainting under the
weight of the cross ; or dying as no one else
could die. There is no mistaking these
facts. They all possess the air and circum-
stance of grave realities. Fiction, after
exhausting its last resources, must stop in-
finitely short of such a picture so full of
life and reality.
While making these general observations
let us not fail to notice the sameness of
character which is depicted by the four
Evanglists. There are indeed minor varia-
tions in the details of the narratives which
may be accepted as sufficient proof that
there was neither collusion nor compact
among the writers; but none of these
divergencies affect the character of the
person whose life they record in common.
The writers evidently acted independently
of each other, and yet nothing can be
more certain than the fact that they drew
from one and the same source. Their ideal
could have been nothing less than a living
person, and they sought no higher honour
than to be the instruments of recording His
mighty works.
Proceeding now to more particular con-
siderations regarding the character of
Christ, the first feature to be noticed is
His absolute sinlessness. This fact is sup-
ported by a mass of evidence derived from
the most opposite sources. Nothing short
of this perfect sinlessness was the claim
of Christ Himself, as might well have been
expected, seeing that He professed to
appear among men as the Son of God from
Heaven. His own declaration was, “ The
prince of this world cometh and hath
nothing in Me.” He boldly challenged
His enemies to convict Him of sin. The
strongest testimony He could have had
from His enemies was their recourse to
false witnesses in order to procure his con-
demnation. Pilate on his judgment seat
proclaimed His innocence when he washed
his hands of the foul proceedings and
exclaimed, “I find no fault in this man.”
Vastly more significant than all these
testimonies is the witness of Judas
Iscariot who betrayed Him. No one had
better opportunities of knowing His real
character than the treacherous disciple.
He had enjoyed the most intimate interr
course with the Master for more than three
years. It appears from some reason or
other he had been more trusted than any of
his fellow disciples, for he it was that
carried the common purse of the apostolic


company. If there had been any scheme
to impose upon the world and make gain of
godliness, no one could have had better op-
tunity of knowing the true facts of the
case or would have been more willing to
expose the fraud. There was nothing in
the man to prevent his doing so, for he was
vile enough to sell his Master for the price
of a slave. But after this atrocious deed
was done, and when he saw Him con-
demned to death, his evil heart began to
relent. The wretched man was over-
whelmed with the pangs, not of repentance
but remorse, and he hastened to the rulers
with whom the horrid compact had been
made, but he came not to tell of any secret
delinquency on the part of His Master, or
to reveal a fraud which would have
justified his conduct and delivered him from
the furies of remorse. Judas, although he
had been the familiar friend of Christ, had
no secrets to reveal. He came to the door
of the temple, and throwing the money
into the treasury, uttered words that will
never be forgotten. “ I have sinned in
that I have betrayed innocent blood!” The
sinless character of Christ which is so
amply certified, is of great consequence to
the present argument. If placed Him in-
disputably beyond the rank of common
men, and made all other claims of easy
admission. No other than a sinless
Saviour could have given life to the world,
or been the founder of a church which for
eighteen centuries has gone forward from
victory to victory. To quote the words of
a recent writer, “ Christ declared that He
came forth from God and that He was sent
of God. But if He had been convicted of
a single sin, then the validity of these re-
presentations would have been undermined.
One sin would have broken the entire
evidence, and stamped as an impostor the
character of Jesus Christ: but He was free
from the least particle of sin. It is
observed both by Paley and Dwight that
neither the Mishna nor the Talmud which
contains the whole of the Jewish testimony
on this subject—neither Celsus nor Por-
phyry nor Julian, who may fairly be sup-
posed to have given the whole of the
heathen testimony, ascribe to Christ a
single instance of folly or sin; and we
have the declaration of Origen, that down
to his time no charge of this kind was ever
alleged against Him. We venture to say,
then, that the perfect innocence of Christ
is an established fact and thus we derive
substantial evidence of the truth of Christ-
ianity.” The eloquent Bishop Sherlock
thus contrasts the perfect sinlessness of
Christ with the character of the great
Oriental rival Mahomet. “ Go,” says he,
“ to your natural religion ; lay before her
Mahomet and his disciples arrayed in
armour and in blood, riding in triumph
over the spoils of thousands and tens of
thousands who fell by his victorious sword;
show her the cities which he set in flames,
the countries which he ravaged and des-
troyed ; and the miserable distress of all
the inhabitants of the earth. When she
has viewed him in this scene, carry her
into his retirement, show her the prophet's
chamber, his concubines and his wives; let
her see his adultery and hear him allege
revelation and his divine commission to
justify his lust and oppression. When
she is tired with this prospect, then show
her the blessed Jesus, humble and meek,
doing good to all sons of men ; patiently
instructing both the ignorant and the per-
verse ; let her see Him in His most retired
privacy; let her follow Him to the moun-
tains and hear His devotions and supplica-
tions to God ; carry her to His table to see
His poor fare and hear His heavenly dis-
course ; let her see Him injured, but not
provoked ; let her attend Him to the
tribunals and consider the patience with
which he endured the scoffs and reproaches
of His enemies. Lead her to the cross,
and let her view Him in the agony of
death, and hear His last prayer for His
persecutors, ‘ Father, forgive them, for
they know not what they do.’ When
natural religion has seen both, ask which
is the prophet of God ? But her answer we
have already had. When she saw part of
this scene through the eyes of the centurion
who attended at the cross, by him she
spake and said, ‘ Truly this man was the
Son of God.’ ”
The next important feature in Christ’s
character is His unswerving fidelity. This
bears principally on His relation to the
Father whose servant He professed to be
as well as His Son. “ Moses was faithful
in all His house as a servant, but Christ
as a Son.” This faithfulness,led to many


consequences which can be explained only
on the supposition that Christianity is true.
An impostor seeks to accommodate himself
to the passions and prejudices of the multi-
tude, and, in the worst sense of the words,
makes himself all things to all men. The
impression which is made on the unbiassed
reader of the gospel narratives is the very
reverse of this unrighteous conformity in
order to gain the favour of men. Instead
of being anxious to draw disciples into His
fellowship by accommodating Himself to
their prejudices or partialities He seemed
often to repel them when they came of
their own accord. One of Herod’s
courtiers, a nobleman of the Kingdom,
was so favourably inclined to Jesus as to
ask Him to come and heal his son. Here
then was a fine opportunity of getting into
favour with the foremost men of the coun-
try ; but Christ’s answer was a rebuke
rather than an advance. “ Except ye see
signs and wonders ye will not believe.’’ A
certain scribe volunteered to follow Him
whithersoever He went, but received the
unexpected answer, “ Foxes have holes, and
birds of the air have nests but the Son of
Man hath not where to lay his head.”
When a gentile woman addressed Him in
the most honourable style and besought
an act of healing. He turned and said, “ It
is not meet to take the children’s bread
and cast it to the dogs.” This is not the
manner of an impostor, neither is it the
policy of designing men who make it a
matter of the last importance to gather
around them a multitude of followers by
every possible means. But if Christ did
not accommodate His manner much less did
He adapt His doctrines to the humours and
fancies of men. Here his inflexible fidelity
shone forth nobly conspicuous. In His
discourse with the Jewish Rabbi, JNlco-
demus, He entered at once upon one of the
hardest of all his doctrines to the unsancti-
fied mind, and when His distinguished
hearer, in real or feigned difficulty, stum-
bled at the supernatural ground on which
it rested, he was confronted with another
truth which contained his difficulty in
much larger measure, for Christ declared
that He, the very person who was speaking
on earth, was at the same time also in
heaven. On another occasion the same
striking characteristic is also brought into
prominent notice. For once it appeared
that Christ was likely to obtain the
honour to which He was so justly entitled.
Around the shore of the Sea of Galilee the
people had gathered in multitudes to hear
His unparalleled discourses. At one time,
at least, he had a congregation of five
thousand persons, and on other occasions
perhaps many more. The tide of popu-
larity had set in suddenly and strong. Men
began to talk of taking Him by force and
making Him their King. But here again
His faithfulness to His mission of humilia-
tion and suffering shone forth with und'm-
inished lustre. Perceiving that he was
followed only from carnal motives, Christ
told them that He Himself must be their
food. “I am the living bread which came
down from heaven; if any man eat of this
bread he shall live for ever; and the bread
that I give is my flesh, which I will give
for the life of the world.” This was close
and faithful dealing, and it is not surpris-
ing to find the Jews asking, “ How can
this man give us His flesh to eat P” Here
was an eventful moment. The crisis had
now arrived, and upon its issues depended,
as the sequel shows, the acceptance or the
rejection of Christ by the nation of Israel.
A time-server would have known well how
to act in the emergency. He would have
relaxed his severity, explained that he was
speaking only in figurative language, and
stripped His doctrine of all that made it
distasteful to the multitude. But Christ
was the true and faithful witness; and
therefore did the very reverse. He again
took up His disagreeable doctrine, and in
words of redoubled sharpness hurled it
straight in the teeth of his defiant objec-
tors. “ Yerily, verily, I say unto you,
except ye eat the flesh and drink the blood
of the Son of Man, ye have no life in you.”
This faithfulness cost Him His popularity.
First arose an indistinct murmur, and then
the articulate objection, “ This is an hard
saying, who can hear it,” and next a
breaking away of many followers who
walked no more with Him. Did the
Teacher now falter in the hour of deser-
tion ? On the contrary, He turned to the
Twelve and with dauntless breast proposed
this question for their decision, “ Will ye
also go away P”
The next constituent of Christ’s cha-


racter that shall engage onr attention is
His active benevolence. His birth was
heralded by angels as an event fraught
with good-will to men. The key-note thus
struck was well sustained through the
whole of His busy life. There is no better
motto for that life to be found anywhere
than the words of the Apostle Peter, “ He
went about doing good.” This benevo-
lence was not manifested in one, but in
many ways. His whole work tended to
promote man’s highest good and was di-
rected towards spiritual rather than tem-
poral blessings. Yet the latter were by
no means neglected, although it was, gene-
rally, that they might be stepping-stones
to what was higher and better. The cures
He wrought on the bodies of men seem to
have been literally innumerable ; and they
embraced every species of disease ; nay,
even death itself. To accomplish this mis-
sion of mercy He made Himself of no repu-
tation, stooped to what most men would
have considered great indignity, and sub-
jected Himself to the utmost toil and self-
denial. The discourse with the woman of
Samaria may be taken as an illustrative
case. Bent upon a mission of mercy, He
was travelling at noon under an oppressive
Eastern sun, and sat down worn with
fatigue at Jacob’s Well. He was weary,
almost ready to faint, and in urgent need
of repose. He was suffering the pangs of
thirst, and under the necessity of asking
drink from one who would be unwilling to
give it; and hungry also, for the stock of
provisions was exhausted, and the disciples
had gone into the city to huy food. Here
then were three urgently pressing wants,
and many a man of great self-denial would
have considered himself justified in attend-
ing to these necessities before all other
claims. But this was not the way of the
Saviour. His burning love for that perish-
ing woman made him forget his own wants
and address himself at once to hers. His
discourse was one of the longest and most
spiritual of any that have been recorded.
And yet the audience consisted of but one
solitary individual. Humanly speaking,
what had an ambitious leader of men to
expect from such material. Nothing can
explain His conduct but a loving purpose to
save that woman’s soul. Many a preacher
would have considered a sermon delivered
to an audience of one as labour thrown
away. But He who spake as never man
spake reasoned quite otherwise. He forgot
His own wants in the desire to relieve
hers, and was satisfied with this object for
His reward. Again we ask can such a
character be explained on any principle
which infidelity has ever proposed !
Christ’s meekness and humility are also
strongly marked lines in His character.
Nothing can be more telling than the con-
trast which is expressed in the Apostle’s
words, “ Who being in the form of God
thought it not robbery to be equal with
God, but made Himself of no reputation,
and took upon Himself the form of a ser-
vant, and was made in the likeness of men,
and being found in fashion as a man, He
humbled Himself and became obedient
unto death, even the death of the
cross.” Thus Christ came, not to be minis-
tered unto, but to minister and give Him-
self a ransom for many. His whole life
was a humiliation; but there were parti-
cular times and occasions when His humi-
lity appeared more than usually striking.
One such was the washing of the disciples’
feet. This kind of work fell to the lot of
servants of the lowest rank. But even from
so humble a service the King of Kings did
not shrink.
If we now bring these rays into a focus
their combination will form a perfect cha-
racter, such as no one else among the chil-
dren of men has ever exhibited. Even the
best of the saints whose names are en-
shrined in sacred history are usually repre-
sented as more or less imperfect—men of
like passions and infirmities with ourselves.
The place assigned to Jesus Christ is alto-
gether unique. He also stands out as the
absolutely perfect character. The Son of
Man is the ideal of humanity. But even
here scepticism has found a ground of ob-
jection. It has declared that the realisa-
tion of such an ideal was simply an impos-
sibility, and consequently that the perfect
character ascribed to Jesus Christ can be
nothing else than a creation of the imagina-
tion. To this objection it may safely be
answered, that the character ascribed to
Christ is of such a kind as to transcend al-
together the depraved faculties of fallen
man. That like produces like is a maxim
which holds good all the world over. At


the beginning God made Adam in his own
image, but after the fall Adam begat a
son in his own likeness. Such a character
of holiness and benevolence, it could not
have entered into the heart of man to con-
ceive, least of all, surely, into the hearts of
men who were taken from their nets at the
Sea of Galilee, and who to the last hour of
their intercourse with Christ were filled
with the carnal hopes of a restoration of
the temporal kingdom of Israel. Water
will not rise higher than its source ; nei-
ther can the depraved heart of man invent a
characterof perfect righteousness and show
it as being carried consistently through an
average life-time in this wicked world. If
this could possibly be accomplished we
might well say with the celebrated Rous-
seau, “ that the inventor would be a more
astonishing character than the hero.”
An able writer has adverted to these
difficulties in the following judicious re-
marks : —“ To describe a perfect man is a
marvellous and unprecedented achieve-
ment. To attempt to describe the all-per-
fect God acting in the nature of man, and
amid the scenes and realities of human
life, is a design most daring, and to succeed
in it a miracle the most astonishing that
mortal mind can conceive. Yet this de-
sign these waiters have accomplished—this
miracle these writers have wrought, and
wrought too so effectually that we chal-
lenge the infidel to point out one single
circumstance in the whole course of
Christ’s conduct that is unworthy of the
deity—that militates against one attribute
of His being. While, on the other hand,
the wisdom, the mighty works, the dignity,
the calm but majestic authority, which
Jesus so signally displayed, all bespeak a
character which may well claim to be
divine. We repeat then the question of
Rousseau, ‘ Shall we suppose the Evangelic
history a mere fiction,’ and we feel sure
that few will hesitate to answer with him,
* Indeed it bears not the marks of fiction
and we are equally sure that this impres-
sion will be confirmed to demonstration
when the peculiarities of the history and
the circumstances of the apostles them-
selves are taken into account. Who and
what were they? Were they men that,
from education, talents, and accomplish-
ments, were likely to be qualified for plan-
ning such a plot and sustaining such a
story ? On the contrary, we find, in the
first place, that they were men obscure in
rank, of but limited education and no
learning. Indeed the enemies of Christi-
anity, among all their other objections,
allege that the reputed authors of the
Gospel History were possessed of but very
inferior talents; they complain that
their writings are very confused —that it is
hard to understand their meaning in many
passages —that they do not seem to have
had clear ideas themselves or the faculty
of communicating their conceptions to
others ; yet these weak, illiterate, and per-
plexed writers have laid before the world a
character in which infidelity cannot find
a flaw—a character which it has baffled
the highest efforts of genius to imagine,
much, less to develop as they have done,
and which is so perfect in all its parts that
it presents no unfitting representation of
the life and death of an incarnate God.
But this character is not only superior but
highly singular ; it is not only without a
match but without a model. The heroes
of ancient poetry, the wise men of ancient
philosophy, even the holiest saints of
ancient history, could have furnished no
material for the life of Christ; yea, though
all the excellencies of all the best men and
best models that ever existed were col-
lected and combined together, they could
neither have supplied the element nor sug-
gested the idea of a character so new, so
wonderfully original. But this character
is not only singular; it is also unpopular.
It is one that no writer of fiction, who
wished to consult the public taste or im-
pose on the public mind, would have ven-
tured to write. If it were the design of
the Gospel historians to deceive their coun-
trymen—to take advantage of their fond
expectations, and to palm upon them a
Messiah, we would naturally conceive that
they would, at least, present him in a light
that corresponded with their favourite
theories and was likely to secure their
approbation. But so far were they from
following this course, that, contrary to
every rule which common prudence in such
a case would have prescribed, they ran
directly counter to all the proudest feel-
ings and deepest prejudices of their nation.
They did what they knew would excite the
keenest animosity against them, and stir
up every man to unmask their imposture.


The Messiah whom they described instead
of chiming in, as a deceiver would have
done, with their fondly cherished expecta-
tions —instead of assuming the pretensions
of a mighty prince come to deliver them
from the thraldom of their oppressors, and
lead them on to victory and to glory, ap-
peared in the rank of poverty —spent a life
of poverty —was followed by the children
of poverty, and at last died the death of a
malefactor and a slave. It is indeed per-
fectly incredible —it is inconsistent with
every principle of human nature, to sup-
pose that the men who on the infidel theory
could have drawn such a character as that
of Jesus Christ from their own invention,
would have placed him in circumstances
that were so clearly and infallibly calcu-
lated to defeat their own design. But
finally, the manner in which the disciples
narrate the life of Christ affords another
proof that it is not a fictitious story, but a
statement of facts. How artless is the tale
they tell—how simple in its construction,
though sublime in its communications and
results ! Here we find no effort to produce
effect —no rhetorical artifices —no laboured
plot. The whole scene is laid open with an
air of simple truth, of natural and familiar
ease, that deceit could never assume. Not-
withstanding the strange and striking cir-
cumstances that they so often have occa-
sion to relate, they never express their own
wonder, never point attention to the extra-
ordinary incidents any more than to the
common occurrences that are connected
with the history of their Lord. They seem
to contemplate His mightiest works with the
calmness of persons who were familiarly
accustomed to observe them, and who,
from the views they entertained of Christ’s
power, most naturally aud appropriately
manifested no surprise either in witnessing
or describing them. Neither do they take
the least notice of the reasons that might be
urged against the facts and statements
they record, although many of these were
opposed to the opinions and obnoxious to
the feelings of their contemporaries. It
does not appear that it ever came into
their minds to consider how this or that
action would be regarded by the world, or
what objections it was likely to create.
Without a thought either of themselves or
others, they lay their facts plainly before
you, at not no pains to inquire whether they
appear credible or not. If the reader will
not believe their testimony, there is no
help for it. They tell the truth and attend
to nothing else. Surely this looks like
sincerity! Surely these simple-minded,
open, artless men could not have been
deceivers!”
Believing, therefore, that Jesus Christ
was a real personage possessed of that per-
fect character which is ascribed to Him in
the Gospel records, the question of His
origin next presses for answer —Was He
from earth or from heaven ? The Uni-
tarians are bound by their system to hold
by the first side of this alternative. Jesus
Christ is with them the best of men, but
still nothing more than man—simply the
best outcome of humanity. It may well be
asked if the circumstances were such as to
produce so great a prodigy on the mere
principles of development under the ordi-
nary action of cosmic forces. Eenan in
his “ Life of Jesus” has dwelt very largely
on the situation and surroundings of Naza-
reth as fitted to call forth a holy enthusi-
asm and go far to make Christ what He
ultimately became; just as if there were
not hundreds and thousands of youths
brought up in the same place which was
so destitute of moral development that it
passed for a proverb—“ Can any good thing
come out of Nazareth?” The times, as
well as the place, were the most unfavour-
able in the history of the nation for such a
result on the operation of natural principles.
Prophecy had been silent four centuries,
Sadducean materialism had invaded the
land, and the only visible remains of re-
ligion were incrusted in the rigid formalism
of the Pharisees. It is simply impossible to
account for the appearance of Jesus Christ
on the principle of the religious develop-
ment of the nation. The other alternative
—that He is from heaven —must therefore
be the true one: This is the uniform re-
presentation of the Scriptures both of the
Old Testament and the New. The great-
est miracle of Christianity is the incarna-
tion of the Son of God, as it is also the
fundamental doctrine of the whole system.
If this interposition into the ordinary
course of humanity is admitted all other
miracles are rendered possible and become
easily explicable. The Christ of the
Gospel is the key to the whole system of
Christian doctrine and religious faith. He
reconciles all things in Himself.


The Testimony of the Foub Evangelists.
The earthly life of our Lord Jesus Christ
is recorded in four separate gospel narra-
tives. A thoughtless reader might easily
imagine that the same purpose would be as
well, perhaps, better served by one clear
and orderly history. And no doubt it
would if the object had been to produce a
frigid chronicle of bare and bald annals,
the accuracy of which was to be secured
by a theory of inspiration consisting of
nothing else but the mechanical dictation
of mere words to passive and hardly con-
scious men. But understanding it to have
been the purpose of God to spaak by the
Spirit in and through men to their fellow-
creatures and produce a record of the
manifold fulness of Christ for all times,
it is not difficult to discern the wisdom
displayed in the choice of a variety of
narratives which, viewed as a whole, are
found to be complementary of each other.
If we wish to gain a particular acquaint-
ance with a special period of the world’s
history, we count it a real advantage to be
possessed of the works of several authors
who have written of those times from
different points of view. Probably we
would turn, in the first place, to the pub-
lished accounts of the martial achieve-
ments of the period, inquiring what battles
had been lost or won: what extent of
territory had been annexed or disintegrated,
and what terms of peace had been obtained
or refused. Then we might seek to learn
from other sources what progress was made
in arts and sciences, and how far the nation
advanced or retrograded in wealth and
status. After this we might proceed to a
third author for information regarding the
philosophical speculations of the period, in
the desire to learn what schools of thought
arose or declined, whether Aristotle or
Plato was in the ascendant, or whether
some new philosopher had arisen and
endeavoured to unseat them both. There
is no thorough-going student of history
that would neglect, much less despise, any
of these sources of information; and he
would count himself happy on finding
such a variety of authors supplied to his
hand. It is now generally admitted that
no single writer, however gifted or experi-
enced, is competent to deal with all the
complex facts and aspects of any one age ;
and the only hope of seeing justice done
to history is to fall back on the division of
labour in which each man shall have
assigned to him for his task that particular
subject in which he is best fitted to excel.
Again, to take another illustration, let
us turn to the records of some splendid
military campaign which constitutes one
of the outstanding events of the world’s
history. It would be impossible to meet
with or compile any single work on such
a subject as would satisfy the expectation
of every class of inquirers ; and the attempt
is perhaps never seriously made. Different
writers compose their accounts for various
sorts of readers. The leaders of the armies
furnish notes, in the form of state-papers,
for the information of sovereigns or parlia-
ments ; a correspondent of the Press gives
a description of attacks and retreats as
observed from an outside point of view;
an officer, who has spent his youth in a
military college learning the art of war,
writes also a history of the campaign, but
only for men of arms, and he fills his
work with the success of tactics, the
strength of fortifications, and the superior-
ity of different sorts of weapons. A fourth
writer, let it be supposed, is simply an
intelligent soldier who looks only for
popular readers and describes what he
saw and experienced from the point of
view of a man in the ranks. Here then
are no fewer than four separate accounts
of one and the same military enterprise.
Each is written in accordance with the
author’s own position and idiosyncrasies;
but while all wrote independently, no one
is found to exclude the others. The four
are really complementary, and it is only
when taken together that a complete his-
tory of the war is obtained. The loss of
one would be irreparable, and no intelli-
gent reader would willingly be deprived
of a single member of the fourfold narra-
tive.
These considerations will prepare us to
make a correct estimate of the relation
which the four gospel histories stand to the
life of Christ. It is necessary first of all
to dismiss from our minds the crude notion


of a merely fourfold rehearsal of the same
story. The time is now past when any
entertainment could be given to the old
clumsy theory which regarded Mark’s
gospel as an abbreviation of Matthew’s or
Luke’s, and John’s as nothing more than
an appendix or supplement to the other
three. While there is a substantial unity,
as containing but one Saviour, there are
also individual characteristics and parti-
cular tendencies in so far as the human
element manifested itself and prevailed.
In the general department of biographical
literature a real difficulty is often experi-
enced iu finding a person fully competent
to write the life of a man of many-sided
greatness. What is chiefly desired, and
not always obtained, is a kindred sensi-
bility, quick to discern and ready to appre-
ciate all that is great and good in the
subject under treatment. In the case of
supremely great men, who form an epoch
in the world’s history, it is scarcly possible
to find any single person who can do justice
to their biography; and the deficiency is
not uncommonly supplied by means of a
plurality of writers. If this is so with the
world’s men of genius, how much greater
reason is there to expect infinitely more
difficulty in the case of Him who was both
the Sou of Man and the Son of God ? It
is matter for profound thankfulness, there-
fore, that no fewer than four God-inspired
men of widely different characteristics were
called to the task of recording the events of
that marvellous life which all ages will
profoundly study, even to the world’s end.
Each of the four evangelists by reason of
his strongly pronounced individuality, was
specially fitted to catch and reflect some
one of the many features of our Lord’s life
and character. The result is that we
possess four specifically different pictures
of the one Saviour in His manifestation
unto men. The loss of any one of the
gospels would be irreparable; and the
Christian Church has profound reason for
thankfulness that all the four have been
preserved in their primitive purity and
perfection.
Before proceeding to inquire more parti-
cularly into the diversity of the several
narratives, it will be proper to consider for
a moment their fundamental unity. All
the gospels arc professedly the records of
the life and doings of one person, the Lord
from Heaven. He is their beginning and
ending; their Alpha and Omega. His
lowly birth, His public manifestation,
His miracles of power, His discourses of
love, His shameful death, His glorious re-
surrection, and His triumphant ascension
from the warp and woof of all the gospels.
His person is shown by all four to be
divine and human. The first three who
give most prominence to His human nature,
yet prove His divinity from His mighty
works; while John, who dwells purposely
upon His divinity, has perhaps the most
human touch of all to mark His humanity
when he pictures Him, faint and weary,
resting at Jacob’s well and soliciting a
woman of Samaria to give Him water to
quench His thirst. The same holiness of
character, the same zeal for His Father’s
house, and the same sclf-sacriticing love
for men, arc found to pervade all of the
gospels. It is the self-same Jesus through-
out, inspired with the all-absorbing desire
to give Himself a ransom for many. One
evangelist may bring out one feature into
greater prominence than is found in the
others, yet there is no contradiction. The
several portraits present a variety of
shading; but the one likeness is unmis-
takable in all the four. This unity, again,
may be looked at from a doctrinal point of
view. There are four narratives but only
one gospel. It is the declaration of all the
evangelists that man is by nature hope-
lessly ruined; that the only lledecmer is
the Lord Jesus Christ, that reconciliation
is possible only through the blood of atone=
ment; and that the soul can be regenerated
and sanctified only by the Holy Spirit. The
terms of salvation, too, arc everywhere the
same. It is not proposed as the reward
of works in one, and as the gift of grace in
another. With all this unity it matters
little whether there be uniformity or not —
there may be much of the latter with
scarcely any of the former.
There is one aspect of this unity, or,
more correctly, the striking uniformity of
certain portions, which has called forth a
good deal of discussion. Every reader of
the first three gospels, usually known as
the synoptics, must be conscious of meet-


>le sections which are almost
identical, both in expression and arrange-
ment, in each of these narratives. Many
have viewed this remarkable fact with no
small suspicion and pronounced it irrecon-
cilable with a belief that the evangelists
wrote independently of one another. It
has therefore been assumed that some
reason ought to be given to show why
these parallel passages and sections are so
frequently met with. In the desire to
supply this felt want some able critics too
rashly suggested that one of the first three
gospels must have formed the basis ot the
others ; the authors of the latter having had
the former in their hands, and so framed
their gospels very much upon the same
model; and in this way it was explained why
the synoptics possessed so much in common.
The next question was to discover whether
Matthew’s, Mark’s, or Luke’s was the
original gospel on the form of which the
other two had been constructed. This
point could be decided only by internal
evidence, and hence a wide door was opened
to the vagaries of fanciful and ingenious
men. Any one who has made a little pro-
gress in arithmetic will easily perceive that
the three gospels may be so arranged and
re-arranged, on the principle of combina-
tion and permutation, as to make just six
different positions possible. And as re-
gards the supposition of the three evange-
lists copying from each other, precisely
half-a-dozen theories have been propounded
by men who have considered themselves
competent judges in this matter. Error
could no farther go, for even arithmetic
rendered a seventh proposal impossible.
So many opposite answers given to the
same question, all professedly based on
identical facts, must surely be regarded as
sufficient reason for dismissing the idea of
the inspired writers copying from one
another. Still the indisputable fact of the
parallel sections remains, and it is neces-
sary that a more satisfactory explanation
be forthcoming. Some scholars, therefore,
who rejected the hypothesis of one of the
synoptic gospels having served as the basis
of the other two, have supposed that all
three were constructed, to a large extent,
on some primitive written gospel, which
being of an inferior character, soon dropped
out of sight after the appearance of those
which bear the names of Matthew, Mark,
and Luke. The text and paragraphs
which are common to all three being thus
supposed to have been transcribed from the
assumed original document. This might be
a satisfactory explanation of the difficulty
if there were any evidence that such a
narrative ever existed. But in all antiquity
there is not a trace of this original gospel
which is presumed to have been of so great
authority as so afford an undisputed ground-
work for the others. It must in that case
have been generally accepted, and being
so, it is inconceivable that it should have
perished without even the mention of its
name in the most ancient Christian litera-
ture. The argument is thus built upon a
gratuitous assumption and is entitled to no
consideration in the settlement of this im-
portant question. Must the attempt there-
fore be given up in despair, and it be
frankly confessed that no reasonable ac-
count of the common sections in the synop-
tics can be rendered ? This consequence
by no means follows as the necessary con-
clusion. The foregoing considerations will
have conveyed some partial conception of
the amount of painstaking study which the
present century has been bestowing on this
interesting inquiry; and now, at last, it
has reached a result in which the great
masters in this department of learning are,
one after another, expressing their concur-
rence. It does not propose for its basis a
written, but an oral gospel as preached by
the apostles and substantially repeated by
one Christian to another. From the
ascension of Christ to the appearance of
the first written gospel there must have
intervened a period of at least 20 or 30
years, perhaps much more. All this time
the apostolic activity found full vent in
preaching. So far only did the Lord’s
command extend. Necessity was laid
upon them to preach the gospel to every
creature; but there is no record of an in-
junction to write the gospel. It was an
age, indeed, that reckoned written as of
very little value compared with oral teach-
ing. Nor was it to be expected during the
full fervour of the Pentecostal Spirit, that
much leisure would be found or inclination
shown for systematic writing. It was not,


perhaps, till many years had passed away
that the necessity for a permanent record
or records became evident. The apostles
for the first 20 or 30 years gave themselves
wholly to the word of God, that is, to the
preaching of the gospel as distinguished
from the act of writing. The subject of
their preaching, from first to last, was the
person of Christ together with the out-
standing facts of His life and death. They
everywhere proclaimed the form of sound
words, that Jesus was born of the seed of
David; that He went about doing good,
that He taught lessons of heavenly wisdom
and performed mighty works, that He died
for our sins and rose again according to
the Scriptures. The facts of Christ’s
birth, life, and death, would thus, by the
incessant iteration of the same truths,
gradually assume the form of an orderly
narrative ; and this unwritten gospel would
be familiar to every preacher and be often
repeated in nearly the same or equivalent
words. This oral gospel, having taken
definite shape, and being in the minds of
all Christians, and especially of those who
at length addressed themselves to the task
of a written narrative, it followed, almost
as a matter of course, that some of the
leading passages would find their way into
the Hew Testament histories which were
then transferred to a permanent record.
This being done as may be supposed, by
Matthew, Mark and Luke, we are fur-
nished with a very simple and satisfactory
explanation of those sections which they
have in common as also of the general
similarity of the three narratives. The ac-
count has the merit of not only being
probable; but also is clearly the correct
one, for the more it is examined the better
will it yield itself up to all the facts of the
case. If we look closely at those parallel
passages comparing them carefully with
each other, we shall observe that the
verbal coincidence is least in the mere nar-
rative portions, becomes more exact when
the words of others are reported, and closest
of all when the sayings of Christ are re-
corded. These results are precisely what
must have been expected had the gospels
originated in the way which has been last
stated.
It is now time to proceed to the second
branch of the subject and see what account
can be given of the diversities which are
observed to prevail through all the four
gospel histories. The very titles are suffi-
cient to suggest the complex fact of unity
in diversity. It is the one gospel which is
given according to the points of view of the
several writers, according to Matthew,
Mark, Luke and John. Each evangelist
presents it under a different aspect; but it
is the same glorious gospel, nevertheless.
In speaking of these clearly marked diver-
sities care must therefore be taken not to
press them to a degree which would preju-
dice this sameness which makes the four
fundamentally one. Reasons have already
been given for the employment of several
writers to record the events of this marvel-
lous life; and it now remains to show their
specific differences. From the earliest
period it has been customary to compare
the fourfold gospel to the cherubim, or
composite image seen in vision by Ezekiel.
It is described as having the faces of an ox,
a lion, a man, and an eagle. Following
out the comparison in detail and applying
the same, the ox has been assigned to
Matthew, the lion to Mark, the man to
Luke, and the eagle to John, The gospel,
according to Matthew, with the sacrificial
ox for its symbol, possesses a strongly
marked individuality. The author was a
Jew and wrote with a special view to
Jewish Christians. His great object seems
to have been to prove that in Jesus of
Hazareth the long-expected Messiah had
appeared and set up His Kingdom upon
earth. He ever delights to show how all
that the law typified and the prophets
foretold were accomplished in Him who
was born King of the Jews, and hence the
oft-recurring formula, “ That it might be
fulfilled which was spoken by the pro-
phet.” In giving the genealogy Matthew
is satisfied with tracing His descent only
from Abraham t© show that the Messiah
was born of he anceint stock of Israel.
Much of this gospel is occupied with mat-
ters which concerned the beginnings of the
Kingdom of Christ. The Sermon on the


Mount is recorded for this reason, that it
furnishes the code of laws; and nearly all
the parables are given as illustrating some
aspects of this Kingdom of Heaven. Even
after He had been cast off by an unbe-
lieving generation, crucified and laid in the
grave, Matthew" still shows Him as the
King raised to everlasting authority and
dominion, for his gospel closes with these
words, “ All power is given unto me in hea-
ven and in earth.” Coming now to the
second gospel, we find that the symbol of
the lion has been very appropriately as-
signed to Mark. He seems to have had
ever present in his mind Christ as the Son
of God and the Lion of the tribe of Judah.
This evangelist was evidently a man of an
ardent and impulsive spirit; and this cha-
racteristic has left an indelible impression
upon his gospel. Unlike Matthew he
wrote not for Jews, but for Gentiles, and,
there is reason to believe, more especially
for Eoman Christians. In support of this
assertion there is no need for further proof
than the fact that wdien Jewish customs
and localities are mentioned a word of ex-
planation is usually added—a circumstance
which certainly implies that the parties to
whom he was writing were supposed to be
strangers to the Jews and the country in
which they dwelt. Mark’s gospel is the
shortest of the four, yet this brevity does
not arise through any lack of subject-mat-
ter but from a greater crowding of inci-
dents, and quick transitions from one event
to another. It is his delight in a scries of
life-like and rapidly shifting pictures, to
exhibit the Son of God as the Lion of the
tribe of Judah bearing down all opposition
and triumphing over every evil power. In
this gospel more than in any other He is
seen casting out devils, banishing diseases
from men’s bodies, and ruling over the ele-
ments of nature as their Lord and Master.
No other evangelist possesses such graphic
power or is able to produce so clear a de-
scription in so few touches. A single word
or a slight turn in the expression gives a
life-like reality to the incident which
leads the reader to conceive of himself
as being present and gazing upon the scene.
Such are the peculiarities and diversities of
this gospel. If Matthew delights us with
the portraiture of the King of the Jews
fulfilling all that the prophets had spoken,
not less does Mark please and instruct us
with his vivid, but quickly-passing pictures
of the all-conquering might of the in-
carnate Son of God. Luke, the next
evangelist, has man for his symbol. This
word strikes the keynote which is well sus-
tained throughout Ids gospel. He keeps
constantly in view the wants of suffering
humanity, and delights to hold forth
the Saviour of the world as the balm for
every sorrow. Matthew was content to
trace His genealogy to Abraham the
father of the Jewish nation, but Luke goes
back to Adam, the source of the human
race. It is Luke who records the mission
of the seventy disciples who were regarded
as representing the supposed seventy
nations of the earth. He repeats also, with
evident satisfaction, the Lord’s words de-
claring that many shall come from the east
and from the west, and sit down with
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob in the
Kingdom of Heaven. It will thus be per-
ceived that universality is the strongly
marked characteristic of the third gospel.
Of all the four it is the most genuinely hu-
man, and may well be prized by ourselves
seeing that, as a matter of descent,
Abraham is ignorant of us and Israel ac-
knowledges us not. The gospel according
to John fitly closes the series. By universa
consent the eagle has been assigned to him
as his symbol. He takes a loftier flight
than any of his compeers, and eagle-like
gazes with steady eye upon the face of the
Sun of Righteousness. It has already
been stated that John’s sole object could
not have been to supplement the other
gospel narratives. Nevertheless, it is ex-
tremely probable that writing, as he cer-
tainly did, long after the other gospels
were published, he purposely abstained
from repeating the same facts, and devoted
his efforts specially to the exhibition and
defence of the Divinity of the Lord Jesus
Christ, for which reason he has usually
been called the divine or the theologian.
With the exception of the closing events,
there are only three incidents which John
has in common with the other three
evangelists, and even two of these are ne-
cessarily connected with discourses of the
Saviour which he only has recorded. While


Matthew and Luke commenced their
gospels with an account of the birth and in-
fancy of Jesus, John has given in pre-
ference the doctrine of His pre-existence as
the Eternal Son of God. It is His divine
nature and His relation to the Father that
form the theme of the third gospel. For
this reason it has received very opposite
treatment at the hands of divergent sects.
By those who understand, believe, and ap-
preciate its sublime doctrine, it has ever
been held as a very precious legacy. But
there have been not a few in every age
who have lightly esteemed the fourth
gospel, nay, even condemned it as spurious
and sought its exclusion from the canon of
Scripture. This perpetuated hostility has
led some one to remark that John has been
the most tried of ail the Apostles, inasmuch
as he had to bear the cross not only during
his life-time, but, moreover, has been com-
pelled to bear it in his gospel ever since his
death.
The discourses recorded by the first
three evangelists as compared with those
contained in the fourth gospel have been
supposed to present a real difficulty. They
are said by some to read like the utter-
ances of two different persons who have
little in common. Henan goes so far as to
say that, “ The difference is such that we
must make a decided choice ; if Jesus spoke
as Matthews represents, He did not speak
as John represents.” It is often objected
that in the one He speaks almost always
in parables and often under an impulse of
fiery indignation, whereas in the other, He
is calmly dignified and scarcely ever opens
His mouth in parable. As to the preva-
lence of parabolic language in the first three
gospels and its comparative absence in the
fourth, there is little ground for raising a
difficulty ; for it is expressly affirmed that
He spake in parables to the people, but to
His disciples without parables. And it so
happens that in the synoptical gospels it
is Christ’s discourses to the people, for the
most part, that are recorded ; whereas it is
is usually those that were delivered to His
disciples, or to some noted opponents,
which have been preserved in the gospel
according to John. As to the rest, it is
surely the height of presumption to assert
that the divine-human Person could not,
out of His infinite fulness, have spoken in
as various ways as the occasion required.
An illustrative case, in a vastly lower
plane, and all the better for that, is found
in the records of the philosopher Socrates
as written by two of his admiring dis-
ciples, Xenophon and Plato. The former
represents him as a plain, practical man,
simply a humble and unpretentious teacher
of his generation; whereas the latter de-
scribes him as a philosopher and specu-
lative sage of the highest order. Could he
have been both F Undoubtedly he was
and no other proof is needed than the fact
that from the same person there sprang
the most diverse, and even opposite,
schools of morals and philosophy. How-
ever much they differed from one another
all claimed Socrates for their founder, who
is thus seen to have combined in his own
person the most dissimilar elements and
divergent tendencies. An instance of this
kind should put men upon their guard
against such rash statements as have been
quoted. It was the infinite fulness which
dwelt in Christ that rendered possible, so
many different aspects of His teaching as
compared with the teaching of the world’s
greatest men.
Christianity in Conflict with
Heathenism.
At the commencement of the Christian
era the whole world, with the exception of
the small province of Judaea, lay steeped
in idolatry. Even Greece, the most cul-
tured nation of antiquity, reckoned her
gods at thirty thousand, and as for Athens
—“ the eye of Greece” —it was said to be
more easy to find a god there than a man.
If the record from Home is less definite, it
was probably because the deities were too
multitudinous to be counted and enrolled
in an accurate census. Augustine, in his
“ City of God” fills page after page with
scathing ridicule of the hosts of divinities
who were supposed to protect the Homan
empire, while he showed that the higher
rank presided over the heaven, the earth,
the sea, and the underworld ; but that the
rage for gods had not ceased till it found
tutelary deities for such trifles as the
hinges of the doors. As Home advanced


on her career of conquest she usually
admitted into her liberal system of worship
the religions of the vanquished nations on
the convenient excuse that the foreign gods
were virtually the same as her own, al-
though they had been acknowledged under
different names. The same patronage
would have been extended to Christianity
on the understanding that it would be
content to take a recognised place alongside
the host of other religions that prevailed in
the empire; and one of the pagan emperors
is said to have offered to erect a statue to
Jesus Christ among the other deities of the
Pantheon. Such a proposal must have
been indignantly rejected ; for Christianity
claimed to be the only true religion, and to
have for its mission the suppression of
every form of idolatrous worship. Res-
pecting the relation of Christianity to the
religions of the heathen nations the follow-
ing positions have been maintained by every
consistent Christian advocate ; —that there
is no truth in any other religion which
does not shine forth with brighter lustre in
Christianity ; that Christianity has bor-
rowed no truth from any pagan creed ;
and that evary system except Christianity
mingles much error along with the truth
which it contains. With these convictions
the religion of Christ disdained the thqught
of compromise and threw itself into inter-
necine conflict with the powers of paganism.
While passing through this fiery ordeal
the Church had to bear the brunt of ten
general persecutions commencing with Nero
in the year 64, and ending with Diocletian
in 813. To an impartial observer victory
often seemed to quiver in the balance.
Sometimes the sword prevailed so com-
pletely, to all outward appearances, that
the persecutors made their boast of having
extinguished the very name of Christianity.
But by this time paganism had received its
mortal wound, and was dying surely, if
slowly. By the edict of Constantine in
313 Christianity became the recognised
religion of the State. Pagan worship was
legally suppressed by Theodosius in 390.
Its complete dissolution became manifest
to the most incredulous at the sack of
Rome by Alaric in 410. For ages the
oracles had repeated the assurance that
Rome, the eternal city, could never be
overthrown. Its fall, therefore, came with
as much surprise upon the Romans, as
Jerusalem had done to the Jews, The
cause alleged by the pagans for the loss of
their city was itself an acknowledgment of
the victory of Christianity. Rome fell
because the gods, its time-honoured defen-
ders, had forsaken their temples, and they
had taken their departure because men
ceased to worship them. It was at this
crisis that Augustine, the greatest of the
Church Fathers, came forward with his
grandest work the “ City of God.” He
showed that heathen deities had nowhere
saved a country from disaster, that even
those of Rome had not defended it in
former times from the sack of the Gauls ;
but that God in His providence had per-
mitted the removal of the City of Man to
make way for the City of God, which was
to be the realisation of Christianity. If
this holy man could have foreseen the
corruptions that were to follow in that
same place, his allusion would, to a cer-
tainty, have been less local and more
spiritual; yet his noble work, in its retro-
spective view, is completely satisfactory as
showing that the end of paganism in Rome
had now been reached. There were re-
actions, indeed ; but they came to nothing.
The most memorable of the attempts to
re-establish paganism took place in the
latter half of the fourth century, and was
supported by all the ability and energy of
Julian, one of the most competent of the
Roman emperors. His devotion to this
ruling object of his life and the complete
failure of his efforts may be understood
from a notable instance which has been
recorded by the sceptical Gibbon in con-
nection with the Emperor’s visit to Antioch
one of the chief centres of the old-world
superstitions: “When Julian, on the day
of the annual festival, hasiened to adore
the Apollo of Daphne, his devotion was
raised to the highest pitch of eagerness and
impatience. His lively imagination antici-
pated the grateful pomp of victims, of
libations, and of incense ; a long procession
of youths and virgins, clothed in white
robes, the symbol of their innocence; and
the tumultuous concourse of an innumerable
people. But the zeal of Antioch was
diverted, since the reign of Christianity,


into a different channel. Instead of heca-
tombs of fat oxen sacrificed by the tribes
of a wealthy city, to their tutelar deity, the
Emperor complained that he found only a
single goose, provided at the expense of a
priest, the pale and solitary inhabitant of
this decayed temple. The altar was de-
serted, the oracle had been reduced to
silence, and the holy ground was profaned
by the introduction of Chiistian and
funeral rites.”
The heathenism of the Roman Empire
found its most brutal expression in the
gladiatorial exhibitions which were the
most popular of all the spectacles furnished
by the Imperial city. There in an amphi-
theatre, capable of containing ten thousand
sight-seers, men of the common brother-
hood of the human family and possessed
of immortal souls, were “ butenered to
make a Roman holiday.’ If a new
Emperor ascended the throne, if a signal
victory was won, or if a rising demagogue
courted the favour of the populace, the
customary gratification was a gladiatorial
combat. The miserable victims were
captives taken in war, slaves of the wealthy
classes, or prisoners of the state. In an-
nouncing these barbarous exhibitions, it
was sometimes added as a special attraction
that the vanquished would not be spared.
Within the spacious galleries of the
Coliseum were gathered, the exalted
mortal whom men worshipped as the master
of the world, the senate who gave laws to
the mighty empire, and who never forgot
how an enemy had described them as an
assembly of k’ngs, the Roman nobles who
were more powerful than modern proves,
and the city’s populace together with as
many slaves as could find their way thither.
This motley multitude sat or reclined in
ease and comfort, the very air they breathed
being filled with perfumes, that the
Romans might thoroughly enjoy the spec-
tacle of human beings slaughtering their
fellows. Surely no greater indictment can
be brought against ancient civilisation and
no stronger plea could have been urged for
Christianity than the popularity of these
brutal shows. For a long time the influence
of the Christians who were comparatively
few in number, produced little visible
fruit, but it must have been gradually
sapping the foundation of this monstrous
heathen evil. After the accession of Con-
stantine, the first Christian emperor,
gladiatorial combats were legally abolished
but still continued to be largely practised
because of their firm hold on the heathen
population. It was not till the reign of
Honorius that the power of Christianity
achieved the extinction of these savage
exhibitions. Of this fact we possess the
very satisfactory testimony of the historian
Gibbon whom no one can accuse of partia-
lity to the Christian religion. The follow-
ing extract is from his master-piece, “The
Decline and Fall of the Homan Empire’’:
—“ In these games of Honorius,” says he,
“the inhuman combats of gladiators pol-
luted for the last time, the amphitheatre
of Home. The first Christian Emperor may
claim the credit of the first edict which
condemned the art and amusement of shed-
ing human blood, but this benevolent
law expressed the wishes of the prince
without reforming an inveterate abuse,
which degraded a civilised nation below
the condition of savage cannibals. Several
hundred, perhaps several thousand victims
were annually slaughtered in the great
cities of the empire, and the month of
December more particularly devoted to
the combats of gladiators still exhibited to
the eyes of the Roman people a grateful
spectacle of blood and cruelty. A midst the
general joy of the victory of Pollentia, a
Christian poet exhorted the emperor to
extirpate by his authority the horrid custom
which had so long resisted the voice of
humanity and religion. The pathetic
representations of Prudentius were less
effectual than the generous boldness of
Telemachus, an Asiatic monk, whose death
was more useful to mankind than his life.
The Romans were provoked by the inter-
ruption of their pleasures, and the rash
monk, who had descended into the arena
to separate the gladiators, was overwhelmed
under a shower of stones. Bnt the madness
of the people soon subsided ; they respected
the memory of Telemachus who had de-
served the honours of martyrdom, and they
submitted to the laws of Honorius which
abolished for ever the inhuman sacrifices
of the Amphitheatre.”


These successes were gained in the heart their zeal and so signal their success, that
of the empire, yet all the while Christian- the Christian Church was established among
ity was sending forth its influence to the
most distant extremities, and even into re-
moter territories. During the period of
the Homan occupation of Britain, every
Christian is said to have been a missionary.
The form of heathen worship which pre-
vailed there was Druidism, a system ex-
tremely alien to the spirit of the Christian
religion. The Roman poet Lucan thus de-
scribes these abominations :
Here Hesus’ horrid altar stands,
Here dire Tutates human blood demands ;
Here Taranis by wretches is obeyed.
And vies in slaughter with the Scythian
maid.
Druidical worship was celebrated in
dark groves where the light of day was shut
out from their direful orgies. Caesar in-
forms us that they made enormous figures
of wicker work, and filled them with hu-
man beings, whom they burned to death.
There is no doubt that human sacrifices
were terribly frequent. Yet even here
Christianity achieved a complete victory
over heathenism. Gi-ildas, a Welsh monk,
who flourished about 520, left the follow-
ing on record: —“The church is spread
over the nation, organized, endowed, hav-
ing sacred edifices and altars, the three
orders of the ministry, and monastic insti-
tutions embracing the people of all ranks
and classes.” It had spread, moreover,
into Ireland and Scotland. It was also a
learned church, possessing its own version
of the Bible and its own ritual. Beyond
the north-eastern frontier of the empire,
the countries now known as Hungary and
Translyvania were occupied at the dawn
of Christianity, by the tribes of the Goths,
the reports of whose deeds of savagery was
already filling the world. They had al-
ready begun their raids on the southern
countries which, in the end, were to over-
throw even the empire itself. In the mean-
time they were satisfied with flying vic-
tories and returned laden with spoils, the
most valuable of all being Christian con-
verts, whom they had captured as prisoners
of war. These captives carried their reli-
gion with them, not as a dead letter but a
living principle, and so became the first
missionaries to the Goths. So fervent was
the Goths sufficiently early at least, to be able
to send a representative to the first general
council which was held at Nicaea in 325.
A short time afterwards, the work was
crowned by Uphila, a man of the true mis-
sionary type, and usually known as the
apostle of the Goths, but he found them so
illiterate that he had to invent an alphabet
before he could give them a translation of
the Scriptures, and so warlike, that rightly
or wrongly, he kept back the Books of
Kings lest their martial propensities might
be roused all the more. Such were the
materials on which Christianity had to
work in contact with heathenism. Not less
remarkable was the career of Winfred or
Boniface, the “ Apostle of Germany.” He
laboured at a much later period, but had
the merit of carrying the gospel into the
far northern wilds of Europe. The sum-
mit of his success was reached in the vast
forests of Thuringia. The following in-
cident related by Neander will show what
manner of man he was and how he went to
work “At Geismar,” says this prince of
ecclesiastical historians. “ stood a gigantic
and venerable oak, sacred to Thor, the god
of thunder, which was regarded by the
people with feelings of the deepest awe,
and was a central spot for their popular
gatherings. In vain had Boniface preached
on the vanity of idols. The impression of
that ancient object of superstitious venera-
tion ever counteracted the effect of his ser-
mons, and the newly converted were drawn
back by it into paganism. Boniface re-
solved to destroy one sensuous impression
by means of another of like kind. Accom-
panied by his associates, he repaired to
the spot with a large axe. The pagan
people stood around, full of rage against
the enemy of the gods, and they expected
nothing but that those who dared attack
the sacred monument, would fall as dead
men, struck by the avenging deity. But
when they beheld the huge tree, cut into
four pieces fall prostrate before their eyes,
their faith in the power of the dreaded
deity vanished. Boniface took advantage
of this impression, and, to make it a lasting
one, immediately caused to be constructed,
out of the timber, a church, which he dedi-


cated to St. Peter the Apostle.” The pre-
ceding incident must suffice as specimens
of the sort of conflict Christianity had to
maintain with paganism. The complete-
ness of her victory may now be described
in the words of Principal Cairns “ The
classic paganism, Greek and Eoman, the
Syrian, the Egyptian, the North African,
the Druidic, and ultimately the Teutonic,
have all fallen to rise no more, and at this
moment there is not on the face of this
earth a single worshipper of ‘ the great
goddess Diana,’ or ‘ the image that fell
down from Jupiter,’ of Baal or Dagon, of
Isis or Serapis, of Thor or Wodin. They
are preserved in imperishable literature,
and in equally imperishable art. Homer
and the great tragedians have enshrined
them; Virgil and Ovid, even Milton in his
“ Paradise Lost” and “Christmas Hymn,”
to say nothing of the wonderful Book,
which, in revealing their abominations, will
be found to hare carried farthest and widest
their memory. But not a single shrine re-
mains to them in the proper sense of the
word, not even where the Apollo or Venus,
the Minerva or Hecules, enchains uni-
versal admiration. They are abolished as
idols, while immortalised as relics, and not
even the exquisite beauty lavished on them
can hide the moral deformity to which they
owe their downfall. It is long centuries
since one single soul regarded them with
anything of the feeling with which the
African trembles before the rudest fetish,
or the Hindu before the most unsightly of
his divinities. Another conquest so com-
plete and absolute does not mark the history
of the world. All ranks and classes passed
through the revolution. The husbandman
had to give up his offerings to Liber and
Ceres, the sailor his votive tablets to Nep-
tune, the soldier his chaplets dedicated to
Mars. The youth had to forget his place
in the procession, the virgin her part in the
dance or secular games. The senat or had
to forego his libation on entering the senate.
The general his search after the omens be-
fore battle. The very Emperor, the honour
of his own coins and titles of divinity.
What but an immense and boundless power
could have wrought this change, and
wrought it not by constraint but willingly
through the force of persuasion P It can-
not be denied that some of the later con-
flicts with paganism were unfair, and that
Christianity refused to idolatry the civil
justice which it had so nobly and passion-
ately claimed for itself by act and suffering.
But in the decisive stages of the contest
nothing prevailed, or could have prevailed,
but moral influence, and the preacher, the
apologist, and the martyr secured a pure
and bloodless victory.”
It is the reverse of this principle of ac-
tion that is presented during the middle
ages when the church, not Christianity,
abandoned her proper weapon, persuasion,
and drew the sword. Christendom, almost
in mass, frantically dashed itself against
the Mohammedanism of the East in the
vain attempt to rescue Palestine from the
followers of the prophet of Mecca. From
1096 to 1270 no fewer than seven expedi-
tions left Europe for the Holy Land, the
first of which is said to have numbered at
starting as many as six millions of souls.
As might well have been expected, no per-
manent advantage was gained, and these
convulsions, which shook Christendom to
its centre, ended only in disaster in which
the loss of life had been incalculable.
The world has never yet seen such an-
other fulfilment of Christ’s words, which
he spoke for the guidance of his followers:
—“ They that take the sword shall perish
with the sword.” By such a weapon it
was never intended that Christianity should
prevail over heathenism or infidelity.
The history of the modern conflict of
Christianity with heathenism is the story
of revived missionary zeal. The lessons
which were taught during the earlier efforts
of this warfare valuable as bearing on
both sides of the question. A short period
after the Reformation, a striking revival of
the missionary spirit took place within the
Roman Catholic Church, with very doubt-
ful results. None but a bigot can refuse
to acknowledge the zeal and self-denial of
Loyola and Xavier, together with the better
part of their followers ; but the work was
altogether too superficial and the result
looked more like a compromise with
heathenism than its thorough-going con-
versiun. Submission to the mere form of
baptism was too readily accepted as an
evidence of the surrender of the heart to


the power of divine grace. Of a very
different character was the still later
missionary enterprise of the Moravians.
They commenced their labours in 1732,
having adopted as their motto, “ Venture
in Faith.” During the twenty years that
followed, the Moravians had established
more missions than the combined Protest-
ant churches in two hundred years. The
countries which have been most con-
spicuously blessed with their efforts arc
Greenland and Labrador. It has been the
opinion of many that savages ought to be
civilised before the gospel is preached to
them; but the success of the Moravians
has abundantly shown that it is a false
method to put anything before the gospel,
as being needful preparation. They have
taught the world, on the contrary, that the
gospel itself when carried to heathen tribes
is the best preparative for civilisation. Nor
is this all the problem which the Moravians
have worked out for the benefit of the
churches. They have clearly demonstrated,
from their own experience of success and
failure, that it is the evangelical, rather
than the moral side of the gospel that is
to be first presented even to heathenism.
This important lesson regarding the proper
method of missionary work will be best
learned from an extract from Spanganbcrg,
one of their representative writers : —“ The
method of the brethren to bring the heathen
to Christ was in the beginning of their at-
tempts, particularly in Greenland, nearly
as follows: They proved to the heathen
that there is a God, and spoke to them of
His attributes and perfections. In the
next place, they spoke upon the Creation;
how God had made man after His own
image, which, however, was soon lost by
the fall. They then made the heathen ac-
quainted with the laws which God gave by
His servant Moses. Hence they proved
to them that they were sinners, and had
deserved temporal and eternal punish-
ment. And from this they drew the con-
sequence, that there must be one that re-
conciled them to God. This method of
teaching they continued for a long time,
but without any success, for the heathen
became tired of such discourses. If it be
asked, how happened it that the brethren
fell upon this method, I must confess that
I am apprehensive, I myself was the cause
of it. The first brethren who were des-
tined for Greenland, went to Copenhagen
by way of Halle, where I at that time lived.
They tarried a few days with me, and
conversed with me relative to their inten-
tions. Upon this I gave them a book to
read (for I knew no better at that time) in
which a certain divine treated, among other
things, of the method to convince and to
bring the heathen to Christ. The good
man had probably never seen a heathen in
all his life, much less converted any ; but
yet he imagined he could give directions
how to set about it. The brethren followed
them but without success. Meanwhile it
pleased the Lord our Saviour to give the
congregation at Herrnhutt more insight
into the work of atonement through the
offering of Jesus. Nor were the brethren
wanting in declaring to those in Greenland
that they must preach Jesus Christ, if they
meant to produce any blessing among the
heathen. Upon this the brethren began to
translate some parts of the gospel, espe-
cially what relates to the sufferings and
death of Jesus and read that to the
heathen. This gave an opportunity to
speak with them further on that head.
Then God opened their hearts that they
attended to the word, and it proved to them
also the power of God. They became
desirous of hearing more about it, and the
fire which had been kindled in them by the
Holy Ghost, spread farther and farther.
And thus many were converted to God;
since which time the brethren were fre-
quently asked by the heathen why they
did not preach to them sooner of Jesus.”
Such is the theoretical service which the
Moravians have rendered to the missionary
question. Subsequent enterprises have
succeeded in proportion as they have ad-
hered to the same method.
A new era in the history of missions was
opened by the English Baptist Association
in 1792. For some years previously regular
meetings were held for prayer on behalf of
the extension of the gospel; but it was not
till the date mentioned that any English-
man had been sent into the foreign field
as a missionary of the Cross. Then it was
that Carey commenced his great work
in India, to be followed soon after by
Marshman and Ward. The Serampore
Mission was so abundantly succcssful that
the rest of the leading churches of Britain
were stimulated and encouraged to send


forth labourers into other fields. In 1799
Henry Martyn proceeded to Dinapore and
Cawnpore under the auspices of the Church
Missionary Society. The Church of Scot-
land sent Duff to Calcutta in 1829. The
Presbyterian Church of England made a
praiseworthy advance in in 1847 by sending
the Bev. W. C, Burns to China. At the pre-
sent time there are at least one hundred
missionary societies belonging to the
churches of Christendom. The results, if
not all that could be wished, are at least
encouraging. During the century that has
passed since the commencement of the
modern missionary epoch, it is shown that
the additions to the Christian Church by
the admission of converts have been
proceeding on a geometrical ratio. In India
the census reveals the fact that the
Christians have increased every ten years,
at the rate of 53 per cent, in 1861, at 61
per cent in 1871, at 86 per cent, to 1881,
while the normal rate of increase of all
non-Christians has been 6| per cent,
in each ten years. Yet it must be con-
fessed that the conversion of the world to
the faith of Christ has proceeded so slowly
as to be a heavy reproach to the Christian
Church, which received as the Master’s
last words, “ Go ye into all the world and
preach the gospel to every creature.” Even
to this day two-thirds of the inhabitants
of the earth remain non-Christian. The
population of the human race is now esti-
mated at very nearly 1,500,000,000. Of
these barely 500,000,000 are Christians
even nominally, including the Protestant,
Boman and Greek Churches. Some one
has recently said that if Christians were
simply to do their duty in this matter the
world might be converted in ten years.
There are clear indications in the.prophecies
to warrant the belief that accessions to the
church will yet be made by multitudes at
once, so that a nation may be said to be
born in a day. These promises are not
meant to supersede, but to stimulate the
efforts of the Christian Church. Nothing
is more remarkable than the contrasts of
Scripture between the beginning and the
consummation of the New Testament dis-
pensation. It is like a handful of corn on
the top of the mountains, the fruit of which
shall shake like Lebanon, or a stone cut
out of the mountain without men’s hands
which itself grows into a great mountain
and fills the earth, or it is a little leaven
hid in three measures of meal till the whole
is leavened; or, finally, it is the express
assurance of the Almighty confirmed by
the oath of Him who can swear by no
greater than Himself. “As I live, saith
the Lord of Hosts, the whole earth shall
be filled with My glory.’’V.—Civilization
According to the shortest possible system
of chronology the human race had existed
four thousand years before Christianity
appeared. One obvious purpose served by
the delay was to give a demonstration of
the inability of mankind to work out, by
natural principles and operations, a civili-
zation which could be in any sense worthy
of the name. If philosophy and culture
could have done it, Greece would have
earned the palm; if it could have been
achieved through wealth and power, Borne
would have secured as signal a triumph
here as she did in subduing by arms the
nations of the earth ; if trade and com-
merce could have inaugurated the new era,
Alexandria or Carthage would have antici-
pated the nineteenth century. But all
these signal civilizing powers had run
their course and were spent forces by the
time that Christianity appeared. What
the world needed was the infusion of new
elements into the very core of society which
would work outwards through all its ramifi-
cations. As Dr. Storrs has pointed out, this
want was supplied by Christianity which
began by introducing a new conception of
God as the universal Father, a holy Per-
sonality, caring for the most insignificant
of His creatures and exercising a watchful
Providence over all their interests ; and all
this as the counterpart of the gods of.
paganism who were chiefly local, at most
only national, and never taking a benevo-
lent concern in the masses or helping
forward the progress of the race. Equally
remarkable was the new conception of man
revealed by Christianity. He was declared
to be the creation of God, formed in the
very image of Him who had made of one
blood all nations of men to dwell on all the
face of the earth, creatures endowed with
immortal souls, who were responsible to a
final tribunal, and were concerned with an


eternity of weal or woe which stood over
against the facts of this present life. These
ideas were in flat contradiction to all pre-
vious notions concerning the origin and
dignity of man. Even the Greeks, the
most intelligent nation of antiquity, were
the foremost to repudiate a divine father-
hood, and made it their boast that they
had sprung from the soil, and, in con-
formity with this debasing belief, this
people selected the grasshopper as the
badge of their origin. Any conception of
the true dignity of man and the consequent
sacredness of human life was impossible
and no trace of it is to be found in all an-
tiquity. The ancients were not slow to
appreciate genius, they even adored it and
sometimes elevated its possessors to the
rank of demi-gods; but respect for man as
such, according to our modern ideas, was
never entertained by the ancient world.
These new conceptions of God and man,
together with their reciprocal relations,
have ever since proved to be the motive
powers of civilization and in the same
degree in which they have been allowed
unrestricted operation. It is not the part
of a Christian to deny that some side forces
have been at work; but even they have
been largely vitalised from the same primal
source. As a general statement of the case
the finding of the late M. Victor Cousin may
well pass unchallenged; “Our modern
civilization is Christianity.’’
Following the method of Christianity
itself which works from the centre to the
circumference, we shall take a brief review
of the services rendered to civilization as
they connect themselves with the family,
with the community, and with international
relations. The family is the basis of
society, and when this is corrupted, as it
was lamentably so in pre-Christian times,
the state itself rests on a hollow founda-
tion. The bond of the household is the
marriage tie which above all things called
for the helping hand of the new religion.
Throughout the ancient world the mutual
obligation of husband and wife was reck-
oned of little account. Divorces were
easily obtained and exceedingly frequent.
Free marriages, an arrangement which
could be terminated at the request of cither
party, were not uncommon with such
results as might be expected, frequent
separations and the abandonment of chil-
dren. In no case was the wife allowed to
possess any power in her own right, she was
simply the slave of her husband who had
purchased her for a sum of money. “ To
buy a wife” passed in some countries for
the name of marriage. Christianity changed
all by infusing a new dignity and a kind of
sacredness into the marriage relation. It
was shown to have a divine origin before
man had fallen into sin, the prototype w r as
held forth in that love w'hercwith Christ
loved the church in dying for its salvation ;
and He Himself declared that marriage
could not be broken except by the one act
which in its own nature annulled it. The
reformation which these ideas effected in
this fundamental article became a matter
of common observation, and was duly ac-
knowledged even by the heathen. Nothing
is more forbidding in the ancient world
than its treatment of children. The father
was an unlimited despot within his own
family. The laws of the Twelve Tables
expressly authorized him to kill his own
children if he preferred not to rear them.
Child-murder, in one form or another, is
seen in Homan history to have been awfully
frequent, and passed as a matter of course.
An actor on the stage once “broughtdown
the house’’ with the exclamation, “lam a
man and nothing human is indifferent to
me.” The applause is heartily kept up in
modern times ; but it is not perhaps gener-
ally known that the same actor, before
reaching the end of the play, finds fault
with his own wife because she refused to
commit infanticide. The expression of this
horrid sentiment, so far as the record
shows, provoked no dissent. The usual
way of getting rid of children who were
sickly or whom their parents found it in-
convenient to rear, was by abandonment or
exposure. Certain places were named
where babes might be left to perish of
want, to be devoured by beasts of prey, or
picked up by more savage men to be reared
for slaves or even worse purposes. These
barbarous practices could no more continue
under the influence of Christianity than
rivers could remain icebound through the
hot summer days. The Christian fathers
said, very beautifully, that the Man Christ


Jesus by living through all the periods of
life had sanctified every one of its stages.
The Master Himself laid His hands on
children and blessed them, saying, “ Suffer
little children to come unto Me and forbid
them not. for of such is the Kingdom of
God.” The Bible furnished touching in-
stances of ministering children like Samuel
and Timothy. With such examples before
it, the church admitted infants into its
fellowship by baptism, and reckoned them
part of itself. In all places where Christ-
ianity prevailed the barbarous treatment of
children came to an end and the blessing
has continued to augment up to the present
time, as witnessed by Sunday-schools, and
children’s literature which was wholly un-
known in ancient times. In all antiquity
there is no trace of a book written expressly
for the young. The author who would
attempt such a novelty would have been
regarded as having taken leave of his
senses.
Coming now to the wider sphere of the
community it may be proper to begin by
a consideration of woman’s position in
society, just as we have glanced at her
relation to her husband in the home. The
status of woman in Christian and non-
Christian countries reaches a perfect con-
trast. Where the gospel does not prevail
she is scarcely recognised as possessing
any rights, sometimes accounted a thing
rather than a person, to be bought and
sold by her lords at will. She has been
described as owing three obediences, to her
father till married, to her husband till his
death, and to her eldest son for the re-
mainder of her life. How immeasurably
the gospel has elevated the condition of
woman and ennobled her character is
strikingly pourtrayed by Dr. Storrs in his
recently published work on “ The Divine
Origin of Christianity.” “ The Lord Him-
self, whom the early disciples regarded
certainly as a transcendent person, had
been born of a woman; and the fact was
recited to her praise as to His, in the
jubilant oecumenical creeds of the church.
Women had been His devoted disciples
during his personal ministry upon earth ;
the wife of Chuza, the sisters at Bethany,
the woman who because she loved much
had been bidden by Him to go in peace.
Women had been the first converts in
Europe, Lydia at Philippi, the honourable
women at Thcssalonica, the woman named
Damaris—another Athenian Magdalen she
may have been—upon Mars’ Hill, the
Priscilla whose name is more than once
placed before her husband’s, as if to
indicate a certain conceded and beautiful
leadership in her genius and spirit. As
soon as congregations of Christian disciples
began to be formed in any proud and
dissolute city, women began to bo recog-
nised and effective in definite and import-
ant ministerial functions. Salutations
were addressed to them, epistles even, by
the foremost apostles ; and that faith which
was afterwards radiantly shown by their
sisters in the spirit, in the arena and at the
stake, had been discovered and commended
in themselves before the prosecuting
frenzies arose. The grandmother Lois,
the mother Eunice, were remembered by
Paul in his prison at Borne, when his
chained hand could not trace his own
words. The whole church, to the thought
of the disciples, took the form of a woman,
radiant and crowned, on earth and hi
heaven. The effect of all this was im-
mediate and immense. The standard of
character and of moral inspiration, was ra-
pidly and permanently lifted among women.
Not losing modesty, only finding it per-
fected in the love of the Lord, they began
to reveal that intensity of faith, that reck-
less completeness of self-consecration to
noblest aims, which has been since the
glory of the sex. This was true of those
in the humbler class. From celestial in-
structions, assurances, hopes, even menial
service took upon it celestial gleams, while
those of higher ranks, like the British
Claudia, passed out of enticements of
luxury and lust into a wholly new realm
of experience. Monogamy was made uni-
versal in the church, and marriage became
a free and solemn covenant for life, taking
a character even sacramental. In all the
Lord’s recorded dealings with the women
of His time, His act had been one of libera-
tion. To women, as the disciples believed
He had spoken from the cross as on the
Via Dolorosa which led to that. To them
as they equally believed He had shown
himself first after the resurrection. Women


had been joined in prayer with the apostles
when from beneath the opened heavens
they returned to Jerusalem from the
mount called Olivet. And the lesson of the
position thus assigned to the sex has never
since been lost from the world.”
Another burden under which the old
world groaned was the curse of slavery. It
was universal when Christianity appeared.
The number of slaves was simply enor-
mous. Gibbon reckons that under the
Emperor Claudius the servile population
throughout the Roman empire balanced the
free, there being probably sixty millions of
each. There were many causes which
tended to the increase of slaves, while there
were but few occasions on which they were
set free. The life of these slaves was
wretched in the extreme. They were
totally deprived of all rights and passed
from one owner to another as goods and
chattels. At the mere pleasure of their
owners these miserable bondmen might be
beaten or killed with impunity. The only
mode of discipline in common use was the
lash. When they grew old and too feeble
to be worth their food, they might be con-
veyed to an island in the Tiber to die or be
thrown into their masters’ fish-ponds to
feed the fish. Such was the position of the
slave question when Christianity appeared.
How did the new gospel act on the vile
curse of slavery ? It must be understood
that it was no purpose of Christianity to
cause any violent disruption of the bond
of society, and plunge the world into a state
of anarchy. It depended more on its own
transforming spirit than on the force of ex-
ternal legislation. Its own chosen emblem
is a little leaven which a woman took and
hid in three measures of meal till the whole
was leavened. Just so did it operate upon
slavery. It sought to put an end to the
evil, not by demolishing the structure
which was so closely dovetailed into the
framework of society, but by silently in-
troducing a new force which, sooner or
later, would sweep the curse from off the
face of the earth. Such was the explana-
tion given by the primitive Christians, who
had perfect confidence in their principles.
In the writings of Chrysostom, the golden-
mouthed patriarch of Constantinople, one
meets with such memorable words as
these, “Through the vista of history we
see slavery and its pagan theory of two
races, fall before the holy word of Jesus—
all men are the children of God.” Of
course immediate and energetic measures
were at once adopted to suppress the evil
as far as practicable. Emancipation took
effect wherever possible, and the form of
manumission was usually performed on the
Sabbath day and within the walls of a
Christian church. It was counted as a
pious deed to give money for liberating
slaves; many persons left legacies for the
same purpose, while they seldom forgot to
indicate that it was done under a sense of
religious duty. Sometimes the church
plate was sacrificed to this benevolent ob-
ject, and there is a memorable resolution
passed by the Council of Toledo which for-
bade this being done except for the ransom
of slaves. By one means and another, the
church had almost extinguished slavery in
Italy in the thirteenth century, and in Ger-
many also in another two hundred years
more. Every sign favoured the expecta-
tion of seeing the curse swept from the face
of the earth. But the exciting discovery of
America with the enormously enhanced de-
mand for slave labour, again threw history
back beyond the dark ages. Every
Englishman will remember with shame
the part his country played in the abomin-
able slave traffic, by which 3.000,000 of ne-
groes were believed to have been conveyed
with every circumstance of horror, from
their homes in Africa to America and the
West Indies. Ho page in English history
is blacker than this. And yet it must be
thankfully acknowledged that the mighty
impulse which has almost extinguished mo-
dern slaveryproceeded from the Christianity
of Britain. Men never tire in repeating the
sacrifice of twenty millions which the nation
expended in giving freedom to every slave
within her dominions. But it was not till
the rising tide of Christianity rendered it
impossible to endure the disgrace any
longer. It was through the instrumentality
of her most Christian men that this crown-
ing victory for humanity was achieved. At
the head of this philanthropic band stood
the noble Wilberforce who was one of the
finest realisations of the Christian ideal.
It is scarcely possible to find a better via-


dication of Christianity or a finer exhibition
of its spirit than those which are contained
in Wilberforce’s “Practical View.” So
evident is it that this blessed work was
accomplished through the influence of our
holy religion. It was but yesterday when
another victory, on so large a scale that it
can never be repeated, was achieved in the
United States of America. This one also
was won through the widening influence of
Christianity. The movement was eventu-
ally forced upon the South by the determi-
nation of the North ; but this motive power
was generated by the gospel doctrine of the
natural equality of all men in the sight of
God, and the command to love one's neigh-
bour as himself. Anyone at all acquainted
with the religious literature of the Northern
States at this period will remember how
completely it was saturated with the
Christian principle as bearing on slavery.
It is much to be regretted that in some
dark places of the earth the curse still
lingers, but it will cease there also when
Christianity comes in power and love bring-
ing liberty to the captives and the opening
of prison doors to them that are bound.
Very remarkable also have been the
efforts of later Christianity in humanising
punishment and tempering prison discip
line. Torture, so long the reproach of
every nation, has been totally abandoned
by all countries which claim to be Christ-
ian. Human ingenuity put itself on the
rack in order to devise instruments for
agonizing the human body, and produced
them in such numbers that their name is
legion. Happily they are to be found now
only in antiquarian museums. Up till
quite a recent period the state of the pri-
sons, even in the most advanced European
countries, was a shame and a disgrace to
modern civilization. All ages, with the
most varying degrees of criminality, were
huddled together in obscene dens like pigs
in a sty, to the imminent danger of their
health and the absolute certainty of sink-
ing to a lower depth in the mire of im-
morality. The reform was long in appear-
ing but it came at last from Christianity.
John Howard and Elizabeth Fry were the
two pioneers in this philanthropic move-
ment. The former was a distinguished
layman in the Baptist denomination. He
spent life and fortune in travelling through
many countries in Europe for the purpose
of visiting its gaols and pleading that the
incarcerated victims might be treated as
human beings. Elizabeth Fry was a mem-
ber of the Society of Friends and had a
recognised office in the connection. Her
labours in the cause of humanity lay among
the sinks of iniquity which were known as
the prisons of England. “ The filth, the
closeness of the rooms, the ferocious man-
ners and expressions of the women towards
each other, and the abandoned wickedness
which everything bespoke, are quite inde-
scribable,” were her own words in speaking
of what she had seen. In her case, hap-
pily, knowledge led to immediate action.
She urged on the necessity of ameliorating
prison life and morals, while she daily
visited the gaols and read the Scriptures to
the prisoners. Nothing has been more
remarkable in the moral development of the
nation than the success which has attended
these Christian efforts to humanise prison
discipline. Formerly these filthy dens were
the nurseries of disease from which pesti-
lent disorders were spread far and wide.
One species, known as the gaol-fever, was
wholly indigenous to this polluted soil.
The case, as it stands now, has become
completely reversed, for it passes as a
maxim that the gaols of Britain are the
health spots of the country.
It is now time to consider this subject
from an international point of view. Up to
a comparatively recent period all nations
kept themselves in a position of jealous
isolation. The ocean was believed to have
been divinely interposed for the purpose of
preventing the different countries from
holding intercourse with each other. One
nation was supposed to prosper in propor-
tion as its neighbours were reduced to a
condition of poverty and weakness, the
normal international relation being a state
of war. Out of this chronic enmity arose
the barbarous strangers’ rights, or what
should have been called, the usurped rights
over strangers. A Roman writer was pro-
bably giving the echo of an old proverb
when he said, “A man is a wolf to a man
he docs not know.” The part of the wolf
was very willingly played when a stranger
from another country happened to come in


the way. In nearly all countries he was
reckoned lawful prey to be seized, robbed,
and reduced to servitude unless he put
himself under the humiliating protection of
a local tyrant. The spirit of Christianity
confronted this barbarity, and at length
overcame it through the power of love.
It brought into the field a very wholesome
precept from the Old Testament, “ Thou
shalt not vex a stranger.” Christ made it
even one of the points on which the final
judgment would turn, “ I was a stranger
and ye took me in . , . inasmuch as ye
did it unto one of the least of my brethren,
ye did it unto Me.” The apostles also
urged the virtue of hospitality and ex-
horted the faithful “ not to be forgetful to
entertain strangers,” These principles have
brought about a complete shange in the
treatment of the stranger. In every civi-
lised country he is received with welcome,
unless an evil fame has preceded him ; and,
if he desires, can be absorbed into the body
of the nation by a simple form of naturalisa-
tion.
The so-called wreckers’ rights are but
the other side of this same criminality. It
is a fearful indictment against human
nature that it has taken a fiendish delight
in the direst misfortune of its fellow-
creatures to gratify its insatiable greed ;
that when the winds have driven a mer-
chant vessel upon a shelterless coast, the
inhabitants, it may be claiming to be the
most advanced of the nations, have seized
upon the cargo as lawful plunder, and sold
the mariners into slavery ; nay more, that
so-called civilised people without imagining
they were doing anything wrong, or being
thought worthy of punishment, have used
false lights to allure seamen to their de-
struction. Yet these diabolic practices at
one time were general, and in less aggra-
vated form have survived to recent days.
Scott, whose fictions are very true to nature
and history, has shown in “ The Pirate”
how large a remnant of these truly bar-
barous practices continued to exist till the
modern period. His graphic pen has pic-
tured an unfortunate ship caught in the
current and slowly drifting to the rocks;
the ill-concealed delight of the inhabitants
who were waiting like a tiger to spring
upon its prey ; their wicked industry in
making away with the booty as each man
found most suitable to himself; and their
displeasure with a visitor from the south
who had saved the captain from drowning,
alleging as their belief that a man saved
from the waves never failed some time or
other to inflict mortal injury upon his de-
liverer—surely a most convenient and profit-
able doctrine for all such as made their
gain from the misfortunes of those that “ do
business in great waters.” Happily all
these deeds of savagery are now things of
the past, although some of them are not
very long past. It is the living power of
Christianity that has wiped them out.
When a wreck is reported now it is a signal
to the inhabitants not -to make a rush to the
shore and scramble for the spoil, but to
hasten with food to the hungry and clothes
to the naked. Life-boats have now taken
the place of false lights ; and the man who
rescues another from a watery grave, in-
stead of being frowned upon with a hint of
mortal injury from the hand he has saved,
is fittingly rewarded for bis heroism by the
presentation of a gold medal from a Eoyal
Society.
Yet notwithstanding all that has been
accomplished, it must be acknowledged
with sorrow that war, the greatest of all
international scourges, still exists with
fearful vitality. But that it also shall be
finally put down by Christianity is one of
the most certain of all certainties. This
will take place neither sooner nor later
than the time when the nations of the
earth shall embrace the Gospel of Christ in
reality and come under its power. Already
much has been done in lessening the horrors
of war and circumscribing its limits. Poi-
soned weapons, the infliction of needless
pain, and the slaughter of prisoners are
abandoned by every nation which calls
itself Christian in any sense. In former
times when two nations went to war, every
citizen, as well as every soldier, was ex-
pected to take up a hostile attitude towards
the enemy, and inflict all the mischief that
was possible in any conceivable way.
Now the strife is being limited more and
more to the armed hosts. It was a new
thing in military annals when the Emperor
of Germany—so often sneered at for his
piety—proclaimed that “he made war no


on French citizens, but on French soldiers.’’
The code of international law, which was
first formulated by Grotius, the eminent
statesman and divine, is being steadily ex-
tended and has been substantially adopted
by all the great Powers. It has already
borne excellent fruit, not only in circum-
scribing the limits of war, but also in pre-
venting, in many notable cases, an appeal
to the sword by calling in the intervention
of mediation or arbitration. It is the pro-
phecy of Christianity, as it is the certain
aim of its spirit, that “ nation shall not lift
up sword against nation, neither shall they
learn war any more.”
Such then is a brief outline of the lead-
ing services which Christianity has ren-
dered to civilization, or the progress of the
race. What is the correct inference to be
drawn from the results which have been
reached after a calm consideration of the
whole subject? Is it to be a quiescent
toleration of Christianity on the ground of
its utility ? Is it to be allowed to take its
place alongside the other religions of the
world, renouncing its claim to a super-
natural origin and being content to live
because it is useful ? So, at least, many
tell us at the present time. The churches
are asked to give up the claim of a divine
right, to cease to be dogmatic, and be con-
tent to exist as moral institutes. If reli-
gion should ever come to take up such a
position, it would be found by sad experi-
ence that Christianity had been useful just
because it was something more and far
better. Your wife, let it be supposed, is of
great service to you as a housekeeper. So
far you can appreciate her worth, if no
further, and you are willing to give her
room and maintenance, because she saves
you the expense of a hired servant; but she
would never consent to occupy such a place
in your house or your estimation; and if
she did, you would soon find the mercenary
value you set upon her also disappear. She
might tell you, very truly, that her useful-
ness was the necessary consequence of her
being your wife, and that the excellence
of her service is inseparably connected with
the love she bears you. So it is with our
religion. It is the divine element in
Christianity that has made it so useful to
humanity under all conditions. The last
issue of many of the contests has been with
the sword, the flames, or the wild beasts ;
and nothing could have carried the martyrs
through but the conviction that our faith is
what it claims to be in its creeds. Once
eliminate this element, regard the churches
as moral institutes to be supported because
they are useful in this present world; and
the roll of Christian martyrs will be fin-
ished—“ the noble army” will be wholly a
thing of the past, and the race as com-
pletely extinct as the megatheria of the
pre-Adamite earth.
Christianity and Cultuee.
Christianity addresses itself to man as a
rational being and asks for intelligent assent.
A superstitious credulity finds no place in
its creed. It claims, indeed, to be received
and acted upon in the spirit of a generous
faith ; but this only as the means to a better
knowledge and a fuller acquaintance with
its system of truth. The Divine Founder
said, “ If any man is minded to do His will
he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be
of God, or whether I speak of myself.”
Paul, its principal expounder, addressed
these suggestive words to the Christians at
Corinth :—“ In the church I had rather
speak five words with my understanding
that by my voice I might teach others also,
than ten thousand words in an unknown
tongueand again, “ I speak as unto
wise men; judge ye what I say.” It is
not enough that the heart be impressed ;
the understanding also must be enlightened.
An interesting incident in the “ Acts of the
Apostles” clearly indicates the function of
the intellect in the reception of Christianity.
A treasurer of Candace, Queen of the
Ethiopians, had, as a proselyte, visited
Jerusalem to discharge a religious duty
according to the Old Testament ritual, and
on his homeward journey was engaged
reading the Prophet Isaiah when he was
accosted by Philip with the all-important
question “ Understandest thou what thou
readest ?” The stranger had come from
almost the ends of the earth, had performed
his duties at the temple, had possessed
himself of a copy of the Scriptures at what
would appear to us a fabulous price, and,


to the neglect of the novel sights and scenes
through which he was passing, evidenced
his piety and devotion by reading, in an
audible voice, the story of the promised
Messiah. Most religions would have been
satisfied and have asked nothing more.
But Christianity will have the head as well
as the heart; and for this reason its
authorized expounder drew near to the in-
teresting stranger and ceased not to instruct
him till he understood what he had read.
The religion of Jesus Christ is contained
in the New Testament which sustains the
same relation to the Old as the flower does
to the plant. It is at once the most simple
and the most profound of all books. As
some one has said, there are shallows where
a child may wade, and depths where an
elephant may swim. It is taught to profit
in Sunday Schools, and the most gifted in-
tellects find it an inexhaustible mine after
a life-long study. It is the profounder
side of the Divine Word that allies it so
closely with the culture of the mind. No-
thing short of colossal learning will suffice
to establish a claim to Biblical criticism. A
complete mastery of Old Testament Hebrew
and New Testament Greek are indispens-
able to the man who aims at making the
highest use of the Scriptures, whether for
public instruction or private edification—
to say nothing of his proficiency in other
languages in which the oldest versions have
been embalmed. The side-lights also are
innumerable and cannot possibly be ignored
without detriment to an intelligent compre-
hension of the Bible. Sacred history, in
all its great crises dovetails into the trans-
actions of all the neighbouring nations, and
cannot be profitably studied as an isolated
narrative. The canon of Scripture has
been closed for a period of something like
eighteen centuries. Its composition, there-
fore, belongs to old world times and cannot
be understood now without drawing largely
on the department of antiquities both
secular and sacred. For these reasons the
Christian, who would know his text-book
thoroughly and become mighty in the
Scriptures, must be a man of wide culture
and manifold attainments. He requires to
be at home in a number of languages, to
have found his way through the history of
ancient nations, to be well-informed of the
progress of archaeological research in the
disinterment of long buried cities like
Nineveh and underground Jerusalem, and
to keep abreast of modern travel in Bible
lands; and after all this is done he will not
have passed beyond the externals of his
subject. To break the shell is only the
means of reaching the kernel. All the
learning hitherto described is but the
necessary apparatus for the intelligent ap-
prehension of the doctrines of Scripture.
The fundamental truth concerning God,
that there is but one Godhead and yet a
Trinity of Persons, is so profound a mystery
that the most gifted minds, after the study
of a life-time have left it as great a mystery
as ever. No less engaging is its revelation
concerning man, as created pure, as fallen,
as redeemed, as being regenerated and
fitted for an eternity of blessedness.
Equally profound is the action of the
Almighty power on the human mind; which
is free and yet divinely transformed into a
new creature. Then again there is the
formulating of all the individual doctrines
into a system of theology which calls for
the wisest exercise of the judgment, and
the highest operation of the understanding.
Furthermore, really to understand what
Christianity is, one must study it in its his-
tory and development during the past
eighteen centuries. There is no single
doctrine contained in the records which has
not emerged on the surface of ecclesiastical
history and come in for its share of public
discussion in prolonged, earnest, and often
heated controversy. Not even philosophy
with Jail its searching questions of life and
being, of the world and nature, of God and
man, has presented such absorbing prob-
lems to the human mind as have been
furnished by ecclesiastical history. The
great church councils, of which eight are
reckoned oecumenical, and most of them
attended by many hundreds who were the
flower of the genius and scholarship of the
age, were all convened to deliberate and
decide on some Christian doctrine which
was absorbing the public attention of the
period. These assemblies with their dele-
gates, crossing seas almost untraversed and
scaling lofty mountain ranges, formed the
first examples of a system of representative
Government which now yields its fruij in


the Parliaments of every free country.
These are the exercises of mind which are
indispensable to an intelligent apprehension
of Christianity as contained in the Scrip-
tures and the development of doctrine in
the history of the church. Of such im-
portance are they all reckoned that not one
of the series is omitted from the curriculum
of a well equipped theological institute in
any part of Christendom. If Christianity
had done nothing more for the world than
to impart this impetus to intellectual
culture it would have more than repaid all
the sacrifices which have been offered at its
shrine.
The foregoing services which Christianity
has rendered to the culture of the mind
are of a private and individual kind. The
class of persons who are so benefited are
necessarily limited. Only those who take
a profound and life-long interest in the
Christian religion obtain this incidental
advantage of a high intellectual discipline
through continuous study of the Book and
its doctrines. These are but a few com-
pared with the many to whom thinking is
a burden, and who are satisfied with a
superficial knowledge of the catechism and
the creed. Happily there are other results
to the culture of mankind which under the
wonder-working providence of God have
issued spontaneously from the action of
Christianity upon the world. The services
which have been rendered to literature,
both in its lower and higher forms are in-
calculable. The Scriptures have been
translated into the vernacular speech of
every country to which the gospel has been
carried. At this day versions of the Bible
are to be found in nearly three hundred
languages and dialects. Where no written
speech previously existed, it was created as
an auxiliary to the propagation of Chris-
tianity among a barbarous people. IJJphilas,
well-known in ecclesiastical history as the
apostle of the G-oths, finding no written
language among the warlike tribes beyond
the Danube, assiduously devoted his ener-
gies to supply this indispensible boon to
the Christianisation of the Goths. So illit-
erate were these aggressive sons of the
north that their missionary had to commence
even with the formation of an alphabet by
deyising signs to represent vocal sounds. In
this way he created for them a written
speech, and after prodigious labour supplied
the nation with a translation of the Scrip-
tures in their own tongue. This monument
of his industry remains, though in a defec-
tive form, to the present day, and is the
only extant specimen of the Gothic lan-
guage. Later services in the same line were
still more valuable toother nations. Up to
the period of the Reformation the Latin was
the universal language for the learning of
Europe. Hearly every book was written
in this tongue and the Bible itself could
scarcely be found in any other. But dia-
lects were growing up among all the nations
of the continent and conspicuously also in
Britain. These were the vernacular of the
people -just as the Latin was the language
of the learned. For an author to write in
any of these formative tongues was to
limit himself to one obscure nation with
the certainty of finding scarcely any
readers there in those illiterate times. A
yawning gulf thus intervened between
the learned men of a nation and those who
should have been his readers. What was
needed above all things was the introduc-
tion of some lever power to elevate and
develop the despised vernacular tongue.
The help which was so urgently required
came with the Reformation which claimed
the Bible for the people, gave them the
right of private judgment, and made the
Scriptures alone the judge of controversies
as well as the rule of faith and morals. It
followed as a necessary consequence, that
the Bible must be put into the hands of
the populace, not in the old Latin vulgate
of Jerome, but in the people’s own mother
tongue. Martin Luther, the prince of the
Reformers, led the van in this new depar-
ture. In his busiest days he would find
time for this benevolent task ; but his pro-
longed yet friendly confinement in the
castle of the Wartzburg, happily furnished
him with sufficient leisure to go through
the work of translation on which his heart
was so much set. Luther’s Bible not
merely formed the leading factor in the
formation of the German language, for it
almost created it as a written speech. The
same remarks apply in substance to the
English language. It was the transla-
tions of the Bible, and particularly the


authorised version, executed in the reign
of King James, that gave position and
stability to our mother tongue. Even
till within the last few years it was univer-
sally read in public and private schools,
and in this way its simple yet expressive
language became entwined with the
earliest thoughts and habits of the people.
It is this timely association with the divine
and solemn themes of the Bible that has
given to the German and English languages
their chaste sobriety and their remarkable
adaptation to the expression of religious
thought. No such good fortnne befell the
French tongue. It possesses no historic
version of the sacred Scriptures. This
determining cause was wanting in its
formative stage, and hence its jaunty and
flippant style, and acknowledged insuffi-
ciency as a vehicle for the communication
of solemn and profound religious thought.
In the higher departments of literature
also, the services which have been rendered
are such as to call for sincere gratitude.
The flood of barbarism which spread over
southern Europe in the middle ages threat-
ened to make an entire and irreparable
breach between antiquity and modern
times.
Had it not been tor the Ark in the days
of Noah none of the antediluvian life could
have been carried across the deluge to the
postdiluvian period; and but for the monas-
teries, notwithstanding all that can justly
be said against them, it is difficult to see
how the smallest salvage of ancient learn-
ing could have been preserved for modern
times. Fortunately for the cause of learn-
ing the masterpieces of antiquity were
gathered into cloisters and, whether studied
or not,were sheltered from the general havoc
and kept in safety till more propitious
times. The revival of learning, usually
known as the Bcnaissancc, was not the
direct effect of the church, but it would
scarcely have been possible except for the
services which Christianity had previously
rendered to literature.
The influence of the same power upon
the line arts is equally indisputable.
Architecture was the first to feel the gene-
rous impulse, but it could not come, of
course, till Christianity was fairly well
established. The Christians did not pos-
sess churches till the reign of Alexander
Scvcrus in the first quarter of the third
century. To the astonishment of the hea-
then, the religion of Christ had as yet ap-
peared without temple or altar; the re-
ligious assemblies had been held in private.
For so long it had been only a domestic
worship. After the connection of the
Church with the State, not only respectable
but even superb, places of worship began
to be erected. Partly on account of evil
associations, and still more on account of
their plan, the heathen temples, even after
they had ceased to be used for idolatrous
purposes, were deemed unsuitable for
places of public worship in the services of
the Christian Church. Almost the only
exception was made in favour of the Basi-
licas, or halls of justice, which were less
polluted by superstition and offered better
accommodation for a congregation of wor-
shippers. But nothing short of special
edifices would satisfy the growing taste of
ecclesiastical aspirations, and as the church
increased in wealth there was little diffi-
culty in finding the means for the erection
of costly structures. Triumphs of archi-
tecture on a lower plane had been achieved
in pre-Christian times as the temples of
Greece sufficiently testify, but a wholly
new impulse was given to this branch of
the fine arts by the requirements of the
Christian Church. The prevailing desire
now was not to produce massive grandeur
or elaborate workmanship merely for their
own sake, but to express in stone and
marble spiritual and super-terrestrial ideas,
and this object was attained in a marvel-
lous degree. One of the most memorable
creations is the steeple or spire which was
an architectural effort quite unknown to
the ancients. Basing from its massive
basement and tapering till the vanishing
point is reached, the spire invites the
thoughts of men away from the vanities of
earth and leads them towards the skies as
if exhorting the sons of men to set their
affections on things above not on things on
the earth. It is the same sentiment that is
embodied in the Gothic style with its
arches converging from the earth and
pointing to heaven. As the name suffi-
ciently indicates this impressive style of
architecture owes its birth to northern


Christianity, and, as a matter of fact, it
has never established itself in Italy which
has been as prolific in styles of her own as
she has been jealous of all others. Paint-
ing is the next of the fine arts which has
been supremely indebted to the inspiring
influence of Christianity. It is the over-
whelming grandeur of her themes that has
set on fire the painter’s genius and given
birth to the creations of his mind. The
master-pieces from Michael Angelo to
Gustave Dorc run usually in the line of
Scripture scenes. If all were to perish
which are grounded on Bible incidents or
ecclesiastical history, there would be very
little left that the world would be anxi-
ous to preserve.
The art of music has likewise been laid
under deep obligation to Christianity. The
department of sacred music it has entirely
created. The joy of the first converts found
expression in the spiritual songs and hymns
which even persecution could not suppress.
Paul and Silas though bleeding with stripes
and bound fast in the stocks broke the
silence of the midnight hour by singing
praise to God. One of the first notices of
the Christian religion, which comes from a
heathen source, describes the new converts
as engaged in singing responsive hymns to
Christ as their God. In the early times
there must have been much of the feelings
of the heart expressed in song with
very little of the science of music. But the
overflowing abundance of the matter for
song and the new spirit in which the praise
was to be offered could not be long in find-
ing improved methods of expression. The
history of sacred music in the ancient
church contains two names which are pre-
eminently distinguished. The first is Am-
brose of Milan in the last quarter of the
fourth century. It may be difficult to de-
scribe exactly the state of church praise as
he found it and left it, but his services are
acknowledged to have introduced a new
era in musical science. The second name
is that of Gregory the Great, who lived to-
wards the close of the sixth century, and is
usually reckoned one of the last great
church fathers. His chants retain their
popularity to the present day. The world,
whether Christian or infidel, is perfectly
willing to acknowledge its obligation to the
church for the boon of sacred music.
Its rehearsal is the most popular of all
entertainments. Any man, who is not al-
together insensible to the charms of music,
listens with rapture to Handel’s Messiah
whether he believes in Christ or not. And
much remains also to be said of the world’s
obligation to the Christian Church for in-
strumental as well as vocal music. What
ear is not delighted with the chiming of
bells as their soothing tones are wafted
on the wings of the gentle zephyrs of the
Sabbath eve ? Yet these valued posses-
sions were the special creation of ecclesi-
astical necessities. And yet again the
organ, which is the perfection of all musi-
cal instruments, had its origin within the
bosom of the church and is specially dedi-
cated to the praises of the sanctuary. More
than any other, it is the instrument of
ecclesiastical service, and would have re-
mained such in an exclusive sense had not
the world appreciated its value and made
the organ also minister to its delight.
The intellectual blessing which Christ-
ianity has brought to mankind has exerted
its principal influence through educational
channels. The church lists never been con-
tent to limit itself to religious instruction
when secular education could not be ob-
tained from other sources. In point of
fact, education both in its intellectual and
spiritual aspects, has been the task of Chris-
tianity, speaking generally, up to the life-
time of the present generation. The early
church gave good heed to this duty.
Throughout the Middle Ages, even if the
period is extended from Charlemagne to the
Eeformation, the reader of history is con-
tinually meeting with injunctions from
the decisions of ecclesiastical councils re-
quiring priests to open schools in their res-
pective parishes, and usually also to give
the children of the poor the benefit of free
education. It is well-known what a mighty
impulse was given to the same movement
by the Eeformation of the sixteenth cen-
tury. Scotland has ever since been speci-
ally distinguished for its popular educa-
tion, and great as the results have been,
something far more satisfactory would
have been achieved had Knox’s scheme
been carried out on the comprehensive
and statesmanlike plan which he had


formed. But unhappily the rapacious
noblemen seized on the lion’s share of the
patrimony of the church and applied it to
their own selfish purposes. Yet out of
the slender means which were left under
the control of the church, a school was
established in every parish of the country,
where the elements of education were im-
parted to the poorest of the people. Never
were better results obtained on so slender
an expenditure. So much has Christianity
done even in a poor country for popular
education. But the very highest achieve-
ments of learning were none the less accom-
plished within her pale. To her belongs
the university as well as the common
school. At the period of the revival of
letters the fountain heads of learning were
the Universities of Paris and Oxford, as
they were also the parents of many others
which sent forth the light of knowledge
over the continent of Er'-ope, But these
historic seats of learning were theological
institutes. In the beginning the only
studies pursued at these schools in Paris
and Oxford were the sacred Scriptures in
connection with the ministry of the church
and the theory of morals. iOl that these
famous universities afterwards became was
an outgrowth from this primal root. In
their earliest and most precarious stage of
existence, these institutions grew un under
the protecting influence and fostering care
of the Christian Church.
Such, then, are some of the principal
services which Christianity has rendered to
human culture. In the absence of this in-
fluence it is impossible to see how the flood
of barbarism could have been avei „ed and
a new era introduced, The Units of Chris-
tianity, in this department of its labours,
are very real and lie patent on every side.
Men of culture should be the foremost and
best friends of the religion of Christ; but
unhappily, ingratitude is one of the most
common failings of human nature. It is
humiliating to observe that of all classes of
the people, the men of culture are the least
disposed to entertain the claims of Christ-
ianity, and some of the church’s most bitter
opponents are drawn from its ranks. The
intellectual powers it has done so much to
develop, the wits it has so much sharpened,
and the knowledge it has imparted are
turned agaiust itself m order tori* de*ufac-
tion. To such a depth has he fallen who
was made but a little lower than the
angels.
That the essence of religion consists in
pious sentiment is the belief of a large,
and certainly a growing, party in this nine-
teenth century. Man is defined as being
in some sort “ a religious animal” who is
at perfect liberty to choose any form of
religion which he may judge best fitted to
arouse and express devotional sentiment.
It may be the most distorted caricature of
Christianity, or a heathen system from
India or China; for the religious eclectic
is allowed the same freedom as the musician
who exercises his right to use whatever in-
strument he considers best suited to excite
the gift that is in him, and give it the most
touching expression. It is difficult to sec
how Christianity can be construed into the
semblance of a sanction to this view of re-
ligion which is emotional and nothing more.
True, indeed, it is very eminently a religion
of feeling, but the sentiment grows out of
a very substantial root. There comes first
the truth and then its influence upon the
affections as its proper consequence. He
who will have Christianity without dogma
must end by having neither. The Bible is
as thickly set with doctrines as the winter
sky is studded with its glowing sapphires.
The analogy may be carried one step farther.
In both there prevail the prodigality of
wealth, even the embarrassment of riches,
and an infinity of details quite overwhelm-
ing, but without any formal arrangement
or attempted grouping of particulars: yet
in the one as well as in the other the in-
dustry of man has reduced multiplicity to
unity and evolved a systematic presentation
of facts which have resulted, in the one
case, in the science of astronomy, and, in
the other, of the science of theology. The
principle of the development of doctrine
has often been wrought out to a perilous
extreme for the aggrandisement of church
power ; but notwithstanding some fearful
abuses, it is a wholesome method when ex-
ercised within its proper limits. The body
of Christian truth was originally given in
mass, not for the purpose of being kept by
the church as a palladium; but to be
worked out into a system of doctrine by the


sanctified intellect under the guidance of
the Spirit who was sent to lead the church
unto all truth. The faith once for all de-
livered to the saints, or the body of truth
which was the church’s priceless heritage,
contained, so to speak, certain lines of
cleavage which caused the fundamental
doctrines to fall apart according to a
divinely pre-arranged system which, as a
whole, has been confessed by the orthodox
church in all ages, while, of course, the
way was left open for the vagaries of self-
conceited men who wished to exalt their
own reason above the authority of God’s
word. The discussion and definition of
particular doctrines began at an early
period and were finally determined by the
great ecclesiastical councils which were
convened during the following centuries;
but the systems of theology, which can be
so regarded on a fully comprehensive scale,
do not go farther back than the Reforma-
tion of the sixteenth century. There are
certain primary truths which are not only
all-important in themselves, but also, ac-
cording as a higher or lower interpretation
is put upon them, exercise a controlling in-
fluence on the others which fall into a sub-
ordinate place. In virtue of this principle,
it has been found that there are, and can
only be, three fundamental schemes of
Christian doctrine. These are now univer-
sally known by the historic names of the
Socinian, the Arminian, and the Calvinistic
systems of theology.
While the Reformation was proceeding
on its marvellous career in the countries to
the north and west of the Alps, two very
remarkable men rose into notoriety within
the borders of Italy. These were Lselius
and Faustus Socinus, uncle and nephew,
the former must be regarded as the real
founder of the system which is identified
with his name; but it was the latter who
wrought out the details and gave it that
degree of stability which it long retained on
the continent of Europe. Faustus, finding
the intolerance of Italy unendurable,
sought refuge among the Reformers of
France and Switzerland; but perceiving
that incompatibility of doctrine rendered
their intercourse less friendly than he had
expected, the heresiarch thought it advis-
able to retire to Poland which offered a
better field for the propagation of the novel
system of belief, and this he had the more
reason to expect as the Anabaptists were
already tinged with some of his funda-
mental ideas. After much opposition,
during which Socinus showed he was not
destitute of the spirit of a martyr, his
peculiar views were eventually adopted by
the ecclesiastical Synod. In subsequent
years the doctrines of the Italian heresiarch
were fully developed and digested into a
coherent system which was ever afterwards
known as Socinianism. It is not simply
the negation of all the leading doctrines
of the orthodox church but is a positive
scheme of doctrine which, however con-
trary to the Scriptures as commonly inter-
preted, has the merit at least of being
consistent with itself. It starts with the
divine records as being the primary docu-
ments of the Christian faith. These are
not allowed to be supernaturally inspired.
The writers are acknowledged to have
been good men who did their best accord-
ing to the light that was in them, but not
being guided by any higher power might,
and in fact did, err in many important
matters which remain to be corrected by
the application of rational principles. In
respect to the Godhead, the Socinians are
strict Unitarians. They deny that a
Trinity of persons is possible with the
unity of God. The Holy Spirit is under-
stood to be merely an influence or a mode
of the operation of deity, much being made
of such expressions as speak of the spirit
being poured out, and breathed upon the
disciples by the Saviour. The most
characteristic tenet of the Socinian system
is its teaching concerning the person of
Christ. He is not acknowledged as divine;
but yet He is accepted as no ordinary man.
In character He stands above all the sons
of men. He had also a divinely appointed
mission to men. Of the three offices, of
prophet, priest, and king, the two latter are
virtually emptied of their meaning, and the
whole weight is laid on the prophetical or
teaching office. Men are taught both by
His word and by His example. Not being
divine, death was of course inevitable.
The significance of that death as a satis-
faction to divine justice is strenuously
denied, for God is believed to pardon sin as


a free act of His mercy. Nevertheless,
there are several moral considerations con-
nected with the death of Christ, As a
Teacher who was despised and rejected, it
was fitting that He should seal His testi-
mony with His own blood. And it was
part of the same office that He should give
to His followers an examnle of patient
suffering and submission to tne will of G od.
Another purpose of the death of Christ,
which has found a place in the Socinian
scheme, is sufficiently remarkable. It is
understood that one point of cardinal
importance in His teaching was to bring
immortality to light. But this, it is said,
could be done only by the man Christ
Jesus entering into the future life and
coming again from the same state. Hence
it was necessary that He should rise from
the dead, and this, again, could only be
through the prior act of dying. Such are
the leading views of Socinians in theology
proper. Their treatment of anthropology,
or the doctrine concerning man, is on the
same level. The fall of Adam and its
legacy to his posterity are wholly repu-
diated. It is denied that the father of the
race was created in a state of superadded
righteousness, which he lost once for all.
Nor is it admitted that his descendants, in
the matter of obedience to God’s law, are
in a worse position than Adam was at his
creation, except in so far as they see more
examples to sin, and are therefore so much
more likely to follow evil courses. The
foregoing are the main peculiarities of the
Socinian scheme of theology. In its
earlier history it greatly exercised the mind
of the Church, as is sufficiently evidenced
by the libraries of controversial works to
which it gave rise. In a historical point of
view it has been fruitful of consequences,
which orthodox Christianity can contem-
plate with no other feeling but sincere
regret. The old Socinianism eventually
broke up into two schools which may, with
some latitude, be termed a right and a left
party. The former have developed into
the Unitarian denomination of Christians,
although some have denied them that
honourable name because of their denial
of the divinity of Christ. The Left School
have gravitated into downright rationalism,
which has taken from religion everything
but the name, if even to much lias been
allowed to remain.
Arminianism occupies an intermediate
position between Socinianism and Cal-
vinism ; but inasmuch as it is a revolt
from the rigid Calvinistic scheme of doc-
trine, it may conduce to a clearer ap-
prehension of the subject to take it up as
the +l iird in the order of discussion. Cal-
vinism has received its name from the
eminent reformer of Geneva, not as imply-
ing that it originated with him, but rather
to mark the great services which Calvin
rendered to the elucidation of this system
of theology. So far from claiming him for
its founder Calvinists maintain that it is
the very doctrine of the New Testament as
expounded more especially by St. Paul in
his epistles. The main outlines of the
scheme were so fully illustrated and de-
fended by Augustine in the beginning of
the fifth century that many have thought
it would be more appropriately called
Augustinism than Calvinism. Neverthe-
less, the signal service which the great
reformer rendered to this system of reli-
gious truth in his immortal Institutes of
Theology fully entitles him to all the honor
implied in the intended compliment. Cal-
vinism grounds itself exclusively on divine
revelation. It accepts the Bible as being
fully inspired in all its details, and regards
it as the only rule of faith and morals, as
well as the sole judge of controversies. Its
theology is peculiarly honouring to God,
whom it acknowledges as having pre-
ordained whatsoever comes to pass, and as
executing in time what He has purposed
from all eternity; but yet as being in no
sense the author of sin, nor doing violence
to the free actions of his responsible crea-
tures. The Trinity of Persons in the one
Godhead is strenuously asserted. The
agency of the Holy Spirit is insisted upon
as indispensable to conversion and the
consequent work of sanctification in the
soul. The Calvinistic doctrine concerning
the Person of Christ it also very exalted.
Not only is He declared to have existed
from all eternity, but His relation to the
Father is defined as the only begotten Son,
and this is grounded in the highly mys-
terious doctrine of eternal generation. In
the fulness of time the Word was made


flesh, the second Person of the Trinity
having taken to Himself a true body and a
reasonable soul. Just because of this
union of the divine and human He was
fitted to offer Himself a ransom for many,
the one making Him capable of suffering,
and the other giving to these sufferings an
infinite value. Hence the death of Christ
was a real atonement offered vicariously to
God for the sins of man in order that He
might be just while justifying the ungodly.
Not less characteristic and sharply defined
is the Calvinistic doctrine concerning man.
Adam is declared to have been created not
only free from sin but with a superadded
holiness, to have been taken into a cove-
nant relation to God in which he repre-
sented his posterity as well as himself, to
have fallen from his high estate, and by
his sin involved all his descendants in a
condition of misery in virtue of a twofold
relation he sustained to them; first, as
being their federal head, and thereby
bringing upon them the guilt of a broken
covenant; and secondly, as transmitting to
them a corrupt nature, which was there-
fore alienated from the favour of God. All
his ordinary posterity are thus regarded
as spiritually dead. In this state they would
for ever remain but for the gracious efficacy
of the Holy Ghost in making them new
creatures in Christ Jesus.
Besides these broad features of the
scheme there are certain so-called
“ peculiarities of Calvinism *' which at an
early period and under the exigencies of
controversy came to be antithetically ex-
pressed in five particulars which sprang
into historic notoriety as the famous “ five
points” in the contest with Arminianism.
These were: —Ist. Election or particular
predestination in the sense that God from
all eternity had chosen some to everlasting
life and left the others to the just penalty
of their sins; 2nd. Limited Atonement
or the belief that Christ died only for the
elect and not for all men indifferently
whether they would be saved or lost; 3rd.
Natural inability which means the im-
possibility of fallen man turning from a
state of sin unto God by his own motion
and in the absence of the help that comes
from above ; 4th. Irresistible grace, or the
doctrine of the Spirit’s efficacious influence
on the soul in spite of the opposition of the
flesh; and sth. The final perseverance of
the saints, or the certainty that those who
are once in Christ by being born again of
the Holy Ghost will not permanently fall
from grace and be lost eternally. The
doctrines of Calvinism, especially as ex-
pressed in the five points, are profoundly
humbling to human nature and lay all its
pride in the dust. It is little marvel,
therefore, that they have been stoutly
opposed by the mass of mankind in every
generation. The system is often caricatured,
knowingly or übknowingly, by antagonistic
divines who have spared no weapon which
could be of use to the pulling down of
strongholds. The position usually taken
up by opponents is the plausible one that
the system supersedes human exertion and
even encourages immorality; for if men
be elected they will certainly be saved with-
out any effort on their part, and if not
elected no effort can be of any avail. But
Calvinists have always protested against
this objection as being grounded on a total
misapprehension of the purpose of God in
election inasmuch as men are not predesti-
nated to salvation as the end without first
being elected to holiness as the means,
“ He hath chosen us in Him before the
foundation of the world that we should be
holy and without blame before Him in
love.” For a man to live in sin and yet
count on being saved because he may be
predestinated is to give positive evidence
that he has neither part nor lot in the
election of God. The best answer to the
objection that this system of doctrine leads
to immorality is just the history of Cal-
vinism itself, as it has operated among
various peoples and in different countries
during the past centuries. “ The practical
effect of Calvinism,” says Dr. A. A. Hodge,
“ is the best possible refutation of the
charges often brought against it. First, it
has uniformly raised the moral standard of
both individuals and communities by ex-
alting the sovereignty of God, and em-
phasizing the moral law. Compare the
Waldensians with the other Italians;
Geneva under Calvin’s rule with its con-
dition before or since ; the Huguenots,
with their Roman Catholic fellow-citizens ;
the Jansenists with the Jesuists; the


English Puritans with the courtiers of
Charles II; and, finally, all those sections
of Amexica settled by the Puritans and the
Presbyterians of Scotland, France, and
Holland with those settled by men of other
faiths ; North America with South America.
Calvinism makes giants of men. William
the Silent and Cromwell, Knox and Bunyan
were Calvinists. The Shorter Catechism
fought through successfully the Kevolu-
tiouary War. Again, as in personal
character, so, of course, in Government
both in church and state. It promotes
political freedom ; it establishes religious
liberty. Its principles strip the ministry
of all sacerdotal powers. They make all
men and all Christians equal before God.
They make God absolute and supreme over
all, and the immediate controller and dis-
poser of human affairs. Hence all churches
accepting Calvinism, unless prevented by
external conditions, have immediately
adopted popular constitutions-Presbyterian
or Independent. The republic was es-
tablished at the same time with Presbytery
at Geneva. The simple enumeration of
the names of the great representative
Calvinistic nationalities, the Waldenses,
the Swiss, the Huguenots, the Hollanders,
the Puritans, the Covenanters, the New
England and Scotch-Irish Americans prove
this point beyond question. Third, the re-
lation of Calvinism to education is no less
conspicuous and illustrious. The little re-
public of Geneva became the sun of the
European world. The Calvinists of France,
notwithstanding all their embarrassments,
immediately founded and sustained three
illustrious theological schools, at Montan-
ban, Saumur, and Sedan. The peasantry
of Scotland excel in intelligence those of
other European peoples, thanks to the
parish schools. For the first two hundred
years of the history of the United States of
America, almost every college and seminary
of learning, and almost every academy and
common school even, had been built up
and sustained by Calvinism. Fourth,
while it is true that every religion and re-
ligious party however impure its creed, or
temporary its success, may boast of its
martyrs, it is nevertheless a fact equally
certain and significant, that, beyond all
others put together, the Calvinistic churches
hare furnished the martyrs to Christianity
since the lleformation. It is only necessary
to mention the Waldenses, the victims of
the Inquisition in Italy and Spain, the
massacre of St. Bartholomew, the revocation
of the edict of Nantes, the victims of
Philip and Alva in Holland, of “ Bloody
Mary” and of the “ High Commission”
and of the Bloody assizes” in England,
the Puritans and Covenanters, and victims
of Claverhouse, and the “ Killing time ” in
Scotland. And, lastly, Calvinism is the
friend of missions ; but in this it is not
alone. No Church of Christ can forget His
command to disciple all nations, but this
can fairly be claimed on behalf of the
Calvinistic Churches. They have been
alike in priority and in extent of enterprise
and devotion leaders in this great work.
They have also excelled in the thorough-
ness of their educational organizations, and
in the manly and Christian type of
character they have formed in the converts
they have gathered of all races and in all
lands.”
It should not be forgotten, however, that
there is also an extreme in Calvinism which
has sometimes wrought injuriously to the
best interests of the church. Calvin him-
self was too guarded in his statements to
permit his advocacy to exceed due bounds.
After all that has been said of this system
of doctrine with which the name of the
great lieformer has been associated, one is
surprised to find how small a portion of his
voluminous writings is occupied with the
*' Peculiarities of Calvinism.” The subject,
indeed, is never shirked. It has a place of
its own, but is limited to that place, and
the due proportion is maintained between
all the parts of the theological system.
This important fact was overlooked by
others who thought they were walking in
his footsteps. Bcza, who succeeded him at
Geneva, was described as being “ Calvinior
Calvino,” that is to say, more Calvinistic
than Calvin himself. Other divines from
an excessive love of system through which
Ihey determined to drive a hard and fast
logic at all hazards, went to still greater
lengths in hyper-Calvinism. The re-action
which might well have been foreseen, at
length began to manifest itself ffitd made vC"
its first appearance in the Low Coubtrhnr.


The first important movement against
Calvinism took place in the Reformed
Churches, and may be dated from the
appointment of Arminius to the chair of
theology at Leyden in 1603. The re-action
had indeed commenced with another divine
whom Arminius had been appointed to
confute; but a closer examination of the
subject led him to adopt the same views
and also to deviate still farther from
Calvinism. The founder of a new system
of theology had but a short career as pro-
fessor for he died in 1609, and appears to
have differed from the current orthodoxy
only on three points, election, particular
redemption, and irresistible grace. The
controversy which had now reached an
acute stage was continued under able
successors, and the Arminians, or as they
were first called, Remonstrants, grew into a
powerful opposition. The points in dispute
were referred for settlement to a national
synod which was held at Uort in 1618, and
sat for six mouths. The Remonstrants pre-
sented their views as expressed in five
articles which, as already noticed, called
forth in defence the five antithetic points of
Calvinism, the one series being the counter-
part of the other. The Arminians denied
predestination in the Calvinistic sense, a
limited atonement as being for the elect
alone, the total inability of fallen man in
the matter of his own salvation, the doc-
trine of irresistible grace, and the final
perseverance of the saints. These five
articles after much debate were rejected by
the Synod and Calvinism re-affirmed. In
keeping with the practice of the times in
all ecclesiastical proceedings, the defeated
party were severely and summarily dealt
with. About two hundred ministers were
deposed, and such as persisted in prolong-
ing the controversy were banished from the
country. Happily more tolerant views
prevailed soon after these harsh measures
were inflicted. In 1830 full toleration was
granted with the power of erecting churches
and schools. The remarkable fact is that
the sect was more prosperous under perse-
cution than under toleration. No sooner
were they granted liberty of worship than
they began to decline in numbers, and this
retrogression has continued to the present
time, 'when there arc only twenty-one
ministers in the original Arminian Church.
The system of theology, nevertheless, is
now more widely prevalent than over,
having displaced Calvinism in the Church
of England as well as in other denomina-
tions. Arminianism has the appearance of
an escape from the difficulties which lie on
the surface of Calvinism ; but it too has its
roots in mysteries which are equally pro-
found and inscrutable to the human mind.
Cheistianity, the Religion of the
Futuee.
“ That Christianity,” observes Pascal,
“ is not the only religion is no real objec-
tion to its being true. On the contrary,
this is one of the means of proving that it
is true.” Here is a hint that may be
turned to some practical account in the
present section, as it bears very directly on
the religion of the future. The systems of
religious belief which dominated Europe at
the commencement of our era have all and
utterly passed away leaving not a single
worshipper; but in Asia other religions
which flourished at that time, or have since
come into existence, still pose as the rivals
of Christianity and claim the future for
their own. The leading antagonistic sys-
tems are seven in number, and, like Christ-
ianity, are all book religions founded on
what are accepted as “ sacred oracles,” or
a written religious code. Of these, one
arose among the Jews, one among the
Arabs, one among the Persians, two
among the Hindoos, and two among the
Chinese. The most ancient is Judaism,
which, though of divine origin, and notwith-
standing that it is still professed by the
nation at large, was certainly designed to
be local and temporary, being but a shadow
of good things to come. The religion of
the future must serve for the whole race
of mankind ; but Judaism was at all points
the antithesis of this desideratum. It was
given to a single people who were isolated
from all other nations in order that their
religion might be kept free from contami-
nation with the surrounding systems of
heathen worship. Aliens could obtain the
spiritual benefit in no other way than by
becoming Jcws to all intents and purposes.


Climatic conditions interposed an effectual
barrier to its adoption as a universal re-
ligion which, in fact, was rendered abso-
lutely impossible by its fundamental re-
quirement of a personal appearance at
Jerusalem thrice a year to celebrate the
solemn festivals. The purpose it was
designed to serve was to prepare for
Christianity and its highest professed aim
was the bringing in of a better hope.
Mohammedanism, or Islam, originated
in a strange and incongruous mixture of
Mosaic and Christian elements which were
immediately overlaid with heaps of rubbish
of a very sickening character. In a.d.,
570, there was born in Mecca, the capital
of Arabia, a child who received the name
of Mohammed. He was soon left an
orphan and passed for a very ordinary and
undistinguished individual till he had more
than reached the meridian of life. In his
later manhood Mohammed devoted many
of his days to solitary meditation in a
neighbouring cave, where he pretended to
receive communications from the npper
world giving him revelations of a new
system of religion and appointing the re-
cipient as the prophet of God in the same
line as Moses and Christ, but being im-
measurably superior to either. His career
was shaped by circumstances and his re-
ligion grew out of the facts of his own life
in the most crude and concrete fashion.
One wife after another was added to his
harem till the number ten was reached. If
his conduct at any time appeared to shock
the moral sense of his followers, their
scruples were quickly removed by yet
another divine communication to the pro-
phet which must be devoutly received by
his followers. At first he used no other
weapon than persuasion ; but, having failed
to make disciples by such means, he drew
the sword, of course by divine direction,
and by one victory after another both over
the Jews in the peninsula and the opposing
tribes of his own countrymen, Mohammed
succeeded during the remaining twenty
years of his life in making himself the
undisputed political and religious autocrat
of Arabia. It was under his successors
that the Moslem arms were carried over
the neighbouring and into distant countries.
Mahommedanism in its best feature was a
protest against idolatry and was also
iconoclastic in practice. Its monotheism
extended to the negation of the Trinity,
The essence of Islam lies in the watchword :
“There is no God but the Lord and
Mohammed is his prophet.” The founder
of the Arabian religion wrote nothing, and
it is doubtful if he possessed the art of
writing. His pretended revelations were
noted down by some one on stray leaves
which were collected after his death into
one volume called the Koran. With the
genuine immobility which characterizes
the whole East, Islam remains precisely as
Mohammed left it, a real fossil or petrified
organism. The commentaries written on
the Koran are now innumerable, but not
one word has been added to it since the
death of the prophet. On the occasion of
his last address to the people, he said,
“ This day have I perfected your faith unto
you, and fulfilled my mercy upon you, and
appointed Islam for you to be your re-
ligion.” Even with the sanction of the
sword it failed to make good its claim to be
received as a universal religion. The
astonishing progress once achieved over
several countries was due not to the force
of truth, but to the power of the sword.
Though undoubtedly on the wane, it still
counts 172 millions of worshippers. Its
sensualism, its despotism, and its localising
tendency limit its sphere to oriental coun-
tries and take away the possibility of its
ever becoming the religion of the world.
Parseeism, the ancient religion of Persia,
traces its genealogy back to Zoroaster who
lived most probably in the sixth century
before Christ. It is one of the oldest of all
systems of religion, and has proved its
vitality up to the present day, but cannot
now boast of a large following. Its Bible
is the Zendavesta. The fundamental prin-
ciple which distinguishes Zoroastrianism
from all other religious beliefs is a dual
theology. It teaches the doctrine of two
original and perpetually contending powers.
Ormuzd, the good principle, who is bene-
volent in all his actions, and Ahriman the
author of all evil. Fire as being incorrupt-
ible is regarded as the symbol of the Deity.
This religion has figured considerably in
the past, but it can have no future.
Coming now to India we find two im-


posing forms of religion which connect the
present time with the distant past. Brah-
minism is the religious system originated
and elaborated by the Brahmins who are
the highest of the four castes or classes into
which the Hindoo people are divided—
priests, soldiers, agriculturists, and ser-
vants, Its sacred books, the Yedas, are
said to have been in existence, in part at
least, 1000 years before Christ. It domi-
nates over India and holds in bondage a
highly acute and intellectual race. In an
early period of its history Brahmiuism re-
ceived a severe, but only temporary check
from a powerful rival system known as
Buddhism. This latter is the more worthy
of attentions as it is believed to make the
nearest approach to Christianity; and is
professed by at least an equal number of
adherents. Its admirers in other coun-
tries where the gospel is known are fond of
comparing Buddha with Christ and en-
deavour to show that his character was
scarcely less perfect. It cannot be denied
that Buddhism presents many parallels to
Christianity, but it so happens that the
system is not less remarkable for its con-
trasts. The founder was a great moral and
religious reformer who had an open eye to
the miseries of human life; but as he
failed to see that they all sprang from sin
as their common root, he was unable to
suggest a remedy. He, above all men, be-
lieved that life is not worth living. Bud-
dhism is the religion of despair. The
highest aim of existence is to escape exist-
ence as speedily as possible. Buddha, or
Guatama, more properly, was a pessimist
of the worst type. This fact alone is suffi-
cient to disqualify his system from any
claim to be the religion of the future.
There still remain two noted systems of
religious belief, and they are found in
China. The first is the uncompromising
opponent of Buddhism, founded by Laotze,
probably about 550 B.C. It is better
known under the name of Taoism. At its
head there is a pope who bears the style
of the “ Heavenly Master.” For the last
eighteen centuries it has been a fully de-
veloped religion with its idols, temples,
monasteries, and religious services. It is
emphatic regarding a future state of
punishment, teaching that the soul can
pass through endless transmigrations, and
if its punishment do not improve it, the
spirit is assigned to an endless hell. The
other form of religion, indigenous to China,
is Confucianism. Its origin is involved in
much uncertainty; but the founder is
believed to have lived four or five hundred
years before the birth of Christ. His
system is moral and political as well as
religions. The general tendency of his
teaching is described as good and, com-
pared with that of Greece and Rome, it
takes precedence by its purity and the
attention paid to the rules governing the
common intercourse of life. Both of these
religious must be regarded as local, and the
haughty isolation of the Chinese Empire
has saved their devotees irom the self-
denying zeal of propagandism.
From this brief review of the leading re-
ligious systems which have survived till the
present time, there arise two important
questions which imperatively call for an
answer. First, What is the relation of
Christianity to these, as well as to the pre-
viously existing religions. Second, what
are its superior qualifications in justifica-
tion of its claims to be the religion of the
future ? In reference to the former query,
it is undeniable that many are firmly pos-
sessed of the belief that religion comes
under the law of evolution, that every
nation has wrought out the problem for
itself; that the ultimate religion will de-
pend upon the survival of the fittest, it may
be Christianity, it may be some other, or
it may be a system of eclecticism derived
from many or most other forms of religion.
The latter is the opinion of Professor Max
Muller who predicts that when the con-
summation shall have been attained, Christ-
ianity will not be considered to be the
one absolute religion, but that the Hindu,
the Buddhist, the Mahomrnedan, the
Jew, and the Christian will form one
church, by each retaining of their respec-
tive systems some great principle. The
issue would amount simply to the last
application of the law of evolution to the
science of religion. But if it bear upon
Christianity at all, it is more likely to do
so at the beginning than at the end. Is
this highest and best form of religion the
natural development from previously exist-


ing systems? This belief, in the opinion of
many, is confirmed by the recent science of
comparative religion which has brought to
light many features which are common to
Christianity and other systems.. While
holding that our religion is matter of reve-
lation and not of evolution, there is nothing
unaccountable in the fact that partial
resemblances to it should have appeared at
various times and among widely differing
peoples. Christianity fully prepares us to
expect these points of contact by its teach-
ing concerning human nature. It tells us
that God never left Himself without a
witness among men in giving them rain
from Heaven and fruitful seasons filling
their hearts with food and gladness. Man-
kind bad had early discoveries of God,
they had innate tendencies pressing them
towards Him, and even intuitions of the
Unseen which vice could not altogether
eradicate, so that as a race they could not
become atheistic, even if they tried. Such
being the case it was natural to expect that
there would be, in the language of Augus-
tine, “ grains of truth in all religions,” and
certain foregleams, or unconscious pro-
phecies of that final dispensation which
God had in store for the human race. But
it must be carefully noted that, however
signal such pre-Christian or extra-Christian
indications may have been of what at last
becomes manifest in the gospel, the new
religion did not come by natural develop-
ment from any one preceding or from all of
them combined.
Whatever else it is oris not, Christianity
is at least a system peculiar and self-
contained. It has borrowed nothing from
other religious systems. It is as inde-
pendent of those which the world had
elaborated outside of Palestine as if they
had been non-existent. The only religion
with which it had any vital relations was
tkat of the Hebrews The connection of
Christianity with the system that came be-
fore by Moses is everywhere acknowledged
and by none so much as by the Master
Himself. But how far the later religion
was from being a development out of the
earlier, is demonstrated by the fact that
the Jews themselves even to this day have
offered the most relentless hostility to the
whole Christian scheme. This indepen-
dence on all other systems delivers Christi-
anity from the contagion of decay, by which
each of them in turn will be assailed, and
gives a good opening into the oth( r ques-
tion ef the superiority of this religion and
its prospect of universality. All other
systems of religion are essentially ethnic
in character, suited for a particular people
and virtually limited to them ; but Christi-
anity is pre-eminently the religion adapted
for universality in every respect and in all
its relations. The basis of this cosmo-
politan condition is already laid in that
which gives it authority, the Bible. Ho
book is at once so divine and so human ;
nor is there any other in the wide world
that is so capable of translation into all the
languages spoken by mankind. This is a
most remarkable and exceedingly happy
peculiarity of the Book which was given to
be the judge of controversies, and the rule
of faith and morals to the whole world.
Another fact which leads in the same
direction is the manner in which the
doctrines of Christianity are taught in the
sacred Scriptures. They are not given in
the abstract but in the concrete, and in
such a way as to make them easily intelli-
gible to the common and untrained mind.
“ What is most extraordinary in Christi-
anity,” says Dr. Porter, “ what is itself
superhuman, and well might prove the
system divine, is not so much the doctrines
it makes known, as the fact that these
doctrines are taught by history. In this is
made conspicuous an adaptation to the
wants of all men, in all conditions of exist-
ence, such as none but a divine forecast
could have provided. Scarce a human
being is so simple, scarce a generation is so
uncultured, to whom some fact of this
history may not suggest and enforce its
leading truths. Ho individual, and no
generations, have as yet been so cultured,
that these truths have not served as prob-
lems and suggesters of whole systems of
philosophic inquiry. But it is not intimated
that such results are possible. The truths
are taught and enacted for practical effect
alone. If God is revealed as a spirit, it is
that we may worship Him in spirit and in
truth; not that the speculations of mere
curiosity respecting the possibility of an
Infinite Spirit, and of his relations to the


finite, may be excited or put to rest. If
men are convinced of guilt and danger, it is
not that they may speculate about either,
but that they may repent and be reformed.
If Christ is set forth to them as a Deliverer,
it is not that they may perfect a science
respecting His person or His work, but
that they may believe and obey Him.”
Another property of Christianity which
adapts it to universal acceptance and gives
a pledge of ultimate triumph, is the fact
that it grounds itself in general principles
rather than in particular details. It was
this latter peculiarity which would have
disqualified Judaism for the acceptance of
all nations had there been no other hin-
drance. It was no great hardship to the
Jews to be denied the use of fire on the
Sabbath day, but the precept would have
wrought with intolerable rigour on the in-
habitants of Arctic countries. It is a
significant fact that Christianity burdens
itself with no such impracticable regula-
tions. Its formal precepts are few and no
one of them is found to press harder on
men of one country than on those of ano-
ther. It is emphatically a religion of
general principles. In the most generous
manner it appeals to the enlightened
Christian conscience, and seeks to be obeyed
in the spirit of loving discipleship. Hence
it has happened that, during eighteen
centuries of experience in every quarter of
the globe, it has never come in contact with
a nation to which it has proved to be un-
suitable in respect of any of the ends for
which a religion is intended. But this re-
sult follows in virtue of another essential
property which should be carefully noted.
Christianity meets the necessities of a
nation just because it satisfies all the wants
of the individuals of which a nation is
composed. Its effect was beautifully des-
cribed by the poet Young when he penned
the line: “ The Christian is the highest
style of man,” and the saying is as remark-
able for its truth as for its beauty. There
is another striking property of Christianity
looking in the same direction, which should
not be left out of the reckoning in forming
an estimate of its capabilities for a uni-
versal religion—it is radically distinct from
are usually identified with the State like
Mohammedanism, or closely connected with
it as the polytheism of Ancient Rome,
so that the fall of the nation renders almost
certain the destruction of its religion.
Christianity steers clear of this rock and
cannot suffer shipwreck from political re-
volutions. Christ’s Kingdom, not being of
this world, is independent of the fate of
nations. His own precept, “ Give unto
Caesar the things that are Caesar’s, and unto
God the things that are God’s” has been
as practicable for every succeeding age as
it was for His. Christianity can exist
under any form of Government be it
monarchy, oligarchy, or democracy. It lived
under the despotism of Nero with as in-
destructible a vitality as it does now under
the American flag of independence. It is
impossible to divine what developments are
yet to be made in the art and manner of
Government, but enough is known of the
genius of Christianity to make safe the
prediction that it will be able to live and
flourish under the framework of any pos-
sible Government, and this is more than
can be said of any other religion which the
world has ever seen.
While the foregoing facts are undeniable
there is one danger of an internal character
which, in the opinion of some, seriously
threatens the future of Christianity. It is
true indeed that no despotic power has been
able to crush it out of existence. On the
contrary, it has flourished under persecu-
tion to a degree which has given birth to
an unquestionable proverb that speaks of
the martyr’s blood as being the seed of the
church; as also to the saying that a poor
church is a pure church. But it is equally
undeniable that the purity of Christianity
has been greatly vitiated in seasons of
prosperity. The gold has become dim. and
the most fine gold changed. This is one
side of the question ; but the other is still
more significant. While Christianity, as
professed in the world, has shown itself,
like all other religions, to be susceptible
of corruption from the evil that is without;
it has also shown its superiority to all
others in a marvellous inherent power of
throwing off every form of corruption with
the State and may therefore exist under which it has from time to time been over-
any form of Government. Other religions laid as if consigned to its tomb. After


every act of reformation it has again come
forth in pristine purity and in renewed youth.
Fortunately for Christendom, it has never,
with the exception of only one section,
hound itself down to the principles of in-
fallibility which necessarily precludes
reform. It confesses its liability to err,
but believes also in the possibility of de-
parting from its errors and returning to
apostolic purity. In this remarkable power
of casting off corruptions may be discerned
an evidence of the divinity of its origin and
a pledge of final triumph.
It only remains to consider the claim of
Christianity itself to be the final and
universal form of religion. This was one
of the common-places of the Old Testament
prophets. Isaiah in particular, and es-
pecially in the second part of his book
of prophecy, dwells upon the golden age,
which is also to be the final phase of
Christianity, with a copiousness of incident
and a sublimity of language which have no
parallel in secular or sacred literature. But
in other parts of Scripture the allusions to
the same glorious consummation are equally
significant and exhibit the same confi-
dence of faith. As if for the sake of
effect, the first and the last age of the
gospel dispensation are often set in sharp
contrast. One of these occurs towards the
close of the 72nd Psalm ; There shall
be an handful of corn in the earth upon
the top of the mountains, the fruit thereof
shall shake like Lebanon, and they of
the city shall flourish like the grass of the
earth.” Here is a beautiful figurative
description of the small beginning of the
gospel in Galilee, and its eventual triumph
throughout the wide world. Men expect a
crop of corn only in fertile valleys or on
rich alluvial river flats; but here a handful
of seed is cast on the top of a barren moun-
tain, the most unlikely of all situations,
and yet from such unpromising conditions
there comes a crop which waves its full
ears like the cedars of Lebanon, betokening
the truth that they of the City of God, the
Christian Church, shall spring up like the
grass of the earth, the blades of which no
man can number. One of Cromwell’s Iron-
sides, while his life’s blood was ebbing
away on a hard-fought battlefield, seized a
few ears of grain and cast them into the
air as with quivering lips he quoted this
passage, thus proving by his action his
conception of the words and the strength of
his faith in the final triumph of the gospel.
Another equally pertinent text is found in
Daniel, where the same truth is set forth
under the symbolism of a stone. The world-
power, as the enemy of the Church, was
represented to the king of Babylon under
the form of an imposing image which stood
on feet partly of iron, but also partly of
clay. But the prophet saw in vision a
stone cut out of the rock in the everlasting
hills without the help of man. The stone,
bounding down the hillside and acquiring
momentum at every leap, smote the image
on its feet of clay, and after grinding it to
powder, the stone itself grew into a great
mountain and filled the whole earth.
Another and the most engaging aspect in
which the final and universal phase of
Christianity is presented in Scripture is
that of the millennium. The period of the
latter-day glory is often alluded to by
Isa'ah and is definitely described in the
first six verses of the twentieth chapter of
.Revelation. Its measure is given as a
thousand years ; but as it is not uncommon
in prophecy to take a day as representing a
year, many will have it that the thousand
is to be multiplied by three hundred and
sixty five, which would give a period that
baffles the comprehension of the human
spirit. The state is described as one of
universal peace, for men “shall beat their
swords into ploughshares and their spears
into pruning hooks ; nation shall not lift up
sword against nation, neither shall they
learn war any more.’ The guarantee for
immunity from war is not laid in binding
treaties which leave no possibility of mis-
construction or evasion; but in the changed
disposition of mankind. “ The ape and
tiger” in man shall have died then, together
with all brutal passions which made man a
wolf to a man. In the strong figures of the
prophets this new state of society, as
universal and wholly Christianised, is com-
pared to the herding together of beasts of
prey and harmless domestic animals, the
representation being designed to be under-
stood not in a physical but in a meta-
phorical sense; “ The wolf also shall dwell
with the lamb, and the leopard with the


kid ; and the calf and the young lion and
the failing together, and a little child shall
lead them. And the cow and the bear
shall feed; their young ones shall lie down
together; and the lion shall eat straw like
the ox; and the suckling child shall play in
the hole of the asp, and the weaned child
put his hand on the cockatrice’s den. They
shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy
mountain ; for the earth shall be full of the
knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover
the sea !’


WORKS BY THE SAME AUTHOR.
THE A USTRALIAN EXPLORERS ; their Labours, Perils , and Achievements.
Being a Narrative of Discovery from the Landing of Captain Cook to
the Centennial Year. Price Three Shillings and Sixpence.
THE SABBATH; Patriarchal , few is h, and Christian. Price One Shilling.
A CONCISE HISTORY OF AUSTRALIA; Being a Narrative of the Rise
and Progress of New South Wales and her Sister Colonies; with Sketches
of New Zealand , and the British Possessions in the Pacific Ocean.
Price Two Shillings and Sixpence.
MEMORY; and How to Improve It.
Price One Shilling.
THE UNVEILING OF AFRICA ; A Sketch of Travel and Discovery in the
Dark Continent from Glapperton to Stanley. Price Sixpence.
TWELVE LECTURES on The Immortality of the Soul and the Life Ever-
lasting. Price Two Shillings.
ANGUS & ROBERTSON.
89, Castlereagh Street, Sydney.


♦
• 4
•I
V *.. **>'
* >* ■-. * *
- >*V
' >
vr *
. *
