



THE
HIGH PRESSURE FIRE-MAIN SYSTEM.
(VINNING’S PATENTS.)
A METHOD OF APPLYING AN
INSTANTANEOUS HIGH PRESSURE
WATER SUPPLY
TO THE
FIRE MAINS AND HYDRANTS OF DISTRICTS
AND BUILDINGS
WHERE THE GRAVITATION WATER-SUPPLY EXISTING IS OF INSUFFICIENT
PRESSURE FUR EFFECTIVE FIRE-SERVICE, OR WHERE
GRAVITATION SUPPLY IS NON-EXISTENT.
iHE HIGH PRESSURE FIRE-MAIN CO., U
M. VINNING.
<y 6, QUEEN ANNE’S GATE,
WESTMINSTER,
LONDON, S.W


THE
HIGH PRESSURE FIRE-MAIN SYSTEM.
WINNING'S PATENTS.)
FIRE MAINS UNDER THE USUAL EXISTING
CONDITIONS.
The great value of an internal system of Fire
Hydrants with Fire Cocks and suitable lengths of hose at
various points and levels of large buildings, is too well
known to make it necessary to point out its many advan-
tages here, but in many localities gravitation-water supply,
of sufficient pressure to make a Hydrant system effective,
even on the lower floors of buildings, is altogether absent;
and in the majority of places, including many towns (and
large portions of the Metropolis may here be included),
the pressure is altogether inadequate for fire extinction
purposes, especially on the middle and upper floors of
Wildings of no very great altitude, and it is as a remedy
tor this state of things that this High Pressure Hydrant
system is now introduced to public authorities and property
owners.
It is pretty generally admitted that a pressure of
about 20 lbs. to the square inch (some experts say 30 lbs.)
at the nozzle, 1.e., on each floor, is the eery lowest that is of
any use for dealing with a serious outbreak of fire; but
this can barely be considered efficient; and it is well known
V experts that the greater the pressure—up to a limit of
about 100 to 120 lbs. —the more easily and quickly can an
outbreak be successfully dealt with, the smaller is the


Floor,
Elevation
Pressure
Remarks.
in feet.
in lbs.
1st
Say 15
About 23£
Effective.
2nd
„ 25
„ 19
Scarcely Effective.
3rd
„ 35
„ 15
Ineffective.
4th
„ 45
„ 10i
Very Ineffective.
5th
„ 55
» 6
quantity of water required; and also the destruction that
occurs.
In London, from the public fire mains, the pressure
may be taken to average about 30 lbs. ; though in some
parts, and at some periods of the day and night, it is
higher and sometimes lower, but this is at the level of the
pavement, and at higher levels it becomes as follows :
the pressure on the upper three floors being practically
useless for dealing with a serious outbreak, and this in a
building where the ceiling of the top or sth floor is only
65 feet from the pavement level.
Partly in consequence of this and partly as a precau-
tion against the possibility of the main supply being
weakened at one point, when required for fire extinction,
from its being drawn upon for another fire, or diverted
for other purposes, in the same neighbourhood, large open
tanks have very extensively been erected on the roofs of
important buildings, including most of the Palaces and
Government Offices chiefly those of greater elevation
than 65 feet—with falling-mains conveying the water to
the various firecocks, but this plan whilst (in the case of
buildings of 80 or 90 feet elevation) it carries the barely
effective pressure some 20 feet higher, still leaves the upper
floors without even the “ very ineffective ” pressure, and
of course leaves the roof without any delivery at all.


A similar hazardous deficiency of pressure exists in a
very large number of country houses, where—in the
absence of external supply of sufficient head to give
efficient pressure —storage tanks placed under the roof
have been the best means hitherto provided for instantly
dealing with fire.
As a means of remedying, to a certain extent, this
absence of pressure on the upper floors, fixed hand-fire-
engines, and sometimes ordinary manual fire engines, have
been placed on the roofs of buildings, or in connection
with the open fire-tanks ; but though these are of great
use when a sufficient number of men have been put to
work and can he kept at work , the inevitable delay in
collecting enough men for the purpose is a most serious
matter, as is also the fact that working a hand-fire-engine
on the upper floors of a building where a serious fire
exists—probably at a lower level—is both hazardous and
difficult on account of the ascending smoke and heat, and
that the pumpers would in all probability be driven from
their ground.
As the only means hitherto of obtaining immediate
self-acting greater pressure has been the conveyance of
water from an elevation from perhaps a considerable
( listance, or the erection of a water tower of groat height,
hoth of which entail very great expense and inconvenience,
whilst the latter might be most unsightly either attached
or near the main building; the introduction of
VINNING’S HIGH PRESSURE FIRE-MAIN
SYSTEM
must commend itself to property owners.


THE HIGH PRESSURE SYSTEM
Consists in the placing of one or more closed steel or iron
High Pressure Tanks or water vessels, in any convenient
part of a building—in the roof or in the basement, or in a
detached outhouse if desirable—and of a series of cylinders
for containing compressed air. The latter can be placed
in any part of the building that admits of the leading of a
small air-pipe for conveying the pressure to the surface of
the water vessel.
From the High Pressure tank the water is conveyed
by the ordinary fire mains (those now existing if mains
are already fitted) to the necessary fire cocks, but remains
at ordinary pressure until the instant high pressure is
required, when the mere opening of the valve—the work
of one or two seconds —by the person who discovers the
fire, instantly brings a pressure on to the whole fire main
system, upstairs and down, equal to that of a steam fire
engine or of a manual engine manned by some 30 to 40
men. Pressure Levers can be fitted on different floors, but
in most cases it is sufficient to have one lever situated in a
position always accessible.
The duration of this high pressure supply depends upon
the size of the tanks erected, but the extinguishing power
of water is so greatly increased by very high pressure that
for a building even of considerable size a closed tank oi
1,500 gallons—giving a delivery of 50 gallons a minute
for half-an-hour—would generally far more than suffice
for the suppression of a fire of serious extent, but of course
larger tanks can be erected.
The air vessels with their connections, pipes and
fittings, are so constructed as to permanently retain the
compressed air absolutely without any leakage.


Where the conditions of the water supply admit of the
fire mains being separate from the domestic supply of a
building, the high pressure can be kept permanently stand-
ing on the whole of the fire mains, so that a high pressure
jet can be turned on at any point by merely opening any fire-
cock. This plan is adopted in an installation of the system
now being erected at the Army and Navy Co-operative
Society’s Stores in Victoria Street, Westminster.
The air vessel is charged to a higher pressure, and the
. . . & . 6 . 1 . . . .
working pressure acting on the water is maintained at the
desired point by means of a specially constructed reducing
and regulating apparatus. This and minor details will be
best understood by reference to the following description and
illustration of the installation erected by order of
THE SCIENCE AND ART DEPARTMENT
FOR THE
SOUTH KENSINGTON MUSEUM.
The museum has the water company’s mains entering
fr°m four differents points, with an average pressure by
day of 55 lbs., and at night somewhat higher, at ground
kvel, and it also has open tanks in the roof at an elevation
°f 90 feet. The highest point of the buildings is 110 feet
111 height, and consequently at that point the pressure
h' ( >m the mains is only about 8 lbs.
Tig. I. is a Plan, Fig. 11. a Sectional Elevation at a h
the System, and Fig. 111. a front view of the “Pressure
Lever and Pressure Gauge Hoard.”


FIG. 11.
FIG. 111.
A riveted Steel Cylindrical Ifigli Pressure Tank (A)
ysee illustration) containing 2,00(1 gallons of water, 11(^


14 wrought iron cylinders (B) each 14 feet long and 12
inches diameter, containing compressed air at a pressure
of 350 lbs. to the square inch, are placed in a cellar
under the roadway at the entrance of • the offices.
Through this cellar passes an existing 4 inch main (C)
conducting the water from the Company’s mains into the
buildings, and a 4 inch iron pipe connects this main to
the base of the High Pressure Tank. The 14 air cylinders
are connected by piping so as practically to form one
vessel, and from the bottom tier of cylinders a pipe (D)
is carried upwards to the Pressure Lever, and Pressure
Gauge Board (E) fixed against the wall in the road-way
above. Here the pressure is retained by a check valve
within the Valve Box (F), above which a Pressure Gauge
(G) shows the maintenance of the pressure at the required
350 lbs. From this the pipe is continued to the Regulating
and Reducing Valve (H), and from thence is carried down-
ward to the top of the Water Tank, at its junction to
which is fitted a weighted Safety-valve and a small Float-
ball Valve (|), which permits the air to pass upwards
through it when the tank is being filled with water, but
doses by floatation when full. At the base of the Water
Tank a large Float-ball Valve (K) falls when all the water
18 discharged, and prevents the compressed air from
entering the fire mains. On the Pressure Lever (L) being
pulled downwards, the valve is opened and the compressed
ai r passes through the Regulating and Reducing Valve (H),
and downwards on to the surface of the water, which is
then— on the opening of any of the fire-cocks all over the
Wilding delivered from the High Pressure Tank at
130 lbs. pressure. A Pressure Gauge (M) over the
Regulating and Reducing Valve shows that the necessary
air cushion is always maintained; and a third Gauge (N)
s hows the pressure acting upon the water system after the
Pressure Lever is turned.


The result of this is that the Museum has at instant
command, at its highest point—an elevation of 110 feet
from the ground level—about 120 feet head or 51 lbs.
pressure instead of the present head of 20 feet or 8 lbs.
pressure, and this entirely free from the risk of any tem-
porary failure of the external public supply.
The air-cylinders are charged to the necessary pressure
of 350 lbs. to the square inch by means of a number of
steel bottles or tubes, of portable shape and weight, con-
taining compressed air at a pressure of from 1,500 to 2,000
lbs. These bottles are delivered by the Patentee and
removed after charging the cylinders—a work of a few
minutes. This is a very convenient method of charging
the air cylinders, where it is not found convenient to
provide an air-pump and the necessary power for driving it;
which would usually be a one to three horse-power engine,
or its equivalent in manual, water or other power.
THE LEADING & IMPORTANT ADVANTAGES
OF THE SYSTEM
ARE TESTIFIED TO IN THE APPENDED
REPORTS BY
SIR HENRY BESSEMER, C.E., F.R.S., &c.,
AND
HENRY ROBINSON, Esq., MJ.C.E.,
Professor of King's College, London,
but they may fairly be summarised thus :
—That it place*, without a moment's delay, at the
disposal of the one or more persons at hand, a pressure


service, equal 1o that which icould only he afforded hy a steam
or larye manual enyine AFTER a DELAY OF AT LEAST
A QUART Ell OF AN HOUR AFTER THE ALARM OF FIRE
WAS RAISED, supposing mch appliances are kept in the
immediate vicinity, anil are in perfect order.
2nd.—That the action of the pressure does not derpend
upon any WORKING FRICTIONAL TARTS requiring con-
stant cleaning or attention ‘ the neglect of which would
cause failure at a critical moment, hut is, humanly
speaking, ahsidufely certain, provided there is water in the
tank, and the pressure shown hy the gauge stands at about
its proper point.
3rd. — That whilst giving the immediate action and
pressure of a Water lower or Reservoir of some 240 to
300 feet elevation , its cost Is far less, and the Water and
Air Vessels can he placed in any position IN OR OUTSIDE
THE BUILDING THAT STRUCTURAL OR ARCHITECTURAL
REASONS MAY NECESSITATE.
Extracts from Report by
Sir HENRY BESSEMER, C.E., F.R.S., &c.
“ With reference to your Patent for the use of Compressed Air stored
ln suitable Vessels for the purpose of l>eing applied instantly to the surface
water contained in other Vessels;
“ There can Ikj no doubt but that a well-arranged Apparatus for that pur-
pose if applied to Public Buildings, Warehouses, Private Mansions, Ac., would
provide a mo*t rapid and effective mean* of dealing with a Fire at the moment
"f it»first discovery, and this without necessarily adding to the weight in the
°Pper part of the Building,—for such Vessels may be placed in any out-of-
the-way portion of the Basement, or below Ground, —so that in those cases
"here the Architect has not provided for heavy Water Tanks on the top of
*he Building, this system of yours can be applied most readily, and at the
Bamc ihne avoid the many serious inconveniences attending Tanks on the Hmf;


since it only requires a comparatively small extra pressure in Vessels placed
in the Basement, to make them as effective as those placed on the Roof,
while this System admits of a much larger store of Water than one could
venture to place at the top of the Building when no proper provision for
it had originally lieen made.”
Referring to the difficulties he himself experienced
in fixing a large Tank on the Roof of a large Public
Ruilding, Sir Henry adds: —
“ Had your Invention been then in use. I should most i/ladlij have availed
myself of it.”
Referring to some of his own experiences in connection
with Fire, he concludes :
“This experience has confirmed my previously strong opinion, viz.
that all large Establishments should have within themselves, and under
their own control, some adequate means of extinguishing Fire, and I know of
no System more suitable for this purpose than your own.
“To M. Vinning, Esq., R.N.”
REPORT ON THE VINNING HIGH PRESSURE
FIRE-MAIN SYSTEM.
BY
Professor HENRY ROBINSON, M. Inst C.E.
“ Westminster Chambers,
“ 13, Victoria Street, London, S.Y .
“ 21. st January, 1890.
“ Having been instructed to inspect and report on the Vinning High
Pressure Fire-Main System, I visited the South Kensington Museum on the
9 fll^
13th hist., and, by permission of the Science and Art Department, saw
Apparatus in operation as installed in the Museum.
“ The principle upon which this System is based consists in the stora? 6
of highly compressed air in Receivers connected with the water-man> s )


that in case of fire the air pressure can, by means of a suitable Valve
arrangement, be brought to bear on the low-pressure water, by which the
water can be raised to a height far greater than that due to its own head,
owing to the expansive force of the compressed air.
“ I am of opinion that this System permits of a very wide application,
affording as it docs a cheap and ready means of bringing into operation,
instantaneously, a Ixxly of water at a pressure enabling it to reach the
highest parts of a building or district.
“ At the South Kensington Museum, air at a pressure of 350 lbs. to the
square inch is stored in a scries of Cylinders, connected with each other and
retaining this body of high pressure air without any appreciable loss from
leakage. A regulating apparatus is attached to the air main, by which the
pressure can be reduced to any desired pressure, depending upon the height
of the building to which it is desired to carry the water. This regulating
apparatus, when set to work, admits of the air pressure being brought to
hear on a body of water enclosed in a cylinder (capable of sustaining
internal pressure) so that upon opening any Fire-Hydrant, at any level
included in the water-circuit, the water in this cylinder sustains the column
at a pressure due to the expansive force of the air. As lam not desired to
enter into any detailed explanation of the apparatus but to give my general
opinion on its efficiency, I will confine myself to stating that the mechanical
arrangements arc extremely simple, and are capable of being advantageously
applied to utilizing high pressure air in the way described with immunity
from loss or leakage. I consider the System will be largely employed as an
adjunct to a water service at but a trifling part of the cost of the usual
water tower or elevated reservoir, which is now generally relied upon to
produce a head of water for Fire extinction purposes.
“ In addition to the adaptability of the System to individual buildings,
either as detached houses or otherwise, Mr. Vinning has shown me, privately
and confidentially, a Provisional Specification for a development by which
he proposes to improve the System so as to admit of its application to
extended areas in a way which appears to me to be novel and to afford a
held for wide and useful application.
“ I have been associated with the distribution of power by Compressed
•lir for a variety of purposes for many years, and, from my experience, I am
a,J le to express a very favourable opinion of Mr. Vinning’s System.
Signed,
“ HENRY ROBINSON, M. Inst. C.E.,
“ Professor of Civil Engineering,
“ King's College, London."


Particular* ami K*timate* can he obtained , free of cud,
from the . , r
il.c HS'jH rPibbbuliu Fiat: ..wllH CO., L~
PROPRIETORS ASftß
JM. VINNING,
•V. G, QUEEN ANNE’S GATE,
WESTMINSTER,
LONDON, S.W.
