

THE
DESERT
TRAIL
With the Light Horse
through Sinai to Palestine.
By
SCOTTY’S BROTHER
By authority of the Department of Repatriation.
PRINTED BY W. N. THOMAS & CO., ADELAIDE.


THE
DESERT TRAIL
WITH THE LIGHT HORSE
THROUGH
SINAI TO PALESTINE
BY
SCOTTY’S BROTHER
By authority of the Department of Repatriation
ADELAIDE:
\V. K. Thomas A Co., Printers, Grenfeli. Street-
-1919,


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS.
To all those officers and men who helped me with the letter-press
and photographs of this book, I give a man’s handshake.
But there is another to whom I am more indebted than I can
express. Without the help of Miss Telsie Hague—a lady known in the
literary world as “Myah”—, my notes would probably still be in the
dark recesses of my desk. Knowing of them and being deeply
interested in the Light Horse work, she urged me on, offering to go
through the story and to bring rough matter into due form. This she
has done and more. Without her I feel the book would probably never
have been published, and on behalf of the boys for whom it is written 1
thank her as only soldiers can.
It is with much regret that it has been found impossible to include
the Australian Flying Squadron within the scope of this work. As the
Light Horse have been the feelers of the campaign they have been the
eyes, and their work has been beyond praise. One should mention, too,
that there are many sons of Australia in the Imperial Camel Corps which
has co-operated with the horsemen right through the trail.


FOREWORD.
It was on the way home. We were in a hospital ashore at one of the ports of
call, when a corporal stepped smartly up to me, saluted, and said, “A lady outside
wishes to speak to you, sir.”
In turn I saluted the lady. “ When I heard you speak,” she said, “ I realized
that you come from the same country as I do. I’ve asked three of the men in bed
what your name is, but all they can tell me is that you are ‘Scotty’s brother.’
Note who may ‘Scotty ’ be ?”
So, because this book is partly in memory of “ Scotty ” and those others of his
comrades ivho, like him, made the supreme sacrifice, I will preface my account of
the work of the Light Horse in the Desert with an outline of the way he died.
“Scotty” was an original member of one of the Australian Light Horse
Regiments, and a general favourite. Shortly before a, particular battle he, with
several others, was detailed to be sent down to hospital on account of septic sores;
but three hours before the Red Cross train was due he paraded before the Medical
Officer to be allowed to remain for the fight. The next engagement was his last.
He was despatch rider, and after carrying despatches from 2a.m. until 9 a.m. he
was attached to Headquarters. Twice in half-an-hour he asked to be allowed to
loin his squadron, and was finally granted permission.
But he never reached his friends ; he was wounded on the way out, and
dressed by strangers who forgot, in the retirement, to bring him in. The Turks
discovered him, removed all his valuables, and then drove a bayonet through his
body and left him.
Later on he was seen doubled up in No Man’s Land, and when a comrade went
out to bring him in he expressed the wish that, as his case was hopeless, his
“ cobber ” should go back without him and try to save himself. This request was
repeated twice on the way in, and as often refused. But they were still under fire,
and no doctor was available and nothing could be done to relieve him. “ Scotty”
realized what was happening, and after sending me a message—l was on the staff
of the hospital to which he would have been sent on the previous occasion—he
closed his eyes, calm and confident to the end. And there, on the sand ridge, they
left him.


The heroism of his death was not unique, but rather typical of the way the
boys of the Light Horse have continued to do their duty in spite of desperate
hardships in the field and lack of appreciation from their homeland.
Nothing can ever eradicate from my mind the underlying sad and forlorn
spirit of the officers and men whom 1 met on the borders of Egypt and Palestine.
Here they were, fighting their way across a forbidding desert under the very worst
possible conditions, doing work equal to anything they had done on Gallipoli, and
in no sense inferior to that being done by their mates in France, and yet the public
of Australia and the Motherland knew nothing about it. even their immediate
relatives being in the dark except for such hints as could be gleaned from censored
Utters.
A malignant minority even went so far as to call them “cold-footers out on
a picnic ” —an outing which these damnable stay-at-homes took good care not to
sample. And as for cold feet in the desert—l never saw them till they were cold
in death.
It ivas not the lack of applause that hurt, but the injustice. It was so
bitterly hard to contend, weary in body and spirit, with hardships and dangers and
suffering, knowing all the while that their trials were discounted, the very nature
of their campaign unknown.
It is to give some slight idea,until the full record comes to light, of what these
men have done, that these notes are written by one who, joining them near the end
of their desert journey, lays no claim whatever to the glory of one of the greatest
and grandest campaigns of the whole war.
SCOTTY'S BROTHER.


SCOTTY.


THE DESERT TRAIL.
Part I.
THE PUSHING OUT.
“• League after league of blazing silver sand;
Mile after mile of camel-weed and scrub;
Black marshes ■with their brine encrusted ground,
Where sandhills roll out and spread around;
Ridge upon ridge of wind-swept shifting sand ;
Deep sudden hollows where an armg hides ”
R. T. T., “The Desert of Sinai.’’
—The Nature of the Campaign.—
There are very few people who realize the nature and extent of the
work which has been accomplished in Egypt in clearing the Soudan of
the hostile Senussi, in guarding the approaches to the Canal in the early
days of the war, and finally in driving the Turk back to Palestine. It
is with this last phase, the campaign of 1916-1917. in which Australia
was represented by her Light Horse and a Squadron of Flying Corps,
that I wish to deal.
Although to-day the number of Australian troops in Palestine is a
mere fraction of the Allied Army there, no one will deny that the
Australian Light Horse, with the New Zealand Mounted Rifles and the
British Yeomanry were the pioneers. Theirs was the honour to prepare
the way, to pierce the stillness of the desert air, to ride that trackless
waste of heavy sand, and, under conditions almost unendurable, to
bronze beneath the fury of a fiery sky.
There is no need to refer to the fact that the Light Horse, in com-
mon with the Infantry, covered themselves with glory on Gallipoli.
Everybody knows that they offered themselves unreservedly to fight
there alongside their comrades on foot—and how much blood was
spilled in helping to write the immortal letters ANZAC on the history
of the world has already been made known to the nations by writers
who gave sincere and willing tribute to the magnificent courage and
sacrifice of our splendid men.
The public, too, are aware that since the fall of Gaza and Beersheba
at the end of the year 1917 the Light Horse have again been fighting
hard and continuously ; but very few are cognisant of the fact that all


the time they were crossing the Desert of Sinai they were engaged in a
ceaseless warfare—a warfare different, perhaps, from that going on in
France, but none the less severe and exacting, and none the less finely
fought and won.
So this book does not seek to deal with Gallipoli or the later opera-
tions in Palestine. Its purpose is solely to throw some light on the
hardships endured by the lads from the time they left the Suez Canal
until they reached Gaza.
Mention of the Suez Canal leads one to recall the first effort of the
Turks against Egypt. Germany, who coveted the waterway that leads
from west to east, early in 1915 fired the Syrian imagination with the
thought of a conquered Egypt as a gift to lay at the feet of the holy
prophet, and so succeeded in mobilising a Turkish army at Beersheba.
From there as a base they railed it to El Auja on the border of Palestine
and Egypt, and then tramped the weary way, bringing their iron pon-
toons with them, across the desert over the Maghara hills to strike the
Canal at Serapeum and Tussum. But their hope was a forlorn one as
the British forces were well prepared and repelled the attack, the invad-
ing army being utterly vanquished in the attempt.
Then came Gallipoli, and then, the Desert Trail.
The reason primarily for. the advance across the Desert, was un-
doubtedly to guard the Suez Canal. There is a good old football rule
that the best way to protect your own goal is to kick into your oppo-
nents’, and that is practically what was done. To protect the Canal it
was not enough to have great flood areas between it and the enemy, to
dig trenches, man blockhouses, and lay down barbed wire entanglements.
It was necessary to sieze the gateway— and that was Gaza —one of the
earliest cities built by human hands, and probably the most war-worn
in the history of the world.
To lay seige to it, however, it had first to be reached, and it is just
this crossing of the desert, with the constant pushing back of the Turk,
that has proved so difficult and dangerous an undertaking.
If you look at the map, note the distance between the Suez Canal
and the Turko-Egyptian frontier, and realize that everywhere in between
there is nothing but sand —nothing but sand and sun—a whitish sand
and a withering sun—you will have some small idea of the magnitude of
the task.
But there is another thing to remember if you are to gain a proper
appreciation of what the Light Horsemen of Australia have endured.
They, with the New Zealand Mounted Rifles and the British Yeomanry,
have been the pioneers of this campaign. Their business has been to
nose out the enemy and to keep pushing him back. Consequently they
have always been ahead, out in the lead. You go to Sinai now, and you
find a railway, you enjoy a regular and certain water supply, and you
have everywhere wire netting roads to walk on. But in the early days
there were none of these—they are the tangible results of the work of
the Light Horse.


DESERT DUNES.
THE TRACKLESS WASTE.


—The Desert.—
The Desert was not as I had pictured it.
. One seems to think of a desert as a great flat expanse of sand, with
green patches or oases at irregular intervals. But that wasn’t the
Desert of Sinai. There was sand in all conscience, but very little that
was flat. It was more a succession of elevations, of undulations, and in
many places of high steep hills of sand with deep dark gullies in between.
Here and there one would strike a hardened surface of salt encrusted
flat below the level of the surrounding sand with some miserable looking
reeds or stunted bushes, and on the march one would see an occasional
palm grove or “hod” as it is called out there.
It was the very nature of the country that made the warfare so
difficult, the—“ Deep sudden hollows where an army hides”—had to be
reconnoitred by advance guards, and ceaseless vigilance was necessary to
prevent surprise attacks by the enemy, who, familiar with the ways of
the desert, could lie in ambush in an unsuspected shadow.
The recruit now arriving has a few hours’ train journey over the
sand, but it took the old boys over a year to fight their way across, and
none but they will ever know the loneliness and the monotony of the
way.
It is sand, sand, sand, that everywhere meets the eye through the
shimmering dancing heat when one turns wearily for relief from the
everlasting sameness. And there, is no life in the air, except the aero-
plane, nor on the ground save the sneaking Turk.
The monotony of the life by day, however, is more than equalled
by the awe and loneliness of the night. The silence and stillness and
inky blackness of a moonless night in Sinai is something that one re-
members all one’s life.
But some, perhaps, will recall more vividly the moonlight nights.
The desert under the full moon appears to be a huge cheerless icefield,
while the sandhills and peculiar undulations help to produce a weird
deathlike stillness. These were the occasions chosen by the enemy
planes to bomb us. We have now a very superior air service in Pales-
tine, but it must never be forgotten in estimating the trials of the desert
campaign that in the early days the advantage lay with the enemy.
Our pilots and observers were gallant in the extreme, but they were
helpless against the then modern machines of the enemy. Our lads
were bombed by day or night, whenever it suited the Turk to come
along, and with very heavy loss at times.
I have mentioned how necessary it is to remember that the
mounted Anzacs were fighting many miles ahead of the lines of com-
munication, and I repeat it, for it is the key to the full realization of the
life they led. They had no fixed base, but kept pushing on, 48 hours in
this spot, 72 in that. Tents on the march were an unknown luxury,
the “bivvy” was their shelter—a triangular stretch of canvas or blanket


some three feet off the ground at the angle, into which they had to-
crawl on their hands and knees. Here the man keeps his private per-
sonnel a change of socks and shirt, his brush and comb and razor, and,
perhaps most precious to him, his letters from home, and his writing
pad. As a protection the “bivvy” is of most use at night when it acts
as a shelter from the very heavy dew which is a feature of the desert
through practically the whole of the year. By day it is impossible to
use it much because of the intense heat. The thermometer in Sinai
reaches an average shade temperature of well over 100 degrees, often
over-reaching the 120 mark, and the reflection from the sand is probably
more trying than the actual over-head heat.
But when a “khamsin” raged any protection was better than none,,
for then the air becomes a mass of flying particles of sand, and apparent-
ly the earth below and the heavens above are composed of myriads of
grains of grit.
That was, perhaps, one of the most irritating of the minor discom-
forts endured, the continual presence of sand. In the food the men
ate, the things they touched, was the ever-present, perpetual grittiness
of sand.
Their food, too, testified to pioneering—bully beef, hard biscuit, and
water—the latter carried in the water bottle slung at the side, forming
part of their equipment, and luke-warm before the sun was two hours in
the sky. That allowance, moreover, had to last them through the day’s
operations, for the only certain water obtainable was that brought up
from the rear by camel transport.
Firewood was practically unprocurable, and no infinitesimal bit of
driftwood was too small to escape the eye of an experienced soldier.
Many stories are told by long-service men of the dodges resorted to to
obtain a piece of much desired wood either lawfully or without the
sanction of the authorities, and many were the expedients devised to
take the place of the much needed fuel.
There was another hardship incidental to pioneer warfare in the
desert which caused untold suffering to the men involved —the means
of transport of the wounded to the nearest stationary hospital and the
time taken to reach it. In France it is the justly proud boast, that,,
owing to the wonderful arrangements and the transport facilities, a man
can be on the operating table in a London hospital within twenty four
hours of being wounded.
In crossing the desert it has been very different. There the
wounded were picked up by stretcher bearers, taken out of the firing
line on sandcarts, and then transferred to sand sleighs drawn by horses.
The next stage was generally in stretchers or chairs slung on the side of
a camel, and the time taken from becoming a casualty to reaching hos-
pital probably two the pain endured by badly wounded men
during that time consequent to the cramped position, the jolting of the


transport, and the exposure to the desert sun by day and dew by night,
can be more easily imagined than described.
Septic sores were almost universal, but unless very severe no man
reported them, and no one ever thought of not carrying on; they were
an evil incidental to the type of warfare, and as such to be put up with,
but they went a long way to making the conditions of the life more
unpleasant and adding to the hardships of the desert.
Yet of all this the general public has remained ignorant—and the
men, taking every hardship as part of the game, have not grumbled.
—The Men.—
Perhaps the description of a Light Horesman given by a correspon-
dent in Palestine in their own paper, “The Kia Ora Coo-ee” will be the
truest illustration I can discover of the men themselves, so I venture to
quote “Surcingle” in the June issue of the magazine—“ Tall, brown,
broad-shouldered, deep-chested, clean-shaven, with a lazy, slouching gait
like that of a sleepy tiger, and calculating eyes: there is the Light
Horseman as I know him. Easy going mostly, he is full of surprises
when aroused.
Rut with his horse, with singlet on and leggings off, and the brown
hide of him beaded with moisture, you see him at his best. His chief
duty is to keep his horse fit and well under trying conditions. Between
an original horse and an original man there is a bond that even death
cannot break. Veterans both, they take the vicissitudes, surprises, and
inconveniences of this weary campaign as a matter of course.
The daily patrols that leave in the cold grey dawn to probe the
enemy’s line are part of the Light Horseman’s life. With his belt and
bandolier crammed full, his coat on his saddle, his nosebag, quartpot
and water bucket tied, mostly in his own fashion, to his horse, he
sallies forth to joust with “Jacko’s” outposts. His sense of direction is
true; he always knows where he is, and how to get back whence he
came. He sees all tracks, spots any movement, and knows how to bluff
when in a tight corner. His training in scouting he does not need to
remember ;it is all second nature with him now. He could not give you
reasons, but he seldom fails to do anything but the right thing when
carrying out this private daily fight of his own. When the day breaks,
he lights his pipe and keeps it burning even when firing or being fired
at, and he pushes forward with all senses keenly alert.
When orders are out for the big fight, you see him and his mates
clustered round the feed dump. To cram nosebag and sandbag with
more feed than they will hold is then his chief aim in life. After his
horse’s requirements are drawn, he sees to his own. . . Then,
smothered in dust and perspiration, he drains his water bottle and refills
it, stands to his horse, and is ready for the long night ride that is usually
the prelude to a hard fight next day. Slow and wearisome this night
ride always is: many halts, much dust, mounting and dismounting


from the overladen old horse, until the most equable of tempers is upset.
The man with the pack-horse has the worst of it, and earns the pity of
all when his load comes off. Just before dawn there is usually a long
halt. The column then disperses and moves by Regiments or Brigades,
first to one flank and then to the other; shortly afterwards intermittent
rifle fire announces that the enemy outposts have been disturbed. It
is here that the Light Horseman gives his gear a final overhaul. There
is no excitement about these preparations. The short sharp ride under
artillery fire, the rapid dismount for action, the handing over of his
horse, and the steady advance under ever increasing fire changes that
careless gait into a livesome, athletic swing, that takes him over the
ground much quicker than other troops. Alert and eager, he avails
himself of every bit of cover.
He obeys orders without question, and when no orders are forth-
coming, he acts instinctively. With bayonet fixed, and galvanised into
a rushing charge, he is invincible. After the day is over and the fight
finished, he bears no animosity to his beaten foe. He treats his prisoner
with a drink from his bottle and half his rations, just as a matter of
course. It is only when the led horses come up, and the long night ride
back to the bivouac area commences, that he realizes the loss of some
of his mates. The horses with empty saddles that he has to lead tell the
tale.”
To me, between the sailor, who faces death daily and whose far-seeing
eyes are accustomed to gazing over wide spaces, untramelled by inter-
ruptions that limit his vision, and the Light Horseman, there seems
something akin.
The Light Horseman does not view life from a restricted area—his
work has taken him over vast distances, and given him a broad outlook.
He is absolutely dependable, and can be relied on in any emergency.
As a writer with intimate knowledge of his subject says—“ One of
the greatest factors in the success attained by the Light Horse boys is
their initiative and willingness to accept responsibility.”
There is an easy assurance in his manner, he has never shirked, and
is prepared to accept whatever the Fates might have in store for him.
Trained to be watchful and alert, his keen eyes are quick to notice small
but important details overlooked by the casual observer, and it was only
his resourcefulness and courage that snatched success from apparently
insuperable difficulties and against such tremendous odds.
—The Daily Routine.—
There was no such thing as resting in the desert warfare, even when
there was no big battle on.
In fact it was just the daily life of the Regiment which was so hard
and trying. At six o’clock at night the outposts took up their lonely
watch—one hour on and two hours off—until six o’clock next morning.
No one except those who have done this have any idea what a nerve-


A SCRUB UP.
FINISHING TOUCHES.


wracking experience it is. According to the nature of the ground and
the darkness of the night, the man on either side of you may be 40 or
400 yards away, and there, with fixed bayonet you stand, scanning the
ground, plying your eyes from the outpost on your left to the other on
your right. The We and loneliness of that hour is perhaps more trying
to the mind than the searching of the sand to the eye.
Other men in groups went out on night patrol, spreading out across
the desert sand in quest of the advanced guards of the enemy. At
daylight the men returned and were met by the day patrols going out
to take their place.
Duty on “observation posts” was another onerous task, although less
trying than night out-post. About 6 a.m. half a dozen men rode out to
each of these posts, situated some twelve or fifteen miles off on all the
higher sandhills. One man and a signaller went on duty at a time, two
hours on and two hours off. On these high dunes of sand there was not
a vestige of shade of any kind to shelter from the blistering sun. No
wonder the men were no longer white. It was possible in a regiment to
pick out the old service men by the colour of the skin, and in those who
had blue eyes the effect was quite remarkable.
In addition to these duties, every now and then, according to the
need, the entire Regiment set out on what is called a reconnaisance.
They usually left soon after mid-night, scouts going in advance to give
warning should any unexpectedly large force of the enemy be espied.
Usually they went out for some twenty miles and would not return until
evening or late at night—the men on one bottleful of water, and the
horses perhaps on none. And even when the horses were watered and
fed, it was not a question of tea, a smoke, and then to bed. Outposts
and stable pickets had to be seen to just the same.
—The Story of a Regiment.—
Although the record here set down deals chiefly with the Victorian
Regiment to which “Scotty” belonged, it applies almost equally to the
other Regiments in the Brigade, and as the life of this Brigade differs
in no way from that of the others, the story applies to all.
On Christmas Day, 1915, what remained of one of the Australian
Light Horse Regiments after the campaign on Gallipoli, disembarked at
Alexandria, arriving at their Base at Heliopolis on the night of the 26th.
Here the Regiment was re-organised, and the time spent in training and
re-equipping the men.
Two months later and exactly a year from the day they left Aus-
tralia the men set out on the long lone desert trail.
Their first encampment was at Serapeum situated on the Suez
Canal at the northern end of the Bitter Lakes. In ten days the troops
moved across to the other side. From this and other points along the
eastern bank of the Canal light railways had previously been run out
into the desert for a distance of some nine miles, roads running out to


outposts some ten miles further east. Within a week the Regiment
pushed out to railhead, A and B squadrons remaining here while C
squadron went out to Post 62 where they were kept busy digging
trenches.
Two weeks later the Regiment moved ten miles north to the rail-
head at Ferry Post and stayed there till the end of July. As at
Serapeum one squadron would go out to the advanced position carrying
on with trench digging and doing outposts, both mounted and stationary,
acting as the feelers of the infantry who filled the trenches, manned the
blockhouses, and laid down the barbed wire entanglements.
All water for men and horses, all food and fodder, ammunition, and
all the impedimenta of war.had to be transported to the front line on
camels, and it was the duty of the squadrons stationed at railhead to
form the escort and see to the safe disposal of the stores.
Towards the end of July the Regiment rode to Balah Bunion, ten
miles east of Balah Lakes, patrolling the desert and digging wells. But
the stay was short. At 6 a.m. on the 4th August the Brigade received
orders to leave within an hour. At 1 p.m. they reached Hill 70 when
the boys learned for the first time that they were going into action.
On reaching Dueidar, one Regiment went on outpost duty for the
night, the other two resting for the fight on the morrow when advancing
through Nuss, they closed with the enemy, defeating him and taking
over 500 prisoners. The Brigade camped for the night near Nuss, and
next morning pushed on, we this time being in advance; but it was the
day following—the 7th—before we caught up with the Turks at Nagid,
the fight lasting all day. We pushed on to Dahab, and on the 9th
moved out towards Bada meeting strong opposition, and sustaining a
number of casualties. Our Regiment was leading again and spent all
day in the firing line, being relieved at dusk. The 10th of August was
one long dreamless sleep,, but next night we took up the outpost line,
and in the morning moved forward, pursuing the enemy past Bir-el-Abd
towards Salmana. This finished the running scrap for the meantime,
and the next day the Regiment pitched camp in the hod (palm grove)
at Hassaneia.
The fighting described above was the part played by our Brigade,
while the other two Australian Brigades with the New Zealand Mounted
Rifles and the British Yeomanry were bearing the brunt of the attack
on Romani, which earlier in the year they had selected as their base.
From it patrols went out and reconnaissances were made as far as Bir-el-
Abd, getting into touch with the Turkish advanced forces, never show-
ing serious fight, but rather giving the impression they wished to avoid
it. By these tactics the Turks were lured down to our base. Doubt-
less they expected to surprise and annihilate us as they had done a
small body of Yeomanry at Katia in April, for at mid-night on Friday,
August 4th, the enemy attacked in great force. It was in answer to a
message sent from Romani that our Brigade set out so hurriedly from its


Camp by the Canal, and by travelling at the rate of about 30 miles a
day—on heavy desert sand—reached the scene of operations on Sunday
morning. The fighting in the early hours of Friday morning was par-
ticularly fast and furious, and it was well into the afterfioon before the
Turks had been forced to give way. When we arrived the Romani
force had worked out towards Katia, and a combined attack was
planned against the Turkish troops. The enemy was defeated and fled
leaving 1,000 prisoners in our hands. In the evening those who had
sustained the first onslaught returned to their base for a two days’ rest
while our Brigade continued to push on as already described, we in our
turn getting the spell when the others came out again to carry on.
In this fighting many of our finest officers and men were killed.
Some of the wounded were so badly hit that they could only lie limply
across the saddle—head on one side, feet on the other— as brave com-
rades brought them in.
A friend of mine had two horses shot dead under him on the first
day, and towards the close of the fighting was shot through the knee.
Rather than dismount and risk capture by the Turks, he rode back the
30 miles that separated him from the Base. Our casualties in horses
were 3,000.
For about a month then the Regiment was posted at Hassaneia,
carrying on with outposts, pickets, and patrols, when somewhere
towards the middle of September we moved across to Hod-el-
Amara and took up the front line from Hisha to Bir-el-
Abd and south to Bada a squadron being in each place.
On the 23rd we set out to find the Turk reported to be
lurking near Mazar. Leaving at mid-night the Regiment rode
out in the dark, dismounting at Salmana at 5 a.m. Here we waited till
sun-down, and then after 12 hours riding sure and hard we found what
we were out for, and reconnoitred the enemy’s position. But we were
very far from our base, horses and men were thirsty and very very tired,
so after a short scrap we turned for home. This was eleven in the morn-
ing, and not till late in the afternoon did we strike any water that was
fit to drink. Salmana was reached at 8 p.m. Here we halted till 5.30
next morning when we made tracks for Amara, getting in about 9 a.m.
More than one man had shut-eyed as he rode along at night, and
there was at least one incident that helped to ease the strain. One of
the troopers while the Regiment was at walking pace trusted for a
moment to his horse, but iust at that moment the horse, sleepy as its
rider, bumped into a Captain’s mount. The rebuke was immediate,
but imagine the merriment of the men when next night the Captain fast
asleep rode past the General-in-command.
Next day—September 26th—we pushed on to Bir-el-Abd, and camped
there for a fortnight doing outposts and patrols by day and night; then
back again to Amara for a few days, and then to Ge’eila somewhere in
the second week in October. Here the men registered their referendum
vote.


On 26th October the Regiment rode back to Bir-et-malar reaching it
on October 28th. We went easy now for three weeks. Going easy means
that the strain of regular outposts and patrols is off, but it also means
that the horses and harness and your kit come in for extra attention.
It is a change of occupation, not lack of it. Slowing down is not
recognised in Egypt, and there is only one form of striking—at the
enemy.
Somewhere about November 24th the Regiment moved out
again to the firing line, riding the first night to Salmana, the next to
Mosefig, and the next to Malha. This was our base until December
20th, when we received orders to move on. We rode all day and about
eight o’clock in the evening were told to drop all superfluous gear.
That done we rode on through the night to El Arish reaching it at
dawn on the 21st to find that the Turks had evacuated it and retired to
Maghdaba. There was great difficulty and some delay in getting the
troops watered here. Many things are advisable on a desert march,
but water is absolutely necessary. That night the men slept on the
beach, and on the next the Brigade set off to attack Maghdaba. First
shots were exchanged at dawn, followed by determined ding dong fight-
ing that lasted all through the morning and well into the afternoon.
They were making us pay for every inch of the. advance, but tactics
were good, the troops were working round, and when about four o’clock
in the afternoon our Brigade took the lead in a brilliant dashing charge,
the enemy broke before the violence of the onslaught, only to find them-
selves cut off in the rear.
We were able to see to our wounded right away, for one of the
buildings at Maghdaba had been converted by the Turks into a hospital.
Leaving sufficient men to bury the dead and to tally the spoil, the
rest of us were very soon riding seawards to Massaid, which was reached
about 9 o’clock next morning. The fact that this was Xmas Eve made
no difference—outposts and stable pickets had to be seen to just the
same, but we knew that the folks at home were thinking of us, for on
the 19th the “billies” had been distributed, and we carried them through
the stunt.
For the next fortnight the days were taken up with training, and at
night we did the usual out-post— taking it in turns.
On January 7th the Regiment had its first experience of an air raid
by night, four Taubes coming over, dropping bombs among the men and
horses, and using their machine guns with good effect. It was a long
twenty minutes, and as only the day before warning orders had been
issued regarding possible submarine attacks, we thought at first it
was the water rats.
Next day at dinner time we set off again, this time for Rafa. Late
in the afternoon we camped three hours, and then set out under
cover of night, reaching Sheikh Zouaiig at 1 a.m„ where we halted for an


A BRIGADE MOVING OUT.
ON THE MARCH.


hour, and then advanced quickly to the Turkish position at El
Magruntein.
The New Zealanders took up the position on the right flank, next to
them on the right front were the Australians, the left front was in charge
of the Yeomanry, while the Camel Corps held the extreme left.
The fight was a remarkable one. The enemy had the advantage
of an excellent position, their artillery being well placed on an undulat-
ing high hill that commanded the plain across which we were compelled
to advance. For a time it was “anybody’s game”, they were landing
their shells to some effect, and our horses were beginning to show the
worse for wear. Something would need to happen soon What did
was not to our liking, the General Commanding giving the order to
retire.
The Yeomanry received it first and turned for home, the Australian
Division was next advised and halted, but somehow that order took a
long time to travel. Meantime the New Zealanders, in a difficult posi-
tion, were fighting hard. “Fix bayonets and charge” was the order
they received. That did it. The Australians didn’t retire. They
joined in the charge, and in one fell swoop Rafa was British.
Our Brigade was closely associated with the New Zealand move,
but the honours are to the N.Z. Mounted Rifles. It was touch and go,
for only four miles off 3,000 Turkish reinforcements were coming up.
These were held off all that night and half next day by one of the Aus-
tralian Regiments to allow the Field Ambulances to clear away the
wounded.
Meanwhile the other troops had returned to their base where in the
evening the horses had their first drink for two days and a half. The
march back to Massaid was continued that night, this being the third
successive night in the saddle.
Most of the men now had five days’ leave to Cairo or Port Said-
two of these being spent in travelling to and fro. The weather was wet
and cold, and on account of having to travel in open trucks many re-
turned in a less fit condition than when they left the Regiment. Leave
soon passed, however, and the men entered into a period of hard train-
ing until the 12th of March, when a move was made along the beach to
El Burg twelve miles beyond El Arish. Three days later we pushed on
further, camped for the night, then rode to an encampment situated on
the beach between Shiekh Zowaiig and Rafa. From here on the 19th
the Regiment did a reconnaissance towards Gaza capturing a Turkish
patrol.
On the 21st the Brigade moved camp to Marakeb, a position on the
beach near Khan Yunus, and at night our Regiment went on outpost.
Until the 24th, when we were relieved by Welsh and English troops, the
front line was held by us.
Final preparations were there made for the first Gaza fight, and we
set out at nightfall—riding all night—to take up a position about seven


milos on the other side of the most beleaguered city the world has ever
known, with a view to keeping off re-inforcements. The sadness of
Gaza hangs heavy as I write. With the precision born of 200 miles of
fighting and the lack of fuss that speaks the master hand these lads of
Australia, New Zealand, and Great Britain took up their positions
around Gaza. Their business, as I have said, was to keep out re-inforce-
ments. The infantry—English and Welsh—on this occasion were to
attack Everything was accomplished without even the reserve dm-
sion-Scots-being called upon. It was a brilliant victory, but from
somewhere came the order to retire. Never were steps retraced more
bitterly Our Brigade, under its brilliant and beloved General, was
furthest out and last to retire. All that evening and all next night,
without the loss of a single man or horse, they held the main reinforce-
ments in check. But while they were fighting'the others had retired,
and at daylight they had to follow, fighting all the way. The Victorians
were last in and pitched camp at Deir-el-Belah, eight miles south-west
of Gaza. From then until the second battle of Gaza on the 19th April
they were constantly on the move, reconnoitring, skirmishing, scouting,
and doing advanced outposts. They had little sleep and no rest. This
time they were to fight as infantry, but for the three days and nights
before that day of death, they hugged their horses in a long embrace.
The “Galloper’s” Brigade was in the forefront again, and while all
the Regiments suffered, the heaviest toll was taken of his men, men from
Victoria, South Australia, and the West. There had been nothing like
it since that day on Walker’s Ridge, the reinforcements had just arrived,
and the old Anzacs with a “noblesse oblige” stepped out to it. Troopers,
corporals, sergeants, as well as commissioned ranks, they set the
example, and they paid the price, almost a third of the Brigade being
put out of action that day. Their task on earth was over. Right
from the Canal by patient, persevering and persistent work, by day and
night, over a forbidding and an arid waste they had led the way, but
to many entrance was denied.
—Following After.—
And as the Light Horse were pushing forward Infantry were follow-
ing in their wake, but before large forces of infantry could have any
mobility on the desert a road of some kind became necessary. This has
been made by the very simple plan of rolling out one inch mesh wire-
netting, four rolls side by side, wiring them together, and fixing the
edges into the ground with long steel pegs. Quicker transport than
that, however, was essential to success, so the desert gave birth to a
railway, not all at once, but like Topsy “it grew”. The Royal Engineers
were the fathers, and under their direction the Egyptian Labour Corps
has carried out a really momentous work. Stretching from Kantara
on the Canal it winds its way through Romani to Bir-el-Abd, Mazar, and
El Arish from there to Rafa on the border of Palestine, and on to the


TWO ORIGINATES.
BIVVIES.


precincts of Gaza itself. There are nearly two hundred miles of busy
thoroughfare thronged with troop trains full of laughing, joking men,
and goods waggons loaded with all that is necessary for modern warfare
in these parts—camels, horses, mules, ambulances, tanks, artillery and
munitions, fodder, food, and stores. But one thing yet was lacking,
and in laying the water pipe all the way across the shifting sand to the
firing line the Engineers have accomplished a feat even greater than the
making of the railway.
The water is first pumped from the Fresh Water Canal at Kantara
West, underneath the Suez Canal to Kantara East, and then by a series
of pumping station's and reservoirs at certain places which I shall not
mention, the water finally flows into the cisterns at the actual front.
The Australians did not lay a sleeper nor a rail, they did not handle
a pipe nor weld a single joint, they did not unroll that wondrous simple
netting road, but they with the other mounted troops made it possible.
Every inch of the way from Kantara on the Canal to Gaza in the
Promised Land has first been covered by these lads. They were the
pioneers, and as such were always camped some 10 o- 20 miles ahead of
the line and the water-pipe. Their duty was to nose out the enemy, and
keep pushing him back to enable the lines of communication to be laid
down.
Sacrifice has been called for and never refused. Besides the physi-
cal fatigue of forced marching over heavy sand, the mental strain of
lonely vigils of the night, the monotony of the everlasting sand, the
fierceness of the Sinai sun, the uncertainty and frequent scarcity of
water supply, and the eversameness of the food—besides all these things
and more the mounted troops sustained an overwhelming proportion of
the entire casualties between February of 1916 and March of 1917.


Part II.
NEARING THE END.
“Here, at least, were men
Who meant and did the noblest thing they knew’’
—i^owell.
—Extracts from a Diary.—
This Diary was written on the scene.
The impressions here recorded were put down each day as the
writer experienced them.
The way the Light Horse had won through the desert was seen as
an accomplished fact. And nearby the borders of Palestine I, personal-
ly, observed the wonderful fortitude of the men, when shattered, and
tortured with pain, they were brought back from the making of the way.
They had endured steadfastly, struggled against tremendous odds, and
when the further load of pain and wounds was laid upon them, their
courage rose up to meet the demands made upon it.
But let the diary speak for itself—and while you are reading of the
trials that beset them even when nearing the end of their work in the
desert, while they were battering at the gates that further barred the
way—the city of Gaza —remember the weary months that for them had
gone before.
“We Light Horse reinforcements landed at Suez early in March, 1917.
and entrained for Moascar at 10 a.m. The original regiments were not
so fortunate. They went on to Cairo, and then had to lead their horses
ten miles to Mena. It was a bit rough on them just coming off the
boat, and rougher still when they found insufficient tents and no blan-
kets, and only iron rations for the first three days. Whenever you meet
an original Light Horseman, take off your hat to him. At Suez, you
will be astonished at the broken down appearance of the houses—they
look as if half finished, and then so much straw placed on top. I under-
stand there are two reasons for this. After the Moslem conquest the
natives did not dare appear well off for fear of taxation; but there is
another and older reason. When the head of a household dies the house
is never taken over by another. The buildings, therefore, are not made
to last. The Suez Canal and the accompanying fresh water canal are
on our right.
We pulled up at several stations in the sand, but Serapeum was the
next stop of interest. It is situated on the Canal near to the Bitter
Lakes. The Third Brigade was encamped on the other side of the Canal


from here in March 1916. There was a lot of cultivation in the vicinity
on the irrigation system. Noted good crops of beans, barley and
berseem (a form of clover or lucerne) on which the fellah’s cattle, goats
and donkeys feed, and I suppose the camels too. Here, too, I first saw
the carrier pigeons—Egypt’s postmen—as in days of long ago.
At Nefisha there is a small camp along the fresh-water canal.
Moascar. Arrived here at 12.50 p.m. This is the first home of the Aus-
tralian soldier in Egypt. Everyone from the A 6 transport detrained but
myself and an A.S.C. sergeant. I was very sorry to leave the men, and
jumped down for a last farewell. The moving train brought me to my
senses, and I had a sprint to reach my carriage. A great number of
large hawks here.
Ismailia, 1 p.m. Change here and wait an hour to catch the Port
Said to Cairo express. Had lunch with the sergeant, and afterwards
walked down to fresh-water canal and across it to Lake Timpsah, a lake
in the course of the Suez Canal. Ismailia is a very pretty place. Some
fine avenues of trees.
At Tel-el-Kebir, it was the British Cemetery which interested me
most. There is the old and the new one—the former bearing testimony
to those who fell in 1882, when Sir Garnet Wolseley defeated the
Nationalist rising, and the latter showing the crosses erected to those who
died in the present campaign. There was a big Australian camp here,
during the exceptionally hot summer of last year. All vegetation is
between the railway and the fresh-water canal now. On the other side
the desert reigns.
Abuhammad is the first station that is really busy—the natives
young and old bustling around offering oranges and cigarettes for sale.
In this district irrigation is practised on a greater scale, and the land is
very productive on both sides of the line.
On the way along quite a large number of townships have been in
view at variable distances from the train. In these near at hand the
houses seem so closely packed together that there cannot be too much
room left for the camels and donkeys to move about in. Each has its
mosque with minaret.
The fresh-water canal with its offshoots is a constant source of inte-
rest. Here native bullocks are quenching their thirst, there children are
washing and splashing, while every now and then we see a herd of goats
moving quietly along, nibbling as they go. Commonest sight of all,
however, is the universal beast of burden, always well loaded, and as
often as not carrying its master too. Poor donkey, he is so broken in
spirit, he does not require a bridle.
The devices for getting water from one channel to another are
various. I noticed what I took to be a sort of centrifugal pump,—a hol-
low cylinder of wood let into the water below and angled to the level
of the channel above. It was being rotated by hand. Commoner than
this was the device being worked- by a blindfolded bullock, walking


slowly round and round in a circle. The beast is yoked to a horizontal
wheel fitted by cogs to a perpendicular one, to which are attached
earthenware jars which come up full of water. This is the sakeer. The
banks of the canal are raised and have a path on top.
One cannot help noticing the smart appearance of the Egyptian
stationmaster —but he is not on that account to be trusted —so tradition
goes, and I fancy it is right. We are now at Zagazig—a large native
town on the fresh water canal. Afternoon tea was served after leaving
here. From the dining car windows, a specially good view is got of the
country, dotted with townships and farms. I noticed several areas evi-
dently just newly planted almost under water. It seems to be the cus-
tom to more or less swamp their fields to start with.
Benha. This is another native town on big lines. Change here for
Alexandria.
Cairo. 5 p.m. I was very glad to have the assistance of a Major
who had shared the compartment from Ismailia. Drove to A.I.F. Head-
quarters, but found office closed, so put up for the night at the National
Hotel near by. 9.30 a.m. Reported to acting A.D.M.S. Given leave
until Thursday morning. No hope of getting further west, but the
Lieutenant-Colonel very kindly offered to get me out to see Willie. He
is out at the very front in Palestine, so I shall see something before long.
Enquired now at Base Records for Ivan. Was handed over to a Nhill
bank clerk, who rang up the Flying Corps, and ascertained his where-
abouts. Set out and by using my tongue freely found the gentleman
without difficulty. Spent the afternoon and evening with him, and by
means of motor car and gharry saw just enough to whet my appetite.
No day nor week nor month would be enough to learn half the walls
have got to tell. I would just like to mention the old slave market —a
large square area enclosed by high walls on one of which the faded blood
marks can still be distinctly seen below the scaffold. How much blood,
of how many races, must have dripped there? The place is used mean-
time as an army distributing centre. More to do with our immediate
presence in Cairo was the scene of the damage done by a hostile aero-
plane. In the late afternoon, went out to Heliopolis, saw the Virgin’s
tree at Mataria, and had dinner in the Heliopolis House Hotel. Got
back to the National at 10,30, and found the Padre of our ship in room
20. Next morning I received word at breakfast that I was wanted at
Headquarters. Told to proceed to-morrow to the boys. Thereafter I
spent the forenoon visiting old friends in the various hospitals and look-
ing up the Remount Depot. In the afternoon Daimpre and I set out
for Pyramids in electric tram —a marvellous run for fivepence. Had
afternoon tea at Mena House Hotel, then went on and had a close look
at the pyramids, the Sphinx, and their temples, returning to the tram-
line on camels Got back to our hotel before 9 p.m. Thoroughly tired,
had dinner, and full of the prospect of getting out on the morrow, soon
fell fast asleep. I cannot claim to have seen Cairo, but then lam not


here as a tourist. The railway route next day was the same as before
as far as Ismailia. From there to Kantara it was new. Just beyond
Ferdan, the line runs alongside the Canal. At Bala I saw a flood area
for the first time—on the east side of the Canal, done in the early days
to keep the Turks at a distance. There is a good road here between the
railway and the water with military traffic plying to and fro, and here
is Kantara the starting point of the journey east. There are two sta-
tions —one on either side of the Canal —Kantara West and Kantara East.
Mounted a motor lorry and crossed by pontoon bridge to the encamp-
ment which is on a very large scale. With its railway stations and sid-
ings, its blacksmith’s shops, its canteens, and its stores it resembles a
township complete, even to its metalled roads and watering carts. Pro-
ceeded to rest camp. Glasgow High School man in charge. As I meant
to go on with the 6 a.m. train I was given rations—bully beef, bread and
cheese. There is a train at 6 this evening, but I am anxious to see
Kantara. Had afternoon tea with the hospital staff and met another
Glasgow High School Boy. At dinner in the evening still another. A
regiment of D.C.L.I. marched in and on beyond.
9 p.m. Told guard to waken me at 4.30 a.m. Off to bed on the
sand. It is bitterly cold. Mid-night: Between a full dose of cold and
a gippy stomach I cannot get asleep so told guard not to bother me.
In the morning not feeling fit. Had a quiet walk round the camp.
Scottish accent everywhere. Spoke to several. Nearly all Glasgow and
Ayrshire men. There are great numbers of seagulls about acting as
scavengers. Next train due to leave at 12.55 p.m., but when it will leave
depends on sandstorms and whether there is any block due to derailment.
Went down to the station at one o’clock, but train did not move out
until 3.30 p.m. Large flood areas to east of Canal. We passed through
them on either side for a mile or two. Telegraph poles and wires along-
side just as at home. The train is very bumpy, no glass in the window
spaces only wooden blinds, after the cutler desk system. An Ayrshire
friend from Ballantrae in my carriage. Flood area like a great sea
extends miles inland, and I believe begins opposite Port Said. This
was done to keep the enemy from approaching the Canal.
Signs of warfare all along,—redoubts with barbed wire, stone walls, and
earthworks. There is a twelve inch water pipe running parallel to the
line and extending to the Palestine border. Nearly all the work is done
by the Egyptian Labour Corps, under the direction of the Royal
Engineers.
Gilban. The station house is really a block house with mound all
round and sandbags on top of that with loopholes. The wire-netting
road begins here. It is four yards broad, and enables the Infantry to
march with some degree of comfort The action at Dueidar was fought
on the starboard bow of the station. There is an encampment here both
sides of the line. The flood area still continues two or three miles
beyond Gilban.


Pellusium, 4.40. Fitted up like an ordinary station. Desert undu-
lating. Redoubts.
Romani, 5.30. Several thousand troops camped here—Edinburgh
the prevailing accent. Large Y.M.C.A. Hut. Good flute band playing
belonging to the British West Indians. Railway sidings on a large scale
here. Fine recreation ground in a sort of a hollow, —damp in winter,
but now dry. Patches of palms and tents on rising ground all round.
Like the look of this place. This train will probably not go through to
El Arish to-night, on account of an accident between Bir-el-Abd and El
Arish. Left the train at Romani, and spent the night here. 8 p.m.:
Long train with horses passed through. A Railway Transport Officer
came in from Dakhla oasis in the Soudan. He had met Ivan. Romani
is the first big station from Kantara. There is a loft of carrier pigeons
here.
17/3/17. Rose at 6 a.m. Train left 8.30, Indian troops at station.
Barbed wire entanglements everywhere. On our left saw engine lying
on its side. Damp areas every now and then along the line, and the
heath in these places is green. Palm trees on the right. Railway to
Mahamadiya on the coast branches off main line here. Some bulrushes
about.
Katia. Palms, rushes, heath. The scene of the massacre of
the Yeomanry is four miles out and at an angle of 2 o’clock. Tents
about. A dash of water. Native Indian Officer with us. Palm groves
or “hods” on a bit.
Khirba. I noticed a London-and-South-Western-Railway engine here.
Tents.
Bir-el-Abd. Barbed wire entanglements. Block-houses. Camp
here. First A.L.H. Brigade marching out, camel transport leading.
10.30 a.m.: Left Bir-el-Abd, getting a shove off for some distance from an
engine behind. The trains are very long, and often heavily laden,
and at some of the inclines it takes the engine all its time to pull the
load. Egyptian Lieutenant in our carriage. A sand ridge with furze
on top is being built all along both sides of the line to prevent the sand
blowing on to the railway.
Salmana. Block-houses surrounded with barbed wire in circles and
off-shoots running from them. The houses are all loop-holed.
Tilul. Block-houses. A few tents. Outside Tilul —large damp
areas with a white salt-like encrustation on the surface. They have
probably been lagoons, and will be again when the rains come I suppose.
Motor tractor wending its way along with two trucks—all on the cater-
pillar system. Some tents about and barbed wire as usual. At Bir-el-
Abd, we got some refreshments, and a cork suddenly flying from a bottle
nearly caused an accident. All canteens east of Kantara are dry.
Mazar. The atmosphere warm here. A train from railhead passed.
The line is single except at stations where it is double or treble, in addi-
tion to sidings and lines going off to Supply and Army Ordnance Stores.


A SQUADRON OF LIGHT HORSE WATERING.
HORSES WATERING.


Bought a cake here for I was very hungry. Everyone was eating but
the Indian Officer —the Egyptian had gone out —and feeling sorry for
him I offered him some of mine, but I fell in badly. He pushed it
away quickly. “No, thank you, Ido not eat that.” I feared this, but
took the risk rather than, possibly be unkind. He must have been
famishing all the same. Camp here as usual. Redoubts about every
here and there. Barbed wire. 2.15: Cool sea breeze now blowing, but
sea not yet in sight. 2.25: Stopped. 2.55: Moved on. You can see
that they don’t run express trains on this line yet. Came on more tents
and block-houses. The sea in view. 3.7: The outskirts of El Arish—
the sea on our left. 3.9: Aerodromes. Headquarters of Flying Corps.
3.15: Passed the upturned engine and train that kept us back yesterday,
hitting the broken off axle and the wheels of the engine. 3.27: Passed a
Division Transport. 3.30: Men and horses bathing—entirely bareback!
3.31: Camels—some hundreds on the move. Tents everywhere. Evi-
dently we are near the El Arish encampment. Palm tree shades. 3.32:
Now alongside a long water platform. 3.35: Drew up at El Arish
station. A noise like a motor engine overhead. Sure enough it is one
of our aeroplanes flying very low. After much asking I found the
quarters of my unit. The officers were just gathering for afternoon tea.
Reported to the Colonel. After dinner I asked the Officer Commanding
if I might get up the line to see Willie. Granted. Went down to the
Railway Transport Officer to enquire re trains. Rang up signals, i.e. our
telephone people. They told me the Brigade was at El Burj as far as
they knew. The night Corporal called me at 2.30, and I left at 3 a.m.
El Burj. Arrived 4.30 a.m. The Brigade was still here I was told
by the man in charge. Train moved on. Five minutes later he in-
formed me they left nearly a week ago. And perhaps not another train
to-day! Fished around —went over to a tent showing a light—luckily
it was “Signals” and a Scotsman from Rossshire in charge. He was a
‘brick’, and for half-an-hour tried to find out everything for me. Mean-
time I learned that a water train going on to the next stop—Sheikh
Zowaiig—was due in three-quarters of an hour. My friend at Signals
found out that the boys I was after were beyond Sheikh Zowaiig.
Anzac Mounted Division Headquarters, were at Rafa, and the signaller
was getting a message through to notify them that I was on the train.
Glorious sunrise—first the dawn, a succession of the most delicate
tints; then the sun rose over the horizon with a moon-crescent still
high in the heavens. It is absolutely still: not a sound disturbs the
silence of the scene, but on a far off sand hill something is moving against
the sky-line. It is a camel caravan. Left at 6.5 a.m. on the water train.
From El Burj on there is more vegetation. Shrubs and trees becoming
more common, and a lot of poor looking barley belonging to the
Bedouins. Palms, groves, and hills. The water trucks are nearly all
leaking, and the Gyppy gangs at the stopping places came forward and
used the tiny spouts for washing purposes.


Sheikh Zowaiig. Arrived 6.50 a.m. A number of Light Horsemen
with spare horses were waiting for their officers who had probably gone
on to Rafa in my original train. They were able to tell me where the
Victorian Regiment was, and one of them took my kit bag and gave me
a horse to ride. He was leading another which broke away on two occa-
sions. Luckily there were plenty of mounted men about, so we weren’t
much delayed. The ground along the railway was very like a Fifeshire
golf course. I noticed a number of graves with crosses indicating where
some Light Horsemen fell in the Rafa fight. Rode some five miles along
this sandy grass—the larks were singing—and then cut off at right angles
over very high sandhills towards the sea. I hadn’t pictured the desert
like this. Here were hills as high as a three-storey building, almost pre-
cipitous on one side, rounded at the top, and shelving away more gradu-
ally on the other. It was like being in a snow-covered range of hills in
Scotland- —the awe, the loneliness, the ever-sameness of it. We must
have been riding up and dotfm for two o r three miles when gaining the
crest of the last line of dunes we beheld the boys bivouacked below, and
the sea beyond. Just before I got in, Willie had got my wire, and had
set off with a horse to fetch me. He took a different route,
but met some of the 10th boys coming back, from whom he learned
that a Scotty fellow with red hair and three stars up was coming in by
another track. “That’ll do me’’, said Bill, so he turned and got in
almost as soon as I did.
Willie looks fit as ever I saw a man, and weighs 11 stone 5 lbs. His
face and arms are as brown as his tunic. Had breakfast in the mess
bivvy, then shaved and washed outside, during which time some eight
aeroplanes flew overhead, our planes flying towards Jerusalem —that way
anyhow. Chatted with the Minyip boys, Bill Kane, Fred Cox, and one
of the Lachlan Boyds. Then had lunch bully beef or herrings and
tinned peaches, the latter two, trench comforts. After lunch—paid visit
to the Brigade Field Ambulance commanded by C ’s brother-in-law.
Then reported to the Colonel, about a mile down, Willie showing me the
place. Spent next three hours riding backwards and forwards with
Willie, listening to all he had to tell me, and getting the latest home
news. Then after watering the horses we turned to the bivvies Tea
with Officers—stew. My appetite has been keen to-day. In the evening
Willie and I climbed to the top of a sandhill. He showed me the bible
given him Trinity Church, enclosed in a neat tightly-fitting cover which
he had made out of an old pair of trousers on Gallipoli. From the hill-
top it was remarkable the number of regiments we could see nestling in
the different hollows. Willie evidently a favorite, and is known in the
regiment as “Scotty”. After talking on the hill for an hour or two we
came down and made for bed. Major C. however met me, and it was
11.30 before we turned in. The Regiment was moving out at 1.30 a.m.
on a reconnaissance so we hadn’t much sleep. The day was the
most memorable one I have ever spent. Everything was new to me and


full of interest. The Officers went out of their way to entertain me by
giving me “carte blanche”! They were astir at 1 a.m., and at 1.30 bade
me “au revoir”. It was then pitch dark. You could see nothing, and
the sound of the preparations made it quite eerie. At 4.30 I got up
with the crescent moon in the sky. 5 p.m,: First suggestion of the dawn.
Moved off with the moon ahead of us. There was something very fas-
cinating about that ride in the dark—marching to the dawn up these
steep sandhills and down again. 6 a.m: The sun showing above the
horizon. The skies are strewn with myriads of tiny fleecy clouds. “It’s
going to blow,” said Willie, “And it can blow here when it likes”. 6.20:
Reached Sheikh Zowaiig where a goods train had just come in from Rafa.
Flung my kit into van and bade good-bye (pro tern) to Bill. Springing
into the saddle he was soon out of sight over the top of the nearest
mound. From the top of the train I got a glimpse of him, and watched
till I could no longer make him out. I was very glad I had seen him
and found him so well. And now back to El Arish and to work. I
found everyone in the Regiment willing to stick it out, but nevertheless
heartily sick of the war. Good news from other fronts gladdens them
and makes home seem nearer. I landed back about 10 a.m. without
having broken fast. Reported to the Colonel, and then had a cup of tea.
Am appointed to Isolation section of Hospital.
Thursday evening. Sharing tent with Nigel A. of Adelaide. Usually
waken about 6.30 a.m., shave, wash, and go down for a bathe. Come
back and eat a voracious breakfast. Go round the patients in the morn-
ing, look into interesting points late in the forenoon, and after lunch
carry out any special treatment and see to the new admissions. Every
fifth day one is orderly officer, which means that one has to supervise
the admission of all new cases and inspect the whole camp as well as do
one’s own work. Tuesday was my day this week, when I admitted 120.
I have twice already seen a Turkish aeroplane and watched our anti-
aircraft guns warn him off. The enemy planes fly very high—they are
almost indistinguishable, while our planes fly quite low, at least over our
lines. They usually fly towards the enemy’s lines about breakfast time
and return in the evening, but some of them are about at all hours. The
encampment here, about two miles distant from an Arab village is now
a huge township with every accessory in the way of stores and workmen s
sheds. The Railway sidings are quite extensive. The main railway,
the water pipe, and the wire-netting road run on to the border beyond.
About a year ago there was nothing on this side of the canal but sand
and occasional lagoons and the caravan routes of the Biblical and early
days.
23/3/17. Royal Flying Corps supplying us with a number of cases
of relapsing fever. Enjoying cool morning bathe, after which double
dose porridge, two eggs and bacon, bread and marmalade soon disappear.
Anti-aircraft firing to be heard this morning up the line. Rumours of a
biggish action. Our aeroplanes keep flying to and fro all day. Yester


day evening, one swooped down very near to the ground and then
mounted again. I was close by and saw the two men and the parts of
the machine distinctly.
24/3/17. About 9 a.m. five steam trawlers came into the bay and
anchored close in. They sent a boat ashore, but so far we Have heard
nothing. Unusual air activity this forenoon, and a lot of distant boom-
ing round about 9.30 a.m. May have been anti-aircraft guns, but didn’t
seem like that. Some of the aeroplanes flew over our camp very low.
They must go at great speed. You may be reading when a throbbing
like a motor engine, which of course it is, becomes audible down the
line. Looking up in that direction you see an aeroplane approaching,
the noise becomes more distinct, and soon she is abreast of you, now
overhead, and a minute later she is vanishing out of sight. On the under
part of the lower of the two main planes, are painted two red white and
blue rings, one on either side. These are plainly visible from the height
our “birds” fly over here. Until to-night we had only candles at night,
but now electric light is working. The dynamo was a special gift from
West Australia I believe for X-ray and lighting purposes. This hospital
only arrived here ten days ago—just a day or so before I came up.
Outside our tents there are a set of poles carrying the electric wires and
another lot of heavier poles with crossbars carrying the telephone wires.
Sunday 25/3/17. Alongside the railway there are the telegraph wires
in addition to those mentioned above. All stations, camps, and troops
connected by telegraph. On going to bathe at 7.30 a.m. found that other
four trawlers had just arrived, and other four boats are on the horizon,
steaming in. Two of these are longer the ordinary trawler, and
one looks like a small gunboat. After the usual breakfast, I spent an
hour trying to show one of the Egyptian Labour Corps what he had
missed in cleaning up our lines. which I went round my patients
and now, 12.30, lam just famishing. 1.30: Got my first innoculation
against cholera. It seems our troops, W’s brigade among them, have
been in action for two days. Four hospital trains passed through here
to the front between 3 a.m. and 6 a.m. to-day. I feel rather anxious
about the youngster. 3.30: Have just been down to the Red Cross train
which is picking up a number of cases from our hospital to leave us
plenty of beds for the reception of wounded who may arrive any time.
Two troopers on board the train recognised me: R. Gutch, D Troop, C
Squadron, and Ritchie, Regimental Headquarters. Both know Willie.
They told me that last Monday they caught the Turkish patrol they
went out after. On Wednesday they moved camp beyond Rafa, still on
the beach, and on Friday reconnoitred up close to Gaza and within sight
of it. The same day I believe they moved still further along the beach,
and to-night are going out ready to attack in the morning. G has
a bad septic finger (thumb); R , rheumatism. They mentioned,
too, that large numbers of infantry and much heavy artillery had gone
up during the past five days. I hope we do what we want to without


heavy loss. G said that the intention was to keep the enemy
moving after this. All the above must be taken as conjecture for the
men, and even the junior officers have no definite knowledge of what is
going to take place. 4.20 p.m.: Just had afternoon tea. The tea is in
a large teapot—takes two hands to lift it, and you have to be in early
to get tea—late comers get a solution of tannin. The fare consists of
bread, cheese and jam. We never get butter, but so far I have been
able to digest the jam. The mid-day meal is at 1 p.m. We get some-
thing in the beef line— either bully or fresh beef—usually the latter, and
with it small potatoes with their coats on. After that you get tea and
bread, cheese, marmalade or jam. Every Sunday there is a cigarette
and tobacco issue with matches. The smokers reckon it is rubbish we
get. Evening meal is at 6.30 p.m., and consists of soup, stew, and
pudding with such tea, bread, cheese, marmalade and jam as you wish.
Coffee can be had if desired. At breakfast you can have either tea or
coffee. As you know soups and jams upset my digestion at home, but
out here in the desert I am glad to take everything I can get, and so far
I have had no ill effects. It is a long time since I felt so well. 4.45:
Set out for a walk with A to an eminence just beyond us overlook-
ing the sea, and commanding a fine view of the country around here.
On the hill is an old mosque and a couple of concealed guns pointing
seawards. Standing with one’s back to the sea and looking right, left
and straight ahead there are camps as far as the eye can see. We
walked back along the beach and passed quite a number of officers be-
longing to Headquarters, among them General Murray, commanding the
forces in Egypt. He had just arrived in state (Pullman cars), and is
to superintend the operations beginning to-night or to-morrow morning.
After he passed we watched a native fishing from the shore with a net.
He had several nets set in the water, but this one he threw so that it
fell on the water in a circle like a skirt, and being weighted around the
foot it settled on the water as thrown. As we turned from him the
sun was sinking below the horizon, and moving on to another part of
the world it left a gorgeous confusion of colours in our sky. And there
above is a thin strip of moon on its back with the old moon in its bosom.
We turned off to our lines with one thought in our hearts—those at
Home, Sweet Home. 10 p.m.: At noon I hung my service tunic outside
to give it a sunning, and forgot it till now. It is soaked through with
dew and is quite heavy.
26/3/17, 10.30 am. Dull booming has been audible for the last
hour, and is going on now. I saw a Red Cross train go up about 6.30
a.m. At 7.30 a.m. went for a bathe—very misty and damp. Sun did
not break through till 9 a.m. About that time another boat—three or
four times bigger than the smaller trawlers—came into the bay, when all
14 of them moved out. While they were in the bay, two were always
out in the offing, one right, and one left, keeping an eye open for sub-
marines. The prevailing idea here is that these boats are stocked with


provisions for the troops, and will land them at Gaza, whenever tha
position falls. The railway does not go to Gaza meantime. 11.30: 1
am orderly officer to-day, and have just finished my round of inspection.
In a camp, every precaution is taken against the spread of disease. All
water is chlorinated before use. We carry our own disinfector for
vermin. Refuse, including kitchen refuse, is burned in an incinerator,
while all soapy and greasy water is dealt with by a grease The
greatest care is taken with the disposal of excreta and urine. T e or
mer is burned in our camp, and the latter run into deep pits. When
the war is over the sanitary authorities must begin to wage war against
the fly. So far we seem to have no very effective method of lessening
his millions. 4 p.m.: Hospital train with a few cases—mostly septic
sor es—came in from rail-head. We took in 56 cases and the train went
back to the front. There were two of W’s Regiment among them.
They say the railway is now effective as f. r as Khan A unus, and that
the Brigade moved out at 3 p.m. yesterday, and was to attack early
this morning. 7.30 p.m.: There has been heavy booming all day since
9 am. The Major thinks most of it is due to firing from monitors.
He is generally right. About 7 p.m. a Field Ambulance evacuated 23
patient's to us as they got orders to move on at once. Three of our
aeroplanes passed over here in the darkness round about 7 p.m. They
would have to descend by flares. They must have had a heavy day.
One of the Light Horse boys mentioned above told me Willie has very
bad sores, but wouldn’t knock off. There is much expectancy here as
to what has happened. In spite of man’s turmoil, however, the sun set
in its golden glory, leaving a marvellous sky, and soon the moon was
shedding a silver sheen across the still waters of the bay.
27/3/17. So far, 2 p.m., no definite news, and no word yet of the
hospital trains, one of which, after being here all night, went on to Khan
Yunus in the forenoon. At 1.30 p.m. I saw a despatch rider ride smart-
ly down the lines to General Murray’s Pullman cars and hand in a note.
4 pm. Got orders to be at hospital train to assist in dealing with
casualties. 4.30 pm. Fresh orders—no cases to be taken off here, but
we to send down the line all cases possible out of our hospital. 5.30
pm.: Hospital train came in. Our cases put aboard. Train has 139
casualties aboard including 10 cot cases. The news they gave us not too
good. One of our aeroplanes within sight of the train went alight just
after rising, and both men were burnt to cinders. I feel anxious about
W . Just before the train came in I got a note from him with a
letter of Mother’s included telling me of George going off to Yorkshire.
At the train I met Capt. A. D. D , and R. S. T , old school
and University men whom I have not seen for over *ix years. My tent
mate is in bed with a touch of dysentery. There is a wondrous path
of light across the sea to-night. Fell asleep to the sound of distant
booming.


Wednesday, 28/3/17. Our aeroplanes were flying north this morn-
ing before it was light. At 7.30 a.m. when 1 went for my swim, a
British monitor was steaming along the Bay, in the direction of Gaza.
She was flying the white ensign. About 10 a.m. a train passed through
here with eight armoured cars, one Ford, and eight caterpillar tanks.
Last night the emergency ambulance train was sent for and left for the
front. The air to-day is very hot—the first hot day so far. Yesterday
evening was decidedly chilly. 2.30 p.m.: Hospital train came in with
250 wounded, mostly Welshmen and East Anglians. There was only an
odd Light Horseman among them, but we hear they are fighting. One
poor fellow shot in the neck died soon after admission. We officers
were allotted sections, and before any wounded arrived, I set out to get
all I wanted in the way of dressings, solutions, morphia, serum and
syringes. The orderlies worked like heroes, and before any wounded
arrived everything was in readiness, and we went straight ahead with-
out a hitch. All my men were dressed by 7 p.m., before which—some-
where between 4 and 5 p.m.—they had had tea, coffee, and biscuits. I
drank a pint of coffee at a gulp. I was very thirsty, and my back was
aching with the stooping. 7 p.m.: Spent ten minutes at dinner and
then injected all the men with anti-tetanic serum. At 8 p.m. they got
hot cocoa and biscuits. Poor fellows they were like children with
chocolates, so pleased were they. As a matter of fact cigarettes and
chocolates were handed to the men to start with. I finished up by
taking notes of wounds, and left most of them sound asleep before 10
p.m. They had all been hit on Monday. For about a fortnight they
say they have had practically no water to wash with—a quart to 14
men, and for the past two days have had very little water to drink, no
tea, and only issue biscuits to eat. Monday night and Tuesday night
they spent in the open without even a blanket to cover them. Two of
my cases were badly septic, which occurring in two days is very serious.
One is suffering severely from shock. He was lying on the ground
firing when a shell exploded in front of him throwing him on to a con-
crete floor ten feet below. Another has his chest ripped open, and one
man has an entrance wound below the chin with the exit hole behind
the left ear. The shrapnel bullet travelled from the one to the other.
He has great difficulty in speaking and in swallowing, but he indicated
that he wished a cigarette, and smoked it! The officer’s ward is
crowded out. They got it very badly. A has received a ham-
per from home. We are smoking and eating it after the seven hours’
rush.
Saturday, 31/3/17, 5 p.m. Since Wednesday 3 p.m. we have been
going all we know, and until the last hour or so when I lay down I had
no idea of what day it was, nor a very clear idea of anything else, except
my own immediate job. About 2 p.m. I fell sound asleep—so soundly
that I was not wakened by our guns firing at a Turkish aeroplane. At
3.30 I jumped up, divested myself of clothing—there has been no ques


tion of sea-bathing for the past 72 hours, had a good wash all over and
a complete change, even to the cap. To go back to where 1 left off on
Wednesday night.
On Thursday 7.30 a.m. another hospital train came in with 320. 1
saw it coming as I was going down to bathe, came back at once, and
while waiting for breakfast converted the tray of my cabin trunk into a
dressing tray. I thought of the idea the night before. Most of the
men were unable to come up to the dressing table, and the carrying
about of solutions, and dressings in towels seemed to me a great waste
of time and of orderlies. Accordingly I lined the tray with sterile
towels and placed on it everything necessary—lint, gauze, cotton wool,
jaconet, bandages, ’slings, safety pins, iodine, solutions, instruments,
morphia, and hypodermic syringe, anti-tetanic serum, and serum syringe.
The tray proved so light and handy that I was able to release the
orderlies to see to the slight cases, and they worked with such a will
that we had 50 cases dressed by noon. Each wounded man gets 500
units of anti-tetanic serum injected to ward off lock-jaw, and finishing
early in the afternoon, I was able to help others. In the officers’ ward,
a poor old Major, very like Father in appearance, but younger, was the
worst case-shot through the lungs. He died, poor chap, later. I was
dressing the man next him. He had been shot across the eyes, and one
eye at least was sightless. In the next tent there was a young
lieutenant whom I met at Kantara a fortnight ago. His face was
covered with bandages, but I recognised his voice, and when I spoke to
him he said, “Oh! it’s grand to hear a voice you know.” We had been
together for barely 24 hours at an officer’s rest camp, and yet he knew
me better than those around. When the action started he had only
been two days with his platoon. He is quite young. lam writing to
his Mother and a Miss to-night after he is X-rayed. About 11
p.m. another train of open trucks emptied its load, and it was a weird
sight. The long train of wounded in the fitful moonlight—it was misty
—and the blinking lanterns of our Anzac boys. At the rear there was
a number of Turkish prisoners. Workers were many and willing, and
soon the fellows were assisted down. They were lined up and quickly
passed through the orderly rooms, and soon were allotted marquees,
several of which had been specially put up for them. Our Hospital
caters for 800 when full, and we had now over 900. By mid-night empty
stomachs were being filled. The men were famishing, but it was the
hot tea they relished most. The forty-four men I was seeing to drank
three great buckets full. Very few of them chose Bovril. 1 a.m. I
turned in. In the morning the Major asked me to supervise two new
marquees in addition to the one I had already. This meant that I had
160 wounded to look after in addition, to my other cases. Each
marquee had a senior and junior orderly, and two fatigue men —the lat-
ter to help in the general rough work. I was fortunate in having good
orderlies, and as every one gave of his best we managed to do what


THE DESERT AMBUGANCE—SAND-CARTS.
SAND SLEIGHS FOR WOUNDED.


otherwise would have been impossible. This forenoon all the slighter
•cases were sent down the line in open trucks. Many of the fellows were
very short of clothing, on account of their old ones being torn and blood
soaked. The Quarter Master, however, was able to supply the need,
except in the way of head gear. I gave my older cap to a man
wounded on the head. After these lads went I dressed the more
serious ones, and the orderlies set to, to clear up, and get ready for the
new arrivals. At 4 p.m. a hospital train passed through with 300 cases
for somewhere further down the line. The Colonel told us that 400 were
on their way here. Well I have dressings ready for all comers, although
I hope they won’t be too late. About 1.30 p.m. an armoured train
passed through here at a good rate. 6.30: Some heavy booming,
8 p.m. to 9.301 p.m.: In X-ray room—examination of arms, legs, chests,
heads —metal everywhere. Just after dinner this evening I was speaking
to a Cheshire man. He was wounded in the arm on Tuesday at 3 p.m.
—looked for his regimental M.O. but could not find him —was directed
to the Brigade Field Ambulance, and dressed at 6 p.m. At 7.30 p.m.
the wounded —this lad among them —were sent off on camels —two on
each camel. Some time after dark they got lost, and the wounded sat
down on the grass for the night. Setting off at daybreak, they reached
a Casualty Clearing Station at 9.30 a.m. on Tuesday, where they got
milk and bovril. In the afternoon their wounds were dressed and anti-
tetanic serum injected. They spent two nights there under a large
bivouac. They had plenty of blankets. On Wednesday at 2 p.m. they
moved on—halted for a little at 6 p.m.—then were driven in sand carts
to another Casualty Clearing Station, where they were dressed again,
and slept the night in marquees. At 5 p.m. they set off in open trucks,
reaching our Hospital at 11 p.m. on Thursday. Many of them were
sent on again this forenoon, i.e., Saturday.
Observer and pilot of one of our aeroplanes were shot to-day, the
former is in hospital, but the pilot was dead when the train arrived.
10.30 p.m.: Very tired. Just been told that the hospital train has gone
on past us. Orders are constantly being changed like this. One never
knows for certain what is going to happen till it actually does happen.
Most of my cases went on to-day.
Sunday, 1/4/17. The least eventful All Fool’s Day possible. No-
body was anxious for larking. Isolation ward visited, and dressing
surgical cases in forenoon. The afternoon spent studying a rare case
-of Malarial fever. Had a most interesting time in the laboratory.
Later gave intravenous injection of salvarsam to case of Relapsing
Fever. 5 p.m. Hospital train came in with 520 slight casualties. We
admitted 120, and transferred the other 400 to hospital train bound for
down the line.
7.30 p.m. 25 patients admitted to my ward. 9.45 p.m.: Finished
dressing the new cases. One had not been dressed since Monday, and
three or four since Tuesday. One man had a horribly gashed and sep


tic cheek with fracture of the lower jaw, and bloodshot eyes. I’m
afraid last week’s fight was not a success. It is much nearer the truth
as far-as one can judge that we received a set-back. One of the
wounded officers told me that his men were marched about 30 miles,
and after some bully and cold water, were sent into the fight. “We
thought we were going to get a walk over, and got instead a d d
hiding.” This afternoon an officer with a bayonet wound in the
abdomen called me over and enquired from which part of Scotland I
came. He was from Girvan way, Colmonell. Then from which part
of Australia? Did I know the Wimmera? Mrs. D ? The Hs
? S ——— ? His sister is a boon companion of Esther F’s, now
Mrs. H. The world isn’t small is it? A few days ago, met a Mr. L ,
a Missionary in Korea, who is spending his furlough with the Y.M.C.A.
at the front. He is a nephew of the late Dr. John G. Paton, and a
great friend of Mr. McP’s. 11 p.m.: Time I was in bed. Resumed bath-
ing to-day. Yesterday there was nearly another fatality on the beach,
the R.T.O. collapsing in attempting to save a man. I could under-
stand it as the backwash was powerful in the extreme. One has to take
no risks.
Monday, 4 p.m. This morning I had to turn out and start dressing
before breakfast on account of some of our cases leaving by early train.
One of my cases had the right side of his face pretty well blown to
mush. He was wounded on Monday, and when he arrived here last
night, had not been dressed since Tuesday. The smell due to the
septic condition of the wound was terrible. The whole cheek was
gashed, gaping, and greenish yellow in appearance. This morning I
dressed him under an anaesthetic. Two pieces of the cheek bone were
lying loose in the wound, the lower jaw is fractured, and his eyes blood-
shot. He can articulate with difficulty, and can only swallow fluids.
Yet he is contented and very thankful for everything done for him
He has been out since the very beginning—August, 1914. This after
noon I did some sewing—one of the khaki shirts is a snag—tears away
at the stitching. About 2.30 p.m. a man from the Brigade Field Ambulance
called at our tent. He told us that the fight was to be renewed to-day.
The Brigade was well out beyond Gaza, and did not come in until the
morning after the retirement.
Just been told to expect another 500 wounded from last week’s
action. 6 p.m. 500 just arrived,—but not all wounded. Many are
sick, and some only slightly, which looks as if the regiments were clear-
ing decks prior to action. 11 p.m.: 194 of the new cases went into my
wards, and with the help of several orderlies we changed all their
dressings. They go down to base hospital in the morning.
Tuesday, 3/4/17. One of the officers admitted last night was Cap-
tain P , R.A.M.C., who had been shot through the hand. I spent
an hour with him this morning. He was one of my pupils in Sir Wil-
liam’s Clinique. “I remember your moustache, well,” he said: "It was


more prominent then.” This morning we heard the guns again. Our
wards are nearly empty now. The Unit is busy cleaning up in readi-
ness for the next lot. Doesn’t it sound cold and callous? And yet if
we are to win the war the men must continue fighting; that means
wounds, so our duty is clear, to have everything in readiness for the
comfort and care of the unfortunate. At noon we had the first rain
since my arrival, but it was only a few drops. Lieut. T from
Glasgow was the cause of the heartiest laugh I have indulged in for a
long time. Someone was talking about Hughes. “Is that the man
from Australia, who went about England holding meetings?” asked
T . The humour was quite unconscious, but none the less rich.
My second injection of vaccine against cholera to-day. There were two
hot days last week, but quite cool since. 10.30 p.m.: Train with 140
cot cases and 140 walking. The C.C.S. to take 130 of the latter. An-
other train expected in two hours. Many, if not most, of these cases
are sick. The regiments are evidently sending down the ineffectives in
view of an engagement. We, of course, will pass on those who can
travel as soon as possible to the General Hospital lower down. 11.30
p.m. I have seen my admissions housed for the night.
Wednesday, 4/4/17, 6 a.m.: Another Hospital train arrived with
about 500 Was in the ward dressing them by 6.30. Many of these
cases septic from want of attention, and most of them wounded on
Monday 26th. One man has the flesh torn off the hips, another a
thumb shattered, and another with the inner part of the foot blown off
by an explosive bullet. In one case the bullet had hit the abdomen
and thigh probably when he was lying. The muscles of the abdomen
are being ballooned out by the bowel. Another quarter of an inch and
he would still be lying on the field. There are some fearful gashes, but
enough of this. Saw to remainder of dressings, and to isolation depart-
ment up to lunch, and then slept soundly from 2to 4 p.m. After a cup
of tea, with Lieut. T-———, I set off for a walk. On the way out I
examined defence redoubts, underground passages and dugouts, and on
the way back saw the Egyptian Labour Corps going home in companies
of about 100 under leadership of one of their own kind dressed in flow-
ing garments and provided with a lash. Both going to and coming
from work they chant in a sort of monotone. One man sings out
something and all the others make response. These fellows have had
a big share in the success of the movement. Practically if not all of
the heavy rough work has been done by them. They work in great
gangs under the supervision of officers of the Royal Engineers. In the
shortest possible space of time they remove mountains of sand and all
by means of little baskets. It is the number of hands th&t counts and
the continuous going. Possibly the singing they indulge in helps. Just
before we came in we saw the guard being mounted on the hill dominat-
ing the supply depot. There were earthworks on the spot. My first
letters from home to-day—two lots.


5/4/17. Quietest day so far for a long time. My wounded went
down to the Base before breakfast. At 1 p.m. another Brigade of Light
Horse passed by to encamp about two miles further on en route for the
front. 2.3 p.m. Stan P (Staff Captain Brigade Headquarters), and
a Major (A.A.M.C.) rode into our lines. I recognised P ,
and as neither he nor his friend had had food since 7 a.m. I bustled
around and managed to give them a cold lunch in our tent. 4.30 p.m.
Spent an hour and a half in the laboratory.
Further details re wounds.
(a) Pay book and pocket book in right hand breast pocket both
shot through—wound in chest slight in consequence.
(b) Bullet penetrates hat and flesh of head—skull intact.
(c) Cigarette case in lower side pocket saved another man.
So funny in the desert to hear the puff-puff-puff of the engines all
day long. Like the waves on the shore, they are the first things heard
in the morning, and the last thing heard at night. The aerodrome is
north of us now so that we don’t have so many of the planes passing to
and fro. Among mascots here is a gazelle. One of the Cornwalls
reared it by hand from infancy. It is a little beauty. A quail paraded
among my wounded last week. But then this is the land of quails,
isn’t it?
6/4/17. I expect young Charlie is being told this is his father’s
birthday. 8 a.m. One of my senior orderlies sick with severe attack
of dysentery. He worked too hard during the rush. 11 a.m. Two
enemy aeroplanes coming up from down the line. Our guns formed a
barrage in the air and compelled them to put out to sea very quickly.
Later on—an hour after—two of our planes passed over, one of them
flying very low. A case of Anthrax admitted to-day. Dressed a poor
fellow to-night with an appalling injury. The skull on left side over an
irregular area of some two or three inches has gone. Happily
he is unconscious and can hardly recover.
7/4/17. Booming going on between 6 a.m. and 8 a.m. 7.30 a.m.:
Swim. 8.45: The man above mentioned died. A General at breakfast
this morning. Another General is a patient. Saw trucks full of guns
going up this morning. Am told this has been a daily occurrence lately.
Train-loads of horses too have been passing through.
8/4/17. Wakened this morning—about 6.30 —by a terrific explosion.
I believe it was a mine which had been washed ashore and which was
fired by our men. Just when finishing breakfast bang went two
shots in succession so we ran out to see the Taube. He was coming up
on the right of our lines, and as enemy planes have been doing some
damage further back, he got a hot reception from our anti-aircraft guns.
Sixty-two shots were fired before the gunners were satisfied that Mr.
Turk was beyond the site of our reservoir and ammunition dump,
so that even if an enemy plane does no damage he causes us to draw appre-
ciably on our war loan. Went to Church of England service in the


EGYPTIAN LABOUR CORPS ON THE WIRENETTING ROAD.
LAYING THE WATERPIPE.


evening. It was held in British West Indian Tent. Most of the wor-
shippers were 8.W.1. boys—black skin, curly black hair, and thick lips.
Many of our fellows affect to despise them, but I had no such feeling
as I stood between a lad from Trinidad and one from Barbadoes. They
doubtless have their faults like every white man, but to judge men,
many of whose forbears were slaves in recent times, by the same stan-
dard as is applicable to long civilised and free-born people, is hardly fair
There are parts of the British Empire which ought to receive more care-
ful handling than they do get from some of its—shall I say—petty
officers. We were commemorating the Rising of Christ not far from
where the Resurrection took place. Later walking home from the
beach, we saw three large holes in the sand made by bombs dropped
from aeroplanes some six months ago. In one of the places 54 Gyppies
were killed according to my informant.
The danger of bathing here is not altogether negligible. The sea
breaks on sandbanks on its way in. Coming back it cannot surmount
the banks but flows outwards with a rush between them. The current
outwards in the channels is very strong. This morning when bathing
with A , orders are that no one must bathe alone, I was caught in
the tow. I had just learned the trudgeon stroke, and on this occasion
had gone further than I expected, and less straight. I only saved the
situation by swimming quietly but resolutely on the breast in an
oblique direction, thus gaining the lee of the nearest sandbank. I
don’t mind admitting that as soon as ! got into quieter water and could
maintain my footing I walked ashore and dressed—glad to be safely on
terra firma—and to have solved the reason of the danger. A beautiful
sky-scape this evening in the west. A tinge of fading gold above the
water, then a clear pale belt, and the whole surmounted by a twinkling
star of rare size and beauty set in a sky of darkest blue. The moon
had not risen, but now it is climbing the heavens. 10.30 p.m. It is as
clear as day, and the shadow thrown on the sand is very definite. I
hear we are expecting an air raid soon. The regiments are digging funk
holes everywhere.
10/4/17. “Everyone with one of his hands wrought in the work, and
with the other hand held a weapon.” Neh. IV. 17. And here to-day we
have the Egyptian Labour Corps doing the work and the Britishers
doing the fighting. 12 noon. Several explosions heard—sounds like
bombs. Several of our planes passing up now.
11/4/17. Field Ambulance limbers and material passed up 9 a.m.
to the front. Several lots have gone in the past few days. Huge red
crosses are being made on the sand at the extremities of the hospital
grounds in view of the air-raid about which we have been warned. A
shark was seen close to one of the sandbanks yesterday. Yesterday,
too, when I was bathing a fish —size of a whiting—jumped clean out of
the water. I was unable, however, to induce him to come up for
breakfast. Heavy booming about 3 p.m.


12/4/17. Enemy aeroplanes flew over our lines this forenoon—right
across the hospital. 1.30 p.m. Hospital train arrived with a number
of wounded from an enemy air raid on our aerodrome. An officer who
was asleep in bed was the most seriously injured—where he wasn’t hit
would be difficult to say. He is perfectly riddled, poor fellow, and I’m
afraid won’t last till morning. Two anti-aircraft guns sent up from
here to the front this morning. Have conquered the trudgeon swim-
ming stroke.
13/4/17. Heavy booming up the line. Captain W leaves
this afternoon for an artillery battery. No return of hot weather so
far, although most of the men and some of the officers are wearing
shorts. In the evening it is quite chilly. Had a game at football this
afternoon, and expect to feel stiff to-morrow in consequence. About
1,000 pack camels passed along the beach while we were bathing this
morning. Yesterday at the Ramp waiting for the hospital train, there
were a number of camels with stretchers along their sides, others had
padded seats. The “ship of the desert” is certainly a handy animal.
14/4/17. Wakened before 7 a.m. to the sound of very heavy can-
nonading. The shots kept following in rapid succession. Troops and
ambulances still passing to the front. 10.30 a.m . Turkish aeroplane
warded off in good style by our new anti-aircraft gun. 5 p.m. This
afternoon W. R (Captain R.A.M.C.) was admitted to hospital here.
We were at University and in Western Infirmary together, and only
last night I received a letter from him. He tells me he was in the
advanced Field Ambulance last time. No one could understand the
retirement, he said. Their Ambulance remained out for many hours
after, and were 2J miles in advance of our outposts, but never once saw
the enemy.
Sunday, 15/4/17. R went on to Base. Trainloads of horses
and ambulances still going up the line. Heavy firing to-day again.
We know now that all the firing is on the part of the Turks! They
have been trying to smash up our A.S.C. Dump at Railhead. They suc-
ceeded in landing a few among the Field Ambulances for we admitted
quite a number of casualties, including an M. 0., to-day. R told
me that in the last stunt the enemy did for the supplies, including the
water—smashing the fantasies. The M.O.’s had two biscuits and one
water bottleful in three days, and they had no sleep from the Sunday
(Saturday night, Sunday morning), till Wednesday night, and yet they
were working at full pitch all the time. No wonder the fellow is off
colour. It is almost certain that the fatigue and starvation are the
causes of his complaint. This evening when the hospital train arrived
she got orders to go back to railhead at once. Supplied the remarks at
the Y.M.C.A. service this evening. The turnout was great, and the
singing simply splendid. Many of the fellows had walked a long dis-
tance to be present. Letter from W to-night includin g group
photograph of G ’s battery. 11.15 p.m. The electric light has


gone out. We get a warning—three or four blinks—five minutes before
it is switched off.
Monday, 16/4/17. Heavy booming before breakfast. 9 a.m. Five
ships on horizon and Taube overhead. Anti-aircraft shooting good.
Fourteen motor ambulances, horses, &c., went up the line 8 a.m. 3 p.m.
Ships on horizon. Got an issue of two shirts, one tussore and one flan-
nel, yesterday—the latter rather gaudy. Have acquired a most inte-
resting collection of coins from the Y.M.C.A. canteen. They accept all
moneys tendered giving full face value in return, and later re-exchange
the coins at the banks in Cairo. Every nation fighting is represented in
the set, and there are coins from all the different fronts in which we are or
have been fighting. Some disquiet to-day, owing to reports that several of
our men recently have been done away with by Bedouins, nor is this the
first occasion of such happenings. The Bedouins are heartily hated,
and are credited with the vilest treachery. The flies are simply appal-
ling this afternoon. Booming still audible at intervals.
Tuesday, 17/4/17. A very heavy bombardment started before five
o’clock this morning, and it has been going on for over three hours now.
A train passed up just now, 8 a.m., loaded with guns, horses, and men.
7.45 p.m. Ambulances, horses and men going up all day. I could not
help pitying even the horses—dumbly unconscious of what was in store
for them. It has been very hot to-day. I have had a nasty headache.
7 p.m. Message through from railhead that the hospital train is loaded
ready to leave. We are to receive to-night. I have been allotted to
take charge of the'officers, so I’m off to bed for an hour or two of
“shut-eye” as W calls it when he comes off night out-post. I had
the A. & S. Herald and Public Opinion from him to-day.
18/4/17. Hospital train arrived at 2.30 a.m., and had to rise to
see to my new arrivals. Major McL had a fractured collar bone,
which I fixed up right away. W well when he left. Trainloads
of men, horses, and guns still going forward. Weather cool to-day, and
flies less troublesome.
19/4/17. Have had a very busy time since writing the above notes.
In the afternoon yesterday another hospital train arrived, and it was
9.30 p.m. before I finished dressing. One officer is paralysed from the
chest down —shot in the spine high up. Another will lose the sight of
one eye if not both, while another has a depressed fracture of the skull.
To-day I began at 6 a.m., and before I finished one lot another hospital
train arrived, so that it was 3.30 p.m. before I got my swim, but it was
a most enjoyable one, the wind being cool, and the sea feeling quite
warm in comparison. The waves, too, were rough, and we had a fine
twenty minutes in the briny. Just dressed in time for afternoon tea,
and at 5.30 p.m. a band belonging to one of the Regiments in the district
gave us an hour’s real treat. 6.30. Dinner, and then after a look at my
patients—all comfortable —I turned in to write a few notes. These past
few days there has been a great preponderance of Scotchmen among the


wounded. Lieut. T of our unit and an old Glasgow Academy boy
—he and I between us know nearly all the officers. The Highland Light
Infantry, Scottish . Rifles, and Royal Scots Fusiliers are
nearly all Glasgow and \\ est of Scotland men the lusiliers being
chiefly from Ayrshire. Lately the wounds have been caused
mostly by bombs dropped from aeroplanes and by shrapnel shells,
whereas in the previous fight it was the machine guns that did the havoc.
There seems little doubt that last time our casualties were far in excess
of what we expected. Just got word that a hospital train with 250
wounded is expected in a few hours, so I must go to bed.
20/4/17. Written from memory on 21/4/17. 2.30 a.m. Rose to
admit wounded. Got to bed 4.30 a.m. All of these officers but one
were able to go on in the morning. Rose at t .30 a.m. Forenoon in
theatre. Lay down for half an hour after lunch. 2.30 p.m. Badly frac-
tured skull with injury to brain and its coverings. Operation. This
is the fourth fractured skull in the last couple of days. There are no
steel helmets on this front. 4 p.m. Cup of tea. In theatre again.
5 p.m. Trainload of wounded including 70 officers —43 of whom were
stretcher cases. The latter came into my ward. A man from W ’s
squadron tells me W was despatch-riding and attached to Head-
quarters. He is probably all right he said, or I should have heard by
now.
Nearly all my cases this time are severe, and among them are
wounds of every description, in every part of the anatomy of man.
[PS.—One poor fellow I shall never forget. His right arm and
practically his whole abdominal wall had been blown away, yet when I
made my preliminary round he apologized for being in the ward, as he
was a Sergeant, and asked to be shifted. I, of course, refused, and re-
assured him that he would be an officer next time. “No more next time
for me,” he said, tilting up the stump of his arm. The bravery of that
man until he passed away four days later was something to be remem-
bered for ever. Another man, a Colonel, before he lapsed into his last
unconsciousness motioned to me, he could not speak, that he wished
my note book and pencil. “Am afraid I’m giving the orderlies a rot-
ten time.” was what he wrote. I showed it to the orderlies afterwards,
and they were too broken up to speak. 1
Began dressing and seeing to worst cases right away, then operations
in theatre till mid-night.
21/4/17. At mid-night 800 odd landed on the ramp. No officers
among them. I have never seen men so cold. They had been for hours
in an iron train as cold as a refrigerator, and when they landed here
they were chilled to the bone and chattering to a man. Everyone, too,
was wounded. In ward again till 2 a.m. Asleep till 6 a.m. Rose and
dressed cases till 8 a.m. Dressing from 9 a.m. till 1 p.m. Another
train 1 p.m. Dressing till 4. Another train 4 p.m. My ward full up.
Overflow had to go to the Medical Wards. In the early morning Lieut.




AFTER A WEEKS FIGHTING.
BIVVY MATES AND THEIR COBBERS.


I - S brother passed away. It is very sad, and w T e all feel very
sorry for him. I feel very anxious about W . The scenes pass-
ing before our eyes—fresh sights and horrors every hour by day and by
night—are too harrowing for description. And yet the papers dish up
such awful hash for home consumption. Why can’t we have the whole
truth? I wish the politicians, especially the talkers, could get three
months’ duty at the various fronts—not “cushy jobs” as the soldier puts
it—but just the ordinary rough and tumble work and life of the ordi-
nary soldier. 6.30 p.m. Dinner. 7 p.m. In Ward again till 9 p.m.,
when another train arrived with wounded. Helped to carry some of
the cot cases with the R.C. Padre. 928 in hospital to-night. lam dead-
dog tired.
22/4/17. At breakfast time an hospital train went straight on with-
out discharging patients for the very good reason that there is not an
available blanket, not to mention bed, in the unit. Very sad news of
W wounded—dressed—left out—robbed and bayonot.ted.
23/4/17. The news too true.
24/4/17. Four deaths over night in the Hospital and many dying.
If only the politicians could see the reality—the front lin; trenches—the
shell-swept plains that the men have to cross—the dressing stations, and
the hospitals—they would talk less and do more. Why isn’t everybody
whole-hearted in the war? Germany must be beaten in the field—bea-
ten hip and thigh—if the world is to be safe for our children to live in.
I was up through the night at a patient and up again at 6 a.m. I can’t
bear to lie awake just now. How terribly I miss home these days.
8 a.m. The Sergeant is calling out the afternoon shift and general service
men to load a train with wounded. The poor orderlies are walking in
their sleep. The train left about 11 a.m. with most of my cases on
board. The paper we got this morning gives the communique of last
week’s fighting. Personally I put no reliance on it whatsoever, and I
know nobody who does. Everything it says may be true, but it is not
the whole truth. There is no word of our terrible losses. Thursday,
19th April, 1917, was a most disastrous day for us on the Palestine
front. I cannot help thinking that our men should have steel helmets.
Fractured skulls have been very common this time. Altogether our
hospital has been a shambles. The fine manhood that I have seen des-
troyed these past few days, not to speak of those dead on the field—in
some places in rows—is enough to make one sick to death. Everything
during the past month has been too late in spite of Lloyd George’s boast-
ful protestations. There were groans in the officers’ ward for Lord Kit-
chener this morning. If I could only bring Bill back. If God spares
me to return my tongue shall lisp the truth. 7 p.m. Had a chat with
Frank Knight, wounded in 26th C.C.S. He saw the whole incident. The
men cannot speak of it without surging with rage. Bill Kane is fairly
knocked out. I would rather know W dead though than in the
hands of these murderous Turks. They’ll shake hands with you when


losing, and commit every atrocity when they’re on top. Several of our
boys have been reported with their heads smashed.
25/4/17. My last letter to Bill was asking him after the fight to try
to get down to see me. There were several things I wanted to see him
about. Somehow I thought he was going to get through now, he had
come through so much. B. K told me he never saw him cheerier
than in the morning—very early a.m.—of the fight. “I’m detailed
despatch rider to the Colonel, Bill,” he said, “and I’ve to pick one of the
best horses. You’d better give me yours.” And while he was saddling
up, “This is going to be a hot job, but we’ve got to see it through.”
With that and a “Cheer-o” he leapt into the saddle and left his squadron
to join the Colonel.
In the Indian hospital it is 120 in the shade to-day, in ours over 112.
Hospital train coming in this evening. I have two Turkish reports of
the first Gaza fight. The British press is ridiculing them, but they are
practically correct. A month goes past during which time the Turks
increase the value of their positions, bring up huge guns, and convert
Gaza into a modern fortress. On the 17th April we move up, advance
still further on the 18th, and on 19th get a severe set-back. Our losses
are terrible—and for nothing. Everyone is disgusted. The Turks
know the range everywhere to a nicety. They know where our men
must come, and the guns seem already aimed waiting for men to reach
particular spots. Several officers told me of a place where what they
took to be our men digging in, proved to be the poor fellows on hands and
knees dead in a row.
Thursday, 26/4/17. A week to-day since W died, and so far
no particulars. Emptied Officers’ ward to-day. J. M. P of Sel
kirk, whom I met at Braco, Perthshire, was one of them. Very hot
to-day till mid-day, but wind changed then, and cool since. A hospital
train stopped this afternoon to hand out a man who died on the
way down. The cases on board were particularly bad ones. Another
train is due at 2 a.m.
Friday, 27/4/17. Lieut. of Cheshires belonging to Liverpool
admitted to my ward this morning. The man has been sent up from an
hospital down the line to join his Regiment. Yesterday he had acute
diarrhoea, and last night severe abdominal pains. He has some
bronchitis and some tenderness over appendix, but the lad is suffering
chiefly from weariness—absolute fatigue. Sent him to bed, and when
he had had a cup of tea and settled down I injected morphia. He
knows Geo. D one of my Liverpool cousins well, and knows all
about the family. Meeting one with something in common
seemed greatly to solace him. 12.30. Have just returned from a walk
to ordnance with A . We followed the railway siding back to the
station, passing through the workshops and ammunition dump. The
ammunition is protected by sandbags and sand. Had a look at the
reservoir. This consists of two storage tanks which when full hold half


a-million gallons. Just now, however, there is some difficulty in keeping
up the supply on account of the large quantities being carried up in the
water train. Normally 80,000 gallons go up per diem, but Just now the
trains are carrying three times that amount. Each truck holds 2,000
gallons, and each train has 21 trucks. The water is pumped from
the fresh water canal, first to Kantara then to Romani, from there to
Bir-el-Abd, then to Mazar, and from Mazar to El Arish. From here it
is pumped to Sheikh Zowaiig, from there to Rafa, then to Deir-el-Belah,
and from there it is pumped into canvas tanks at the front. The great
difficulty has been to get the pipes desired. The original consignment
was of 12-inch bore, later it was 10-inch, and finally 6-inch was the best
that could be procured. The latter are too small to convey the re-
quisite amount per diem hence the trains which in addition to supplying
the deficiency are able to carry out intermediate distribution. All the
pipes had to come from America, and the first hundred miles were com-
pleted in four months —October, 1916 to January, 1917. Thunder at 1.30.
Raining now, 2 p.m. The sky overcast and the sea choppy and of a
leaden hue. Just the sort of day which is so common on the West
Coast of Scotland.
Saturday, 28/4/17. S. P (Staff Captain) spent the afternoon
with me. He is sorrowing over his cousin who died here. Line blown
up in two places last night. Weather still cold and cloudy. Fresh
forces going up already, but not much likelihood of a fight for six or
eight weeks I should think. (P.S. —It has proved to be over six months).
Sunday, 29/4/17. Still very cold wind blowing. Operation at 9.30
a.m., and later did my isolation work for the first time since the fight.
We have evacuated the last of the wounded officers, but to-night ad-
mitted six suffering from septic sores. One is Lieut N from the
West, who was telling me more about the latest fight. Brig-Gen. R
has been the favourite among officers and men from the Canal out, and
still is. To-day I have been feeling very tired, especially from my hips
down. I feel as if I had been flayed. In the morning I lay down and
slept till lunch and lay down again in the afternoon. I suppose it is the
reaction. The band this afternoon, 5.30 p.m., played the Lost Chord—it
was beautiful. 7 p.m. I went to service in the Y.M.C.A. Hut, but had
to leave on arrival of hospital train. The singing by the men is always
fine. For most men on active service it is impossible to make Sunday
much different from any other day, but each man to a certain degree
can make his own day.
Monday, 30/4/17. Weather still cool. Not so cold as yesterday.
At the Colonel’s request have written letters to relatives who have asked
for particulars of their fallen friends.
Tuesday, 1/5/17. Orders out on Sunday that no bathing to take
place betwen 10 a.m. and 4 p.m. on account of risk of sun-stroke.
3 p.m. A parcel from Mother to W redirected from the Regi-
ment with two parcels of W ’s effects from Padre D just brought


in by postman. “The Brigadier of this Brigade is over 60
years of age, and a splendid type of man,” says Lieut.-Col. Fin a
letter to me. “He has been soldiering since 10 years of age, and has
been in every fight in South Africa. He states that the battle on the
19th was the fiercest he had ever experienced, and on such a day your
brother did his duty to the end.” Mother’s parcel to W contained
one sponge cake, one Velma chocolate, one Horlick’s Lunch Tablets, one
Anti-Thirst Tablets, one tin sardines, one Bivouac Cocoa and Milk, one
Vigoral Beef-Tea Cubes, one Keating’s Powder, one writing block, Id-
bag cinnamon sweets, Id. bag peppermint sweets, Id. bag of round pep-
permints—the kind Uncle F used to pass round in Church. The
list was well thought out, but it was the “sweeties” from Aitkens that
took my eye. I was home in a moment doing my lessons round the
table with the girls. I heard Father’s step on the pavement, the creak-
ing of the gate, the key turning in the big door, the umbrella dropping
in the stand, and then the dining room door opened, and we got a cinna-
mon and a peppermint all round. Upstairs there were three small boys
fast asleep, one of them the blue-eyed, fair-haired laddie—the boy who
died the man-—-“pro deo, pro rege, pro patria”. The things sent me by
Padre D are, disc and wrist strap, pipe beautifully hand-carved by
himself, Havelock Tobacco, knife, Auto Shaving Kit, Collins Gem Dic-
tionary, Diary 1917 given him by me, notebook with addresses and full
particulars of letters, packets, and parcels received; one “Scotland for
Ever” writing compendium, two pairs socks—-one khaki and one grey,
one shirt (khaki), one pair shorts (khaki, with new braces), two books
sent Willie by me, viz., “Thirty-nine Steps”, “Diary of the Great War”.
Wednesday, 2/5/17. Artillery firing since early morning and still
audible at noon. Lieut. T and Lieut. E left us to-day.
Thursday, 3rd May, 1917. Liberty. “The memory of the men and
women who have won us this birthright, and the story of their struggle
and their suffering are amongst the most precious possessions of our
English race.”—W. C. Braithwaite.
A fortnight to-day since W died for Liberty. May Ibe
worthy of him in every way and at all times. Heavy gun-fire again
this morning. Both this and yesterday’s thought to be naval. The
firing throughout the forenoon has been very heavy. Beautifully cool
day with warm sunshine. P.M. Beautiful sunset. Evening quite cold.
Another hospital train coming to-night, making the second to-day.
Staff Capt. H. G in bell tent with Scarlet Fever. He lost his
brother in July, 1916, on Gallipoli under very sad circumstances. He
was out with a bombing party, and got wounded. That is the last
known of him as it became necessary to block the communication
trench. Such is the sadness —the impenetrable sadness of war. 10.30
p.m. W ’s last letter to me was that he had just come in from
night out-post duty, and was going to have a bathe, and then a shut-eye.
When I saw him that day he said to me, in reply to a remark of mine


about the hardness of service, that the only thing he did not like was
outpost duty at night. They have only one hour on at a stretch, but
the strain is so great that it is always a very long hour.
We were expecting 400 sitting cases in the iron train from rail-head.
Wire just in that line blocked, and that no satisfactory arrangements
can be made for feeding.
Friday, 4/5/17. Booming still going on. I believe our monitors
are shelling the Turks, and the Turks are I know shelling our railhead
and trenches. A parcel to W— from Dora S . Some wounded
in to-day from the desultory scrapping. Ivan in my tent at 4 p.m., had
been interviewing Major R —at Rafa. Spent a most enjoyable
three hours with him. Capt. K from Auckland spent the evening
with us. 1 notice that clay bricks are being made in a hollow here.
It reminds one of the old days of bondage.
Saturday, 5/5/17. At 10 p.m. last night a Casualty Clearing Station,
and a Brigade Field Ambulance were systematically attacked by four
enemv ’planes. With engines shut off they dropped bombs every ten
yards along the line of tents, opened machine gun fire and threw hand
grenades at those who were running for shelter. Heavy losses in killed
and wounded, and the tents torn to ribbons. A taube over here this
morning. I have been orderly officer to-day, and have been on the
tramp most of the time. Lieut. N of the old Regiment spoke to
me before entraining this morning. He, like W , is one of the
originals. “The old fellows”, he said, “felt Scotty’s death as if it had
been a brother’s.” I’m afraid meantime I don’t like knocking up
against men of his Regiment. I used to look for them, but somehow
just now the light blue on yellow makes me reflect “if only this , if only
that”, but poor boy, he’s gone, and nothing can bring him back. I don’t
know whether it is because this is Saturday night or not, but I m long-
ing for home—for R and Baby, and a cheery fire. What a terrible
sadness there is in the world just now everywhere. Twenty-six despatch
bearers, I am told, were killed on the 19th April.
Sunday, 6/5/17. Everybody last night, I think, expected the
Taubes, but they didn’t come. They seem to have fairly smashed up
the Casualty Clearing Station and the Brigade Field Ambulance. There
has been heavy bombing all day. I have a patient from the Ardrossan
Ammunition Column, R.F.A. I spoke to Macallum and Ferguson of
Saltcoats, Dempster of Stevenson, and a couple of Ardrossan boys, but
I forget their names. It is full moon just now. Most of us are scan-
ning the sky these nights.
Monday, 7/5/17. There has been heavy artillery firing all day. and
at noon the Colonel told us that the hospital was to be emptied oi
patients as soon as possible. We are wondering whether this is on
account of a possible air raid such as the front line C.C.S. and the
ambulances are suffering from, or whether fresh fighting is anticipated.
Last night the Casualty Clearing Stations were bombed and raided by


Taubes for the second time. Many of the men are horribly burned
from head to foot. One man who was operated on for appendicitis
three days before had a leg and an arm blown off (Col. T the
authority), and in a tent containing six patients, a man suffering from
pneumonia was the only one not hit. In the first raid a lad M
of the Bth was badly wounded —he was suffering from diarrhoea—and it
is rumoured C of Minyip was killed. A man in the dispensary
was burned to death. Ruthlessness is the order of day and night just
now—sinking of hospital ships, bombing of hospitals, murdering the
wounded, and ill-treating the prisoners. 5.30: Very heavy rumbling-
the heaviest T have yet heard.
Thursday, 8/5/17, 7 a.m. Wakened to the sound of heavy gun-fire
as we fell asleep to it last night. I’ve been thinking a lot lately about
the circumstances of W ’s death. Why did God, I have found
myself asking, allow him to be the only one left out at the retirement?
Why should he have such a cruel death after so long and such faithful
service? Am I drifting to fatalism? Sometimes I think I am, and
yet on calmer reflection one sees it is all a matter of individual choice.
Firstly you choose between staying at home or enlisting for active ser-
vice abroad, and then, when in the field, you have to choose between
being in the forefront, or looking for a soft job—between being a volun-
teer for danger or being a hanger back. And having made the choice
one must accept the possible consequences. But it is so hard to see
through a glass darkly. The booming to-day from earliest morning—
it may never have stopped all night—till now, 11 p.m., has been incessant
and very heavy. I had a letter from Lieut. H. T , V.C. to night.
Poor fellow, he too lost his brother on 19th April. The Y.M.C.A. are
instituting cocoa and light refreshment depots close up to the firing line.
Secretary Hancock left here at 2 p.m. to join the Welsh Division. A
large shark has been seen and shot at quite close inshore for the past
three or four days. Two of our own officers saw it to-day. C- of
our shipload was in the theatre to-night. Lord Curzon says that the
enemy is retreating from every front (Gazette 7/5/17). What about
Gaza and Mush? How much nonsense people talk through taking
things for granted. I mended W ’s shorts this morning, and made
a good job of them, but I’m not so handy as he was.
9/5/17. The booming is quite plain this morning, but duller. The
Colonel told us that the A.C. asked him what steps we had taken to pro-
tect our patients and selves against possible bomb raid. His reply was
that as no instructions had been received nothing had been done. Later
in the morning a Staff-Captain called at the Orderly Room and asked
the Colonel around which tents he proposed placing sandbags; to which
the Colonel replied that as it was not certain which tents were to be
bombed it would be rather futile making a selection. The Quarter-
master then informed the Colonel—who has been in charge here less
than a week—that sandbags had been refused for defence purposes to


TROOP RETURNING FROM PATROL.
A BRIGADE CAMEL CONVOY.


hospitals, saying that we must depend for safety on the Red Crosses.
Lately I'm afraid the Taubes have regarded everything enclosed within
Red Crosses as bull’s eyes. Very cheery, isn’t it? 10.45 pm. The
desert rats getting busy again. We had a regular pantomime last night.
10/5/17, 7.30 a.m. Bathed as usual. A wind-jammer on the
horizon jammed—becalmed. Orderly Officer to-day. 10 a.m.: A
Taube overhead evidently reconnoitring. There is great head-shading
in high places because it will cost £7OO to protect the wards with sand
bags Seven hundred pound-' I wouldn’t mind giving them £7OO for
one life. Transferred from Isolation to Surgical to-day. The armoured
train went down the line at 1.30 a.m.
11/5/17. Had a bad night on account of fleas, which >robably
reached me via yesterdav’s patients from the front, or possibly from the
rats. Camel caravans about 1,000 to 1,200 strong are passing up almost
daily to the front. Many are provided with double seat and others with
two stretchers. In the last fight thousands of camels were killed.
Two days ago Padre O’C (R.C.), left us, and this morning Padre
K (C. of E.) joined us. Both good fellows. According to a
cutting from Egyptian Mail of 11/5/17, the Turkish troops with their
German leaders and N.C.O.’s are behaving towards the inhabitants of
Palestine as brutally as they are to our wounded—God help our
prisoners. Colonel T gave us some very interesting information
to-night about Japan and her foreign policy, which he heard from the
Professor of Political Economy at Tokio.
This afternoon a letter from Mother and one from Winnie D-
both to W , reached me. There was a notice in Orders a week ago
that English letters from April Ist to 7th had gone down in the
Mediterranean. I have had no letters from R or Mother for a long
time, and I miss them. The armoured train went past here this
morning again. We are all praying that the moon may wane quickly.
13/5/17, 7.30 a.m. Swim as usual. At 9.50 a.m. a Taube overhead.
Our shooting much better, causing the plane on one occasion to bank
Sixty shots fired. 10 a.m. Communion service at which I was present.
Every officer but one has diarrhoea to-day—l 2 out of 13. Had a letter
last night from a lady in England to whom I sent some information re-
garding one of the wounded. 10.30 p.m. Still feeling off colour. Bad
appendix cases very common just now.
14/5/17, 7.45 a.m. Wakened feeling tired. Did not bathe. After
breakfast felt all right again. Am admitting officer to-day. Saw my
appendix cases about 10.30 p.m., and had a cup of hot tea from the night
sergeant.
15/5/17, 6.45 a.m. Dressed a Light Horseman before he went off
on the morning train. Did my appendix boys too, and then had a
bathe. Am Orderly Officer to-day. The hospital got warning that
about 11.30 a.m. an enemy mine which was washed inshore during the


morning would be exploded. Explosion shook the whole hospital.
Dressing in the ward from 2.30 p.m. to 5 p.m. J who came out
in the Clan Mac with us called to see me, but somehow missed me. I
was working in my ward, and was much upset when I found he had
gone. 8 p.m. to 10 p.m. Doing a little in wards, but mostly chatting
with Trooper Herbert. He was one of the three who spied W
lying out on the field. Jack Foreman, he tells me, went out at a great
personal risk over 200 yards to get W . Why nobody carried the
boy in when the withdrawal took place will never be known.
17/5/17. Yesterday I was too busy to write, being at it hard from
8.30 a.m. till mid-night. Was wakened twice in middle of the night to
see patients, and got up at 5 a.m. for good. Taube visited us about
10 a.m, yesterday, but beaten off. Jack B-- of Ardrossan, and
Davidson of Canal Street, Saltcoats, admitted yesterday. “Skipper” Hun-
ter of Ardrossan Celtic and Kilwinning Rangers fame viisted the hospital
in the evening. He told us that Bobby Parker, the Ashfield, Rangers,
and Everton man had passed through us seriously wounded in abdomen,
Lieut. M of Irvine is stationed nearby. He was up to-day for
dressing. I had Sergeant MacNamara of Barr Place, Ardrossan, with the
A. &S. Herald the day before that, i.e. 15/5/17. These past two days
in the afternoon a sandstorm has blown up, filling the tents with fine
drift. It takes the tents all their time to stand the strain. Have been
writing a number of letters to mothers whose boys have gone. The
prodigal waste of human life is appalling. I remember when I first went
to Australia shuddering at the waste of throwing bunches of black
grapes to the hens. What a bruising of the best is going on to-day!
I shall never forget the 18th March, 1917, nor the ride next morning at
dawn over the sandhills to the railway line. W and I meant to
see one another in a month or two. The time is up. The Brigade is
coming back, but some one else is riding W ’s horse.' Eight mil-
lion deaths to date, says Smuts, due directly to the war, and probably
a greater number permanently maimed. The late Joseph Parker of
the City Temple once said of the Sultan from the platform of the
Albert Hall, London, “God damn the Sultan.” May I suggest that a
like punishment be meted out to the Kaiser, and all his bloody crew.
The punishment barely fits the crime. That spot where I saw the
Nhill, Minyip, and other Victorian lads will always live in my memory.
18/5/17. Feeling very tired to-day and headachy—perhaps due to
the khamsin (hot wind) this morning on top of night work. Every
afternoon lately we have had a minor sandstorm with a stiff breeze from
the sea.
19/5/17. Tt was on the 19th last month that W passed away
and left me. Did not bathe this morning as I was feeling too tired.
All afternoon we had a terrible sandstorm with a wind as hot as a fur


nace. One could only see a short distance ahead even if you did dai«w
open your eyes. Sand everywhere, including your mouth. The atmos-
phere was yell9w, but this afternoon the wind changed. There is now
a cool breeze off the sea, and the air is clearer again. But what must
it be inland a bit among the sandhills!
20/5/17. Yesterday’s respite from the hot wind and sandstorm only
lasted about an hour. About 1.15 p.m. the wind changed again and
blew up from the south with redoubled fury. Till 6.30 p.m. I was busy
in the ward, and did not notice much how things were going outside.
Then I found that several, bell tents had been blown over, and one mar-
quee ripped. The sand was blinding, and the heat made it most
oppressive. The amount of fluid we drank was remarkable, and after
an intake of about two pints of weak coffee in the Padre’s tent at 10
p.m. I went to turn in. The wind was now of hurricane force, and 1
found on putting on the light that the sand had been blown away from
around parts of our E.P. tent, and that she was beginning to rock. I
got undressed and into my pyjamas, but before my tentmate arrived
the west corner of the tent had begun to assume the horizontal. There
was nothing for it but to get out and seize the guy-ropes until help
arrived. A was now on the scene, and by means of his lusty
shouting aroused attention, and after some 15 minutes a fatigue party
came to the rescue. It was rather a novel experience squatting on the
sand holding on as best one could to a guy-rope attached to an angry
balloon, one’s face being most thoroughly massaged the while by the
drifting sand. The trouble was due to the men who made our dug-out
not refixing the guy-ropes. But for the sandbags in the dugout, how-
ever, we would not have been able to save the tent. The next thing
was to get inside and secure our belongings, and the next to hunt out
the best place in which to sleep, for our tent was still in two minds—in
other words—unstable. We decided on the X-ray room, whither with
blankets we proceeded to put in the night on the floor. Two others, by
the way, were there when we arrived. It was mid-night when we fell
asleep, and that was when we lay down. At 3 a.m. I wakened feeling
the cold, and got below the blankets. Previous to that a sheet had
sufficed. At 5 a.m. one of the night orderlies wakened us with a mug
of very hot tea, for which I was jolly thankful, and at 7.30 I got up.
The tent was still standing, thanks to our efforts of the night before,
but inside everything was inches deep in sand. The wind was now from
the sea and the air cool. With the batmen we started after breakfast
to get things straightened out. It was no joke, and took the man two
to three hours. I had to clear out for I, being orderly officer for the
day, had to go round the unit to see the damage. A number of bell
tents had been blown down, and two E.P. tents ripped, but the damage
is comparatively slight. Everything, however, is in a terrible state with
sand, and although few tents are down, all have suffered more or less.
The large Y.M.C.A. canteen marquee is down, and the C.C.S. tents fared


very badly. Everywhere there are drifts of sand, and the dugouts are
more than half filled up. Whatever was left out was buried. Forty
years in the wilderness—the Israelites must have been good stuff! It
is in orders that another mail has been lost at sea. Letters written
about the end of April. That is the second mail gone in the one month.
Young Barbour or Ardrossa'n—his father works in A. & S. Herald Office
—has been in my ward for two days. Owing to the sandstorm the line
between this and the Canal has been blocked. No supply train has
come through to-day. The Quartermaster tells us we shall be on
rations to-morrow, viz., bully beef and biscuits. Had a fine half-hour
in the surf this afternoon. It was altogether too rough for swimming.
I am very tired after last night.
21/5/17. In addition to a full ward lam admitting officer. In the
theatre all evening till late. A Scotch officer—M from Dundee —
in surgical ward. He is in the same Regiment (R.S.F.) as N. G
—'brother of R. G— — the brilliant Glasgow High School boy killed
early in the war. I have the magazines here with their photographs.
We have one lad from Aberdeen—George B—— —, with a wound in the
neck reaching to the spine. He is married. When I heard from the
Padre of him—he generally puts me on to the Scots —especially
those who are very ill—l went off to see him at once. 1 found him
very ill, so I did all the talking, telling him all I knew of Aberdeen. He
was very pleased, and smiled when he found that both our boys were
of the same age. When I spoke of the New Market Candy, he said, “I
wouldn’t mind having a bit of it now.” He knows Bucksburn and
Bankhead quite well, and Davidson’s and Pirie’s mills too. His home
is in Seamore Street, and his Mother lives in Lodge Walk. I had a chat
too with a Glasgow boy who has lost an arm He had just been dis-
charged from an hospital at the front, and in the act of crossing two
miles of open ground separating his regiment from the hospital he was
hit by a piece of shell. He was all by himself, and lay for some hours,
meanwhile losing a lot of blood, when two R.A.M.C. officers riding over
the ground saw him. One of them attended him, while the other rode
off for the motor ambulance. There is another Scotsman with a
terribly mutilated thigh, and another with a badly fractured skull just
above the left eye.
22/5/17. The Aberdeen lad passed away at 4 p.m. A letter from
Major C . Of the original four whom I met on the 19th March but
cue remains, viz.: Biffen. Cane is wounded, Cox and Willie
gone, the former killed in a bombing raid on the hospital, W
bayonetted as he lay wounded on the field. So fights the Turk and
German, and yet Lord Robert Cecil compromises, “No peace with the
Hohenzollerns”. Off with your kid gloves, man; you ought to be on
outpost, not in parliament. The air’s clearer there. R. M. Vernon,
Ardrossan, is another home lad attending hospital lately, but* I’m afraid
I haven’t been able to keep all their names. It is very hot to-day but


no wind. 4.15 p.m. Cool breeze from the sea. Had a fine swim. 7.30.
In theatre for an hour, and after that dressed the wound of the first
Algerian of the new French detachment here. Very hot last night.
Distinct explosion about 11.30 p.m. like a very dull thud. Everybody
put lights out —candles at that hour. We went out to have a look and
saw the armoured, train a little way up the line flashing her searchlight.
12 mid-night. Few drops of rain. 2 a.m. Armoured train passed down
the line. The wind rising again and tent creaking. 3 a.m. A heavy
shower of rain.
23/5/17. Armoured train very busy between 10 p.m. and 11 p.m.
24/5/17. High School boy from Bearsden in officers’ ward. Have
lent him my G.H.S. magazines. In the Quiver of December, 1916, lent
me by one of the Unit—Pte. C. C. M of Adelaide—there are some
exquisite reproductions in colour of rustic glamour—marshland with the
buttercups in early spring; the cool of the forest glade on a summer’s
afternoon; bare trees, knee deep in autumn’s russet leaves; and a beauti-
ful well-kept English garden. But outside the tent here nothing but
drifting sand. 3.45. Set out for the Arab village nearby armed with per-
mit—other two in the company. The environment of the village is
studded with date palms and fig trees, and we could see several hawks
lounging lazily in the air as we came on. The universal sparrow was in
evidence too. Before reaching the town itself we passed some houses
on the outskirts. In front of one of these the father was lying on the
ground snoozing, the mother was preparing some food, and the children,
six in number, were romping about—three of them exactly as God made
them. The village itself is “compactly built together”. Each house
seemed to have its own court with camel or donkey and dog, and hens
and chickens galore. A high wall surrounds the lot, and the streets are
merely lanes between these walls built of mudbricks. The houses are
built of the same material. There is a mosque in the centre of the com-
munity. Near it is a well—the water being raised by pails. Close by,
too, are the shops, sweet shops, drapers’ shops, tobacco shops, and
grocers’ shops, and all in the desert shut off by sand. The padre bought
some cigarettes. Children were much in evidence calling for “Buck-
sheesh, half a piastre”; “bucksheesh, cigarette”, and we saw a number of
old men, but very few young males of military age. One lad showed
us a bit of shell—“ English”, he said, and we saw, too, a heavy cannon
ball, of some age I fancy. There is another place of interest I should
have mentioned, in the outskirts and to the left—a sort of mausoleum.
Inside was what might be an old tomb, and crossing above it lines of
string with bits of old dirty rag and thread attached. lam told, but
have no authority for saying so, that the burial services are held here.
As we left the village we met a number of women and girls with pitchers
balanced on their heads going to and from a well. It was situated a
little way to the west on the edge of a rise surrounded by a low circular
parapet, and there just as one reads in the Bible the women were draw


ing water. But the spell was rather broken by one fair lady carrying
instead of a pitcher a Mobiloil 8.8. 4 gallon tin. i had a good look at
the women in spite of the fact that they covered all the face save the
eyes whenever they noticed you looking. I only saw one that had any
beauty. As I trudged back to the hospital over the sand I turned
round more than once almost against my will, and as 1 viewed the
undulating waste —the deep shadows in the hollows, and the observation
posts on the lonely hill tops I could not help thinking of the pioneering
of the Australian Light Horse—their hardships, and lonely vigils in the
night. The armoured train passed down the line about 8 p.m. The
noise of its approach is so unmistakable that no one can fail to be aware
of its coming. It passed up again about 10.30 p.m.
25/6/17. All admissions to my ward to-day are boils, carbuncles,
and septic sores. Poor Mac, our batman, had his left hand run over on
the railway this morning.
26/5/17. Taube overhead at 8 a.m. Fifty-three new cases in my
wards to-day. Been very busy. I. Y here 5.30 p.m. till 6.30 p.m.
on his way to Aerodrome. One of our planes crossed our lines flying
home while he was here.
27/5/17. Sunday. Attended Y.M.C.A. Service in the evening taken by
Capt. MacF . Photographs of Baby. Letters from Father and
Mother telling me they have got the news. The bravest letters I have
ever read.
28/5/17. At 4 p.m. for quite twenty minutes we had an exhibition
of the finest anti-aircraft shooting we have witnessed here. The Taube
made very persistent attempts to do \rfhat it wanted, coming back on
two occasions, but each time he had to beat a hasty retreat. Two guns
were firing—in different places of course—and how the plane escaped I
do not know. A.n Aberdeen boy in my ward from Powis Place.
29/5/17. I —’s batman called this morning at 7 a.m. to get the
bag he lost. At 5.45 while writing outside my tent to Mr. McE——,
Adelaide, the Colonel told me I had to report to A.D.M.S., Cairo, and
authorised me to leave by the Hospital train next morning at 7.40 a.m.
Operating during evening.
30/5/17. Our “Archie” firing at a Taube. 8.15 a.m. Backed from
the Ramp into the station. Although I expect to be back at El Arish
by Saturday it was a real agony to me to move down the line. W--
was uppermost in mv mind—a feeling that deepened as we passed the
hod where the Brigade had been for its longest spell. I felt as if we
were separating. One of his old friends from the Regiment. Corporal
McC, Horsham, called at my tent just as I was going to breakfast. “He
had a great character. I often used to wonder at him. You couldn’t
keep him out of anything, he was always there” and there was something
akin to moisture in the eve that looked across the blue to the horizon.
About 6 30 a.m. I dressed my serious patients who were leaving, and had
a chat with them on the wav down. Captain Y of H.L.T. a


brother of Lieut.-Col. Y of the Norfolks was in the train. He is
another High School boy. John B- of Bellahousten was killed on
the 19th—the third son in the family gone, and two G brothers
were killed on same day. B was one of the very brilliant High
School, Glasgow University, Oxford men.* The railway stations from
Gaza to Kantara are, Deil-el-Belah, Khan Yunus, Rafa, Sheikh Zowaiig,
El Burj, El Arish, Bardiwell, Maadan, Mazar, Tilul, Salmani, Bir-el-Abd,
Kirba, Katia, Romani, Pellusium, Gilban, Hill 40, Kantara East. In
the ten weeks since I saw the line last great changes have been effected
at the stations. At Mazar the bricks were in course of preparation, but
from there down to Kantara each stopping place has its cement station
building. I meant to mention that at El Arish all patients boarding
the train were presented with a little Red Cross satchel containing box
of sweets (acid drops), packet cigarettes, box matches, handkerchiefs,
face cloth, toothbrush, writing paper, envelopes, postcards, and pencil.
We reached Kantara East 4 p.m., and I walked across to Kantara West
crossing the Canal just before the pontoon bridge was opened to let a
steamer through. The patients were removed to the hospital in motor
ambulances. Opposite the west station there is a rest camp for men
and officers to which I repaired, and had three eggs, tea, bread and
butter. On the train about 12 noon we had a light luncheon. This
club is being run just now by two Australian ladies from New South
Wales. I don’t know what Kantara would be like without it. My
train for Cairo is due at 7.46 p.m. 6.45. The sun sank down in glory
over the reed-beds into the still lagoon. I strolled to the Canal side and
enjoyed the cool breeze springing up from the water. For about two
miles on the eastern bank it is spread with canvas. Just above the
lower pontoon bridge lies an Hospital ship—the “Indiana”, a two deck
boat with stern paddle. At the Port Said end of the encampment a big
ship is unloading. In between there are innumerable dhows. The
Kantara camp area must be quite two miles square—probably more.
Several men swimming in the Canal and others fishing. 7.30. W. G
of Largs and Glasgow University hailed me at the station, and we
travelled together to Ismailia, where he is bacteriologist. Reached
Cairo midnight.
31/5/17, 10 a.m. Called Headquarters; Colonel sick; to call again
to-morrow. Pottered around shops till lunch. In afternoon went out
to Maadi with Mr. and Mrs. C , fine kiddies—“a doe’s deckin’’.
Evening:—Had dinner at 14th A.G.H. with Col. Mac. and Padre O’C .
Met Major K late of Glasgow and now of N.S.W. Stayed the
night, and in the morning saw some of my old patients. Col. M
a real old father. I shall never forget his great kindness to me in grant-
ing me leave to see W immediately on my joining the Unit.
10.45: A.I.F. Headquarters. 11 a.m.; Left Cairo and glad to get away.
It has been an awful rush. Had dinner-eggs, sausages, ham, with tea
and bread and butter at Soldiers’ Club, and boarded hospital train at
"The fourth and last son was "killed in IMS.


9.30 p.m. We left for the desert at 10 p.m., and reached here at 5.30
am The train was shaky, bumpy and dusty, and 1 hardly closed an
eye. 1 was glad -to be back out of the dust and clammy heat of Cairo.
The first thing I did was to get a bucket of hot water from the cook,
have a bath, and then stick all my underclothing into it. Only then did
I feel clean, but I’ve had a nasty headache all day, and, after X-raying
two cases I am going to bed. A letter-a very brave one-from George
to-day. He too has emerged from his boyhood. It makes a fellow
feel a bit old. Heavy monitor firing all day. They tell me here it has
been so for a day or two.
Sunday, 3rd June, 1917. Firing still heavy. Slept ten hours and
still tired. We have heard bombs bursting all day. It was so yester-
day also. One trainload of men who had been wounded in the fight on
the 19th April were going back to join their regiments. They were
bombed by enemy planes just a few miles beyond this. This is the
second time lately men rejoining have been hit on the way up. I took
the service at the Y.M.C.A. Hut to-night. It was fine, and at the end a
lot of Ayrshire lads waited to speak to me. One of them was James
A , a brother of Johnnie, Tommy, and David Anderson, of local foot-
ball fame.
4/6/17. A Taube overhead at 9 a.m. The guns too good for him,
turning him off at once. Lately we have admitted a large number of
injuries due to horses—kicks chiefly. One or two have ended fatally.
Lively discussion on America at mess to-night. Between ten and eleven
A T , W and I had a supper perhaps not
as elaborate, but as much enjoyed as any in a girls’ board-
ing school. Full moon again. Heavy booming to-day as
yesterdav. Weather warmer this morning—the sea quite warm.
Put on shorts and putties for the first time. Water now laid on all
over the hospital. The moon is very bright to-night. One can read
quite easily by its light.
6/6/17. Rose 6.30 a.m., and dressed an appendix. Shaved, washed,
and had swim at 7.30. Breakfast at 8. Dressing in wards from 9to
11. Lunch at 1 p.m. Dressing and treating new cases from 2 p.m. till
4 p.m. 4 p.m.: Afternoon tea. Taube overhead, but cleared off at
first shot. Swim, 6 p.m. Dinner, 6.30. X-rays, 7.30-3. Operations in
Theatre till 10 p.m. G of Ayr, Capt. R.A.M.C., D. 5.0.. and Croix
de Guerre is in Hospital to-day with bullet wound through thigh. He
had been previously wounded at Gallipoli in the arm, and at Romani
through the lungs. This is the third time he has been hit while bring
ing in wounded under fire. 10 p.m. Ward visit and then bed. A great
many bomb-wounds admitted to-day. The planes have been busy.
10.20. We have just heard the sound of bombs higher up. The full
moons seem to come round very quickly.
7/6/17. In wards dressing at 6.30 a.m. Have fixed up a fine little
idea to simplify R ’s visiting list, viz., a small wooden box with A


to Z divisions, and divisions also of the days of the week. Great num-
ber of bomb wounds continuing to come They are mostly very
serious. Two patrols yesterday got into difficulties and suffered
heavily.
8/6/17. The noise from up the line to-day sounds like bombing.
In a ward there are several boys from Patna, New Cumnock, Rankins-
ton. A Dalmellington man was asking for me, and I believe McCrum
from Saltcoats is coming up to see me. Two letters from R and one
from Mother to-day.
9/6/17. Very hot sun to-day, but nice cool breeze from the sea.
Exceptionally heavy firing this forenoon, and at intervals throughout
remainder of day. It is probably the monitors at work. Six French
patients to-day and a French Captain of the A.M.C. messing with us.
He has the Croix de Guerre with two stars. He is very cheery, keen
and active. Did I ever mention the sand sleighs? They are used a
great deal on the desert, and are fitted with runners just like the
ordinary sleigh. Cable from R to-night.
10/6/17. This morning after doing my wards I went down to the
R.F.A. depot where our Church of England Padre was taking the Church
Parade. Although the battery and column of this Brigade are entirely
Scottish in personnel the Padre is a great favorite. He had told Major
R of me and the Major requested that I should visit them. I’m
afraid I forget the names of most of the officers, but one of them I
won’t forget. We walked over together to the column, and on the way
he asked me if I knew S in the Light Horse. Of course I did,
and he said that his family knew the S s very well. While we
were sitting in the E.P. tent —he was signing a memo at the time— I
asked him if he knew a girl from his part of Kirkcudbright. I recalled
her first, and then after a little, her second name. There was a sup-
pressed smile on his lips when I mentioned the first name, and after
mentioning the second he handed me the memo, with his name. He
was her brother. She and Nan H were at school together in
London, and they had stayed with one another since that. He
(McD ) remembered Nan well, and recalled her visit to his father’s
home. We had an enjoyable walk and talk together, and a ginger beer
in my tent to finish with. It’s the first ginger beer I’ve had for a very
Tong time. It has just come up the line. There is a very big rest camp
on the shore here, large enough to accommodate 100 officers and 2,000
men at one time. I believe it is intended to give the men a spell when-
ever possible. After being a year or more on the desert a change of
environment in my mind is as necessary as the physical rest. In one
of my wards I have two men suffering from the bite of a centipede or
scorpion—in the one case the nose and in the other the foot—both bitten
while asleep. These bites cause a lot of swelling. To-night there was
a gorgeous sunset. The varying shades of deep dark red surmounted
by an arc of greenish hue, and above all the evening star produced an


effect that is truly eastern. i have never seen such richness of red any-
where as in Egypt. I noted it in Cairo where the silhouetting of the
mosques against the fading light accentuates the eastern touch. Met
Tom McCallum and Ferguson of Saltcoats to-day.
11/6/17. One blanket and sheet not enough at 2 a.m. Put oa
another.
12/6/17. Orders to proceed to Moascar. Appendix.
We certainly have not been in the front line of trenches here, but we
are at least nearby to the scene of operations. During the past three months
many thousands of cases have passed through the hospital, and it has
assumed very large proportions, chiefly owing to the rapid increase of
the Isolation section. This class of work, however, is soon to be cut out
of our regime, and we are to confine our energies to Medicine and
Surgery. The area covered by tents is more than half a mile on each
of its four sides, and in addition to an installation of electric light, water
is laid on all over the camp. The operating theatre, preparation room,
and the X-ray room form different sections of a large wooden hut. In
the first of these there are two tables, each with two rows of lights of
ten globes, one at the head of the table, and the other at the foot.
There is also a central light and a moveable globe that can be brought
into any position desired. On the medical side again there is a clinical
tent in addition to the attached Bacteriological laboratory, where any
examination can be carried out at any time. It is in this laboratory too
that judgment is pronounced on the water supplies. All water drunk is
chlorinated. The hospital carries all its own stores and extras pro-
vided by the Red Cross Society. We have our own branch post office
and postman, our own barber, joiner, and electrician, we have quite an
artist in the painting line, and a man efficient to repair your
wounded watch. I never thought of mentioning those who administer
to our needs—of the body and the soul—the cooks and the padres
they go without saying and believe me, are equally necessary. The
Hospital left Fremantle on 12/12/14. Sergeant B— of Fremantle
gave me the dates. Arrived Colombo, 25/12/14; Aden, 3/1/15, Suez,
12/1/15; Port Said, 13/1/15; Alexandria, 14/1/15; Cairo, 22/1/15; Mena
Camp, 24/1/15. From the Pyramids they moved out about 18th April,
1915, stopping at Zeitoun for a day or two, and reaching Alexandria
20/4/15, where the unit was split up into sections and put aboard troop-
ships running to and from Gallipoli with wounded. B embarked
on s.s. Hindoo 20/4/15; arrived Lemnos, Mudros Harbour, 24/4/15. Next
day they were off Helles at the landing, and on 28/4/15 off Anzac and
transferred to s.s. Devannah. Mid-night, 28-29 April received wounded
and reached Alexandria in 40 hours. Back again to the Peninsula and
so on. After six weeks troopship duty the unit was concentrated, and
in Mav-June erected the hospital at East Mudros. On 6th August the
hospital was transferred to West Mudros to receive wounded in connec-
tion with the projected attack on Hill 971 Departed from Mudros


A STATIONARY HOSPITAL.
CAMEL AM BULANCES.


10/1/16 on “Dunvegan Castle” for Egypt, arriving Alexandria 23/1/16,
and Tel-el-Kebir 25/1/16, where the hospital was quartered till 6th
August, 1916, when it left for Port Said, remaining there till 19th of
November. Mahamadiya was the next site where it remained till 9th
of March, 1917. On 10th of March it settled down at El Arish, where it
still remains. The hospital is one of 800 beds, but during the two Gaza
engagements we never had less than 1,000, and generally more. At the
second stunt in 24 hours we admitted 1,500 wounded, 300 of whom after
feding we had to pass on as soon as a train was available. In times like
these the hospital is practically a surgical one for just before an expected
action the O.C. gets orders to evacuate all cases to the Base. Duties at
these times are very heavy, but nobody minds. Officers and orderlies
alike are only too glad to do all they can. But even when things are
more or less normal there is a constant daily admission averaging
between 60 and 100 cases. Infectious cases are always common.
Diphtheria and Scarlet Fever being the most prevalent lately. The
medical section deals with a wide diversity of cases—Dysentry and
Diarrhoea perhaps being in the lead, while on the surgical side, in addi-
tion to the daily casualties from bomb and shell-fire and accidents, there
is a steady admission of septic sores, and lately serious appendix cases
have been very common. The question of coping with the outbreak of
septic sores is going to be a difficult one. Many of the Regiments have
70 per cent affected. Some of these units have been on the desert for
over 18 months without a spell for the simple reason that there are none
to take their place.
13/6/17, 5.15 a.m. Put'finishing touches to packing, then wrote a
few letters. 6 a.m.: Said good-bye to the boys. They are a fine lot
of fellows, and I felt leaving the unit keenly. Going down the line was
a tearing up of memories all the way. It seemed as if I was leaving
Willie for good, but death has ceased to mean anything to me now, but
the changing of the outward trappings to enable us to apear in the next
stage of life. If it was the end, creation would almost seem cruel.
Immortality means continuous life, and that means that our essential
beings do not die. Flesh and blood are non-essentials. They are
merely dress material, and do not constitute us any more than our
different clothes do. On the other hand one mind differs entirely from
another. They are separate entities. We see things from different
angles. Our essential beings are individual. Each personality differs
from every other personality, and that quite apart from physical diffe-
rence. If these separate “egos” do not continue there is no immortality,
and we are no better than the beasts of the field. Christ did not willing-
ly suffer the agonies of the Cross for mortal bodies that end with what
is commonly called death. True, much that was best of human fiesh
lies buried beneath the sand, but the boys are alive, and in a larger and
grander sphere are “waiting those of us who worthy and endure.


Part III.
THE ACHIEVEMENT.
“Evermore
For Sacrifice they die, —through Sacrifice
They live— ——L. Morris.
—Obstacles Overcome.—
Much discussion has raged round the value of the fighting on the
eastern fronts, but the following passage from an article by the Lecturer
on Imperial History at London University puts the matter in its true
light.
Sir Sidney Low states —“Germany made this war primarily with an
eye to the East. Her Western aims were, and perhaps still are,
secondary and incidental. The seizure of the North Sea coast and the
Channel ports, leading to the eventual downfall of this country and the
collapse of the British Empire, was intended to come later; and was —
and is—reserved for the next war.
The programme for this one was to clear the way eastward, and to
build up an irresistible mid-European Power by, in the first place, bring-
ing Austria, Turkey, and all the Balkan States, within the Teutonic ring
fence; and secondly, by weakening, disorganising, and, if possible, break-
ing up Russia.
In these aims, so far Germany has succeeded. She has succeeded,
I think, beyond her most sanguine expectations. She might restore
Belgium, and even Alsace-Lorraine, and still be content if she were
allowed to hold her Eastern and South Eastern conquests and spheres of
influence. For with these secure, she can begin the Next War, when it
suits her, with good hope of gratifying her largest ambitions and becom-
ing the mistress not only of Europe, but of the Outer World as well.
Before the war the Central Powers were shut off from extension
eastward by the barrier States of the Balkans, and-the mighty bastion
and glacis of the Russian Empire. Both obstacles have temporarily
disappeared. All the South Eastern countries, from Bohemia to the
British battle-lines in Palestine and Mesopotamia, are Germany’s vassals
or Germany’s slaves.”
This book does not seek to deal with the importance of the Persian
Gulf and the Mesopotamian Front, but it is hoped that a perusal of its
pages may lead the reader to appreciate more clearly, of what paramount
importance has been the work of the Australian Light Horse and other
troops in Sinai, in maintaining the Suez Canal as a free waterway to the
East, and in preventing Egypt from falling into German hands.


OBSERVATION POST.
"GONE WEST."


That was the objective set before the Lighthorsemen when, after
Gallipoli, their gallant comrades of the Infantry bade them farewell as
they left to do their part in France.
And that—the protection of the Canal, and the “Valley of the Nile”,
and with it the safeguarding of their own fair Commonwealth has been
ever before them as they fought their weary way mile by mile, night by
night, and stunt by stunt, across the barren wastes of Sinai. It was
well that they had the stimulation of a great part to play, for there was
little else to encourage them in a land where it was sand in front of them,
sand to the right and the left of them, sand behind them, and as often
as not sand all round about them, shutting out the blue sky overhead.
There was only one other thing in plenty, and that was the Turk a cruel
fiend whenever he could effect his treachery with impunity. But while
the enemy, like the sand, was before and to either side of our men, he
never got behind them. The boys did their work too well for that.
The mounted troops, like good pioneers “grubbed” thoroughly, leaving
clear country for the Engineers to do their part in.
But the Royal Engineers were 20 miles back, and water
had to be carried in tins on camels from rail head to the little khaki
bivvies of the frontiersmen, which meant that there was barely
enough water to drink, let alone have some to cool a skin that had been
scorching all day in a fierce and shadeless sun,
Under conditions such as these the food too, was bound to lack
variety, but no one grumbled. “My poor .old horse” was the only plaint
one ever heard, whether it was a shortage of water, a forced march over
the heavy yielding sand, or a “good-bye” when, having become a
casualty, the rider was about to begin the trek back to the nearest
hospital.
But the hardest thing, the greatest sacrifice called for on the desert
trail, was to leave one’s comrade on a sandhill—and then move on
That night as the sun went down in all its blood-red glory, one half of a
bivvy was empty—but that did not exempt one from night out-post, or
the ceaseless night patrol.
All the way back to the Canal the Trail is marked with mounds--
soldiers sleeping where they fell —but the Light Horsemen of Australia
are pioneers, and they still keep moving on.
“In this war we’re always moving.
Moving on;
When we make a friend another friend has gone
“When the bravest and the best
Of the Boys you know ‘Go West’,
Then you’re choking down your tears and
Moving on.”
Egypt. —A. B. Paterson.


—Gaza—Yesterday and To-day.—
To anyone with even the smallest gift of the historical sense the
name of Gaza must conjure up a motley host, for who of the many great
emperor madmen lusting after world power has not been forced to knock
at its gates, and who are the people not represented among the spirits
that must throng its hills and wadis?
Throughout the ages whenever the world has been in turmoil the
seige of Gaza has been one of the most stubborn battles of the war.
Situated as it is on the main route that links Asia and Europe with
Egypt, it has had to choose between allowing the conqueror to pass or
barring the way. The latter course it has invariably chosen, and no
city in the world has such a record of seiges and sacks.
The Avims, according to Deuteronomy, were the original inhabitants
of Gaza, but the Fhilistines are the people to whom it owes its fame.
Its antiquity may be gauged when one mentions that it was about 2500
B.C. when Gaza had its first visit from a mighty potentate. This was
Pharoah Pepi I. who went north on a punitive expedition against the
Bedouins. Centuries later it was invaded by the Hyksos, an Asiatic
horde, which was driven back in turn by another Egyptian army.
Nearly a thousand years then pass before the desert was crossed again—
Pharoah Thutmosis going to Asia to combat with another of the warlike
peoples who were constantly appearing from the further east.
The next event of outstanding importance in the history of Gaza
occurred some six to seven hundred years later when, toward the end of
the ninth century before Christ, the city was captured by Assyria. It
remained under her control for nearly two hundred years, but the period
was not one of unruffled calm. In 734-732 B.C. her independent spirit
caused her to revolt, but Tiglath Pileser 111. crushed her with vehemence.
She was sacked again by Sargon in 720 8.C., and finally dealt with by
Sennacherib in 701, although he himself soon after lost nearly all his host
from plague not far from Rafa.
So far the Assyrians had failed to enter Egypt, but they were not to
be denied, and in 670 B.C. we find them passing through Gaza, this time
to wreak their vengeance on the most ancient civilization in the world.
The Scythians were next at her doors, but that tide flowed back,
and with its ebb began the wane of the splendour of Assyria, and Necho
—the last of the Pharoahs to pass this way—marched through Palestine
and Syria to extend his empire to the east. But his triumphs were short
lived, for Babylon after an eclipse of a thousand years loomed once again
on the horizon, and Nebuchadnezza became overlord of Gaza about 600
B.C.
Another century went by and the Persians were now in the ascen-
dent among the races of the earth. Cambyses had covetous eyes on the
“Valley of the Nile” like every would-be world conqueror from the dawn
of time to the present Hound of Hell, but before he was lord of Egypt
and Ethiopia he had first to conquer Gaza, and this he did with all the
ruthlessness of an Asiatic fiend.


On every occasion Gaza has resisted the tyrant, but just as often
she has had the price to pay. Never, however, was the seige so pro-
longed nor the sack so thorough as when the merchant town was visited
by Alexander the Great. The Greeks behaved with all the cruelty of
a heathen race, but vengeance was not long delayed.
In a few short years the last traces of the ruling house of Macedonia
had vanished for ever from the earth. Gaza, however, rose from her
ashes to receive again the camel caravans of Arabia and the spices from
the Persian Gulf—and to fight. Alexander’s Generals had split up his
Empire among themselves Ptolemy taking Egypt and Palestine,
Antigonus, Macedonia and Thrace, and Seleucus, the Empire of the East.
But inevitable quarrels followed, and Gaza was the battleground. Per-
haps the most historical of all the fights took place in 312 8.C., when
Ptolemy heavily defeated Demetrius, the son of Antigonus, who had
come out on his father’s account against him, and Gaza was again razed
level with the ground.
Seleucus and Ptolemy now consolidated their respective gains, then
each in turn attempting the conquest of the other, met and fought at
Gaza.
Nearly a hundred years later we find another Seleucid king—
Antiochus 111. in possession of the city, only to be routed in 217 B.C. by
Ptolemy IV. in the battle of Rafa. Then a Jew came on the field, laid
seige to the city for a year, captured it in the end by blackest treachery,
and left it a rubble heap. It was rebuilt by a Roman Governor, but
sacked by Jews again before it entered a period of some centuries of un-
broken prosperity under the Roman rule. The Emperor Heraclius
restored the Cross to Jerusalem, but in a decade the influence of the
Semitic prophet Mahomet, who as a young man had visited Gaza some
years before, spread throughout the Eastern world, and Islamic forces
led by Amrou marched through Gaza on their way to Egypt.
Then followed the Crusades. We read of the Saladins, the Saracens,
and the Christians; of St. Louis of France and Richard Coeur de Lion.
Gaza has known them all.
This brings us to the end of the twelth century and to the beginning
of Turkish rule which has exercised its cruel and barbaric sway ever
since, bringing everything and every person in its power to its own level
of squalor and incompetence.
In 1799 the city, shorn of nearly all its pristine glory and importance,
fell an easy prey to Napoleon, but in a few months, on account of
troubles nearer home, he had to retrace his steps.
Not until British troops crossed the desert was Gaza and the
Promised Land to be finally freed from the blighting influence of the
Turk—but not without the traditional stubborn resistance of the age-
long city, nor until many thousands of the fairest lives had been taken
as the toll.


But let it be noted that this time it was the tyrant who was defend-
ing the city against its deliverance, and that its fall—perhaps for the first
time in its history—was not followed by the usual ruthless sack.
Thus milleniums pass and are forgotten, and the oldest and the
youngest races meet. The city that had known the i'haroahs and the
Ethiopians, the Assyrian hosts from Nineveh, the Babylonians, and the
dwellers in Mesopotamia, that had withstood the overwhelming Scythian
hordes, and the might of the Medes and Persians, that had given Alexan-
der the Great his most difficult conquest, that had been the bone of con-
tention between the Seleucids and the Ptolemies, that could remember
the days of Herod and the Roman governors as part of its later life, that
could show where the young Mahomet had walked its streets, that had
watched the varying fortunes of the Crescent and the Cross, that had
seen a Napoleon come and go, was now to rise again under the tutelage
of the sons of the youngest nations on the earth—the mounted men
from islands of the far and distant seas, and their antipodean brothers
of the North.
—Open Gates.—
The Gates are open now—the way through Gaza is safe, the border
is crossed, and our men are pushing the infidel from the Holy Land.
So I cannot close this book, which intended to deal only with the
desert trail, without writing a little of the life of our soldiers in Palestine.
The scene has changed from desert sand to bleak and arid hills, the Holy
City itself is in Christian hands once more—but freeing the land from the
Turks has proved hazardous and difficult as making the way through
Sinai. The hills are desolate and stony, the paths are donkey pads or
goat tracks —most of the moving forward is done by night, and “scrap-
ping” with the enemy takes place each day.
The men are infinitely weary—it is years since many of them have
seen Australia—their work is undervalued by the majority—their mails
are irregular, their discomforts and hardships innumerable. Yet with
dogged endurance they continue the task that has been set them, and
when the whole history of the war is published the value of their achieve-
ments will be more fully understood.
A soldier writing from Palestine says—“ For six days we have had all
our clothes and equipment on, and had to chance any sleep we might
get—’the average was 2| hours out of the twenty-four.”
' And again, “People talk of hardships. Fancy horses going without
water for 100 hours and the men 76. Imagine marching all night and
then beginning a fierce battle at daylight and carrying on all day and
then all night, and the next day and night. Many of the night marches
mean 30 and 40 miles over unknown country, and night movement is
very trying to the nerves. The great trouble was that we moved much
faster than our transports, which carried our food, water, and fodder.
Sometimes water was located, but we could not touch it because the
enemy poisoned the wells . .”


The letter ceases a little later because “there are thousands of insects
crawling about the ground to-night including beastly looking spiders and
earwigs—we cannot get rid of them, the only thing to do is to go to sleep
and chance them stinging or biting. There are also scorpions in galore,
snakes, and small lizards—they all dwell in the bivvies with us.
These incidents of the life are not written of in a complaining spirit,
they are only narrated in answer to a request for more details, for the
average Light Horseman does not grumble at hardships, he pushes
through in spite of them.
A Medical Officer attached to a Light Horse Regiment covers the
ground in letters written to friends at home perhaps as fully as will be
permitted at the present time, but it must be realized that, although the
work of every Regiment is practically the same, times and locations
naturally differ according to the Brigade’s position in the advance.
He writes—“l feel that I owe you an apology for not writing more
frequently, but we have been kept so constantly on the move that
opportunities have been few and far between.
During the stunt I often thought of you and wished you were out
here sharing the fun, for after all it’s been jolly good sport, even if it was
rather rough and dangerous, and I know you would have enjoyed it.
Most of our long marches were done at night in glorious brilliant moon-
light, and in absolute silence. Great clouds of dust were raised by the
horses, so that at times one couldn’t see his next door neighbour, or at
the best some grey ghost-h'ke shape riding silently on. It was like a
phantom army, and my word, wasn’t it cold! You remember those
nights after the Gaza stunts and how we shivered and the patients were
chilled to the bone? We travelled light, and only carried one blanket
per man, slept on the ground wherever we happened to camp, often
without water, so that the poor devils of horses had a very rough spin.
In one fortnight they went for periods of 24 to 48 hours on four occasions
without water, and for food we had to rely on the country and what we
carried on the horse. Our Brigade was in the advance, and so had to
develop water for those following. We had camels with the ambulance,
and on one occasion I took these to water, a trip of twenty miles there
and twenty back. To give my horse a rest I rode a camel, and believe
me, it was some stunt. No more camels for me.
I know you will be interested in all the details so will describe our
part of the stunt at length. We struck camp 21/10/17 at 6 p.m. I was
Brigade Sanitary Officer, and had to inspect the area, and was able to
give a certificate as to its cleanliness. Marched in troop formation until
one a.m., when we camped for the night.
22nd. Woke at dawn and moved off at 5 o’clock. No water for
horses. Much indignation in Brigade, as water should have been
developed for us. Passed day without incident.
23rd. Watered horses and camels. Had my first view of Turkish
trenches (later taken by our infantry.) Could see Turks moving about.


Moved out at 5.30 p.m., passing camel corps at Khalasa at 10 o’clock.
Reached Asluj at 1.30 a.m. after very tedious and slow march. Stand
to at 4.30 a.m.
24th. Out and roused unit at 4.30 a.m. Mosque and several build-
ings near wells which have been blown in by Turks, no prospects of
water for horses or selves. Feel pretty dirty. Narrow gage railway
built by Germans with very neat railway station looking quite out of
place so far from civilization.
25th. Watered horses but not camels. I start back on camels, 20
miles deadly slow trip, which I reached two o’clock. Camped on our
old site.
26th. Other Brigades arriving. Watered camels and proceeded
back at 6 p.m. Rain, most uncomfortable. Rejoined Regiment at two
a.m. very wet and cold and tired. Slept till morning. Got some snaps
from W .
28th and 29th. Very quiet. Gen. Allenby turned up and congratu-
lated Brigade on work done so far. Seems to be the right man in the
right place. Everyone very enthusiastic. Bully and biscuits for tea.
30th. Quiet day. Biscuits and bully. Move off at 6 p.m. Plane
came over us at mid-day, but did not stay long. Watered camels here.
Were expecting resistance at Amara, but Turks had evacuated. Stayed
here until 3.30 am., then continued our outflanking movement.
October 31st. Came out of hills into valley at dawn, and had my
first experience of actual war. N.Z.’s going into action on our left.
The right clear, so we advanced and took up our position. Brigade
heavily shelled, but marvellous to relate, no casualties. Shells bursting
above, around, and all over our men, but no wounds! Heard that
Turks were escaping along Hebron Road with guns, so moved off at the
gallop to interrupt. Again heavily shelled but no casualties. Brigade
cut Hebron Road and captured prisoners, guns escape. Camped for the
night.
November Ist. Two German planes came over and bombed us well
and truly, but missed ambulance. Then machine gunrfed B.H.Q. and got
one casualty. Our machine guns oper sd out and drove him off. Aus-
tralians with magnificent charge captured Beersheba.
2nd. Took two sandcarts with patients to Beersheba to hospital.
En route saw about forty dead horses. Redoubt very strong, and won-
der how we ever took it. Saw Wibund in Beersheba, also saw the
famous well. Most of the town in ruins from our bombardment
Numerous trap mines. Returned to the Regiment at night and got a bit
off the track as it was pitch dark, but found my way to camp all right.
Only surface water available from rain that fell on 26th ult. Absolutei5 r
saved our Brigade. Men filling their bottles from all sources, although
lam insisting on all water being chlorinated. Expect dysentry and
cholera. Dined on biscuits and bully.
November 4th. Moved out along Hebron Road: still watering on


AUSTRALIAN FLYING MEN READY FOR THE MORNING STRAFE.
BATTERY IN ACTION.


surface water which is pretty choice. Several casualties. The Turks
are very strongly entrenched in the hills, and we can’t dig ’em out.
November sth. Fractured femur from sth. Put up in splint.
Horses without water as surface water is finished.
November 6th. Relieved by Camels and Scotch and retired to Beer-
sheba, which we reached at 2 p.m. Watered horses, and at once pro-
ceeded northwards through hills as fast as we could go. All along the
track dead transport animals and numbers of Yeomanry horses dead.
Camped on cold hillside and slept like a log.
November Bth. Moved off at 8 a.m. Signs of heavy fighting all
along the track. Khuweilfe had fallen. We pressed westward and
came out beyond Sheria. Passed numbers of dead Turks. Shells still
bursting in ridges around us, but doing no damage. Captured huge
Turkish ammunition dumps and»all manner of stores scattered broadcast
and thrown down by the enemy as they fled demoralized and disordered.
Captured some 300 odd prisoners. Again came under direct shell fire.
Quite unpleasant. Shells bursting over and all around us, but our luck
seems to be in. At night set out with guide to get wounded from
Regiment. Took two sand carts. Wandered about in the dark in No
Man’s Land for three hours until guide admitted he was lost, so I led way
back to camp and got fresh sand carts and new guide. After much
trouble found the Regiment and got in the wounded. All dog tired.
November 9th. Moved at 7.30. Shells bursting all around us.
Sheltered in a Wadi. Dislodged enemy and were able to water our
horses for the first time since leaving Beersheba. Had a wash and a
shave and felt comparatively clean again. Was sent to take over a
Turkish hospital and treat wounded. Found large hospital with eight
wounded Turks and any amount of medical stores. Turks attended to
and left Sergeant and one man in charge. All the tentage here
eventually fell into Bedouin’s hands. This was one of the most annoy-
ing incidents of the stunt. After tough fighting we would capture stores
of various discriptions, pass on, and the Bedouins would come along after
and collect the best of everything. Some of them collected bombs and
were blown to blazes, which was some slight comfort but no reparation
to us. 28 British planes flew over us and bombed us! by mistake. They
then machine gunned 8.H.Q., but only got two slight casualties. I
think later they did more harm to the Turks. Our planes have the
wind well up us! !
November 10th. Moved off at 8.30 a.n.. Brigade galloped twelve
miles without a stop and captured Turkish Headquarters and a huge
transport train, also several large guns. Ambulance left well behind.
All M.O.’s save self detached to look after wounded. Crossing an open
space with the ambulance the Turks opened on us with a battery of
shrapnel. Quite the warmest time I have experienced, shells bursting
thickly overhead beyond and not quite far enough. Galloped for shel-
ter without casualties, then returned across open for camels which had


suddenly retired. Brought them up by another route. Captured a lot
of Turkish bread hot from ovens. Very nice for a change as bully beef
finished. Moved off again at 6 p.m. and advanced until we were held
up. I was under pretty concentrated rifle fire while getting wounded
out. No harm done. Camped for night. No rations, no medical com-
forts, few dressings. Absolute hell for patients, none of whom com-
plained. They were Britons. Two very bad abdominal cases died
through the night. One had been practically disembowelled. No pos-
sibility of evacuating. Only one sand cart with us, and we are about
twenty miles ahead of anything else.
November 12th. Got some eggs. Later received rations and
evacuated patients. Retired to sea. Watered our horses at village.
All the natives scrambling for water so had devil’s own job. The well
was about ten feet deep. The methsd of drawing, extremely crude,
consisted of a bucket and rope passed over a round log and drawn by a
bullpck. It took us about three hours to partially water our horses.
Moved off again and halted mid-night.
November 13th. Got oranges from village nearby, and dressed
native girl who had picked up a bottle which exploded killing her mother
and wounding the girl in about ten places—none serious. She was very
grateful and insisted on kissing our boots. Camped on the sand and had
a glorious swim in the sea. Fresh water six feet from sea on beach so
had a shave too. Rained during night. Everyone wet.
November 14th. Moved off again. Camped.
November 15th. Followed Brigade all day, and eventually caught
them. Passed aerodromes and huge dumps of ammunition of all sorts
Numerous large guns taken and a couple of planes. Held up in very
rough country after capturing junction station and cutting Jerusalem
line. All along the route dead transport animals, camels, horses, bul-
locks, buffalo, everything that could possibly draw a load. Natives all
seem pleased to see us.
November 18th. Came to Jewish village. Ras Derran founded
by Rothschild. Camped by large orange grove. Made the most of our
stav. Wine in abundance. English understood by number of people.
Quite a pretty town with red tiled roofs. Houses all white washed.
November 20th. Passed north. Evacuated our mess orderly with
dysentry. Rain, but did not get very wet. Camped in an olive grove,
with plenty of firewood.
November 23rd. Moved on to near Jaffa, which had fallen some
days previously. Quite deserted. Just a few natives strolling about.
Many fine houses and residences closed and owners flown. The town
nestles aihong orange groves and date palms, and seen from inland with
the glimpses of the Mediterranean beyond is a very pretty sight indeed.
Could do no business as had no silver, and paper money would not be
changed by people.


AWAITING TOE DAWN.


November 25th. Moved out to front line. Shelled Turks and had
very warm engagement for some days. Were dismounted and horses
sent back. First experience of trench warfare.
My diary finished here, but soon after this we retired, got wet
through with heavy rain and camped again near Ras Derran for about
a week. Then we went back about another twenty miles, and here I
had quite a job as sanitary officer as there were numerous dead horses
lying about. Christmas and New Year were both unseasonable wet
days spent out in the open with bully beef and biscuits for dinner, lunch
-and tea"
• \
The diary recommences.
“April 3rd, 1918. We have just returned from a raid into Moab, the
land of the Ammonites, and believe me, it was some stunt. Nine
tenths of the time I thought it was all up with us and CO;, as we
were out-numbered and out-flanked by the Turks and Germans who held
strongly entrenched positions on hills which in themselves were veritable
fortresses.
It is difficult to give you an idea of the country, but it was not un-
like the Adelaide hills in their steepest part, but with no trees, and the
ground stony and slippery. You can imagine the job we had getting
our horses up with no roads at all. It was impossible to get guns or
limbers up the slopes, and you know you can take them just about
anywhere.
The stunt from the face off was unfavourable. Our first camp
before reaching Jerusalem was a huge bog, and wet and raining the
whole time. Then we spent three days in Jerusalem, where I visited
the mosque of Omar, which is on the site of the Temple of Solomon, the
Church of the Holy Sepulchre, Mount of Olives, Garden of Gethsemane,
the Jewish Wailing place and the old city, and was greatly impressed
with the filth and squalor of the place, but hardly imbued with its
sanctity.
After leaving Jerusalem on a night march we camped for three days
on stony hills, overlooking Jericho and the Jordan, where the horses
were unable to lie down. The last day of my stay there my old horse
went lame, and I had to ride my pack horse and put my pack on a
camel. This proved to be a great mistake as eventually the camels got
left behind, but I’ll tell you about that later.
We left this camp at night, marched all night, and just at dawn
crossed the Jordan not far from the Dead Sea, on Pontoon Bridges.
We then hit out for the foothills of Moab and came to the scene of an
encounter between the Turks and N.Z. (both cavalry). I't was a grue-
some sight as the Bedouins had stripped the dead stark naked, and they
were lying out in the open. Our chaps had had a victory.
We were then welcomed by some of the Bedouins who belonged to
the Sheriff of Mecca. They were as wild a looking crowd as you would


see anywhere, and would cut your throat as soon as lod at you if they
could. They were mounted on little Arab ponies, all 'living skeletons,
and most of them with sore backs. The Arab pony is not the animal
the stories are written about, but a very sorry creature indeed. The
Bedouins are a very low class, but better than those on the west of
Jordan.
After confabing with these beauties for some hours, we started out
on the most disastrous and rigorous trip I have ever been on, with a
few Arabs as guides. They led us up a winding foot track, and at times
no track at all where the horses hung on by sheer molecular cohesion.
When we got up about 3,000 feet it started to rain, a cold bitter sleety
rain, and everyone got wet to the skin and icy cold, and here was where
I began to regret my pack horse and blankets being on a camel.
At last after most strenuous efforts we gained the plateau in the
early morning, but though we halted, no one had any rest as the rain
continued all day. That night, still raining, we continued our march,
passing through a Cossack village. We had now been about 76 hours
without sleep, and everyone was seeing things. One very general
delusion was due to the fog, which appeared as a wall on either side of
the road about 100 feet high, and there was the appearance of block
houses right in the track. This was due to a halt in front when the
horses would bunch together. All along the line men were sleeping in
their saddles while on the march.
On several occasions I fixed a horse on ahead which I wanted to
catch up, and at once dozed off, the old horse walked along, overtook
and passed the objective, then I woke up, couldn’t see it, thought I had
dropped behind, and hurried along to the head of the column. This
sort of thing went on all night. Finally we reached our camping ground
and the sun shone out for a while. I took off my coat and weather-
proof (?) cape, placed the cape on the ground and the coat over me
and was asleep. An enemy plane came over and bombed and machine
gunned us, but I slept on.
The next thing I was conscious of, I was about two miles from the
camp, with my overcoat on and my cape on my arm, walking up a
gully! The thing that brought me to my senses, was passing a Bedouin
to whom I said “Saida” (good day). He came over to me, examined
my cape and boots and asked me by signs how much I paid for them,
and seemed quite attached to them. This woke me up and put the
wind right up me. I kicked him out and made off for camp, which I
reached without any further incident. T shivered through that night
somehow, and got a few hours sleep.
In the morning we moved off again towards Amman (the city of
Ammonites), got well and truly shelled on the march, and finally got
into action. Experienced officers in the Regiment saw it was the
hottest corner we had been in. Our Regiment was split up, and out of
fifty men in our squadron which went into action, 23 were wounded


My A.M.C. Sergeant was wounded in the neck, but gallantly carried on.
We had to go out to try and get to some wounded and went through a
perfect hail of machine gun, and rifle, and shell fire, but were not hit.
On our return to cover we went in different directions, and I passed
a "Tommy” soldier wounded in the leg who said he couldn’t walk. We
were about 500 yards from good shelter, so 1 picked him up and carried
him back, first about 100 yards to some rocks, then across an open crop
as far as I could go, about 300 yards, and dropped down in the middle of
it. My wounded friend must have thought I was killed, as without a
moment’s pause he dashed on at record speed to cover. I chose a
picturesque attitude of death, and lay quite still for about two minutes
until I got my wind, and then sprinted for it myself.
The position we tried to take was absolutely honeycombed with
prepared machine gun positions, and they were also able to enfilade us
from both flanks, so you see it was some corner. One of our men got a
direct hit with a shell, and had his head blown off. We returned about
500 yards and held on for the night, still bitterly cold, and in the morn-
ing were moved over to the other extreme flank. Here our other two
squadrons got cut to pieces in another attempt to advance. They were
ordered to take an impregnable position at all costs, and the poor devils
tried to. About ten are still out there, missing, the first in the history
of the Regiment.
After this we retired behind a ridge and were well and truly shelled
with big guns. The Turks were outnumbering us by about 20 to one,
and we were constantly afraid they would outflank us. We were
holding a front of H miles with 130 men. Had the enemy attacked
they must have crumpled us up like paper, and little N would per-
haps have seen glimpses of Constantinople from inside their jails. We
hung on in this precarious position for three days more, still wet and
bitterly cold.
The only ray of brightness in the show was the arrival of my groom
with the pack horse, well, and blankets, waterproof sheet, and that rug
I bought, and by Jove, I was thankful I had bought a good one, even
if it was a bit of a price. It was quite the coldest night of the lot.
The next morning we had to withdraw, and jolly glad we were too.
My Regiment had to guard the right flank. We marched all day with-
out incident, rationed and marched all night, camping for a few hours at
dawn. Two troops left as a rear guard were cut off by enemy cavalry,
but out-fought and out-manoeuvred them, and finally escaped with one
man wounded.
At sunrise we continued our retreat passing through the town which
is famous for raisins. From here until we reached the Jordan we were
passing a continuous stream of refugees, Armenians, and Christian
Bedouins fleeing from the Turks. They were carrying much of their
personal property on their backs, and they all had bundles reminding
me of the San Fransisco earthquake. You would see old men carrying


older women on their backs, mothers with nursing babies on their
breasts and huge bundles on their backs, children of ten carrying
younger infants, all manner of pack animals loaded to the last ounce.
They were all hungry and crying out for “Mungaree” (food) which we
didn’t have.
At last, just at dusk we reached the Jordan valley, which is about
1,200 feet below sea level, and quite a different climate from the one we
had just left. We rationed and had a good night’s sleep. Broke camp
at dawn and returned across the plain to the river. Here eleven enemy
planes came over us and bombed us with great gusto, but didn t get any
of us. They were eventually driven off by one of ours, which shows
how much superior our machines are now. A few days ago one of our
machines tackled five of them, brought down three, and chased the
other two home! We crossed the Jordan again about 10 a.m., and
finaly camped about a mile from Jericho. Whats that you say, Go
to Jericho.” Run away, I’ve been, and a rotten filthy hole of a place
it is.
After camping I had a bath in a tributary of the Jordan, and a
shave, and then our camels and limbers found us, and I got my Broonsi
tent and sleeping valise and clean clothes. Had quite a thrilling half
hour hunting and bagged 12 crabs. Ido it quite scientifically with a
pair of forceps, which squash ’em as I drag ’em off. Ive got them beat
with blue ointment and vaseline, which poisons and smothers them.
Had a great sleep last night, and to-day visited a Greek monastry
near the Jordan. To-morrow if we are still here, I hope to ride down
to the Dead Sea and have a swim 1,300 feet under the sea. Some stunt
what!
This morning the Turks were over bombing again and got about 18
N.Z. horses and a couple of men, also bagged about 20 camel niggers, lr
we stay here long enough I guess we’ll all get stouched.
I am feeling fit as a fiddle; never better in my life in fact, so there
is no need to worry on that score.”
So we leave them, still fighting tenaciously and stubornly, gallant
in face of danger, and cheerful in spite of hardships.
Our fate lies safely in their trusty hands—a fate shielded already by
a splendid sacrifice—for the spirit of the gallant lads who have passed
ahead lives on in the hearts of their comrades.
And they will not retrace their steps along the Trail until their part
is done. ' ; •’■ •'*. . “flti
w. K Thomas k Go., Printer, Adelaide.
