

NO. 1. Id. (posted MAY, 1893
THE
“FOR TRUTH
Anarchy and the Social Revolution.
lam an Anarchist. That is to say, I believe that
for mankind to be as happy as is possible with men
constituted exactly as they are at present, it is neces-
sary to do away with every form of rale and ruledness,
authority and subjection. Some of you are no doubt
aware that you are ruled (and ruled with a rod of iron)
by the capitalistic class ; not only through the courts
and through the Government, but, even more, ruled
directly by those who own the means and the products
of your labor, and those who own the privilege of re-
fusing you the use of the land whereon to live and the
fruits of your collective labor to consume, except on
condition of your satisfying their demands. You may
have seen on the one hand growing up enormous riches
—that is to say enormous privileges of solely enjoying
the products of tens of thousands of workers, and of
commanding their further services—and on the other
hand increasing (when indeed there is so much as a
possibility for it to increase) the poverty and depen-
dence of those whose labor with brain and hand pro-
duced all these good things, which those who possess
them labored, if at all, not to make but to take. And
you may too have realised that not only this suffering
is a wrong, but the system; the privilege—the rule
that admits it, as well as the rule that it occasions.
You may have become convinced, by the experience
of your daily life, that it is hopeless to expect happi-
ness and right for the world so long as some are bound
to regard others as their lords concerning the land, as
their masters touching their labor, or as their warders
who own against them their products which they wish
to consume. I hope that many of you, and many more,
are fully convinced of this urgent fact. I am convinced
of it, and on that very account 1 refuse to acknowledge a
lord, or a master, or a warder, in the shape o/the State,
any more than in the shape of a private individual. I
began my working life in the service of the State, where
my father had served before me.* He died a terrible
death, raving of the tyranny he had seen and partly
endured, | yet he was only two removes from the
Minister of the Department. I entered the service
after his death, and saw and suffered worse, if less
brutal, tyrannies. I admit that these were not equally
the lot of all, but I know this—that there can be no
possible system of subordination, no possible system
of employment in which some are chiefs and others
subordinates, no possible system in which some are
judges and others the judged, no centralisation contain-
• Victorian Mining Department. | See records of Brough
Smyth Inquiry. One clerk named Denbigh died from the worry.
The Government declared that however guilty Smyth might he, if it
were not pushed in spite of itself to dismiss him, it would in the
name of discipline dismiss the entire stafffor complaining.
AND RIGHT.”
ing Authority and “ Duty,” be its name or form what
it may—private, corporate, or national—but it con-
tains all the elements of similar tyranny. And the
more so, in proportion as the less the direct interest
which the chiefs of all have in the transactions of the
concern with an outside public ; the more so, as far as
these particular forms of evil are concerned, the less
that the institution is a profit-seeking venture and the
more that is a simple trust, as regards them ; the more
so, and without escape, the more that it is society, and
the less that exists outside of it. This I know, and
I know moreover, from experience in my own admin-
istration of public affairs, as well as by observation at
close quarters, that under no State rule or fixed rule
whatever can equal justice be done or injustice avoided.
To admit of it, you must entrust your administrators
with the privilege of adhering to or departing from the
law at their own discretion, and by so doing you make
them masters of the law. lam not confined to my
experience in the Civil Service ; having served in a
confidential capacity under one of the ablest solicitors
in Victoria, and I well know how no matter what law
can be made to defeat its nominal purpose, how the
innocent can be made to appear guilty and the guilty
innocent, and how the minds of judges and juries can
be swayed. And I know also in a thousand ways
that the whole system of Authority and Subordination
is a curse, be it ownership, mastership, or officialdom,
private or of the State ;—a thing rotten and corrupt,
the parent of tyranny and misery, the murderer and
abortionist of good—a thing to be hated and fought
against until no living human being has to say either
to another, or to a dead, blind phantom called the
Law, “Not my will, but thine, be done.”
But, foul and vile as I consider Authority—horrible
and debased and wretched, Subjection—l am not going
now to declaim against them, or to expose particular
instances, though these might give a new revelation
to some who look on the State, outside its present
relationship towards Capital and Labor, as the coming
salvation—and I can assure you that, for most of the
cases I have in my mind, it was immaterial whether
Society had been capitalistic as it was, or on the con-
trary one of the strictest and most radical State Social-
ism. I should have become a Social-Democrat before
I heard of Anarchy at all, only this knowledge pre-
vented me. I did once call myself a State Socialist,
but that was before I had any experience, when I was
not aware that the workers suffered from any deeper
cause than the greed of some individual employers,
and I looked on the workers as brutal and ignorant
savages who would make it a crime to be able to read
and write. I thought it wrong that they should be
cruelly treated, but at all costs we must be the masters
—hence I insisted on the State. By the time I knew
the people better I knew more of the wrong inherent


in officialism, and in considering the Republican So-
cialist propositions, identical with Social Democracy,
then popular with the Secularists, I thought the re-
medy worse than the disease, and could see no hope,
so long as I regarded Law and the State as natural
and eternal, except in a bloody revolution every few
years to wipe out the accumulated results of pernicious
potentialities crystallised in the forms of Society, the
fruits of sharp practice or errors of justice, etc., and
afford the temporary relief of a fresh start. The only
escape from this desperate view of things is Anarchy,
which it is my purpose to expound as a logical doc-
trine, as well on its own positive merits as through
the overturning of the doctrine of Authority by plain
cold reason.
(to be continued.)
KROPOTKINS ON “NEW AUSTRALIA.”
Someone here has written to Kropotkine for hi s
opinion on the “ New Australia ” scheme, Kropot-
kine criticises it as under :
The fact that men and women who have made Aus-
tralia what it is, are compelled to migrate from it,
speaks volumes in itself. “ Make the land, be the dung
that renders it productive, build the centres of civilisa-
tion which render it valuable—and go away ! ” That
is the true picture of modern capitalist management.
The same here, nhe same at the antipodes—always
the same.
Every time I see men and women of energy, enter-
prise and initiative, starting similar colonies, 1 feel
sorry. You know how much Russia has lost of her
best elements, those that had the capacity of being dis-
satisfied and revolting against bad conditions, because
she had at her very doors Siberia, where the lovers of
freedom could go, and escape for a few years all the
curses of the State —military service, bureaucracy,
functionaries and their despotism. What would be-
come of the European revolutionary movement if most
women and men of strong individuality—most of those
ready to rebel—went to settle in distant lands, trying
to make colonies there ?,...The longer we all live the
more we see that the very limited Communist solidar-
ity which is practised among all revolutionary and es-
pecially ail Anarchist groups, exercises a much more
powerful effect than if it were practised even to its
full extent somewhere on the boundaries of the civil-
ised world Besides, when I recollect the numerous
colonies which have been started for the last 50 years
and the number of men and women, some of whom I
knew personally, whose unflinching energies and per-
severance I cannot but admire, and yet see the failures
on record, I cannot but think there is some great cause
at work against such colonies. [l. They have not been
large enough to afford sufficient scope to individuality.
2. In the “ colony ” the average worker is cut off from
the trifles which civilisation gives to fill up the void
corners of life, and “ even the struggle in a larger
arena which every active nature likes.” He goes on
to argue that a colony which will cohere can better be
established near a city.] But even at its best, it will
only be a refuge for those who have abandoned the
battle which has to be fought face to face with the,
enemy I need not tell you that if the colony is to
have any chance of success, it ought to have no direc-
tors, no superintendents, no balloting, no voting what-
soever. These and the intrigues they give rise to, have
always been the stumbling blocks to colonies. Are the
new settlers less intelligent, less capable, than a Rus-
sian village mir (commune) that goes to settle in Sibe-
ria ? The Russian peasants live without authority,
agree at their meetings for common work, and are in-
telligent enough not to have authorities or ballots,
and to arrive at unanimity in their decisions. Are the
Australians inferior to them in any way, that they
need rulers ?
MAGIC!
The swindlers have again come uppermost in France. A fresh
Government has arisen out of the ruins of Panama, no more honest
than that overthrown by recent exposures. No wonder there are
French Revolutions and Paris Communes ! We, more fortunate, can
stop anything of the kind this trip by the ballot-box. —Worker.
Why and how ? The State constitution of Prance
is much the same as that of any Australian colony—
military service excepted—and its municipal constitu-
tion much more advanced. There are far more organ-
ised socialists in proportion to population, and most
of the Panama members went in on the socialist ticket.
“ Don’t bet with Sharper, bet with Welsher ! ” But
perhaps you mean that you can stop the Revolution or
the Commune by the seduction of the praying-machine
known as the ballot-box. Ah! that is what the fleecers
have been doing all along. Are these things called
workers men at all, or what are they, that they ima-
gine they can have no rights till they get new masters
to give them to them ?
ANARCHY IN PRACTICE.
At Montreal! (France) some of our comrades have
founded an excellent institution on the following lines.
Appliances for various kinds of work have been
provided by voluntary contributions.
Anarchists living within convenient distance can
go singly or in groups and produce what they require
quite freely. Those who are not expert in the line of
production needed, make their requirements known,
and similarly those who cannot reach the spot. Any
comrade with spare time on his hands spends it in
working pleasurably to do what is needed by others,
or for the common stock of resources ; and anyone
possessing what he finds no need of, transmits it to
the Commune for the use of whoever may require it.
Those who can produce or supply from where they
are, without resorting to the appliances specially pro-
vided by the Montreuil local group, do the same from
their position. Country comrades are visited by those
from the city, who enjoy a pleasant outing and health-
ful exercise while helping in the work of the fields,
the products being shared by the city adherents, while
the farmers receive the benefit of clothing, black-
smithing, building, etc., in like manner, and so on all
round—the principle aimed at being, throughout, the
most eqfial satisfaction, by voluntary solidarisation,
of all the needs of all.
No money is used in these doings (that needed for
outside purchases being provided by the adherents in
the same way as labor and goods, viz., according to
their capacity to supply), nor is there any bargaining
or buying or selling or wage or price in the matter,
but simply a common understanding that each is pre-
pared to do his best at all times in a friendly way to
supply the wants of the rest, “ without money and
without price ,” and to regard equally the needs of the
others when about to take for his own needs—as in a
harmonious family. Of course a combination on these
lines enables its adherents to do more and more
without money at all, and go on increasing in com-
fort, though, so long as there remain enemies outside,
it cannot supersede the necessity for less peaceful
phases of the social revolution.
The Commune of Montreuil is rather (it will be
perceived) a Friendly Society than a “ Settlement,”
and to Anarchists it is needless to add, there is no-
authority, officialdom, or formal organisation about it,
nor has it anything to do with the law.


/r | ■<£ *y J
From the Eve to the Morrow of the Social
Revolution.
CHAPTER I.
THE BEGINNING OF THE END.
In Victoria the last attempt to settle the labor
question compatibly with the established bases of
society had been tried and abandoned. It was evident
that a crisis had been reached.
First the order of the day had been National Work
Shops. The workers wera paid Union rates —the
profits went to the State. But as the number of
State workers increased, these profits began to accu-
mulate in the form of goods which could not be sold,
for the simple reason that the actual producers could
not buy them all back with their wages, nor would
they have needed them all if they had been able to
purchase them ; neither could the officials consume
the surplus. And, as the producers under private
employers were in the same position, and foreign
countries were also similarly situated, with the excep-
tion of a few half-savage regions whose markets were
already glutted by the competition of the owners of
surplus goods from all parts of the world, there was
no way of bringing in money to meet the liabilities
which had been incurred. The State, half-bankrupt
to the great financiers, took a step to which it had
long been urged by the socialists—it issued Value
Notes based on its goods and productive power, and
made them legal tender within its own boundaries.
As the socialists had predicted, the private manu-
facturers began to close their establishments, and a
large number of persons passed into the employ of the
State. This, though for awhile it relieved the Treasury
as to the method of meeting its internal liabilities,
only intensified the difficulty of finding a market in
which to raise money based on gold and silver to
satisfy the stockholders. In a time of reaction the
workshops were closed, and great distress ensued ; in
desperation the Government eventually declared the
remaining unalieuated lands absolutely free to all.
The people flocked into the country districts by thou-
sands ; but the result was merely a change in the form
of the original difficulty. They had to raise money
to pay their rates and taxes, as well as, in many cases,
to pay off their liabilities to the capitalists from whom
they had procured requisites, and who did not want
to be paid in mere inconvertible assets of goods. In
the long run, people who wished to “go upon the
land ” found that they had to do so with no other
resources than what they already happened to possess
for the purposes of city life. They could scarcely buy
seed or live stock. Nevertheless many of them, spurred
on by necessity, went forth, and gathered round them
flocks and herds of opossums, wallaby, kangaroos and
rabbits, and cultivated the wild plants of the bush in
such fashion as they could contrive to do in the inter-
vals of dodging the collectors. The State was bank-
rupt in a pecuniary sense, and most of society likewise.
Nor could the money debts be repudiated, for if the
country was regarded as a dependency its constitution
would be cancelled and a rackrenting Administration
appointed, and several times the nominal value of the
liabilities extorted in the shape of goods at the ex-
pense of throwing out of employment millions of per-
sons abroad, many of whom would by hook or by crook
find their way to Victoria and eternalise the terrible
Unemployed Problem—while in any case the reduction
of foreign purchasing power would aggravate the local
trouble ; and if the country were treated as an inde-
pendent state, well, it would simply mean that the
ame would be done by means of a war—as in the
case of Egypt years before. Besides, some of the
local capitalists and legislators were either bondholders
themselves, or interested in institutions that were !
In fiery Queensland, all was disintegration. The
State had virtually ceased to exist. All over the
country one could find nothing but strikes and lock-
outs, varied by abortive conspiracies at arms, and
battles between wandering strikers and the police and
military forces, openly the private hirelings of capi-
talist syndicates.
In New South Wales, ever slow except when
spasmodically convulsive—because there the destruc-
tive forces in opposite directions were better balanced
and held each other in check—the old System was
apparently as far off its end as ever, and the only sign
of the impending dissolution was the anxiety with
which the authorities regarded the movement of events
in the sister colonies, and the exaggerated efforts they
made to crush out the propaganda of revolution, or
even simple discontent, in their own midst.
In the other colonies similar conditions prevailed.
For the last few months there had been, in all, an
unusual quietude. But everyone felt that the very
silence betokened the rapid approach of an immeasur-
able social cataclysm. As it had been written :
“ The spell of a coming tempest is laid on the
earth and air,
And none is so bold to venture, and none is so
brave to dare,
But sudden to palsied tremor the hands and the
thoughts are stilled—
To numbness the vivid senses, to despond the
hopes are chilled.
And over the earth and oceaUj from city and
field and sea,
Steal rumors, and dark forebodings, and fears
of the things to be;
And hushed is the groaners’ anguish, before the
pervading dumb
That, borne on the wings of Terror, speaks
loudest the storm to come 1
’Tis but for a moment ! Quickly the fiercely
resounding boom
Of world-wide and wild war-thunders will peal,
through the circling gloom,
A call, that shall waken Reason, and Courage,
and Hope, and Faith,
And herald the final conflict —the fight between
Life and Death ! ”
....And suddenly and almost simultaneously in
all parts of the continent, the long threatened storm
broke forth.
In that suburb of Melbourne known as Collingwood,
some navvies were working at a difficult spot on the
bank of the Yarra, when a winch gave way, knocking
one of them, with a leg and an arm broken, into the
river. Another man abandoned his post and sprang
in to the rescue ; in consequence a further accident
occurred by which several thousand pounds’ damage
was caused to the machinery and works. The man
who had occasioned or permitted the damage jby going
to the aid of his injured comrade, was dismissed by
the contractors, and a strike took place. Finding
public feeling very bitter against them the contractors
hastened to explain that “ they were in no way actu-
ated by any spirit of revenge for the (Josses they had
sustained ” but that the man discharged would have
been discharged in any case, as, though personally a
man against whom nothing could be said, he was
entirely incompetent for work like theirs, requiring
constant close attention ; “ as a matter of fact, it must
be evident that, had he been faithfully absorbed in his


duties, he would have failed to observe the accident to
the other man, and it must be borne in mind that the
result might, under any other circumstances than what
actually took place, have been that this very man,
instead of posing as a martyred hero and being the
centre of so much hysterical sympathy, would now be
cowering in the felon’s dock, charged with manslaugh-
ter, and the object of equally hysterical execration.”
Notwithstanding this and the fact (which they would
not hesitate to admit) that they had been subjected to
a far greater loss than what they might have had to pay
had the injured man perished in the river (as it could
not be maintained he necessarily would) they “ had
been p r epared to recognise his heroism by re-employing
him after a week or two ; but as the other workmen
had raised the question of the firm’s right to employ
only whom they pleased, this was of course impossible
on any consideration. To prove the genuineness of
their position the firm would however be prepared to
settle upon the man a pension equal to the amount
of his wages, and would not refuse to re-employ the
other men, who had gone out on strike, if the latter
would apply as on a fresh job, and subject to what
new terms and conditions suited the firm under exist-
ing circumstances—which was not to be taken as
implying that the firm contemplated any reduction in
the rate of wages.”
The men unanimously rejected these offers. The
“ right to work ” had not so long ago been wrung from
the State (notwithstanding that the State mechanism
for ensuring it had collapsed so miserably) that it had
yet ceased to stir men’s hearts. Indeed, since the
abolition of the National Workshops, the idea had
taken even firmer root, and, without any formal
organisation, a custom had sprung up for men, after
working for a certain length of time according to those
dependent on them, to retire for a period in favor of
the unemployed, who did the same in their turn ; and
in some cases strikes had taken place for the enforce-
ment of the “spell” against persons who held on to
their employment too long, the “ unemployed ” for the
time being and the “ ‘ in’ hands ” staunchly joining
in refusing to work at such establishments till the
obnoxious individuals were brought to compliance.
The origin of the custom was, of course, that there
was scarcely anybody in work who did not have some
close relative or intimate friend unemployed, and
whom he felt it necessary to aid ; and as under the
circumstances there was not room for much difference
between the conditions of helper and helped, and the
state of affairs held out no promise of alteration, an
equal division of employment was necessitated in order
to harmonise the distribution of earning with that of,
the earnings. And the employers had fallen in with
the arrangements of the men, partly unconsciously
and partly so that there should not be too many people
hungry enough to be dangerous. Note, the feeling was
that there were not enough people hungry enough to
be servile ; and in consequence a number of employers
had only been waiting the opportunity to re-assert their
privilege of dealing out employment to whom and for
how long it suited them. Instead of this strike coming
to an end, it was extended over numerous other estab-
lishments, or rather there was a widespread lock-out.
The men issued a brief and simple manifesto. It
was this :—-
“ So long as opportunity is lacking for everyone to
earn a full living, the hardship should be borne equally
by all whom the conditions surround ; equal help and
equal share. The producers of wealth having agreed
to this among themselves, it is not for those who do
not produce, but merely appropriate, to interfere with
their arrangements. The capitalists still have the
privilege of controlling the implements of production
and the work to be accomplished, in accord with the
system on which their speculations are based ; they
still have the privilege of limiting in twofold fashion,
by wages and prices, the proiucers’ share of the pro-
ducts, and extending the unearned share of the para-
sitic class. They have no longer the privilege of
regulating the individual condition of, or consigning
to idleness and starvation, members of the producing
class. The opportunities belong equally to all, and
anyone who seeks to appropriate them in order to give
them to some and detain them from others, to increase
his power over the producers, will have to understand
that he wages a war of conquest against the people,
and that war is war. To those who provoke it be
the blame ; to the victors the spoils! ”
It was impossible to find out who originated the
manifesto f but by adoption it was truly a manifesto of
the masses. It was not only a claim for what had
never been, in its thoroughness, even seriously asked
for before; not only propounded with an audacity and
determination which, accompanied by so much weight,
had never yet been displayed in the history of the
country ; but it was also a plain and defiant threat
against the entire privileges of Capitalism, and an
ultimatum that they would be immediately overthrown
by force unless this one were surrendered peacefully,
“ Then,” said the Government, “ we must be in readi-
ness to suppress the revolt ! ” “ Provided you can,”
answered a colleague, “but I fear it will suppress you,”
The next day he set sail for Samoa, cursed by the other
Ministers because his cowardice would embolden the
mob.
Nevertheless the associated capitalists succeeded in
bribing over a few men, who went to work on the terms
required of them, under contract to serve for three
years unless previously dismissed. Troops were called
out to “ preserve order,” and posted all round the spots
where these persons were employed; these deluded
traitors who had sold themselves to undermine the
interests of their neighbors, then found themselves
actual prisoners of war, mere captive slaves who had
betrayed themselves. Once on the works, they were
forbidden to leave by day or night, or to have any
communication with the outer world—nominally for
fear of violence from the people, and really, to quite
as great an extent, for fear they should be influenced
to abandon the contract. Rifles and bayonets menaced
them if they dared attempt to leave their encampment.
Food was brought to them from the military mess, and
if some who had been brought from a distance repu-
diated their engagement, saying they had been grossly
deceived in everything relating to it, their rations were
stopped, but they were not allowed to depart, “ The
manager accepted my resignation,” said more than one
when stopped by the soldiers from quitting the camp.
“ I can’t help that,” was the reply, “my duty is to keep
the ‘ insides ’ and the ‘ outsides ’ from meeting, or who
knows what will happen ? ” “ But I must go, or I shall
starve ! ” “ That has nothing to do with me.” Back
again to the manager—“ If you don’t allow me to pass
out you will have to feed me as long as I am detained.”
u I ? I told you to go ! I have nothing to do with
the orders of the military—you must take your chances
of that.” After a day or two they signed on again,
driven by hunger.
( TO BE CONTINUED.)
Communications to J. A. Andrews, Sussex-st. P. 0., Sydney.
Printed for J. A. Andrews by B. T. and J. Radoliffe, at 292 Sussex-st - ,
Sydney, and published by J. A. Andrews, 44 Bathufst-st., Sydney, NSW


Tlcur &V<L~y f XUy y * ft- S'
vZ”/? /i/» Ci/*~O-CjCcs f PL*.. ;;:
,■ * £~fX-
'TL&MC. t-t* •
*3{r Urti* •y r
isWSZ S £*-- S ~^£^LS*-4f^ / ~ <S~ -£\r OL^/t-*f~p C- '
/ * y 4~o~£ &J-TXS3 4^4~<fC>
1 '/ • t *... *
- /^-A^
Uras* & /? • /?~Hjf&xa~±4jr& J 4rw^
'V*<<> 'PXmt
jfaj%jL--C7~^ r <3<*~£ -t. ■...'o £
C f 4X,
*sf ✓X- 'ifiLjJa £*~ Unoa z^p-pt*
- S’ / /%*_*
(?U uu*
■'HiJUyvss 4 Z%X? urtru-CtCr "~t&
Ph*** / V':L& **s syr5 y r r 7pf. fasrxju f~ <'t *
&VL. - %ST^
(/Xjp -su-c- <£t*44uzL'
l/ 4 C7Zx^-^xx~^yL^~A*4^
M &*XnA(\*.
