

THE COMMONWEALTH
AND
THE EMPIRE
SPECIAL CONTRIBUTIONS AND COM-
MUNICATIONS ON THE SUBJECT OF AUS-
TRALASIAN FEDERATION FROM LEADING
COLONIAL AND IMPERIAL WRITERS AND
STATESMEN
EDITED BY W. GAY AND ill. E. SAMPSON
GEORGE ROBERTSON AND COMPANY
/Melbourne, Sgbneg, Adelaide, and Brisbane
18 9 5
SIXPENCE




ITbe Commonwealth anb Cbe Bmpire




THE COMMONWEALTH & THE EMPIRE
SPECIAL CONTRIBUTIONS AND COMMUNICATIONS ON THE
SUBJECT OF AUSTRALASIAN FEDERATION FROM LEADING
COLONIAL AND IMPERIAL WRITERS AND STATESMEN
EDITED BY 'IF. GAY AND M. E. SAMPSON
■ . . to form a more perfect union, establish justice, ensure domestic tranquillity,
provide for the common defence, promote the general welfare, and secure the blessings of
liberty to ourselves and our posterity. —United States Constitution
GEORGE ROBERTSON AND COMPANY
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, ADELAIDE, AND BRISBANE
18 9 5


From all division let our land be free,
For God has made her one: complete she lies
Within the unbroken circle of the skies,
And round her indivisible the sea
Breaks on her single shore ; while only we,
Her foster children, bound with sacred ties
Of one dear blood, one storied enterprise,
Are negligent of her integrity.
Her seamless garment, at great Mammon’s nod,
With hands unfilial we have basely rent,
With petty variance our souls are spent.
And ancient kinship underfoot is trod;
0 let us rise, united, penitent,
And be one people, — mighty, serving God I
—The Review of Reviews.


The Commonwealth and The Empire.
iVTrODUCTOPY HE h°P e % the publication of this pamphlet
to increase, by however little, the public interest in
Federation.
For that purpose they have obtained from one or more of the ablest
writers on the subject in each of the Colonies contributions which set
forth, with a truly Federal unanimity, the desirability of Federation
as not only indispensable to material progress, but as introducing con-
ditions more favourable to intellectual development and moral eleva-
tion, and as needful, above all, for the security of our homes.
Representative men throughout the Empire, also, have entrusted to
the Editors, for communication to the Australasian public, messages
which show that the Federal movement is regarded by our own kin
in other parts of the world with interest and approval, and is even
in some quarters looked forward to with hopeful eagerness. The
tone of these communications is properly somewhat apologetic, since
they proceed from those who have not made any special study of the
subject, and since the matter to which they refer is, of course, one which
it lies entirely with ourselves to settle. In the great undertaking of which
we in these Colonies are already on the threshold, it cannot, however, be
unpleasant for us to be assured of the general good-will of the Empire
in whose counsels the happy issue of that undertaking will give us a
more commanding voice; and it would be well to remember also that
though our Federal union is an event which chiefly concerns ourselves,
yet, at the same time, it will not be without its effect on the general
current of human affairs, and that the opinions of friendly, and even
of hostile, outsiders may be useful to us, as coming from those who
regard it from a point of view different from our own.
As it is not the chief object of this pamphlet to furnish instruction
in the making or working of a Federal Constitution, but merely to
excite that interest in the subject which will make instruction both a
thing to be sought for and a thing to take pleasure in, so the following
pages have not been arranged on any formal plan, but rather in
such a way as it is hoped will conduce to their variety and popular
interest.


I. From SIR SAMUEL GRIFFITH.
[G.C.M.Gr.: Chief Justice of Queensland : one of the ablest and most scholarly of
Australian public men: formerly a leading politician and Premier of the
Colony: an ardent Federationist: delegate to the great Federation Convention
held at Sydney in 1891.]
The physical conditions of Australia are unique in
the certainty ie wor i ( j < It is surrounded by the ocean. It
OF AUSTRALIAN '
federation contains no large ranges ot mountains, no wide and
deep rivers dividing one region from another. In
the case of the nations of the older world the territorial limits are
found to coincide, to a greater or less degree, with natural features,
mountain chains, or rivers, or expanses of desert. In early stages of
civilisation the territory of a people was small—often little more than
the valley of some stream. Then the inhabitants of contiguous
valleys combined for defence, and by degrees became a nation; or, in
the case of plain country, the nomad populations became associated
together. But between one nation and another there was always
some physical obstacle of land or water which prevented convenient
and rapid communication.
It is impossible to point to a single instance where a people, speaking
the same language and occupying a territory over which communication
was easy and unimpeded, has remained permanently divided for
political purposes by artificial boundaries.
The idea of a country—a fatherland —for which feelings of affection
or pride can be entertained, involves the notion of separateness from
the rest of the world. It is a conception of some part of the earth
as having features that distinguish it from all others and make it
worthy of special regard.
If Australia has any destiny as a country, if there are to be
Australian patriots, Australia must submit to the common law of
humanity as declared by universal experience. A man may be proud
of his house or of his ancestral estate. But can anyone conceive of a
feeling of patriotism entertained with regard to a portion of territory
bounded only by parallels of latitude and degrees of longitude, and
which has no natural aspects to distinguish it from the adjoining
territory on the other side of the invisible and factitious line of
demarcation ? If so, it will be a new concept, the evolution of
which experience gives no warrant for anticipating.
Consider the existing boundaries between the Australian States.
Western Australia is divided from the eastern Colonies by a great
expanse of almost desert country which can only be effectively crossed
by a line or lines of railway; but the lines of separation between the


other Colonies are, with the exception of a few miles of a low range of
hills on the northern boundary of New South Wales and a few miles
of narrow river on its southern and northern boundaries, separated by
purely imaginary lines. Nowhere is there such a difference in the
character of the country that a stranger would ever guess on crossing
the frontier that he had passed from one State to another.
Moreover, the lines of division, such as they are, are altogether
arbitrary, and may be said to be almost entirely accidental. Any
others would have been almost equally suitable. Certainly they are
not scientific frontiers.
The territory is inhabited by a people speaking one language, proud
of a common origin, and enjoying similar institutions.
Neighbouring nations are always liable to quarrel and make war
upon one another, and there is no reason to suppose that human
nature on the Australian continent is exempt from this weakness. Is
it not the very height of absurdity to imagine two Australian States
fighting for the substitution of one degree of longitude for another as
the frontier between them ?
And with regard to the rest of the world, with which the relations of
the inhabitants of Australasia cannot always be expected to remain
wholly friendly, can a foreign nation be conceived as paying any
respect to these artificial lines ?
Every lesson of history, then, teaches that the manifest destiny of
Australia is to be one people.
Let this fact be once realised, let the people once recognise their
destiny, and the question will not be whether the Australian Colonies
are to be federated, but what is the best and quickest way to bring
about the Federation. And, when the idea becomes familiar, the
advantages of union as compared with the disadvantages of present
disunion will become so plain that the only wonder will be why they
were not sooner recognised. Those who oppose union are opposing an
irresistible force, which, however strenuous the opposition, must
ultimately prevail.
Probably if the people of the several Colonies had now to rely on
their own unaided efforts to protect themselves, instead of relying, as
they certainly do, whether they consciously think so or not, on the
protection of the British Empire, the absolute and urgent necessity of
union would be already apparent to everyone. The danger of invasion
may be laughed at—everyone hopes that it is remote; but it is none
the less real. If the people could only find time to lift their eyes from
the ground and look around them, and read what is written in the
pages of history, the advocates of Federation would have a very
different task from that which now demands all their efforts.


The practical recognition of the certainty of Federal union would
have immediate beneficial effect. Statesmen would no longer devote
their energies to measures which in a few years must be futile or worse
than futile. And the energy thus set free might be directed with
advantage to other channels where it would be of use alike to the
province and to the Continent. The minds of statesmen would be
enlarged. The sentiment of patriotism just beginning to show itself
would be developed, and in a few years the opponents of union would
be regarded as little better than curious survivals of a bygone era.
11. From W. E. H. LECKY.
[The most distinguished of living British historians: author of History of
nationalism, History of European Morals, and History of England in the
Eighteenth Century.']
The subject of Australasian Federation is one which
salvation requires a fulness of local knowledge that Ido not
FROM x 0
militarism profess, and it seems to me that it would be a mere
impertinence on my part to volunteer my sentiments
upon it. Your own statesmen and your own Parliaments are perfectly
competent to deal with it.
All good men at this side of the world will rejoice, however, at any
policy that draws the Colonies more closely together, and, by lessening
the chance of war, saves them from that exaggerated militarism which
is one of the chief curses and dangers of modern Europe. It is not
too much to say that if the English-speaking races remain united and
pacific the future of the world must be mainly in their hands.
111. From the MAEQUESS OF DUFFEEIN AND AY A.
[A statesman and diplomatist of the first rank: British Ambassador to Prance:
has been Ambassador at St. Petersburg, Constantinople, and Borne, Chancellor
of the Duchy of Lancaster, Governor-General of Canada, and Viceroy of
India: a lineal descendant of Sheridan: is accomplished and versatile, and
has shown considerable literary talent in his Letters from High Latitudes
and in various speeches.]
Foe reasons which may be readily understood lam
THE EXAMPLE , n , . ’ . f, ...
of ca nad 1 precluded, as long as lam in the public service,
from expressing an opinion on any political question.
Nor, indeed, have I any special acquaintance with Australia which
would entitle me to pronounce authoritatively on the subject of
Federation. This much, however, I have no hesitation in saying:—
that, in the case of Canada, her increased prosperit}-, self-respect, and
prestige, as well as the sentiment of her nationality, have been


immensely stimulated by Federation. Nor throughout the six and a
half years during which I presided over the Government of the
Dominion did the union which had recently been brought about seem
to work in any other way than to the advantage of every member of it.
IV. From the HON. J. LANGDON PARSONS.
[ Formerly Minister of Education in South Australia, in which capacity he also
had charge of the affairs of the Northern Territory: resigned this double port-
folio in 1884, and was appointed Government Resident of the Northern
Territory, a position which he held till 1890: granted, in 1884, the Queen’s
permission to bear the title of Honourable; in July of the present year
appointed by the Government as Special Commissioner to inquire into the
economic condition of China and Japan and the possibilities of commercial
relations with those countries.]
The history of the successive discoveries of the
three PLEAS Island-Continent of Australia, and of the settlements
which have resulted in the five Colonies of Australia,
AUSTRALIAN .„ ... ,
would, if written, be as interesting as a romance.
I 1 JojUsLIxA. 11UN t 9
The present rank of Australia —-social, economical,
and political—is one of the marvels of the close of the nineteenth
century. The future of Australia ought to be one of signal brilliance
and of wide dominion; but to realise the hope and expectation of true
patriots, instead of continuing to be five separate and independent
Colonies, Australia must become a Federated Commonwealth.
It is to be deplored that the Imperial statesmen who were in power
when South and Western Australia were founded, and when Victoria
and Queensland were allowed to separate from New South Wales, had
not the prescience to insist upon some Federal connection between the
scattered and severed parts, so that they might have grown into a
United State. That opportunity was lost. It should now be the
ardent and determined effort of Australian Premiers, Cabinets, Parlia-
ments, and Electors, to make the hope of Federation an accomplished
fact, at the earliest possible moment.
I offer Three Pleas for the immediate Federation of the Australian
Colonies.
Australia comprises about 3,000,000 square miles —
three-fourths of the size of Europe. It is the last
large area of the globe which the surplus population of Europe can
inhabit without dispossessing numerous aboriginal races. Africa,
which is now being exploited and jealously subdivided into “spheres of
control” by European nations, is densely peopled. To give full scope
for the white man’s enterprise and activities the rights of the black man
must be sacrificed, and it is only too probable the Africans will wither


away before their alien usurpers and rulers. The aboriginal inhabitants
of Australia were always too few to be an embarrassment. They have
not received generous treatment at our hands, and they are perishing
fast.
Australia is fitted to be the home of tens of millions of white men.
They will occupy the inland plains, the valleys, the uplands, and the
mineral fields. They will penetrate back gradually from the sea-boards
to central Mount Stuart.
Then the geographical position of Australia is unique. It lies
between the crowded nations of Southern Asia and the Eastern
Archipelago, and the groups of islands in the Pacific Ocean. Australia
is the chief representative in the Eastern World of the Western
Civilisation and the Caucasian Race. She presents to the civilised
and savage coloured races of Asia and Polynesia the results of the
culture, the inventive genius and mechanical skill, the political
institutions, and the civil and religious liberty of Europe. To fulfil her
destiny as the last pure Caucasian Commonwealth, and as the Exemplar
of Western Civilisation, she must become one State.
Sa j ( , Uj In bygone years the dread that haunted the minds
of Australian Cabinets and Colonists was, that if
Great Britain were caught in the toils of some vast European war and
became crippled, the conqueror would seize Australia. With the
increase of population this peril has become less serious. Even three
millions of people, chiefly of English, Scottish, and Irish descent, with
railways connecting the four great centres of population, would muster
a formidable army. Fighting for hearth and home, and for national
existence, undisciplined Australians would make foreign conquest and
occupation a tremendous task. The danger of invasion, though more
remote than it was, is still within the bounds of possibility. No wise
man pretends to be able to forecast the issues of a general European
war, or to predict with certainty the position Great Britain would
occupy at its close.
But the last year has revealed with indisputable certainty that a first-
class military and naval power exists in the Far East. Japan must be
acknowledged, and will have to be reckoned with. The Japanese are
acutely intelligent and intensely active, and they are filled with a
boundless ambition. They have determined that Japan shall be the
Great Britain of Asia. Their national policy is to emphasise the claim
of “Asia for the Asians.” They intend to regenerate and educate the
four hundred millions of China, the two hundred millions of India, the
tens of millions in the Central Asian Khanates. In a generation they
have sprung out of feudalism and torpidity into “ the foremost files of
Time.” The process of development in the other Asian nations will


be slower, but it will come much quicker than our racial conceit allows
us to think possible. The Japanese have conceived the idea of
exercising imperial sway over the vast multitudes of Asia. They have
obtained Formosa; they mean to have the Philippines; they want the
Eastern Archipelago; and some day in the not distant future they will
affirm that Austral-Asia was obviously intended for the surplus
population of Asia first, and that they must have right of entrance and
occupation. The gold and mineral wealth of Australia will be a
scorching temptation to the ambitious and daring Japanese. So long
as the peace of Europe is maintained these ambitious dreams will be
kept in check; but if the nations of Europe enter upon a conflict to the
bitter end, Japan’s opportunity will have come.
The possibility of a European invader, and the more serious, if more
remote, possibility of this Asian invader, makes the Federation of
Australia imperative.
The pioneer work of settlement is accomplished.
Development .
The scattered bands ot colonists on tne coasts have
laid the foundations of an Australian nation. Separate Colonies have
fulfilled their mission in peopling, though sparsely, their lands to their
several boundaries. Supreme Local Government has achieved marvel-
lous results. It has been enormously costly, but it has been wonderfully
effective. The distances between the capital cities were so enormous,
and the means of communication so scanty and slow T , that a Central
Government was impracticable in the early days.
Now the geographical boundaries of the Colonies are really
imaginary, but as really mischievous, lines of demarcation. It is
high time that, while preserving Local Administration for all purposes
for which it is best, for National purposes all the separating lines
should be abolished. There should be a Federal Parliament and
Government, a common Statute Book, and free exchange of products
and commodities.
Economy in the cost of government demands it. The present scale
of expense, from the Governors to the cadets of the Civil Service, is
outrageously extravagant. The cost both of government and of
administration is ruinous.
The utilisation of the soils and climatic conditions demands it.
Colonial protective duties and bonuses make food dearer for Australians,
and intensify the struggles of producers. Let Nature have free play,
and the staples will be produced where the conditions are most
favourable and the cost is least.
The necessity for using natural outlets and routes to markets
demands it. The competition for the supply of the world’s wants is
becoming more acute every year. Eailroads have been built to


compete against rivers, and to haul produce and stores over unnecessary
distances to gratify the greed of rival cities and ports. Australians pay
the bills for all this waste. If the laws of cheapness and least
resistance were allowed to prevail, Australia would be enriched by the
vast sums that would be saved by the abolition of cut-throat tariffs
and political and rival railways.
Great enterprises, such as the Trans-Continental Railways, demand
it. Only a Federated Australia can undertake the work of bridging
the Continent, first from south to north, then from east to west. Asia
will before long be connected by rail from the Hellespont to Singapore
as well as from the Urals to Yladivostock, A Trans-Continental
Railway with branches to Brisbane, Sydney, and Melbourne, will be
wanted for the conveyance of mails from Port Darwin, as well as to
render the development of Central Australia practicable.
The utilisation of the tropical belt of North Australia demands it.
No country in the world is so potentially self-satisfying as Australia.
On the hills near the south coast English fruits grow to perfection; on
the north coast coffee and spices can be grown in equal perfection; in
the latitudes between, every necessary and luxury of modern life can
be produced. Colour antipathy, racial conceit, labour timidity,
Colonial jealousy, and hostile custom houses have, up to the present,
doomed the tropical areas of Australia to waste uselessness. On the
day of Federation Australia will enter upon her inheritance in the
tropics. She can grow everything she consumes—except, perhaps, tea
—on her own soil. She can introduce, use, and return to the place
from whence it came, the labour necessary for tropical agriculture.
To fulfil her Destiny, to secure her Safety, and to promote her
Development Australia must be Federated—and the sooner the better.
V. From the MARQUESS OF RIPON*
[Secretary of State for the Colonies: has been Secretary for War, Governor-
General of India, and First Lord of the Admiralty.]
Colonial Office,
THE IMPERIAL ■ T -, , . lonr
a OVERNMEST „ February 15th, 1896.
FAVOURABLE EAK IR
I am desired by Lord Ripon to acknowledge
receipt of your letter of December 24th last, and to inform you that his
Lordship’s views with regard to the subject of your communication
* The Government of which Lord Ripon was a member has resigned since the
above communication was made; but the new Government, with Mr. Chamberlain
as Secretary for the Colonies, may be safely considered as even more favourable
to Australasian Federation.


are contained in the accompanying copy of an answer given by
Mr. Buxton in the House of Commons on the 12th of this month.
Yours truly,
George L. St. Quintin.
Wm. Gay, Esq.
AUSTRALASIAN FEDERATION.
Mr, W. Redmond (Clare, E.): I beg to ask the Under Secretary of
State for the Colonies whether, if, as an outcome of the present
Conference of Australasian Premiers, the various Australasian Colonies
should decide upon a Federal Constitution, Her Majesty’s Government
will be prepared to introduce an Act for the purpose of enabling such
a Federal Constitution being established ?
The Under Secretary for the Colonies (Mr. S. C. Buxton, Tower
Hamlets, Poplar): The question is hypothetical; and Her Majesty’s
Government cannot state the exact course that they would pursue in
the event of the Australian Colonies approaching them on the question
of Federation. But this may be said at once, that Her Majesty’s
Government are favourably inclined to the idea of Inter-Australian
Federation.
YI. From DR. ALFRED RUSSEL WALLACE.
[The most distinguished of living British naturalists: shares with Darwin the
honour of the discovery of the law of natural selection: author of important
works on biology and natural history, some of which, as The Malay
Archipelago, are of great general interest: also writes on social and political
questions, and is the author of a work on land nationalisation, which he treats
in a more moderate and less rhetorical manner than Henry George.]
I look with great interest and hope on the movement
j STEP in
" human f° r Australian Federation, as a step towards an
progress ultimate Federation of the English-speaking peoples
all over the world.
I believe the prosperity and happiness of civilised mankind are to
be most effectively secured by the largest possible extension of local
self-government, combined with union for all common objects which
can only be attained by such union. Among these are, —national
defence, free inter-communication and free trade as regards the
members of the Federation, cheap postal service, and, as the result
of these, a deeper feeling of solidarity and the dying out of all inter-
colonial jealousy arising from conflicting interests.


YII. From E. R. GAEEAN, B.A.
[An able and well-informed writer on the subject: a member of the Executive
Committee of the Australasian Federation League of Sydney, which he
represented as a delegate at the Corowa Federation Conference in 1893: read
a paper on a subject connected with Federation at the meeting of the
Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science held at Brisbane in
January, 1895.]
Better to-day than to-morrow; better at sunrise than noon:
Let doing not wait on delaying, nor Now be the servant of Soon.
The rare Australian species “ anti-Federationist,”
THE URGENCY . , ~ , „
of federation w * lose bones may occasionally be unearthed from
old newspaper files, is now r thought to be extinct;
these two years his voice has not been heard in the land. We are
divided now, not for and against Federation, but as Federationists
who are in earnest and Federationists who are not. Federationists,
of a sort, we all are: from those who bring heart and soul to the
cause, down, through every shade of vanishing enthusiasm, to those
who are content to keep Federation eternally second on the list —-
which amounts to putting it at the bottom —their motto being “to-
morrow, and to-morrow, and to-morrow,” till all lesser questions shall
have been settled, and there shall be leisure to think of the greatest
question of all.
It is the postponers of Federation who have now to be exhorted,
and exhorted strongly. More than all else, it is the urgency of the
question which needs to be publicly perceived; for with the perception
of urgency will come enthusiasm, and with enthusiasm action. Once
let it become clearly recognised that every argument for delay is a
pitfall, and Federation will be at hand.
And what are the arguments for delay? We are told that there are
difficulties in the way. Well, there are. If there were none, Federa-
tion would not be worth fighting for. But how small the difficulties
are, compared with those which America, Switzerland, Canada, fought
and conquered! We have no barriers of race, language, religion,
prejudice. We are one people in origin, in sentiment, in institutions
—in everything but fact. Other nations have faced difficulties: can
Australia do nothing but talk about them ? * Be the difficulties what
they may, time will assuredly increase them. Every step not in union
is a step farther apart, and Federation will grow less easy each year
that it is delayed. Seeing that union is our destiny, and that we are
abundantly ripe for it—far riper in point of population, development,
self-governing capacity, and sense of national unity, than were the
American States in 1787, or the Canadian Colonies in 1867 —is it a


courageous policy to shift the task with accumulated difficulties on to
the shoulders of our children ?
But we have no time; the poor and the unemployed are with us ;
great social problems press for solution. Federation, according to this
gospel, is to wait till there are no more poor and no more problems!
It may be worth while to inquire what progress we are making with
our problems, that we cannot turn aside for a moment. Are we, by
provincial methods, getting much nearer their solution? The answer
must be that our political progress, if progress it be, is lamentably slow.
In the provincial Parliaments great questions and small questions
crowd and tumble over one another for a hearing, but only succeed in
blocking one another’s way; and nothing is done. Suppose—which
is not the case —that to gain Federation it were necessary to put aside
all provincial legislation for a year: it would not be a year lost, but a
year most profitably invested. On the debit side, a year’s provincial
legislation, at present rates of speed; on the credit side, the ground
cleared and the field free for provincial and national legislation both.
Take the “ fiscal questionit has been “ sunk” time and again, but
has never had Christian burial. It periodically re-appears on the
surface, to the disturbance and hindrance of provincial legislators.
Federation would waft its restless spirit up to the higher sphere of a
national Parliament, where it would reincarnate on a national plane,
and haunt provincial politics no more. Provincial questions will then
have a chance of being settled. “No time” is the excuse of the idler;
if we cannot find time for Federation, it is because we are wasting time.
The Federationist does not ignore local problems; he show's the
shortest road to their solution. He does not steel his heart against
the cry of the unemployed; he points the speediest way to increased
industrial activity, and prospect of permanent employment for everyone.
After all, the great problem is to lay a sound basis for the national
prosperity, in its best and widest sense —the prosperity, that is, of
every citizen. Provincial methods have failed to do this. There is no
salvation in relief works and village settlement schemes. Social and
industrial questions can only be settled on the basis of sound national
finance. We must have confidence and stability to begin with; and to
have that we must do away with the see-saw of provincial tariffs and
the w’alls of provincial isolation. Federation is not a matter of
sentiment only; it is a matter of pounds, shillings, and pence, to each
and all of us. The border folk see this, and see the urgency of the
question; it remains for the whole people to see it, for it is equally
true for all. The first step towards prosperity must be to strike off
the provincial fetters which cramp the commercial and industrial
growth of young Australia.


Surely any sense of proportion must teach us that the founding of
the nation is infinitely more important than any the greatest piece of
local legislation. But if anyone be still unconvinced, let him at least
choose to err from conviction, and not from apathy. It is the duty of
every citizen to interest himself closely in this matter, and to make
himself familiar with the case for doing and for delaying. The
responsibility of delay, if there should be delay, will not be with a few
statesmen, or even with politicians at large; it will rest on the people.
The work of founding the nation is a work for the people, and they
must bring to it all their ability, all their patriotism, all their
enthusiasm. A way has been shown by which, without stopping the
course of provincial legislation for a single week, the direction of this
work may be given into the hands of the people themselves; by which
the voice of the people may be heard in initiation, in deliberation, and
in decision. There will be no lack of staunch leaders and wise
counsels; let there be no lack either of that enthusiastic popular
support which is essential to the success of a great national movement.
VIII. From PROFESSOR E. BOWDEN.
[Professor of English Literature at Trinity College, Dublin: author of many
essays in literary criticism, and of well-known works on Shakspere, Southey,
and Shelley.]
I no not understand the subject of Imperial Federa-
FEDERATION ,• • ~ ,
tion sufficiently to express a clear and decided
SEP All a TION opinion on it, but my feeling is strongly in favour of
every measure which, while maintaining due freedom
to the constituent parts of our great Empire, binds all those parts as
closely together as is practicable, I am sure that in Ireland, for
example, the real needs of the country will be better served by Local
Self-Government than by Home Rule, and that—as far as Ireland is
concerned—the strength of the Empire is best maintained by a
United Parliament sitting at Westminster.
IX. From FIELD-MARSHAL LORD ROBERTS.
[Served through the Indian Mutiny, winning the Victoria Cross at 26: took part
in the Abyssinian War of 1868: by brilliant tactics and courage brought the
Afghan War of 1878 to a successful conclusion: commanded the Indian Army
from 1885 to 1893: raised to the peerage in 1892: made Field-Marshal in 1895.]
AN IMPEBIAL So iar as lam acquainted with the existing state of
MILITARY VIEW affairs * n Australasia, lam entirely in favour of the
Federation of the several Colonies, because I consider
that such a measure would tend to consolidate the British Empire and


to further the scheme of defensive union combined with local
autonomy on which the future progress and welfare of the nation
appears to me greatly to depend.
The Colonies have their duties and responsibilities as well as their
rights, and I should hope that if the latter are conceded and suitable
means are adopted for granting the Australian community and the
other great off-shoots of the British race a proportionate voice in the
counsels of the Empire, our Colonists will show themselves as ready
as the population of the Mother country to submit to those sacrifices
which are needed to uphold our interests and protect our possessions
and commerce at home and abroad.
The potential strength of Australasia and South Africa has increased
so rapidly of late years that, if the patriotic spirit is properly developed
and encouraged, there seems good reason to believe that our position
as a great Eastern Power will become more and more secure. But
potential strength without the requisite organisation is of little avail)
and, from a naval and military point of view, closer defensive union
between the Colonies themselves and the parent kingdom is essential
to our national stability and safety.
X. From the HON. ALFRED DEAKIN.
[Member of the Legislative Assembly of Victoria: a statesman of ability and
character: has held among other offices those of Solicitor-General and Chief
Secretary: member of the Federal Council: delegate to the great Federation
Convention, Sydney, 1891.]
Dear Sir —
I'JFIJEj REjA l , .
Frankly, if it were possible for me to excuse
OBSTACLES TO J .f, . „ ~.
be overcome m .V ‘ rom complying with your request tor a letter
on Federation, I should do so out of hand. Reasons
are plentiful and obvious. Take the first. The task of repeating the
commonplaces of the subject is tedious in the extreme, as tedious to
those who utter as to those who hear, and most tedious of all to write
out in cold blood. Doubtless these truisms need to be incessantly
repeated; and, admitting so much, I necessarily deliver myself over to
you without more ado. As you will at once perceive, this is not a
promising opening. Resignation is not a good key-note for such a
theme. Let the grumble serve, however, as a warning of the simplicity
of my aim.
Can we flatter ourselves that with all our reiteration we have yet
got the ear of the public? To put it paradoxically : have our common-


places really become common ? They are stale enough to those
engaged in furthering the cause —whether fitfully or persistently, on
the platform or in the press. They are also familiar enough no doubt
to those whom they really influence. But are these more than a
minority ? Do they even constitute a minority important in numbers ?
Have we actually secured the attention, not to say conquered the
convictions, of the great public—that is, of the pre-occupied multitude
of individuals, each steadily absorbed in his own affairs, who con-
stitute the Australian people ? I doubt it. Occasionally praised but
rarely understood, Federal principles are consistently disregarded.
The ears of those who attend banquets and public meetings have been
titillated, but the work-a-day masses, home-keeping citizens, and the
crowds whose volatile interest is perennially occupied by business,
sport, or amusement remain unreceptive and unresponsive. Appeals
to organise have been frequent. What is their net result ? We are
still without a recognised party pre-eminently or even predominantly
Federal. We have raised no electioneering army, conducted no
regular canvassing campaign. Have we even a volunteer company
upon which we can implicitly rely ?
It is customary both for those who wish to retard Federation and
for those who dislike the task of persistent agitation, to find a cold
comfort in the declaration that after all the cause has no real foes.
“ What is organisation, activity, and propagandism, but a means of
self-advertisement, or an effort after personal aggrandisement?” cries
one critic. “Why seek to enrol battalions of Federalists and to raise
another standard amid the host of those which local factions are ever
flaunting before us ?” says another, “We are all in favour of Federa-
tion in some indefinite conditions, at some undetermined date, and
under some problematical contingencies,” adds a third; “let us
content ourselves with that assurance, do nothing to prepare for it,
nothing to hasten it; let us censure discussion of its principles as idle,
and condemn any step towards their actualisation as impracticable.”
These are, in their essence, the familiar Conservative comments on
this and every other movement.
To those whose Toryism is of so stagnant and contented a
character that they are satisfied with the existing regime of pro-
vincialism, separatism, and intercolonial antagonism, there is mani-
festly little to be said. If complete candour were compulsory they
must declare themselves adverse to Federalism. It is well to
recognise that there are a certain number of active opponents who
have sheltered themselves, so far, behind such pretexts. One of the first
and healthiest consequences of a genuine Federal agitation would be
to compel them to come out into the open. If they would but do this


boldly, and at once, they would go a great way towards elevating their
antagonism and gaining a general respect. They would assuredly
help the cause, which at present suffers inevitably in the guerilla
warfare to which it is exposed, since there is no hostile array against
which it can be rallied so long as its antagonists refuse to take the
field and content themselves with harassing it under pretence of
lending friendly assistance.
But these opponents are not our chief anxiety. Unquestionably
what all Federalists are striving against is the inexhaustible vis inertice
of our populace as a whole. We brace ourselves at times, seeking to
lift the deadweight of apathy a little. Under favouring conditions we
occasionally succeed. But the load is too heavy for the strongest to
sustain for more than a short time, and back the mass sinks again into
its ruts of routine. This passive resistance is at once the most
uninspiring and indefatigable of antagonisms. No wonder that
Federalist after Federalist has succumbed, and that all the forces of
Philistia rejoice at the invariable discomfiture of these outbursts of
energy, enthusiasm, and aspiration. Sheer inertness is that on which
they invariably rely to postpone, maim, and defeat all schemes of
reform. “ Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the
hands to sleep.”
When one Colony shakes off its indifference and takes a step forward,
all the provincialists within its borders join in a chorus of con-
temptuous criticism. Knowing that the movement must fail unless
it is taken up by several members of the group, they delay the
response of their own Parliament by appeals to local emergencies,
until the opportunity has passed, and they can pose once more as
Federalists pining for an opportunity of action which neighbouring
Colonies refuse to give them.
There are also some persons, or perhaps classes, who believe that a
Federal union will be less favourable to their private interests.
Certain individuals apparently consider that it will diminish their
personal influence, or the importance of the places they fill, or of the
cities in which they reside. It is the practice of such to be very
anxious about details, and to quarrel on one ground or another with
all systems as fast as they are formulated, protesting at the same time
their loyalty to Federation in the abstract.
Nor are our foes all outside our own household. Some Federalists
desire to use the movement chiefly as a stalking-horse behind which
they may attain ulterior political ends. Others, again, approve only
of some one type of Federalism which shall be profitable or agreeable
to themselves. Even the true Federalists —those who place the
attainment of National Union above and beyond all other political


issues—appear capable of misconstruing the duties devolving upon
them at a given juncture. With them, and in them, lies the hope of the
cause and its future, but it is not even for them to take the Continent
by storm, or to force the issue upon its communities without regard to
the timeliness of the onset. In this, as in all practical action, the
seasonable hour, “ the tide in the affairs of men,” has much to do with
the success of our endeavours. Evidently we shall need a very
favourable conjunction of political planets to enable us to achieve
Federation. Possibly, as many candid friends tell us, its favourableness
may arise only from some threatening aspect of foreign affairs towards
our general fortunes.
In the meantime in our combat against vis inertia we are perforce
limited. We have first the day of small things, of preparations, of
trials of strength, of the spreading of knowledge, the promotion of
discussion, the organising and disciplining of adherents, the awakening
of National ideals. This sounds large, but, for the most part, means
mere drudgery. Humdrum work it must usually be for the few who
undertake it, or rather who persevere in it, with little visible result
and no individual reward. Unless we wish to find ourselves in the
position of the foolish virgins, we must prepare for the hour of action
—strike when it may. It will probably strike suddenly. Then will
be need of prompt action. Now there is need of much unpaid and
unappreciated preliminary work. For these reasons, among others, the
cause is likely to prove attractive to those who possess the idealist
temper, to the young and hopeful, the generous and brave. Of such
were the cohorts with which Garibaldi freed Italy, The strictly
peaceful tasks immediately before ns are less tempting to the adven-
turous, they are less romantic, less inspiring than were those of his
legions; but it does not follow that, in the end, they will be less
fruitful.
Devotion to the cause need not divert us from practical issues. A
study of the questions involved in Federalism, from all sides and in all
their phases, must, at least, impart to some an excellent training in
constitutional principles, whether it ever dowers into constitution-
making or not. The consistent criticism of all local party proposals
from the Federal point of view must be, in itself, a valuable contribu-
tion to provincial politics. In these, and indeed in all ways, the work
of the Federalist is not for a far-off Utopia. It helps the public life of
this Colony to-day and every day. At the same time it prepares men
for a larger and nobler sphere into which we or our children may
enter, better equipped for the profound problems with which we will
then be confronted. Unless our skies prove as enervating as they are
beautiful, the race which founded the great Commonwealth of the old


land upon the sound basis of popular rights and Parliamentary
privilege will surely arise again in its strength before long to create
in this new land another Commonwealth, more democratic and more
pacific, more extensive and more stable.
Yours very truly,
Alfred Deakin.
Wm. Gay, Esq.,
Bendigo.
XI. From SIR MACKENZIE BOWELL.
[Prime Minister of Canada: has been Minister of Trade and Commerce, and has
filled other offices in the Government of the Dominion.
I should not care to give my views on the subject
ENCOURAGE- 0 f Australian Federation unless I were able to do so
.MEET FROM ... ~ „ . , .. . , .
with that fulness and care winch the importance of
CANADA t *•
the subject demands. This, I find, I cannot do in
the very limited time at my disposal. I can only say that the
Confederation of the Canadian Provinces in 1867 has proved a perfect
success, and I doubt not that similar results will follow the Federation
of the Australasian Colonies ... a matter in which lam deeply
interested.
XII. Prom SIR LEWIS MORRIS.
[Author of Epic of Hades, Songs of Two Worlds, and other volumes of poetry:
the A thenceum asserted of him lately that he is one of the two leading poets
of the world: knighted 1895.]
I do not think that I have any special claim or right
DANGERS OF .
DEI AY s P 011 the great question of Australian Federa-
tion, but I am conscious of a great good-will towards
Australia, where, indeed, I have a great many unknown friends; and
I am, moreover, and always have been, in favour of the maintenance
of the great Empire of which she forms so important a part.
It seems to me that, whether from the point of view of national self-
defence or from that of intercolonial commerce, it is essential that the
Colonies of the Australian Continent should proceed to federate them-
selves with as little delay as possible. I do not know how far this
would apply to New Zealand and the other insular Australasian
provinces. It is possible that there may be difficulties in the way of
including them at present, but so far as the first-named Colonies are
concerned, I have no doubt whatever. The example of the Dominion


of .Canada seems to me conclusive. The Federation of the Colonies
is only an inevitable stage in the development of the Australian nation,
and the longer it is delayed the greater is the risk of developing that
spurious semi-national feeling which might in time develop into acute
jealousies, only to be removed at last, as in the United States, by the
results of the dread Arbitrament of Force.
Such a Federation should leave room for the fullest play of each
State and its peculiar interests, subject to the authority of the central
power, and subject also to an ultimate appeal, as in the case of the
Dominion of Canada, to the Crown. One of these days the Govern-
ment of Great Britain, if it is to preserve the unity of the great Empire
of which it is the head, will have to recognise, in a remodelled Imperial
Senate which shall take the place of the present narrow and provincial
Assembly of English Landlords, the rights and the claims of her great
dependencies to take part in all matters of Imperial concern. When
this is done, and a true Federation established, nothing more will be
wanted than a close alliance, which is already in the air, with the other
great branch of the Anglo-Saxon race in the United States of America,
to make war impossible, and to allow the nations of the world to enter
at last upon the path of progress and of triumphant peace. May the
new century, which is so near, bring in this great gift with its early
years.
XIII. From the HON. J. W. HACKETT.
[Member of the Legislative Council of Western Australia: editor and part
proprietor of The West A ustralia n: delegate to the Federation Convention
at Sydney, 1891: formerly a resident of Melbourne, where he was sub-warden
of Trinity College, and where also in 1876 he was admitted to the bar.]
In the space which the Editors have been good
should ha enough to allot me for a few remarks on the Federa-
HURRY °
, tion movement I should like to touch on a feature
FEDERA TION!
which does not seem to me to have always received
its proper share of attention. There is no disprite that the essence of
the Federal nexus in these Colonies must be looked for in the convinced
approval, the unwavering co-operation, of the whole people. It may
be possible, perhaps even easy, to get the separate States to recognise
in something more than principle the highest form of nationhood
which lies open, perhaps to our knowledge, and certainly to our
acceptance. But it will not do to depend on public professions, or
newspaper assumptions, or even upon demonstrations which may not
go deeper or prove more fruitful than the enthusiasm which graced
the memorable Federal banquets of 1890 and 1891. It will not do to


treat it merely as a highly promising experiment. If it does not
command the earnest acquiescence of most of those who live between
the four Aiistralian seas, if it does not present itself to the vast
majority as the most desirable of constitutions, the time for Federa-
tion will not have come. Union must be a strong and a solid thing,
capable of withstanding the shock of all conceivable storms, however
great their fury or unexpected their direction. It is clear at a glance
why this is specially true of Australian Federation. In this land all
we have to depend i;pon is the preference of the people for the Federal
bond. In these “homes of peace’’ we need not at present fear the
hostile forces from without or within which have made union
compulsory in others. All that a united Australia will have to rely
upon is the intimate fusion of the six States, the acceptance of the
principle of “ one people one destiny” as being as obvious and
unquestioned a fact as that of one’s own existence. It should, for
example, make not a whit of difference to the popular imagination in
what part population may be settling itself, where capital is finding
employment, from what district supplies are being derived, or where
they are being distributed. It ought to be enough for all to know
that it is being done by Australians for Australia. For how much
of this Continent would this be true at the present time ? Unless
patriotism can weave into one Federal tie the activities, jealousies,
and ambitions of our people and our public men, the failure of Federa-
tion is pre-doomed.
I dwell on these considerations for two reasons. First, because, all
important as is this general and loyal concurrence, there seems a
danger that its necessity may be either forgotten or slighted; and next,
because we are so apt to harp on the manifest advantages of union
that we are prone to keep the difficulties too much in the background.
We may conceivably be too eager for a premature junction. It might
be well to leave the gains of Federation alone for a little, to allow us
to devote the chief share of attention to meeting objections which
have sunk deep into minds filled to overflowing with local sentiment
and the sense of sectional interest. Until the more serious of these
obstacles are disposed of we cannot move many paces forward. To
postpone dealing with these until the Federation is established will
carry with it the great peril of deferring all precise knowledge and
estimate of the strength of any disruptive forces which may be lying
hid, to a moment when it may be the most dangerous to test them and
the most difficult to uproot them.
In view of all this, can we be quite sure that the steps suggested,
and even recommended by men of experience and foresight whose
fidelity to the Federal cause we may not doubt, will give us the


Federation we desire to have ? In despair apparently at the want of
progress various proposals are being brought up. We hear it said, for
instance—“ Let some few of the Colonies federate and in time the rest
will have to come in.” Those who examine the precise nature of this
obligation will see how ill it augurs for a stable Federation. Why
must those outside join ? Is it from choice or necessity ? For benefits
withheld or offered ? Compulsion or a bribe ? And in what way will
this overcome former reluctance? With Newfoundland before our
eyes it is hardly safe to be too certain on this point. There is an
equally serious danger in the assumption that the work of conversion
is really almost over, and the mind of the masses can now be
sufficiently depended on. The fruit is ripe, we are told, ripe to be
plucked; but we are also assured, and the cry is echoed in England,
that the golden crop is watched by jealous beings who decline to let it
be harvested. Their Parliaments stand, it appears, between the six
nations and their desires. It does not seem to be remembered by
those who speak so, that if the attraction of the electors towards
Federation be too faint to compel their representatives to acknowledge
its existence, its working capacity is hardly to be trusted. Indeed,
there are those who are so filled with impatience at the delay, and so
mistake its causes, that they are prepared to look for the remedy in
novel paths. The reproach is cast in the teeth of the legislatures that
they will not consider the question, that they have not time, or say that
they have not, to consider a federating statute. But does this mean
other than that they recognise that their constituents do not care
whether they do or not ? It would be well to examine if this be really
so. If it is, the road to union is not yet open. There are other lions
in the path besides that of the tariff.
Should this be so, there is nothing for it but to begin once more,
to take up the old course, disheartening as the task may be, to
travel again over the old round —convincing, conciliating, and inspiring.
If the people are not ready, they must be made ready. In how many
of the Colonies do their leaders believe in their hearts that those they
govern will receive it now in the spirit which seems the first condition
of success ? What is the chance of the people’s consent, if given now,
proving in the best and the only safe sense national ? If there is but
little, is it wise to hurry Federation? Meantime, those for whom it
may be necessary to fall back a little in their advance have this
encouragement, that the}' are working at the cause the highest of all,
next to that of the original work of settlement, which it has been
given to the inhabitants of these lands to labour for. It is surely
worth a little more time and trouble, if by these will be promoted the
union of all Australia.


XIV. From WILLIAM GAY.
Mr. Hackett in the foregoing article exemplifies
SHO ULD ° °
‘ the characteristic West Australian attitude towards
r ejIJPj KAII U-iS
BE DELAYED! Federation. He approves of but is not anxious for
it; and it might seem as if his views did not
accord with the Editors’ purpose. But such is not altogether the case,
for we quite agree with him that union is not desirable except by the
enlightened consent of the people; and it is the object of this pamphlet
to arouse, be it only here and there, such an interest in the subject as
may naturally cause some need for enlightenment to be felt.
But though it is thus admitted that the people are not so well
informed on the subject as they might be, the admission does not
imply that preliminary legislation need be longer deferred. Even if
the people could not directly of themselves draw up a satisfactory
constitution (which is not a thing that will be required of them), yet
they are surely wise enough to elect those who could. Our whole
government proceeds on the assumption that they possess at least so
much wisdom, and the assumption is justified by the fact that these
Colonies are among the freest and best-governed States in the world,
and it is likely that in the present instance it would receive still greater
justification, since the Federal question is not a party one.
Every reform first appears as an idea in the minds of individuals.
It arises from experience and reflection into what may be called the
ethical imagination, presenting itself as a good and reasonable thing
whose realisation is a duty. Progress is the result of a gradual
communication to the many of the ideals of the few and is possible
only because those ideals, though first conceived by particular persons,
are not merely the creations of the individual fancy, but are in
themselves such as everyone who understands must approve of. Thus
progress is not capricious, but rational: it is not the imposition on the
community of any arbitrary private will, but is Eeason, which is the
same in all of us, gradually shaping human affairs to its own form.
If, then, Federation be good and reasonable, which few deny, there
can be no valid objection to its immediate introduction into actual
politics, even though it is only by the perseverance of a minority that
such an introduction is achieved.
Moreover, unless we are to begin with the infant school, it is only
by this course of bringing Federation at once within the sphere of
practical interests that that education of the people which Mr. Hackett
and all of us desire, can be advanced in any satisfactory degree; for
its adoption will be immediately followed by such discussion in
Parliaments, conventions, public meetings, newspapers, and private


talk, that when at last the constitution is presented to the people for
ratification they will be able to give or withhold their consent with a
sufficiently clear knowledge of what they are doing. Newspapers will
not give much attention to the subject until the attention of the public
itself becomes more general; and the exhortations which now and then
proceed from individual societies and persons are but voices in the
wilderness—forgotten with the wind that carries them to the ear.
But mere information is not enough, for a knowledge of history and
of political science is by no means inconsistent with unsoundness of
judgment and a want of integrity. There are also needed that large
common sense and that solicitude for universal justice to which public
opinion after much conflict usually settles down in the long run.
For these it is to the people we must go, as it is from them also
we must learn those needs and desires on the satisfaction of which a
lasting union alone can be founded and for a true account of which
we must depend as much on the ttnsophisticated instincts of the
people as on the declarations of a popular enlightenment which can
at the best be but partial, or on the conclusions of the few whose
experience and learning are wider, but who, all the same, cannot
divest themselves of the prepossessions which vitiate the reasonings
of the wisest.
Since, then, we have already a sufficient basis in the wisdom and
justice of a whole people, in the large amount of general political
enlightenment which they possess, and in that smaller amount of
special information as to the nature and purposes of Federation which
is scattered among them like good seed ready to bear fruit as soon as
the season of practical need sets in, why should we not proceed to
immediate action? More than a hundred years ago the Americans
drew up a constitution which, in spite of whatever faults it may have,
is still the admiration of the world ; and why should we, who have an
experience to guide us which they did not possess, be unable to frame
a constitution still more perfect than theirs ?
It is not to be denied that delay has its advantages, yet it would not
be wise to sacrifice for the lessons of delay the larger lessons of an
actual Federal experience; nor when it is seen that delay not only
means the loss of much that we can ill afford to lose in the of
commercial expansion, legislative efficiency, social reform, and inter-
national influence, but is also seen to be dangerous to our national
existence, is it easy to understand how anyone can reasonably insist
on risking so much for the sake of so little.
The people of Australia are at the present moment in reality a single
nation. A man from Ballarat does not in Hobart, in Cooktowm, or in
Coolgardie, feel among foreigners. There is less diversity of local


prejudice, of dialect, and of custom between the north and south and
east and west of the whole of this Continent than there is between the
north and south and east and west of England. And if this is a fact
which Australia does not yet recognise, yet the instinct of nationality
is there, and would at once reveal itself in the hour of danger. In such
an hour her scattered communities would feel and act as one people
and would thenceforward have a clear perception of what was before
but a practical instinct and would know themselves to be a nation.
This unity Federation would express: to the national spirit it would
give the head, hands and feet without which it cannot become an
actual power in the world.
Meanwhile, however, local feeling is maintained in vigorous life
through provincial institutions; and unless the national feeling be also
supplied with the organs in which it can exercise itself it may well be
that provincial patriotisms, growing stronger and more aggressive, will
utterly sap its comparatively feeble strength, and, arrogating to each
of themselves a national dignity, power, and exclusiveness, become the
curse of posterity. Federation, as actual experience has proved, is
capable of preventing so unhappy an issue by giving to all the
inhabitants of each of the States an interest in Australia as a whole
and by removing from the jurisdiction of the separate States the very
matters about which they would be likely to disagree and transferring
those matters to the jurisdiction of a Central Government in which all
the States would be justly represented and which would settle such
matters in the common interest.
But while internal dissension is one of the possible dangers of delay,
there is actually and continually present a danger for which it is even
more plainly our duty to prepare by immediate union. The feeling of
security which is present throughout Australia seems strange to those
who are acquainted with man’s nature and history and know how
much the fortunes of a community depend on external events over
which it has no control. Australia is rich, and she is no farther
from Japan or Yladivostock, or even from Europe, than were Hindo-
stan and North America from England or France in the middle of the
last century, or Mexico and Peru from the Spaniards of an earlier
time. Deplorable though it be, it is yet incontestable that war is still
a constant possibility. What prospect of continued peace is there in a
world in which there exist such half-civilised countries as Russia,
Turkey, Japan, and China; in which a cause of quarrel may at any
moment be furnished by India, Egypt, Central Africa, or Armenia; in
which is possible such a cynical alliance as that between France and
Russia; and in which, in short, there is so much international
misunderstanding, jealousy, and hoarded revenge? In little more


than thirty years there have been five great wars; and only an insane
optimism can think that peace has at last definitely set in.
Australia, therefore, had better provide for her safety in the present
calm. Disunited, she invites the attack which, were she united, might
never be made. Her house is built on the sand and if she is wise she
will not wait for the storm before building on a rock. It is difficult, of
course, to realise an evil to which we have never been actually sub-
jected, but at this late age we might be supposed to have learned
something from a whole world’s experience. If it is our distance from
the “armed camp” of Europe that deludes us into a feeling of security,
the rise of Japan and the awakening of the Far East, to say nothing of
the proximity of India and of the terminus of the Siberian railway now
being constructed, might ruffle our equanimity. “ The Far East,” says
Mr. Henry Norman, with the approval of the Times, “is the seed bed of
a multitude of new political issues.” However peaceful our pursuits and
intentions we cannot be sure of a national existence for whose protec-
tion we have made no adequate provision, and it is sheer fatuity that
would delay such a provision while the majority of nations are still
capable of carrying out under the guise of military operations every
crime that vanity, greed, or revenge can prompt.
It is true, of course, that the greatest questions of to-day are social,
but those reformers are very short-sighted who would postpone
Federation as of minor importance. In itself it will be a great social
reform; by a division of the labour of legislation it will clear the way
for other reforms; and it will furnish that protection against the
destructive forces of the outside world without which all labours for
the better constitution of society might prove futile. One man one vote,
the minimum wage, the enfranchisement of women, and such like
questions, are intrinsically of the first importance; but in the minds
of everyone they would pale into insignificance before the news that the
Japanese had raided the Northern Territory; and if the Russians were
to attack Warrnambool, employers, unionists, and “free labourers,”
all equally possessed by a common patriotism, would soon be found
marching side by side to the seat of war.
Progress of whatever kind is possible only throxxgh association. The
State is the indispensable condition for the development of all the good
which is in individuals, and consequently the preservation of the State
is that duty of the citizen which comes absolutely first. But as this is
a duty which we in Australia cannot efficiently discharge unless we
federate, it clearly follows that it is also our duty to federate without
delav.


XY. From MRS. FAWCETT.
[Author of works on political economy: an eloquent speaker; one of the leaders
in the movement for the higher education and political enfranchisement of
women: widow of the late Et. Hon. H. Fawcett, an able writer and statesman.]
urn /> n'Sim rr ~r 1)0 not fed that 111 J kHOWledgC Of til 6 Sublet Is
STRENGTH IA . . J
UNITY sufficient to justify me in expressing a confident
opinion on the question of Australasian Federation,
but I feel that nothing but good can result from the wish on the part
of the Australian Colonies to enter into stronger bonds of union with
one another, and to strengthen the links which unite them with the
Mother country. I feel sure that in great things as in small union is
strength; and that it is the people who have the capacity and genius
for united action who will conquer the world—by the peaceful
conquests of civilisation; whereas the people in whom the opposite
quality of disintegration is abnormally developed are doomed in the
nature of things to failure and collapse.
I hope and believe that our fellow-countrymen in Australia will
show that they belong to the former and not to the latter of these two
classes.
XVI. From SIR CHARLES TUPPER.
[High Commissioner for Canada in London: Prime Minister of Nova Scotia,
1864-7: did much, as Canadian Minister of Railways, to promote the con-
struction of the Canadian-Pacific Railway: has written on Imperial
Federation.]
I have no hesitation in expressing my personal
ir ) * opinion that the Australasian Colonies would find it
AFFJxOVJbI) L .
as advantageous to federate as the different provinces
of Canada have done ; and it seems to me that in principle the same
feeling prevails in Australasia and every other part of the Empire.
In fact, it is difficult to see how any other opinion could possibly exist,
and I only hope that some way may be found of effecting the union at
no distant date.


XVII. From the HON. A. INGLIS CLARK.
[Member of the Tasmanian Parliament: Attorney-General since 1887, except
from 1892 to 1894: member of the Federal Council: delegate to the Federation
Convention at Sydney in 1891: in 1890 went to England to represent the
Government in an appeal to the Privy Council: a very able man generally,
and specially well informed on the subject of Federation, of which he is an
earnest advocate.]
In obedience to the perpetual tendency of Nature to
FEDERATION produce varieties in every sphere of her activity,
ESSE ATJ A L populations of the same origin and living under
similar physical conditions, but without any contact
NATIONAL J . . . ...
GROWTH or communication with one another, will develop
distinctive characteristics and customs. If their
physical environments are diverse the divergence in their characteristics
and habits will become greater, and the germs of a distinctive
nationality will always appear in every sufficient aggregate of people
permanently located within fixed geographical limits.
The populations of separate cities in the same country frequently
exhibit distinct peculiarities, and if each city is an independent
political community, such as were the larger cities of ancient Greece,
the difference in character and custom is often very prominent. The
inhabitants of Athens, Sparta, and Thebes were all Greeks, but they
were distinguishable by well-marked characteristics; and a similar
statement may be made with regard to the populations of the larger
cities of mediaeval Italy, such as Venice, Genoa, Florence, and Rome.
The inclusion of all the independent cities of Greece in one superior
political organisation would not have obliterated the distinctive
peculiarities of the Attic, Doric, and Boeotian character, but it would
have produced a more comprehensive type of Greek life and nationality.
The populations of the several Australasian Colonies are located in
very similar physical environments, but there is a sufficient difference
in those environments to co-operate with the tendencies which separate
communities possess of exhibiting varieties of type, and so to produce
distinctive features in the social and intellectual life of each of them.
Proximity and frequent intercourse extend, in a large degree, to
the people of the whole of Australasia the characteristics primarily
manifested by particular Colonies, and we have consequently in
Australasia a distinctively Australasian type of life and character
which, in successive generations born on Australasian soil and nur-
tured under Australasian influences, will become more and more
emphatic, and will more clearly distinguish the native Australasian
from his contemporaries in England and America; and it is this


distinctively Australasian type of life and character which will be our
contribution to the multiform civilisation of the world. But in order
to make that contribution complete and perfect, the populations of the
several Colonies must be included in one political organisation which
will increase their mutual intercourse and co-operation and impart to
them an abiding consciousness of their common nationality and
destiny. The influences of an inclusive political organisation upon
the intellectual and moral development of its component communities
may be subtle and difficult to trace and to define, but they are real
and powerful, and the nascent nationality of Australasia would rapidly
strengthen and expand under their operation. Every one of us who
was born on Australasian soil may well be proud of our British origin
and traditions, but Australasia is emphatically and peculiarly our
country and our home, and our highest duty to our children and
to humanity is to do all that is within our power to ensure the
development and maturity of the nation which Providence has
appointed us to create. The feeling which we describe as patriotism
may undoubtedly exist in a high degree in regard to a centre of
associations and traditions which, as a city or a province, is a part
only of some larger political and geographical aggregate, but its
highest manifestations are not evoked until it embraces all that
which, under the name of nation or country, gives to us our
distinctive name and place among the other nations around us. It is
truly “ a glorious privilege” throughout the civilised world to be able
to say—“l am an Englishman.” It has become almost an equal
privilege to say—“l am an American.” Why should it not become
also in due time a similar privilege to say —“I am an Australasian”?
But before that day can come Australasia must become politically, as
she is now geographically, a unit. No longer must there be Victorians,
or New South Welshmen, or Queenslanders, or Tasmanians, but all
these, together with the citizens of all the other Colonies of Australasia,
must have one name indicative of the possession of a common home
and of participation in the same destiny. The unborn generations
who are to inherit that name and all that it may express will have an
ampler field for their energies than that which is now open to us, and
will doubtless undertake and execute many things which we cannot
even attempt; but it may well be doubted whether any privilege which
their larger opportunities and resources may confer upon them will
be comparable with that which is now offered to us of laying the
foundations upon which they must build.


XYIII. From LOED BEASSEY.
[Governor designate of Victoria; Civil Lord of the Admiralty, 1880-4: Secretary
to the Admiralty, 1884-5; D.C.L., Oxford, 1888: has written on political,
social, and Imperial topics: well known as the owner of the yacht Sunbeam,
in which he has made extensive voyages, some of which were described by the
first Lady Brassey in volumes of great popularity.]
I strongly approve of the movement m favour of
SOME BENEFITS k . .
Australasian h ederation.
When carried out it will strengthen the credit of Australasia,
rendering it possible to raise loans, when required, on more favourable
terms.
The customs barrier, which now exists and must impede trade,
Avill be thrown down.
The naval and military forces of Australasia will be combined under
one Federal Government more effectively for purposes of defence than
is possible at present.
XIX. From GOLDWIN SMITH.
[For many years a foremost writer on literary, historical, and political subjects,
his treatment of which is exceedingly vigorous: from 1858 to 1868 Regius
Professor of History at Oxford: in 1868 appointed Professor of History at
Cornell University, New York; in 1871 appointed a member of the Senate of
the University of Toronto.]
Unfortunately I have never visited Australasia,
parti and j ( | 0 no t feel that my knowledge of your
GOVERNMENT- . . . r , • ■
. circumstances, derived from books, is a sufficient
A WARNING
basis for a practical judgment. All must depend on
the predominance of the centripetal over the centrifugal forces, of
which those on the spot alone can judge. To the motives for
Australasian union may now, I presume, be added the development of
Japanese power.
The chief difficulty which presents itself to my mind is that
connected with the application of Party Government to your proposed
Confederation. On what will the parties be founded, and by what
meahs, consistent with political purity, will they be held together ?
Canadian experience shows that, if the party system is to prevail,
you will have to limit carefully the power of the Central Government
to expend Federal money for provincial or other local objects. Y r ou
will otherwise be in danger of sinking into the corruption which you
will know to have been rife in Canada, and which, there is reason to
apprehend, has seriously impaired the political character of the
Canadian people.


XX. From the late EARL OF SELBORNE.
[Formerly, as Sir Eoundell Palmer, a prominent figure among English Liberals;
raised to the peerage in 1872, and made Lord Chancellor: a writer on
ecclesiastical subjects : h. 1812, d. May, 1895. j
A LECa I think the people of the Australian Colonies are
OPINIO V better judges than anyone else of such a question as
that of Australian Federation. I therefore attribute
little importance to my own opinion upon the subject, which, as far as
I am able to form one, is that Federation, on terms more or less
similar to those on which the several Provinces of British North
America are now united, might be for the future advantage of those
Colonies, if accomplished by general consent.
XXI. From .1. G. DRAKE.
"A Queensland lawyer and journalist: in his contributions to the press has
endeavoured to promote the development of the national life of Australasia:
elected to Parliament, 1888: re-elected, 1898: a member of the Liberal, or
White Labour, Party.]
Federalists who have addressed themselves to a
' ' ‘ consideration of the obstacles that lie in the path of
BEYOND . r
Australian Federation, have generally agreed in
giving the place of first importance to the barrier which hostile tariffs
have raised between the Colonies, and more particularly between
Victoria and New South Wales. These two Colonies, as the leading
Colonies of the group, and as representing respectively the opposite
commercial systems of protection and free trade, are naturally regarded
as the champions of the two systems, and the difference that exists
between them on this subject has come to be regarded as the “ lion in
the path.” It might be useful to consider briefly what is the real
nature of the obstacle, and how it came into existence. Let it be
borne in mind that the difficulty we are considering does not arise
because Victoria lias adopted a protectionist policy, or because New
South Wales has adopted what is called a free trade policy. Had both
Colonies adopted either one policy or the other no trouble of the kind
would have occurred. The true statement of the ease is, that under
the operation of opposite commercial systems the two Colonies have
developed on different lines, and each having adopted its own as its
national policy, neither can at once accept the policy of the other


without great disturbance to its existing commercial and industrial
arrangements. Such a barrier should not, however, daunt the sincere
Federalist who believes that the movement has a genuine national
basis. If Federation is desirable and justifiable on other grounds, that
barrier must come down. And perhaps, after all, it is not quite so
solid as it looks. Is it not common history that Victoria during the
last few years has shown leanings towards free trade —at all events
with her sister Colonies—and that New South Wales at the present
moment is progressing under a system of modified protection? The
discovery of a via media, cannot be beyond the wisdom of Australian
statesmen.
But while the Colonies are balking at this fiscal barrier, a far more
formidable barrier is steadily rising beyond. Fiscal differences alone
have never prevented union, nor torn the States of a union asunder.
Fundamental differences in political principles have, and will do so
again. “ The morbid dreams of an unholy league between perpetual
bondage and* free trade” set the Southern States of America upon a
career which left no alternative but civil war then or disunion for ever
after, and the democratic North accepted the first alternative. To-day
an analogous movement is on foot in Australia. Both the movement
and its tendency, though almost entirely ignored in Australia, fyave
been noted and commented on freely by visitors. The representative
of the London Times, who visited Australia during the beginning of
the year 1898, reported that she had found tw 7 o Australias existing—the
one, a temperate Australia; the other, a tropical Australia, where the
wiry, auburn-haired Australian gave place “to the South Sea Islander
. . . . to black-hatted industrious Chinese, to Javanese and
Japanese, Malays and Singalese, whose bright costumes harmonise
with the landscape;” and, apparently regarding as inevitable the
separation of these two Australias into separate and distinct political
communities, she forecasts future political developments thus: —“The
business of the politician of temperate Australia will be to regulate
the working of a Constitution based upon universal suffrage, in which
every member of the community—women, probably, as well as men
—will exercise the rights and responsibilities of self-government. The
business of the politician of tropical Australia will, on the contrary,
in all probability be to find means by which the affairs of a large
servile population may be justly administered by a relatively small,
and consequently aristocratic, body of white men.”
The policy of a community such as is here depicted—a large servile
population ruled over by a select aristocracy—will be to direct the
industrial energies of the population to the production almost exclu-
sively of food and raw materials for exportation, relying upon foreign


sources for the supply of manufactures; and it will be easily understood
that the creation of such a State would be sure to find favour in the
eyes of the great London newspaper which has always been the organ
of the English manufacturing and trading classes, and which, during
the American Civil War, so strongly supported the cause of the slave-
holding South. But what is the significance to Australia of this
atavistic birth in a Colony where political equality and democratic
institutions seemed to be so firmly established ? We possess a country
whose potential wealth is absolutely beyond the power of computation.
Mount Morgan and Broken Hill have killed the faculty of wonder, and
we feel that nothing could now astonish us. Can we, all too few to
guard so ridi a heritage, afford to be divided? Happily situated in a
country which contains no physical obstacles to internal union, shall
we raise for ourselves a barrier, as compared with which the highest
range of mountains in the wide world and the deepest and broadest
rivers would be but a trifling impediment ? Every true Australian,
Federalist or not, would say—No! Yet such a barrier is undeniably
going up in Australia. It throws its shadow now over Queensland,
and by the daily lengthening of that shadow all men may know at
what a rapid rate the barrier is rising. Federation, by establishing a
Federal control over the introduction of alien races, may be strong
enough to stem the tide of invasion and make the rearing of such a
barrier between Australians impossible ; but if, on the other hand, the
barrier be allowed to rise, it will eventually make Federation itself
impossible.
What has happened before will happen again. We now see the
beginnings; we shall not probably live to see the end. Let us not
despise the day of small things. The tiny coral insect works unseen
and unsuspected till the reef approaches the surface and the stately ship
with its precious freight of love and hope goes with sudden wreck to
untimely destruction. If we would be wise in time we will brush
aside the paltry obstacles in the way of Federation that jealousy or
greed suggests, seek out the true means by which all the legitimate
differences between the Colonies may be justly accommodated, and
then join hands to face bravely those real difficulties which may be
met and coped with now, but for which, if they be allowed to grow
to maturity, there will be no peaceful solution.


XXII. From SIR WALTER BESANT.
[A leading British novelist, and a writer on various subjects, especially on
subjects connected with the history of London and with French literature:
has done much to organise men of letters : knighted 1895.]
„ I must point out that Australasian Federation is not
FEDERATION . .
INEVITABLE a su ' ) .l on which lam entitled to express an
opinion, and that no opinion of mine could possibly
obtain any weight with Australians who have studied the question
from their own point of view.
Speaking in general terms, however, and without reference to such
considerations as may for the moment have to be taken into account —
as the exigencies of trade—for and against Federation, I may say that
I have always been taught to believe that the Australian countries must
inevitably tend towards a Federation as of sovereign States. In the
same way the existence of separate States in America would long since
have become impossible. When they ceased to be colonies they were
bound to unite. So the States of Australia, when—as must, I suppose,
happen sooner or later—they cease to be colonies, must necessarily unite,
unless the world is going to sink back into barbarism and tribal war
and local quarrels. Those who speak the same language, and live side
by side, and are governed by the same laws, must become close friends,
or they will become deadly enemies.
The noble dream of one common Federation of all the English-
speaking races in the world will thus, I hope and believe, ultimately,
and before very long, be realised. Let us try to imagine such a
Federation. It would include the States of Australia, the States of
New Zealand, the States of South Africa, the States of Canada, the
United States of America, the British Islands, —what power on earth
could resist this splendid Federation? Already it would number a
hundred and twenty millions, all speaking the same language, all
governed by the same laws, all having the same common origin, all
enjoying the same liberties, all rejoicing in a common literature. The
world has never yet seen a more powerful, a more magnificent,
Federation.
It is not, moreover, a dream of Conquest or of Rapine. We have
the best, and most favoured, and most pleasant places on the earth, all
our own. We want no extension of Empire, though we shall doubtless
have to extend our frontiers. It is a dream of Peace, Industry, Wealth,
Plenty, Culture, and Liberty. It is a dream of a State strong and
free, and able to address itself, without let or hindrance, to the
promotion of the general happiness. And its Senate House—its


central place of meeting? Shall it be in Melbourne, or Sydney, or
Washington, or London? I think it matters nothing; but perhaps
each in turn.
It may be I have said too much. Let it stand, however, for the
fervent aspiration of one very humble person, who is not a politician.
XXIII. From GILBERT PARKER.
[One of the ablest of the younger English writers : a typical citizen of the Empire,
being a Canadian now resident in London and formerly in Australia, about
which he has written a book —Round the Compass in Australia : his novels,
such as The Trail of the Sword, and his many short stories, are familiar to
all readers of fiction and the lighter magazines.]
Regarding this important matter of Australian
FEDERATION Federation, lam glad indeed to express myself
PRO VINCI iLISM sympathy with a cause to which in my small
way I gave my adherence when resident in
Australia. I believe that in the early stage of a country’s develop-
ment provincialism is productive only of good. It serves to
concentrate effort, it fosters independence, it gives decisiveness, and
it begets an inherent local pride and energy. As interests broaden,
however, as provincial affairs increase in weight, as outside relations
become more important and complex, as settlements grow, and
railways unite districts and regions hitherto widely separated, that
very provincialism which was at first a benefit becomes a danger.
In Australia especially, standing alone as she does in the South
Seas, concerted general action is required on the part of all the
different States in such vital matters as Chinese immigration, naval
defence, and the Polynesian labour question ; and Confederation would
thus seem to be almost imperatively necessary simply for the sake of
the political machinery which it would supply, and quite apart from
that spirit of union which is itself a force, a means of development,
and an impetus towards a real national character.
I cannot think that my opinion upon the matter will have much
weight one way or another, but still, as a British subject who knows
all the Colonies well, I gladly give expression to it, for it is probable
that no honest declaration of adherence to a good cause is ever lost.


XXIV. From J. B. O’HARA.
[M.A., Melb. Univ.: author of Songs of the South, which was well received both
in England and Australia.]
Ours is a golden heritage of glory,
Whose cradle song was sung by vassal seas;
Our greatness grew not with the centuries,
Our freedom not from clanging fields and gory;
Then let us, worthy of our lineage hoary,
As brothers rise, and catch the hour that flees
To grave on Time’s imperishable frieze
A fitting sequel to our fathers’ story:
For we are brothers!—still the crimson thread
Of kinship binds us under Austral skies;
And shall we look with alienated eyes
Across tire sundering lines, with that dark hate
From evil strife and Jealousy misbred,
And know the bitter loss, alas, too late ?


Mason, Firth & M'Cctcheon,
General Printers,
516 Little Collins Street, Melbourne.


